THE TWO SOURCES 
OF 
MORALITY AND RELIGION 
BY 
HENRI BERGSON 
TRANSLATED BY 
R. ASHLEY AUDRA AND 
CLOUDESLEY BRERETON 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF 
W. HORSFALL CARTER 
CREE:\"\\"00]) PRESS. PUBLISHERS 
\\'FSII'OR 1'. CO:\:\FCIIC!ll 

Librar)· of ('ongress Cataloging in Public.·alion Data 
Bergson, Henri Louis, 1859-1941. 
The two sources of morality and religion. 
Reprint of the ed. p·J.blished by Holt, lie'' York. 
Translation of Les deux sources de la morale et de la 
religion. 
1. 
Sthics. 
2. 
cism. 
I. 
7itle. 
Ɏ2430.B4D42 
1974 
ISBN 0-8371-7679-4 
Religion--Philosophy. 
3. 
Wwsti-
170 
74-10373 
TraƧslated from the French: 
Ln Dz:vx SouRcEs DE LA 1\loRAU: ET DE LA RELJCJOR 
Copyright 1935 by Henry Holt and Company, Inc.; 
Copyright Renewed© 1963 by 1/olt, Rinehart and 
Winston, Inc. 
Originally published in 1935 by Henry Holt and Company, 
New York 
This edition is published by arrangement with Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston, Inc. 
Reprinted in 19 74 by Greenwood Press, 
a division of Williamhouse-Regency Inc. 
Library of Congress Catalog Card :\'umber 74-10373 
ISBN 0-8371-7679-4 
Printed in the United States of America 

TRAN S L AT ORS' PREF A CE 
IN undertaking to place before the English public M. Henri 
Bergson's great work, which since its publication in March 1932 
has gone through seventeen editions, the translators were con­
fronted at the outset with great difficulties. 
An example of 
the utmost importance, was the word "morale," which has a 
wider meaning in French than in English, conveying both 
morality and ethics. There are obvious disadvantages in at­
tempting to use now the one now the other of these two terms, 
though this has in some cases been done. But we have in most 
cases kept to the word "morality," and therefore consider it 
advisable to inform our readers of the wide sense in which we 
use it. 
As Monsieur Bergson himself says more than once, 
"You may attribute what meaning you like to a word, pro­
vided you start by clearly defining that meaning." 
The path of all translation is strewn with stumbling-blocks. 
This is especially true of The Two Sources of Morality and 
Religion. 
Here the thought is the outcome of twenty-five 
years' reflection and research, cast with unfailing skill in the 
language in which it was conceived; the language becomes 
inseparable from the thought it expresses. That is why the 
reader who cares to compare the English with the French text 
will find a certain number of passages which might appear at 
first sight to have been altered from the original. 
A closer 
study will reveal that this is not the case and that in almost 
every instance an effort has been made to convey the meaning 
of the French sentence more accurately still than would have 
been possible by 
a word-for-word translation. 
Monsieur 
Bergson realized the difficulties with which the translators 
were confronted, and with the kindly courtesy which is 
v 

v1 
TRA NSLAT OR S' PREFACE 
characteristic of him helped them in their task. At his partic­
ular request, and under his guidance, these passages have been 
re-written and even re-thought in English. 
Once recast in this 
way, they have been submitted to his final approval. 
The 
translators and the reader owe him a debt of gratitude for his 
generous and careful collaboration. 
The translators also wish particularly to thank Mr. W. 
Horsfall Carter, who has helped them with his advice through­
out the work of translation, has taken over from Dr. Cloudesley 
Brereton the work of final revision (owing to the latter's ill­
health), and has undertaken the arduous and delicate task of 
re-reading the book as a whole, with a fresh mind. Owing to 
his remarkable command of his own language, together with a 
consummate knowledge of French, his assistance has been of 
the greatest value. 
R. AsHLEY AuoRA 
CLOtJDESLEY BRERETON 

CO NTENT S 
CHAPTER I 
MORAL OBLIGATION 
Social order and natural order-The individual in 
society-Society 
in 
the 
individual-Spontaneous 
obedience-Resistance to resistances-Obligation and 
life-The closed society-The call of the hero-Pro­
pulsive force of emotion-Emotion and creation­
Emotion and representation-Liberation of the soul 
-Forward movement-Closed morality and open 
morality-Self-respect-Justice-Of intellectualism in 
morality-Moral education-Training and the mysti­
cal. 
CHAPTER II 
STATIC RELIGION . 
Of absurdity in the reasoning being-The myth­
making function-Myth-making and life-Signifi­
cance of the "vital impetus"-Part played in society 
by 
myth-making-General 
themes 
of 
practical 
myth-making-Assurance against disorganization­
Assurance against depression-Assurance against the 
unforeseeable-On chance-The "primitive mental­
ity" in civilized man-Partial personification of 
events-On magic in general-Magic and science-
vii 
PAGE 

VIII 
C O NTENT S 
Magic and religion-Deference paid to animals­
Totemism-Bclief in gods-J\'Iythological fantasy­
The myth-making function and literature-On the 
existence of gods-General function of static re­
ligion. 
CHAPTER III 
DYNAMIC RELIGIOȮ 
Two meanings of the \vord religion-Why we 
use one word-Greek mysticism-Oriental mysti­
cism-The prophets of Israel-Christian mysticism­
Mysticism and regeneration-Philosophic value of 
mysticism-Of the existence of God-Nature of 
God-Creation and love-The problem of evil-S ur­
vival-Of experience and probability in metaphysics. 
CHAPTER IV 
PAGE 
FINAL REMARKS: MECHANICS AȯTI MYSTICIS M 
255 
Closed society and open societ:y-Persistence of 
the natural-Characteristics of natural society-Nat­
ural society and democracy-Natural society and 
war-The Industrial Age-Evolution of tendencies­
The law of dichotomy-Law of double frenzy­
Possible return to the simple life-Mechanics and 
mysticism. 
INDEX 

CHAPTER I 
i\1 0 R A L 0 B L I G AT I 0 N 
THE remembrance of forbidden fruit is the earliest thing in the 
memory of each of us, as it is in that of mankind. 
We should 
notice this, were not this recollection overlaid by others which 
we are more inclined to dwell upon. 
What a childhood we 
should have had if only we had been left to do as we pleased! 
We should have flitted from pleasure to pleasure. 
But all of a 
sudden an obstacle arose, neither visible nor tangible: a prohi­
bition. 
Why did we obey? 
The question hardly occurred 
to us. 
W c had formed the habit of deferring to our parents 
and teachers. 
All the same we knew very well that it was 
because they were our parents, because they were our teach­
ers. Therefore, in our eyes, their authority came less from 
themselves than from their status in relation to us. They occu­
pied a certain station; that was the source of the command 
which, had it issued from some other quarter, would not have 
possessed the same weight. 
In other words, parents and teach­
ers seemed to act by proxy. 
We did not fully realize this, but 
behind our parents and our teachers we had an inkling of some 
enormous, or rather some shadowy, thing that exerted pres­
sure on us through them. 
Later we would say it was society. 
And speculating upon it, we should compare it to an organism 
whose cells, united by imperceptible links, fall into their re­
spective places in a highly developed hierarchy, and for the 
greatest good of the whole naturally submit to a discipline 
that may demand the sacrifice of the part. This, however, can 
only be a comparison, for an organism subject to inexorable 
Jaws is one thing, and a society composed of free wills another. 
1 

2 
MORAL OBLIGATION 
But, once these wills are organized, they assume the guise of 
an organism; and in this more or less artificial organism habit 
plays the same role as necessity in the works of nature. 
From 
this first standpoint, social life appears to us a system of more 
or less deeply rooted habits, corresponding to the needs of the 
community. 
Some of them are habits of command, most of 
them are habits of obedience, whether we obey a person com­
manding by virtue of a mandate from society, or whether from 
society itself, vaguely perceived or felt, there emanates an im­
personal imperative. 
Each of these habits of obedience exerts 
a pressure on our will. 
We can evade it, but then we are at­
tracted towards it, drawn back to it, like a pendulum which has 
swung away from the vertical. A certain order of things has 
been upset, it must be restored. In a word, as with all habits, 
we feel a sense of obligation. 
But in this case the obligation is ·immeasurably stronger. 
When a certain magnitude is so much greater than another 
that the latter is negligible in comparison, mathematicians say 
that it belongs to another order. 
So it is with social obligation. 
The pressure of it, compared to that of other habits, is such 
that the difference in degree amounts to a difference in kind. 
It should be noted that all habits of this nature lend one another 
mutual support. 
Although we may not speculate on their es­
sence and on their origin, we feel that they are interrelated, 
being demanded of us by our immediate surroundings, or by 
the surroundings of those surroundings, and so on to the utter­
most limit, which would be society. 
Each one corresponds, 
directly or indirectly, to a social necessity; and so they all hang 
together, they form a solid block. 
Many of them would be 
trivial obligations if they appeared singly. 
But they are an 
integral part of obligation in general, and this whole, which is 
what it is owing to the contributions of its parts, in its turn 
confers upon each one the undivided authority of the totality. 
Thus the sum-total comes to the aid of each of its parts, and 

M O R A L  OB L I G A T I O N  
3 
the general sentence "do what duty bids" triumphs over the 
hesitations we might feel in the presence of a single duty. 
As 
a matter of fact, we do not explicitly think of a mass of partial 
duties added together and constituting a single total obliga­
tion. Perhaps there is really not an aggregation of parts. The 
strength which one obligation derives from all the others is 
rather to be compared to the breath of life drawn, complete 
and indivisible, by each of the cells from the depths of the 
organism of which it is an element. 
Society, present within 
each of its members, has claims which, whether great or small, 
each express the sum-total of its vitality. 
But let us again re­
peat that !:his is only a comparison. 
A human community is a 
collectivity of free beings. The obligations which it lays down, 
and which enable it to subsist, introduce into it a regulariry 
which has merely some analogy to the inflexible order of the 
phenomena of life. 
And yet everything conspires to make us believe that this 
regularity is comparable v.:ith that of nature. 
I do not allude 
merely to the unanimity of mankind in praising certain acts 
and blaming others. 
I mean that, even in those cases where 
moral precepts implied in judgments of values are not ob­
served, we contrive that they should appear so. 
Just as we 
do not notice disease when walking along the street, so we do 
not gauge the degree of possible immorality behind the ex­
terior which humanity presents to the world. 
It would take a 
good deal of time to become a misanthrope if we confined 
ourselves to the observation of others. 
It is when we detect 
our own weaknesses that we come to pity or despise mankind. 
The human nature from which we then turn away is the human 
nature we have discovered in the depths of our own being. 
The evil is so well screened, the secret so universally kept, 
that in this case each individual is the dupe of all: however 
severely we may profess to judge other men, at bottom we 

4 
M O R A L  OB L I G A T I O N  
think them better than ourselves. 
On this happy illusion much 
of our social life is grounded. 
It is natural that society should do everything to encourage 
this idea. The laws which it promulgates and which maintain 
the social order resemble, moreover, in certain aspects, the 
laws of nature. 
I admit that the difference is a radical one in 
the eyes of the philosopher. 
To him the law which enunciates 
facts is one thing, the law which commands, another. 
It is 
possible to evade the latter; here we have obligation, not 
necessity. 
The former is, on the contrary, unescapable, for 
if any fact diverged from it we should be \vrong in having 
assumed it to be a law; there would exist another one, the true 
one, formulated in such a way as to express everything we 
observe and to which the recalcitrant fact would then con­
form like the rest. True enough; but to the majority of people 
the distinction is far from being so clear. A law, be it physical, 
social or moral-every law-is in their eyes a command. 
There 
is a certain order of nature which finds expression in laws: 
the facts are presumed to "obey" these laws so as to conform 
with that order. The scientist himself can hardly help believ­
ing that the law "governs" facts and consequently is prior to 
them, like the Platonic Idea on which all things had to model 
themselves. 
The higher he rises in the scale of generalizations 
the more he tends, willy-nilly, to endow the law with this im­
perative character; it requires a very real struggle against our 
O\vn prepossessions to imagine the principles of mechanics 
otherwise than as inscribed from all eternity on the tran­
scendent tables that modem science has apparently fetched 
down from another Sinai. But if physical law tends to assume 
in our imagination the form of a command when it attains to 
a certain degree of generality, in its turn an imperative which 
applies to everybody appears to us somewhat like a law of 
nature. 
The two ideas, coming against each other in our 
minds, effect an exchange. 
The law borrows from the com-

M O R A L  OB LI G A TI ON 
s 
mand its prerogative of compulsion; the command receives 
from the law its inevitability. Thus a breach of the social 
order assumes an anti-natural character; even when frequently 
repeated, it strikes us as an exception, being to society what a 
freak creation is to nature. 
And suppose we discern behind the social imperative a re­
ligious command? No matter the relation between the two 
terms: whether religion be interpreted in one way or another, 
whether it be social in essence or by accident, one thing is 
certain, that it has always played a social role. This part, in­
deed, is a complex one: it varies with time and place; but in 
societies such as our own the first effect of religion is to sustain 
and reinforce the claims of society. It may go much further. 
It goes at least thus far. Society institutes punishments which 
may strike the innocent and spare the guilty; its rewards are 
few and far between; it takes broad views and is easily satisfied; 
what human scales could weigh, as they should be weighed, 
rewards and punishments? But, just as the Platonic Ideas re­
veal to us, in its perfection and fulncss, that reality which we 
see only in crude imitations, so religion admits us to a city 
whose most prominent features are here and there roughly 
typified by our institutions, our laws and our customs. Here 
below, order is merely approximate, being more or less 
artificially obtained by man; above, it is perfect and self­
creative. Religion therefore, in our eyes, succeeds in filling 
in the gap, already narrowed by our habitual way of looking 
at things, between a command of society and a law of nature. 
We arc thus being perpetually brought back to the same 
comparison, defective though it be in many ways, yet appro­
priate enough to the point with which we are dealing. The 
members of a civic community hold together like the cells of 
an organism. Habit, served by intelligence and imagination, 
introduces among them a discipline resembling, in the inter-

6 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
dependence it establishes between separate individuals, the 
unity of an organism of anastomotic cells. 
Everything, yet again, conspires to make social order an 
imitation of the order observed in nature. It is evident that 
each of us, thinking of himself alone, feels at liberty to follow 
his bent, his desire or his fancy, and not consider his fellow­
men. But this inclination has no sooner taken shape than it 
comes up against a force composed of the accumulation of all 
social forces: unlike individual motives, each pulling its own 
way, this force would result in an order not without analogy 
to that of natural phenomena. The component cell of an 
organism, on becoming momentarily conscious, would barely 
have outlived the wish to emancipate itself when it would be 
recaptured by necessity. An individual forming part of a 
community may bend or even break a necessity of the same 
kind, which to some extent he has helped to create, but to 
which, still more, he has to yield; the sense of this necessity, 
together with the consciousness of being able to evade it, is 
none the less what he calls an obligation. From this point of 
view, and taken in its most usual meaning, obligation is to 
necessity what habit is to nature. 
It does not come then exactly from without. Each of us 
belongs as much to society as to himself. \Vhile his conscious­
ness, delving downwards, reveals to him, the deeper he goes, 
an ever more original personality, incommensurable with the 
others and indeed undefinable in words, on the surface of life 
we are in continuous contact with other men whom we 
resemble, and united to them by a discipline which creates 
between them and us a relation of interdependence. Has the 
self no other means of clinging to something solid than by 
taking up its position in that part of us which is socialised? 
That would be so if there were no other way of escape from 
a life of impulse, caprice and regret. But in our innermost 
selves, if we know how to look for it, we may perhaps dis-

M O R AL O B L I G A T I O N  
7 
cover another sort of equilibrium, still more desirable than 
the one on the surface. Certain aquatic plants as they rise 
to the surface are ceaselessly jostled by the current: their 
leaves, meeting above the water, interlace, thus imparting to 
them stability above. 
But still more stable arc the roots, 
which, firmly planted in the earth, support them from below. 
However, we shall not dwell for the present on the effort to 
delve down to the depths of our being. If possible at all, it is 
exceptional: and it is on the surface, at the point where it 
inserts itself into the close-woven tissue of other exteriorised 
personalities, that our ego generally finds its point of attach­
ment; its solidity lies in this solidarity. But, at the point where 
it is attached, it is itself socialized. Obligation, which we look 
upon as a bond between men, first binds us to ourselves. 
It would therefore be a mistake to reproach a purely social 
morality with neglecting individual duties. Even if we were 
only in theory under a state of obligation towards other men, 
we should be so in fact towards ourselves, since social solidarity 
exists only in so far as a social ego is superadded, in each of 
us, to the individual self. To cultivate this social ego is the 
essence of our obligation to society. Were there not some 
part of society in us, it would have no hold on us; and we 
scarcely need seek it out, we are self-sufficient, if we find it 
present within us. Its presence is more or less marked in dif­
ferent men; but no one could cut himself off from it com­
pletely. Nor would he wish to do so, for he is perfectly aware 
that the greater part of his strength comes from this source, 
and that he owes to the ever-recurring demands of social life 
that unbroken tension of energy, that steadiness of aim in ef­
fort, which ensures the greatest return for his activity. But he 
could not do so, even if he wished to, because his memory and 
his imagination live on what society has implanted in them, be­
cause the soul of society is inherent in the lant,TUagc he speaks, 
and because even if there is no one present, even if he is merely 

8 
M O R A L  OB L I G A T I O N  
thinking, he is still talking to himself. 
Vainly do we try to 
imagine an individual cut off from all social life. 
Even 
materially, Robinson Crusoe on his island remains in contact 
with other men, for the manufactured objects he saved from 
the wreck, and without which he could not get along, keep 
him within the bounds of civilization, and consequently within 
those of society. 
But a moral contact is still more necessary 
to him, for he would be soon discouraged if he had nothing 
else to cope with his incessant difficulties except an individual 
strength of which he knows the limitations. 
He draws energy 
from the society to which he remains attached in spirit; he 
may not perceive it, still it is there, watching him: if the in­
dividual ego maintains alive and present the social ego, he will 
effect, even in isolation, what he would with the encourage­
ment and even the support of the whole of society. 
Those 
whom circumstances condemn for a time to solitude, and who 
cannot find within themselves the resources of a deep inner 
life, know the penalty of "giving way," that is to say of not 
stabilising the individual ego at the le'vel prescribed by the so­
cial ego. They will therefore be careful to maintain the latter, 
so that it shall not relax for one moment its strictness towards 
the former. 
If necessary, they will seek for some material or 
artificial support for it. 
You remember Kipling's Forest Of­
ficer, alone in his bungalow in the heart of the Indian rukh? 
He dresses every evening for dinner, so as to preserve his self­
respect in his isolation.1 
We shall not go so far as to say that this social ego is Adam 
Smith's "impartial spectator," or that it must necessarily be 
identified with moral conscience, or that we feel pleased or 
displeased with ourselves according as it is favourably or on­
favourably affected. We shall discover deeper sources for our 
moral feelings. 
Language here groups under one name very 
different things: what is there in common between the remorse 
1 Kipling, "In the Rukh," from Many Inventions. 

M O R A L  OB L I G AT I O N  
9 
of a murderer and that racking, haunting pain, also a remorse, 
which we may feel at having wounded someone's pride or 
been unjust to a child? 
To betray the confidence of an inno­
cent soul opening out to life is one of the most heinous offences 
for a certain type of conscience, which is apparently lacking 
in a sense of proportion, precisely because it does not borrow 
from society its standards, its gauges, its system of measure­
ment. 
This type of conscience is not the one that is most 
often at work. 
At any rate it is more or less sensitive in dif­
ferent people. 
Generally the verdict of conscience is the 
verdict which would be given by the social self. 
And also, generally speaking, moral distress is a throwing­
out of gear of the relations between the social and the in­
dividual self. 
Analyse the feeling of remorse in the soul of a 
desperate criminal. 
You might mistake it at first for the dread 
of punishment, and indeed you find most minute precautions, 
perpetually supplemented and renewed, to conceal the crime 
and avoid being found out; at every moment comes the awful 
thought that some detail has been overlooked and that the 
authorities will get hold of the tell-tale clue. But look closer: 
what the fellow wants is not so much to evade punishment as 
to wipe out the past, to arrange things just as though the crime 
had never been committed at all. 
"\Vhen nobody knows that a 
thing exists, it is almost as if it were non-existent. 
Thus it is 
the crime itself that the criminal wants to erase, by suppressing 
any knowledge of it that might come to the human ken. But 
his own knowledge persists, and note how it drives him more 
and more out of that society within which he hoped to remain 
by obliterating the traces of his crime. 
For the same esteem 
for the man he was is still shown to the man he is no longer; 
therefore society is not addressing him; it is speaking to some­
one else. 
He, knowing what he is, feels more isolated among 
his fellow-men than he would on a desert island; for in his soli­
tude he would carry with him, enveloping him and supporting 

10 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
him, the image of society; but now he is cut off from the 
image as well as the thing. 
He could reinstate himself in 
society by confessing his crime: he would then be treated ac­
cording to his deserts, but society would then be speaking 
to his real self. He would resume his collaboration with other 
men. He would be punished by them, but, having made him­
self one of them, he would be in a small degree the author of 
his own condemnation; and a part of himself, the best part, 
would thus escape the penalty. Such is the force which will 
drive a criminal to give himself up. Sometimes, without going 
so far, he will confess to a friend, or to any decent fellow. By 
thus putting himself right, if not in the eyes of all, at least in 
\'iomebody's eyes, he re-attaches himself to society at a single 
point, by a thread: even if he does not reinstate himself in it, 
at least he is near it, close to it; he no longer remains alienated 
from it; in any case he is no longer in complete rupture with 
it, nor with that element of it which is part of himself. 
It takes this violent break to reveal clearly the nexus of the 
individual to society. In the ordinary way we conform to our 
obligations rather than think of them. If we had every time to 
evoke the idea, enunciate the formula, it would be much more 
tiring to do our duty. But habit is enough, and in most cases 
we have only to leave well alone in order to accord to society 
what it expects from us. Moreover, society has made matters 
very much easier for us by interpolating intermediaries be­
tween itself and us: we have a family; we follow a trade or a 
profession; we belong to our parish, to our district, to our 
county; and, in cases where the insertion of the group into 
society is complete, we may content ourselves, if need be, 
with fulfilling our obligations towards the group and so paying 
our debts to society. Society occupies the circumference; the 
individual is at the centre: from the centre to the circum­
ference are arranged, like so many ever-widening concentric 
circles, the various groups to which the individual belongs. 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
1 1  
From the circumference to the centre, as the circles grow 
smaller, obligations are added to obligations, and the individual 
ends by finding himself confronted with all of them together. 
Thus obligation increases as it advances; but, if it is more 
complicated, it is less abstract, and the more easily accepted. 
When it has become fully concrete, it coincides with a tend­
ency, so habitual that we find it natural, to play in society 
the part which our station assigns to us. 
So long as we yield 
to this tendency, we scarcely feel it. It assumes a peremptory 
aspect, like all deep-seated habits, only if we depart from it. 
It is society that draws up for the individual the programme 
of his daily routine. 
It is impossible to live a family life, 
follow a profession, attend to the thousand and one cares 
of the day, do one's shopping, go for a stroll, or even stay at 
home, without obeying rules and submitting to obligations. 
Every instant we have to choose, and we naturally decide on 
what is in keeping with the rule. 
\Ve are hardly conscious of 
this; there is no effort. 
A road has been marked out by 
society; it lies open before us, and we follow it; it would 
take more initiative to cut across country. Duty, in this sense, 
is almost always done automatically; and obedience to duty, if 
we restrict ourselves to the most usual case, might be defined 
as a fonn of non-exertion, passive acquiescence. 
How comes 
it, then, that on the contrary this obedience appears as a state 
of strain, and duty itself as something harsh and unbending? 
Obviously because there occur cases where obedience implies 
an overcoming of self. 
These cases are exceptions; but we 
notice them because they are accompanied by acute conscious­
ness, as happens with all forms of hesitation-in fact conscious­
ness is this hesita.t.ion itself; for a n  action which is started 
automatically passes almost unperceived. 
Thus, owing to the 
interdependence of our duties, and because the obligation as 
a whole is immanent in each of its parts, all duties are tinged 
with the hue taken on exceptionally by one or the other of 

12 
MORAL O BLIGATIO N 
them. 
From the practical point of view this presents no in­
convenience, there are even certain advantages in looking at 
things in this way. 
For, however naturally we do our duty, 
we may meet with resistance withm ourselves; it is wise to 
expect it, and not take for granted that it is easy to remain a 
good husband, a decent citizen, a conscientious worker, in a 
word an honest fellow. Besides, there is a considerable amount 
of truth in this opinion; for if it is relatively easy to keep within 
the social order, yet we have had to enrol in it, and this en­
rolment demands an effort. 
The natural disobedience of the 
child, the necessity of education, are proof of this. 
It is but 
just to credit the indi,·idual with the consent virtually gi,·en 
to the totality of his obligations, even if he no longer needs 
to take counsel with himself on each one of them. The rider 
need only allow himself to be borne along; stil he has had 
to get into the saddle. 
S o  it is with the individual in relation 
to society. In one sense it would be untrue, and in e\·ery sense 
it would be dangerous, to say that duty can be done auto­
matically. Let us then set up as a practical maxim that obe­
dience to duty means resistance to self. 
But a maxim is one thing, an explanation another. 
\Vhen, 
in order to define obligation, its essence and its origin, we lay 
down that obedience is primarily a struggle with self, a state 
of tension or contraction, we make a psychological error 
which has vitiated many theories of ethics. 
Thus artificial 
dificulties haYe arisen, problems which set philosophers at 
variance and which will be found to vanish when we analyse 
the terms in \vhich they are expressed. 
Obligation is in no 
sense a unique fact, incommensurate with others, looming 
above them like a mysterious apparition. 
If a considerable 
number of philosophers, especially those who follow Kant, 
have taken this view, it is because they ha,·e confused the sense 
of obligation, a tranquil state akin to inclination, with the 

1\I O R A L O B L I G A T I O N  
13 
violent effort we now and again exert on ourselves to break 
down a possible obstacle to obligation. 
After an attack of rheumatism, we may feel some dis­
comfort and even pain in moving our muscles and joints. 
It 
is the general sensation of a resistance set up by all our 
organs together. 
Little by little it decreases and ends by being 
lost in the consciousness we have of our movements when we 
are well. Now, we are at liberty to fancy that it is still there, 
in an incipient, or rather a subsiding, condition, that it is only 
on the look-out for a chance to become more acute; we must 
indeed expect attacks of rheumatism if we are rheumatic. 
Yet 
what should we say of a philosopher who saw in our habitual 
sensations, when moving our arms and legs, a mere diminution 
of pain, and who then defined our motory faculty as an effort 
to resist rheumatic discomfort? 
To begin with, he would 
thus be giving up the attempt to account for motory habits, 
since each of these implies a particular combination of move­
ments, and can be explained only by that combination. 
The 
general faculty of walking, running, moving the body, is but 
an aggregation of these elementary habits, each of them find­
ing its own explanation in the special movements it involves. 
But having only considered the faculty as a whole, and having 
then defined it as a force opposed to a resistance, it is natural 
enough to set up rheumatism beside it as an independent 
entity. 
It would seem as though some such error had been. 
made by many of those who have speculated on obligation. 
\Ve have any number of particular obligations, each calling 
for a separate explanation. 
It is natural, or, more strictly 
speaking, it is a matter of habit to obey them all. Suppose that 
exceptionally we deviate from one of them, there would be 
resistance; if we resist this resistance, a state of tension or 
contraction is likely to result. 
It is this rigidity which we 
objectify when we attribute so stern an aspect to duty. 
It is also vlhat the philosophers have in mind, when they 

14 
M OR A L O B L I G A T I O N  
see fit to resolve obligation into rational elements. 
In order 
to resist resistance, to keep to the right paths, when desire, 
passion or interest tempt us aside, we must necessarily give 
ourselves reasons. 
Even if we have opposed the unlawful de­
sire by another, the latter, conjured up by the will, could 
arise only at the call of an idea. In a word, an intel ligent being 
generally exerts his influence on himself through the medium 
of intelligence. 
But from the fact that we get back to obliga­
tion by rational ways it does not follow that obligation was of 
a rational order. We shall dwell on this point later; we do not 
intend to discuss ethical theories for the present. 
Let us 
merely say that a tendency, natural or acquired, is one thing, 
another thing the necessarily rational method which a reason­
able being will use to restore to it i ts force and to combat 
what is opposing it. 
In the latter case the tendency which has 
been obscured may reappear; and then everything doubtless 
happens as though we had succeeded by this method in re­
establishing the tendency anew. 
In reality we have merely 
swept aside something that hampered or checked it. 
It comes 
to the same thing, I grant you, in practice: e xplain the fact in 
one way or another, the fact is there, we have achieved success. 
And in order to succeed it is perhaps better to imagine that 
things did happen in the former way. 
But to state that this is 
actually the case would be to vitiate the whole theory of 
obligation. Has not this been the case with most philosophers? 
Let there be no misunderstanding. 
Even if we confine our­
selves to a c cnain aspect of morality, as we have done up to 
now, we shall find many different attitudes towards duty. 
They line the intervening space between the extremes of two 
attitudes, or rather two habits: that of moving so naturally 
along the ways laid down by society as barely to notice them; 
or on the contrary hesitating and deliberating on which way 
to take, how far to go, the distances out and back we sh all 
have to cover if we try several paths one after another. In the 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
15 
second case new problems arise with more or less frequency; 
and even in those instances where our duty is fully mapped 
out, we make all sorts of distinctions in fulfilling it. But, in 
the first place, the former attitude is that of the immense 
majority of men; it is probably general in backward com­
munities. And, after all, however much we may reason in 
each panicular case, formulate the maxim, enunciate the prin­
ciple, deduce the consequences: if desire and passion join in 
the discussion, if temptation is strong, if we are on the point 
of falling, if suddenly we recover ourselves, what was it that 
pulled us up? A force assens itself which we have called the 
"totality of obligation": the concentrated extract, the quintes­
sence of innumerable specific habits of obedience to the count­
less particular requirements of social life. This force is no one 
particular thing and, if it could speak (whereas it prefers to 
act), it would say: "You must because you must." Hence the 
work done by intelligence in weighing reasons, comparing 
maxims, going back to first principles, was to introduce more 
logical consistency into a line of conduce subordinated by its 
very nature to the claims of society; but this social claim was 
the real root of obligation. Never, in our hours of temptation, 
should we sacrifice to the mere need for logical consistency our 
interest, our passion, our vanity. Because in a reasonable being 
reason does indeed intervene as a regulator to assure this con­
sistency between obligatory rules or maxims, philosophy has 
been led to look upon it as a principle of obligation. W c might 
as well believe that the fly-wheel drives the machinery. 
Besides, the demands of a society dovetail into one another. 
Even the individual whose decent behaviour is the least based 
on reasoning and, if I may put it so, the most conventional, 
introduces a rational order into his conduct by the mere fact 
of obeying rules which are logically connected together. 
I 
freely admit that such logic has been late in taking possession 
of society. 
Logical co-ordination is essentially economy. 

16 
MORAL OBLIGAT ION 
From a whole it first roughly extracts cenain principles and 
then excludes exerything which is not in accordance with 
them. Nature, ,by contrast, is lavish. The closer a community 
is to nature, the greater the proponion of unaccountable and 
inconsistent rules it lays down. 
We find in primitive races 
many prohibitions and prescriptions explicable at most by 
vague associations of ideas, by superstition, by automatism. 
Nor are they \vithout their use, since the obedience of every­
one to laws, even absurd ones, assures greater cohesion to the 
community. But in that case the usefulness of the rule ac­
crues, by a kind of reverse action, solely from the fact of our 
submission to it. 
Prescriptions or prohibitions which are in­
trinsically useful are those that are explicitly designed for the 
preservation or well-being of society. No doubt they have 
gradually detached themselves from the others and survived 
them. 
Social demands have therefore been co-ordinated with 
each other and subordinated to principles. But no matter. 
Logic permeates indeed present-day communities, and even the 
man who does not reason out his conduct will live reasonably 
if he conforms to these principles. 
But the essence of obligation is a different thing from a re­
quirement of reason. 
This is all we have tried to suggest so 
far. Our description would, we think, correspond more and 
more to reality as one came to deal with less developed com­
munities and more rudimentary stages of consciousness. 
It 
remains a bare outline so long as we confine ourselves to the 
normal conscience, such as is found to-day in the ordinary de­
cent person. But precisely because we are in this case dealing 
with a strange complex of feelings, of ideas and tendencies all 
interpenetrating each other, we shall avoid anificial analyses 
and arbitrary syntheses only if we have at hand an outline 
which gives the essential. 
Such is the outline we have at­
tempted to trace. Conceive obligation as weighing on the will 
like a habit, each obligation dragging behind it the accumulated 

M O R A L O B L I G A T I O N  
17 
mass of the others, and utilising thus for the pressure it is 
exening the weight of the whole: here you have the totality of 
obligation for a simple, elementary, moral conscience. 
That 
is the essential: that is what obligation could, if necessary, 
be reduced to, even in those cases where it attains its highest 
complexity. 
This shows when and in what sense (how slightly Kantian!) 
obligation in its elementary state takes the form of a "categor­
ical imperative." 
We should find it very difficult to discover 
examples of such an imperative in everyday life. 
A military 
order, which is a command that admits neither reason nor 
reply, does say in fact: "You must because you must." 
But, 
though you may give the soldier no reason, he will imagine 
one. If we want a pure case of the categorical imperative, we 
must construct one a priori or at least make an arbitrary 
abstraction of experience. 
So let us imagine an ant who is 
stirred by a gleam of reflection and thereupon judges she has 
been wrong to work unremittingly for others. Her inclination 
to laziness would indeed endure but a few moments, just as 
long as the ray of intelligence. 
In the last of these moments, 
when instinct regaining the mastery would drag her back by 
sheer force to her task, intelligence at the point of relapsing 
into instinct would say, as its parting word: "You must be­
cause you must." This "must because you must" would only 
be the momentary feeling of awareness of a tug which the ant 
experiences-the tug which the string, momentarily relaxed, 
exens as it drags her back. 
The same command would ring 
in the ear of a sleep-walker on the point of waking, or even 
actually beginning to wake, from the dream he is enacting: 
if he lapsed back at once into a hypnotic state, a categorical 
imperative would express in words, on behalf of the reflexion 
which had just been on the point of emerging and had in­
stantly disappeared, the inevitableness of the relapse. 
In a 
word, an absolutely categorical imperative is instinctive or 

18 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
somnamb ulistic, enacted as such in a normal state, represented 
a s  such if reflexion is ro used long enough to take form, not 
long eno ugh to seek for reasons. 
B ut, then, is it not evident 
that, in a reasonable being, an imperative will tend to become 
categorical in proportion as th e activity bro ught into play, 
altho ugh intelligent, will tend to become instinctive? 
But an 
activity which, sta rting as intelligent, progresses tow ards an 
imitation of instinct is exactly what we call, in man, a habit. 
And the most powerful habit, the habit whose strength is 
made up of the acc um ulated force of all the elementary social 
habits, is necessarily the one w hich best i mitates instinct. 
Is 
it then s urprising that, in the short moment 'vhich separates 
obliga tion merely experienced as a living force from obligation 
f ully real ized and justified by all sorts of reasons, obligat ion 
sho uld i ndeed take the fo rm of the categorical imperative : 
"yo u  must bec ause yo u must"? 
Let us consider two divergent lines of evol ution with so ­
cieties at the extremities of each. 
The type of society which 
will appear the more n atural will obvio usly be the instinctive 
type; the link that unites the bees of a hive resembles far more 
the link which holds together the cells of an organism, co­
ord inate and subordinate to one another. 
Let us suppose for 
an instant that na ture has intended to prod uce at the extremity 
of the second line societies where a certain latitude was left 
to individual choice : she wo uld have arranged that intelligence 
sho uld achieve here res ults comparable, as regards their reg­
ularity, to those of instinct in the other; she wo uld have had 
reco urse to habit. 
Each of these habits, which may be called 
"moral," wo uld be incidental. 
B ut the aggregate of them, I 
mean the habit of contracting these habits, being at the very 
basis of societies and a necessary condition of their existence, 
wo uld have a force comparable to that of inst inct in respect 
of both intensity and regularity. This is exactly what we hav e 
called the "totality of obligation." 
This, be it said, will apply 

M O R A L O B L I G A T I O N  
19 
only to human societ ies at the moment of emerging from the 
hands of nature. 
It will apply to primitive and to el em entary 
soc ieties. 
But, howeve r much human society may progress, 
grow complicated and spiri tualized, the o riginal d esign, e x­
pressing the purpose of nature, will remain. 
Now th is is exactly what has happen ed . 
Without going 
deeply into a matte r we have dealt with elsewhere, l et us 
simply say that intelligence and instinct a re forms of consciou s­
ness which must have interpenetrated each other in thei r 
rudimentary state and become dissociated as they grew. 
Th is 
development occu rred on the two main lines of evolution of 
animal l ife, with the Arth ropods and the Verteb rates. 
At the 
end of the form e r  we have the instinct of insects, more espe­
cially the Hymenoptera; at the end of the second, human 
intelligence. 
I nstinct and intelligence have each as their es­
sent ial obj ect the utilisation of implements: in the first case, 
o rgans suppl ied by nature and h ence immutable; in the second, 
invented tools, and the re fore varied and unforeseen. 
The 
implement is, moreove r, designed for a certain type of work, 
and this work is all the more efficient the mo re it is spec ialized, 
the more it is d ivided up between diversely qualified workers 
who mutually supplement one anothe r. 
Social life is thus im ­
manent, like a vague ideal, in instinct as well as in intelligence :  
th is ideal finds its most complete expression i n  the hive o r  the 
ant-hill on the one hand, in human soc ieties on the othe r. 
Whether human or an imal, a society is an organization; it im ­
pl ies a co-ordination and generally also a subo rdination of 
elements; it therefore exhibits, whether merely embodied in 
l ife or, in add ition, specifically formulated, a collection of 
rules and laws. 
But in a hive or an ant-hill the individual is 
riveted to h is task by his struc ture, and the organization is 
relat ively inva riable, whereas the human community is variable 
in form, open to every k ind of progress. 
The result is that 
in the forme r each rule is laid dow n by nature, and is nec es -

20 
MORAL OBLIGAT ION 
sary: whereas in the latter only one thing is natural, the 
necessity of a rule. Thus the more, in human society, we delve 
down to the root of the various obligations to reach obligation 
in general, the more obligation will tend to become necessity, 
the nearer it will draw, in its peremptory aspect, to instinct. 
And yet we should make a great mistake if we tried to' ascribe 
any particular obligation, whatever it might be, to instinct. 
\Vhat we must perpetually recall is that, no one obligation 
being instinctive, obligation as a whole would bave been in­
stinct if human societies were not, so to speak, ballasted with 
variability and intelligence. It is a virtual instinct, like that 
which lies behind the habit of speech. The morality of a 
human society may indeed be compared to its language. 
If 
ants exchange signs, which seems probable, those signs are 
provided by the very instinct that makes the ants communicate 
with one another. On the contrary, our languages are the 
product of custom. 
Nothing in the vocabulary, or even in 
the syntax, comes from nature. But speech is natural, and 
unvarying signs, natural in origin, which a:re presumably used 
in a community of insects, exhibit what our language would 
have been, if nature in bestowing on us the faculty of speech 
had not added that function which, since it makes and uses 
tools, is inventive and called intelligence. vVe must perpetually 
recur to ·what obligation would have been if human society 
had been instinctive instead of intelligent: this will not explain 
any particular obligation, we shall even give of obligation in 
general an idea which would be false, if we went no further; 
and yet we must think of this instinctive society as the counter­
part of intelligent society, if we are not to start without any 
clue in quest of the foundations of morality. 
From this point of view obligation loses its specific char­
acter. 
It ranks among the most general phenomena of life. 
When the elements which go to make up an organism submit 
to a rigid discipline, can we say that they feel themselves liable 

M O R A L O B L I G A T I O N  
21 
to obligation and that they are obeying a social inst inct? 
Ob­
v iously not; but whereas such an organism is barely a com­
m unity, the hive and the ant-hill are actual organisms, the 
elements of wh ich are un ited by in vis ible ties, and the social 
instinct of an ant-I mean the force by v irtue of which the 
worker, for example, performs the task to wh ich she is pre­
destined by her structure -cannot differ radically from the 
cause, whatever it be, by v irtue of wh ich every t issue, every 
cell of a l iving body, to ils for the greatest good of the whole. 
Indeed it is, strictly speaking, no more a matter of obligation 
in the one case than in the other, but rather of necessity. 
It is 
j ust this necess ity that we perceive, not actual but virtual, at 
the foundations of moral obl igation, as through a more or less 
transparent yeil. 
A human being feels an obligation only if 
he is free, and each obligation, considered separately, implies 
liberty. 
B ut it is necessary that there should be obl igat ions; 
and the deeper "·e go, away from those particular obligat ions 
which are at the top, towards obl igation in general, or, as we 
have sa id, t mvards obl igation as a \vhole, wh ich is at the bot­
tom, the more obl igation appears as the very form assumed by 
necessity in the realm of life, when i t  demands, for the accom­
plishment of certain ends, intelligence, cho ice, and therefore 
liberty. 
Here aga in it may be alleged that th is appl ies to very s imple 
h uman societies, that is to say primitive or rudimentary so­
c ieties. 
Certainly, but, as we shall have occasion to point o ut 
later, c ivilized man d iffers from primitive man above all by 
the enormous mass of knowledge and hab its which he has 
absorbed, since the first awakening of h is consciousness, from 
the social surroundings in which they were stored up . 
\Vha t  
is na rural i s  in great measure overlaid by what is acq uired; but 
it end ures, almost unchangeable, throughout the centuries; 
hab its and knowledge by no means impregnate the organism 
to the extent of being transmitted by heredity, as used to be 

22 
MORA L O BLIGAT ION 
supposed. It is true that we could consider what is natural 
as negligible in our analysis of obligation, if it had been crushed 
out by the acquired habits which have accumulated over 
it in the course of centuries of civilization. 
But it remains in 
excellent condition, very much alive, in the most civilized so­
ciety. To it we must revert, not to account for this or that 
social obligation, but to explain what we have called obligation 
as a whole. Our civilized communities, however different they 
may be from the society to which we were primarily destined 
by nature, exhibit indeed, with respect to that society, a fun­
damental resemblance. 
For they too are closed societies. They may be very ex­
tensive compared to the small agglomerations to which we 
were drawn by instinct and which the same instinct would 
probably tend to revive to-day if all the material and spiritual 
acquisitions of civilization were to disappear from the social 
environment in which we find them stored; their essential 
characteristic is none the less to include at any moment a cer­
tain number of individuals, and exclude others. 
We have 
said above, that underlying moral obligation there was a social 
demand. Of what society were we speaking? 
Was it of that 
open society represented by all mankind? 
We did not settle 
the matter, any more than one usually does when speaking of 
a man's duty to his fellows; one remains prudently vague; one 
refrains from making any assertion, but one would like to 
have it believed that "human society" is already an accom­
plished fact. 
And it is well that we should like to have it 
believed, for if incontestably we have duties towards man 
as man (although these duties have an entirely different origin, 
as we shall see a little later) we should risk undermining them, 
were we to make a radical distinction between them and our 
duties to our fellow-citizens. This is right enough so far as 
action is concerned. 
But a moral philosophy which does not 
emphasize this distinction misses the truth; its analyses wil 

M O R A L  OB L I G AT I O N  
23 
thereby be inevitably distorted. 
In fact, when we lay down 
that the duty of respecting the life and property of others is 
a fundamental demand of social life, what society do we 
mean? To find an answer we need only think what happens 
in time of war. 
Murder and pillage and perfidy, cheating and 
lying become not only lawful, they are actually praiseworthy. 
The warring nations can say, with Macbeth's witches: "Fair 
is foul, and foul is fair." 
Would this be possible, would the 
transfonnation take place so easily, generally and instanta­
neously, if it were really a certain attitude of man towards 
man that society had been enjoining on us up till then? 
Oh, 
I know what society says (it has, I repeat, its reasons for say­
ing so) ; but to know what it thinks and what it wants, we 
must not listen too much to what it says, we must look at 
what it does. 
It says that the duties it defines are indeed, in 
principle, duties towards humanity, but that under excep­
tional circumstances, regrettably unavoidable, they are for the 
time being inapplicable. 
If society did not express itself thus, 
it would bar the road to progress for another morality, not 
derived from it, which it has every inducement to humour. 
On the other hand, it is consistent with our habits of mind to 
consider as abnonnal anything relatively rare or exceptional, 
disease for instance. But disease is as nonnal as health, which, 
viewed from a certain standpoint, appears as a constant effort 
to prevent disease or to avoid it. 
In the same way, peace has 
always hitherto been a preparation for defence or even attack, 
at any rate for war. 
Our social duties aim at social cohesion; 
whether we will or no they compose for us an attitude which 
is that of discipline in the face of the enemy. This means that, 
however much society may endow man, whom it has trained 
to discipline, with all it has acquired during centuries of 
civilization, society still has need of that primitive instinct 
which it coats with so thick a varnish. 
In a word, the social 
instinct which we have detected at the basis of social obliga-

24 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
tion always has in view-instinct being relatively unchange­
able-a closed society, however large. 
It is doubtless overlaid 
by another morality which for that very reason it supports 
and to which it lends something of its force, I mean of its 
imperative character. But it is not itself concerned ·with 
humanity. For between the nation, however big, and humanity 
there lies the whole distance from the finite to the indefinite, 
from the closed to the open. 
vVe are fond of saying that the 
apprenticeship to civic virtue is served in the family, and that 
in the same way, from holding our country dear, we learn 
to love mankind. Our sympathies are supposed to broaden 
out in an unbroken progression, to expand while remaining 
identical, and to end by embracing all humanity. 
This is a 
priori reasoning, the result of a purely intellectualist concep­
tion of the soul. 
\Ve observe that the three groups to \vhich 
we can attach ourselves comprise an increasing number of 
people, and we conclude that a progressive expansion of feeling 
keeps pace with the increasing size of the object we lm·e. 
And what encourages the illusion is that, by a fortunate coin­
cidence, the first part of the argument chances to fit in with 
the facts; domestic virtues are indeed bound up with civic vir­
tues, for the very simple reason that family and society, orig­
inally undifferentiated, have remained closely connected. But 
between the society in which we live and humanity in general 
there is, we repeat, the same contrast as between the closed and 
the open; the difference between the two objects is one of 
kind and not simply one of degree. 
How much greater it 
would be if, passing to the realm of feeling, we compared with 
each other the two sentiments, love of country and love of 
mankind! 
\Vho can help seeing that social cohesion is largely 
due to the necessity for a community to protect itself against 
others, and that it is primarily as against all other men that we 
love the men with whom we live? 
Such is the primitive in­
stinct. 
It is still there, though fortunately hidden under the 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
25 
accretions of civilization; but even to-day we still love naturally 
and directly our parents and our fellow-countrymen, whereas 
love of mankind is indirect and acquired. We go straight to 
the former, to the latter we come only by roundabout ways; 
for it is only through God, in God, that religion bids man love 
mankind; and likewise it is through reason alone, that Reason 
in whose communion we are all partakers, that philosophers 
make us look at humanity in order to show us the pre-eminent 
dignity of the human being, the right of all to command re­
spect. Neither in the one case nor the other do we come to 
humanity by degrees, through the stages of the family and 
the nation. We must, in a single bound, be carried far be­
yond it, and, without having made it our goal, reach it by 
outstripping it. Besides, whether we speak the language of 
religion or the language of philosophy, whether it be a ques­
tion of love or respect, a different morality, another kind of 
obligation supervenes, above and beyond the social pressure. 
So far we have only dealt with the latter. The time has come 
to pass to the other. 
We have been searching for pure obligation. To find it we 
have had to reduce morality to its simplest expression. The 
advantage of this has been to indicate in what obligation con­
sisted; the disadvantage, to narrow down morality enormously. 
Not indeed because that part of it which we have left on 
one side is not obligatory: is there such a thing as a duty 
which is not compulsory? But it is conceivable that, starting 
from a primitive basis of obligation pure and simple, such as 
we have just defined, this obligation should radiate, expand, 
and even come to be absorbed into something that trans­
figures it. Let us now see what complete morality would be 
like. We shall usc the same method and once more proceed, 
not downwards as up to now but upwards, to the extreme 
limit. 
In all times there have arisen exceptional men, incarnating 

26 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
this morality. Before the saints of Christianity, mankind had 
known the sages of Greece, the prophets of Israel, the Arahants 
of Buddhism, and others besides. It is to them that men have 
always turned for that complete morality which we. had best 
call absolute morality. And this very fact is at once character­
istic and instructive; this very fact suggests to us the existence 
of a difference of kind and not merely one of degree between 
the morality with which we have been dealing up to now and 
that we are about to study, between the minimum and the 
maximum, between the two extremes. \Vhereas the former 
is all the more unalloyed and perfect precisely in proportion 
as it is the more readily reduced to impersonal formulae, the 
second, in order to be fully itself, must be incarnate in a 
privileged person who becomes an example. The generality 
of the one consists in the universal acceptance of a law, that of 
the other in a common imitation of a model. 
Why is it, then, that saints have their imitators, and why 
do the great moral leaders draw the masses after them? They 
ask nothing, and yet they receive. They have no need to 
exhort; their mere existence suffices. For such is precisely the 
nature of this other morality. \Vhereas natural obligation is 
a pressure or a propulsive force, complete and perfect morality 
has the effect of an appeal. 
Only those who have come into touch with a great moral 
personality have fully realized the nature of this appeal. But 
we all, at those momentous hours when our usual maxims of 
conduct strike us as inadequate, have wondered what such or 
such a one would have expected of us under the circumstances. 
It might have been a relation or a friend whom we thus evoked 
in thought. But it might quite as well have been a man we 
had never met, whose life-story had merely been told us, and 
to whose judg01ent we in imagination submitted our conduct, 
fearful of his censure, proud of his approval. It might even 
be a personality brought up from the depths of the soul into 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
27 
the light of consciousness, stirring into life \vithin us, which 
we felt might completely pervade us later, and to which we 
wished to attach ourselves for the time being, as the disciple 
to his teacher. As a matter of fact this personality takes shape 
as soon as we adopt a model; the longing to resemble, which 
ideally generates the form, is an incipient resemblance; the 
word which we shall make our own is the word whose echo we 
have heard within ourselves. But the person matters little. 
Let us merely make the point that, whereas the first morality 
was the more potent the more distinctly it broke up into im­
personal obligation, on the contrary the latter morality, at first 
dispersed among general precepts to which our intelligence 
gave its allegiance, but which did not go so far as to set our 
will in motion, becomes more and more cogent in proportion 
as the multiplicity and generality of its maxims merge more 
completely into a man's unity and individuality. 
Whence does it derive its strength? \Vhat is the principle 
of action which here takes the place of the natural obligation, 
or rather which ends by absorbing it? To discover this, let us 
first see what is tacitly demanded of us. The duties dealt with 
so far are those imposed on us by social life; they :1re binding 
in respect of the city more than in respect of humanity. You 
might say that the second morality-if we do distinguish two 
-differs from the first in that it is human instead of being 
merely social. And you would not be entirely wrong. For 
we have seen that it is not by widening the bounds of the city 
that you reach humanity; between a social morality nnd a 
human morality the difference is not one of degree but of 
kind. The former is the one of which we are generally think­
ing when we feel a natural obligation. Superimposed upon 
these clearly defined duties we like to imagine others, the lines 
of which are perhaps a little blurred. Loyalty, sacrifice of 
self, the spirit of renunciation, charity, such are the words we 
use when we think of these things. But have we, generally 

28 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
speaking, in mind at such times anything more than words? 
Probably not, and we fully realize this. It is sufficient, we say, 
that the formula is there; it will take on its full meaning, the 
idea which is to fill it out will become operative, when the 
occasion arises. It is true that for many people the occasion 
will never arise or the action will be put off till later. With 
certain people the will does make a feeble start, but so feeble 
that the slight shock they feel can in fact be attributed to no 
more than the expansion of social duty broadened and weak­
ened into human duty. But only let these formulae be in­
vested with substance, and that substance become animate, lo 
and behold! a new life is proclaimed; we understand, we feel 
the advent of a new morality. Consequently, in speaking here 
of love of humanity we should doubtless be denoting this 
morality. And yet we should not be expressing the essence 
of it, for the love of humanity is not a self-sufficient force or 
one which has a direct efficacy. The teachers of the young 
know full well that you cannot prevail over egoism by recom­
mending "altruism." It even happens that a generous nature, 
eager to sacrifice itself, experiences a sudden chill at the idea 
that it is working "for mankind." The object is too vast, the 
effect too diffuse. We may therefore conjecture that if a love 
of humanity constitutes this morality, it constitutes it in much 
the same way as the intention of reaching a certain point 
implies the necessity of crossing an intervening space. In one 
sense it is the same thing; in another sense it is something en­
tirely different. 
If we think only of the interval and the 
various points, infinite in number, which we still have to pass 
one by one, we shall be discouraged from starting, like Zeno's 
arrow, and besides there would be no object, no inducement. 
But if we step across the intervening space, thinking only of 
the goal or looking even beyond it, we shall easily accomplish 
a simple act, and at the same time overcome the infinite mul­
tiplicity of which this simplicity is the equivalent. \Vhat then, 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
29 
in this case, is the goal, what the direction of the effort? What 
exactly, in a word, is required of us? 
Let us first define the moral attitude of the man we have 
been considering up to now. He is part and parcel of society; 
he and it are absorbed together in the same task of individual 
and social preservation. Both are self-centred. True, it is 
doubtful whether private interest invariably agrees with public 
interest: we know against what insurmountable difficulties 
utilitarian ethics has always come up when it laid down the 
principle that the individual could seek only his own good, 
while maintaining that this would lead him to desire the good 
of others. An intelligent being, pursuing his personal ad­
vantage, will often do something quite different from what the 
general interest demands. Yet, if utilitarian ethics persists 
in recurring in one form or another, this means that it is not 
untenable, and if it is tenable the reason is precisely because, 
beneath the intelligent activity, forced in fact to choose be­
tween its own interests and those of others, there lies a sub­
stratum of instinctive activity, originally implanted there by 
nature, where the individual and the social are well-nigh in­
distinguishable. The cell lives for itself and also for the or­
ganism, imparting to it vitality and borro,ving vitality from 
it; it will sacrifice itself to the whole, if need be; and it would 
doubtless then say, if it were conscious, that it made this sac­
rifice in its own interest. Such would probably be the state 
of mind of an ant reflecting on her conduct. She would feel 
that her activity hinges on something intermediate between 
the good of the ant and the good of the ant-hill. Now it is 
just with this fundamental instinct that we have associated 
obligation as such: it implies at the beginning a state of things 
in which the individual and society are not distinguishable. 
This is what enables us to say that the attitude to which it 
corresponds is that of an individual and a community con-

30 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
centrated on themselves. At once individual and social, the 
soul here moves round in a circle. It is closed. 
The other attitude is that of the open soul. \Vhat, in that 
case, is allowed in? 
Suppose we say that it embraces all 
humanity: we should not be going too far, we should hardly 
be going far enough, since its love may extend to animals, to 
plants, to all nature. And yet no one of these things which 
would thus fill it would suffice to define the attitude taken by 
the soul, for it could, strictly speaking, do without all of them. 
Its form is not dependent on its content. We have just filled 
it; we could as easily empty it again. "Charity" would persist 
in him who possesses "charity," though there be no other 
living creature on earth. 
Once again, it is not by a process of expansion of the self 
that we can pass from the first state to the second. 
A 
psychology which is too purely intellectualist, following the 
indications of speech, will doubtless define feelings by the 
things with which they are associated; love for one's family, 
love for one's country, love of mankind, it will see in these 
three inclinations one single feeling, growing ever larger, to 
embrace an increasing number of persons. The fact that these 
feelings are outwardly expressed by the same attitude or the 
same sort of motion, that all three incline us to something, 
enables us to group them under the concept "love," and to 
express them by one and the same word; we then distinguish 
them by naming three objects, each larger than the other, to 
which they arc supposed to apply. This does in fact suffice 
to distinguish them. But does it describe them? Or analyse 
them? At a glance, consciousness perceives between the two 
first feelings and the third a difference of kind. The first 
imply a choice, therefore an exclusion; they may act as in­
centives to strife, they do not exclude hatred. The latter is 
all love. The former alight directly on an object which at­
tracts them. The latter does not yield to the attraction of its 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
3 1  
object; it has not aimed at this object; it has shot beyond and 
reached humanity only by passing through humanity. Has it, 
strictly speaking, an object? We shall ask this question. But 
for the present we shall confine ourselves to noting that this 
psychic attitude, or rather psychic motion, is self-sufficient. 
Nevenheless there arises in regard to it a problem which 
stands ready solved in the case of the other. For that other 
was ordained by nature; we have just seen how and why we 
feel bound to adopt it. But the second attitude is acquired; it 
calls for, has always called for, an effort. How comes it that 
the men who have set the example have found other men to 
follow them? And what is the power that is in this case the 
counterpart of social pressure? We have no choice. Beyond 
instinct and habit there is no direct action on the will except 
feeling. The impulse given by feeling can indeed closely re­
semble obligation. Analyse the passion of love, panicularly in 
its early stages; is pleasure its aim? Could we not as well say it 
is pain? Perhaps a tragedy lies ahead, a whole life wrecked, 
wasted, ruined, we know it, we feel it, no matter, we must 
because we must. Indeed the worst perfidy of a nascent passion 
is that it counterfeits duty. But we need not go as far as 
passion. Into the most peaceful emotion there may enter a 
cenain demand for action, which differs from obligation as 
described above in that it will meet with no resistance, in that 
it imposes only what has already been acquiesced in, but 'which 
none the less resembles obligation in that it does impose some­
thing. Nowhere do we see this more clearly than in those 
cases where the demand ceases to have any practical con­
sequence, thus leaving us the leisure to reflect upon it and 
analyse what we feel. This is what occurs in musical emotion, 
for example. We feel, while we listen, as though we could 
not desire anything else but what the music is suggesting to 
us, and that that is just as we should naturally and necessarily 
act did we not refrain from action to listen. Let the music 

32 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
express joy or grief, pity or love, every moment we are what 
it expresses. Not only ourselves, but many others, nay, all 
the others, too. \Vhen music weeps, all humanity, all nature, 
weeps with it. In point of fact it does not introduce these 
feelings into us; it introduces us into them, as passers-by are 
forced into a street dance. Thus do pioneers in morality pro­
ceed. Life holds for them unsuspected tones of feeling like 
those of some new symphony, and they draw us after them 
into this music that we may express it in action. 
It is through excess of intellectualism that feeling is made 
to hinge on an object and that all emotion is held to be the 
reaction of our sensory faculties to an intellectual representa­
tion. Taking again the example of music, we all know that 
it arouses in us well-defined emotions, joy, sorrow, pity, love, 
that these emotions may be intense and that to us they are 
complete, though not attached to anything in particular. Are 
you going to say that we are here in the realm of art and not 
among real things, that therefore we are playing at emotion, 
that our feeling is purely imaginative, and that, anyway, the 
musician could not produce this emotion in us, suggest it with­
out causing it, if we had not already experienced it in real 
life, where it was caused by an object from which art had 
merely to detach it? That would be to forget that joy and 
sorrow, pity and love, are words expressing generalities, words 
which we must call upon to express what music makes us feel, 
whereas each new musical work brings with it new feelings, 
which are created by that music and within that music, are 
defined and delimited by the lines, unique of their kind, of 
the melody or symphony. They have therefore not been 
extracted from life by art; it is we who, in order to express 
them in words, are driven to compare the feeling created by 
the artist with the feeling most resembling it in life. But let 
us then take states of emotion caused in effect by certain things 
and, as it were, prefigured in them. Those ordained by na-

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
33 
ture are finite, that is to say limited in number. They are 
recognizable because they are destined to spur us on to acts 
answering to needs. The others, on the contrary, are real in­
ventions, comparable to those of the musician, at the origin 
of which there has always been a man. Thus mountains may, 
since the beginning of time, have had the faculty of rousing 
in those who looked upon them certain feelings comparable 
with sensations, and indeed inseparable from mountains. But 
Rousseau created in connection with them a new and original 
emotion. This emotion has become current coin, Rousseau 
having put it into circulation. And even to-day it is Rous­
seau who makes us feel it, as much and more than the 
mountains. True, there are reasons why this emotion, sprung 
from the heart of Jean-Jacques, should fasten on to mountains 
rather than any other object; the elementary feelings, akin to 
sensations, which were directly aroused by mountains must 
have been able to harmonize with the new emotion. But 
Rousseau gathered them together, gave them their places, 
henceforth as mere harmonics in a sound for which he pro­
vided, by a true creation, the principal tone. It is the same 
with love of nature in general. Nature has ever aroused feel­
ings which are almost sensations; people have always enjoyed 
the pleasant shade, the cool waters, etc., in fine all those things 
suggested in the word "amoenus" by which the Romans de­
scribed the charm of the country. But a fresh emotion, surely 
the creation of some person or persons, has arisen and used 
these pre-existing notes as harmonics, and produced in this 
way something to be compared with the fresh tones of a new 
instrument, what we call in our respective countries the sen­
timent of nature. The fundamental tone thus introduced might 
have been different, as is the case in the East, in Japan espe­
cially: the timbre would then have been different. 
Feel­
ings akin to sensation, closely bound up with the objects 
which give rise to them, are indeed just as likely to attract a 

34 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
previously created emotion as they are to connect with an 
entirely new one. This is what happened with love. From 
time immemorial woman must have inspired man with an in­
clination distinct from desire, but in immediate contact, as 
though welded to it, and pertaining both to feeling and to 
sensation. But romantic love has a definite date: it sprang up 
during the Middle Ages on the day when some person or 
persons conceived the idea of absorbing love into a kind of 
supernatural feeling, into religious emotion as created by 
Christianity and launched by the new religion into the world. 
When critics reproach mysticism with expressing itself in the 
same terms as passionate love, they forget that it was love 
which began by plagiarizing mysticism, borrowing from it its 
fervour, its raptures, its ecstasies: in using the language of a 
passion it had transfigured, mysticism has only resumed 
possession of its mvn. We may add that the nearer love is 
to adoration, the greater the disproportion between the emo­
tion and the object, the deeper therefore the disappointment 
to which the lover is exposed-unless he decides that he will 
ever look at the object through the mist of the emotion and 
never touch it, that he will, in a word, treat it religiously. Note 
that the ancients had already spoken of the illusions of love, 
but these were errors akin to those of the senses, and they con­
cerned the face of the beloved, her figure, her bearing, her 
character. Think of Lucretius' description: the illusion here 
applies only to the qualities of the loved one, and not, as with 
the modern illusion, to what we can expect of love. Between 
the old illusion and the illusion we have superadded to it there 
is the same difference as between the primitive feeling, eman­
ating from the object itself, and the religious emotion sum­
moned from without by which it has been pervaded and 
eventually submerged. The margin left for disappointment 
is now enormous, for it is the gap between the divine and 
the human. 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
35 
That a new emotion is the source of the great creations of 
art, of science and of civilization in general there seems to 
be no doubt. Not only because emotion is a stimulus, be­
cause it incites the intelligence to undertake ventures and the 
will to persevere with them. \Ve must go much further. 
There are emotions which beget thought; and invention, 
though it belongs to the category of the intellect, may partake 
of sensibility in its substance. For we must agree upon the 
meaning of the words "emotion," "feeling" and "sensibility." 
An emotion is an affective stirring of the soul, but a surface 
agitation is one thing, an upheaval of the depths another. 
The effect is in the first case diffused, in the second it remains 
undivided. In the one it is an oscillation of the parts without 
any displacement of the whole; in the other the whole is driven 
forward. Let us, however, get away from metaphors. \Ve 
must distinguish between two kinds of emotion, two varieties 
of feeling, two manifestations of sensibility which have this 
one feature in common, that they are emotional states dis­
tinct from sensation, and cannot be reduced, like the latter, to 
the psychical transposition of a physical stimulus. In the first 
case the emotion is the consequence of an idea, or of a mental 
picture; the "feeling" is indeed the result of an intellectual 
state which owes nothing to it, which is self-sufficient, and 
which, if it docs experience a certain reaction from the feel­
ing, loses more than it gains. It is the stirring of sensibility by 
a representation, as it were, dropped into it. But the other 
kind of emotion is not produced by a representation which it 
follows and from which it remains distinct. Rather is it, in 
relation to the intellectual states which arc to supervene, a 
cause and not an effect; it is pregnant with representations, not 
one of which is actually formed, but which it draws or might 
draw from its own substance by an organic development. The 
first is infra-intellectual; that is the one with which the psychol­
ogist is generally concerned, and it is this we have in mind 

36 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
when we contrast sensibility with intelligence, and when we 
make of emotions a vague reflection of the representation. But 
of the other we should be inclined to say that it is supra-in­
tellectual, if the word did not immediately and exclusively 
evoke the idea of superiority of value: it is just as much a ques­
tion of priority in time, and of the relation between that which 
generates and that which is generated. Indeed, the second kind 
of emotion can alone be productive of ideas. 
This is just what the critic overlooks when he qualifies as 
"feminine," with a touch of contempt, a psychology which 
accords so extensive and so handsome a place to sensibility. 
First of all he should be blamed for abiding by the current 
commonplaces about women, when it is so easy to use one's 
eyes. I do not intend, for the mere sake of correcting an 
inappropriate word, to enter upon a comparative study of the 
two sexes. Suffice it to say that woman is as intelligent as 
man, but that she is less capable of emotion, and that if there 
is any faculty or power of the soul which seems to attain less 
development in woman than in man, it is not intelligence, but 
sensibility. I mean of course sensibility in the depths, not 
agitation at the surface.1 But no matter. \Vhen the critic 
fancies that he would do injustice to man if he related to sen­
sibility the highest faculties of the mind, he is still more to be 
blamed for not seeing precisely where the difference lies be­
tween that intelligence which understands, discusses, accepts 
1 We need hardly say that there are many exceptions. Religious fer­
vour, for example, can attain, in women, to undreamt-of depths. 
But 
nature has probably ordained, as a general rule, that woman should con­
centrate on her child and confine within somewhat narrow bounds the 
best of her sensibility. 
In this depanment she is indeed incomparable; 
here the emotion is supra-intellectual in that it becomes divination. How 
many thingſ rise up m the vision of a mother as she gazes in wonder 
upon her hnle one? 
Illusion perhaps! 
This is not cenain. 
Let us 
rather say that reality is big with possibilities, and that the mother sees 
in the child not only what he wiil become, but also what he would be­
come, if he were not obliged, at every step in his life, to choose and 
therefore to exclude. 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
3 7  
o r  rejects-which in a word limits itself t o  criticism-and the 
intelligence which im·ents. 
Creation signifies, above all, emotion, and that not in lit­
erature or art alone. \Ve all know the concentration and effort 
implied in scientific discovery. 
Genius has been defined as 
"an infinite capacity for taking pains." 
True, we think of 
intelligence as something apart, and, too, as something equally 
apart a general faculty of attention which, when more or less 
developed, is supposed to produce a greater or less concentra­
tion of intelligence. 
But how could this indeterminate atten­
tion, extraneous to intelligence, bring out of intelligence some­
thing which is not there? 
\Ve cannot help feeling that 
psychology is once more the dupe of language when, having 
used the same word to denote all efforts of attention made in 
all possible cases, and having thus been deceived into assum­
ing them to be all of the same quality, it perceives between 
chem only differences of degree. 
The truth is that in each 
case attention takes on a distincti\-e colouring, as though in­
dividualized by the object to which it applies: this is why 
psychology has already a tendency to use the term "interest" 
as much as "attention," thus implicitly introducing sensibility, 
as being capable of more extensive variation according to par­
ticular cases. 
But then this diversity is not sufficiently in­
sisted upon; a general faculty of being interested is posited, 
which, while always the same faculty, once again affords 
nriety only through a greater or less application to its object. 
So do not let us speak of interest in general. 
Let us rather 
say that the problem which has aroused interest is a repre­
sentation duplicated by an emotion, and that the emotion, being 
at one and the same time curiosity, desire and the anticipated 
joy of solving a stated problem, is, like the representation, 
unique. 
It is the emotion which drives the intelligence for­
ward in spite of obstacles. 
It is the emotion above all which 
vivifies, or rather vitalizes, the intellecrual elements with which 

38 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
It IS destined to unite, constantly collecting everything that 
can be worked in with them and finally compelling the enunci­
ation of the problem to expand into its solution. 
And what 
about literature and an? A work of genius is in most cases 
the outcome of an emotion, unique of its kind, which seemed 
to baffle expression, and yet which bad to express itself. 
But 
is not this so of all work, however imperfect, into which there 
enters some degree of creativeness? 
Anyone engaged in 
writing has been in a position to feel the difference between 
an intelligence left to itself and that which burns with the fire 
of an original and unique emotion, born of the identification 
of the author with his subject, that is to say of intuition. 
In 
the first case the mind cold-hammers the materials, combining 
together ideas long since cast into words and which society 
supplies in a solid form. 
In the second, it would seem that the 
solid materials supplied by intelligence first melt and mix, then 
solidify again into fresh ideas now shaped by the creative mind 
itself. 
If these ideas find words already existing which can 
express them, for each of them this seems a piece of unexpected 
good luck; and, in truth, it has often been necessary to assist 
fonune, and strain the meaning of a word, to mould it to the 
thought. 
In that event the effort is painful and the result 
problematical. But it is in such a case only that the mind feels 
itself, or believes itself, to be creative. 
It no longer starts from 
a multiplicity of ready-made elements to arrive at a composite 
unity made up of a new arrangement of the old. 
It has been 
transported at a bound to something which seems both one 
and unique, and which will contrive later to express itself, more 
or less satisfactorily, in concepts both multiple and common, 
previously provided by language. 
To sum up, alongside of the emotion which is a result of the 
representation and which is added to it, there is the emotion 
which precedes the image, which vinually contains it, and is 
to a certain extent its cause. A play may be scarcely a work 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
39 
of literature and yet it may rack our nerves and cause an emo­
tion of the first kind, intense, no doubt, but commonplace, 
culled from those we experience in the course of daily life, and 
in any case devoid of mental content. But the emotion excited 
within us by a great dramatic work is of quite a distinct char­
acter. 
Unique of its kind, it ha s sprung up in the soul of the 
poet and there alone, before stirring our own; from this emo­
tion the work has sprung, to this emotion the author was con­
tinually harking back throughout the composition of the work. 
It was no more than a creative exigency, but it was a specific 
one, now satisfied once the work is finished, which would 
not have been satis fied by some other work unless that other 
had possessed an inward and profound resemblance with the 
former, such as that which exists b etween two equally satis­
factory renderings, in tenns of ideas or images, of one and the 
same melody. 
Which amounts to saying that, in attributing to emotion a 
large share in the genesis of the moral disposition, we are 
not by any means enunciating a "moral philosophy of senti­
ment." 
For we are dealing with an emotion capable of 
crystallising into representations and even into an ethical 
doctrine. 
From this panicular doctrine we could never have 
elicited the moral disposition any more than from any other; 
no amount of speculation will create an obligation or anything 
like it: the theory may be all very fine, I shall always be ab le 
to say that I will not accept it; and even if I do accept it, 
I shall claim to be free and do as I please. But if the atmosphere 
of the emotion is there, if I have breathed it in, if it has entered 
my being, I shall act in accordance with it, uplifted by it; not 
from constraint or necessity, but by virtue of an inclination 
which I should not want to resist. 
And instead of explaining 
my act by emotion itself, I might in this case just as well 
deduce it from the theory built up by the transposition of 
that emotion into ideas. We here get a glimpse of the possible 

40 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
reply to a weighty question which we have just touched on 
incidentally and with which we shall be confronted later. 
People are fond of saying that if a religion brings us a new 
morality, it imposes that morality by means of the meta­
physics which it disposes us to accept, by its ideas on God, 
the universe, the relation of the one to the other. 
To which 
the answer has been made that it is, on the contrary, by the 
superiority of its morality that a religion wins over souls 
and reveals to them a certain conception of things. 
But would 
intelligence recognize the superiority of the proposed morality, 
since it can appreciate differences of value only by comparing 
them with a rule or an ideal, and this ideal and this rule are 
perforce supplied by the morality which is already in occupa­
tion? On the other hand, how could a new conception of the 
universal 
order of things 
be anything but yet another 
philosophy to set alongside of those we know? 
Even if our 
intelligence is won over, we shall never see in it anything 
but an explanation, theoretically preferable to the others. 
Even if it seems to enjoin on us, as more in harmony with 
itself, certain rules of conduct, there will be a wide gap 
between this assent of the intellect and a conversion of the 
will. 
But the truth is that the doctrine cannot, as a purely 
intellectual representation, ensure the adoption and, above all, 
the practice of the corresponding morality, any more than the 
particular morality, considered by intelligence as a system of 
rules of conduct, can render the doctrine intellectually prefer­
able. 
Antecedent to the new morality, and also the new meta­
physics, there is the emotion, which develops as an impetus 
in the realm of the will, and as an explicative representation 
in that of intelligence. 
Take, for example, the emotion in­
troduced by Christianity under the name of charity: if it 
wins over souls, a certain behaviour ensues and a certain 
doctrine is disseminated. 
But neither has its metaphysics 
enforced the moral practice, nor the moral practice induced a 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
4 1  
disposition to its metaphysics. 
Metaphysics and morality 
express here the self-same thing, one in terms of intelligence, 
the other in terms of will ; and the two expressions of the 
thing are accepted together, as soon as the thing is there to 
be expressed. 
That a substantial half of our morality includes duties 
whose obligatory character is to be explained fundamentally 
by the pressure of society on the individual will be readily 
granted, because these duties are a matter of current practice, 
because they have a clear precise formula, and it is therefore 
easy for us, by grasping them where they are entirely visible, 
and then going down to the roots, to discover the social 
requirements from which they sprang. 
But that the rest of 
morality expresses a certain emotional state, that actually we 
yield not to a pressure but to an attraction, many people will 
hesitate to acknowledge. 
The reason is that here we cannot, 
generally speaking, get back to the original emotion in the 
depths of our hearts. 
There exist formulae which are the 
residue of this emotion, and which have settled in what we 
may call the social conscience according as, within that emo­
tion, a new conception of life took form-or rather a certain 
attitude towards life. 
Precisely because we find ourselves in 
the presence of the ashes of an extinct emotion, and because 
the driving power of that emotion came from the fire within 
it, the formulae which have remained would generally be 
incapable of rousing our will, if older formulae, expressing 
the fundamental requirements of social life, did not by con­
tagious influence communicate to them something of their 
own obligatory character. 
These two moralities, placed side 
by side, appear now to be only one, the first having lent to 
the second something of its imperative character and having, 
on the other hand, received from it in exchange a connotation 
less strictly social, more broadly human. 
But let us stir the 
ashes, we shall find some of them still warm, and at length the 

42 
M OR A L O B LIGATION 
sparks will kindle into flame; the fire may blaze up again; and, 
if it docs, it will gradually spread. I mean that the maxims 
of the second morality do not work singly, like those of the 
first: as soon as one of them, ceasing to be abstract, becomes 
filled with significance and acquires the capacity to act, the 
others tend to do the same: at last they all fuse in the warm 
emotion which left them behind long ago, and in the men, 
now come to life again, who experienced it. 
Founders and 
reformers of religions, mystics and saints, obscure heroes of 
moral life whom we have met on our way and who are in 
our eyes the equals of the greatest, they are all there: inspired 
by their example, \Ve follow them, as if we were joining an 
army of conquerors. They are indeed conquerors: they have 
broken down natural resistance and raised humanity to a new 
destiny. Thus, ·when we dispel appearances to get at reality, 
when we set aside the common form assumed, thanks to 
mutual exchanges, by the two moralities in conceptual thought 
and in speech, then, at the two extremes of the single morality 
we find pressure and aspiration: the former the more perfect 
as it becomes more impersonal, closer to those natural forces 
which we call habit or even instinct, the latter the more 
powerful according as it is more obviously aroused in us by 
definite persons, and the more it apparently triumphs over 
nature. True, if we went down to the roots of nature itself 
we should perhaps find that the s ame force which manifests 
itself directly, rotating on its own axis, in the human species 
once constituted, also acts later and indirectly, through the 
medium of privileged persons, in order to drive humanity 
forward. 
But there is no need to resort to metaphysics to determine 
the relation between this pressure and this aspiration. 
Once 
again, there is some difficulty in comparing the two moralities 
because they are no longer to be found in a pure state. The 
first has handed on to the second something of its compulsive 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
43 
force; the second has diffused over the other something of its 
perfume. 
W c find ourselves in the presence of a series of 
steps up or down, according as we range through the dictates 
of morality from one extreme or from the other; as to the 
two extreme limits, they have chiefly a theoretical interest; 
it is not often that they arc actually attained. 
Let us, neverthe­
less, consider separately, in themselves, pressure and aspiration. 
Immanent in the former is the representation of a society 
which aims only at self-preservation; the circular movement 
in which it carries round with it individuals, as it revolves on 
the same spot, is a vague imitation, through the medium of 
habit, of the immobility of instinct. 
The feeling which would 
characterize the consciousness of these pure obligations, as­
suming they were all fulfilled, \vould be a state of individual 
and social well-being similar to that \vhich accompanies the 
normal working of life. 
It would resemble pleasure rather 
than joy. 
The morality of aspiration, on the contrary, im­
plicitly contains the feeling of progress. 
The emotion of 
which we were speaking is the enthusiasm of a forward 
movement, enthusiasm by means of which this morality has 
won over a few and has then, through them, spread over the 
world. 
"Progress" and "advance," moreover, are in this case 
indistinguishable from the enthusiasm itself. 
To become con­
scious of them it is not necessary that we should picture a goal 
that we are trying to reach or a perfection to which \Ve are 
approximating. 
It is enough that the joy of enthusiasm in­
volves something more than the pleasure of well-being: the 
pleasure not implying the joy, while the joy does imply and 
encompass the pleasure. 
We feel this to be so, and the cer­
tainty thus obtained, far from hinging on a metaphysical 
theory, is what will provide it with its firmest support. 
But antecedent to this metaphysical theory, and far nearer 
to what we have directly experienced, are the simpler repre­
sentations which in this case spring from the emotion in pro-

44 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
portion as we dwell on it. 
We were speaking of the founders 
and reformers of religion, the mystics and the saints. 
Let us 
hearken to their language; it merely expresses in representa­
tions the emotions peculiar to a soul opening out, breaking 
with nature, which enclosed it both within itself and within 
the city. 
They begin by saying that what they experience is a feeling 
of liberation. 
Well-being, pleasures, riches, all those things 
that mean so much to the common run of men, leave them 
indifferent. 
In breaking away from them they feel relief, and 
then exhilaration. 
Not that nature was wrong in attaching us 
by strong ties to the life she had ordained for us. But we must 
go further, and the amenities which are real comforts at home 
would become hindrances, burdensome impedimenta, if we 
had to take them on our travels. 
That a soul thus equipped 
for action would be more drawn to sympathize with other 
souls, and even with the whole of nature, might surprise us, 
if the relative immobility of the soul, revolving in a circle in 
an enclosed society, was not due precisely to the fact that 
nature has split humanity into a variety of individuals by the 
very act which constituted the human species. 
Like all acts 
creative of a species, this was a halt on the road. By a resump­
tion of the forward movement, the decision to halt is broken. 
True, to obtain a complete effect, the privileged soul would 
have to carry the rest of humanity with it. But if a few follow, 
and if the others imagine they would do likewise on occasion, 
this already means a great deal; henceforth, with the begin­
ning of accomplishment, there will be the hope that the circle 
may be broken in the end. 
In any case, we cannot repeat too 
often that it is not by preaching the love of our neighbour 
that we can obtain it. 
It is not by expanding our narrower 
feelings that we can embrace humanity. 
However much our 
intelligence may convince itself that this is the line of advance, 
things behave differently. 
What is simple for our understand-

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
45 
ing is not necessarily so for our will. In cases where logic 
affirms that a certain road should be the shortest, experience 
intervenes, and finds that in that direction there is no road. 
The truth is that heroism may be the only way to love. Now, 
heroism cannot be preached, it has only to show itself, and 
its mere presence may stir others to action. For heroism itself 
is a return to movement, and emanates from an emotion­
infectious like all emotions-akin to the creative act. Religion 
expresses this truth in its own way by saying that it is in God 
that we love all other men. And all great mystics declare that 
they have the impression of a current passing from their soul 
to God, and flowing back again from God to mankind. 
Let no one speak of material obstacles to a soul thus freed! 
It will not answer that we can get round the obstacle, or that 
we can break it; it will declare that there is no obstacle. We 
cannot even say of this moral conviction that it moves moun­
tains, for it sees no mountains to move. So long as you argue 
about the obstacle, it will stay where it is; and so long as you 
look at it, you will divide it into parts which will have to be 
overcome one by one; there may be no limit to their number; 
perhaps you will never exhaust them. But you can do away 
with the whole, at a stroke, if you deny its existence. That 
is what the philosopher did who proved movement by walk­
ing: his act was the negation pure and simple of the effort, 
perpetually to be renewed, and therefore fruitless, which 
Zeno judged indispensable to cover, one by one, the stages of 
the intervening space. By going deeply into this new aspect 
of morality, we should find an impression of coincidence, real 
or imaginary, "\vith the generative effort of life. If seen from 
outside, the activity of life lends itself, in each of its works, 
to an analysis which might be carried on indefinitely; there 
is no end to a description of the structure of an eye such as 
ours. But what we call a series of means employed is, in reality, 
but a number of obstacles overcome; the action of nature is 

46 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
simple, and the infinite complexity of the mechanism which 
it seems to have built up piece by piece to achieve the power 
of vision is but the endless network of opposing forces which 
have cancelled one another out to secure an uninterrupted 
channel for the functioning of the faculty. So, if we took into 
account only what we saw, the simple act of an invisible hand 
plunged into iron filings would seem like an inexhaustible in­
terplay of actions and reactions among the filings themselves 
in order that they might effect an equilibrium. 
If such is the 
contrast between the real working of life and the aspect it 
presents to the senses and the intelligence which analyse it, is 
it surprising that a soul which no more recognizes any material 
obstacle should feel itself, rightly or wrongly, at one with the 
principle of life? 
Whatever heterogeneity we may at first find between the 
effect and the cause, and though the distance is great from 
a rule of conduct to a power of nature, it has always been 
from the contact with the generative principle of the human 
species that a man has felt he drew the strength to love man­
kind. 
By this I mean, of course, a love which absorbs and 
kindles the whole soul. 
Bʩt a more lukewarm love, faint and 
fleeting, can only be a radiation of the former, if not a still 
paler and colder image of it, left behind in the mind or de­
posited in speech. 
Thus, morality comprises two different 
parts, one of which follows from the original structure of 
human society, while the other finds its explanation in the 
principle which explains this structure. 
In the former, obliga­
tion stands for the pressure exerted by the elements of society 
on one another in order to maintain the shape of the whole; 
a pressure whose effect is prefigured in each of us by a system 
of habits which, so to speak, go to meet it: this mechanism, of 
which each separate part is a habit, but whose whole is com­
parable to an instinct, has been prepared by nature. 
In the 
second, there is still obligation, if you will, but that obligation 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
47 
is the force of an aspiration or an impetus, of the very impetus 
which culminated in the human species, in social life, in a 
system of habits which bears a resemblance more or less to 
instinct: the primitive impetus here comes into play directly, 
and no longer through the medium of the mechanisms it had 
set up, and at which it had provisionally halted. 
In short, to 
sum up what has gone before, we should say that nature, 
setting down the human species along the line of evolution, 
intended it to be sociable, in the same way as it did the com­
munities of ants and bees; but since intelligence was there, 
the maintenance of social life had to be entrusted to an all but 
intelligent mechanism: intelligent in that each piece could be 
remodelled by human intelligence, yet instinctive in that man 
could not, without ceasing to be a man, reject all the pieces 
together and cease to accept a mechanism of preservation. 
Instinct gave place temporarily to a system of habits, each 
one of which became contingent, their convergence towards 
the preservation of society being alone necessary, and this 
necessity bringing back instinct with it. 
The necessity of the 
whole, felt behind the contingency of the parts, is what we 
call moral obligation in general-it being understood that the 
parts are contingent in the eyes of society only; to the in­
dividual, into whom society inculcates its habits, the part is 
as necessary as the whole. 
Now the mechanism designed by 
nature was simple, like the societies originally constituted by 
her. 
Did she foresee the immense development and the end­
less complexities of societies such as ours? 
Let us first agree 
as to the meaning of this question. 
\Ve do not assert that 
nature has, strictly speaking; designed or foreseen anything 
whatever. 
But we have the right to proceed like a biologist, 
who speaks of nature's intentions every time he assigns a 
function to an organ: he merely expresses thus the adequate­
ness of the organ to the function. 
In spite of humanity's hav­
ing become civilized, in spite of the transformation of society, 

48 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
we maintain that the tendencies which are, as it were, organic 
in social life have remained what they were in the beginning. 
\Ve can trace them back and study them. 
The result of this 
investigation is clear; it is for closed, simple societies that 
the moral structure, original and fundamental in man, is 
made. 
I grant that the organic tendencies do not stand out 
clearly to our consciousness. 
They constitute, nevertheless, 
the strongest element of obligation. 
However complex our 
morality has grown and though it has become coupled with 
tendencies which are not mere modifications of natural tend­
encies, and \vhose trend is not in the direction of nature, it is 
to these natural tendencies that we come in the end, when 
\Ve want to obtain a precipitate of the pure obligation con­
tained in this fluid mass. Such then is the first half of morality. 
The other had no place in nature's plan. 
We mean that 
nature foresaw a certain expansion of social life through in­
telligence, but it was to be a limited expansion. 
She could 
not have intended that this should go on so far as to endanger 
the original structnre. 
N"umerous indeed are the instances 
where man has thus outwitted nature, so knowing and wise, 
yet so simple-minded. ʪature surely intended that men should 
beget men endlessly, according to the rule followed by all 
other living creatures; she took the most minute precautions 
to ensure the preservation of the species by the multiplication 
of individuals; hence she had not foreseen, when bestowing 
on us intelligence, that intelligence would at once find a 
way of divorcing the sexual act from its consequences, and 
that man might refrain from reaping without forgoing the 
pleasure of sowing. 
It is in quite another sense that man out­
wits nature when he extends social solidarity into the brother­
hood of man; but he is deceiving her nevertheless, for those 
societies whose design was prefigured in the original struc­
ture of the human soul, and of \vhich we can still perceive 
the plan in the innate and fundamental tendencies of mod-

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
49 
em man, required that the group be closely united, but that 
between group and group there should be virtual hostility; 
we were always to be prepared for attack or defence. 
Not, 
of course, that nature designed war for war's sake. 
Those 
leaders of humanity drawing men after them, who have broken 
down the gates of the city, seem indeed thereby to have placed 
themselves again in the current of the vital impetus. 
But 
this impetus inherent in life is, like life, finite. 
Its path is 
strewn with obstacles, and the species which have appeared, 
one after the other, are so many combinations of this force 
with opposing forces: the former urging us forward, the 
others making us turn in a circle. 
1\Ian, fresh from the hands 
of nature, was a being both intelligent and social, his sociability 
being devised to find its scope in small communities, his in­
telligence being designed to further individual and group life. 
But intelligence, expanding through its own efforts, has de­
veloped unexpectedly. 
It has freed men from restrictions 
to which they were condemned by the limitations of their 
nature. 
This being so, it was not impossible that some of 
them, specially gifted, should reopen that which was closed 
and do, at least for themselves, what nature could not possibly 
have done for mankind. 
Their example has ended in leading 
others forward, in imagination at least. 
There is a genius of 
the will as there is a genius of the mind, and genius defies all 
anticipation. 
Through those geniuses of the will, the impetus 
of life, traversing matter, wrests from it, for the future of the 
species, promises such as were out of the question when the 
species was being constituted. 
Hence in passing from social 
solidarity to the brotherhood of man, we break with one par­
ticular nature, but not \vith all nature. 
It might be said, by 
slightly distorting the terms of Spinoza, that it is to get back 
to natura naturans that we break away from 11atura naturata. 
Hence, between the first morality and the second, lies the 
whole distance between repose and movement. 
The first is 

so 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
supposed to be immutable. If it changes, it immediately forgets 
that it has changed, or it acknowledges no change. 
The 
shape it assumes at any given time claims to be the final shape. 
But the second is a forward thrust, a demand for movement; 
it is the very essence of mobility. Thus would it prove, thus 
alone, indeed, would it be able at first to define, its superiority. 
Postulate the first, you cannot bring the second out of it, 
any more than you can from one or several positions of a 
moveable body derive motion. But, on the contrary, move­
ment includes immobility, each position traversed by the 
moving object being conceived and even perceived as a virtual 
stop. But a detailed demonstration is unnecessary: the superi­
ority is experienced before ever it is represented, and further­
more could not be demonstrated afterwards if it had not first 
been felt. There is a difference of vital tone. Those who 
regularly put into practice the morality of the city know this 
feeling of well-being, common to the individual and to society, 
which is the outward sign of the interplay of material resist­
ances neutralizing each other. But the soul that is opening, 
and before whose eyes material objects vanish, is lost in sheer 
joy. Pleasure and well-being are something, joy is more. 
For it is not contained in these, whereas they are virtually 
contained in joy. They mean, indeed, a halt or a marking 
time, while joy is a step forward. 
That is why the first morality is comparatively easy to for­
mulate, but not the second. For our intelligence and our 
language deal in fact with things; they are less at home in 
representing transmons or progress. 
The morality of the 
Gospels is essentially that of the open soul: are we not justified 
in pointing out that it borders upon paradox, and even upon 
contradiction, in its more definite admonitions? If riches are 
an evil, should we not be injuring the poor in giving them 
what we possess? If he who has been smitten on the one cheek 
is to offer the other also, what becomes of justice, without 

M OR A L O B L I G A T I O N  
5 1  
which, after all, there can be n o  "charity"? 
But the paradox 
d isappears, the contrad iction vanishes, if \ve cons ider the 
intent of these max ims, wh ich is to create a certa in dispos i­
t ion of the soul. 
It is not for the sake of the poor, but for 
his own sake, that the rich man should give up h is riches: 
blessed are the poor " in sp irit"! 
The beauty l ies, not in be ing 
deprived, not even in depriv ing oneself, but in not feel ing 
the deprivation. 
The act by wh ich the soul opens our 
broadens and ra ises to pure sp iritual ity a morality enclosed 
and material ized in ready-made rules: the latter then becomes, 
in comparison w ith the other, someth ing like a snapshot v iew 
of movement. 
Such is the inner meaning of the ant itheses 
that occur one after the other in the Sermon on the i\1ount: 
"Y e have heard that it was said . . .  I say unto you . . .  
" 
On the one hand the closed, on the other the open. 
Current 
moral ity is not abol ished; but it appears l ike a v irtual stop in 
the course of actual progression. 
The old method is not 
given up; but it is fitted into a more general method, as is the 
case when the dynamic re:1bsorbs the static, the latter then 
becoming a mere particular instance of the former. \Ve should 
need then, strictly speak ing, a means of expressing d irectly 
the movement and the tendency; but if we st ill want-and we 
cannot avoid it-to translate them into the language of the 
stat ic and the motionless, we shall be confronted with formulae 
that border on contrad ict ion. 
So we might compare \vhat is 
impract icable in certa in precepts of the Gospels to what was 
illogical in the first explanations of the d ifferent ial calculus. 
Indeed, between the moral ity of the anc ients and Christianity 
we should find much the same relat ion as that between the 
mathematics of ant iqu ity and our own. 
The geometry of the anc ients may have provided particular 
solutions which were, so to say, an antic ipated appl icat ion 
of our general methods; but it never brought out these 
methods; the impetus was not there wh ich would have made 

52 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
them spring from the static to the dynamic. 
But at any rate 
it carried as far as possible the imitation of the dynamic by 
the static. 
Now, we have j ust the same impression when we 
compare, for example, the doctrine of the Stoics with Chris­
tian morality. 
The Stoics proclaimed themselves citizens of 
the world, and added that all men were brothers, having come 
from the same God. 
The words were almost the same; but 
they did not find the same echo, because they were not spoken 
with the same accent. 
The Stoics provided some very fine 
examples. 
If they did not succeed in drawing humanity after 
them, it is because Stoicism is essentially a philosophy. 
The 
philosopher who is so enamoured of this noble doctrine as 
to become wrapped up in it doubtless vitalizes it by translating 
it into practice; just so did Pygmalion's love breathe life into 
the statue once it was carven. 
But it is a far cry from that 
to the enthusiasm which spreads from soul to soul, unceas­
ingly, like a conflagration. 
Such an emotion may indeed 
develop into ideas which make up a doctrine, or even sev­
eral different doctrines having no other resemblance between 
them than a kinship of the spirit; but it precedes the idea 
instead of following it. 
To find something of the kind in 
classical antiquity, we must go not to the Stoics, but rather 
to the man who inspired all the great philosophers of Greece 
without contributing any system, without having written any­
thing, Socrates. 
Socrates indeed exalts the exercise of reason, 
and particularly the logical function of the mind, above every­
thing else. 
The irony he parades is meant to dispose of 
opinions which have not undergone the test of reflection, 
to put them to shame, so to speak, by setting them in con­
tradiction with themselves. 
Dialogue, as he understands it, 
has given birth to the Platonic dialectics and consequently to 
the philosophical method, essentially rational, which we still 
practice. 
The object of such a dialogue is to arrive at con­
cepts that may be circumscribed by definitions; these concepts 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
53 
will become the Platonic Ideas; and the theory of Ideas, in its 
tum, will serve as a model for the systems, also essentially 
rational, of traditional metaphysics. 
Socrates goes further 
still; virtue itself he holds to be a science, he identifies the 
practice of good with our knowledge of it; he thus paves the 
way for the doctrine which will absorb all moral life in the 
rational function of thought. 
Reason has never been set so 
high. At least that is what strikes us at first. 
But let us look 
closer. 
Socrates teaches because the oracle of Delphi has 
spoken. 
He has received a mission. 
He is poor, and poor he 
must remain. 
He must mix with the common folk, he must 
become one of them, his speech must get back to their speech. 
He will write nothing, so that his thought shall be commu­
nicated, a living thing, to minds who shall convey it to other 
minds. 
He is indifferent to cold and hunger, though in no 
way an ascetic; he is merely delivered from material needs, 
and emancipated from his body. 
A "daemon" accompanies 
him, which makes its voice heard when a warning is necessary. 
He so thoroughly believes in this "daemonic voice" that he 
dies rather than not follow it; if he refuses to defend himself 
before the popular tribunal, if he goes to meet his condemna­
tion, it is because the "daemon" has said nothing to dissuade 
him. 
In a word, his mission is of a religious and mystic order, 
in the present-day meaning of the words; his teaching, so 
perfectly rational, hinges on something that seems to transcend 
pure reason. 
But do we not detect this in his teaching itself? 
If the inspired, or at all events lyrical sayings, which occur 
throughout the dialogues of Plato, were not those of Socrates, 
but those of Plato himself, if the master's language had always 
been such as Xenophon attributes to him, could we understand 
the enthusiasm which fired his disciples, and which has come 
down the ages? 
Stoics, Epicureans, Cynics, all the Greek 
moralists spring from Socrates-not only, as has always been 
said, because they develop the teaching of the Master in its 

54 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
vanous directions, but also, and, above all, because they 
borrow from him the attitude which is so little in keeping 
with the Greek spirit and which he created, the attitude of 
the Sage. 
Whenever the philosopher, closeted with his wis­
dom, stands apart from the common rule of mankind-be it 
to teach them, to serve as a model, or simply to go about his 
work of perfecting his inner self-Socrates is there, Socrates 
alive, working through the incomparable prestige of his person. 
Let us go further. It has been said that he brought philosophy 
down from heaven to earth. 
But could we understand his 
life, and above all his death, if the conception of the soul 
which Plato attributes to him in the Phaedo had not been his? 
More generally speaking, do the myths we find in the dialogues 
of Plato, touching the soul, its origin, its entrance into the 
body, do anything more than set down in Platonic terms a 
creative emotion, the emotion present in the moral teaching 
of Socrates? 
The myths, and the Socratic conception of the 
soul to which they stand in the same relationship as the ex­
planatory programme to a symphony, have been preserved 
along with the Platonic dialectics. 
They pursue their subter­
ranean way through Greek metaphysics, and rise to the open 
air again with the Alexandrine philosophers, with Ammonius 
perhaps, in any case with Plotinus, who claims to be the suc­
cessor of Socrates. 
They have provided the Socratic soul 
with a body of doctrine similar to that into which was to be 
breathed the spirit of the Gospels. 
The two metaphysics, in 
spite, perhaps because, of their resemblance, gave battle to each 
other, before the one absorbed the best that was in the other; 
for a while the world may well have wondered whether it was 
to become Christian or Nco-Platonic. 
It was Socrates against 
Jesus. 
To confine ourselves to Socrates, the question is: what 
would this very practical genius have done in another society 
and in other circumstances; if he had not been struck, above 
all, by the danger of the moral empiricism of his time, and 

M OR A L  O B L I GATION 
55 
the mental anarchy of Athenian democracy; if he had not had 
to deal with the most crying need first, by establishing the 
rights of reason; if he had not therefore thrust intuition and 
inspiration into the background, and if the Greek he was had 
not mastered in him the Oriental who sought to come into 
being? 
We have made the distinction between the closed 
and the open: would anyone place Socrates among the closed 
souls? 
There was irony running through Socratic teaching, 
and outbursts of lyricism were probably rare; but in the 
measure in which these outbursts cleared the road for a 
new spirit, they have been decisive for the future of humanity. 
Between the closed soul and the open soul there is the soul 
in process of opening. 
Between the immobility of a man 
seated and the motion of the same man running there is the 
act of getting up, the attitude he assumes when he rises. 
In 
a word, between the static and the dynamic there is to be 
observed, in morality too, a transition stage. 
This inter­
mediate state would pass unnoticed if, when at rest, we could 
develop the necessary impetus to spring straight into action. 
But it attracts our attention when we stop short-the usual 
sign of insufficient impetus. 
Let us put the same thing in a 
different way. 
We have seen that the purely static morality 
might be called infra-intellectual, and the purely dynamic, 
supra-intellectual. Nature intended the one, and the other is 
a contribution of man's genius. The former is characteristic 
of a whole group of habits which are, in man, the counterpart 
of certain instincts in animals; it is something less than intelli­
gence. 
The latter is inspiration, intuition, emotion, suscep­
tible of analysis into ideas which furnish intellectual notations 
of it and branch out into infinite detail; thus, like a unity 
which encompasses and transcends a plurality incapable of ever 
equalling it, it contains any amount of intellectuality; it is 
more than intelligence. 
Between the two lies intelligence 
itself. It is at this point that the human soul would have 

56 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
settled down, had it sprung forward from the one without 
reaching the other. 
It would have dominated the morality of 
the closed soul; it would not have attained to, or rather it 
would not have created, that of the open soul. 
Its attitude, 
the result of getting up, would have lifted it to the plane of 
intellectuality. 
Compared with the position it had just left­
described negatively-such a soul would be manifesting in­
difference or insensibility, it would be in the "ataraxy" or the 
"apathy" of the Epicureans and the Stoics. 
Considered in 
what it positively is, if its detachment from the old sought to 
be an attachment to something new, its life would be con­
templation; it would conform to the Platonic and the Aris­
totelian ideal. 
From whatever angle we look at it, its attitude 
would be upright, noble, truly wonhy of admiration and re­
served for the chosen few. 
Philosophies which stan from very 
different principles may find in it a common goal. The reason 
is that there is only one road leading from action confined in 
a circle to action developing in the freedom of space, from 
repetition to creation, from the infra-intellectual to the supra­
intellectual. 
Anyone halting between the two is inevitably in 
the zone of pure contemplation, and in any case, no longer 
holding to the one but without having yet reached the other, 
naturally practises that half-virtue, detachment. 
We are speaking of pure intelligence, withdrawing into 
itself and judging that the object of life is what the ancients 
called "science" or contemplation. 
We are speaking, in a 
word, of what mainly characterizes the morality of the Greek 
philosophers. 
But it would no longer be a matter of Greek 
or Oriental philosophy, we should be dealing with the morality 
of everybody if we considered intelligence as a mere elabora­
tion or co-ordinating agent of the material, some of it infra­
intellectual and some of it supra-intellectual, with which we 
have been dealing in this chapter. 
In order to define the very 
essence of duty, we have in fact distinguished the two forces 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
57 
that act upon us, impulsion on the one hand, and attraction 
on the other. This had to be done, and it is because philosophy 
had left it undone, confining itself to the intellectuality which 
to-day covers both, that it has scarcely succeeded, so it would 
seem, in explaining how a moral motive can have a hold upon 
the souls of men. But our description was thereby condemned, 
as we hinted, to remain a mere outline. That which is aspira­
tion tends to materialize by assuming the form of strict obliga­
tion. That which is strict obligation tends to expand and to 
broaden out by absorbing aspiration. Pressure and aspiration 
agree to meet for this purpose in that region of the mind 
where concepts are formed. The result is mental pictures, 
many of them of a compound nature, being a blend of that 
which is a cause of pressure and that which is an object of 
aspiration. But the result is also that we lose sight of pure 
pressure and pure aspiration actually at work on our wills; 
we see only the concept into which have been melted the two 
distinct objects to which pressure and aspiration were respec­
tively attached. The force acting upon us is taken to be this 
concept: a fallacy which accounts for the failure of strictly 
intellectualist systems of morality, in other words, of the ma­
jority of the philosophical theories of duty. Not, of course, 
that an idea pure and simple is without influence on our will. 
But this influence would operate effectively only if it could 
remain in isolation. 
It has difficulty in resisting hostile influ­
ences, or, if it docs triumph over them, it is because the pres­
sure and the aspiration, which had each renounced its own 
right of action to be represented together in one idea, have 
reappeared in their individuality and their independence and 
have exerted their full strength. 
We should have to open a very long parenthesis indeed if 
we had to give their due share to the two forces, the one social, 
the other supra-social, one of impulsion, the other of attraction, 
which impart to each moral motive its driving force. An 

58 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
honest man will say, for example, that he acts from self­
respect, from a feeling of the dignity of man. Obviously he 
would not express himself thus, if he did not begin by split­
ting himself into two selves, the personality he would be if 
he simply let himself drift, and the one to which his will 
uplifts him; the ego that respects is not the same as the ego 
respected. ·what, then, is the latter? 
·wherein lies its dignity? 
Whence comes the respect it inspires? Let us leave aside the 
task of analysing this respect, in which we should find above 
all an impulse of self-c!Taccment, the attitude of the apprentice 
towards the master, or rather, to use the language of Aristotle, 
of the accident in the presence of the essence. 
There would 
remain to be defined the higher ego to which the average 
personality defers. 
There is no doubt that it is in the first 
place the "social ego" within each of us, on which we have 
already touched. If we posit, simply for the sake of theoretical 
clearness, a "primitive" mentality, we shall see in it self-respect 
coinciding with the feeling of so firm a solidarity between 
the individual and the group that the group remains present 
in the isolated individual, keeps an eye on him, encourages or 
threatens him, demands, in a \vord, to be consulted and obeyed; 
behind society itself there arc supernatural powers on which 
the group depends, and which make the community responsi­
ble for the acts of the individual; the pressure of the social 
ego is exerted with all these accumulated forces. 
The indi­
vidual, moreover, does not obey merely from a habit of dis­
cipline or from fear of punishment; the group to which he 
belongs must, of course, exalt itself above the others, if only 
to rouse his courage in battle, and the consciousness of this 
superiority of strength secures for him greater strength, to­
gether with all the satisfactions that pride can give. 
If you 
want to make sure of this, take a state of mind already more 
fully "evolved." 
Think of all the pride, as well as all the 
moral energy which is represented by civis Romanus sum: self-

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
59 
respect, in the Roman citizen, must have been tantamount to 
what we call nationalism to-day. 
But we need not tum to 
history or pre-history to sec self-respect coinciding with a 
group-pride. 
We need only observe what goes on under our 
very eyes in the small societies which form within the hig 
one, when men are drawn together by a distinguishing badge 
which emphasizes a real or apparent superiority, separating 
them from the common herd. 
To the self-respect which 
every man, as a man, professes is then coupled an additional 
respect, that of the ego which is no more than man for an 
ego that stands out among men. All the members of the group 
behave as a group, and thus a common code of behaviour 
comes to be observed, a feeling of honour springs up which 
is identical with esprit de corps. 
These are the first com­
ponents of self-respect. Looked at from this angle, a point 
of view which we to-day can isolate only by an effort of ab­
straction, it "binds" us by the prestige of the social pressure 
it brings with it. Now indeed the impulsion would obviously 
become attraction, if self-respect were the respect for a person 
admired and venerated, whose image we bore in our hearts 
and with whom we \vould aspire to become identified, as the 
copy to an original. 
In reality it is not so, for even if the 
word merely evokes the idea of an attitude towards one's self, 
nevertheless self-respect is, at the end of its evolution as at 
the beginning, a social feeling. 
But the great moral figure.<; 
that have made their mark on history join hands across the 
centuries, above our human cities; they unite into a divine city 
which they hid us enter. 
\Ve may not hear their voices dis­
tinctly, the call has none the less gone forth, and something 
ans\\'ers from the depth of our soul; from the real society 
in which we live we betake ourselves in thought to this ideal 
society; to this ideal society we bow down when we reverence 
the dignity of man within us, when we declare that we act 
from self-respect. 
It is true that the influence exerted on us 

60 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
by definite persons tends to become impersonal. 
And the 
impersonal character is still more stressed when a philosopher 
explains to us that it is reason, present in each of us, which 
constitutes the dignity of man. 
But here we must take care 
to know what we mean. 
That reason is the distinguishing 
mark of man no one will deny. 
That it is a thing of superior 
value, in the sense in which a fine work of art is indeed valu­
able, will also be granted. 
But we must explain how it is that 
its orders are absolute and why they are obeyed. 
Reason can 
only put forward reasons, which we are apparently always 
at liberty to counter with other reasons. Let us not then 
merely assert that reason, present in each of us, compels our 
respect and commands our obedience by virtue of its para­
mount value. 
\Ve must add that there are, behind reason, 
the men who have made mankind divine, and who have thus 
stamped a divine character on reason, which is the essential 
attribute of man. 
It is these men who draw us towards an 
ideal society, while we yield to the pressure of the real one. 
All moral ideas interpenetrate each other, but none is more 
instructive. than that of justice, in the first place, because it 
includes most of the others, and next, because it is expressed, 
in spite of its extraordinary richness, in simpler formulae; 
lastly and above all, because here the two forms of obligation 
are seen to dovetail into each other. Justice has always evoked 
ideas of equality, of proportion, of compensation. 
Pensare, 
from which we derive "compensation" and "recompense," 
means to weigh. 
Justice is represented as holding the scales. 
Equity signifies equality. 
Rules and regulation, right and 
righteousness, are words which suggest a straight line. 
These 
references to arithmetic and geometry are characteristic of 
justice throughout its history. 
The idea must have already 
taken shape as far back as the days of exchange and barter; 
however rudimentary a community may be, it barters, and it 
cannot barter without first finding out if the objects exchanged 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
61 
are really equal in value, that is to say, both exchangeable for 
a definite third object. Let this equality of value be set up as 
a rule, this rule be given a place among the customs of the 
group, the "totality of obligation," as we called it, adding its 
weight to the rule: here we have justice already, in a clearly 
defined shape, with its imperative character, and the ideas of 
equality and reciprocity involved.-But such justice will apply 
not only to the exchange of objects. It will extend gradually 
to intercourse between persons, though unable, for a long time 
to come, to shake off all idea of objects and exchanges. It 
will then consist mainly in the regulation of natural impulses 
by the introduction of the idea of a no less natural reciprocity, 
for example, the expectation of an injury equivalent to the 
injury done. In primitive societies, assaults on persons con­
cern the community only exceptionally, when the act is likely 
to injure the community itself by bringing down upon it the 
wrath of the gods. The injured party or his family has only 
therefore to obey his instinct, react naturally, and avenge 
himself; and the reprisals might be out of all proportion to 
the offence, if this requital of evil for evil was not, to all 
appearances, vaguely subject to the general law of exchanges 
and barter. It is true that the quarrel might go on for ever, 
the "vendetta" might be kept up indefinitely by the two 
families, if one of them did not make up its mind to accept 
"damages" in cash; here the idea of compensation, already 
implied in the idea of exchange and barter, will clearly emerge. 
Now let the community itself undertake to exact punishment, 
to repress all acts of violence '"·hatsoever, and it will be said 
that the community is dispensing justice, if the rule to which 
individuals and families referred for a settlement of their dis­
putes were already being described by that term. Moreover, 
the community will assess the penalty according to the gravity 
of the offence, since otherwise there would be no object in 
stopping, once \Ve have begun to do wrong; we should not 

62 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
run any greater risk by proceeding to extremities. An eye 
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, the injury received must always 
be equivalent to the injury inflicted.-But is the price of an 
eye always an eye, the price of a tooth always a tooth? Quality 
must be borne in mind as well as quantity. The law of retalia­
tion is applied only within a class; the same injury sustained, 
the same offence received, will call for greater compensation, 
or heavier punishment, if the victim belong to a higher class. 
In a word, equality may connote a ratio and become a pro­
portion. Hence, though justice may embrace a greater and 
greater variety of things, it is always defined in the same way. 
-Nor will its formula alter when, in a more civilized state, it 
extends to the relations between the rulers and the ruled, and 
in a more general way to those between different social cate­
gories; into a state of things which only exists de facto it will 
introduce considerations of equality or proportion which will 
make of that state something mathematically defined, and, 
thereby, it would seem, apparently de jure. There is indeed 
no doubt that force lies at the origin of the division of ancient 
societies into classes subordinate to one another. But a subor­
dination that is habitual ends by seeming natural, and by seek­
ing for itself an explanation; if the inferior class has accepted 
its position for a considerable time, it may go on doing so when 
it has virtually become the stronger, because it will attribute 
to the governing class a superior value. And this superiority 
will be real, if the members of this class have taken advantage 
of the facilities they may have had for intellectual and moral 
improvement; but it may quite as well be a mere carefully­
fostered appearance of superiority. However it may be, 
whether real or apparent, this superiority needs only to persist 
in order to seem a matter of birth; since hereditary privilege is 
there, there must be, people say to one another, some innate 
superiority. Nature, who intended ordered societies, has pre­
disposed man to this illusion. Plato shared it in his Ideal 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
63 
Republic. If a class system is understood in this way, re­
sponsibilities and privileges are looked upon as a conunon 
stock, to be eventually distributed among the individuals ac­
cording to their worth, consequently according to the services 
they render. Justice here still holds her scales, measuring 
and proportioning.-Now, from this justice, which, though it 
may not express itself in utilitarian terms, is none the less 
faithful to its mercantile origins, how shall we pass to the 
justice which implies neither exchange made nor service 
rendered, being the assertion pure and simple of the invio­
lability of right and of the incommensurability of the person 
with any values whatever? 
Before answering this question, 
let us pause to admire the magic property of speech, I mean 
the power which a word bestows on a newly created idea­
when it extends to that idea after having been applied to a 
pre-existent object-{)f modifying that object and thus retro­
actively influencing the past. In whatever light we view the 
transition from relative to absolute justice, whether it took 
place by stages or all at once, there has been creation. Some­
thing has supervened which might never have existed, which 
would not have existed except for certain circumstances, 
certain men, perhaps one particular man. 
But instead of 
realizing that some new thing has come and taken possession 
of the old and absorbed it into a whole that was up to then 
unforeseeable, we prefer looking upon the process as if the 
new thing had always been there, not actually but virtually 
pre-existing, and as if the old had been a part of it even then, 
a part of something yet uncreated; and on this showing the 
conceptions of justice which followed one another in ancient 
societies were no more than partial, incomplete visions of an 
integral justice which is nothing more or less than justice as 
we know it to-day. There is no need to analyse in detail this 
particular example of a very general illusion, barely noticed 
by philosophers, which has vitiated a goodly number of 

64 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
metaphysical doctrines and which sets the theory of knowl­
edge insoluble problems. Let us simply say that it is part of 
our habit of considering all forward movement as a progressive 
shortening of the distance between the starting-point (which 
indeed exists) and the goal, which comes into being as a stop­
ping-place only when the moving object has chosen to stop 
there. It does not follow that, because it can always be in­
terpreted in this sense when it has attained its end, the move­
ment consisted in a progression towards this end: an interval 
which has still but one extremity cannot diminish little by 
little, sinl:e it is not yet an interval: it will have diminished 
little by little when the moving object has created, by its 
actual or virtual stopping, a second extremity, and when we 
consider it in retrospect or even simply trace the movement 
in its progress while, in anticipation, reconstituting it in that 
way, backwards. But this is just what we do not realize for 
the most part; we introduce into the things themselves, under 
the guise of the pre-existence of the possible in the real, this 
retrospective anticipation. This illusion lies at the root of 
many a philosophical problem; Zeno's Dichotomy has pro­
vided the typical example. And it is this same illusion which 
we find in ethics when the continually expanding forms of 
relative justice are defined as growing approximations of ab­
solute justice. The most we are entitled to say is that once 
the latter is stated, the former might be regarded as so many 
halts along a road which, plotted out retrospectively by us, 
would lead to absolute justice. And even then we should 
have to add that there had been, not gradual progress, but at a 
certain epoch a sudden leap.-It would be interesting to de­
termine the exact point at which this saltus took place. And 
it would be no less instructive to find out how it was that, 
once conceived (in a vague form), absolute justice long re­
mained no more than a respected ideal, without there being 
any question of translating it into practice. Let us simply 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
65 
say, in so far as the first point is concerned, that the long­
standing inequalities of class, doubtless imposed in the begin­
ning by force, and accepted afterwards as inequalities of merit 
and services rendered, become more and more exposed to the 
criticism of the lower classes; the ruling elements are, more­
over, deteriorating, because, being too sure of themselves, 
they are guilty of a slackening of that inner tension upon 
which they had called for a greater effort of intelligence and 
will, and which had consolidated their supremacy. They could 
indeed maintain their position if they held together; but be­
cause of their very tendency to assert their individuality, there 
will one day arise ambitious men from among them who mean 
to get the upper hand and who will seck support in the lower 
class, especially if the latter already has some share in affairs: 
on that day is shattered the belief in a native superiority of the 
upper class; the spell is broken. Thus do aristocracies tend 
to merge into democracy, simply because political inequality 
is an unstable thing, as, indeed, political equality, once it is 
established, will be, if it is only de facto, if therefore it admits 
of exceptions, if, for example, it tolerates slavery within the 
city.-But it is a far cry from such examples of equilibrium, 
arrived at mechanically and always transitory, like that of 
the scales held by the justice of yore, to a justice such as 
ours, the justice of the "rights of man," which no longer 
evokes ideas of relativity and proportion, but, on the contrary, 
of the incommensurable and the absolute. Of this justice we 
could form a complete idea only if , .. ,e were to "draw it out 
to iP£nity," as the mathematicians say; it is formulated pre­
cisely and categorically, at any stated time, only by prohibi­
tions; but on its positive side it proceeds by successive creations, 
each of them being a fuller realization than the last of person­
ality and consequently of humanity. Such realization is pos­
sible only through the medium of laws; it implies the assent 
of society. It would, moreover, be futile to maintain that it 

66 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
takes place gradually and automatically, as a consequence of 
the state of mind of society at a given period of its history. 
It is a leap forward, which can take place only if society has 
decided to try the experiment; and the experiment will not 
be tried unless society has allowed itself to be won over, or at 
least stirred. 
Now the first start has always been given by 
someone. It is no use maintaining that this leap forward does 
not imply a creative effort behind it, and that we have not to 
do here with an invention comparable with that of the artist. 
That would be to forget that most great reforms appeared at 
first sight impracticable, as in fact they were. 
They could be 
carried out only in a society whose state of mind was already 
such as their realization was bound to bring about; and you 
had a circle from which there would have been no escape, 
if one or several privileged beings, having expanded the social 
ego within themselves, had not broken the circle and drawn 
the society after them. 
Now this is exactly what occurs in the 
miracle of artistic creation. A work of genius which is at first 
disconcerting may create, little by little, by the simple fact of 
its presence, a conception of art and an artistic atmosphere 
which bring it within our comprehension; it will therr become 
in retrospect a work of genius; otherwise it would have re­
mained what it was at the beginning, merely disconcerting. 
In a financial speculation, it is the success that causes the idea 
to have been a good one. 
Something much the same occurs 
in artistic creation, with this difference, that the success, if 
the work which at first repelled us eventually wins through, 
is due to a transfonnation of public taste brought about by 
the work itself, the latter being then force as well as matter; 
it has se.t up an impetus imparted to it by the artist, or rather 
one which is the very impetus of the artist, invisible and 
present within· the work. 
The same can be said of moral 
invention, and more particularly of the creations which more 
and more enrich, one after the other, the idea of justice. They 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
67 
bear, above all, upon the substance of justice, but they modify 
its form as welL-To take the latter first, let us lay down 
that justice has always appeared as obligatory, but that for 
a long time it was an obligation like other obligations. 
It 
met, like the others, a social need; and it was the pressure of 
society on the individual which made justice obligatory. 
This 
being so, an injustice was neither more nor less shocking than 
any other breach of the rules. There was no justice for slaves, 
save perhaps a relative, almost an optional, justice. 
Public 
safety was not merely the supreme law, as indeed it has re­
mained, it was funhermore proclaimed as such; whereas to­
day we should not dare to lay down the principle that it 
justifies injustice, even if we accept any particular consequence 
of that principle. 
Let us dwell on this point, put to ourselves 
the famous question: "What should we do if we heard that 
for the common good, for the very existence of mankind, 
there was somewhere a man, an innocent man, condemned 
to suffer eternal torment? " 
\Veil, we should perhaps agree 
to it on the understanding that some magic philtre is going 
to make us forget it, that \Ve shall never hear anything more 
about it; but if we were bound to know it, to think of it, to 
realize that this man's hideous torture was the price of our 
existence, that it was even the fundamental condition of exist­
ence in general, no! a thousand times no! 
Better to accept 
that nothing should exist at all! 
Better let our planet be blown 
to pieces. Now what has happened? How has justice emerged 
from social life, within which it had always dwelt with no 
particular privilege, and soared above it, categorical and 
transcendent? 
Let us recall the tone and accents of the 
Prophets of Israel. 
It is their voice we hear when a great 
injustice has been done and condoned. 
From the depths of 
the centuries they raise their protest. 
True, justice h:J.S singu­
larly expanded since their time. 
The justice they preached 
applied above all to Israel, their indignation against injustice 

68 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
was the very wrath of Jehovah against His disobedient people, 
or against the enemies of this chosen people. 
If any of them, 
like Isaiah, may have thought of universal justice, it was be­
cause Israel, the chosen of God among the other peoples, 
bound to God by a covenant, was so high above the rest of 
mankind that sooner or later it was destined to be taken as 
a model. None the less, they imparted to justice the violently 
imperative character which it has kept, which it has since 
stamped on a substance grown infinitely more extensive.­
But these extensions did not occur spontaneously either. 
On 
each one of them a competent historian could put a proper 
name. 
Each development was a creation, and indeed the door 
will ever stand open to fresh creations. 
The progress which 
was decisive for the substance of justice, as the era of the 
prophets had been for its form, consisted in the substirution 
of a universal republic, embracing all men, for that republic 
which went no further than the gates of the city, and, within 
the city, was limited to free men. 
It is from this that all the 
rest has followed, for, if the door has remained open to new 
creations, and probably will for all time stand open, yet it 
must have been opened. 
There seems to be no doubt that 
this second advance, the passage from the closed to the open, 
is due to Christianity, as the first was due to the Prophets of 
Judaism. 
Could it have been brought about by mere philoso­
phy? 
There is nothing more instructive than to see how the 
philosophers have skirted round it, touched it, and yet missed 
it. 
Let us leave out Plato, who certainly includes the Idea 
of man among the transcendent Ideas: did it not follow that 
all men were of the same essence? From this to the idea that 
all men, qua men, were of equal worth and that the common 
essence conferred on them the same fundamental rights, was 
but one step. 
But the step was not taken. 
It would have 
meant condemning slavery, giving up the Greek idea that 
foreigners, being barbarians, could claim no rights. 
Was it, 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
69 
in fact, an essentially Greek idea? 
We find it, implied in 
others, wherever Christianity has not penetrated, in modem 
as well as in ancient times. 
In China, for example, there have 
arisen very noble doctrines, but they have not been concerned 
with laying down laws for humanity; though they do not 
expressly say so, they are in fact interested only in the Chinese 
community. 
Indeed, before Christianity, we find Stoicism 
and, among the Stoics, philosophers who proclaim that all men 
are brothers, and that the wise man is a citizen of the world. 
But these dicta were the expression of an ideal, an ideal merely 
conceived, and very likely conceived as impracticable. There 
is nothing to show that any of the great Stoics, not even the 
Stoic who was an emperor, considered the possibility of lower­
ing the barrier between the free man and the slave, between 
the Roman citizen and the barbarian. 
Humanity had to wait 
till Christianity for the idea of universal brotherhood, with 
its implication of equality of rights and the sanctity of the 
person, to become operative. 
Some may say that it has been 
rather a slow process; indeed eighteen centuries elapsed before 
the rights of man were proclaimed by the Puritans of America, 
soon followed by the men of the French Revolution. It began, 
nevertheless, with the teachings of the Gospels, and was 
destined to go on indefinitely; it is one thing for an idea to be 
merely propounded by sages worthy of admiration, it is very 
different when the idea is broadcast to the ends of the earth 
in a message overflowing with love, invoking love in return. 
Indeed there was no question here of clear-cut wisdom, re­
ducible, from beginning to end, into maxims. There was rather 
a pointing of the way, a suggestion of the means; at most an 
indication of the goal, which would only be temporary, de­
manding a constant renewal of effort. 
Such effort was bound 
to be, in certain individuals at least, an effort of creation. The 
method consisted in supposing possible what is actually im­
possible in a given society, in imagining what would be its 

70 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
effect on the soul of society, and then inducing some such 
psychic condition by propaganda and example: the effect, once 
obtained, would retrospectively complete its cause; new feel­
ings, evanescent indeed, would call fonh the new legislation 
seemingly indispensable to their appearance, and which would 
then serve to consolidate them. The modern idea of justice 
has progressed in this way by a series of individual creations 
which have succeeded through multifarious effons animated 
by one and the same impulse.-Classical antiquity had known 
nothing of propaganda; its justice had the unrufied serenity 
of the gods upon Olympus. Spiritual expansion, missionary 
zeal, impetus, movement, all these are of Judaic-Christian 
origin. But because men went on using the same word, they 
too readily thought they were dealing with the same thing. 
We cannot too often repeat that successive creations, indi­
vidual and contingent, will be generally grouped under the 
same heading, classified under the same idea and labelled by 
the same name, if each one has given rise to the one that 
follows it and if they appear, in retrospect, as continuations of 
one another. Let us go funher. The name will not apply only 
to the terms already existing of the series thus obtained. 
Encroaching on the future, it will denote the whole series, and 
it will be placed at the end, nay, be drawn out to infinity; as 
the designation was created long ago, we shall imagine the 
idea which it represents as having been also created just as 
long ago, and indeed existing since the beginning of time, 
though still open to additions and of undetermined content; 
thus each advance is imagined to be so much gained over an 
entity conceived as pre-existing; reality is looked upon as eating 
its way into th{. ideal, incorporating into itself, bit by bit, the 
totality of eternal justice.-Now that is true not only of the 
idea of justice but also of the ideas which are cognate with it 
-equality and libeny, for example. We are fond of defining 
the progress of justice as a forward movement towards liberty 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
71 
and equality. The definition is unimpeachable, but what are 
we to derive from it? 
It applies to the past; it catط seldom 
guide our choice for the future. Take liberty, for instance. 
It is commonly said that the individual is entitled to any liberty 
that docs not infringe the liberty of others. But the granting 
of a new liberty, which might lead to an encroachment of all 
the different liberties on one another in present-day society, 
might produce the opposite effect in a society where feeling 
and custom had been modified by that very reform. So that 
it is often impossible to state a priori the exact degree of 
liberty which can be allotted to the individual without injury 
to the liberty of his fellow-men; change the quantity, and 
the quality is no longer the same. On the other hand, equality 
can hardly be obtained, save at the expense of liberty, so that 
we should first ask ourselves which of the two is preferable 
to the other. But the question admits of no general answer; 
for the sacrfice of this or that liberty, if it is fully agreed upon 
by the citizens as a whole, partakes still of liberty; and above 
all, the liberty which is left may be superior in quality if the 
reform, tending towards greater equality, has led to a society 
where men breathe more freely, where greater joy is found in 
action. Look at it how you will, you must ahvays come back 
to the conception of moral creators who see in their mind's 
eye a new social atmosphere, an environment in which life 
would be more worth living, I mean a society such that, if 
men once tried it, they would refuse to go back to the old 
state of things. Thus only is moral progress to be defined; 
but it is only in retrospect that it can be defined, when some 
exceptional moral nature has created a new feeling, like a new 
kind of music, and passed it on to mankind, stamping it with 
his own vitality. Think in this way of "liberty," of "equality," 
of "the sanctity of the individual," and you will see that you 
have here no mere difference of degree, but a radical differ­
ence of nature between the two ideas of justice which we have 

72 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
distinguished, the one closed, the other open. For relatively 
stable justice, closed justice, which expresses the automatic 
equilibrium of a society fresh from the hands of nature, mani­
fests itself in customs to which the totality of obligation is 
attached, and this totality of obligation ends by incorpor­
ating, as public opinion progressively accepts them, the decrees 
of the other justice, the justice which is open to successive 
creations. 
Thus the two substances, the one supplied by 
society, the other a product of man's genius, come to be cast 
in the same mould. Indeed, in practice, they may well be 
indistinguishable. But the philosopher must discriminate the 
one from the other; if not, he is sure to misunderstand the 
nature of social evolution as well as the origin of duty. Social 
evolution is not the evolution of a society which has devel­
oped according to a method destined to transform it later. 
Between the development and the transformation there is here 
neither analogy nor common measure. Because closed justice 
and open justice are incorporated in equally peremptory laws, 
expressing themselves in the same way, and outwardly similar, 
it does not follow that they must be explained in the same 
fashion. No example can bring out better than this the two­
fold origin of morality and the two elements of obligation. 
There can be no question that, in the present state of things, 
reason must appear the sole imperative; that it is to the in­
terest of humanity to attribute an intrinsic force, an authority 
of their own to moral concepts; in a word that moral activity 
in a civilized society is essentially rational. How else could 
we tell what to do in each particular case? There are deep 
underlying forces here, one of impulsion, the other of attrac­
tion; we cannot refer directly to them each time we have to 
make a decision. To do so would, in most cases, simply 
amount to doing needlessly over again something which 
society, on the one hand, and the highest representatives of 
humanity on the other, have done for us.-
Their work has 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
73 
resulted in certain rules being laid down and an ideal being 
set up as a pattern: to live morally will mean to follow these 
rules, to conform to this ideal. In this way alone can we be 
sure of remaining in complete accord with ourselves: the 
rational alone is self-consistent. 
Only in this way can we 
compare various lines of conduct with one another; only in 
this way can we estimate their moral value. The thing is so 
obvious that we have barely hinted at it, we have nearly 
always taken it for granted. But the result was that our 
statement remained a mere diagram and might well appear 
inadequate. Indeed, on the intellectual plane, all the precepts 
of morality interpenetrate one another in concepts of which 
each one, like Leibnitz's monad, is more or less representa­
tive of all the others. Above or below this plane, we find 
forces which, taken singly, correspond only to a pan of what 
has been projected on the intellectual plane. Since this draw­
back to the method \Ve have adopted is undeniable, and indeed 
inevitable, since we perceive that we must use this method and 
since we feel that it cannot fail to raise objections through­
out its application, we think it important, in conclusion, to 
dwell on it once more, define it yet again, even if we are once 
more obliged to repeat at certain points, and almost in the 
same terms, what we have already had occasion to say. 
A human society with its members linked together like 
the cells of an organism, or, what amounts almost to the same 
thing, like ants in an ant-hill, has never existed, but the group­
ings of primitive humanity were certainly nearer the ants than 
ours are to-day. N"ature, in making man a social animal, in­
tended that this solidarity should be very close, while relaxing 
it sufficiently to enable the individual to display, in the interests 
of society itself, the intelligence with which she had provided 
him. \Ve went no further than this contention in the first 
part of our argument. It would be of slight importance for 
any moral philosophy that accepted without guestion the be-

74 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
lief in the heredity of acquired characteristics. 
Man might 
in that case be born to-day with very different tendencies 
from those of his remotest ancestors. 
But we rely upon ex­
perience, which teaches that the hereditary transmission of a 
contracted habit, assuming that it ever happens, is an excep­
tional and not a regular or frequent occurrence, sufficient in 
the long run to bring about a far-reaching alteration in the 
nature of man. 
However radical the difference may be be­
tween primitive man and civilized man, it is due almost solely 
to what the child has amassed since the first awakening of its 
consciousness; all the acquisitions of humanity during centuries 
of civilization are there, at his elbow, deposited in the knowl­
edge impaned to him, in the traditions, the institutions, the 
customs, the syntax and vocabulary of the language he learns 
to speak, and even in the gestures of the people about him. It 
is this thick humus which covers to-day. the bed-rock of orig­
inal nature. 
It may indeed represent the slowly accumulated 
effects of an infinite variety of causes; it has, nevenheless, had 
to follow the general configuration of the soil on which it is 
deposited. 
In shon, the obligation we find in the depths of 
our consciousness and which, as the etymology of the word 
implies, binds us to the other members of society, is a link of 
the same nature as that which unites the antɰ in the ant-hill or 
the cells of an organism; it would take· this form in the eyes of 
an ant, were she to become endowed with man's intelligence, 
or of an organic cell, were it to become as independent in its 
movements as an intelligent ant. 
I refer here of course to 
obligation taken in this simple form, devoid of matter: it is 
the irreducible, the ever-present element, even now, in our 
nature. 
It goes without saying that the matter wrought into 
this form becomes more and more intellectual and self-con­
sistent as civilization progresses, and new matter accrues in­
cessantly, not inevitably at the direct bidding of this form, but 
under the logical pressure of the intellectual matter already in-

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
75 
traduced into it. And we have seen also how a certain kind 
of matter which is intended to be run into a different mould, 
whose introduction is not due, even indirectly, to the need for 
social preservation, but to an aspiration of individual conscious­
ness, adopts this form by settling down, like the rest of mo­
rality, on the intellectual plane. 
But every time we come 
back to the strictly imperative element in obligation, and even 
supposing we found in it everything intelligence had put there 
to enrich it, everything with which reason has hedged it round 
to justify it, we find ourselves once again confronted by this 
fundamental framework. So much for pure obligation. 
Now, a mystic society, embracing all humanity and moving, 
animated by a common will, towards the continually renewed 
creation of a more complete humanity, is no more possible 
of realization in the future than was the existence in the past 
of human societies functioning automatically and similar to 
animal societies. Pure aspiration is an ideal limit, just like 
obligation unadorned. It is none the less true that it is the 
mystic souls who draw and will continue to draw civilized 
societies in their wake. The remembrance of what they have 
been, of what they have done, is enshrined in the memory of 
humanity. Each one of us can revive it, especially if he brings 
it in touch with the image, which abides ever living within 
him, of a particular person who shared in that mystic state 
and radiated around him some of its light. If we do not evoke 
this or that sublime figure, we know that we can do so; he 
thus exerts on us a virtual attraction. Even if we ignore in­
dividuals, there remains the general formula of morality ac­
cepted to-day by civilized humanity: this formula includes 
two things, a system of orders dictated by impersonal social 
requirements, and a series of appeals made to the conscience 
of each of us by persons who represent the best there is in 
humanity. The obligation relating to the orders is, in its orig­
inal and fundamental elements, sub-rational. The potency of 

76 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
the appeal lies in the strength of the emotion it has aroused 
in times gone by, which it arouses still, or can arouse: this 
emotion, if only because it can indefinitely be resolved into 
ideas, is more than idea; it is supra-rational. The two forces, 
working in different regions of the soul, are projected on to 
the intennediary plane, which is that of intelligence. They 
will henceforth be represented by their projections. These 
intenningle and interpenetrate. The result is a transposition 
of orders and ::.ppeals into tenns of pure reason. Justice thus 
finds itself continually broadظned by pity; "charity" assumes 
more and more the shape of justice; the elements of morality 
become homogeneous, comparable, and almost commensurable 
with one another; moral problems arc clearly enunciated and 
methodically solved. Humanity is asked to place itself at a 
certain level, higher than that of animal society, where obliga­
tion would be but the force of instinct, but not so high ?.s an 
assembly of gods, where everything would partake of the 
creative impetus. Considering then the manifestations of moral 
life thus organized, we shall find them perfectly self-consistent, 
capable therefore of being referred to first principles. Moral 
life will be rational life. 
Everybody will agree on this point. But because we have 
established the rational character of moral conduct, it does 
not follow that morality has its origin or even its foundation 
in pure reason. The important question is to find out why 
we are "obliged'' in cases where following our inclination by 
no means suffices to ensure that our duty is done. 
That in that case it is reason speaking, I am willing to 
admit; but, if it spoke only in its own name, if it did anything 
more than rationally express the action of certain forces which 
dwell behind it, how could it struggle against passion and self­
interest? The philosopher who considers that reason is self­
sufficient and claims to demonstrate this, succeeds in his dem­
onstration only if he tacitly reintroduces these forces; in fact 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
77 
they have crept back themselves, unbeknown to hiع surreptiti­
ously. Just examine the demonstration. It takes two forms, 
according as it assumes reason to be void or grants it a con­
tent of matter, according as it sees in moral obligation the 
necessity, pure and simple, of remaining logically in agreement 
with itself, or an invitation logically to pursue a certain end. 
Let us take these two forms in turn. \Vhen Kant tells us that 
a deposit of money must be handed back because, if the re­
cipient appropriated it, it would no longer be a deposit, he is 
obviously juggling with words. Either by "deposit" he means 
the material fact of placing a sum of money in the hands (say) 
of a friend, with an intimation that it will be called for later. 
But this material fact alone, with this intimation alone, would 
have no other effect than that of impelling the holder to give 
back the sum if he has no need of it, or simply to appropriate 
it if he is short of money; both proceedings are equally con­
sistent, equally logical, so long as the word deposit evokes only 
a material image unaccompanied by moral conceptions. Or 
else moral considerations are involved, there is the idea that 
the deposit has been "entrusted" and that a trust "must not" 
be betrayed; the idea that the holder has pledged himself, that 
he has "given his word;" the idea that, even if he has said 
nothing, he is bound by a tacit "contract;" the idea that there 
exists a "right of property," etc. Then indeed it would be self­
contradictory to accept a deposit and refuse to give it back; 
the deposit would no longer be a deposit; the philosopher might 
say that the breach of morality in this case pertains to the 
irrational. But it would be because the word "deposit" was 
taken in the sense that it has in a human group possessing fully 
developed moral ideas, conventions and obligations; the moral 
obligation would no longer' pertain to the bare and empty 
necessity of not contradicting oneself, since the contradiction 
in this case would simply consist in rejecting, after having ac­
cepted it, a moral obligation which for this very reason was 

78 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
already there. But enough of these quibbles. It is quite narural 
that \Ve should meet with a pretension to found morality on a 
respect for logic among philosophers and scholars, who are ac­
customed to bow to logic in speculative matters, and are thus 
inclined to believe that in all matters, and for the whole of 
humanity, logic must be accepted as the sovereign authority. 
But because science must respect the logic of things and logic 
in general if it wants to succeed in its researches, because such 
is the interest of the scientist as a scientist, it is not to be con­
cluded that we are obliged always to conform to logic in our 
conduct, as though such were the interest of man in general, 
or even the interest of the scientist as man. 
Our admiration 
for the speculative function of the mind may be great; but 
when philosophers maintain that it should be sufficient to 
silence selfishness and passion, they prove to us-and this is a 
matter for congratulation-that they have never heard the voice 
of the one or the other very loud within themselves. So much 
for a morality claiming as its basis reason in the guise of pure 
form, without matter.-Before considering the morality which 
adds matter to this form, we must note that people often get 
no further than the first when they think they have reached 
the second. That is the case with those philosophers who ex­
plain moral obligation by the fact that the idea of the Good 
forces itself upon us. 
If they take this idea from organized 
society, where human actions are already classified according 
as they are more or less appropriate for maintaining social 
cohesion and furthering the progress of humanity, and, above 
all, where certain clearly defined forces produce this cohesion 
and bring about this progress, they can doubtless say that an 
activity is more moral, the more it conforms to the Good; 
and they might also add that the Good is conceived as claim­
ing obedience. But this is because the Good would be merely 
the heading under which men agree to classify the actions 
which present one or the other fearure and to which they feel 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
79 
themselves prompted by the forces of impulsion and attraction 
which we have defined. The notion of a graduated scale of 
these various lines of conduct, and therefore of their re­
spective values, and, on the other hand, the all but inevitable 
necessity which forces them upon us, must then have existed 
before the idea of Good, which appeared later simply to pro­
vide a label or name; this idea, left to itself, would have lent 
no assistance to their classification, and still less to their enforce­
ment. But if, on the contrary, it is maintained that the idea 
of the Good is at the source of all obligation and all aspiration, 
and that it should also serve to evaluate human actions, we must 
be told by what sign we shall recognize that a given line of 
conduct is in conformity with it; we must therefore be fur­
nished with a definition of the Good; and we fail to see how it 
can be defined without assuming a hierarchy of creatures, or 
at the very least, of actions, of varying elevation: but if the 
hierarchy exists by itself, there is no need to call upon the idea 
of the Good to establish it; besides, we do not see why this 
hierarchy ought to be maintained, why we should be bound 
to respect it; you can invoke in its favour only aesthetic rea­
sons, allege that a certain line of conduct is "finer" than an­
other, that it sets us more or less high up in the ranks of living 
beings: but what could you reply to the man who declared that 
he places his own interest before all other considerations? 
Looking more closely, one would see that this morality has 
never been self-sufficient. It has simply been added on, as an 
artistic make-weight, to obligations which existed before it, 
and rendered it possible. \Vhen Greek philosophers attributed 
a pre-eminent dignity to the pure idea of Good, and, more 
generally, to a life of contemplation, they were speaking for 
a chosen few, a small group formed within society, which 
would begin by taking social life for granted. It has been said 
that this morality was silent about duty and knew nothing of 
obligation as we understand it. True, it was silent about it; 

80 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
but that was precisely because it assumed obligation to be 
self-evident. The philosopher was supposed to have begun by 
doing his duty like anybody else, as demanded of him by the 
city. Only then did a morality supervene, destined to make his 
life more beautiful by treating it as a work of art. In a word, 
and to sum up the discussion, there can be no question of 
founding morality on the cult of reason.-lt remains to be seen, 
as we have said, whether it could be founded on reason in so 
far as reason might supply our activity with a definite object, 
in conformity with reason, but supplementary to it, an object 
towards which reason would teach us to strive systematically. 
But it is easy to sec that no objective-not even the twofold 
one we have indicated, not even the dual preoccupation of 
maintaining social cohesion and of furthering the progress of 
humanity-will impose itself peremptorily as a mere rational 
proposition. If certain really active forces, actually influencing 
our will, are already in possession, reason could and should in­
tervene to co-ordinate their effects, but it could not contend 
with them, since one can always reason with reason, confront 
its arguments with others, or simply refuse all discussion and 
reply by a "sic volo, sic jubeo." In truth, a system of ethics 
which imagines it is founding obligation on purely rational 
considerations, unwittingly reintroduces, as we have pointed 
out already and as we shall point out again, forces of a different 
order. That is exactly why it succeeds so easily. Real obliga­
tion is already there, and whatever reason impresses upon it 
assumes naturally an obligatory character. Society, with all 
that holds it together and drives it forward, is already there, 
and that is why reason can adopt as a principle of morality one 
or the other of the ends towards which social man is striving; 
by building up a thoroughly consistent system of means 
destined to attain this end, reason will more or less rediscover 
morality, such as common sense conceives it, such as humanity 
in general practises, or claims to practise it. For each of these 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
8 1  
objectives, culled by reason from society, has been socialized 
and, by that very fact, impregnated with all the other aims to 
be found there. Thus, even if \ve set up personal interest as the 
moral principle, we shall find no great difficulty in building 
up a rational morality sufficiently resembling current morality, 
as is proved by the relative success of utilitarian ethics. 
Sel­
fishness, indeed, for the man living among his fellow-men, 
comprises legitimate pride, the craving for praise, etc., with 
the result that purely personal interest has become impossible 
to define, so large is the clement of public interest it contains, 
so hard is it to keep them separate. 
Think of the amount of 
deference for others included in \vhat we call self-love, and 
even in jealousy and envy! 
Anyone \vanting to practise ab­
solute egoism would have to shut himself up within himself, 
and not care enough for his neighbour to be jealous or en­
vious of him. There is a touch of sympathy in these forms of 
hate, and the v.ery vices of a man living among his fellows 
are not without certain implications of virtue; all arc saturated 
with vanity, and vanity means sociability. 
Still easier will it 
be, then, to draw all moral maxims, or nearly all, from feelings 
such as honour, or sympathy, or pity. 
Each of these tend­
encies, in a man living in society, is laden with all that social 
morality has deposited in it; and we should have to unload 
it first, at the risk of reducing it to very little indeed, if we 
wished to avoid begging the question in using it to explain 
morality. 
The case with which theories of this kind are built 
up should make us suspicious: if the most varied aims can thus 
be transmuted by philosophers into moral aims, we may sur­
mise, seeing that they have not yet found the philosopher's 
stone, that they had started by putting gold in the bottom 
of their crucible. 
Similarly it is obvious that none of these 
doctrines will account for obligation. 
For we may be obliged 
to adopt certain means in order to attain such and such ends; 
but if we choose to renounce the end, how can the means be 

82 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
forced upon us? And yet, by adopting any one of these ends 
as the principle of morality, philosophers have evolved from 
it whole systems of maxims, which, without going so far as 
to assume an imperative form, come near enough to it to afford 
satisfaction. The reason is quite simple. They have con­
sidered the pursuit of these ends, we repeat, in a society in 
which there arc peremptory pressures, together with aspira­
tions to match them and also to extend them. Pressure and at­
traction, specifying their objectives, would lead to any one of 
these systems of maxims, since each of them aims at the attain­
ment of an end both individual and social. Each of these 
systems then already exists in the social atmosphere when the 
philosopher arrives on the scene; it comprises maxims which 
are near enough in substance to those which the philosopher 
will formulate, the former being obligatory. Rediscovered by 
philosophy, but no longer in the form of a command since 
they are now mere suggestions for the intelligent pursuit of 
an end, such as intelligence might easily repudiate, they are 
snapped up by the vaguer or perhaps merely virtual maxims 
which resemble them, but which are laden with obligation. 
They thus become obligatory, but the obligation has not come 
dov.m, as might be imagined, from above, that is to say, from 
a principle from which the maxims have been rationally de­
duced; it has come up from below, I mean from that substratum 
of pressure, capable of being extended into aspiration, which 
is the basis of society. In a word, the moral theorists take so­
ciety for granted and consequently also the two forces to 
which society owes its stability and its mobility. Taking ad­
vantage of the fact that all social ends interpenetrate one an­
other, and that each of them, resting as it were on that stability 
and mobility, seems to be invested with these two forces, they 
have no difficulty in reconstituting the content of morals with 
one or other of the ends assumed as a principle, and then show­
ing that such morality is obligatory. For, by taking society 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
83 
for granted, they have also taken for granted the matter of this 
morality and its form, all it contains and all the obligation with 
which it is clothed. 
If we now delve down beneath that illusion which is com­
mon to all theoretical moral systems, this is what we should 
find. Obligation is a necessity with which one can argue, 
and which is therefore companioned by intelligence and liberty. 
This necessity is, in fact, similar to that which accompanies the 
production of a physiological or even a physical effect; in a 
humanity which nature had made devoid of intelligence, where 
the individual had no power to choose, the action destined to 
maintain the preservation and cohesion of the group would be 
accomplished inevitably; it would be accomplished under the 
influence of a definite force, the same that makes each ant toil 
for the ant-hill and each cell in the tissue work for the or­
ganism. But intelligence intervenes with its faculty of choice; 
this is a new force which maintains the other in a state of 
virtuality, or rather in a state of reality barely discernible in its 
action, yet perceptible in its pressure: just as the swinging to 
and fro of the pendulum in a clock, while it prevents the ten­
sion of the spring from manifesting itself by a sudden unwind­
ing, is yet a consequence of this tension, being an effect which 
exerts an inhibitive or regulating action on its causes. \Vhat 
then will intelligence do? It is a faculty used naturally by 
the individual to meet the difficulties of life; it will not follow 
the direction of a force which, on the contrary, is working 
for the species, and which, if it considers the individual at all, 
does so in the interest of the species. It will make straight for 
selfish decisions. But this will be only its first impulse. It 
cannot avoid reckoning with the force of which it feels the 
invisible pressure. It will therefore persuade itself into thinking 
that an intelligent egoism must allow all other egoisms their 
share. And if the intelligence is that of a philosopher, it will 
build up a theory of ethics in which the interpenetration of 

84 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
personal and general interests will be demonstrated, and where 
obligation will be brought back to the necessity, realized and 
felt, of thinking of others, if we wish intelligently to do good 
to ourselves. But we can answer that it does not suit us to see 
our interesrs in this light, and it is therefore not obvious why 
we should still feel obliged. Yet we are obliged, and in­
telligence is well aware of it, since this is the very reason why 
it attempted the demonstration. 
But the truth is that its 
demonstration seems successful only because it clears the way 
for something it does not mention, and which is the essential: 
a necessity that pertains to experience and feeling, one which 
some argument has thrust into the background and which 
an opposing argument reinstates. What is therefore, strictly 
speaking, obligatory in obligation does not come from in­
telligence. The latter only supplies the clement of hesitation 
in obligation. When it appears to be the basis of obligation, 
it is merely sustaining it in its resistance to a resistance, in the 
operation of inhibiting itself from inhibiting. And we shall 
see in the next chapter what helpers it enlists. For the present, 
let us revert to a comparison we have found useful. An ant, 
accomplishing her heavy task as if she never thought of her­
self, as if she lived only for the ant-hill, is very likely in a 
somnambulistic state; she is yielding to an irresistible necessity. 
Imagine her suddenly becoming intelligent. She would reason 
about what she had done, wonder why she had done it, would 
say it was very foolish not to take things easy and have a good 
time. "I have had enough of sacrifice, now is the time for 
a little self-indulgence." And behold the natural order com­
pletely upset. But nature is on the watch. She provided the 
ant with the social instinct; she has just added to it, perhaps 
in response to a transitory need of instinct, a gleam of in­
telligence. However slightly intelligence has thrown instinct 
out of gear, it must incontinently set things to rights and undo 
what it has done. An act of reasoning will therefore prove that 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
85 
it is all to the interest of the ant to work for the ant-hill, and 
in this way the obligation will apparently find a basis. But the 
truth is that such a basis would be very unsafe, and that ob­
ligation already existed in all its force; intelligence has merely 
hindered its own hindrance. 
Our ant-hill philosopher would 
be none the less disinclined to admit this; he would doubtless 
persist in attributing a positive and not a negative activity to 
intelligence. 
And that is just what most moral philosophers 
have done, either because they were intellectuals and afraid 
of not according enough importance to intelligence, or rather 
because obligation appeared to them as an indivisible entity, 
defying analysis; on the contrary, if we see in it something 
approximate to a compulsion which may be thwarted by a 
resistance, we realize that the resistance has come from in­
telligence, the resistance to the resistance likewise, and that 
the compulsion, which is the essential, has a different origin. 
In truth, no philosopher can avoid initially postulating this 
compulsion; but very often he postulates it implicitly, and not 
in words. We have postulated it and said so. 
We connect it, 
moreover, with a principle that it is impossible not to admit. 
For, to whatever school of philosophy you belong, you are 
bound to recognize that man is a living creature, that the 
evolution of life along its two main lines has been accom­
plished in the direction of social life, that association is the 
most general form of living activity, since life is organization, 
and that, this being so, we pass by imperceptible transitions 
from the relation between cells in an organism to the relation 
between individuals in society. 
We therefore confine our­
selves to noting what is uncontroverted and incontrovertible. 
But, this being admitted, any theorising on obligation becomes 
unnecessary as well as futile: unnecessary because obligation is 
a necessity of life; ineffectual because the hypothesis pre­
sented can, at the utmost, afford justification in the eyes of 

86 
1\I O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
intelligence, and very incomplete justification at that, for an 
obligation anterior to this intellectual reconstruction. 
Now, life might have stopped at this point and done nothing 
more than create closed societies, whose members were bound 
together by strict obligations. Composed of intelligent beings, 
these societies would ha\'e presented variations not to be found 
in animal societies, which are governed by instinct; but the 
variations would not have gone so far as to encourage the 
dream of a root and branch transformation; society would not 
have become modified to the extent that a single society, em­
bracing all mankind, could seem possible. In fact, this society 
does not yet, and perhaps never will, exist; in according to man 
the requisite moral conformation for living in groups, nature 
probably did all she could for the species. But, just as there 
have been men of genius to thrust back the bounds of in­
telligence, and, thus, far more has been granted to individuals, 
at certain intervals, than it was possible to grant all at once to 
the species, so exceptional souls have appeared who sensed their 
kinship with the soul of Everyman, who thus, instead of re­
maining within the limits of the group and going no further 
than the solidarity laid down by nature, were borne on a great 
surge of love towards humanity in general. The appearance 
of each one of them was like the creation of a new species, 
composed of one single individual, the vital impulse culminating 
at long intervals in one particular man, a result which could not 
have been obtained at one stroke by humanity as a whole. Each 
of these souls marked then a certain point attained by the evolu­
tion of life; and each of them was a manifestation, in an orig­
inal form, of a love which seems to be the very essence of the 
creative effort. The creative emotion which exalted these 
exceptional souls, and which was an overflowing of vitality, 
has spread far and wide about them; enthusiasts themselves, 
they radiated enthusiasm which has never been completely 
quenched, and which can be readily fanned into flame again. 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
87 
To-day, when in imagination we call to life these great moral 
leaders, when we listen to their words and see them at work, 
we feel that they communicate to us something of their fer­
vour, and draw us in their wake; this is no longer a more or 
less attenuated compulsion, it is a more or less irresistible attrac­
tion. But neither docs this second force, any more than the 
first, call for an explanation. For you cannot reject these two 
data: a compulsion, or something like it, exerted by habits 
which correspond, in man, to what you call instinct in 
animals, and, beside this, a certain stirring up of the soul, which 
you call emotion; in the one case you have -primal obligation, 
in the other, something which becomes an extension of it; but 
in both cases you are confronted by forces which are not 
strictly and exclusively moral, and whose origin, therefore, it 
is no special duty of the moralist to trace. Because they have 
nevertheless insisted on doing so, philosophers have misunder­
stood the compound nature of obligation in its present-day 
form: they have been led to attribute to this or that mental 
picture or operation the power of influencing the will: as 
if an idea could ever categorically demand its own realization! 
as if the idea were anything else, in this case, than an intellectual 
extract common to all, or, better still, the projection on to the 
intellectual plane of a whole set of tendencies and aspirations, 
some above, some beneath, pure intelligence! 
Reinstate the 
duality of origin, and the difficulties vanish. N"ay, the duality 
itself merges into a unity, for "social pressure" and "impetus 
of love" are but two complementary manifestations of life, 
normally intent on preserving generally the social form which 
was characteristic of the human species from the beginning, 
but, exceptionally, capable of transfiguring it, thanks to in­
dividuals who each represent, as the appearance of a new 
species would have represented, an effort of creative evolution. 
All teachers have not perhaps a full perception of this double 
origin of morality, but they perceive something of it as soon 

88 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
as they try to inculcate morality into their pupils instead of 
merely talking about it. 
We do not deny the utility, the 
necessity even, of a moral instruction which appeals to reason 
alone, defining duties and connecting them with a principle 
of which it follows out in detail the various applications. 
It is 
on the plane of intelligence, and on that plane alone, that dis­
cussion is possible, and there is no complete morality without 
reflexion, analysis and argument with others as well as with 
oneself. 
But if instruction directed to the intelligence be in­
dispensable to give confidence and delicacy to the moral sense, 
if it make us fully capable of carrying out our intention where 
our intention is good, yet the intention must exist in the first 
place, and intention marks a direction of the will as much as 
and more than of intelligence. 
How can we get a hold over 
the will? 
Two ways lie open to the teacher. 
The one is that 
of training, in the highest meaning of the word; the other the 
mystic way, the term being taken here, on the contrary, in its 
most restricted sense. 
By the first method is inculcated a mo­
rality made up of impersonal habits; by the second we obtain 
the imitation of a person, and even a spiritual union, a more or 
less complete identification. 
The primeval training, the train­
ing intended by nature, consisted in adopting the habits of the 
group; it was automatic; it took place spontaneously in those 
cases where the individual felt himself half merged in the collec­
tivity. As society became differentiated through a division of 
labour, it delegated to the groups thus formed within itself the 
task of training the individual, of putting him in harmony with 
the group and thereby with society itself; but it was still noth­
ing more than a system of habits formed for the sole benefit 
of society. That a morality of this type may suffice at a pinch, 
if it be complete, there is no doubt. 
Thus the man confined 
strictly within the limits of his calling or profession, wholly ab­
sorbed in his daily task, with his life organized so as to tum 
out the greatest possible quantity, the best possible quality of 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N  
89 
work, would generally fulfil ipso facto many other obligations. 
Discipline would have made him an honest man. 
This is the 
first method: it works in the sphere of the impersonal. 
The 
other can supplement it, if need be; it may even take its place. 
We do not hesitate to call it religious, and even mystic; but 
we must agree upon the meaning of the words. 
People are 
fond of saying that religion is the helpmeet of morality in that 
it induces a fear of punishment and a hope of reward. This is 
perhaps true, but they should add that, in this direction, re­
ligion does little more than promise an extension and rectifi­
cation of human justice by divine justice: to the rewards and 
punishments established by society, whose application is so 
far from perfect, it adds others, infinitely higher, to be meted 
out to us in the City of God, when we shall have left the city 
of men; still it is on the same plane of the city of men that we 
thus remain; religion is brought in, doubtless, but not in its 
specifically religious aspect; however high the teaching may 
rise, it still looks upon moral education as training, and upon 
morality as discipline; so that it still clings to the first of our 
two methods, it has not yet sprung over to the second. On the 
other hand, it is of religious dogmas and the metaphysical 
theories they imply that we generally think as soon as the word 
religion is mentioned: so that when religion is said to be the 
foundation of morality, we picture to ourselves a group of 
conceptions relating to God and the world, the acceptance of 
which is supposed to result in the doing of good. 
But it is 
quite clear that these conceptions, taken as such, influence our 
will and our conduct in the same way as theories may do, that 
is to say, ideas; we are here on the intellectual plane, and, as 
I hinted above, neither obligation nor the force which extends 
it can possibly originate in bare ideas, bare ideas affecting our 
will only to the extent which it pleases us to accept them 
or put them into practice. Now if you distinguish this meta­
physical system from all others by saying that it compels our 

90 
M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
assent, you may again be right, but then you are not thinking 
of its content alone, of ideas pure and simple; you introduce 
something different, which underpins the representation, which 
imparts to it some undeniable efficacy, and which is the 
specifically religious element: but then it is this element, and 
not the metaphysics with which you have associated it, which 
becomes the religious basis of morality. 
Here indeed we .tre 
concerned with the second method, but then we are dealing 
with mystic experience. 
I mean mystic experience taken in 
its immediacy, apart from all interpretation. 
True mystics 
simply open their souls to the oncoming wave. 
Sure of them­
selves, because they feel within them something better than 
themselves, they prove to be great men of action, to the surprise 
of those for whom mysticism is nothing but visions, and rap­
tures and ecstasies. 
That which they have allowed to flow 
into them is a stream flowing down and seeking through them 
to reach their fellow-men; the necessity to spread around them 
what they have received affects them like an onslaught of 
love. 
A love which each one of them stamps with his own 
personality. 
A love which is in each of them an entirely new 
emotion, capable of transposing human life into another tone. 
A love which thus causes each of them to be loved for himself, 
so that through him, and for him, other men will open their 
souls to the love of humanity. 
A love which can be just as 
well passed on through the medium of a person who has at­
tached himself to them or to their evergreen memory and 
formed his life on that pattern. 
Let us go further. 
If a word 
of a great mystic, or some one of his imitators, finds an echo 
in one or another of us, may it not be that there is a mystic 
dormant within us, merely waiting for an occasion to awake? 
In the first case a person attaches himself to the impersonal and 
aims at finding room inside it. 
Here he responds to the call of 
a personality, perhaps that of a revealer of moral life or one of 
his imitators, or even in certain circumstances his own. 

M O R A L  O B L I G A T I O N 
91 
\Vhichever of these two methods be adopted, in both cases 
the foundations of human nature have been taken into ac­
count, whether considered statically in itself or dynamically 
in its origin. 
The mistake would be to think that moral 
pressure and moral aspiration find their final explanation in 
social life considered merely as a fact. 
We are fond of saying 
that society exists, and that hence it inevitably exerts a con­
straint on its members, and that this constraint is obligation. 
But in the first place, for society to exist at all the individual 
must bring into it a whole group of inborn tendencies; society 
therefore is not self-explanatory; so we must senrch below the 
social nccretions, get down to Life, of which human societies, 
as indeed the humnn species nltogether, are but manifestations. 
But this is not going far enough; we must delve deeper still if. 
we \V:lnt to understnnd, not only how society "constrnins" in­
dividuals, but again how the individual can set up as a judge 
and wrest from it a moral transformation. 
If society is self­
sufficient, it is the supreme authority. 
But if it is only one 
of the aspects of life, we can easily conceive that life, which 
has had to set down the human species at a certain point of 
its evolution, imparts a new impetus to exceptional individuals 
who have immersed themselves anew in it, so that they can 
help society further along its way. 
True, we shall have had 
to push on as far as the very principle of life. 
Everything is 
obscure if we confine ourselves to mere manifestations, whether 
they are all called indiscriminately social, or whether one 
examines, in social man, more particularly the feature of in­
telligence. 
All becomes clear, on the contrary, if we start by a 
quest beyond these manifestations for Life itself. 
Let us then 
give to the word biology the very wide meaning it should have, 
and will perhaps have one day, and let us say in conclusion 
that all morality, be it pressure or aspiration, is in essence 
biological. 

CH A PTER I I  
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
THE spectacle of what religions have been in the past, of what 
certain religions still are to-day, is indeed humiliating for human 
intelligence. 
What a farrago of error and folly! Experience 
may indeed say "that is false," and reasoning "that is absurd." 
Humanity only clings all the more to that absurdity and that 
error. 
And if this were all! 
But religion has been known to 
enjoin immorality, to prescribe crime. 
The cruder it is, the 
more actual space it occupies in the life of a people. 
\Vhat it 
will have to share later with science, art, philosophy, it de­
mands and obtains at first for itself alone. 
And that is indeed 
a matter for surprise, seeing that we began by defining man 
as an intelligent being. 
Our bewilderment increases when we see that the most crass 
superstition has so long been a universal fact. 
Indeed it still 
survives. 
We find in the past, we could find to-day, human 
societies with neither science nor art nor philosophy. 
But 
there has never been a society without religion. 
What should be then our confusion, were we to compare 
ourselves with animals on this point! 
It is highly probable 
that animals are unacquainted with superstition. 
We know 
but little of what goes on in minds not our own; but, since 
religious feeling generally finds expression in attitudes or in 
acts, we should certainly be made aware by some sign, if 
animals were capable of a religious sense. 
But there is nothing 
for it, facts must be faced. Homo sapiens, the only creature 
endowed with reason, is also the only creature to pin its 
existence to things unreasonable. 
92 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
93 
People talk, indeed, of a "primitive mentality," as, for ex­
ample, to-day that of the inferior races, and in days gone by 
that of humanity in general, at whose door the responsibility 
for superstition should be laid. 
If in speaking thus we mean 
merely to group certain ways of thinking under one common 
heading, and note certain connecting links between them, that 
is indeed useful and unexceptionable work; useful in that it 
marks off a field of ethnological and psychological studies 
which are of the greatest interest; unexceptionable since it does 
no more than establish the existence of certain beliefs and 
certain practices in a humanity less civilized than our own. 
It is to this that J\1. Lcvy-Bruhl has apparently confined him­
self in his remarkable works and particularly in the later ones. 
But this leaves untouched the question as to how beliefs and 
practices which are anything but reasonable could have been, 
and still are, accepted by reasonable beings. 
\Ve cannot re­
frain from seeking an answer to this question. 
\Vhether he 
will or no, the reader of 1\1. Levy-Bruhl's admirable books wil 
draw from them the conclusion that human intelligence has 
gone through a process of evolution, that natural logic has not 
always been the same, that "primitive mentality" corresponds 
to a different fundamental structure, which was supplanted by 
our own, and which is only found to-day among backward 
peoples. 
But this is an admission that habits of mind acquired 
by individuals in the course of centuries can have become 
hereditary, modifying nature and giving a new mentality to 
the species. 
There is nothing more questionable. 
Even sup­
posing that a habit formed by parents is ever transmitted to the 
child, it is a rare occurrence, due to accidental coincidence of 
a whole concourse of circumstances: it will give rise to no 
modification of the species. 
But then, since the structure of 
the mind remains the same, the experience acquired by suc­
cessive generations, deposited in the social environment, and 
given back to each of us by these surroundings, should suffice 

94 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
to explain why we do not think like uncivilized man, why man 
of bygone days was different from man of to-day. The mind 
works just the same in both cases, but it may not be working 
on the same material, because the needs of society are scarcely 
likely to be the same in the one case as in the other. 
Our 
own investigations will indeed lead us to this conclusion. 
vVithout anticipating it, let us merely say that the observation 
of "primitive beings" inevitably raises the question of the 
psychological origin of superstition, and that the general struc­
ture of human thought-the observation therefore of civilized 
man of the present day-will appear to us to supply sufficient 
data for the solution of the problem. 
W c shall have much the same thing to say when we come 
to "collective" instead of "primitive" mentality. 
According 
to Emile Durkheim, there is no need to try and find out why 
those things which such or such a religion asks us to believe 
"appear so disconcerting to individual minds. 
This is simply 
because the representation of those things by religion is not 
the work of these minds, but that of the collective mind. Now 
it is natural that this mentality should see reality differently 
from our own mind, since it is of another nature. 
Society has 
its own mode of existence peculiar to it, and therefore its own 
mode of thinking." 1 
So far as we arc concerned, we shall 
readily admit the existence of collective representations, de­
posited in institutions, language and customs. 
Together they 
constitute a social intelligence which is the complement of 
individual intelligences. 
But we fail to see why these two 
mentalities should clash, and why one should be liable to "dis­
concert" the other. 
Experience teaches nothing of the kind, 
and sociology appears to us to afford no grounds for the sup­
position. If we held the view that nature stopped short at the 
individual, that society is the result of an accident or a con­
vention, we could push the argument to its conclusion and 
1 Annce sociologique, Vol. II, pp. 29 sqq. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
95 
maintain that this conjunction of individuals, similar to that of 
primary elements united in a chemical combination, has given 
rise to a collective intelligence, certain representations of 
which will be puzzling to the individual mind. 
But nowadays 
nobody attributes an accidental or contractual origin to so­
ciety. 
If sociology is open to criticism, it would rather be 
that it leans too much the other way: certain of its exponents 
tend to regard the individual as an abstraction, and the social 
body as the only reality. 
But in that case, how could it be 
that the collective mentality is not prefigured in the individual 
mentality? 
How can we imagine that nature, having made 
man a "political animal," so disposed human intelligence that it 
feels out of its element when it thinks "politically"? 
For our 
part, we believe that in the study of the individual one can 
never overestimate the fact that the individual was meant for 
society. Because it has not sufficiently taken this into account, 
psychology has made such meagre progress in certain direc­
tions. 
I am not speaking of the benefit to be derived from 
an intensive study of certain abnormal or morbid states, imply­
ing among the members of a community, as among the bees 
in a hive, an invisible anastomosis: away from the hive, the bee 
pines away and dies; isolated from society or sharing in­
sufficiently in its activities, man suffers from a similar malady 
very little studied up to now, called listlessness; \vhen isolation 
is prolonged, as in solitary confinement, characteristic mental 
troubles appear. 
These phenomena would well deserve to 
have a separate account opened for them in the books of 
psychology; when closed it would show a handsome profit. 
But this is not all that there is to be said. 
The future of a 
science depends on the way it first dissects its object. 
If it 
has had the luck to cut along the lines of the natural joints, 
like Plato's good cook, the number of "cuts" is of little matter; 
as the cutting up into pieces will have prepared the way for the 
analysis into elements, we shall be finally in possession of a 

96 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
simplified representation of the whole. 
Our psychologists do 
not sufficiently realize this when they shrink from making sub­
divisions. 
For instance, they postulate certain general faculties 
of perception, interpretation, comprehension, without enquir­
ing whether the mechanisms that come into play are not dif­
ferent, according as the faculties apply to persons or things, 
or according as the intelligence is immersed or not in the social 
environment. 
And yet the mass of mankind has already 
sketched out this distinction, and has even recorded it in 
language: alongside of the senses which inform us about things 
it puts conrmon sense, which bears on our intercourse with 
people. We cannot help observing that a man may be a first­
rate mathematician, or an expert physicist, or a subtle psychol­
ogist, as far as self-analysis goes, and yet completely misunder­
stand the actions of other men, miscalculate his own and per­
petually fail to adapt himself to his surroundings, be, in a 
word, lacking in common sense. 
The monomania of persecu­
tion, or more precisely of misinterpretation, is there to prove 
that common sense may become impaired while the reasoning 
faculties remain intact. 
The gravity of this malady, its ob­
stinate resistance to all treatment, the fact that the early symp­
toms are generally to be detected in the remotest past of the 
sufferer, everything would seem to indicate that we have here 
a profound congenital psychic insufficiency, and one that is 
clearly defined. Common sense, then, or as it might be called, 
social sense, is innate in normal man, like the faculty of speech, 
which also implies the existence of society and which is none 
the less prefigured in individual organisms. 
It is indeed hard 
to admit that nature, which placed social life at the extremities 
of the two great lines of evolution ending respectively in the 
Hymenoptera and in man, while regulating beforehand the de­
tailed activity of every ant in the ant-hill, should have neglected 
to give man any guiding principles, however general, for the 
co-ordination of his conduct with that of his fellow-men. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
97 
Human societies doubtless differ from insect societies in that 
they leave undetermined the actions of the individual, and in­
deed those of the collectivity also. 
But this is equivalent to 
saying that it is the actions which are preordained in the in­
sect's nature, and that in man it is the faculty alone. 
The 
faculty is none the less there, being so organized in the in­
dividual that it may function in society. 
How then should 
there be a social mentality supervening, as if it were an ad­
ditional factor, and liable to "disconcert" the individual men­
tality? 
How could the first fail to be present in the second? 
The problem which we stated, and which consists in ascertain­
ing how absurd superstitions have been able and are still able 
to control the lives of reasonable beings, remains then entirely 
unsolved. 
We said that, though we may persist in speaking of 
primitive mentality, the problem none the less bears on the 
psychology of the man of to-day. We shall add that, though 
we may persist in speaking of collective representations, the 
question none the less concerns the psychology of the in­
dividual man. 
But does not the difficulty lie precisely in the fact that our 
psychology is not sufficiently concerned with the subdivision 
of its subject in accordance with the lines laid down by na­
ture? 
The representations which produce superstitions possess 
the common characteristic of being phantasmic. 
Psychology 
relates them to a general faculty, imagination. It will also place 
under the same heading the discoveries and inventions of science 
and the achievements of art. 
But why should we group to­
gether such different things, give them the same name and thus 
suggest the idea of a mutual relationship? 
We do so merely 
for convenience of speech and for the entirely negative reason 
that these various activities are neither perception, nor memory, 
nor logical operations of the mind. Let us then agree to group 
phantasmic representations separately, and to call "myth­
making," or "fiction," the act which produces them. 
This 

98 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
will be a first step towards the solution of the problem. 
Let 
us now remark that psychology, when it splits up the activities 
of the mind into operations, does not take enough pains to find 
out the specific purpose of each of them. And this is precisely 
why the subdivision is all too often inadequate or artificial. 
Doubtless man can dream and philosophize, but first of all he 
must live; there is no doubt that our psychical structure orig­
inates in the necessity of preserving and developing social and 
individual life. 
If psychology does not make this consideration 
its guiding principle, it will inevitably distort its object. What 
should we say of a scientist who dealt with the anatomy of 
organs and the histology of tissues without troubling about 
their use? 
He \Vould risk making erroneous divisions and 
erroneous groupings. If function is comprehensible only from 
structure, the main lines of a structure are not to be discerned 
without some idea of its function. 
We must not therefore 
consider the mind as being what it is "for no particular reason, 
just for the fun of the thing." We must not say: its structure 
being such, it has derived this or that advantage from it. 
The 
advantage it derives from its structure is, on the contrary, the 
factor which must have determined the latter; in any case that 
is the clue for any research. 
Let us take, then, in the vaguely 
and doubtless artificially defined realm of imagination, the 
natural "cut" which we have called myth-making and see to 
what use it is naturally put. To this faculty are due the novel, 
the drama, mythology together with all that preceded it. 
But then, there have not always been novelists and dramatists, 
whereas humanity has never subsisted without religion. 
Very 
likely, therefore, poetry and fantasy of all kinds appeared as 
extras, benefiting from the fact that the mind knew how to 
make myths, but .ieligion is what accounts for the myth-making 
function: faculty standing to religion in the relationship of 
effect and not of cause. 
Some need, individual perhaps, social 
in any case, must have required from the mind this type of 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
99 
mental activity. 
Let us ask what this need was. 
It must be 
noted that fiction, when it has the power to move us, re­
sembles an incipient hallucination: it can thwart our judgment 
and reason, which are the strictly intellectual faculties. 
Now 
\vhat would nature have done, after creating intelligent beings, 
if she had wanted to guard against certain dangers of intellectual 
activity without compromising the future of intelligence? 
Ob­
servation supplies us with the answer. 
To-day, in the full 
efflorescence of scientific development, we see the finest ar­
guments in the world come to grief in the face of a single ex­
periment: nothing can resist facts. 
So that if intelligence was 
to be kept at the outset from sliding down a slope which was 
dangerous to the individual and society, it could be only by the 
statement of apparent facts, by the ghosts of facts; failing real 
experience, a counterfeit of experience had to be conjured up. 
A fiction, if its image is vivid and insistent, may indeed mas­
querade as perception and in that way prevent or modify ac­
tion. 
A systematically false experience, confronting the in­
telligence, may indeed stop it pushing too far the conclusions it 
deduces from a true experience. 
It is in some such fashion 
that nature has proceeded. 
And that being so, we should not 
be surprised to find that intelligence was pen·aded, as soon as 
formed, by superstition, that an essentially intelligent being 
is naturally superstitious, and that intelligent creatures are the 
only superstitious beings. 
It is true that this raises new questions. 
\Ve must enquire 
more carefully what is the utility of the myth-making func­
tion, and what danger nature had to contend with. 
Without 
exploring this point yet, we must note that the human mind 
may be in the right or in the wrong, but that in either case, 
whatever direction it has taken, it goes straight ahead: from 
one conclusion to another, from one analysis to another, it 
plunges deeper into error, just as it may proceed further and 
further along the path of truth. 
We are only acquainted with 

100 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
humanity as already evolved, for the "primitives" we observe 
to-day are as old as we are, and the documents upon which 
the history of religion works belong to a relatively recent past. 
So the immense variety of beliefs with which we have to deal 
is the result of a lengthy process of proliferation. 
From their 
absurdity or strangeness we may doubtless conclude that there 
is a cenain tendency towards the strange or the absurd in the 
working of a certain function of the mind; but these character­
istics are probably thus accentuated simply because the oper­
ation has gone so far: if we take into consideration the direction 
alone, we shall be less surprised at the irrational elements in 
the tendency, and we may be able to grasp its utility. 
\Vho 
knows indeed if the errors into which this tendency led are 
not the distortions, at the time beneficial to the species, of a 
truth destined to be later revealed to cenain individuals? 
But 
this is not all. 
A second question arises, which must in fact 
be answered first: vVhat is the origin of this tendency? 
Is it 
connected with other manifestations of life? 
We spoke of 
an intention of nature; it was a metaphor, as convenient in 
psychology as it is in biology; we thus stressed the fact that 
the contrivance with which we were dealing served the in­
terests either of the individual or the species. But the expression 
is vague, and for the sake of clarity we should say that the tend­
ency under consideration is an instinct, were it not that it 
is precisely in the place of an instinct that these phantasmic 
images arise in the mind. 
They play a pan which might have 
devolved on instinct, and \vhich would actually do so in a be­
ing devoid of intelligence. 
Let us say, for the time being, 
that it is a virtual instinct, meaning that at the extremity of 
another line of evolution, in insect societies, we find instinct 
automatically inducing a behaviour comparable, in its utility, 
to the behaviour which is suggested to man, a being both in­
telligent and free, by these well-nigh hallucinatory images. 
But in thus alluding to divergent and complementary develop-

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
101 
ments, which are supposed to have led, on the one hand, to real 
instincts, on the other to virtual instincts, are we not putting 
forward a specific view of the evolution of life? 
Such is indeed the "vider problem raised by our second ques­
tion. 
It was implicitly contained in the first. 
How is it 
possible to relate to a vital need those fictions which confront 
and sometimes thwart our intelligence, if we have not ascer­
tained the fundamental demands of life? 
We shall find later 
this same problem again in a still more explicit form, when 
a question arises which we cannot avoid, the question of how 
religion has survived the danger which brought it into being. 
How, instead of dying out, has it simply been transformed? 
Why does it still live on, though science has come to fill the 
gap, dangerous indeed, left between the form and the matter 
of intelligence? 
May it not be that, underlying the need for 
stability which life reveals in that pause, or rather that turning 
about on the same spot, which the preservation of the species 
really is, there is some demand for a forward movement, 
some remnant of an impulse, a vital impetus? 
But the two 
first questions will suffice for the present. 
They both bring 
us back to the considerations we have already submitted on 
the evolution of life. These considerations were by no means 
hypothetical, as some apparently have thought. 
In speaking 
of a "vital impetus" and a creative evolution, we were keeping 
as close as we could to actual experience. 
This is what many 
are beginning to realize, since positive science, merely by 
abandoning certain theoretical ideas or giving them out as 
mere hypotheses, is drawing nearer to our views. 
In ap­
propriating them, it would only be entering into its own again. 
Let us then go back over a few of the outstanding features 
of life, and emphasize the distinctly empirical character of our 
conception of the "vital impetus." 
We asked whether the 
phenomena of life could be resolved into physical and chem­
ical facts. 
When the physiologist affirms such a thing, he 

102 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
means, consciously or unconsciously, that the business of 
physiology is to bring out whatever is physical and chemical 
in the vital, that it is impossible to say when the search will 
end, and that, therefore, he must proceed as though the search 
were never to have an end; that this is the only way to go 
forward. 
He is thus only laying down the rules of a method; 
he is not stating a fact. 
Let us then keep to experience: we 
shall say-and more than one biologist acknowledges it-that 
science is as far as ever from a physico-chemical explanation of 
life. That is what we stated, to begin with, when speaking of 
a vital impetus. 
Now, life being given as a fact, how are we 
to picture its evolution? 
Some may maintain that the passage 
from one species to another was accomplished by a series of 
variations, all of them accidental, being preserved by selection 
and fixed by heredity. But if we reflect on the enormous num­
ber of variations, co-ordinate with and complementary to one 
another, which must take place in order that the organism 
shall benefit by them or even merely not be injured, we wonder 
how each one of them, taken separately, can be preserved by 
selection and wait for others which are to complete it. 
By it­
self, one of these variations is more often than not useless; it 
may even hamper or paralyse the function. So that in invoking 
a combination of chance with chance, in attributing to no 
special cause the direction taken by life which is evolving, 
biology applies a priori the principle of economy which finds 
favour with positive science, but it by no means establishes a 
fact, and at once comes up against insurmountable difficulties. 
This inadequacy of Darwinism is the second point we brought 
out when wҔ spoke of the vital impetus: to a theory we op­
posed a fact, we pointed out that the evolution of life occurred 
in certain definite directions. 
Now, are these directions im­
posed on life by the conditions in which it evolves? 
This 
would amount to admitting that the modifications undergone 
by the individual are handed down to his descendants, at least 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
103 
regularly enough to ensuƀe, for instance, the gradual com­
plication of an organ accomplishing the same function with 
ever greater preclSlon. 
But the heredity of acquired char­
acteristics is debatable, and, even supposing that it is observed, 
exceptional; once again it is a priori, and in order to meet 
the needs of the argument, it is taken to be operating regu­
larly. 
Let us consider this regular transmissibility to be in­
nate: we shall conform to experience and we shall say that 
it is not the mechanical action of external causes, but an in­
ward impulse that passes from germ to germ through in­
dividuals, that carries life in a given direction, towards an 
e,·er higher complexity. 
Such is the third idea to be evoked 
by the image of the vital impetus.-Let us go further. 
When 
one speaks of the progress of an organism or an organ adapting 
itself to more complex conditions, one means, more often than 
not, that the complexity of conditions imposes its form on 
life, as the mould does on the clay: thus alone, one says, is a 
mechanical, that is a scientific, explanation obtainable. 
But, 
after affording oneself the satisfaction of interpreting adapta­
tion in general in this way, one reasons in each particular case 
as if the adaptation were something quite different-as indeed 
it is-as if it were the original solution, found by life, of the 
problem set by external conditions. And this faculty of resolv­
ing problems is left unexplained. 
By introducing at this point 
"impetus" we did not proffer an explanation either; but, instead 
of systematically rejecting it in general while resorting to it 
on the sly in each particular case, we brought out this mys­
terious character of the operation of life.-But did we do noth­
ing to fathom the mystery? 
If the marvellous co-ordination of 
the parts with the whole cannot be explained in terms of 
mechanics, yet it does not demand, in our opinion, to be treated 
as finality. 
The same thing which, seen from outside, can be 
decomposed into an infinity of parts co-ordinated with one 
another, may perhaps appear, if realized from inside, an un-

104 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
divided act: just as a movement of the hand, which we feel 
to be indivisible, is perceived from outside as a curve definable 
by an equation, that is to say, as a series of points infinite in 
number, adjacent one to the other, and all obeying one and 
the same law. In evoking the image of an impetus, we wished 
to suggest this fifth idea, and even something more: where our 
analysis, which remains outside, finds positive elements in ever 
increasing numbers-elements which strike us for that very 
reason as more and more marvellously co-ordinate with one 
another-intuition, transferring itself to the inside, would be 
confronted not with factors that are being combined, but with 
obstacles that are being circumvented. 
An invisible hand 
thrust through a heap of iron filings would merely brush aside 
the resistance encountered, but the very simplicity of this act, 
seen from the point of view of the resistance, would appear as 
an alignment, made in a deliberate order, of the filings them­
selves.-Now is there nothing to be said concerning this act 
and the resistance it encounters? 
If life cannot be resolved 
into physical and chemical facts, it operates in the manner of 
a special cause, added on to what we ordinarily call matter, 
matter in this case being both an instrument and an obstacle. 
It divides what it defines. 
We may conjecture that a division 
of this kind is responsible for the multiplicity of the great 
lines of vital evolution. 
But we thereby obtain a suggestion 
as to the means of preparing and verifying the intuition we 
would fain have of life. 
If we see two or three big lines of 
evolution running freely forward, alongside other paths which 
come to a dead end, and if along each of these lines an essential 
characteristic develops more and more, we may conjecture 
that the vital impulse began by possessing these characteristics 
in a state of reciprocal implication: instinct and intelligence, 
which reach their culminating point at the extremities of the 
two principal lines of animal evolution, must therefore be 
taken one with the other, before their separation: not com-

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
105 
bined into one, but one in the beginning, instinct and in­
telligence being then mere views, taken from two different 
points, of that simple reality. 
Such are, since we have begun 
to number them, the sixth, seventh and eighth ideas which 
are to be evoked by the idea of a vital impetus.-And even 
then we have not mentioned, save perhaps by implication, 
the essential one, namely the impossibility of forecasting the 
forms which life creates in their entirety, by discontinuous 
leaps, all along the lines of its evolution. 
Whether you em­
brace the doctrine of pure mechanism or that of pure finality, 
in either case the creations of life are supposed to be pre­
determined, the furure being deducible from the present by 
a calculation, or designed within it as an idea, time being thus 
unavailing. 
Pure experience suggests nothing of the sort. 
"Neither impulsion nor attraction" seems to be its motto. 
Now it is just something of this kind that an impetus can sug­
gest, whilst it can also, by the indivisibility of what is felt in­
ternally and the divisibility to infinity of what is externally 
perceived, give the idea of that real and effective duration 
which is the essential attribute of life.-Such were the ideas 
we condensed into the image of the "vital imperus." 
To 
neglect them, as has been too often done, is to find oneself 
confronted by an empty concept, like that of the pure "will to 
live," and by a barren theory of metaphysics. 
By taking them 
into account, we have an idea full of matter, obtained em­
pirically, capable of guiding our investigations, which will 
broadly sum up what we know of the vital process and will 
also bring out what is still unknown. 
From this standpoint, evolution appears as a series of sudden 
leaps, and the variation constiruting the new species as made up 
of a multirude of differences complementing one another, and 
emerging all together in the organism formed from the germ. 
To use again the same comparison, it is like the sudden move­
ment of the hand plunged among the iron filings and causing 

106 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
an instantaneous readjustment of them all. 
Now, if the trans­
formation takes place in various representatives of the same 
species, it may not be equally successful in all cases. 
It may 
well be that the appearance of the human species was due to 
several leaps in the same direction, taking place here and there 
in a previous species and thus resulting in somewhat different 
types of humanity; each type would then correspond to a 
successful attempt, in the sense that the multiple variations 
characterising each one are perfectly co-ordinate with one an­
other; but they might not be equal in quality, the leaps not 
having covered the same distance in every case. 
They, none 
the less, might have all taken place in the same direction. 
We 
could say, whilst refraining from fixing any anthropomorphic 
sense to the word, that they correspond to one and the same 
intention of life. 
Now, whether or not the human species sprang from one 
stock, whether we have to deal with a single type of humanity, 
or with several which cannot be reduced to a common denom­
inator, is of little consequence; mankind always presents two 
essential characteristics, intelligence and sociability. But, from 
our standpoint, these features take on a special meaning. They 
are no longer a matter for the psychologist and the sociologist 
only. They call, first of all, for a biological interpretation. In­
telligence and sociability must be given their proper place 
back in the general evolution of life. 
To take sociability first, we find it in its finished form at 
the two culminating points of evolution, in the hymenopterous 
insects, such as the ants and bees, and in man. 
As a mere 
tendency, it is found everywhere in nature. 
Some biologists 
have gone so far as to say that the individual is already a 
society: the protozoa, formed from a single cell, it is suggested, 
constituted aggregates which, coming together in their tum, 
produced aggregates of aggregates; and thus the most widely 
differentiated 
organisms originated in the associations 
of 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
107 
elementary organisms barely differentiated from one another. 
This is obviously an exaggeration; "polyzoism" is an excep­
tional and abnormal occurrence. 
But it is none the less a fact 
that things take place in a higher organism as if the cells had 
joined together to share the work between them. 
The bent 
towards the social form, found in so many species, is therefore 
evident in the very structure of any of its members. But, once 
more, this is merely a tendency; and if we wish to deal with 
fully complete societies, clear-cut organizations of distinct 
individuals, we must take the two perfect types of association 
represented by a society of insects and a human society, the 
one immutable/ the other subject to change; the one instinc­
tive, the other intelligent; the first similar to an organism 
whose elements exist only in the interest of the whole, the 
second leaving so wide a margin to the individual that we 
cannot tell whether the organism was made for them or they 
for the organism. 
Of the two conditions laid down by Comte, 
"order" and "progress," the insect chose order only, whereas 
the aim of at least a section of humanity is progress, some­
times exclusive of order, and always due to individual initiative. 
These two finished types of social life are then the counterpart 
of each other and mutually complementary. 
But the same 
could be said of instinct and intelligence, which characterize 
them respectively. When given their place again in the evolu­
tion of life, they appear, as it were, two divergent and com­
plementary activities. 
We shall not go over again what we have stated in a former 
work. 
Let us merely recall the fact that life is a certain effort 
to obtain certain things from raw matter, and that instinct 
and intelligence, taken in their finished state, arc two distinct 
means of utilizing a tool for this object; in the first case, t:le 
1 It goes without saying that the immutability is not absolute but 
esscntiul. 
It exists in principle, but in fact admits of variations on the 
theme 'lnce posited. 

108 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
tool is part of the living creature; in the other, lt 1s an in­
organic instrument which man has had to invent, make and 
learn to handle. 
Grant the fact of utilization, still more the 
fact of fabrication, and then, most of all, the fact of invention, 
and you will find one after the other all the elements of in­
telligence, for its purpose explains its structure. 
But we must 
not forget that there still hangs round the edge of intelligence 
a fringe of instinct, and that in the depths of instinct there 
still survive gleams of intelligence. 
We may conjecture that 
they were originally involved. in one another and that, if we 
went far enough back into the past, we should find instincts 
that are nearer to intelligence than those of our insects, and 
an intelligence closer to instinct than that of our vertebrates. 
The two activities, which began by mutual interpenetration, 
had to part company in order to grow; but something of the 
one has remained attached to the other. Indeed the same thing 
could be said of all the important manifestations of life. 
In 
most cases each reveals, frequently in a rudimentary, latent, 
or virtual state, the essential characteristics of most of the 
other manifestations. 
If we study, then, at the terminal point of one of the great 
efforts of nature, these essentially intelligent and partially 
free groups of beings which constitute human societies, we 
must not lose sight of the other terminal point of evolution, 
the societies swayed by pure instinct, in which the individual 
blindly serves the interests of the community. 
This com­
parison will never justify firm conclusions; but it may suggest 
interpretations. 
If societies are to be found at the two prin­
cipal terminal points of the evolutionary movement, and if the 
individual organism is constructed on a plan which foreshadows 
that on which societies are organized, this means that life is a 
co-ordination of disciplined elements among which the work 
is divided; in fact, that the social underlies the vital. 
If, in 
those societies which are already individual organisms in 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
109 
fact, the constituent pan must be ready to sacrifice itself 
for the whole, if this is still so in those societies of societies 
which form, at the end of one of the two great lines of evolu­
tion, the hive and the ant-hill, and lastly, if this result is ob­
tained by instinct which is but an extension of nature's work 
of organization, this means that nature is more concerned with 
society than with the individual. 
If that is no longer the case 
·with man, this means that the inventive effons manifested 
throughout the domain of life by the creation of new species 
has found in humanity alone the means of continuing its ac­
tivity through individuals, on whom there has devolved, along 
with intelligence, the faculty of initiative, independence and 
liberty. 
If intelligence now threatens to break up social co­
hesion at cenain points-assuming that society is to go on­
there must be a counterpoise, at these points, to intelligence. 
If this counterpoise cannot be instinct itself, for the very 
reason that its place has been taken by intelligence, the same 
effect must be produced by a virtuality of instinct, or, if 
you prefer it, by the residue of instinct which survives on the 
fringe of intelligence: it cannot exercise direct action, but, 
since intelligence works on representations, it will call up 
"imaginary" ones, which will hold their own against the 
representation of reality and will succeed, through the agency 
of intelligence itself, in counteracting the work of intelligence. 
This would be the explanation of the myth-making faculty. 
Though indeed it plays a social role, it must also serve the 
individual, whom as often as not it is to the interest of 
society to favour. 
We may therefore presume that in its 
original and elementary forn1 it brings added strength to the 
individual. 
But before coming to the second point, let us 
consider the first. 
Among the facts collected by "psychical research," we 
noticed some years ago the following case. A lady was on the 

110 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
upper floor of an hotel. 
As she wanted to go downstairs, she 
walked out on to the landing. The gate provided for the lift 
happened to be open. 
As the gate was so contrived as to be 
open only if the lift were stopped at that floor, she naturally 
thought the lift was there and rushed forward to take it. All 
of a sudden she felt herself flung backwards; the man en­
trusted with the working of the lift had just appeared and was 
pushing her back on to the landing. At this point she emerged 
from her fit of abstraction. 
She was amazed to see that neither 
man nor lift were there. 
The mechanism being out of order, 
it was possible for the gate to be open at her floor, though 
the lift was still down below. 
She had been about to fling 
herself into the gaping void; a miraculous hallucination had 
saved her life. 
Need we say that the miracle is easily ex­
plained? 
The lady had reasoned correctly on a real fact, for 
the gate was really open and therefore the lift should have 
been at that floor. The mere sight of the empty shaft would 
have been enough to show her her mistake; but it would have 
been too late, the action consequent upon the correct reasoning 
being already under way. 
It was then that the instinctive or 
somnambulistic self, which underlies the reasoning personality, 
came into action. 
It had seen the danger, it had to act at once. 
Instantly it had thrown her body backwards, at the same time . 
inducing in a flash the fictitious, hallucinatory perception the 
best fitted to evoke and explain the apparently unjustified 
movement. 
Let us imagine then a primitive humanity and rudimentary 
societies. 
It would be a simple matter for nature to ensure the 
requisite cohesion within the groups; she would only have to 
endow man with the appropriate instincts. 
This she did for 
the bee-hive and the ant-hill. 
And with complete success: 
here the individual lives for the community alone. 
Indeed her 
task was an easy one, since she only had to follow her usual 
method; instinct is indeed coextensive with life, and social 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
1 1 1  
instinct, as found in insects, is nothing more than the spmt 
of subordination and co-ordination animating the cells and 
tissues and organs of all living bodies. 
But it is no longer 
towards a mere development of instinct, it is towards an ex­
pansion of intelligence, that the vital impulse of the vertebrate 
tends. 
When the end of the movement is attained in man, 
instinct is not abolished, it is eclipsed; all that remains of it is 
a dim penumbra about the centre, now fully illuminated or 
rather in itself luminous, to wit, intelligence. 
Henceforth 
reflexion will enable the individual to invent, and society to 
progress. 
But if society is to progress, it must first of all be 
able to maintain itself. 
Invention means initiative, and an 
appeal to individual initiative straightaway involves the risk 
of endangering social discipline. 
What if the individual 
diverts his reflexion from the object for which it was designed, 
I mean from the task to be performed, the improvement or 
renovation to be undertaken, and focuses it on himself, on 
the constraint imposed on him by social life, on the sacrifice 
he makes to the community? 
If he were a slave of instinct, 
like the ant and the bee, he would remain intent on the purely 
external object to be attained; he would have automatically, 
somnambulistically, worked for the species. 
Endowed with 
intelligence, roused to thought, he will tum to himself and 
think only of leading a pleasant life. 
Fonnal reasoning would 
doubtless show him that he furthers his own interest by pro­
moting the happiness of others; but it takes centuries of 
culture to produce a utilitarian such as John Stuart Mill, 
and Stuart Mill has not convinced all philosophers, let alone 
the mass of mankind. 
The truth is that intelligence would 
counsel egoism first. 
The intelligent being will rush in that 
direction if there is nothing to stop him. 
But nature is on 
the watch. 
Just now, before the open gate a guardian ap­
peared, to bar the way and drive back the trespasser. 
So 
now some protective deity of the city will be there to forbid, 

1 12 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
threaten, punish. 
Intelligence is guided in fact by present 
perceptions or by that more or less vivid residue of percep­
tion called recollection. 
Since instinct no longer exists except 
as a mere vestige or virtuality, since it is not strong enough 
to incite to action or prevent it, it must arouse an illusory per­
ception, or at least a counterfeit of recollection so clear and 
striking that intelligence will come to a decision accordingly. 
Looked at from tbis first point of view, religion is then a de­
femive reaction of nature against tbe dissolvent power of in­
telligence. 
But this gives us only a figurative symbolization of what 
actually occurs. 
For the sake of greater clearness, we have 
supposed in society a sudden revolt of the individual, and in 
the individual imagination the sudden apparition of a god to 
prevent or forbid. 
Things doubtless take this dramatic form 
at given times and for a certain period in a humanity already 
well along the road to civilization. 
But reality develops to­
wards the precision of drama only by intensification of the 
essential and elimination of the superfluous. 
Indeed in human 
groups, just as they may have come from the hands of nature, 
the distinction between what does and what does not affect 
the cohesion of the group is not so clear, the consequences 
of an act accomplished by the individual do not appear so 
strictly individual, the force of inhibition which arises at the 
very instant when the act is on the point of being accomplished 
is not so completely incarnated in a person. 
Let us dwell on 
these three points. 
In societies such as ours there are customs and laws. 
The 
laws are doubtless often stabilized customs: but a custom 
becomes a law only when it is of particular, recognizable and 
definable value; then it stands out from among the others. 
The distinction is therefore clear between the essential and 
the accidental: we have, on the one hand, what is merely 
custom, on the other, what is legal, or even moral, obligation. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
1 13 
This cannot be so in less advanced societies where we find 
only customs, some of them justified by a real need, most of 
them due to mere accident, or to an irrational extension of 
the former. 
Here all customary things are perforce obligatory, 
since social solidarity, not being condensed into laws, and still 
less into principles, spreads into an acceptance by all and 
sundry of these customs. Everything habitual to the members 
of the group, everything that society expects from individuals, 
is bound to take on a religious character, if it is true that the 
observance of custom, and that alone, attaches man to other 
men, and thus detaches him from himself. 
Let us note, by the 
way, that the question of the relation between morality and 
religion is thus greatly simplified \vhen \Ve consider rudi­
mentary societies. 
Primitive religions can be called unmoral, 
or indifferent to morality, only if \Ve take religion as it was 
in the beginning and compare it with morality such as it 
became later on. 
Originally the \vhole of morality is custom; 
and as religion forbids any departure from custom, morality 
is coextensive with religion. 
It would therefore be vain to 
raise the objection that religious prohibitions have not always 
dealt with things that strike us to-day as immoral or anti­
social. 
Primitive religion, taken from our first standpoint, 
is a precaution against the danger man runs, as soon as he 
thinks at all, of thinking of himself alone. 
It is therefore, 
as we stated above, a defensive reaction of nature against 
intelligence. 
On the other hand, the idea of individual responsibility is 
by no means so simple as might be supposed. 
It implies a 
relatively abstract representation of the activity of the in­
dividual, which is taken to be independent because it has 
been isolated from social activity. 
But the solidarity between 
the members of the group is such at first that all are bound 
to feel that they share to some degree in the lapse of any 
single one, at least in such cases as they consider serious: moral 

1 14 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
evil, if we can use the term at this stage, is regarded much 
the same as a physical evil spreading from one person to an­
other, until it contaminates the whole society. 
So that, if an 
avenging power does arise, it will be to castigate society as a 
whole, without making its weight felt only at the spot from 
which the evil sprang: the picture of Justice pursuing the 
criminal is relatively modern, and we have simplified matters 
too much in showing the individual checked, on the verge of 
breaking the social bond, by the religious fear of a punish­
ment which would fall on him alone. 
It is none the less true 
that things tend to assume this form, and that they assume it 
more and more distinctly as religion, determining its own 
features, becomes more frankly mythological. 
The myth will 
indeed always bear traces of its origin; it will never clearly 
distinguish between the physical order and the moral or social 
order, between intentional orderliness due to the obedience of 
all to a law and the orderliness manifested in the course of 
nature. 
Themis, goddess of human justice, is the mother of 
the Seasons ( "!Jpat ) and of .dbc'l , who represents the physical 
law as well as the moral law. Even to-day we have hardly rid 
ourselves of this confusion; traces of it linger in our language. 
Mores and morality, regularity and regulation, uniformity 
de facto and uniformity de jure are in each case both expressed 
in much the same way. 
Does not the word "order" signify 
both system and command? 
Lastly, we spoke of a god arising to prohibit, to prevent, to 
punish. 
That means presumably that the moral force, from 
which the resistance springs, and even, if need be, the venge­
ance, is incarnated in a person. 
That it thus tends naturally 
to assume, in the eyes of man, a human form, there is no 
doubt. 
But if mythology is a product of nature, it is a late 
product, like flower-bearing plants, and the beginnings of 
religion were more modest. A careful study of what occurs in 
our consciousness shows us that an intentional resistance, and 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
1 1 5  
even a vengeance, a t  first strike us as self-sufficient entitles; 
for them to be clothed with a definite body, like that of a 
vigilant and avenging deity, is already a luxury; the myth­
making function of the mind doubtless works \Vith artistic 
pleasure only on conceptions thus arrayed, but it does not 
form them all at once; it begins by taking them in their 
nakedness. 
We shall have to emphasize this point, which has 
not sufficiently engaged the attention of psychologists. There 
is no proof that the child who knocks his head against the 
table and hits back, looks on the table as a person. 
Indeed 
this interpretation is far from being accepted by all psycholo­
gists to-day. 
But in this case, after attributing too much to 
mythological explanation, they now do not go far enough 
when they suppose that the child simply gives way to an 
impulse to hit, caused by anger. 
The truth is that between 
the identification of the table with a person and the percep­
tion of the table as an inanimate object, there lies an inter­
mediate representation which is neither that of a thing nor 
of a person; it is the image of the act accomplished by the 
table in striking, or, better still, the image of the act of 
striking, bringing with it-like luggage borne on its back­
the table which stands behind. 
The act of striking is an 
element of personality, but not yet a complete personality. 
The fencer who sees the button of his adversary's foil coming 
at him knows that it is the movement of the point which has 
drawn the foil forward, that it is the foil that has drawn the 
arm fonvard, that it is the arm that stretched out the body by 
stretching out itself: he can lunge properly, and give a direct 
thrust instantaneously, only from the time he feels things 
in this order. 
To re\·erse their order is to reconstruct, and 
so to philosophize: in any case it is bringing to light the 
implicit, instead of being content with what action pure and 
simple requires, with what is directly perceived and really 
primitive. 
When we read a signboard "Trespassers will be 

1 1 6 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
prosecuted," we begin by perceiving the prohibition; it stands 
out clearly; it is only behind it, in the shadow, that we have 
a vision of the constable lying in wait to report us. 
In the 
same way, the prohibitions protecting the social order first 
stand out, just as they are; it is true they are already more 
than mere words; they resist, and press, and push; but the 
divinity who forbids, and who was screened by them, will 
only appear later, as the work of the myth-making function 
becomes complete. 
We must not be surprised, therefore, if 
in uncivilized communities we meet with prohibitions which 
arc semi-physical, semi-moral restraints on certain individual 
acts; the object occupying the centre of a field of resistance 
will be called both "sacred" and "dangerous," once these two 
definite ideas are constituted, and once the distinction is 
clearly made between a physical force of repulsion and a moral 
inhibition; up till then, it possesses the two properties fused 
into one; it is taboo, to use the Polynesian term made familiar 
to us by the science of religions. Did primitive humanity con­
ceive the taboo in the same way as the "primitive races" of 
to-day? 
Let us first agree on the meaning of the words. 
There would be no such thing as primitive humanity if the 
species had been formed by imperceptible transitions; at no 
given moment would man have emerged from the animal 
state; but this is an arbitrary hypothesis, which comes up 
against so many improbabilities and rests on such ambiguities 
that we believe it to be untenable; 1 by following the clue of 
facts and analogies, we are far more likely to arrive at a dis­
continuous evolution which proceeds by bounds, obtaining at 
each stopping-place a combination, perfect of its kind, like the 
figures that follow one another in a kaleidoscope; there is then 
a type of primitive humanity, even though the human species 
may have been formed by several converging leaps made from 
1 See Creative Evolution, Chaps. I and II. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
1 1 7  
various points and not all coming equally near to a real­
ization of the type. 
On the other hand, the primitive 
soul would escape us entirely to-day if there had been hered­
itary transmission of acquired habits. 
Our moral nature, 
taken in its raw state, would then differ radically from that 
of our remotest ancestors. 
But again it is under the influence 
of preconceived ideas, and to satisfy the demands of a theory, 
that one speaks of hereditary habit and, above all, that one 
believes in a transmission regular enough to bring about a 
transfonnation. 
The truth is that, if civilization has pro­
foundly modified man, it is by accumulating in his social sur­
roundings, as in a reservoir, the habits and knowledge which 
society pours into the individual at each new generation. 
Scratch the surface, abolish everything we owe to an educa­
tion which is perpetual and unceasing, and you find in the 
depth of our nature primitive humanity, or something very 
near it. 
Are the "primitive" peoples we observe to-day the 
image of that humanity? 
It is hardly probable, since nature 
is overlaid, in their case as well, by a layer of habits which 
the social surroundings have preserved in order to deposit 
them in each individual. 
But there is reason to believe that 
this layer is not so thick as in civilized man, and that it allows 
nature to show more clearly through it. 
The multiplication 
of habits throughout the ages must in their case have occurred 
in a different way, along the surface, through a passage from 
one habit to another analogous habit, and under the influence 
of adventitious 
circumstances; 
whereas 
the 
progress 
of 
technical skill, of knowledge, in a word of civilization, 
takes place over fairly considerable periods in one and the 
same direction, vertically, by superimposed or anastomotic 
variations, resulting therefore in deep transfonnations, and 
not merely in surface complications. 
Hence, it is easy to see 
how far we may regard as absolutely primitive the notion 
of taboo which we find among the "primitive" peoples of 

1 1 8 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
to-day. 
Even supposing that it somehow appeared in a hu­
m:.mity fresh from the hands of nature, it did not apply to 
the same things as now, nor, probably, to so many things. 
Each taboo must have been a prohibition in which society 
had a well-defined interest. 
Irrational from the point of view 
of the individual, since it suddenly checked intelligent activity 
without resorting to intelligence, it was rational inasmuch as 
it was in the interests of the society and the species. 
Hence, 
sexual intercourse, for example, was satisfactorily regulated by 
taboos. 
But precisely because no appeal had been made to 
individual intelligence, because the object was even to thwart 
it, intelligence, seizing upon the idea of taboo, must have 
extended it arbitrarily in all directions, by chance association 
of ideas, without troubling about what we might call the 
original intention of nature. 
Thus, admitting that taboo has 
always been what it is to-day, it probably did not apply to 
so many things, nor lead to such absurd consequences. 
But 
has it kept its original form? 
The intelligence of "primitive" 
peoples is not essentially different from our own; it must have 
a tendency, like ours, to convert the dynamic into the static, 
and solidify actions into things. 
We may presume then that, 
under its influence, the prohibitions have taken up their abode 
inside the things to which they applied: they were nothing 
but resistances opposed to tendencies, but, as a tendency has 
for the most part an object, it was from the object, and as if 
dwelling within it, that the resistance appeared to come, having 
become in this way an attribute of its substance. 
In stagnant 
societies this solidification is an accomplished fact. 
It was 
perhaps less complete, it was in any case temporary, in what 
one might call mobile societies, where intelligence was bound 
in the end to perceive behind the prohibition a person. 
We have been dealing with the first function of religion, 
that which directly concerns social preservation. 
Now let us 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
1 19 
come to the other. 
Once more we shall see it working for the 
good of society, but indirectly, by stimulating and guiding 
individual activities. 
\Ve shall indeed find its work more 
complex, and we shall be obliged to cata.logue the forms it 
takes. 
But there is no danger of losing our way in this search, 
for we have the clue in our hands. We must always remember 
that the sphere of life is essentially that of instinct; that along 
a certain line of evolution instinct has to some extent made 
room for intelligence; that this may lead to a disturbance of 
life; that nature, in such circumstances, has no other resource 
than to set up intelligence against intelligence. 
1l1e intel­
lectual representation which thus restores the balance to 
nature's advantage is of a religious order. 
Let us take the 
simplest case first. 
Animals do not know that they must die. 
Doubtless some 
of them make the distinction between the living and the dead; 
we mean by this that the sight of a dead creature and of a 
living one does not produce in them the same reactions, the 
same movements, the same attitudes; this docs not imply that 
they have a general idea of death, any more than they have 
of life, or any general idea whatsoever, at least in the sense 
of a mental picture and not simply a movement of the body. 
An animal will "sham dead" to escape from an enemy; but 
it is we ,.,-ho define his attitude thus; so far as he is concerned, 
he docs not stir because he feels that by moving he would 
excite or again attract attention and invite attack, because 
movement evokes movement. 
Cases of animal suicide have 
been reported, it is true: even admitting this as an actual fact, 
there is a vast difference between doing what must result in 
death and knowing that the result is going to be death; to 
perform an action, even one that is well-contrived and appro­
priate, is one thing, to forecast the outcome of it is another. 
But even suppose that an animal has the notion of death. 
He 
certainly does not realize that he is bound to die, that he 

120 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
must die a natural death if he does not die a violent one. This 
would require a series of observations of other animals, then 
a synthesis, lastly, a process of generalization which already 
savours of science. 
Even supposing that the animal could 
contrive to make any such effort, it would be for something 
worth while; now nothing could be more useless to him 
than to know that he must die. 
It is more to his interest not 
to know it. 
But man knows he will die. 
All other living 
creatures, clinging to life, are simply carried along by its im­
petus. 
Although they do not contemplate themselves sub 
specie aeterni, their confidence, being a perpetual encroach­
ment of the present on the future, is the translation of such 
contemplation into feeling. 
But with man reflexion appears, 
and consequently the faculty of observing with no view to 
immediate utility, of comparing with one another observa­
tions that are temporarily disinterested, in short, of deducing 
and generalizing. 
Seeing that every living thing about him 
ends by dying, he is convinced that he will die too. 
Nature, 
in endowing him with intelligence, must inevitably lead him 
to this conclu ion. 
But this conviction cuts athwart the for­
ward movement of nature. 
If the impetus of life turns all 
other living creatures away from the image of death, so the 
thought of death must slow down in man the movement of 
life. 
It may later find its appropriate setting in a philosophy 
which ends in raising humanity above its own level and in­
creasing its powers of action. 
But it is at first a depressing 
thought, and would be more depressing still, if man, while 
certain that he must die, were not ignorant of the date of his 
death. 
Death is indeed bound to come, but as we are con­
stantly becoming aware that it does not come, the continued 
repetition of the negative experience condenses into a barely 
conscious doubt, which diminishes the effect of the reasoned 
certainty. 
It is none the less true that the certainty of death, 
arising at the same time as reflexion in a world of living 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
121 
creatures constructed to think only of living, runs counter 
to nature's intention. 
Nature, then, looks as if she is going to 
stumble over the obstacle which she has placed on her own 
path. 
But she recovers herself at once. 
To the idea of in­
evitable death she opposes the image of a continuation of life 
after death; this image, flung by her into the field of intelli­
gence, where the idea of death has just become installed, 
straightens everything out again.1 
This neutralizing of the 
idea by the image simply expresses the equilibrium of nature, 
saving herself from slipping. 
We arc therefore again con­
fronted here with that particular interplay of images and ideas 
which we found characteristic of religion in its beginnings. 
Looked at from tbis second standpoint, religion is a defensive 
reaction of nature against the representation, by intelligence, 
of the inevitability of deatb. 
In this reaction society is as much concerned as the in­
dividual. 
Not only because it profits from the individual 
effort, and because this effort has a more far-reaching effect 
when the idea of an ending docs not intervene to thwart its 
impetus, but also and above all because society itself needs 
stability and duration. A society already civilized is supported 
by laws, by institutions, even by buildings constructed to 
defy the ravages of time; but primitive societies arc simply 
"built up of human beings": what would become of their 
authority if people did not believe in the enduring character of 
the individualities of which they arc composed? 
It is there­
fore essential that the dead should remain present. 
Ancestor­
worship will come later. 
The dead will then be closer to 
gods. 
But for this to happen there must be gods, at least in 
embryo; there must be a definite form of worship; the mind 
1 It goes without saying that the image is hallucinatory only in the 
shape it assumes in the eyes of primitive man. As regards the general 
question of survival, we haYc stated our ideas in former works; we shall 
recur to them in the present book. 
See Chapter III, pp. 250 sqq., and 
Chapter IV, pp. 304-6. 

122 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
must have deliberately rumed towards mythology. 
In its 
beginning, intelligence simply sees the dead as mingling with 
the living in a society to which they can still do good or ill. 
In what form does it conceive their survival? '" e must not 
forget that we are searching in the depths of the soul, by 
means of introspection, for the constituent elements of primi­
tive religion. 
It may be that no single one of these elements 
has ever manifested itself externally in an unadulterated state, 
that it would have immediately come up against other simple 
elements, of the same origin, with which it will have amal­
gamated, or it may even have been seized upon, either alone 
or with others, to be used as raw material for the never­
ending work of the myth-making function. Thus there are in 
existence certain themes, some simple, some complex, sup­
plied by nature; and, on the other hand, we have the countless 
variations played upon them by human fancy. 
To these 
themes doubtless may be traced back the fundamental beliefs 
met with almost everywhere by the science of religions. 
As 
to the variations on the themes, they are the myths and even 
the theoretical conceptions, with their endless diversifications 
according to time and place. 
There is no question but that 
the simple theme we have just indicated combines immediately 
with others to produce, prior to the myths and the theories, 
the primitive representation of the soul. But has it any definite 
shape outside this combination? 
If the question arises, it is 
because our present-day idea of a soul living on after the 
body overlays the image, which presents itself to the imme­
diate consciousness, of the body able to live on after its death. 
Yet this image does exist, and it takes but a slight effort to 
recall it. 
It is nothing more than the visual image of the 
body detached from the tactile image. We have got into the 
habit of considering the first as inseparable from the second, 
as a shadow or effect of the latter. The progress of knowledge 
is all in that direction. 
For contemporary science the body 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
1 23 
is essentially what it is to the touch; it has a definite form and 
dimension, independent of ourselves; it occupies a given posi­
tion in space and cannot change it without taking time to 
occupy successively the intervening positions; the visual image 
of it would in that case be a phenomenon whose variations we 
must constantly rectify by recourse to the tactile image; the 
latter would be the thing itself, the other would merely indi­
cate its presence. 
But the immediate impression is nothing 
of the kind. 
An unwary mind will put the visual image and 
the tactile image in the same category, will attribute to 
them the same reality, and will assume them to be relatively 
independent of one another. 
The "primitive" man has only 
to stoop over a pool to sec his body just as it really appears, 
detached from the tactile body. 
Of course the body he can 
touch is also a body he can see; this proves that the outer 
envelope of the body, which constitutes the seen body, can 
become dual and that one of the two semblances stays with 
the tactile body. 
But the fact remains that there is a body 
which is detachable from the one he can touch, a mere shell 
of a body, devoid of weight, which has moved in a trice 
to the place where he sees it. 
There is doubtless nothing 
about that body to incline us to believe that it lives on after 
death. 
But if we begin by laying down the principle that 
there must be something that docs live on, it will obviously 
be that body and not the other, for the body we can touch 
is still present, it lies motionless and speedily decays, whereas 
the visible envelope may have slipped away somewhere or 
other and remained alive. 
The idea that men live on as 
shades or phantoms is therefore quite natural. 
It must have 
preceded, we believe, the more elaborate idea of a principle 
breathing life into the body; this breath itself has gradually 
become spiritualized into the soul. 
It is true that the ghostly 
envelope of the body seems incapable, by itself, of exerting 
a pressure on human events, and yet it must exert one, since 

124 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
it is the yearning after continued action that has led to the 
belief in an after-life. 
But here a new element supervenes. 
vVe shall not yet define this other elementary tendency. 
It 
is as natural as the two preceding ones. 
It is likewise a 
defensive reaction of nature. 
\V e shall 
have to seek its 
origin later. 
For the present '"e shall only consider what are 
its results. 
It becomes in the end the representation of a 
force diffused throughout the whole of nature and distributed 
among individual objects and beings. 
In the science of 
religions this emanation is generally reported to be primitive. 
We hear of the Polynesian mana, whose counterpart is found 
elsewhere under different names: the waka11da of the Sioux, 
the orenda of the Iroquois, the pmztang of the Malays, etc. 
According to some, the mana is a universal principle of life, 
constituting in particular, to use our own language, the sub­
stance of souls. 
According to others, it is rather a new force 
supervening, which the soul, or indeed anything else, might 
well make use of, but which does not belong essentially to the 
soul. Durkheim, who apparently reasons along the first hypo­
thesis, holds that the mana supplies the totemic principle by 
which the members of the clan commune together; the soul 
is thus regarded as being a direct individualization of the 
totem and as sharing in the uz.ma through this agency. 
It is 
not our business to decide between these different interpreta­
tions. 
Speaking generally, we hesitate to consider as primitive, 
meaning natural, a notion which we should not to-day form 
naturally. 
We are of the opinion that what was once primi­
tive has not ceased to be so, even though an effort of self­
scrutiny may be necessary to re-discover it. 
But in whatever 
shape we take this mental image which we are now consid­
ering, we shall have no objection to admitting that the idea of 
a source of power upon which animate beings, and even a 
considerable number of inanimate objects, can draw, is one of 
the first ideas the mind encounters when following a certain 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
125 
tendency, a natural and primary one, which we shall define 
a little further on. Let us then take this for granted. Man 
is now provided with what he will call later a soul. 
Wil 
this soul survive the body? There is no reason to suppose so 
if we consider the soul alone. There is no reason to believe 
that a power such as the mana should last longer than the 
body in which it dwells. But if we have started by assuming 
the principle that the ghostly form of the body persists, there 
is nothing to prevent our also leaving in it the principle which 
endowed the body with the strength to act. The result will 
be an active and effective shade capable of influencing 
human events. Such seems indeed to be the primitive con­
ception of survival. 
The influence thus exerted would not, indeed, be great, 
if it were not that the soul-idea unites \Vith the spirit-idea. 
The latter comes from another natural tendency which we 
shall also have to define. Let us take it also for granted and 
note that exchanges will occur between the two ideas. The 
spirits supposed to be present everywhere in nature would 
not so closely resemble the human form if souls were not 
already depicted in this shape. On their side, the souls de­
tached from the body would be without influence on natural 
phenomena if they were not of the same order as the spirits 
and more or less capable of taking their place among them. 
The dead are then going to become persons to be reckoned 
with. They can do harm. They may do good. They have 
at their disposal, up to a certain point, what we call the forces 
of nature. In both a literal and a figurative sense they cause 
the rain and the fine weather. 
People will eschew what 
might irritate them. They will spare no pains to secure their 
confidence. They will think of countless ways of winning 
them over, of buying their favour, even of outwitting them. 
Once started on this road, there is hardly any absurdity into 
which intelligence may not stumble. The myth-making func-

126 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
tion works well enough by itself alone: what will it not do 
when it is spurred on by fear and necessity! 
To avert a 
danger or to secure a favour the living are ready to offer any­
thing they fancy the dead man may want. 
They will go so 
far as the cutting off of heads, if that may be pleasing in his 
sight. 
Missionary stories are full of detailed accounts of such 
things. 
Childish and monstrous deeds compose the intermi­
nable list of similar practices indulged in by human stupidity. 
Looking at them, and at them only, we should be tempted 
to abominate humanity. 
But we must not forget that the 
primitives of to-day or of yesterday have lived as many 
centuries as we have, have had plenty of time to exaggerate 
and to 
aggravate, as it were, the possible irrationalities 
contained in elementary tendencies, natural enough though 
they be. 
The true primitives were probably more reasonable, 
if they kept to the tendency and its immediate effects. Every­
thing changes, and, as we have said above, the change will 
take place in breadth if not in depth. 
There are societies 
which progress-probably those on whom unfavourable con­
ditions of life have forced a certain effort to live, and which 
have then consented, at rare intervals, to increase their effort 
in order to follow a pioneer, an inventor, a man of genius. 
The change is here an increase of intensity; the direction 
remains relatively unchanged; the progress is towards an ever 
higher efficiency. 
There are, on the other hand, societies 
that keep to their original level, which is inevitably somewhat 
low. 
As, nevertheless, they do change, there takes place 
within them not that intensification which would be a quali­
tative progress, but a multiplication or an exaggeration of the 
primitive state of things: invention, if we can still use the 
word, no longer requires an effort. 
From a belief answering 
to a certain need they have passed to some new belief which 
resembles the former outwardly, which accentuates one or 
another of its superficial characteristics, but which no longer 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
127 
serves any purpose. 
Thenceforth, marking time, they cease­
lessly pile up additions and amplifications. 
Through the 
double effect of repetition and exaggeration the irrational 
passes into the realm of the absurd, and the strange into the 
realm of the monstrous. These successive extensions must also 
have been due to individuals; but here there was no longer 
any need for intellectual superiority to invent, or to accept 
the invention. 
The logic of absurdity was enough, that logic 
which leads the mind ever further and further astray towards 
wilder and wilder consequences, when it starts out from a 
strange idea without relating it to sources which could explain 
its strangeness and check its proliferation. 
We have all come 
across one of those very united, self-satisfied families, who 
keep themselves to themselves, because they are shy or super­
cilious. 
It is not unusual to notice certain quaint habits among 
them, aversions or superstitions, which might become serious 
if they were to go on fermenting in a closed vessel. 
F_.ach 
one of these singularities has its particular origin. 
It was some 
idea which occurred to one or another of the family, and 
which the others have taken on trust. 
It may be a walk they 
took one Sunday and took again the next Sunday, and which 
then became a settled thing every Sunday of the year: if 
they should have the misfortune to miss it once, goodnes 
knows what would happen. 
In order to repeat, to imitate, to 
follow blindly, we have only to relax ; it is criticism that de­
mands an effort. 
Now take a few hundred centuries instead 
of a few years; magnify enormously all the little foibles of a 
family living in isolation: you will have no difficulty in 
imagining what must have occurred in primitive societies 
which have remained self-centred and self-satisfied, instead of 
opening windows on to the outside world, of dispersing the 
foul vapours as they gathered about them, and of making 
a constant effort to broaden their horizon. 

1 28 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
We have just defined above two essential functions of 
religion and, in the course of our analysis, we have met with 
primary tendencies which appear to provide an explanation 
of the general forms assumed by religion. 
We now pass to 
the study of these general fom1s, of these primary tendencies. 
Our method will still remain the same. 
We postulate a cer­
tain instincti,·e activity; then, calling into play intelligence, 
we try to discover whether it leads to a dangerous disturb­
ance; if it docs, the balance will probably be restored through 
representations evoked by instinct within the disturbing in­
telligence; if such representations exist, they are primary 
religious ideas. 
For example, the vital impulse knows nothing 
of death. 
But let intelligence spring to life under pressure 
from this impulse, and up comes the idea of the inevitability 
of death: to restore to life its impetus, an opposing represen­
tation will start up, and from it will emerge the primitive beliefs 
concerning death. 
But, though death be the greatest accident 
of all, yet to how many other accidents is not life exposed! 
Does not the very application of intelligence to life open the 
door to the unforeseen and let in the feeling of risk? 
An 
animal is sure of itself. 
In its case nothing intervenes between 
aim and act. 
If its prey is there, the animal pounces upon it. 
If it is a matter of lying in wait, its waiting is a forestalling 
of the act and will form, with the accomplishment of it, an 
undivided whole. 
If the ultimate objective is remote, as in 
the case of the bee building the hive, the animal itself is un­
aware of the objective; it sees only the immediate object, 
and the leap it takes is exactly co-extensive 
with 
the 
act it has to accomplish. 
But it is the very essence of intelli­
gence to co-ordinate means with a view to a remote end, and 
to undertake what it does not feel absolutely sure of carrvino-
• 
· ;  
0 
out. 
Between what it does and the result it wants to attain 
there is more often than not, both in space and in time, an 
interval which leaves ample room for accident. 
It begins, 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
129 
and, to enable it to finish, circumstances, as we say, must lend 
their aid. 
It may indeed be fully conscious of this margin of 
the unexpected. 
The savage, when shooting his arrow, does 
not know if it will strike the object at which he aimed: we 
have not here, as in the case of the animal with its prey, con­
tinuity between gesture and result; a gap appears, exposed to 
accident, attracting the unexpected. Doubtless this should not 
be so in theory. 
Intelligence is constituted to act mechanically 
on matter; it thus postulates a universal mechanism and con­
ceives virtually a complete science which would make it pos­
sible to foresee, at the very instant when the action is launched, 
everything it is likely to come up against before reaching its 
goal. 
But it is part of the very essence of such an ideal that 
it is never fulfilled, and that it can at the utmost serve as a 
stimulus to the work of the intelligence. 
In fact, human 
intelligence must confine itself to very limited action on a 
material about which it knows very little. 
But the vital 
impulse is there, brooking no delay, admitting no obstacle. 
It ignores the accidental, the unforeseen, in a word the in­
determinate which lies along its path ; it advances by leaps 
and bounds, seeing only the end in view, devouring the space 
between. And yet it is necessary that intelligence should have 
cognizance of this anticipation. 
A representation will accord­
ingly arise, that of favourable powers overriding or occupying 
the place of the natural causes and continuing into actions 
ordained by them, in accordance with our wishes, the enter­
prise started on natural lines. 
\Ve have set a mechanism going, 
this is the beginning; we shall find a mechanism again in the 
realization of the desired effect, that is the end : between the 
two there must have been inserted a supra-mechanical guarantee 
of success. 
True, if we thus imagine friendly powers inter­
ested in our success, the logic of intelligence will require that 
we postulate antagonistic causes, unfriendly powers, to explain 
our failure. 
This last belief will, after all, have its practical 

130 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
utility; it will indirectly stimulate our activity by inducing us 
to be circumspect. 
But this is derivation, I might almost say 
decadence. The representation of a hindering force is scarcely 
a later development than that of a helping force; if the latter 
is natural, the former is its immediate consequence, but is 
bound to proliferate above all in stagnant societies such as 
those which we now call primitive, where beliefs multiply 
indefinitely by means of analogies without any regard for 
their origin. The vital impulse is optimistic. 
All the religious 
representations which here arise directly from it might then 
be defined in the same way: they are defensive reactions of 
Mture against the representation, by the intelligence, of a 
depressing margin of the unexpected between the initiative 
taken tmd the effect desired. 
Any one of us can try the experiment if he pleases; he will 
see superstitions start up before his very eyes from the will 
to win. 
Stake a sum of money on a number at roulette and 
wait till the ball is near the end of its gyrations; just as it is 
perhaps coming, in spite of all its hesitations, to the number 
you have chosen, your hand goes out to push it, and then to 
stop it; here it is your own will, projected outside of yourself, 
which is to fill up the gap between the decision it has taken 
and the result it expects, thus eliminating chance. 
Now go 
regularly to the gaming rooms, and acquire their habits; your 
hand soon gives up its movement; your will shrinks back into 
its place, but, as it retires, an entity slips in, emanating from 
it and delegated by it: this is luck, a transfiguration of the will 
to win. 
Luck is not a complete personality; it requires more 
than this to make a divinity. 
But it has certain elements of 
divinity, just enough to make you rely on it. 
It is to some such power as this that the savage appeals in 
order that his arrow may reach its mark. 
Skip over the stages 
of a long evolution: you will come to the tutelary gods of the 
city, whose function is to bring victory to its warriors. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
131 
But note that in all cases it is by rational means, it is by 
complying with mechanical sequences of cause and effect that 
things are set going. 
We begin by doing what depends on 
ourselves: it is only when we feel that it no longer lies with us 
to help ourselves that we have recourse to extra-mechanical 
power; even if at the outset, since we believed it present, 
we invoked its assistance, we in no wise imagined we were 
thereby excused from taking action. 
But what might well 
mislead the psychologist here is the fact that the second 
causality is the only one we mention. 
We say nothing about 
the first, because it is taken for granted. 
It governs the acts 
we accomplish with matter as our instrument; we act and 
live the belief that we have in it; what would be the use of 
translating it into words and making the idea explicit? 
This 
would only have value if we already had a science capable of 
using it to advantage. 
But of the second causality it is worth 
\vhile to think, because we find in it at least an encouragement 
and an incentive. Were science to supply the uncivilized man 
with a contrivance ensuring to him the mathematical certainty 
of hitting the mark, he would abide by that mechanical 
causality (supposing, of course, that he could instantly do 
away with inveterate habits of thought) .  I n  the absence of 
that science, his action gets all there is to be got out of 
mechanical causality, since he draws his bow and takes his 
aim; 
but his thought inclines 
rather towards the extra­
mechanical cause which is to direct the arrow where it 
should go, because, failing the weapon which would make 
him sure of hitting the mark, his faith in this causality will 
give him the self-confidence which enables him to take better 
atm. 
Human activity operates among events on which it has a 
certain influence, but on which it is also dependent. 
These 
events are to some extent foreseeable, and, to a greater extent, 
unforeseeable. 
Since our science is constantly extending the 

132 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
field of our prevision, we conceive it as ending in a perfect 
science in which the unforeseeable would cease to exist. 
This is why, to the reflective thought of a civilized man (we 
shall see that the case does not apply to his spontaneous rep­
resentations), the same mechanical concatenation of cause and 
effect with which he comes in contact when dealing with 
things must extend to the whole universe. 
He does not admit 
that the system of explanation which is appropriate to physical 
events over which he has some control ought to make room, 
when he ventures further, for an entirely different system, 
namely the system he applies in social life when he attributes 
to good or bad, friendly or hostile intentions the behaviour 
of other men towards him. 
If he does so, it is unwittingly; 
he would not own to it. 
But the uncivilized man, who has 
at his disposal nothing but an inelastic science exactly propor­
tionate to the effect he exerts on matter, cannot project into 
the realm of the unforeseeable a broader science which might 
embrace it completely and which at once opens up wide vistas 
to his ambition. 
Rather than lose heart, he extends to this 
realm the system of explanation he uses in his intercourse 
with other men; he will expect to meet there with friendly 
forces, he will also think himself exposed to malignant influ­
ences; in any case he will not be dealing with a world com­
pletely alien to him. 
True, if good and evil genii are to 
preside over the successive phases of the operation he per­
forms on matter, they will thereby appear to have exerted 
an influence over that action from the very beginning. 
So 
our individual will speak as though he in no way relied, even 
for that part of the operation which is his own doing, upon 
the mechanical sequence of cause and effect. 
But if he did 
not, in this case, believe in a mechanical sequence, we should 
not see him, as soon as he acts, do exactly what is necessary to 
set things going mechanically. 
Now, whether we are dealing 
with savages or with civilized people, if we want really to 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
133 
know what is in a man's mind, we must refer to what he does 
and not to what he says. 
ln his extremely interesting and instructive books on "primi­
tive mentality," M. Lcvy-Bruhl emphasizes the indifference of 
this mentality to proximate or physical causes, the fact that 
it immediately turns to "mystic causes." 
"Our daily activity," 
he says, "implies unruffled, perfect confidence in the in­
variability of natural laws. 
The attitude of mind in primitive 
man is very different. To him the nature amid which he lives 
presents itself under an entirely different aspect. 
Al things 
and all creatures therein are involved in a network of mystic 
participations and exclusions." 1 And a little further on: "The 
variable element in collective representations is the occult 
force to which the illness or the death which has occurred is 
attributed: now a witch-doctor is the culprit, now the spirit 
of a dead man, now more or less definite or individualized 
forces . . . ; the element which remains recognizable, we 
might almost say identical, is the pre-established link between 
illness and death, on the one hand, and an invisible power, on 
the other." 2 
The author brings various confirmatory repons 
by missionaries and travellers to support this idea, and quotes 
the most curious examples. 
But one point strikes us at once: namely, that in all the 
cases instanced, the effect reported, which is attributed by 
primitive man to an occult cause, is an event concerning man, 
more particularly an accident to a man, more specifically 
still a man's death or illness. 
There is never any question of 
action by the inanimate on the inanimate (save in cases of a 
phenomenon, meteorological or other, affecting, so to speak, 
man's interests) .  We are not told that the primitive man who 
sees a tree bending in the wind or the shingle rolled up by a 
wave, or even the dust raised by his foot, imagines the inter-
1 La Mentalite primitive (Paris, 19zz), pp. •7• 18. 
2 /bid., P· Z+ 

134 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
vention of anything more than what we call mechanic:rl 
causality. 
The constant relation between the antecedent and 
the consequent, both of which he perceives, cannot fail to 
impress him: it satisfies him in this case, and, so far as we 
know, he does not here superimpose, much less substitute, a 
"mystic" causality. 
Let us go further, leaving aside those 
physical facts of which primitive man is an impassive spec­
tator: can we not say of him also, that his "daily activity 
implies perfecr confidence in the invariability of natural laws"? 
\Vithout this confidence, he would not rely on the current of 
the river to carry his canoe, nor on the bending of his bow to 
shoot his arrow, on his hatchet to cut into the trunk, on his 
teeth to bite, on his legs to walk. 
It is possible that he does 
not explicitely picture this natural causality to himself; he has 
no interest in doing so, being neither a physicist nor a philos­
opher; but he has faith in it and bases his activity upon it. 
Let us go further still. 
\Vhen the primitive man turns to a 
mystic cause for the explanation of death, illness or any other 
accident, what exactly is the process that he goes through? 
He sees, for instance, that a man has been killed by a frag­
ment of rock dislodged during a gale. 
Does he deny that the 
rock was already split, that the wind loosened the stone, that 
the blow cracked the skull? 
Obviously not. 
He notes, as we 
do, the operation of these proximate causes. 
Why then does 
he bring in a "mystic cause," such as the will of a spirit or 
witch-doctor, to set it up as the principal cause? 
Let us look 
closer: we shall see that what the primitive man explains here 
by a "supernatural" cause is not the physical effect, it is its 
humcm siwzificance, it is its importance to man, and more 
especially to a particular man, the one who was crushed by 
the stone. 
There is nothing illogical, consequently nothing 
"prelogical" or even anything which evinces an "impervious­
nes to experience," in the belief that a cause should be pro­
portionate to its effect, that, once having admitted the crack 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
135 
in the rock, the direction and force of the wind-purely 
physical things which take no account of humanity-the. ɇ 
remains to be explained this fact, so momentous to us, the 
death of a man. 
The effect is contained pre-eminently in the 
cause, as the old philosophers used to put it; and if the effect 
has a considerable human significance, the cause must have at 
least an equal significance; it is in any case of the same order: 
it is an intention. That the scientific habit of the mind breaks 
it of this manner of reasoning is beyond doubt. 
But it is a 
natural one; it lingers on in civilized man, and manifests itself 
every time the opposing force does not intervene. 
\Ve drew 
attention to the fact that the gambler, placing his stakes on a 
number at roulette, will attribute his success or failure to good 
or bad luck, that is to say to a favourable or unfavourable 
intention. This will not hinder him from explaining by natural 
causes everything that occurs between the moment of putting 
on his money and the moment when the ball stops; but to the 
mechanical causality he will superadd, at the end of the 
process, a semi-voluntary choice that may serve as a counter­
part to his own: thus the final effect will be of the sɈme 
importance and the same order as the first cause, which was 
also a choice. 
And we grasp the practical origin of this very 
logical reasoning when we see the gambler make a movement 
with his hand as though to stop the ball: he is objectifying his 
will to win, and the resistance to this will, in the form of good 
or bad luck, in order to feel the presence of a hostile or friendly 
power, and thus give its full interest to the game. 
But more 
striking still is the resemblance between the mentality of the 
civilized and of the primitive man when dealing with facts 
such as those we have j ust had in view: death, illness, serious 
accident. 
An officer who took part in the Great War told us 
he always noticed that the men dreaded the bullets more than 
the shells, although artillery-fire was far more deadly. 
The 
reason is that with bulets we feel we are aimed at; and each of 

136 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
us, in spite of himself, reasons as follows: "To produce the 
effect, which would mean so much to me, of death or a 
serious wound, there must be a cause of equal importance, 
there must be intent." 
A soldier who, as it happened, had 
been hit by a splinter from a shell, told us that his first impulse 
had been to exclaim: "How silly!" That this fragment of 
shell, projected by a purely mechanical cause, and which 
might just as well have struck anybody, or nobody, should 
nevertheless have come and struck him, him and not some­
body else, appeared to his natural intelligence illogical. 
By 
introducing the idea of "bad luck," he would have demon­
strated more clearly still the kinship of this spontaneous 
intelligence with the primitive mentality. 
A representation 
rich in matter, like the idea of a witch-doctor or a spirit, 
must doubtless relinquish the greater part of its content to 
become the notion of "bad luck"; yet it subsists, it is not 
completely emptied; consequently the two mentalities are not 
so widely different from each other. 
The extremely varied examples of "primitive mentality" 
which 1\1. LcvyӳBruhl has accumulated in his works can be 
grouped under a certain number of headings. 
The most 
numerous are those which show, according to the author, 
that primitive man obstinately refuses to admit the existence 
of chance. 
If a stone falls and crushes a passer-by, it was an 
evil spirit that dislodged it: there is no chance about it. 
If 
a man is dragged out of his canoe by an alligator, it is 
because he was bewitched: there is no chance about it. 
If a 
warrior is killed or wounded by lance-thrust, it is because he 
was not in a state to parry the blow, a spell has been cast upon 
him: there is no chance about it.1 
The formula recurs so 
often in 1\1. Levy-Bruhl's writings that it may be considered 
as summing up one of the main characteristics of primitive 
1 See in panicular La Memalite primitive, pp. z8, 36, 45, etc. Cf. Les 
Fonctions mentales dans les societes inferieures, p. 73· 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
137 
mentality. 
But, we shall say to that eminent philosopher, 
when you reproach primitive man with not believing in 
chance, or at least when you state it to be a characteristic trait 
of his mentality that he docs not believe in it, are you not ad­
mitting the existence of chance? 
And in admitting it, are you 
quite sure that you are not relapsing into that primitive men­
tality you criticize, which at all events you are at great pains 
to distinguish radically from your own? 
I don't mean, of 
course, that you make of chance an active force. 
But if it 
were for you a mere nothing, you would not mention it. 
You would consider the word as non-existent, as well as the 
thing itself. 
But the word exists, and you use it, and it stands 
for something to you, as indeed it does to all of us. 
Let us 
ask ourselves what it really represents. 
A huge tile, wrenched 
off by the wind, falls and kills a passer-by. 
We say it was by 
chance. 
Should we say the same if the tile had merely crashed 
on to the ground? 
Perhaps, but it would then be because we 
were vaguely thinking of a man who might have been there, 
or because, for some reason or other, that particular spot on 
the pavement was of special interest to us, so that the tile 
seemed to have specially selected it to fall upon. 
In Loth cases 
chance intervenes only because some human interest is at 
stake, and because things happened as though man had been 
taken into account, either with a view of doing him a service, 
or more likely with the intention of doing him an injury.1 
Think only of the wind wrenching off the tile, of the tile 
falling on the pavement, of the crash of the tile on the ground: 
you see nothing but mechanism, the element of chance van­
ishes. 
For it to intervene it is indispensable that, the effect 
having a human significance, this significance should react 
upon the cause and colour it, so to speak, with humanity. 
1 \Ve developed this conception of chance in a course of lectures de­
livered at the College de France in 1898, in connection with the Dcpi 
cip.app.tv7Jt; of Alexander of Aphrodisia. 

138 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
Chance is then mechanism behaving as though possessing an 
intention. 
It may perhaps be said that precisely because we 
usc the word when things occur as if there has been intention, 
we do not suppose that there has been real intention, we are 
recognizing, on the contrary, that everything is capable of 
mechanical explanation. 
And this would be very true if we 
were dealing with nothing but reflective, fully conscious 
thought. 
But underlying it is a spm.caneous, semi-conscious 
thought, which superimposes on the mechanical sequence of 
cause and effect something totally different, not indeed to 
account for the falling of the tile, but to explain why its 
falling should coincide with the passing beneath it of a man, 
why it should have chosen just that very moment to fall. 
The element of choice or intention is as restricted as possible; 
it recedes as reflexion tries to grasp it; it is elusive, nay, 
evanescent, but if it were non-existent we should speak only 
of mechanism, there would be no question of chance. Chance 
is therefore an intention emptied of its content. 
It is nothing 
more than a mere shadow, but the shape is there even if the 
matter is not. 
Have we here one of those representations 
which we call "truly primitive," formed spontaneously by 
humanity in obedience to a natural tendencyɉ 
Not quite. 
However spontaneous it may be, the idea of chance reaches 
our consciousness only after having first passed through 
the layer of accumulated experiences which socieɊ"y deposits 
within us from the day it first teaches us to speak. 
It is in 
the course of this passage that it becomes emptied, siflce an 
increasingly mechanistic science drives out of it what purpose­
fulness it contained. We should therefore have to fill it again, 
give it a body, if we wanted to reconstitute the original rep­
resentation. The phantom of an intention would then become 
a living intention. 
On the other hand, we should now have to 
give this living intention far too much content, over-ballast 
it with matter, to obtain the malignant or beneficent entities 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
139 
present in the minds of non-civilized men. It cannot be said 
too often: these superstitions usually imply a magnifying, a 
thickening, in fine an element of caricature. They denote, 
more often than not, that the means has become detached from 
its end. A belief which begins by being useful, a spur to the 
will, has been diverted from the object to which it owed its 
existence to new objects y;here it is no longer of any use, 
where it might even become dangerous. Having multiplied 
lazily through a superficial imitation of itself, it will now 
have the effect of encouraging laziness. Yet we must not go 
too far. It is seldom that primitive man feels justified by that 
belief in not taking action. The natives of the Cameroons 
lay all the blame on the witch-doctor if one of their tribe is 
devoured by a crocodile; but M. Lcvy-Bruhl, who reports 
the fact, adds, from the evidence of a tra\·eller, that crocodiles 
hardly ever attack man in that country.1 lVe may rest assured 
that where crocodiles are habitually dangerous the nati\·e 
avoids going into the water just as we do: there the animal is 
feared, witchcraft or no. It is none the less true that to pass 
from the "primitive mentality" to states of mind which might 
well be our own, we have more often than not to do two 
things. First ,..,e ha,·e to make a clean sweep of all our science. 
Then we must abandon ourselves to a certain laziness, tum 
aside from an explanation "·hich we surmise to be more 
reasonable, but which would call for a greater effort of 
intelligence and, above all, of will. In many cases one of 
these processes is enough; in others we must combine the two. 
Let us take for instance one of the most interesting chapters 
in J\1. Lcvy-Bruhl's books, the one dealing with the first im­
pressions produced on primitive man by our fire-arms, our 
writing, our books, in a word everything we have to give him. 
We find this impression disconcerting at first. \Ve should 
1 La Mentalite primitive, p. 38. 

140 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
indeed be tempted to attribute it to a mentality different from 
our own. But the more we banish from our minds the science 
we have gradually, almost unconsciously, acquired, the more 
natural the "primitive" explanation appears. 
Here we have 
people before \vhom a traveller opens a book, and who are 
told that the book gives information. They conclude that the 
book speaks, and that by putting it to their ear they will hear 
a sound. But to look for anything else in a man unacquainted 
with our civilization would be to expect from him an intelli­
gence far greater than that of most of us, greater even than 
exceptional intelligence, greater even than genius: it would 
mean wanting him to re-invent the art of writing. 
For if he 
could imagine the possibility of depicting words on a sheet of 
paper he would possess the principle of alphabetic, or more 
generally phonetic, writing; he would straightaway have 
reached a point which civilized man has reached only by a long 
accumulation of the efforts of a great number of exceptional 
men. 
Let us not then talk of minds different from our own. 
Let us simply say that they are ignorant of what we have 
learnt. 
There are also, we added, cases where ignorance is coupled 
with an aversion to effort. Those would be the ones grouped 
by M. Levy-Bruhl under the title of "ingratitude of the sick." 
Primitive men who have been treated by European doctors 
are not in any way grateful; nay, more, they expect payment 
from the doctor, as if it were they who had done him a service. 
But having no notion of our medical science, no idea that it is 
a science coupled with an art, seeing moreover that the doctor 
is far from always curing his patient, and finally considering 
that he certainly gives his time and his trouble, how can they 
help thinking that the doctor has some interest, unknown to 
them, in what he does? 
And why, instead of striving to shake 
off their ignorance, should they not adopt quite naturally the 
interpretation which first occurs to their minds, and from 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
141 
which they can profit? 
I put this question to the author of La 
Mentalite primitive, and I shall evoke a recollection, a very 
ancient one, though scarcely older than our old friendship. 
I was a little boy and I had bad teeth. 
There was nothing for 
it but to take me now and again to the dentist, who at once 
showed no mercy to the offending tooth; he pulled it out 
relentlessly. Between you and me, it hardly hun at all, for the 
teeth in question would have come out of their own accord; 
but I was no sooner seated in the dentist's chair than I set up 
a blood-curdling yell, for the principle of the thing. 
My 
family at last found out a way to make me keep quiet. 
The 
dentist, taking care to make a noise about it, would drop a 
fifty-centime piece into the glass from which I was to rinse 
out my mouth ( asepticism was unknown in those far-off 
days) , the purchasing-power of this sum being at that time 
ten sticks of barley sugar. 
I must have been six or seven, and 
was no stupider than most boys. 
I was certainly capable of 
guessing that this was a put-up job between the dentist and 
my family to bribe me into silence, and that they conspired 
together for my particular good. 
But it would have needed 
a slight effort to think, and I preferred not to make it, per­
haps from laziness, perhaps so as not to change my attitude 
towards a man against whom my tooth was indeed bared. 
So I simply went on not thinking, and the idea I was bound 
to form of the dentist then stood out automatically in my 
mind in letters of fire. 
Clearly he was a man who loved 
drawing teeth, and he was even ready to pay for this the sum 
of half a franc. 
But let us close this parenthesis and sum up what we have 
said. 
At the origin of the beliefs we have been studying we 
have found a defensive reaction of nature against a discour­
agement whose source is to be found in intelligence. 
This 
reaction arouses within intelligence itself images and ideas 
which hold in check the depressing representation or prevent 

142 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
it from materializing. Entities then appear which are not 
necessarily complete personalities: it suffices that they possess 
intentions or even that they coincide with them. Belief then 
means essentially confidence; the original source is not fear, 
but an assurance against fear. And, on the other hand, the 
belief does not necessarily begin by taking a person as its 
object; it is content with a partial anthropomorphism. These 
are the two points which strike us when we consider the 
natural attitude of man towards a future about which he 
thinks, precisely because he is intelligent, and at which he 
would take fright because of the unforeseeable elements he 
finds in it, were he to confine himself to the representation 
of it supplied by intelligence alone. But such are also the two 
points we note in cases where we are dealing not with the 
future but with the present, and where man is the plaything 
of forces immeasurably greater than his own strength. Forces 
like the great catastrophes: earthquakes, floods, tornados. 
A very old theory attributed the origin of religion to the fear 
inspired by nature in such cases. Primus in orbe deos fecit 
timor. Science has gone too far in rejecting that entirely; the 
emotion felt by a man in the presence of nature certainly 
counts for something in the origin of religions. But, we repeat, 
religion is less a fear than a reaction against fear, and it is not, 
in its beginnings, a belief in deities. It will not be out of place 
to put this statement to a double test, which will not only con­
firm our preceding analysis, but will enable us to get a more 
precise notion of those entities of which we have said that 
they contain an element of personality without being persons. 
Out of them may grow the gods of mythology, and it wil be 
through a process of enrichment. But these entities could, by 
a process of impoverishment, as easily yield that impersonal 
force which primitive man, we are told, sees underlying al 
things. Let us then follow our usual method. Let us ask our 
own consciousness, divested of the acquired, restored to its 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
143 
original simplicity, how it reacts to an aggression of nature. 
The observation of one's own self is a very difficult matter 
in such a c:J.Se, owing to the suddenness \vith which grave 
events occur; and indeed the occasions are rare when it can 
be done thoroughly. 
But certain bygone impressions of which 
we have only preserved a dim recollection, and which besides 
were already superficial and vague at the time, will perhaps 
become more distinct, and assume a clearer shape, if we com­
plete them by the observations made on himself by a master 
of psychological science. 
William James happened to be in 
California during the terrible earthquake of April 1 906, which 
destroyed part of San Francisco. 
Here is what he wrote on 
the subject: 
"When I departed from Harvard for Stanford University 
last December, almost the last good-bye I got w:J.S that of my 
old Californian friend B. 
'I hope they'll give you a touch of 
earthquake while you're there, so that you may also become 
acquainted with tbat Californian institution.' 
"Accordingly, when, lying awake at about half-past five on 
the morning of April 1 8  in my little 'flat' on the campus of 
Stanford, I felt the bed begin to waggle, my first conscious­
ness was one of gleeful recognition of the nature of the 
movement. 
'By Jove,' I said to myself, 'here's B.'s old earth­
quake, after all! '  And then, as it went crescendo, 'And a jolly 
good one it is, 'too!' I said. . . . 
"The thing was over, as I understand the Lick Observatory 
to have declared, in forty-eight seconds. 
To me it felt as if 
about that length of time, although I have heard others say 
that it seemed to them longer. 
In my case sensation and 
emotion were so strong that little thought, and no reflexion 
or volition, were possible in the short rime consumed by the 
phenomenon. 
"The emotion consisted wholly of glee and admiration; 

144 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
glee at the vividness which such an abstract idea or verbal 
term as 'earthquake' could put on when translated into sen­
sible reality and verified concretely; and admiration at the 
way in \vhich the frail little wooden house could hold itself 
together in spite of such a shaking. I felt no trace whatever of 
fear; it was pure delight and welcome. 
" 'Go it,' I almost cried aloud, 'and go it stronger!' 
.
.
•
 
"As soon as I could think, I discerned retrospectively cer­
tain peculiar ways in which my consciousness had taken in 
the phenomenon. These ways \vere quite spontaneous, and, 
so to speak, inevitable and irresistible. 
"First, I personified the earthquake as a permanent in­
dividual entity. 
It was the earthquake of my friend B.'s 
augury, which had been lying low and holding itself back 
during all the intervening months in order, on that lustrous 
April morning, to invade my room and energize the more 
intensely and triumphantly. It came, moreover, directly to 
me. It stole in behind my back, and once inside the room had 
me all to itself, and could manifest itself convincingly. Animus 
and intent were never more present in any human action, nor 
did any human activity ever more definitely point back to a 
living agent as its source and origin. 
"All whom I consulted on the point agreed as to this 
feature in their experience. 'It expressed intention,' 'It was 
vicious,' 'It was bent on destruction,' 'It wanted to show its 
power,' or what not. To me it wanted simply to manifest the 
full meaning of its name. But what was this 'It'? To some, 
apparently, a vague demoniac power; to me an individualized 
being, B.'s earthquake, namely. 
"One informant interpreted it as the end of the world and 
the beginning of the final judgment. This was a lady in San 
Francisco Hotel, who did not think of its being an earthquake 
till after she had got into the street and someone had ex­
plained it to her. She told me that the theological interpreta-

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
145 
tion had kept fear from her mind, and made her take the 
shaking calmly. For 'science,' when the tensions in the earth's 
crusts reach the breaking-point and strata fall into an altered 
equilibrium, earthquake is simply the collective 11ame of all 
the cracks and shakings and disturbances that happen. 
They 
are the earthquake. 
But for me the earthquake was the cause 
of the disturbances, and the perception of it as a living agent 
was irresistible. 
It had an overpowering dramatic convincing­
ness. 
"I realize now better than ever how inevitable were men's 
earlier mythological versions of such catastrophes, and how 
artificial and against the grain of our spontaneous perceiving 
are the later habits into which science educates us. 
It was 
simply impossible for untutored men to take earthquakes into 
their minds as anything but supernatural warnings or retribu­
tions." 1 
The first thing we notice is that William James speaks of 
the earthquake as an "individual being"; he notes that he 
personified the earthquake "as a permanent individual entity." 
But he does not say that there was-be it god or demon­
an integral personality, capable of a variety of actions, of 
which the earthquake was one particular manifestation. 
On 
the contrary, the entity in question is the phenomenon itself, 
regarded as permanent; its manifestation conveys its whole 
essence; its unique function is to be an earthquake; there is 
a soul, but that soul is simply the intention pervading the act.2 
If the author tells us that "never did human activity more 
definitely point back to a living agent as its source and origin" 
he means by this that the intent and the animus seemed to be­
long to the earthquake in the same way as the acts performed 
1 William James, Memories and Studies, pp. 209-2 14. Quoted by H. M. 
Kallen in Wby Religion? (New York ) ,  1927. 
2 "Animus and intent were never more present in any human action." 

146 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
by a living agent seem to belong to the agent while he remains, 
so to speak, behind them. 
But that the living agent is in this 
case the earthquake itself, that it possesses no other activity, 
no other property, that consequently what it is coincides with 
what it does, is borne out by the whole account. 
An entity 
of this kind, whose being and appearance are one, which is in­
distinguishable from a given act and whose intention is im­
manent in that act itself, being but the design and the con­
scious meaning of it, is precisely what we have been calling 
an element of personality. 
There is now another point which cannot fail to strike us. 
The San Francisco earthquake was a terrible catastrophe. 
But to William James, finding himself suddenly face to face 
with the danger, it appears rather as something mischievous 
which invites familiarity. 
"By Jove, here's the old earth­
quake! "  And other people present had the same impression. 
The earthquake was "wicked"; it had a mind of its own, "it 
was bent on destruction." That is just the way we speak of a 
young scapegrace with whom we may not have broken en­
tirely. 
But the fear that paralyses is the fear born of the 
thought that blind and overwhelming forces are about to crush 
us to pulp unconsciously. 
Thus does the material world ap­
pear to intelligence pure and simple. 
The scientific concep­
tion of the earthquake, alluded to by \Villiam James in the 
last lines, is likely to be the most dangerous of all, so long as 
science, which gives us a clear perception of the peril, has not 
supplied us with means of escaping it. 
To counteract this 
scientific conception, and more generally the mental picture 
which it has endowed with greater precision, there comes a 
defensive reaction in the presence of a grave and sudden peril. 
The disturbances with which we have to deal, each of them 
entirely mechanical, combine into an Event, which resembles 
a human being, possibly a "bad lot" but none the less one of 
us. 
He is not an outsider. 
A certain comradeship is possible 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
147 
between us. This suffices to dispel fright, or rather to prevent 
its arising. Generally speaking, fright has its uses, like all other 
feelings. An animal to whom fear is unknown might have no 
idea of flying or resisting; it would soon succumb in the 
struggle for life. This explains the existence of a feeling such 
as fear. It is intelligible too that fear should be in proportion 
to danger. But it is a feeling which pulls us up, turns us aside 
or pushes us back: it is essentially inhibitive. When the peril 
is great, when the fear is nearing its paroxysm and almost 
paralysing, a defensive rea:ction of nature occurs to counteract 
the emotion, which was also natural. Our faculty of feeling 
could certainly not be changed, it remains what it was; but 
intelligence, impelled by instinct, transforming the situation, 
evokes the reassuring image. It lends to the Event a unity 
and an individuality which make of it a mischievous, maybe a 
malignant, being, but still one of ourselves, \Vith something 
sociable and human about it. 
I ask the reader to search his memory. Unless I am much 
mistaken, he will find a confirmation of William James's 
analysis. I shall at any rate take the liberty of mentioning one 
or two recollections of my own. The first goes back to the far­
off days, since I was very young at the time and went in for 
sports, particularly riding. Now one fine day, having just 
encountered on the road that most fantastic of apparitions, a 
cyclist perched on a tall velocipede, my horse took fright and 
bolted. That this might happen, that in such cases there were 
certain things I should do, or at least try to do, I knew as 
well as any pupil in the riding school. But I had never thought 
of the possibility otherwise than in an abstract form. That the 
accident should actually occur, at a given point in time and 
space, that it should happen to me rather than to someone 
else, struck me as implying a preference for me personally. 
Who then had chosen me? It was not the horse. It was no 
complete being, whatever it was, good or evil genius. It was 

148 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
the occurrence itself, an individual with no body of its own, 
for it was nothing but a combination of circumstances, but 
it had a soul, a very elementary one, hardly distinguishable 
from the intention apparently manifested by circumstances. 
It followed me in my wild gallop, mischievously watching to 
see how I should manage. And my one idea was to show it 
what I could do. If I felt no fear, it was precisely because my 
whole mind was centred on this one idea; and also, perhaps, 
because the malice of my strange companion did not preclude 
a certain good fellowship. I have often thought of this little 
incident, and said to myself that nature could not have con­
ceived any better psychical mechanism than this, if she in­
tended, while endowing us with fear as a salutary emotion, 
to preserve us from it in cases where we had best not give 
way to it. 
I have just cited a case where the "good fellowship" nature 
of the Accident is the most striking thing about it. Here is 
another case, which perhaps brings out more distinctly still 
its unity, its individuality, the clearness with which it carves 
itself out a place in the continuity of the real. While still a 
boy, in 1871, on the morrow of the Franco-Prussian War, I 
had, like all people of my generation, considered another war 
to be imminent during the twelve or fifteen years that followed. 
Later on that war appeared as at once probable and impos­
sible: a complex and contradictory idea, which lasted right 
down to the fatal day. Indeed it called up no image to our 
minds, beyond its verb!ll expression. 
It kept its abstract 
character right down to those terrible hours when the conflict 
became obviously inevitable, down to the very last minute, 
while we were still hoping against hope. 
But when, on 
August 4, 1 9 14, I opened the Matin newspaper and read in 
great headlines: "Germany Declares War on France," I sud­
denly felt an invisible presence which all the past had prepared 
and foretold, as a shadow may precede the body that casts it. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
149 
It was as though some creature of legend, having escaped 
from the book in which its story was told, had quietly taken 
possession of the room. True, I was not dealing with a com­
plete personality. There was only enough of it to produce a 
certain effect. It had bided its time; and now unceremoni­
ously it took its seat like one of the family. It was to intervene 
just at this moment, in this place, that it had been vaguely 
interlinked with my life-history. To the staging of this scene, 
the room with its furniture, the paper upon the table, myself 
standing in front of it, the event pervading every nook and 
cranny, forty-three years of vague foreboding had all been 
leading up. Horror-struck as I was, and though I felt a war, 
even a victorious war, to be a catastrophe, I experienced what 
William James expresses, a feeling of admiration for the 
smoothness of the transition from the abstract to the con­
crete: who would have thought that so terrible an eventuality 
could make its entrance into reality with so little disturbance? 
The impression of this facility was predominant above all 
else. On reflexion, one realizes that, if nature intended to 
oppose a defensive reaction against fear, and prevent a paralysis 
of the will brought about by an over-intelligent representation 
of a cataclysm entailing endless consequences, she would create 
between us and the event simplified, transmuted into a 
rudimentary personality, just this very familiarity which puts 
us at our ease, relieves the strain, and disposes us quite simply 
to do our duty. 
\Ve must search for these fleeting impressions, which are 
immediately blotted out by reflexion, if we want to find some 
vestige of what may have been felt by our remotest ancestors. 
We should not hesitate to do so, if we were not imbued with 
the preconceived idea that the moral and intellectual acquisi­
tions of humanity, incorporated in the substance of individual 
organisms, have come down to us through heredity. In that 
case we should be born totally different from what our 

150 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
ancestors were. 
But heredity does not possess this virtue. It 
cannot make natural tendencies out of habits contracted from 
generation to generation. If it had any hold on habit, it would 
have a very slight one, accidentally and exceptionally; it has 
probably none at all. The natural, then, is to-day what it has 
always been. 
True, things happen as if it had been trans­
formed, since all that society has acquired overlays it, since 
society moulds individuals by means of an education that 
goes on without a break from the hour of their birth. 
But let 
a sudden shock paralyse these superficial activities, let the 
light in which they work be extinguished for a moment: at 
once the natural reappears, like the changeless star in the 
night. 
The psychologist who wants to go back to what is 
primitive muse seek after these out-of-the-way experiences. 
For all that, he will not let go his guiding thread, he will not 
forget that nature is utilitarian, and that every instinct has its 
function; those instincts which we might call intellectual are 
defensive reactions against the exaggeratedly and above all 
the prematurely intelligent elements in intelligence. 
But the 
two methods will help each other: the one serving rather for 
research, the other for verification. It is our pride, a twofold 
pride, which generally makes us shy at them. 
\Ve want man 
to be born superior to what he used to be, as if true merit did 
not lie in effort, as though a species in which each individual 
has to rise above himself by a laborious assimilation of all the 
past were not, to say the least, on a par with a species in which 
each generation would be raised in its entirety to a higher 
level than the preceding ones by the automatic play of 
heredity! 
But there is yet another pride, that of intelligence, 
which will not admit its origiml subordination to biological 
necessities. 
No one would study a cell, a tissue, an organ, 
without caring about its function; in the field of psychology 
itself, no one would consider he had fully accounted for an 
instinct unless he had connected it with some need of the 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
1 5 1  
species; but once you come to intelligence, farewell nature! 
farewell life! 
Intelligence is assumed to be what it is "for no 
particular reason, for the fun of the thing." 
As if it also did 
not primarily correspond to vital needs! 
Its original business is 
to resolve problems similar to those resolved by instinct, 
though indeed by a very different method which ensures prog­
ress and which cannot be applied unless it be, in theory, com­
pletely independent of nature. 
But this independence is limited 
in fact: it ceases at the exact moment when intelligence would 
defeat its own object by injuring some vital interest. 
Intel­
ligence is then inevitably kept under observation by instinct, 
or rather by life, the common origin of instinct and intel­
ligence. 
This is just what we mean when we speak of 
intellectual instincts; we are then dealing with representa­
tions fanned naturally by intelligence, by way of safeguarding 
itself, through certain beliefs, against certain dangers of knowl­
edge. 
Such are then the tendencies, such are the experiences 
psychology must bear in mind, if it wants to get back to the 
fountainhead. 
The study of the uncivilized will be none the less valuable. 
We have said, and we cannot repeat it too often: they are as 
far from the beginning of things as we are, but they have 
invented less. 
So they have had to apply the same knowledge 
in countless different ways; theirs has perforce been a process 
of exaggeration, caricature, in a word, distortion, rather than 
radical transformation. 
But whether it be a matter of trans­
formation or one of distortion, the original form subsists, 
merely covered over by the acquired; in both cases, therefore. 
the psychologist in search of origins will have the same kind 
of effort to make, but the road may be shorter in the second 
case than in the first. This is what will occur especially when 
we come to find similar beliefs among peoples between whom 
there can have been no possible communication. 
These be­
liefs arc not necessarily primitive, but they have very likely 

152 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
come straight from one of those fundamental tendencies 
which an effort of introspection would enable us to discover 
within ourselves. They may then put us in the way of this 
discovery, and guide that introspection which will later serve 
to explain them. 
We have always to go back to these questions of method 
if we do not wish to go astray in our search. At the turning­
point which we have reached we stand particularly in need 
of them. For we are dealing with nothing less than the re­
actions of man to his perception of things, of events, of the 
universe in general. 
That intelligence is made to utilize 
matter, to dominate things, to master e,·ents, there is no 
doubt. That its power is in direct proportion to its knowledge 
is no less certain. But this science is in the beginning very 
limited; very small indeed is the portion of the universal 
mechanism that it embraces, of the space and time over which 
it has control. \Vhat about the rest? Left to itself, intelligence 
would simply realize its ignorance; man would feel himself 
lost in immensity. But instinct is on the watch. To the strictly 
scientific knowledge which goes with technical progress, or is 
implied in it, instinct adds, for all those things which are 
beyond our scope, the belief in powers that are supposed to 
take man into account. The universe is thus peopled with 
intentions which are, it is true, fleeting and variable; the only 
purely mechanical area is supposed to be that within which 
we act mechanically. This area expands \Vith the advance 
of civilization: the whole universe ends by appearing as a 
mechanism to an intelligence which conceives the ideal vision 
of a complete science. We have reached this stage, and it 
takes, to-day, a vigorous effort of introspection to rediscover 
the original beliefs which our science covers over with all it 
knmvs and hopes to know. But, as soon as we get at them, we 
see how they are to be explained by the joint working of in­
telligence and instinct, how they must have corresponded 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
153 
to a vital interest. Turning then to uncivilized man, we verify 
what we have observed in ourselves: but in his case the belief 
is swollen, exaggerated, multiplied: instead of receding, as 
it does with civilized man, in the face of the progress of 
science, it overflows into the area reserved to mechanical ac­
tion, and overlays activities which ought to preclude it. 
This brings us to an essential point. It has been asserted that 
religion began as magic. Magic has also been considered as 
a forerunner of science. If we confine ourselves to psychology, 
as we have done, if we reconstitute, by an effort of intro­
spection, the natural reaction of man to his perception of 
things, we find that, while magic and religion are akin, there 
is nothing in common between magic and science. 
We have indeed just seen that primitive intelligence divides 
its experience into two separate parts. There is, on the one 
side, that which obeys the action of the hand or the tool, that 
which can be foreseen and relied on: this part of the universe 
is conceived physically, until such time as it is conceived 
mathematically; it appears as a concatenation of causes and 
effects, in any case it is treated as such; no matter if this con­
ception be indistinct, or barely conscious; it may never be 
expressed, but we need only look at what intelligence does 
in order to know what it implicitly thinks. Then, on the 
other hand, there is that part of experience upon which homo 
faber feels he has entirely lost his grip. This part is treated no 
longer physically, but morally. Since we can exert no power 
over it, we hope it will exert some power in our behoof. Thus 
nature becomes in such a case impregnated with humanity. 
But she will acquire this human quality only as far as is 
necessary. In default of power, we must have confidence. 
For us to feel comfortable, the event which singles itself out 
before our eyes from the mass of reality must appear animated 
with a purpose. That will be indeed our natural and original 
conviction. But we shall not stop there. It is not enough for 

154 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
us to have nothing to fear, we would fain have something to 
hope for as well. 
If the event is not utterly devoid of feeling, 
can we not manage to influence it? 
Will it not allow itself to 
be convinced or constrained? 
This will be difficult if it re­
mains what it is, a transient intention, a rudimentary soul; 
it would not have personality enough to hearken to our 
prayers, it would have too much to be at our beck and call. 
But our mind can easily impel it in one direction or the other. 
For the pressure of instinct has given rise, within intelligence, 
to that form of imagination which is the myth-making func­
tion. Myth-making has but to follow its own course in order 
to fashion, out of the elementary personalities looming up 
at the outset, gods that assume more and more exalted form 
like those of mythology, or deities ever more degraded, such as 
mere spirits, or even forces which retain only one property 
from their psychological origin, that of not being purely 
mechanical, and of complying with our wishes, of bending 
to our will. 
The first and second directions are those of re­
ligion, the third that of magic. 
Let us begin with the latter. 
There has been a great deal of discussion about the notion 
of mana which was brought out some years ago by Codrington 
in his famous book on the Melanesians, and about its equivalent, 
or rather something analogous to it, supposed to exist among 
other primitives: such as the orenda of the Iroquois, the 
wakanda of the Sioux, etc. 
All these words seem to con­
note a force present throughout nature, a force of which some 
if not all things are said to partake in different degrees. 
From 
this to the hypothesis of a primitive philosophy taking form 
in the human mind at the very dawn of thought there is but 
a step. 
Some authorities have indeed supposed that the minds 
of the non-civilized were obsessed by a vague kind of pan­
theism. But it is very unlikely that humanity starts from such 
general and abstract notions. Before any man can philosophize 
he must live. 
Scholars and philosophers are too much inclined 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
155 
to believe that the mind works in all men as with them, for 
the sheer love of thinking. The truth is that the mind aims at 
action, and that, if there really is any philosophy to be found in 
the uncivilized man, it is ccnainly in action rather than in 
thought; it is implied in a whole group of operations which arc 
useful or considered as such; it emerges from them, it ex­
presses itself in words-and they arc inevitably very vague-only 
for the convenience of action. 
M1vl. Huben and i\lauss, in 
their very interesting Tbeorie generale de la magie, have made 
out a strong case for the belief in magic being inseparable 
from the conception of the mana. 
According to them it 
would appear that this belief derives from that conception. 
Is it not just the other way round? It does not strike us as 
probable that the representation corresponding to such terms 
as mana, orenda, etc., was formed first and that magic orig­
inated thence. Quite the contrary, it is because man believed 
in magic, because he practised it, that he must have represented 
things to himself in this way: his magic apparently worked, 
and he did but explain, or rather express, its success. Now, 
that he should have begun at once to practise magic is easy 
to understand; he realized at once that the limits of his normal 
influence over the outside world were soon reached, and he 
could not resign himself to going no funher. So he carried on 
the movement, and, since the movement could not by itself 
secure the desired result, nature must needs take the task in 
hand. It could be so only if matter were, so to speak, mag­
netized, if it turned of its own accord towards man, to under­
take his errands and carry out his orders. Matter remained 
none the less amenable, as we should say to-day, to physical 
laws; this had to be so, for the sake of the mechanical hold 
upon it. But it was, besides, impregnated with humanity, I 
mean charged with a force capable of entering into human 
designs. Man could turn this tendency to advantage so as to 
extend his action funher than physical laws pcnnitted. We 

156 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
can easily convince ourselves of this if we consider the nature 
of the magical recipes, and of the conceptions of matter which 
made it possible to imagine confusedly that magic could suc­
ceed. 
The operations have often been described, but as the 
applications of certain theoretical principles such as "like 
acts on like," "the part stands for the whole," etc. That these 
fonnulae can serve to classify magical processes there is no 
doubt. 
But it in no wise follows that magical operations are 
derived from them. 
If primitive intelligence had begun by 
conceiving principles, it would very soon have capitulated 
before the evidence of experience, which would have proved 
them erroneous. 
But here again it merely translates into a 
conception what was suggested by an instinct. 
To put it 
more clearly, there is a logic of the body, an extension of 
desire, which comes into play long before intelligence has 
found a conceptual fonn for it. 
Take, for instance, a "prim­
itive" man who wants to kill his enemy: that enemy, however, 
is far away; it is impossible to get at him. 
No matter! 
Our 
man is in a rage; he goes though the motions of pouncing on 
the absent man. 
Once started he goes on to the bitter end; 
he squeezes his fingers round the neck of the victim he thinks 
he has hold of, or wants to have hold of, and throttles him. 
But he knows very well that the result is not complete. 
He 
has done everything that he himself could do: he demands 
that things should do the rest. 
They will not do it mechani­
cally. They will not yield to a physical necessity, as when our 
man stamped on the earth, moved his anns or legs, in a word, 
obtained from matter reactions corresponding to his actions. 
Therefore he wants matter, not only to be obliged to give 
back mechanically what it receives, but also to possess the 
faculty of fulfilling desires and obeying orders. 
There will be 
nothing impossible in this if nature already tends of her own 
accord to take man into account. It will suffice that the same 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
157 
compliance shown by certain events should also be found in 
things. The latter will then be more or less charged with sub­
missiveness and potency: they will hold at man's disposal a 
power which yields to the desires of man, and of which man 
may avail himself. Words such as mana, wakanda, etc., express 
this force, and at the same time the prestige surrounding it. 
You will not find the same precise meaning for all of them, 
if you are looking for precise meanings; but they all correspond 
to the same vague idea. 
They express that which causes things 
to lend themselves to the operations of magic. 
As to these 
operations themselves, we have just determined their nature. 
They begin the act which man cannot . finish. 
They go 
through the motions which alone could not produce the desired 
effect, but which will achieve it, if the man concerned knows 
how to prevail upon the goodwill of things. 
Magic is then innate in man, being but the outward pro­
jection of a desire which fills the heart. 
If it has appeared 
artificial, if it has been connected with superficial associations of 
ideas, it is because it has been studied in processes which were 
especially devised to relieve the magician from putting his 
heart and soul into them, and to enable him to obtain the same 
result without the same effort. 
An actor studying his part 
really and truly lives the emotion he has to express; he notes 
the gestures and inflections to which it gives rise; later, when 
facing the public, he will produce only the inflection and the 
gesture, he can afford to dispense with the emotion. 
It is 
the same with magic. 
The "laws" which have been found for 
it tell us nothing of the natural impulse from which it sprang. 
They are only a fommla for the expedients which laziness has 
suggested to the original magic in order that it might be per­
petuated. 
It arises first of all, we are told, from the fact that "like 
begets like." 
There is no apparent reason why humanity 
should begin by positing so abstract and arbitrary a law. 
But 

1 5 8  
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
it is understandable that after having gone instinctively through 
the motions of flinging himself on his absent enemy, after 
having convinced himself that his anger, projected into space 
and conveyed forward by some obliging matter, will proceed 
to accomplish the act begun, a man should want to obtain 
the same effect without having to work himself up into the 
same state. 
He will therefore go through the process again 
in cold blood. 
That very action, described in his wrath, 
which he performed when he thought he was locking his 
fingers about his enemy's throat, he will reproduce by means 
of a ready-made model, a dummy whose outlines he will 
merely have to go over. It is thus that he will practise hoodoo. 
The puppet he uses need not even resemble his enemy, since 
its only function is to ensure that the act is repeated exactly 
as before. 
Such seems to be the psychological origin of a 
principle to be expressed in some such formula as "like is 
equivalent to like" or, better still, in more precise terms, "the 
static can replace the dynamic if it traces the pattern of 
the latter." 
In this ultimate form, reminiscent of its origin, 
the principle would not lend itself to indefinite extension. 
But 
in the first form it permits of the belief that it is possible 
to affect a distant object through the intermediary of a near 
object bearing the merest superficial resemblance to it. 
It need 
not even be explicitly stated or formulated. 
Merely implied 
in an almost instinctive process, it enables this natural magic 
to proliferate indefinitely. 
Magic practices are referred to yet other laws: "it is pos­
sible to influence a being or a thing by acting on something 
it has touched," "the part is valid for the whole," etc. 
But 
the psychological origin remains the same. 
The essential is 
always to repeat in tranquillity, with the conviction that it is 
efficacious, the act which has given a quasi-hallucinatory im­
pression of its efficacy when performed in a moment of ex­
citement. 
In time of drought, the sorcerer is asked to pro-

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
159 
duce the rain. 
If he were actually to put his whole soul into 
the task, he would, by an effort of imagination, raise himself 
up to the cloud, he would believe that he felt himself cleaving 
it asunder, and scattering it in rain-drops. 
But he will find it 
simpler to suppose he has nearly come back to earth again, 
and then to pour out a little water; this minute fraction of the 
event will produce it in its entirety, if the effort which would 
have had to be launched from earth to heaven finds some­
thing to take its place, and if the intermediary matter is more 
or less charged-as it were with positive or negative elec­
tricity-with a readiness, half physical and half moral, to serve 
or to thwart man. 
This amounts to saying that there exists a 
very simple natural magic, reducible to a small number of 
practices. 
It is reflexion upon these practices, or perhaps the 
mere translation into words, which has made it possible for 
them to multiply in every direction and to absorb all super­
stitions as well, because the fonnula always goes beyond the 
fact which it expresses. 
Magic then seems to us to resolve itself into two elements: 
the desire to act on a thing, even on that which is out of reach, 
and the idea that things are charged, or can be charged, with 
what we should call human fluid. We must revert to the first 
point to draw the comparison between magic and science, and 
to the second to show the connexion of magic with religion. 
That there have been cases where magic has accidentally 
been of service to science is not impossible: matter cannot 
be manipulated without some benefit accruing. 
But even 
then, to utilize an observation or simply to note it, there 
must be some propensity for scientific research. 
Now the 
moment such is the case you are turning your back on magic. 
It is indeed easy to define science, since it has always worked 
in the same direction. 
It measures and calculates with a view 
to anticipation and action. 
It first supposes, then verifies, that 
the universe is governed by mathematical laws. 
In a word, 

160 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
all progress in science consists in a wider knowledge and a 
richer utilization of the universal mechanism. 
This progress, 
moreover, is accomplished by an effort of our intelligence, 
,vhich is designed to guide our action upon things, and whose 
structure must therefore be modelled on the mathematical 
framework of the universe. 
Although we are called upon 
to act only on the things about us, and though such was the 
original intention of the function of intelligence, yet, since 
the mechanism of the universe is present in each of its parts, 
it was absolutely necessary that man should be born with an 
intelligence virtually capable of embracing the whole material 
world. 
It is the same with the working of the mind as with 
the faculty of sight: the eye too was only meant to reveal to us 
objects on which we can act; but just as nature could obtain 
the requisite degree of vision only with an apparatus whose 
effect goes beyond its object (since we can see the stars, while 
we have no control over them), in the same way she neces­
sarily had to give us, along with the faculty of understanding 
the matter we have to deal with, a virtual knowledge of the 
rest, and the no less virtual power of utilizing it. 
True, it 
is a far cry, in this case, from the virtual to the actual. 
All 
effective progress, in the realm of knowledge as in that of ac­
tion, has demanded the persistent effort of one or several 
superior men. 
There was, each time, creation, which nature 
had doubtless made possible in that she endowed us with an 
intelligence whose form exceeds its content, but a creation 
which 'vent, so to speak, beyond what nature had intended. 
Man's structure seemed indeed to destine him for a more 
humble existence. 
His instinctive resistance to innovations 
is a proof. 
The inertia of humanity has never yielded, save 
under the impulsion of genius. 
In a word, science demands 
a twofold effort, that of a few men to find some new thing 
and that of all the others to adopt it and adapt themselves 
to it. 
A society may be called civilized when you find in 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
161 
it such a power to lead and willingness to be led. 
The sec­
ond condition is indeed more difficult of fulfilment than the 
first. 
\Vhat was lacking among the uncivilized was probably 
not the exceptional man (there seems to be no reason why na­
ture should not have had always and everywhere such fits of 
abstraction) but the chance for such a man to show his 
superiority, and the readiness of other men to follow him. 
Once a society is already on the road to civilization, the pros­
pect of a mere increase of well-being will doubtless suffice to 
overcome its ingrained habits. 
But to get it on to this road, 
to start it into motion the first time, requires a great deal 
more: perhaps the menace of extermination, such as that 
created by the discovery of a new weapon by an enemy tribe. 
Those societies which have remained more or less "prim­
itive" are probably those that have had no neighbours, more 
generally still those for whom life has been too easy. 
They 
were not called upon to make the initial effort. 
Subsequently, 
it was too late; the society could not advance, even if it wanted 
to, because it was contaminated by the products of its own 
laziness. 
These products are precisely the practices of magic, 
at least inasmuch as they are excessive and all-encroaching. 
For magic is the reverse of science. 
So long as the inertia 
of the environment does not cause it to proliferate, it has its 
function to perform. 
It temporarily calms the uneasiness of 
an intelligence whose form exceeds its content, which is 
vaguely aware of its ignorance and realizes the danger of it, 
which divines, outside the very small circle in which action 
is sure of its effect, where the immediate future is predictable 
and within which therefore science already prevails, a vast 
area of the unpredictable such as may well discourage action. 
And yet act it must. 
Magic then steps in, as an immediate 
effect of the vital impulse. 
As ma.1 widens his knowledge 
through effort, magic will gradually recoil. 
Meanwhile, as it 
is apparently successful (for the failure of a magical process can 

162 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
always be attributed to the success of some counter-magic) it 
produces the same moral effect as science. 
But this is its only 
feature in common with science, from which it is separated 
by the whole distance between wishing and willing. Far from 
paving the way for science, as some have maintained, it has 
been the great obstacle against which methodical knowledge 
has had to contend. 
Civilized man is a being in whom in­
cipient science, implicit in the daily round, has been able to 
encroach, thanks to an ever-active will, on that magic which 
was occupying the rest of thѪ field. 
Non-civilized man is, on 
the contrary, one who, disdaining effort, has allowed magic 
to invade the realm of incipient science, to overlay it, and 
conceal it, even to the point of making us believe in a prim­
itive mentality devoid of all real science. 
Moreover, once in 
possession, it plays thousands of variations upon its own 
themes, being more prolific than science, since its inventions 
are pure fantasy and cost no effort. 
Let there be no talk, then, 
of an era of magic followed by an era of science. 
Let us say 
that science and magic are both natural, that they have always 
co-existed, that our science is very much more extensive than 
that of our remote ancestors, but that these ancestors must have 
been much less given to magic than non-civilized men to­
day. We have remained, at bottom, what they were. 
Driven 
back by science, the inclination towards magic still survives, 
and bides its time. 
Let our attention to science relax for 
one instant, and magic will at once come rushing back into our 
civilized society, just as a desire, repressed in our waking 
hours, takes advantage of the lightest sleep to find satisfaction 
in a dream. 
There remains then the problem of the relationship between 
magic and religion. 
Everything depends, obviously, on the 
meaning of this last term. 
The philosopher studies for the 
most part a thing to which common sense has already given 
a name. 
Man may have got only a glimpse of it and that 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
163 
glimpse may have been deceptive; the thing may have been 
j umbled up with other things, from which it must be isolated. 
It may even have been segregated from reality as a whole merely 
for convenience of speech, and so not effectively constitute 
an entity, lending itself to independent study. 
Herein lies 
the great inferiority of philosophy compared to mathematics 
and even to natural sciences. 
Its starting-point must be the 
cutting up of reality by speech-a division and distribution 
which is perhaps entirely relative to the needs of the city: 
philosophy too often ignores this origin, and proceeds like a 
geographer who, in order to discriminate between the dif­
ferent regions of the globe and indicate the physical con­
nections between them, should take it into his head to go 
by the frontiers established by treaties. 
In the study we have 
undertaken, we have guarded against this danger by passing 
directly from the word "religion" and everything it embraces 
in virtue of a possibly artificial disgregation of things, to a cer­
tain function of the mind which can be directly observed, with­
out considering the separation of the real into concepts 
corresponding to words. 
In our analysis of the operations of 
this function we have successively rediscovered several of the 
meanings given to the word religion. 
Continuing our study, 
we shall find other shades of meaning, and \Ve may add one 
or two new ones. 
It will then be plainly demonstrated that 
this time the word embraces a reality: a reality which, it is 
true, will somewhat overstep, upwards and downwards, the 
limits of the usual significance of the word. But we shall then 
grasp it in itself, in its structure and in its principle, as 
happens whenever we relate to a physiological function, such 
as digestion, a great number of facts observed in different 
parts of the organism, and even discover thereby new facts. 
If we look at the matter from this angle, magic is evidently 
part of religion. I mean, of course, the lower type of religion, 
the one with which we have been dealing up to now. 
But 

1 64 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
magic, 
m common with this religion, generally speaking, 
represents a precaution of nature to meet certain dangers 
encountered by the intelligent being.-Now, it is possible to 
follow another line, to start from the various ordinary in­
terpretations of the word religion, compare them, and extract 
therefrom an average meaning: in this way we shall have 
solved a dictionary question rather than a philosophical prob­
lem; but no matter, so long as we realize what we are about, 
and do not imagine (a constant illusion of philosophers) that 
we have obtained the essence of a thing when we have agreed 
upon the conventional meaning of the word. 
Let us then 
set out all the acceptations of the word, like the colours of 
the spectrum or the notes in a scale: we shall find, somewhere 
about the middle, at an equal distance from the two ex­
tremities, the adoration of gods to whom men pray. 
It goes 
without saying that religion thus conceived is the opposite of 
magic. 
The latter is essentially selfish, the former admits of 
and often even demands disinterestedness. 
The one claims to 
force the compliance of nature, the other implores the favour 
of the god. Above all, magic works in an environment which 
is semi-physical and semi-moral-the magician, at all events, 
is not dealing with a person; whereas on the contrary it is 
from the god's personality that religion draws its greatest 
efficacy. 
Granted that primitive intelligence thinks it per­
ceives around it, in phenomena and in events, elements of 
personality rather than complete personalities, religion, as 
we have just understood it, will ultimately reinforce these 
elements to the extent of completely personifying them; 
whereas magic looks upon them as debased, dissolved, as it 
were, in a material world in which their efficacy can be tapped. 
Magic and religion, then, go their separate ways, having started 
from a common origin, and there can be no question of de­
riving religion from magic: they are contemporaneous. 
It i! 
understandable, however, that there should be something of 

S T A T I C R E L I G I O N  
165 
the one hovering round the other, that some magic lingers 
in religion, and still more, some religion in magic. \Ve know 
that the magician sometimes works through the medium of 
spirits, that is to say of beings relatively individualized, but 
which do not possess the complete personality nor the 
eminent dignity of gods. On the other hand, incantation may 
partake of both command and prayer. 
The history of religions has long regarded the belief in 
spirits as primitive and explanatory of all the rest. As each 
one of us has his soul, a subtler essence than that of the body, 
so, in nature, everything is said to have been animated, to 
be accompanied by a vaguely spiritual entity. 
Spirics once 
having been posited, humanity passed, so it is said, from be­
lief to adoration: hence a natural philosophy, animism, from 
which religion sprang. To this hypothesis another theory 
is apparently preferred to-day. In a "pre-animist" or "an­
imatist" phase, humanity is supposed to have imagined an im­
personal force, such as the Polynesian mana, present in the 
whole, unequally distributed between the pans; the spirits 
were conceived later. If our analyses are correct, what was first 
conceived was neither an impersonal force nor spirits already 
individualized: man simply attributed purpose to things and 
events, as if nature had eyes everywhere which she focused 
on man. That this is an original tendency, we can all verify 
when a sudden shock arouses the primitive man dormant 
within us all. \Vhat we feel in these cases is the sensation of 
an efficient presence; the nature of this presence is of little 
consequence, the essential point is its efficiency: the moment 
there is any regard for us, even if the intention is not good, 
we begin to count for something in the universe. That is 
what experience tells us. But, even before we consult ex­
perience, it would seem highly unlikely that humanity should 
have begun by theoretical views of any sort or kind. \Ve shall 
say it over and over again: before man can philosophize man 

166 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
must live; it is from a vital necessity that the primeval tend­
encies and convictions must have originated. 
To connect 
religion with a system of ideas, with a logic or a "pre-logic," 
is to turn our remote ancestors into intellectuals, and in­
tellectuals such as we ought to be in greater numbers our­
selves, for we often see the finest theories succumbing to 
passion and interest and holding good only in our hours of 
speculative thought, whereas ancient religions pervaded the 
whole of life. 
The truth is that religion, being co-extensive 
with our species, must pertain to our structure. 
We have 
just now connected it with a fundamental experience; but 
that experience was such that we had foreseen it before 
encountering it; in any case it is quite easily explained when 
it has been encountered; all we have to do is to consider man 
again in his place among living things, and psychology as a pan 
of biology. 
For, look at any other animal. 
It avails itself of 
everything it finds useful. Does it actually believe itself to be 
the centre of the world? Probably not, for it has no conception 
of the world as such, and, besides, it has not the slightest inclina­
tion to speculate. But since it only sees, or at least only takes 
note of what can satisfy its needs, since things exist for it only 
in so far as it makes use of them, it obviously behaves as though 
everything in nature were combined solely with a view to its 
well-being and in the interest of its species. Such is its convic­
tion, not intellectualized, but lived, a conviction which sus­
tains the animal and is indistinguishable from its effon to live. 
You bring reflexion into play, however, and this conviction 
will vanish; man will perceive himself, will think of him­
self as a speck in the immensity of the universe. 
He would 
feel lost, if the effon to live did not at once project into 
his intelligence, into the very place that this perception and 
this reflexion were about to occupy, the opposing image of 
things and events turning towards man; whether well or ill 
disposed, a certain intention of his environment follows him 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
167 
then everywhere, just as the moon seems to run with him 
when he runs. 
If it be good, he will rely on it. 
If it bodes 
harm, he will try to avert its effects. In any case, it means that 
he has been taken into account. Here is no theory, no room for 
the arbitrary. This conviction is forced upon him, there being 
no philosophy about it, but a vital impulsion. 
In like manner, if indeed it splits and evolves into two 
divergent directions, on the one hand towards belief in 
spirits already individualized, and on the other towards the 
idea of an impersonal essence, that is not on account of any 
theory: such reasoning leads to controversy, permits of doubt, 
gives rise to doctrines which may exert an influence on con­
duct, but which do not impinge upon all the incidents of 
existence, and could not possibly become the guiding forces of 
life as a whole. The truth is that once the conviction is firmly 
implanted in the will, the latter impels it in the directions 
which are open already, or which open out before it at the 
points of least resistance al along the path of its effort. It will 
utilize in every possible way the intention which it feels to 
be present, either by taking the physical effectiveness which 
the intention possesses, exaggerating its materiality and then 
trying to master it by force, or by approaching it from the 
moral side, by impelling it, on the contrary, in the direction 
of a personality to be won over by prayer. 
It is, then, from 
the demands of an efficient magic that there arose a conception 
such as mana, an impoverishment or a materialization of the 
original belief: and it is the desire to obtain favours that drew 
from the same belief, in the opposite direction, spirits and 
gods. 
Neither has the impersonal evolved towards the per­
sonal, nor have pure personalities been posited at the out­
set: but, out of some intermediate thing, intended rather to 
sustain the will than to inform the intelligence, there have 
emerged through dissociation, downwards and upwards, the 

168 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
forces that lie beneath the weight of magic, and the gods 
towards whom the voice of human prayer is raised. 
On the first point we have made our opinion clear. 
We 
should have a heavy task if we had to deal at length with the 
second. 
The gradual evolution of religion towards gods of 
increasingly marked personality, who are more and more 
definitely interrelated or who tend to become merged into a 
single deity, corresponds to the first of the two great advances 
of humanity towards civilization. 
It went on until the day 
when the religious spirit turned from the outer to the in­
ncr, from the static to the dynamic, by a change of front 
similar to that performed by pure intelligence when it passed 
over from the study of finite magnitudes to the differential 
calculus. 
This last change was doubtless the decisive one: 
transformations of the individual became possible, like those 
that have produced the successive species in the organized 
world; progress could thenceforth consist in the creation of 
new qualities, and not as previously in a mere increase in 
size; instead of merely taking what life had to give, motionless, 
at whatever point had been reached, humanity could now con­
tinue the vital movement. We shall deal with this religion, an 
entirely inward one, in the next chapter. 
vVe shall see that 
it sustains man by the very movement it impans to him put­
ting him again in the stream of the creative impetus, and not 
as hitherto by imaginative representations intended to recon­
cile in him the activity of the parts with the immobility 
of the whole. 
But we shall also see that religious dynamism 
needs static religion for its expression and diffusion. 
It is 
therefore comprehensible that the latter should hold first 
place in the history of religions. 
It is not our business, we 
repeat, to follow static religion through the immense variety 
of its manifestations. 
It will suffice to indicate the principal 
ones and bring out the connexion between them. 
Let us start then from the idea that there are intentions 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
169 
inherent i n  things: this brings us at once to the representation 
of spirits. 
They are the vague entities dwelling, for instance, 
in springs, rivers and fountains. 
Each spirit is bound to the 
spot where it manifests itself. 
This feature already dis­
tinguishes it from a divinity proper, which will be able, while 
remaining indivisible, to apportion itself between various 
places, and to hold sway over everything belonging to one 
and the same genus. 
This divinity will bear a name; it will 
have its own particular shape, its clearly defined personality, 
whereas the countless spirits of the woods and fountains are 
copies of one model and could, at most, say with Horace: 
110s numerus sznnus. 
Later on, when religion has attained 
to the height of those exalted personages, the gods, it may 
well conceive of spirits in their image: such spirits will be 
minor deities; and they will then appear to have always been 
so. But this is merely a retroactive effect. 
It probably took a 
long time, in Greece, for the spirit of a spring to become a 
graceful nymph, and the spirit of the wood a hamadryad. 
In 
the beginning, the spirit of the spring must have been the 
spring itself, as possessing a beneficent virtue for man. 
To 
put it more clearly, that beneficent action, in its ever-present 
aspect, was the spirit. 
It would be an error in such a case to 
regard as an abstract idea-l mean an idea extracted from 
things by an intellectual effort-the representation of the act 
and of its continuation. 
It is a datum provided directly by the 
senses. 
Our philosophy and our language posit first the sub­
stance and surround it with attributes, and then make such 
and such acts arise therefrom like emanations. 
But we cannot 
too often repeat that the action may be forthcoming first and 
be self-sufficient, especially in cases where man is particularly 
concerned. Such is the act of supplying us with drink: it can 
be localized in a thing, and then in a person; but it has its own 
independent existence; and if the process goes on indefinitely, 
its Yery persistence will set it up as the animating spirit of the 

1 70 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
spring at which we drink, whilst the spring, detached from 
the function which it performs, will relapse the more com­
pletely into the state of a thing pure and simple. 
It is true 
that the souls of the dead naturally enough join with the 
spirits; though detached from their bodies, they have not yet 
renounced their personality. 
In mingling with the spirits they 
inevitably colour them and, by the hues with which they 
tinge them, pave the way for them to become persons. 
Thus, 
by different but converging paths, the spirits will be advanc­
ing towards a complete personality. 
But in the elemental 
form which they first possess, they fulfil so natural a need 
that we must not be surprised to find the belief in spirits 
underlying all ancient religions. 
We spoke of the pan it 
played among the Greeks: after being their primitive religion, 
so far as we can judge by the Mycenean civilization, it re­
mained the popular religion. 
It was the basis of the Roman 
religion even after the most generous provision had been made 
for the greater divinities imported from Greece or else­
where: the Jar fcrmiliaris, who was the spirit of the house, was 
always to retain its importance. With the Romans as with the 
Greeks, the goddess called Hestia or Vesta must have begun 
as nothing more than the flame on the hearth, considered in 
its function, I mean in its beneficent intention. 
Suppose we 
leave classical antiquity and tum to India and China and 
Japan: everywhere we shall find this belief in spirits; we are 
told that even to-day it constitutes (with ancestor-worship, 
which is very closely akin to it) the essential element of 
Chinese religion. 
Because it is universal, it was easy to be­
lieve that it was original. 
Let us at least note that it is not 
very far removed from the original state, and that the human 
mind naturally passes through this belief before attaining to 
the adoration of the gods. 
It might well stop at an intermediate stage. 
We are 
alluding to the cult of animals, so widespread among past 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
1 7 1  
humanity that some people have considered it as still more 
natural than the adoration of the gods in human shape. \Ve 
find it, full of life and tenacity, holding its own even in 
countries where man already represents the gods in his own 
image. It survived thus right up to the end in ancient Egypt. 
Sometimes the god that has emerged from the animal form 
refuses to cast it off entirely; his human body is crowned by 
an animal's head. Such things appear to-day very surprising. 
This is mainly because man has become endowed in our eyes 
with an outstanding dignity. \Ve regard intelligence as his 
main characteristic, and we know that there is no superiority 
which intelligence cannot confer on us, no inferiority for 
which it cannot compensate. It was not so in the days before 
intelligence had proved its worth. Its actual inventions were 
too few for its boundless potentialities of invention to be 
apparent; the weapons and tools with which it supplied man 
could hardly stand comparison with those the animal in­
herited from nature. Even reflexion itself, the secret of man's 
strength, might look like weakness, for it is the source of 
indecision, whereas the reaction of an animal, when it is truly 
instinctive, is instantaneous and unfailing. Even the fact that 
it lacks the power of speech has served the animal by sur­
rounding it with a halo of mystery. Its silence, moreover, can 
pass for contempt, as though it had something better to do 
than to converse with us. All this explains why humanity 
should have felt no aversion to animal worship. But how did 
it come about? We must note that it is for some specific 
quality that the animal is adored. In ancient Egypt the bull 
represented strength in battle; the lioness, destruction; the 
vulture, so careful of her young, motherhood. Now it would 
be incomprehensible that animals should become the object 
of a cult if man had begun by believing in spirits. But if man 
did not first have recourse to beings, but to beneficent or 
malevolent actions regarded as permanent, it is natural that 

172 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
after having gained control of actions, he should have wanted 
to get hold of qualities; these qualities seemed to be present, 
unalloyed, in animals, whose activity is simple, invariably 
consistent and apparently set in one direction. 
The adoration 
of animals was not, then, the primitive phase of religion; but 
on emerging from that phase, man had the choice between 
the cult of spirits and that of animals. 
Just as the nature of an animal seems to be concentrated 
in one single quality, so it would seem that its individuality 
merges into a type. To recognize a man is to distinguish him 
from other men; but to recognize an animal is usually to 
identify the species to which it belongs: such is the particular 
character of our interest in each case; consequently in the 
first case our perception seizes on the individual character­
istics, whereas in the latter it nearly always ignores them. 
An 
animal, for all it is something concrete and individual, never­
theless stands forth as essentially a quality, essentially also a 
species. 
Of these two striking features the first, as we have 
just seen, largely explains the cult of animals. 
The second 
would account to a certain extent, we believe, for that strange 
thing, totemism. 
This is not the place to study the question: 
we cannot, however, refrain from saying a word about the 
subject, for if totemism is not animal worship, it nevertheless 
implies that man treats an animal, or even a vegetable species, 
sometimes a mere inanimate object, with a deference which 
is not without some resemblance to religion. 
Let us take the 
commonest case, that of an animal, a rat or a kangaroo, for 
example, which serves as a "totem," that is to say a patron, 
for a whole clan. The most striking thing is that the members 
of the clan assert they are one with it; they are rats, they are 
kangaroos. 
True, it remains to be seen in what sense they use 
the word. 
To conclude straightaway that there is a specific 
logic, peculiar to "primitive man" and exempt from the prin­
ciple of contradiction, would be somewhat over-hasty. 
Our 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
1 73 
verb "to be" carries meanings that we have difficulty in 
defining for all our civilization: how can we reconstitute the 
meaning given by a primitive man in such and such a case to 
a similar word, even when he supplies us with explanations? 
These explanations would possess an element of precision 
only if he were a philosopher, and even then we should have 
to know all the fine shades of his language to understand them. 
Think of the opinion he, on his side, would have of us and 
our powers of observation and reasoning, of our common 
sense, if he knew that the greatest of our moralists has said 
"man is a reed that thinks." 1 
And besides, does he converse 
with his totem? 
Docs he treat it as a man? 
Note that we are 
always being brought back to the same point: to know what 
is going on in the mind of a primitive man, or even of a civil­
ized man, we must study what he does at least as closely as 
what he says. 
Now, if the primitive man does not identify 
himself with his totem, does he simply take it as an emblem? 
This would be going too far the other way: even if totemism 
is not at the basis of the political organization of non-civilized 
people, as Durkheim would have it, it occupies too large a 
place in their existence for us to see in it merely a means of 
designating the clan. 
The truth must lie somewhere half-way 
between these two extreme explanations. 
Let us offer, simply 
as a hypothesis, the interpretation to which we might be led 
by our principles. 
That a clan is said to be such or such an 
animal, offers no ground for deduction; but that two clans 
within the same tribe must necessarily be two different 
animals is far more enlightening. 
Let us suppose, indeed, 
that it is desired to indicate these two clans as constituting 
two species, in the biological sense of the word: how is this to 
be managed in cases where the language is not yet impregnated 
by science and philosophy? 
The individual characteristics 
1 "L'homme n'est qu'un roseau, le plus faible de la nature, mais c'est 
un roseau pcnsant" (PAsCAL) . 

1 74 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
of an animal do not catch our attention; the animal is per­
ceived, we said, as a species. To express the fact that two 
clans constirute two different species, the name of one animal 
will be given to one, that of another to the other. Each of 
these designations, taken singly, is no more than a label: taken 
together they are equivalent to an affirmation. They indicate 
in fact that the two clans are of different blood. \Vhy is this? 
If totemism is to be found, as we are assured it is, in various 
parts of the globe among communities which can have held 
no possible communication with one another, it must corre­
spond to a common need of these communities, a vital 
necessity. In fact we know that the clans into which the tribe 
is divided arc often exogamous: in other words, marriages 
are contracted between members of different clans, but not 
within one clan. It was even believed for a long time that this 
was a general law, and that totemism always implied exogamy. 
Let us suppose that this was so at the beginning, and that 
in many cases exogamy fell out of use later on. It is easy 
to understand that it is in the interests of nature to prevent 
the members of a tribe from habitually inter-marrying, for the 
result in a closed society such as this would be unions be­
tween near relations: the race would very soon degenerate. 
An instinct, overlaid by quite different habits as soon as it 
ceases to be useful, will predispose the tribe to split up into 
clans, within which marriage will be forbidden. This instinct, 
as a matter of fact, will attain its object by at once causing a 
feeling of relationship between members of the same clan, 
and between clan and clan a feeling of being as foreign as 
possible to each other, for its modus operandi, which we can 
see working in our societies as well, is to diminish the sexual 
attraction between men and women who live- together or who 
know they are related.1 How then will the members of two 
1 See, on this subject, \Vestennarck, History of Human Marriage 
(London, 1901 ) ,  pp. 290 sqq. 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
175 
different clans convince themselves, and express the fact, that 
they are not of the same blood? They will get into the habit 
of saying that they arc not of the same species. So then, when 
they declare tl1at they constitute two animal species, it is not 
on the animality, but on the duality that they lay the stress. 
At least it must have been so in the bcginning.1 We must in­
deed admit that we are dealing here merely with the probable, 
not to say with the purely possible. We only want to apply, to 
a very controversial problem, the method which appears to 
us as the surest generally. Starting from a biological necessity, 
we search for the corresponding need in the living creature. 
If this need does not actually create a real and active instinct, 
it conjures up, by means of what we call a virtual or latent 
instinct, an imaginative representation which determines con­
duct in the same way as instinct would have done. At the 
basis of totemism there may well be a representation of this 
sort. 
But let us close this parenthesis, opened for an object, of 
which it may be said that it deserved better treatment. We 
were dealing with spirits. We believe that, to get at the very 
essence of religion and understand the history of mankind, 
one must needs pass at once from the static and outer religion, 
with which we have been dealing up to now, to that dynamic, 
inner religion which we shall discuss in the next chapter. 
The first was designed to ward off the dangers to which 
intelligence might expose man; it was infra-intellectual. Let 
us add that it was natural, for the human species marks a 
certain stage in the vital evolution: it was here that at a 
given moment the forward movement stopped; man was then 
posited as a whole, with, therefore, his intelligence, with the 
1 The idea that the class takes its descent from the totem animal-an 
idea which M. Van Gennep emphasizes in his interesting work on L'Etat 
actuel du problhne totemique (Paris, 1920) -may quite well be grafted 
on to the representation we have indicated. 

1 76 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
dangers this intelligence might involve, with the myth-making 
function designed to cope with them; magic and elementary 
animism, it all appeared as an unbroken whole, it all corre­
sponded exactly to the needs of the individual and of society, 
the one and the other limited in their ambitions, such as 
nature intended them 
Later, and by an effort which might 
easily never have been made, man wrenched himself free 
from this motion of his on his own axis. 
He plunged anew 
into the current of evolution, at the same time carrying it 
forward. 
Here was dynamic religion, coupled doubtless with 
higher intellectuality, but distinct from it. 
The first form 
of religion had been infra-intellectual; we know why. 
The 
second, for reasons which we shall indicate, was supra-intel­
lectual. 
By contrasting them from the outset, we shall best 
understand them. 
For these two extreme religions are alone 
essential and pure. 
The intermediate forms, which developed 
in antique civilizations, could only lead the philosophy of 
religion astray, if they induced the belief that man passed 
from one extremity to the other by the road of gradual perfec­
tion: doubtless a natural error, explained by the fact that static 
religion has to some extent lingered on into dynamic religion. 
But these intermediate forms have occupied so large a place 
in the known history of humanity that we cannot but dwell 
on them. For our part we see in them nothing absolutely new, 
nothing comparable to dynamic religion, nothing but variations 
on the twofold theme of elementary animism and of magic; 
a belief in spirits, after all, has always remained the basis of 
popular religion. 
But from the myth-making faculty, which 
had elaborated it, there issued, through a later development, 
a mythology round which there grew up a literature, an 
art, institutions, in a word, the essential elements of antique 
civilization. Let us discuss, then, that mythology without ever 
losing sight of that which was its starting-point, and which is 
still visible through it 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
177 
The transition from spirits to gods may be gradual, the 
difference is none the less striking. 
The god is a person. 
He has his qualities, his defects, his character. 
He bears a 
name. 
He stands in definite relationship to other gods. 
He 
fulfils important functions, and, above all, he is alone in ful­
filling them. 
On the contrary, there are thousands of different 
spirits, scattered far and wide over the country, all doing the 
same work; they are described by a common name, and this 
name may, in certain cases, not even possess a singular form: 
manes and penates, to take only these examples, are Latin 
words only found in the plural. 
If the true original religious 
representation is that of an "effective presence," of an act 
rather than of a person or a thing, belief in spirits lies very 
close indeed to those origins; the gods appear only later, when 
the pure and simple substantiality of the spirits rises, in this 
or that one of them, to the level of a personality. These gods 
are superadded to the spirits, but do not replace them. 
The 
cult of spirits remains, as we have said, the basis of popular 
religion. 
The more enlightened part of the nation will none 
the less prefer the gods, and it may be said that progress to­
wards polytheism is an advance towards civilization. 
It is useless to seek for a rhythm or a law in this advance. 
It is essentially capricious. 
From among the countless spirits 
we see some local deity spring up, modest at first, growing 
with the city, and finally adopted by the whole nation. 
But 
other evolutions are also possible. 
It is indeed rare for the 
evolution to end in anything like finality. 
However exalted 
the god may be, his divinity by no means implies immutability. 
On the contrary, it is the principal gods of antique religions 
that have undergone the greatest changes, enriching them­
selves with new attributes by the absorption of other gods, 
and thus increasing their own substance. 
In Egypt, for ex­
ample, the sun god Re, at first an object of supreme adora­
tion, absorbs other divinities, assimilates them or couples 

178 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
himself to them, amalgamates with the great Theban god, 
Amon, forming in this case Amon-Re. 
Thus Marduk, the 
god of Babylon, appropriates the attributes of Bel, the 
high god of Nippur. 
Thus several Assyrian gods are merged 
into the mighty goddess Ishtar. 
But no evolution is richer 
than that of Zeus, the sovereign god of Greece. 
After having 
begun probably as the god worshipped on the mountain­
tops, holding sway over the clouds, and the rain, and the 
thunder, he added to what we might call his meteorological 
functions certain social attributes which became more and 
more complex; and he ended by being the tutelary god of all 
social groups, from the family to the state. 
It became neces­
sary to place after his name the most varied epithets to dis­
tinguish all the lines of his activity: Xenios, when he watched 
over the observances of hospitality; Horkios, when he pre­
sided over the swearing of oaths; Hikesios, when he protected 
the supplicants; Genethlios, when he was invoked for a 
marriage, etc. 
The evolution is generally slow and natural; 
but it can be rapid also, and be effected artificially under the 
very eyes of the worshippers. The divinities of Olympus date 
from the Homeric poems, which did not perhaps create them, 
but in which they were given the forms and the attributes 
under which we know them, and which co-ordinated and 
grouped them under Zeus, the process this time being rather 
one of simplification than of complication. 
They were none 
the less accepted by the Greeks, though the latter knew the 
circumstances and almost the date of their birth. 
But there 
was no need to call in the genius of the poets; a prince's 
decree sufficed to make and unmake gods. 
Without going 
into the details of such interventions, let us merely recall the 
most radical of them all, that of the Pharaoh who took the 
name of Iknaton: he abolished the gods of Egypt in favour of 
one among them, and succeeded in getting this sort of 
monotheism accepted until the time of his death. 
We know, 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
1 79 
moreover, that the Pharaohs themselves shared in the divin­
ity. From the most remote antiquity they styled themselves 
"sons of Re." And the Egyptian tradition of treating the 
sovereign as a god was continued under the Ptolemies. It was 
not confined to Egypt. '\Ve meet with it in Syria under the 
Seleucides, in China, in Japan, where the Emperor receives 
divine honours during his lifetime and becomes a god after 
his death, and lastly in Rome, where the Senate deified 
Julius Caesar, before Augustus, Claudius, Vespasian, Titus, 
Nerva, and finally all the emperors rose to the rank of gods. 
Doubtless the adoration of the sovereign is not taken equally 
seriously everywhere. There is a great distance, for example, 
between the divinity of a Roman emperor and that of a 
Pharaoh. The latter is closely related to the divinity of the 
chief in primitive societies; it is perhaps connected with the 
idea of a special fluid, or a magic power, supposed to reside 
in the sovereign, \vhereas the divinity conferred on Caesar 
was a case of mere toadyism, being utilized later by Augustus 
as an instrumentum 1·egni. And yet the half-sceptical attitude 
mingled with the adoration of the emperors remained, in 
Rome, a prerogative of cultivated minds; it did not extend to 
the people; it cenainly did not spread to the provinces. This 
means that the gods of antiquity could be born, die, be trans­
formed at the whim of man or by circumstances, and that 
pagan faith was limitless in its compliance. 
Precisely because men's fancy and fortuitous circumstances 
have played so large a pan in their genesis, the gods cannot be 
fitted into a hard and fast classification. The most we can do 
is to bring out a fe,v main trends of mythological fantasy; and 
even so, no single one has been by any means regularly 
followed. As gods were for the most pan set up to serve a 
useful purpose, it is natural that functions should be generally 
attributed to them, and that in many cases the idea of a 
particular function should have predominated. This is what 

1 80 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
occurred in Rome, and it has made it possible to say that the 
specialization of gods was characteristic of Roman religion. 
For the sowing there was Saturn; for the flowering of fruit 
trees, Flora; for the ripening of fruit, Pomona. 
The guardian­
ship of the door was attributed to Janus, that of the hearth 
to Vesta. 
Rather than attribute to the same god a multiplicity 
of interrelated functions, it preferred to set up distinct gods, 
content to give them the same name with varying epithets. 
There was Venus Victrix, Venus Felix, Venus Genetrix. 
Jupiter himself was Fulgur, Feretrius, Stator, Victor, Opti­
mus i\laximus; and these were, up to a certain point, distinct; 
they were milestones along the road from Jupiter, dispenser 
of rain or sunshine, to Jupiter, protector of the state in peace 
as in war. 
But the same tendency is exhibited everywhere in 
varying degrees. 
Ever since man began to cultivate the soil, 
there have been gods to watch over the harvest, to dispense 
heat, to ensure the regularity of the seasons. These agricultural 
functions must have been characteristic of some of the most 
ancient deities, even though they have been lost sight of, as 
the e\·olution of the god made him a complex personality, 
overlaid with a long history. 
Thus Osiris, the richest :figure 
in the Egyptian pantheon, seems to have been at :first the god 
of vegetation. 
This was the primitive function vested in the 
Adonis of the Greeks. 
It was also that of Nisaba, in Baby­
lonia, who held sway over the corn crops before she became 
the goddess of Science. 
In the :first rank of the divinities of 
India :figure Indra and Agni. 
To lndra man owed the rain 
and the storms beneficent for the soil; to Agni, :fire, and the 
protection of the domestic hearth; and here again the diversity 
of functions goes with a difference of character, Indra being 
distinguished by his strength, Agni by his wisdom. 
The most 
exalted function is indeed that of Varuna, who presides over 
the universal order of things. \Ve find in the Shinto reli!!ion 
H 
, 
in Japan, the earth-goddess, the goddess of harvests, the gods 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
181 
that watch over the mountains, the trees, etc. 
But no divinity 
of this type has so marked and complete a personality as the 
Demeter of the Greeks; she too is a goddess of the soil and 
harvests, but she also cares for the dead, to whom she gives a 
place of abode, besides presiding, under the name of Thesmo­
phoros, over family and social life. There you have the most 
conspicuous development of the god-making fantasy. 
By endowing them with functions, however, it attributes 
to them a sovereignty which quite naturally assumes a terri­
torial form. 
The gods arc supposed to share the universe 
between them. 
According to the Vedic poems their various 
spheres of influence are heaven, earth and the middle air. 
In 
the Babylonian cosmology the sky is the realm of Anu, the 
earth that of Bel; in the depths of the sea dwells Ea. 
The 
Greeks divided the world between Zeus, god of heaven and 
earth, Poseidon, god of the seas, and Hades, to whom belonged 
the infernal regions. 
These realms are marked out by nature 
herself. 
Now the sun, moon and stars are no less distinct in 
outline; they are individualized by their shape as well as by 
their movements, which appear to depend on themselves; one 
of them is the dispenser of life here below, and the others, 
even though they be not equally powerful, must none the less 
be of the same nature; so in them also we find the stuff of 
gods. 
It is in Assyria that the belief in the divinity of the 
heavenly bodies assumed the most systematic form. 
But the 
worship of the sun and also of the sky is to be found more or 
less everywhere: in the Shinto religion of Japan, where the 
goddess of the sun is set up as sovereign, with, under her, a 
moon-god and a star-god; in the primitive Egyptian religion, 
where the moon and the sky are considered as gods alongside 
the sun, who is their lord; in the Vedic religion, where Mitra 
(identical with the Iranian Mithra, who is a sun-diety) has 
attributes which would be appropriate to a god of sun or light; 
in the ancient Chinese religion, where the sun is a personal 

182 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
god; lastly, among tӁe Greeks themselves, where Helios is 
one of the most ancient gods. Among the Indo-Germanic 
peoples, in general, the sky has been the object of a special 
cult. Under the name of Dyaus, Zeus, Jupiter, Ziu, such a 
god is common to Vedic India, the Greeks and Romans and 
the Teutons, though only in Greece and Rome is he king of 
the gods, like the celestial deity of the Mongols in China. 
Here especially we note the tendencies of the very ancient 
gods, entrusted in the beginning with entirely material tasks, 
to enrich themselves, as they grow older, with moral attributes. 
In Southern Babylonia the sun, who is all-seeing, has become 
the guardian of right and justice; he receives the title of 
"judge." The Vedic Mitra is the champion of truth and 
right; he gives victory to the righteous cause. 
And the 
Egyptian Osiris, who has become one with the sun-god after 
having been the god of vegetation, has ended by being the 
great judge, merciful and just, who reigns over the land of 
the dead. 
All these gods are closely connected with things. But there 
are others-often the same ones seen from a different angle­
that are defined by their connexion with persons or groups. 
Are we to consider as a god the personal genius or daemon of 
a particular indi\·idual? The Roman genius was nzmzen, not 
deus; it had neither shape nor name; it was very near to that 
mere "effecti\·e presence" which we have seen to be the 
primitive and essential element of divinity. The personality 
of the lar fmniliaris, who watched over the family, was scarcely 
more marked. But the bigger the group, the stronger its right 
to a real god. In Egypt, for example, each of the primitive 
cities had its divine guardian. And these gods were distin­
guished one from the other precisely by their connexion with 
this or that community; to call them "He of Edfu," "He of 
Nekkcb," was clear enough. But in most cases they were 
deities who existed before the group, and whom the latter had 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
183 
adopted. 
This was the case, in Egypt itself, with Amon-Re, 
god of Thebes. 
lr was the same in Babylonia, where the city 
of Ur had as its goddess the moon, the city of Uruk the 
planer Venus. 
It was the same in Greece, where Demeter 
was particularly at home in Eleusis, Athene on the Acropolis, 
Artemis in Arcadia. 
Often protectors and protected stood or 
fell together; the gods of a city gained by the aggrandisement 
of that city. War thus became a struggle between rival deities. 
The latter might indeed come to tenns, and the gods of the 
conquered people then entered the pantheon of the victor. 
But the truth is that the city or the empire on the one hand, 
and its tutelary gods on the other, fanned an undefined part­
nership, which must have varied indefinitely in character. 
Nevertheless, it is for our own convenience that we thus 
define and classify the gods of fable. 
No law governed their 
birth, any more than their development; in this case humanity 
has given free play to its instinct for myth-making. 
Doubtless 
this instinct does not go very far when left to itself, but it 
progresses unceasingly if one is pleased to exercise it. 
The 
differences are very great, on this point, between the my­
thologies of different peoples. Classical antiquity shows us an 
example of this contrast: Roman mythology is poor, that 
of the Greeks superabundant. 
The gods of ancient Rome 
coincide with the functions with which they are clothed and 
are thus, so to speak, immobilized in them. 
They barely 
possess a body, I mean an imaginable shape. 
They are barely 
gods. 
On the contrary each god of ancient Greece has his 
physiognomy, his character, his history. 
He moves about, 
does things quite outside the mere performance of his func­
tions. 
His adventures are told, his intervention in our affairs 
described. 
He lends himself to every fancy of the artist and 
the poet. 
He would be, more accurately, a character in a 
novel, if it were not that he had a power greater than that of 
mortal man and the privilege, at least in certain cases, of 

1 84 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
interfering with the regular working of the laws of nature. 
In 
a word, the myth-making function of the mind has in the 
first case stopped short, in the second it has continued its 
work. 
But it remains the same function. 
It will resume, if 
need be, the interrupted work. 
This is what happened with 
the introduction of Greek literarure, and more generally of 
Greek ideas, into Rome. We know how the Romans identified 
some of their gods with those of Hellas, thus endowing them 
with a more marked personality, and changing them from 
immobility to movement. 
We have said of this myth-making function that it would 
be inaccurate to define it as a variant of imagination. This last 
word has a somewhat negative meaning. 
\Ve call imaginative 
any concrete representation which is neither perception nor 
memory. 
Since such representations depict neither a present 
object nor a past thing, they are all considered in the same 
light by common sense and given the same name in ordinary 
speech. 
But the psychologist must not for that reason group 
them in the same category, or connect them with the same 
function. 
Let us then leave aside imagination, which is but 
a word, and consider a very clearly defined faculty of the 
mind, that of creating personalities whose stories we relate 
to ourselves. 
It is singularly vivid in novelists and dramatists. 
There are some among them who become really obsessed by 
their hero; it is he \vho controls them, not they who control 
him; they even have difficulty in getting rid of him when they 
have finished their play or their novel. 
These writers are not 
necessarily those whose work is of the highest quality; but, 
better than others, they enable us to put our finger on the 
existence, at least in some of us, of a special faculty of volun­
tary hallucination. 
In truth, it is found, to some degree, in 
everyone. It is very vivid in children. We find a child keeping 
up a daily intercourse with some imaginary person, whose 
name he can give, whose impressions about every incident of 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
185 
the day he can repeat to you. 
But the same faculty comes 
into play in those who, without creating fictitious beings for 
themselves, are as interested in fictions as in real things. 
What sight is there more amazing than that of a theatre 
audience in tears? 
We shall be told that the play is being 
perfonned by actors and that human beings of flesh and 
blood arc on the stage. 
Agreed, but we can be almost as 
completely "gripped" by the novel we are reading, and sym­
pathize just as keenly with the people whose story is being 
told us. 
How is it that psychologists have not been struck 
by the mysterious element in such a faculty as this? 
The 
answer will be that all our faculties are mysterious, inasmuch 
as we are ignorant of the inner mechanism of them. 
True, 
but this is no question of mechanical reconstruction, we arc 
entitled to ask for a psychological explanation. 
And the ex­
planation is the same in psychology as in biology: the existence 
of a function is accounted for, when we have shown how and 
why it is necessary to life. 
Now novelists and dramatists are 
certainly not necessities; the myth-making faculty in general 
does not correspond to a vital need. 
But let us suppose that 
on one particular point, when utilized for a given object, 
this function be indispensable to the existence of individuals 
as well as of societies: we can easily understand that, while 
designed for this work, for which it is indispensable, it should 
be further employed, since it is still there, for mere amuse­
ment. 
As a matter of fact, we pass quite easily from the 
novel of to-day to more or less ancient tales, to legends, to 
folklore, and from folklore to mythology, which is not the 
same thing, but which was developed in the same way; my­
thology, in its turn, merely develops the personalities of the 
gods into a story, and this last creation is but the extension of 
another and simpler one, that of the "semi-personal powers" 
or "efficient presences" which are, we believe, at the origin 
of religion. 
Here we get at what we have shown to be a 

186 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
fundamental demand of life: this demand has called into being 
the myth-making faculty; the myth-making function is thus 
to be deduced from the conditions of existence of the human 
species. 
Without going back over what we have already 
stated at great length, let us recall that, in the realm of life, 
what appears under analysis to be infinitely complex pre­
sents itself to intuition as an undivided act. 
The act might 
quite well not have been performed; but, if it is perfonned, 
then it h;ts, in one stride, got across all the obstacles. 
These 
obstacles, each one of which raised up another, constitute an 
endless multiplicity, and it is precisely with the removal, one 
after the other, of all these obstacles that our analysis has to 
deal. 
To try and explain each of these processes of elimina­
tion by the preceding one would be going the wrong way to 
work; they are all to be explained by one single operation, 
which is the act itself in its simplicity. 
Thus the undivided 
movement of the arrow triumphs at one sweep over the 
innumerable obstacles which our perception, assisted by Zeno's 
reasoning, thinks it detects in the immobility of the points 
making up the line of flight. 
Thus, too, the undivided act 
of vision, by the mere fact of succeeding, overcomes at a 
stroke thousands and thousands of obstacles; it is these ob­
stacles, surmounted, which appear to our perception and to our 
science in the multiplicity of cells constituting the eye, the 
intricateness of our visual apparatus, in shon, the endless series 
of mechanisms which are at work in the process of seeing. 
Posit in the same way the human species, that is to say the 
sudden leap by which life in its evolution came to man, both 
individual and social, you will then be positing a tool­
contriving intelligence and consequently an effon which is 
bound to go on, of its own momentum, beyond the mere tool­
making operation for which it was intended; and this creates 
a danger. 
If the human species does exist, it is because the 
very act which posited man with his tool-contriving intelli-

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
187 
gence, with the necessary continuation of his intellectual 
effort, and the danger arising from such a continuation, begot 
the myth-making function. The latter was not, then, purposed 
by nature; and yet it sprang up naturally. If, indeed, we add 
it to all the other psychical functions, we find that the sum 
total expresses in a multiple forn1 the indivisible act by which 
life leapt onwards to man, from that rung of the ladder at 
which it had stopped. 
But let us look more clpsely into the reason why the myth­
making function imposes its inventions with exceptional force 
when working in the realm of religion. l11ere, without any 
doubt, it is at home; it is made for. the creation of spirits and 
gods; but since it continues its myth-making work elsewhere, 
we must ask why, though operating in the same way, it no 
longer commands the same credence. 
We may find two 
reasons for this. 
The first is that, where religion is concerned, the adherence 
of each individual is reinforced by the adherence of all. Even 
in the theatre, the spectator's ready acceptance of the dram­
atist's suggestions is singularly increased by the attention 
and the interest of the society in which he finds himself. 
But in this case we have a society just the size of the hall, 
and enduring only just as long as the play lasts: what if the 
individual belief is supported, confirmed by a whole people, 
and if it rests both on the past and on the present? What if 
the god is sung by poets, if he dwells in temples, if he is 
portrayed by art? 
So long as experimental science is not 
firmly established, there will be no surer guarantee of the 
truth than universal assent. Nay, tmth will as a rule be this 
,-cry assent. We may note, by the way, that this is one of the 
causes of intolerance. The man who docs not accept the 
common belief prevents it, while he dissents, from being 
utterly true. Tmth will regain its entirety only if he retracts 
or disappears. 

188 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
We do not mean to say that religious belief can never have 
been, even in polytheism, an individual belief. Each Roman 
had a genius attached to his person; but he believed so firmly 
in his genius only because every other Roman had his own 
genius, and because his faith, personal on this point, was 
guaranteed to him by a universal faith. We do not mean to 
say either that religion has ever been social in essence rather 
than individual: we have, indeed, seen that the myth-making 
function, innate in the individual, has as its first object the 
consolidation of society; but we know that it is also intended 
to support the individual himself, and that, moreover, such is 
the interest of society. As a matter of fact, the individual and 
society are implied in each other: individuals make up society 
by their grouping together; society shapes an entire side of 
individuals by being prefigured in each one of them. The 
individual and society thus condition each other, circle-wise. 
The circle, intended by nature, was broken by man the day 
he became able to get back into the creative impetus, and 
impel human nature forward instead of letting it revolve on 
one spot. From that day there dates an essentially individual 
religion, one that has become thereby, it is true, more pro­
foundly social. But we shall revert to this point. Let us only 
say that the guarantee brought by society to individual belief, 
in the matter of religion, would suffice in itself to put these 
inventions of the myth-making function in a unique position. 
But we must bear yet another thing in mind. \Ve have seen 
how the ancients witnessed, unconcerned, the birth of this or 
that god. Thenceforth they would believe in him as they did 
in all the others. This would be incredible, if we supposed 
that the existence of their gods was of the same nature to 
them as the objects they saw and touched. It was real, but 
with a reality that yet hinged in some degree on the human 
will. 
The gods of pagan civilization are indeed distinguishable 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
189 
from older entities, elves, gnomes, spirits, which popular belief 
never actually abandoned. 
The latter were the almost direct 
product of that myth-making faculty which is natural to us; 
and they were naturally adopted, just as they had been nat­
urally produced. 
They conformed exactly to the need from 
which they sprang. 
But mythology, which is an amplification 
of primitive activity, extends beyond this need in all direc­
tions. 
The interval it leaves between this need and itself is 
filled with a matter in the choice of which human fancy has a 
large share, and this affects the assent accorded to it. 
It is 
always the same faculty intervening, and it obtains for its 
inventions, as a whole, the same credence. 
But each inven­
tion, taken separately, is accepted with the reservation that 
another would have been possible. 
The pantheon exists in­
dependent of man, but on man depends the placing of a god 
in it, and the bestowal of existence on that deity. 
Such an 
attitude of mind does indeed surprise us to-day. 
Yet we lapse 
into it ourselves in certain dreams, where we can introduce, 
at a certain moment, the incident we desire: thus a part 
comes into being through us, whilst the whole has its own 
existence independent of us. 
In just the same way it could 
be said that each distinct god is contingent, whereas the 
gods as a whole, or rather the godhead in general, is neces­
sary. 
If we were to delve into this point, by pushing logic 
further than did the ancients, we should find that there 
has never been any absolute pluralism other than the belief 
in spirits, and that polytheism, strictly speaking, along with 
its mythology, implies a latent monotheism, in which the 
multiple deities exist only secondarily, as representatives of 
the divine. 
But the ancients would have held such considerations to be 
unessential: they would be of importance only if religion be­
longed to the realm of knowledge or contemplation. 
In that 
case a mythological tale could be treated like a historical 

190 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
narrative, and in the one case as in the other the question 
of authenticity might arise. 
But the truth is that there is no 
possible comparison between them, because they are not of 
the same order. 
History is knowledge, religion is mainly 
action: it concerns knowledge, as we have repeated over and 
over again, only in so far as an intellecrual representation is 
needed to ward off the dangers of a certain intellecruality. 
To consider this representation apart, to criticize it as a rep­
resentation, would be to forget that it forms an amalgam with 
the accompanying action. 
We commit just such an error 
when we ask ourselves how it is that great minds can have 
accepted the tissue of childish imaginings, nay, absurdities, 
which made up their religion. 
The movements of a swimmer 
would appear just as silly and ridiculous to anyone forgetting 
that the water is there, that this water sustains the swimmer, 
and that the man's movements, the resistance of the liquid, 
the current of the river, must be taken all together as an 
undivided whole. 
Religion supplies strength and discipline. 
For that reason 
regularly repeated exercises are necessary, like those whose 
automatism ends by instilling into the body of the soldier 
the confidence he will need in the hour of danger. 
This 
means that there is no religion without rites and ceremonies. 
The religious representation is above all an occasion for these 
religious acts. 
They doubtless emanate from belief, but they 
at once react on it and strengthen it: if gods exist, they must 
have their worship; but since there is worship, then there 
must be gods. 
This solidarity of the god with the homage 
paid him makes of religious truth a thing apart, having no 
common measure with speculative truth, and depending, up to 
a certain point, on man. 
It is precisely towards the tightening up of this solidarity 
that rites and ceremonies tend. 
One might dilate on them at 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
191 
length. 
We shall merely touch on the two principal ones, 
sacrifice and prayer. 
In the religion which we shall call dynamic, prayer is inde­
pendent of its verbal expression; it is an elevation of the soul 
that can dispense with speech. In its lowest fom1, on the other 
hand, it was not unlike the incantations of magic; it then aimed, 
if not at compelling the will of the gods and above all of the 
spirits, at least at capturing their goodwill. 
Prayer, as under­
stood in polytheism, generally finds its place half-way between 
these two extremities. No doubt antiquity hit upon admirable 
forms of prayer, in which there was manifested an aspiration 
of the soul to improvement. 
But these were exceptions and, 
as it were, anticipations of a purer religious belief. 
Poly­
theism more generally imposes on prayer a stereotyped form, 
with the latent idea that it is not only the meaning of the 
phrase, but also the sequence of the words, together with al the 
accompanying gestures, which impart to prayer its efficacy. 
We may even say that the more polytheism evolves, the more 
particular it becomes on this point; the agency of a priest 
becomes more and more indispensable to ensure the school­
ing of the believer. 
How can we fail to see that this habit of 
extending the idea of the god, once evoked, through pre­
scribed words and set attitudes, endows his image with a 
greater objectivity? We have shown elsewhere that what con­
stitutes the reality of a perception, what distinguishes it from 
a figment of the imagination, is, above all, the whole group 
of incipient movements which it communicates to the body, 
and which complete this perception by the automatic begin­
nings of an action. 
Movements of this kind may develop 
owing to some other cause: but their actuality will flow back 
just the same towards the representation that produced them, 
and will practically convert it into a thing. 
As to sacrifice, it was, doubtless, to begin with, an offering 
made with a view to buying the favour of the god, or turning 

192 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
aside his wrath. 
If so, the greater the cost and the more 
valuable the thing sacrificed, the more acceptable it was likely 
to be. This is probably the explanation, at least in part, of the 
custom of human sacrifice, a custom to be found in most 
ancient religions, perhaps in all, could we trace them back 
far enough. 
There is no limit to the extent of error, or of 
horror, to which logic may lead, when it is applied to matters 
not pertaining to pure intelligence. 
But there is something 
else in sacrifice: otherwise there would be no explaining why 
the offering had to be animal or vegetable, nearly always 
animal. 
To begin with, it is generally agreed that sacrifice 
originated in a repast of which the god and his worshippers 
were supposed to partake in common. 
Next, above all, there 
was a special virtue i n  blood. 
As the principle of life, it gave 
the god strength, and enabled him the better to help man, and 
perhaps also (but this was a barely conscious idea) it ensured 
to him a more substantial existence. 
It was, like prayer, a link 
between man and the deity. 
Thus polytheism with its mythology had the twofold effect 
of exalting more and more the invisible powers with which 
man is surrounded, and of putting man in ever closer contact 
with them. 
Being co-extensive with the ancient civilizations, 
it battened on everything they produced, having inspired 
literature and art, whence it received still more than it gave. 
This means that religious feeling, in antiquity, was made up 
of many elements, varying from people to people, but which 
have all grouped themselves round an original nucleus. 
We 
have concentrated on this nucleus, because we wished to bring 
out the specifically religious element in antique religions. 
To 
some of them, those of India and Persia, a philosophy has 
been superadded. 
But philosophy and religion always remain 
distinct. 
More often than not, indeed, philosophy only comes 
into existence to satisfy more cultivated minds; religion lives 
on, among the people, in the way we have described. 
Even 

S T A T I C R E L I G I O N 
193 
in those cases where the two are mingled, the elements keep 
their individuality: religion will have moments when it is 
inclined to speculate, philosophy will not shun all idea of 
action; but the first will none the less remain essentially 
action, the second, above all, thought. 
In those cases where 
religion really became philosophy among the ancients, it 
rather discouraged action, and renounced what it had come 
into the world to accomplish. 
\Vas it still religion? 
We may 
attribute what meaning we like to words, so long as we define 
their meaning first; but it would be a mistake to do so when 
we happen to be dealing with a word which corresponds to 
a natural cutting-up of continuous reality: we should then at 
most reject the extension oLthe term to such or such a thing 
which had become accidentally included in it. 
Such is the 
case with religion. \Ve have shown how this name is ordinarily 
applied to representations directed towards action, and called 
forth by nature for a clearly defined purpose; it may be that 
exceptionally, and for obvious reasons, the meaning of the 
word has been extended so as to include some other object; 
religion must none the less be defined in conformity with what 
we have called the intention of nature. 
We have explamed more than once what is me::mt in this 
case by intention. We have also dwelt at length in this chapter 
on the function that nature has assigned to religion. 
Magic, 
animal or spirit worship, worship of gods, mythology, super­
stitions of all kinds, seem very complex, if we take them 
one at a time. 
But, taken all together, they make up a whole 
\'.:hich is extremely simple. 
Man is the only animal whose actions are uncertain, who 
hesitates, gropes about and lays plans in the hope of success 
and the fear of failure. 
He is alone in realizing that he is 
subject to illness, alone in knowing that he must die. 
The 
rest of nature goes on its expanding course in absolute tran­
quillity. Although plants and animals are the sport of chance, 

1 94 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
they rely on the passing hour as they would on eternity. 
We 
drink in something of this unshakable confidence during a 
country walk, from which we return quieted and soothed. But 
this is not saying enough. 
Of all the creatures that live in 
society, man alone can swerve from the social line by giving 
way to selfish preoccupations when the common good is at 
stake; in all other societies the interests of the individual are 
inexorably co-ordinate with and subordinate to the general 
interest. 
This twofold shortcoming in man is the price paid 
for intelligence. 
Man cannot exert his faculty of thought 
without imagining an uncertain future, which rouses his fears 
and his hopes. 
He cannot think about what nature demands 
of him, in so far as she has made a social being of him, with­
out saying to himself that he might often find it more profit­
able to ignore others and to think of himself alone. 
In both 
cases there would be a break of the normal, natural order of 
things. And yet it was nature who ordained intelligence, who 
placed it at the end of one of the two great lines of evolution 
as a counterpart to the highest form of instinct, which is the 
terminal point of the other. 
It is impossible that she should 
not have taken the precaution to see that a condition of order, 
which had been even slightly disturbed by intelligence, should 
tend to re-establish itself automatically. 
As a matter of fact, 
the myth-making function, which belongs to intelligence, and 
which yet is not pure intelligence, has precisely this object. 
Its role is to elaborate that religion we have been dealing 
with up to now, that which we call static, and of which we 
should say that it was natural religion, if the term were not 
used in another sense. We have then only to sum up what we 
have said to define this religion in clear terms. It is a defensive 
reaction of nature against what might be depressing for the 
individwzl, tmd dissolvent for society, in the exercise of intelli­
gence. 
Let us conclude with two remarks, to forestall two mis-

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N 
195 
understandings. 
\Vhen we say that one of the functions of 
religion, as it was ordained by nature, is to maintain social 
life, we do not at all mean by this that there is solidarity 
between such a religion and morality. 
History is witness to 
the contrary. To sin has always been to offend the deity; but 
the deity has by no means always been offended by immorality 
or even crime; there have been cases where he has prescribed 
them. 
True, humanity seems in general to have wished its 
gods to be good; it has often placed the different virtues under 
their patronage; it may even be that the coincidence we pointed 
out between original morality and primitive religion, both 
alike rudimentary, has left in the depths of the human soul 
the vague ideal of a more developed morality and an organized 
religion dependent the one on the other. 
It is none the less 
true that morality has taken definite shape along its own lines, 
that religions have evolved along theirs, and that men have 
always accepted their gods from tradition without asking 
them for a certificate of good conduct, nor expecting them to 
guarantee the moral order. 
But a distinction must be drawn 
between social obligations of a very general character, without 
which no life in common would be possible, and the particular 
concrete social tie which causes the members of a panicular 
social community to be intent on its preservation. 
The first 
have little by little emerged from the confused background 
of customs which we have found at the outset; they have 
emerged through purification and simplification, through ab­
straction and generalization, to form a social morality. 
But 
what binds together the members of a given society is tradi­
tion, the need and the determination to defend the group 
against other groups and to set it above everything. 
To pre­
serve, to tighten this bond is incontestably the aim of the 
religion we have found to be natural; it is common to the 
members of a group, it associates them intimately with each 
other in rites and ceremonies, it distinguishes the group from 

196 
S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
other groups, it guarantees the success of the common enter­
prise and is an assurance against the common danger. 
The 
fact that religion, such as it issued from the hands of nature, 
has simultaneously fulfilled, to use the language of the day, 
the two functions, moral and national, appears to us unques­
tionable: these two functions were in fact inevitably con­
founded in rudimentary societies where only custom existed. 
But that societies, as they developed, should have carried 
religion with them in the second direction, will be easily 
understood by reference to what we have just explained. 
In­
deed, the conclusion might have been reached immediately 
in view of the fact that human societies, at the end of one 
of the great lines of biological evolution, form the counter­
pan to the most perfectly developed animal societies, placed 
at the extremity of the other great line, and that the myth­
making function, though not an instinct, plays in human so­
cieties a pan exactly corresponding to that of instinct in these 
animal societies. 
Our second remark, which we might well refrain from 
making after all we have so often repeated, concerns the 
meaning we give to the "intention of nature," an expression 
we have used in speaking of "natural religion." 
As a matter 
of fact, we were dealing less with this religion itself than with 
the effect it produced. 
There is an impetus of life which 
rushes through matter and wrests from it what it can, though it 
necessarily divides itself in the process. At the extremity of 
the two main lines of evolution thus established lie intelligence 
and instinct. 
Precisely because intelligence is a success, as 
indeed instinct is too, it cannot be posited without the ac­
companiment of a tendency to eliminate any obstacle to the 
production of its full effect. This tendency forms with intel­
ligence, as with all presupposed by intelligence, an undivided 
whole, which becomes divisible when coming within the scope 
of our faculty-which is entirely relative to the intelligence 

S T A T I C  R E L I G I O N  
197 
itself-of perception and analysis. Let us revert to what has 
been said about the eye and sight. We have the act of seeing, 
which is simple, and we have an infinity of elements, and of 
reciprocal actions of these elements on each other, by means 
of which the anatomist and the physiologist reconstitute that 
simple act. Elements and actions express, analytically and so 
to speak negatively, being resistances opposed to resistances, 
the indivisible act, alone positive, which nature has effectively 
obtained. In the same way the anxieties of man, cast upon 
this earth, and the temptations the individual may have to 
put his interests before those of the community-anxieties and 
temptations which are peculiar to an intelligent being-could 
lend themselves to endless enumeration. Indefinite in number 
also arc the forms of superstition, or rather of static religion, 
which resist these resistances. But the complexity vanishes if 
we place man back in nature as a whole, if we consider that 
intelligence is apt to be an obstacle to the serenity we find 
everywhere else, and that the obstacle must be surmounted, 
the balance restored. 
Regarded from this point of view, 
which is that of a genesis and no longer that of an analysis, 
all the elements of disquiet and weakness entailed in the ap­
plication of intelligence to life, with all the peace brought by 
religions, become a perfectly simple thing. Unrest and myth­
making counteract and nullify each other. In the eyes of a 
god, looking down from above, the whole would appear in­
divisible, like the perfect confidence of flowers unfolding to 
the spring. 

C H A P T E R  I I I  
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
LET us cast a glance backward at Life, this life which we had 
previously followed in its development up to the point where 
religion was destined to emerge from it. A great current of 
creative energy is precipitated into matter, to wrest from it 
what it can. At most points, remember, it came to a stop; 
these stops are equivalent, in our eyes, to the phenomena of 
so many living species, that is to say, of organisms in which 
our perception, being essentially analytical and synthetic, dis­
tinguishes a multitude of elements combining to fulfil a multi­
tude of functions; yet the work of organization was but the 
step itself, a simple act, like the making of a footprint, which 
instantly causes a myriad grains of sand to cohere and form 
a pattern. vVe might have thought that along one of these 
lines where it had succeeded in going furthest, this vital 
energy would carry the best of itself with it and would go 
straight on; but it swerved inward, and the whole circle re­
formed: certain creatures emerged whose activity ran in­
definitely in the same circle, whose organs were ready-made 
instruments and left no room for the ceaselessly renewed 
invention of tools, whose consciousness lapsed into the 
somnambulism of instir.ct instead of bracing itself and revital­
izing itself into reflective thought. Such is the condition of 
the individual in those insect societies where organization is 
highly perfected, but the effect of it is sheer automatism. 
The creative effort progressed successfully only along that 
line of evolution which ended in man. In its passage through 
matter, consciousness assumed in that case, as it were from 
198 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
199 
a mould, the shape of tool-making intelligence. 
And inven­
tion, which carries reflexion with it, was at liberty to develop. 
But intelligence was not without its dangers. 
Up to that 
point, all living creatures had drunk greedily of the cup of 
life. 
They lapped up with relish the honey which nature had 
smeared on the rim; they were prepared to gulp down the 
rest blindly. Not so intelligence, which peered into the bottom 
of the cup. 
For the intelligent being was not living in the 
present alone; there can be no reflexion without foreknowl­
edge, no foreknowledge without inquietude, no inquietude 
without a momentary slackening of the attachment to life. 
Above all, there is no humanity without society, and society 
demands of the individual an abnegation which the insect, in its 
automatism, carries to the point of an utter obliviousness of self. 
Reflexion cannot be relied upon to keep up this selflessness. 
Intelligence, except it be that of a subtle utilitarian philosopher, 
would more likely counsel egoism. Thus, from two directions 
it called for a counterpoise. 
Or rather it was already provided 
with one, for nature, we repeat, does not make her creatures 
piecemeal; what is multiple in its manifestation may well be 
simple in its genesis. 
A new species coming on to the scene 
brings with it, in the indivisibility of the act creating it, all 
the elements that impart life to it. 
The very check of the 
creative impetus which has expressed itself in the creation of 
our species has provided, along with intelligence, within 
human intelligence, the myth-making function that contrives 
the pattern of religions. 
That then is the office, that is the 
significance of the religion we have called static or natural. 
Religion is that element which, in beings endowed with reason, 
is called upon to make good any deficiency of attachment 
to life. 
It is true that the possibility of another solution at oneѫ 
occurs to the mind. 
Static religion, such as we find it when it 
stands alone, attaches man to life, and consequently the in-

200 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
dividual to society, by telling him tales on a par with those 
with which we lull children to sleep. Of course they are not 
like other stories. Being produced by the myth-making func­
tion in response to an actual need and not for mere pleasure, 
they counterfeit reality as actually perceived, to the point of 
making us act accordingly: other creations of the imagination 
have this same tendency, but they do not demand our com­
pliance; they can remain just ideas; whereas the former are 
ideo-motory. They are none the less myths, which critical 
minds, as we have seen, often accept in fact, but which they 
should, by rights, reject. The active, moving principle, whose 
mere stopping at an extreme point has expressed itself in man­
kind, doubtless requires of all created species that they cling to 
life. But, as we have previously shown, if this principle pro­
duces all species in their entirety, as a tree thrusts out on every 
side branches which end in buds, it is the act of placing in 
matter a freely creative energy, it is man, or some other being 
of like significance-we do not say of like form-which is 
the purpose of the entire process of evolution. The whole 
might have been vastly superior to what it is, and this is 
probably what happens in worlds where the current rushes 
through matter less refractory than ours: just as the current 
might never have found a free outlet-even to this inadequate 
extent-in which case the quality and quantity of creative 
energy represented by the human species would never have 
been released at all on our planet. But whichever way we look 
at it, life is a thing at least as desirable, even more desirable, 
to man than to the other species, since the latter receive it 
as the effect. produced in passing, by the creative energy, 
whereas in man life is that successful effort itself, however 
precarious and incomplete this success may be. This being 
so, why should man not recover the confidence he lacks, or 
which has perhaps been undermined by reflexion, by turning 
back for fresh impetus, in the direction whence that impetus 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
201 
came? Not through intelligence, at least not through intelli­
gence alone, could he do so: intelligence would be more likely 
to proceed in the opposite direction; it was provided for a 
definite object, and when it attempts speculation on a higher 
plane, it enables us, at the most, to conceive possibilities, it 
does not attain any reality. But we know that all around 
intelligence there lingers still a fringe of inruition, vague and 
evanescent. Can we not fasten upon it, intensify it, and above 
all, consummate it in action, for it has become pure contem­
plation only through a weakening in its principle, and, if we 
may put it so, by an abstraction practised on itself? 
A soul strong enough, noble enough to make this effort 
would not stop to ask whether the principle with which it is 
now in touch is the transcendant cause of all things or merely 
its earthly delegate. It would be content to feel itself per­
vaded, though retaining its own personality, by a being 
immeasurably mightier than itself, just as an iron is pervaded 
by the fire which makes it glow. Its attachment to life would 
henceforth be its inseparability from this principle, joy in joy, 
love of that which is all love. In addition it would give itself 
to society, but to a society comprising all humanity, loved 
in the love of the principle underlying it. The confidence 
which static religion brought to man would thus be transfig­
ured: no more thought for the morrow, no more anxious 
heart-searching; materially the object would no longer be 
worth while, and morally would take on too high a signifi­
cance. Now detachment from each particular thing would 
become attachment to life in general. But should we, in such 
a case, still speak of religion? Or were we right to have used 
the word before for all the preceding argument? Are not the 
two things so different as to exclude each other, and to make 
it impossible to call them by the same name? 
Yet there are many reasons for using the word religion in 
both cases. In the first place mysticism-for that is what we 

202 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
have in mind-may, it is true, lift the soul to another plane: 
it none the less ensures for the soul, to a pre-eminent degree, 
the security and the serenity which it is the function of 
static religion to provide. But we must above all bear in 
mind that pure mysticism is a rare essence, that it is generally 
found in a diluted form, that even then it still gives to the 
substance with which it mingles its colour and fragrance, 
and that it must be taken together with the substance, to be 
regarded as practically inseparable from it, if it is to be ob­
served in its active state-since it was in this state that it 
finally imposed its S\vay upon the world. 
Looking at it 
from this angle, we should perceive a series of transitions, 
and, as it were, differences of degree, whereas really there 
is a radical difference of nature. Let us go back briefly over 
each of these points. 
In defining mysticism by its relation to the vital impetus, 
we have implicitly admitted that true mysticism is rare. We 
shall deal presently with its significance and its value. Let 
us confine ourselves for the moment to noting that it lies, 
according to the above, at a point which the spiritual current, 
in its passage through matter, probably desired to reach but 
could not. For It makes light of obstacles with which nature 
has had to come to terms, and, on the other hand, we can 
understand the evolution of life, setting aside any bypaths it 
has been compelled to follow, only if we view it as seeking 
for something beyond its reach, something to which the great 
mystic attains. If all men, if any large number of men, could 
have soared as high as this privileged man, nature would not 
have stopped at the human species, for such a one is in fact 
more than a man. The same can be said of other forms of 
genius: they are all equally rare. It is not by chance, then, 
it is by reason of its very essence that true mysticism is ex­
ceptional. 
But when it does call, there is in the innermost being of 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
203 
most men the whisper of an echo. 
Mysticism reveals, or 
rather would reveal to us, if we actually willed it, a marvellous 
prospect: we do not, and in most cases we could not, will it; 
we should collapse under the strain. Yet the spell has worked; 
and just as when an artist of genius has produced a work which 
is beyond us, the spirit of which we cannot grasp, but which 
makes us feel how commonplace were the things we used to 
admire, in the same way static religion, though it may still be 
there, is no longer what it was, above all it no longer dares to 
assert itself, when truly great mysticism comes on the scene. 
To static religion, mainly at any rate, humanity will still turn 
for the support of which it is in need; it will leave the myth­
making function, remoulding it as best it can, to go on with 
its work; in a word, man's confidence in life will remain much 
the same as was ordained by nature. But he will sincerely 
believe that he has sought and even to some extent found 
that contact with the very principle of nature which expresses 
itself in quite a different attachment to life, in a transfigured 
confidence. Incapable of rising to these heights, he will go 
through the motions, assume the appropriate attitudes and in 
his speech reserve the foremost place for certain formulae 
\x.:hich he can never see filled with their whole meaning, the 
whole operation being reminiscent of some ceremony where 
certain chairs, reserved for high dignitaries, are standing 
empty. Thus may arise a mixed religion, implying a new 
direction given to the old, a more or less marked aspiration 
for the ancient god who emanated from the myth-making func­
tion to be merged into the God Who effectively reveals 
Himself, Who illuminates and warms privileged souls with 
His presence. Thus do we find interposed, as we were sug­
gesting, transitions and differences, ostensibly of degree, be­
tween two things which are as a matter of fact radically 
different in nature and which, at first sight, we can hardly 
believe deserve the same name. The contrast is striking in 

204 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
many cases, as for instance when nations at war each declare 
that they have God on their side, the deity in question thus 
becoming the national god of paganism, whereas the God 
they imagine they are evoking is a God common to all man­
kind, the mere vision of Whom, could all men but attain it, 
would mean the immediate abolition of war. 
And yet we 
should not, on the strength of this contrast, disparage religions 
born of mysticism, which have generalized the use of its 
formulae and yet have been unable to pervade all humanity 
with the full measure of its spirit. 
It sometimes happens that 
well-nigh empty formulae, the veriest magical incantations, 
contrive to summon up here and there the spirit capable of 
imparting substance to them. 
An indifferent schoolmaster, 
mechanically teaching a science created by men of genius, may 
awaken in one of his pupils the vocation he himself has never 
possessed, and change him unconsciously into an emulator of 
those great men, who are invisible and present in the message 
he is handing on. 
Yet there is a difference between the two cases, and if we 
take it into account, we shall notice, in the matter of religion, 
a gradual disappearance of the contrast between the static 
and the dynamic, on which we have just insisted in order to 
bring out the characteristics of the two religions. 
The great 
majority of men may very well know practically nothing 
about mathematics and yet admire the genius of a Descartes 
or a Newton. But those who have, from afar off, bowed their 
heads to the mystic word, because they heard a faint echo of 
it within themselves, will not remain indifferent to its mes­
sage. 
If they already have their different faiths, from which 
they will not or cannot break away, they will persuade them­
selves that they are effecting a transformation of them, as 
indeed they are: the same elements will subsist, but they will 
be magnetized and by this very magnetizing process be 
diverted into another direction. 
A religious historian will 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
205 
have no difficulty in discovering in the material form of a 
vaguely mystic belief, which has spread far and wide among 
mankind, some mythical and even magic elements. 
He will 
prove thereby that there exists a static religion, natural to man, 
and that human nature is unchanging. 
But, if he stops at 
that, he will have overlooked something, and perhaps the 
essential. 
At any rate he will, unwittingly perhaps, have 
bridged the gulf between the static and the dynamic, and 
justified the use of the same word in such widely different 
instances. 
One will indeed be still dealing with a religion, but 
with a new one. 
We shall be still more convinced of this, we shall see from 
another angle how these two religions are antagonistic and 
yet come together, if we take into consideration the attempts 
of the second to lodge within the first, preparatory to sup­
planting it. 
As a matter of fact, it is we who convert them 
into attempts by an act of retrospection. 
They were, when 
they occurred, complete and self-sufficient actions, and they 
have assumed the guise of initial preparatory efforts only 
since the day when ultimate success transformed them into 
partial failures, by virtue of the mysterious power which the 
present exerts over the past. 
They wil none the less serve 
us to mark the intervening stages, to analyse into its virtual 
elements the indivisible act by which dynamic religion is 
posited, and at the same time to show, by the manifest unity 
of direction of all those efforts which now prove to have been 
unsuccessful, that the sudden leap which marked final achieve­
ment was in no way fortuitous. 
Among the tentative efforts leading to the mysticism which 
was to come, certain aspects of the pagan mysteries occupy a 
foremost position. 
We must not allow ourselves to be led 
astray by the term: there was nothing mystic about most of 
the mysteries. 
They were connected with the established 
religion, which considered it perfectly natural that they should 

206 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
exist along with it. They glorified the same gods, or gods 
ongmating from the same myth-making function. They 
merely strengthened the religious spirit among the initiate by 
adding to it that satisfaction which men have always had in 
forming little societies within the larger one, and setting them­
selves up as privileged beings on the strength of an initiation 
kept jealously secret. The members of these closed societies 
felt as if they were nearer to the god upon whom they called, 
if only because the performance of mythological scenes played 
a greater part here than in the public ceremonies. In a certain 
sense the god was present; the initiates shared to some extent 
in his divinity. They could therefore hope for more and 
better things in another life than the national religion held 
out to them. But these were, most probably, nothing but 
ready-made ideas imported from foreign lands: we know how 
deeply the ancient Egyptians had always been preoccupied 
with the fate of man after death, and we must remember the 
evidence of Herodotus, according to which the Demeter of 
the Eleusian mysteries and the Dionysos of Orphism were 
transformations of Isis and Osiris; so that the celebration of 
the mysteries, or at least what we know of it, discloses no 
striking divergence from the public cult. At first sight, then, 
there would seem to be no more mysticism about this religion 
than the other. But we must not confine ourselves to that 
aspect which was probably the only one to interest most of 
the initiates. We must ask ourselves if some at least of these 
mysteries did not bear the stamp of this or that great person­
ality whose spirit they claimed to recall to life. We must also 
note the importance most of the authors give to scenes of 
religious enthusiasm, where the soul was thought to become 
really possessed by the god it invoked. In fact the most con­
spicuously alive of them, those which ended by attracting 
into their orbit the mysteries of Eleusis themselves, were those 
of Dionysos and his continuator, Orpheus. As a foreign god 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
207 
from Thrace, Dionysos was by his violence a sharp contrast 
to the serenity of the gods upon Olympus. 
He was not 
originally the god of wine, but he easily became so, because 
the intoxication of the soul he produced was not unlike that 
of wine. We know how \Villiam James was treated for 
having described as mystical, or at least having regarded as 
such for purposes of study, the condition induced by inhaling 
protoxide of nitrogen. People took this to be a profanation. 
And they would have been right, if the philosopher had made 
the protoxide a psychical equivalent of the "interior revela­
tion," the protoxide then being, as the metaphysicians say, 
the efficient and sufficient cause of the result produced. But 
in his eyes the intoxication was presumably the occasion 
rather than the cause. The psychic disposition was there, 
potentially, along with the others, only awaiting a signal to 
express itself in action. It might have been evoked spiritually 
by an effort made on its own spiritual level. But it could 
just as well be brought about materially, by an inhibition of 
what inhibited it, by the removing of an obstacle, and this 
effect was the wholly negative one produced by the drug; 
the psychologist preferred making use of the latter, which 
enabled him to obtain his result whenever he wished. It is 
possible that no more important role attached to wine, when 
its effect was compared to the Dionysiac frenzy. But that 
is not the main point. What we want to find out is whether 
this frenzy can be considered, in retrospect, and once mysti­
cism has come on the scene, as heralding certain mystic states. 
In order to answer this question, we need but glance at the 
evolution of Greek philosophy. 
This evolution was purely rational. It carried human 
thought to its highest level of abstraction and generalization. 
It gave such strength and flexibility to the dialectic function 
of the mind that even to-day for such training we go to 
school with the Greeks. Yet two points must be noted. The 

208 
D Y N A I\I I C  R E L I G I O N 
first is that at the origin of this great movement there was an 
impulsion or a shock which was not of a philosophic narure. 
The second is that the doctrine in which the movement 
culminated, and which brought Greek thought to a climax, 
claimed to transcend pure reason. There is no doubt that the 
Dionysiac frenzy was continued into Orphism, and that 
Orphism went on into Pythagoreanism: well, it is to this 
latter, perhaps even to the fonner, that the primary inspira­
tion of Platonism goes back. \Ve know in what an atmosphere 
of mystery, in the Orphic sense of the \vord, the Platonic 
myths \vere wrapped, and how the theory of Ideas itself was 
inclined, by a cm·ert sense of affinity, towards the Pythagorean 
theory of numbers. True, no influence of this kind is notice­
able in Aristotle and his immediate successors; but the philoso­
phy of Plotinus, in which the de,·elopment culminates, and 
which O\ves as much to Aristotle as it does to Plato, is un­
questionably mystic. 
If it has undergone the influence of 
Eastern thought, so very much ali,·e in the Alexandrine world, 
this occurred without the knowledge of Plotinus himself, 
who thought he \vas merely condensing all Greek philosophy, 
with the whole object of opposing it to foreign doctrines. 
Thus, to sum up, there was in the beginning a leaven of 
Orphism, and at the end a metamorphosis of dialectics into 
mysticism. From this the conclusion might be drawn that 
it \Vas an extra-rational force which had caused this rational 
development and carried it to its culmination at a point beyond 
reason. 
In the same way the slow, steady phenomena of 
sedimentation, which alone are visible to us, are the outcome 
of invisible seismic forces which, by heaving up at certain 
times the earth's crust, start the sedimentary activity in a given 
direction. But another interpretation is possible; and we are 
inclined to think it more probable. We may suppose that the 
development of Greek thought was solely the work of reason, 
and that, alongside and independent of it, there occurred at 

D Y N A 1\1 I C  R E L I G I O N  
209 
rare intervals in certain predisposed souls an effort to strike 
out, beyond the limits of intelligence, in search of a vision, a 
contact, the revelation of a toranscendant reality. This effort 
may never have attained its object, but each time, just as it 
was nearly spent, it handed on to dialectics \vhat remained 
of itself, instead of disappearing entirely; and thus, with the 
same expenditure of energy, a fresh attempt could not fail to 
reach a more distant goal, intelligence being caught up again 
at a more advanced point of philosophic development, the 
latter having in the inten·al acquired greater elasticity and 
revealing a greater degree of mysticism. \Ve do, as a matter 
of fact, see a first wave, purely Dionysiac, merging into 
Orphism, which was of a higher intellectual character; a 
second wave, which we might call Orphic, led to Pythago­
reanism, that is to say, to a distinct philosophy; in its tum 
Pythagoreanism transmitted something of its spirit to Platonism, 
and the latter, having adopted it, in time expanded naturally 
into Alexandrine mysticism. But in whatever form we imagine 
the relation between the two currents, the one intellectual, the 
other extra-intellectual, it is only by placing ourseh·es at the 
terminal point that we can call the latter supra-intellectual or 
mystic, and regard as mystic an impulsion which originated 
in the mysteries. 
It remains to be seen, in this case, "·hether the final stage 
of the movement \vas complete mysticism. One may give 
words whatever connotation one likes, provided one begins 
by defining that meaning. In our eyes, the ultimate end of 
mysticism is the establishment of a contact, consequently of a 
partial coincidence, with the creative effort ,,·hich life itself 
manifests. This effort is of God, if it is not God himself. 
The great mystic is to be concei,·ed as an indi,·idual being, 
capable of transcending the limitations imposed on the species 
by its material nature, thus continuing and extending the 
divine action. Such is our definition. \Ve arc free to posit it, 

210 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
provided we ask ourselves whether it ever finds its applica­
tion, and then whether it fits such and such a panicular case. 
As regards Plotinus, there is no doubt about the answer. It 
was granted to him to look upon the promised land, but not 
to set foot upon its soil. He went as far as ecstasy, a state in 
which the soul feels itself, or thinks it feels itself, in the 
presence of God, being irradiated with His light; he did not 
get beyond this last stage, he did not reach the point where, 
as contemplation is engulfed in action, the human will be­
comes one with the divine will. He thought he had reached 
the summit: in his eyes, to go funher would have meant to 
go downhill. This is what he expressed in language of rare 
beauty, yet which is not the language of thoroughgoing 
mysticism. "Action," he said, "is a weakening of contempla­
tion." 1 Therein he remains faithful to Greek intellectualism, 
he even sums it up in a striking formula; and at any rate he 
did contrive to impregnate it with mysticism. 
In shon, 
mysticism, in the absolute sense in which we have agreed to 
take the word, was never attained by Greek thought. No 
doubt it would like to have come into being; as a mere 
virtuality, it knocked more than once at the door. The door 
opened wider and wider, but never wide enough for mysticism 
wholly to enter. 
There is a radical distinction, in this case, between the 
mystical and the dialectical; they only come together at long 
intervals. Elsewhere, on the contrary, they have been con­
stantly intermingled, in appearance helping each other, per­
haps in actual fact mutually preventing each other from 
attaining full maturity. This is what appears to have happened 
in Hindu thought. We shall not engage in any profound study 
of it nor sum it up in its essentials. Its development extends 
over a considerable period of time. Being both a philosophy 
1 'Er.d m2 G.viJp(j'fTot, Orav O.a8cvf;r:r.atv dr rO f!t.pEiv, aKtD.v 8cCJplar ml Myov 
n)v rrpa/tv rrotoiJvmt (Enn. III. viii. 4) . 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
211 
and a religion, it has varied with time and place. It is expressed 
in a language some of whose many shades of meaning prob­
ably escape even those who know it best. Moreover, the 
words of this language have by no means always retained 
the same sense, e\'en supposing that sense to have been always 
a precise one, or to have ever been so. But, for our pur­
pose, a glance at the doctrine as a whole will suffice. And 
since, to obtain this bird's-eye view, we must inevitably con­
tent ourselves with piling up and trying to blend together 
views which have been held by experts, we shall, by picking 
out these lines which coincide, stand a fair chance of not going 
far wrong. 
Let us first remark that India has always practised a religion 
similar to that of ancient Greece. Gods and spirits played 
the same parts as they did elsewhere. Rites and ceremonies 
were similar. Sacrifice was an extremely important element. 
These cults persisted through Brahmanism, Jainism, and Bud­
dhism. How were they compatible with a teaching such as 
that of the Buddha? We must note that Buddhism, which 
came to deliver man, believed that the gods too needed to be 
delivered. It therefore treated men and gods as creatures of 
the same species, subject to the same laws of fate. This is 
easily conceivable in a hypothesis such as ours: man lives 
naturally in societies, and, as the result of a natural function, 
which we have called myth-making, he surrounds himself 
with phantasmic beings of his O\Vn creation, who live a life 
akin to his own, on a higher plane, but bound up with his 
own; such is the religion we regard as natural. 
Did the 
thinkers of India ever see things in this light? It is hardly 
likely. But any mind that sets out on the mystic way, beyond 
the city gates, feels more or less distinctly that he is leaving 
men and gods behind him. And this very fact makes him see 
them intermingled. 
Now, just how far did Hindu thought progress in this direc-

2 1 2  
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
tion? \l,rĦ are considering, of course, ancient India only, alone 
with herself, untouched by the influences which have since 
been brought to bear on her by Western civilization, or by the 
impulse to resist them. For, be it static or dynamic, we 
take religion at its origins. We have found that the first 
was foreshadowed in nature; we see now that the second 
is a leap beyond nature, and we study the leap in those 
cases where the impetus was insufficient or thwarted. The 
Hindu soul seems to have striven for this impetus in two dif­
ferent ways. 
One of them is at the same time of a physiological and 
psychological character. Its remotest origin is to be found 
in a practice common to Hindus and Iranians, previous, there­
fore, to their separation: the recourse to an intoxicating drink 
which they both call soma. It produced a divine rapture, 
somewhat like that which the devotees of Dionysos sought 
in wine. Later came a set of practices designed to inhibit all 
sensation, to dull mental activity, in a word to induce states 
similar to hypnosis; these became systematized into, the yoga. 
Should this be called mysticism in our sense of the word? 
There is nothing mystical in hypnotic states as such, but they 
may become so, or at least herald true mysticism and pave 
the way for it, through the suggestions which creep into them. 
And they will become so very easily, their form will be pre­
disposed to fill out with this matter, if they already entail 
visions, ecstasies, which suspend the critical functions of in­
telligence. Such must have been, in one aspect at least, the 
significance of the practices which culminated in yoga. Here 
mysticism was no more than outlined; but a more marked 
mysticism, a purely spiritual concentration, could utilize the 
yoga in its material elements, and by that very operation 
spiritualize it. In fact, the yoga seems to have been, accord­
ing to the time and place, a more popular form of mystic con-

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
2 13 
remplation or else a complete system which included this con­
templation. 
We must ascertain then what this contemplation was, as 
also what connexion there can have been between it and 
mysticism as we understand it. From the most remote times, 
the Hindu speculated on being in general, on nature, on life. 
But his effort, sustained through many centuries, has not led, 
like the effort of the Greek philosophers, to a knowledge 
susceptible, as was Greek science, of unlimited development. 
The reason lies in the fact that to him knowledge was always 
rather a means than an end. The problem for him was to 
escape from life, which he felt to be unremitting cruelty. And 
suicide would not have provided this escape, for the soul has 
to pass into another body after death, and this would have 
meant a perpetual round of living and suffering. But from 
the very beginnings of Brahmanism, he drifted into the belief 
that deliverance could be won by renunciation. This renun­
ciation was absorption in the Whole as well as in self. Bud­
dhism, which gave a new turn to Brahmanism, did not modify 
it in essentials. It made it, above all, into something much 
more elaborate. Till then human experience had shown indeed 
that life meant suffering; the Buddha worked back to the 
cause of this suffering; he found it in desire of every kind, 
in the craving for life. Thus the road to deliverance could 
be more accurately traced. Brahmanism, Buddhism, even 
Jainism, therefore preached with increasing vehemence the 
extinction of the will to live, and this preaching strikes us at 
first as a call on intelligence, the three doctrines differing 
only in a greater or lesser degree of intellectuality. But on 
looking closer, we perceive that the conviction they aimed at 
implanting was far from being a purely intellectual state. 
Already in antique Brahmanism it was neither by reasoning nor 
by study that the ultimate conviction was obtained; it con­
sisted in a vision, passed on by him who had seen. Buddhism, 

214 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
more philosophical on the one hand, is still more mystical on 
the other. The state towards which it guides the soul is 
beyond joy and pain, beyond consciousness. It is by a series 
of stages, and by a whole system of mystical discipline, that it 
leads to Nirvana, to the abolition of desire during life and of 
Karma after death. We must not forget that the origin of 
the Buddha's mission lies in the illumination that came to him 
in his early youth. Everything in Buddhism which can be 
put into words can doubtless be considered as a philosophy; 
but the essential is the final revelation, transcending both reason 
and speech. It is the conviction, gradually neared and sud­
denly attained, that the goal is reached: man's sufferings, the 
only certainty, and consequently the only living thing in life, 
are over. If we consider that we are here dealing, not with 
a theoretical view, but with an experience closely resembling 
ecstasy, that in an effort at oneness with the creative impetus 
a soul might indeed take the path thus described and only 
fail because it stopped half-way, dangling all dizzy in the 
void between two activities, between the human life it has left 
behind and the divine life it has not reached, then we shall not 
hesitate to see mysticism in the Buddhist faith. But we shall 
understand why it is not complete mysticism. This would be 
action, creation, love. 
Not that Buddhism ignored charity. On the contrary it 
recommended it in the most exalted terms. And it joined 
example to precept. But it lacked warmth and glow. As a 
religious historian very justly puts it, it knew nothing "of the 
complete and mysterious gift of self." Let us add-and it 
comes perhaps to the same thing-that it did not believe in 
the efficacy of human action. It had no faith in such action. 
And faith alone can grow to power and move mountains. A 
complete mysticism would have reached this point. It is per­
haps to be met with in India, but much later. That enthusi­
astic charity, that mysticism comparable to the mysticism of 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
2 1 5  
Christianity, we find in a Ramakrishna or a Vivekananda, to 
take only the most recent examples. But Christianity, and this 
is just the point, had come into the world in the interval. 
Its influence on India-gone over meanwhile to lslamism­
was superficial enough, but to the soul that is predisposed 
a mere hint, the slightest token, is enough. But let us suppose 
even that the direct action of Christianity, as a dogma, has 
been practically nil in India. Since it has impregnated the 
whole of Western civilization, one breathes it, like a perfume, 
in everything which this civilization brings in its wake. In­
dustrialism itself, as we shall try to prove, springs indirectly 
from it. And it was industrialism, it was our Western civiliza­
tion, which unloosed the mysticism of a Ramakrishna or a 
Vivekananda. This burning, active mysticism could never 
have been kindled in the days when the Hindu felt he was 
crushed by nature and when no human intervention was of 
any avail. What could be done when inevitable famine doomed 
millions of wretches to die of starvation? The principal origin 
of Hindu pessimism lay in this helplessness. 
And it was 
pessimism which prevented India from carrying her mysticism 
to its full conclusion, since complete mysticism is action. But 
then, with the advent of machines which increased the yield 
of the land, and above all moved the products from place to 
place, with the advent also of political and social organizations 
which proved experimentally that the mass of the people was 
not doomed, as though by some inexorable necessity, to a 
life of grinding labour and bitter poveny, deliverance became 
possible in an entirely new sense; the mystical impulse, if 
operating anywhere with sufficient power, was no longer 
going to be stopped short by the impossibility of acting; it 
was no longer to be driven back into doctrines of renuncia­
tion or the systematic practice of ecstasy; instead of turning 
inwards and closing, the soul could open wide its gates to a 
universal love. Now these inventions and organization are 

216 
D Y N A ҿӀ I C R E L I G I 0 N 
essentially Western; it is they who, in this case, have enabled 
mysticism to de,·elop to its fullest extent and reach its goal. 
\Ve rna\' therefore conclude that neither in Greece nor in 
ancient 
.
India was there complete mysticism, in the one case 
because the impetus was not strong enough, in the other case 
because it was thwarted by material conditions or by too 
narrow an intellectual frame. 
It is its appearance at a given 
moment that enables us to follow in retrospect its preparatory 
phases, just as the volcano, bursting into activity, explains a 
long series of earthquakes in the past.1 
For the complete mpticism is that of the great Christian 
mystics. 
Let us leave aside, for the moment, their Christianity, 
and study in them the form apart from the matter. 
There is 
no doubt that most of them passed through states resembling 
the various culminating phases of the mysticism of the 
ancients.2 
But they merely passed through them: bracing 
themseh·es up for an entirely new effort, they burst a dam; 
they were then swept back into a vast current of life; from 
their increased vitality there radiated an extraordinary energy, 
daring, power of conception and realization. 
Just think of 
what was accomplished in the field of action by a St. Paul, a 
St. Teresa, a St. Catherine of Siena, a St. Francis, a Joan 
of Arc, and how many others besides! 
Nearly all this super­
abundant activity was devoted to spreading the Christian faith. 
Yet there are exceptions, and the case of Joan of Arc ·wil 
1 "'e are perfectly aware of the fact that there existed other mysti­
cisms in antiquity besides Xeo-Plaronism and Buddhism. Bur, for the 
object we han in Yiew, we need onlv take those that advanced funhest. 
2 ,\1. Henri Delacroix, in a book ¬\·hich deserns to become a classic 
(Etudes d'NstoiTt et de psycbo/ogie du mysticisme, Paris, I9<J8) ,  has 
called attention to the essentially actiYe element of the great mystics. 
Similar ideas will be found in the remarkable works of E\·elyn Underhill 
(Mysticism, London, 191 1 ;  and T!Je ,\!ystic lVay, London, 1913). The 
latter author connectS cenain of her \"iews with those we expressed in 
L'E7.:olution Creatrice, and which we ha\·e taken up again, to carry them 
funher, in the present chapter. See, in panicular, on this point:, Tbe 
Mystic Way. 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
217 
suffice to show that the form can be separated from the matter. 
\Vhen we grasp that such is the culminating point of the 
inner evolution of the great mystics, we can but wonder how 
they could ever have been classed with the mentally diseased. 
True, we live in a condition of unstable equilibrium; nonnal 
health of mind, as, indeed, of body, is not easily defined. Yet 
there is an exceptional, deep-rooted mental healthiness, which 
is readily recognizable. It is expressed in the bent for action, 
the faculty of adapting and re-adapting oneself to circum­
stances, in finnness combined with suppleness, in the prophetic 
discernment of what is possible and what is not, in the spirit 
of simplicity which triumphs over complications, in a word, 
supreme good sense. Is not this exactly what we find in the 
above-named mystics? And might they not provide us \\·ith 
the very definition of intellectual vigour? 
If they have been judged otherwise, it is because of the 
abnonnal states which are, with them, the prelude to the 
ultimate transformation. 
They talk of their visions, their 
ecstasies, their raptures. These are phenomena which also 
occur in sick people and which are part of their malady. An 
important \vork has lately appeared on ecstasy regarded as a 
psycho-asthenic manifestation.1 But there exist morbid states 
which are imitations of healthy states; the latter are none the 
less healthy, and the fanner morbid. A lunatic may think he 
is an emperor; he will systematically introduce a Napoleonic 
touch :into his gestures, his words, his acts, and therein lies 
his madness: does it in any way reflect upon Napoleon? In 
just the same way it is possible to parody mysticism, and the 
result will be mystic insanity: does it follow that mysticism 
is insanity? 
Yet there is no denying that ecstasies, visions, 
raptures, are abnonnal states, and that it is difficult to dis­
tinguish between the abnonnal and the morbid. And such 
1 Pierre Janet, De l'angoisse a l'e:rtase. 

2 1 8  
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
indeed has been the opinion of the great mystics themselves. 
They have been the first to warn their disciples against visions 
which were quite likely to be pure hallucinations. And they 
generally regarded their own visions, when they had any, as 
of secondary importance, as wayside incidents; they had had 
to go beyond them, leaving raptures and ecstasies far behind, 
to reach the goal, which was identification of the human will 
with the divine will. The truth is that these abnormal states, 
resembling morbid states, and sometimes doubtless very much 
akin to them, are easily comprehensible, if we only stop to 
think what a shock to the soul is the passing from the static 
to the dynamic, from the closed to the open, from everyday 
life to mystic life. When the darkest depths of the soul are 
stirred, what rises to the surface and attains consciousness 
takes on there, if it be intense enough, the form of an image 
or an emotion. The image is often pure hallucination, just 
as the emotion may be meaningless agitation. But they both 
may express the fact that the disturbance is a systematic re­
adjustment with a view to equilibrium on a higher level: the 
image then becomes symbolic of what is about to happen, 
and the emotion is a concentration of the soul awaiting trans­
formation. The latter is the case of mysticism, but it may 
partake of the other; what is only abnormal may be accom­
panied by what is distinctly morbid; we cannot upset the 
regular relation of the conscious to the unconscious without 
running a risk. So we must not be surprised if nervous 
disturbances and mysticism sometimes go together; we find 
the same disturbances in other forms of genius, notably in 
musicians. They have to be regarded as merely accidental. 
The former have no more to do with mystical insipiration than 
the latter with musical. 
Shaken to its depths by the current which is about to sweep 
it forward, the soul ceases to revolve round itself and escapes 
for a moment from the law which demands that the species 

D Y N A i\H C  R E L I G I O N  
219 
and the individual should condition one another. 
It stops, 
as though to listen to a voice calling. 
Then it lets itself go, 
straight onward. 
It does not directly perceive the force that 
moves it, but it feels an indefinable presence, or divines it 
through a symbolic vision. 
Then comes a boundless joy, an 
all-absorbing ecstasy or an enthralling rapture: God is there, 
and the soul is in God. 
Mystery is no more. 
Problems vanish, 
darknes is dispelled; everything is flooded with light. 
But 
for how long? 
An imperceptible anxiety, hovering above the 
ecstasy, descends and clings to it like its shadow. 
This anxiety 
alone would suffice, even without the phases which are to 
come, to distinguish true and complete mysticism from what 
was in bygone days its anticipated imitation or preparation. 
For it shO\vs that the soul of the great mystic does not stop 
at ecstasy, as at the end of a journey. 
The ecstasy is indeed 
rest, if you like, but as though at a station, where the engine 
is still under steam, the onward movement becoming a vibra­
tion on one spot, until it is time to race forward again. 
Let 
us put it more clearly: however close the union with God 
may be, it could be final only if it were total. 
Gone, doubtless, 
is the distance between the thought and the object of the 
thought, since the problems which measured and indeed con­
stituted the gap have disappeared. 
Gone the radical separa­
tion between him who loves and him who is beloved: God is 
there, and joy is boundless. 
But though the soul becomes, in 
thought and feeling, absorbed in God, something of it remains 
outside; that something is the will, whence the soul's action, if 
it acted, would quite naturally proceed. 
Its life, then, is not 
yet divine. 
The soul is aware of this, hence its vague dis­
quietude, hence the agitation in repose which is the striking 
feature of what we call complete mysticism: it means that the 
impetus has acquired the momentum to go funher, that 
ecstasy affects indeed the ability to see and to feel, but that 
there is, besides, the will, which itself has to find its way 

220 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
back to God. \Vhen this agitation has grown to the extent of 
displacing everything else, the ecstasy has died out, the 
soul finds itself alone again, and sometimes desolate. Accus­
tomed for a time to a dazzling light, it is now left blindly 
groping in the gloom. It does not realize the profound meta­
morphosis which is going on obscurely within it. It feels that 
it has lost much; it does not yet know that this was in order 
to gain all. Such is the "darkest night" of which the great 
mystics have spoken, and which is perhaps the most significant 
thing, in any case the most instructive, in Christian mysticism. 
The final phase, characteristic of great mysticism, is im­
minent. To analyse this ultimate preparation is impossible, 
for the mystics themselves have barely had a glimpse of its 
mechanism. Let us confine ourselves to suggesting that a 
machine of wonderfully tempered steel, built for some ex­
traordinary feat, might be in a somewhat similar state if it 
became conscious of itself as it was being put together. Its 
parts being one by one subjected to the severest tests, some 
of them rejected and replaced by others, it would have a feel­
ing of something lacking here and there, and of pain all over. 
But this entirely superficial distress would only have to be 
intensified in order to pass into the hope and expectation of a 
marvellous instrument. The mystic soul yearns to become 
this instrument. It throws off anything in its substance that 
is not pure enough, not flexible and strong enough, to be 
turned to some use by God. Already it had sensed the pres­
ence of God, it had thought it beheld God in a symbolic vision, 
it had even been united to Him in its ecstasy; but none of this 
rapture was lasting, because it was mere contemplation; action 
threw the soul back upon itself and thus divorced it from 
God. Now it is God who is acting through the soul, in the 
soul; the union is total, therefore final. At this point words 
such as mechanism and instrument evoke images which are 
better left alone. They could be used to give us an idea of the 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
221 
preliminary work. 
They will teach us nothing of the final 
result. 
Let us say that hencefonh for the soul there is a 
superabundance of life. 
There is a boundless impetus. 
There 
is an irresistible impulse which hurls it into vast enterprises. 
A calm exaltation of all its faculties makes it see things on a 
vast scale only, and, in spite of its own weakness, produce 
only what can be mightily wrought. 
Above all, it sees things 
simply, and this simplicity, which is equally striking in the 
words it uses and the conduct it follows, guides it through 
complications which it apparently does not even perceive. 
An innate knowledge, or rather an acquired ignorance, sug­
gests to it straightaway the step to be taken, the decisive act, 
the unanswerable word. 
Yet effon remains indispensable, 
endurance and perseverance likewise. 
But they come of 
themselves, they develop of their own accord, in a soul acting 
and acted upon, whose liberty coincides with the divine 
activity. They represent a vast expenditure of energy, but this 
energy is supplied as it is required, for the superabundance 
of vitality which it demands flows from a spring which is the 
very source of life. 
And now the visions are left far behind: 
the divinity could not manifest itself from without to a soul 
hencefonh replete with its essence. 
Nothing remains to dis­
tinguish such a man outwardly from the men about him. 
He 
alone realizes the change which has raised him to the rank of 
adjutores Dei, "patients" in respect to God, agents in respect 
to man. 
In this elevation he feels no pride. On the contrary, 
great is his humility. 
How could he be aught but humble, 
when there has been made manifest to him, in mute colloquy, 
alone with The Alone, through an emotion in which his whole 
soul seemed to be absorbed, what we may call the divine 
humility? 
Even in the mysticism which went only as far as ecstasy, 
that is to say contemplation, a certain line of action was 
foreshadowed. 
Hardly had these mystics come back from 

222 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
Heaven to eanh, when they felt it incumbent on them to teach 
mankind. They had to tell all men that the world perceived 
by the eyes of the body is doubtless real, but that there is 
something else, and that this something is no mere possibility 
or probability, like the conclusion of an argument, but the 
cenainty of a thing experienced: here is one who has seen, 
who has touched, one who knows. And yet these were but 
the tentative beginnings of an apostolate. The enterprise was 
indeed discouraging: how could the conviction derived from 
an experience be handed down by speech? And, above all, 
how could the inexpressible be expressed? But these questions 
do not even present themselves to the great mystic. He has 
felt truth flowing into his soul from its fountainhead like an 
active force. He can no more help spreading it abroad than 
the sun can help diffusing its light. Only, it is not by mere 
words that he will spread it. 
For the love which consumes him is no longer simply the 
love of man for God, it is the love of God for al men. 
Through God, in the strength of God, he loves all mankind 
with a divine love. This is not the fraternity enjoined on us 
by the philosophers in· the name. of reason, on the principle 
that all men share by binh in one rational essence: so noble 
an ideal cannot but command our respect; we may strive to the 
best of our ability to put it into. practice, if it be not too irk­
some for the individual and the community; we shall never 
attach ourselves to it passionately. Or, if we do, it will be be­
cause we have breathed in some nook or corner of our civiliza­
tion the intoxicating fragrance left there by mysticism. Would 
the philosophers themselves have laid down so confidently the 
principle, so little in keeping with everyday experience, of 
an equal panicipation of all men in a higher essence, if there 
had not been mystics to embrace all humanity in one simple 
indivisible love? 
This is not, then, that fraternity which 
staned as an idea, whence an ideal has been erected. Neither 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
223 
is it the intensification of an innate sympathy of man for man. 
Indeed we may ask ourselves whether such an instinct ever 
existed elsewhere than in the imagination of philosophers, 
where it was devised for reasons of symmetry. With family, 
country, humanity appearing as wider and wider circles, they 
thought that man must naturally love humanity as he loves 
his country and his family, whereas in reality the family 
group and the social group are the only ones ordained by 
nature, the only ones corresponding to instincts, and the 
social instinct would be far more likely to prompt societies 
to struggle against one another than to unite to make up 
humanity. The utmost we can say is that family and social 
feeling may chance to overflow and to operate beyond its 
natural frontiers, with a kind of luxury value; it will never go 
very· far. The mystic love of humanity is a very different 
thing. It is not the extension of an instinct, it does not orig­
inate in an idea. It is neither of the senses nor of the mind. 
It is of both, implicitly, and is effectively much more. For 
such a love lies at the very root of feeling and reason, as of all 
other things. Coinciding with God's love for His handiwork, 
a love which has been the source of everything, it would 
yield up, to anyone who knew how to question it, the secret 
of creation. It is still more metaphysical than moral in its 
essence. What it wants to do, with God's help, is to com­
plete the creation of the human species and make of humanity 
what it would have straightaway become, had it been able to 
assume its final shape without the assistance of man himself. 
Or to use words which mean, as we shall see, the same thing 
in different terms: its direction is exactly that of the vital 
impetus; it is this impetus itself, communicated in its entirety 
to exceptional men who in their tum would fain impart it 
to all humanity and by a living contradiction change into 
creative effort that created thing which is a species, and turn 
into movement what was, by definition, a stop. 

224 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
Can it succeed? 
If mysticism is to transfonn humanity, 
it can do so only by passing on, from one man to another, 
slowly, a part of itself. The mystics are well aware of this. 
The great obstacle in their way is the same which prevented 
the creation of a divine humanity. 1\lan has to earn his bread 
with the sweat of his brow; in other words, humanity is an 
animal species, and, as such, subject to the law which governs 
the animal world and condemns the living to batten upon the 
living. Since he has to contend for his food both with nature 
and with his own kind, he necessarily expends his energies 
procuring it; his intelligence is designed for the very object 
of supplying him with weapons and tools, with a view to that 
struggle and that toil. How then, in these conditions, could 
humanity tum heavenwards an attention which is essentially 
concentrated on earth? 
If possible at all, it can only be 
by using simultaneously or successively two very different 
methods. The first would consist presumably in intensifying 
the intellectual work to such an extent, in carrying intelli­
gence so far beyond what nature intended, that the simple 
tool would give place to a vast system of machinery such as 
might set human activity at liberty, this liberation being, 
moreover, stabilized by a political and social organization 
which would ensure the application of the mechanism to its 
true object. A dangerous method, for mechanization, as it de­
veloped, might turn against mysticism: nay more, it is by an 
apparent reaction against the latter that mechanization would 
reach its highest pitch of development. But there are cer­
tain risks which must be taken: an activity of a superior kind, 
which to be operative requires one of a lower order, must 
call forth this activity, or at least pennit it to function, if 
necessary, even at the cost of having to defend itself against 
it; experience shows that if, in the case of two contrary but 
complementary tendencies, we find one to have grown until it 
tries to monopolize all the room, the other will profit by 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
225 
this, provided it has been able to survive; its tum will come 
again, and it will then benefit by everything which has been 
done without its aid, which has even been energetically de­
veloped in specific opposition to it. 
However that may be, 
this means could only be utilized much later; in the meantime 
an entirely different method had to be followed. 
This con­
sisted, not in contemplating a general and immediate spreading 
of the mystic impetus, which was obviously impossible, but in 
imparting it, already weakened though it was, to a tiny hand­
ful of privileged souls which together would form a spiritual 
society; societies of this kind might multiply; each one, 
through such of its members as might be exceptional ly gifted, 
would give birth to one or several others; thus the impetus 
would be preserved and continued until such time as a pro­
found change in the material conditions imposed on humanity 
by nature should permit, in spiritual matters, of a radical trans­
formation. 
Such is the method followed by the great mystics. 
It was of necessity, and because they could do no more, that 
they were particularly prone to spend their superabundant 
energy in founding convents or religious orders. For the time 
being they had no need to look further. 
The impetus of love 
which drove them to lift humanity up to God and complete 
the divine creation could reach its end, in their eyes, only with 
the help of God Whose instruments they were. Therefore all 
their efforts must be concentrated on a very great, a very 
difficult, but a limited task. 
Other efforts would be forth­
coming, indeed others had already been; they would all be 
convergent, since God imparted to them their unity. 
We have, indeed, simplified a great deal. 
To make things 
clearer, and, above all, to take the difficulties one by one, we 
have reasoned as though the Christian mystic, the bearer of 
an inner revelation, had made his appearance in a humanity 
utterly ignorant of such a thing. 
As a matter of fact, the men 
to whom he spoke already had their religion, the same, more-

226 
D Y Ě A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
over, as his own. 
If he had visions, these visions showed 
him, in the fonn of images, what his religion had impressed 
on him in the fonn of ideas. His ecstasies, when they occurred, 
united him to a God probably greater than anything he had 
e5er conceived, but who did nevertheless correspond to the 
abstract descriptions with which religion had supplied him. 
The question rnaě· e5en be asked if these abstract teachings 
are not at the root of mysticism, and if the latter has ever 
done more than go over the letter of the dogma, in order to 
retrace it in characters of flame. 
The business of the mystics 
would in this case be nothing but bringing to religion, in 
order to restore its vital heat, something of the ardour '";th 
which they were fired. 
Xow, the man who professes such an 
opinion v.;tl certainly have no difficulty in getting it accepted. 
For the teaching of religion, like al teaching, is meant for 
the intelligence, and :mything of a purely intellectual order 
ca."l be brought within the reach of al men. 
\Vhether or no 
we subscribe to religion, it is always possible to assimilate 
it intellecrually, e5en ii we must admit its mysteries to be 
m:-sterious. 
On the contrary, mysticism means nothing, ab­
solutely nothing, to the man who has no experience of it, how­
e5er slight. Therefore everyone \\;n appreciate that mysticism 
may asert itself, origiru.l and ineffable, now and then, in a 
pre-existing religion which is fonnulated in tenns of in­
telligence, whereas it is difficult: to obtain acceptance for the 
idea of a religion which exists only through mysticism, and 
which is a mere extract of it-an extract capable of being 
foreulated by the intellect and therefore grasped by all. 
It is 
not fo:: us to decide which of these interpretations confonns 
to religious orJwdoxy. Let us only say that from the psychol­
ogis:"s point of view the secoĜd is much more likely than the 
first. 
A docri.."le which is but a doctrine has a poor chance 
indeed of giving birth to the glov.;ng enthusiasm, the illumina­
tion, the faith that moves mountains. 
But grant this fierce 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
227 
glow, and the molten matter will easily run into the mould 
of a doctrine, or even become that doctrine as it solidifies. 
We represent religion, then, as the crystallization, brought 
about by a scientific process of cooling, of what mysticism 
had poured, while hot, into the soul of man. 
Through re­
ligion all men get a little of what a few privileged souls pos­
sessed in full. 
True, religion had to accept a great deal to 
get itself accepted. 
Humanity really understands the new only 
when it inherits much of the old. Now the old was, on the one 
hand, what had been built up by the Greek philosophers, and, 
on the other hand, what had been imagined by ancient re­
ligions. 
That Christianity rccciYcd or derived a great deal 
from both there is no doubt. 
It is permeated with Greek 
philosophy, and has preserved many rites, many ceremonies, 
many beliefs even, from the religion we called static or natural. 
It was in its interest to do so, for its partial adoption of the 
Aristotelian Nco-Platonism enabled it to win over philosophic 
thought, and its borrowings from ancient religions were bound 
to help this new religion-with its marked tendency in the op­
posite direction, having hardly anything in common with past 
religions but the name-to become popular. 
But none of all 
that was essential ; the essence of the new religion was to be 
the diffusion of mysticism. There is such a thing as high-level 
popularization, which respects the broad outlines of scientific 
truth, and enables ordinary cultivated minds to get a general 
grasp of it until the time comes when a greater effort reveals 
it to them in detail, and, above all, allows them to penetrate 
deeply into its significance. 
The propagation of the mystical 
through religion seems to us something of the kind. 
In this 
sense, religion is to mysticism what popularization is to science. 
What the mystic finds waiting for him, then, is a humanity 
which has been prepared to listen to his message by other 
mystics invisible and present in the religion which is actually 
taught. 
Indeed his mysticism itself is imbued with this re-

228 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
ligion, for such was its starting-point. His theology will gen­
erally conform to that of the theologians. His intelligence 
and his imagination will use the teachings of the theologians 
to express in words what he experiences, and in material 
images what he sees spiritually. And this he can do easily, 
since theology has tapped that very current whose source 
is the mystical. Thus his mysticism is served by religion, 
against the day when religion becomes enriched by his mys­
ticism. This explains the primary mission which he feels to be 
entrusted to him, that of an intensifier of religious faith. He 
takes the most crying needs first. In reality, the task of the 
great mystic is to effect a radical transformation of humanity 
by setting an example. The object could be attained only if 
there existed in the end what should theoretically have existed 
in the beginning, a divine humanity. 
So then mysticism and religion are mutually cause and 
effect, and continue to interact on one another indefinitely. 
Yet there must have been a beginning. And indeed at the 
origin of Christianity there is Christ. From our standpoint, 
which shows us the divinity of all men, it matters little whether 
or no Christ be called a man. It does not even matter that 
he be called Christ. Those who have gone so far as to deny 
the existence of Jesus cannot prevent the Sermon on the 
Mount from being in the Gospels, with other divine sayings. 
Bestow what name you like on their author, there is no deny­
ing that there was one. The raising of such problems does 
not concern us here. Let us merely say that, if the great 
mystics are indeed such as we have described them, they are 
the imitators, and original but incomplete continuators, of 
what the Oirist of the Gospels was completely. 
He Himself may be considered as the continuator of the 
prophets of Israel. There is no doubt but that Christianity 
was a profound transformation of Judaism. It has been said 
over and over again: a religion which was still essentially 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
229 
national was replaced by a religion that could be made 
universal. A God who was doubtless a contrast to al other 
gods by His justice as well as by His power, but \Vhose power 
was used for His people, and Whose justice was applied, above 
all, to His own subjects, was succeeded by a God of love, a 
God Who loved all mankind. This is precisely why we 
hesitate to classify the Jewish prophets among the mystics of 
antiquity: Jehovah was too stem a judge, Israel and its God 
were not close enough together for Judaism to be the mysticism 
which we are defining. And yet no current of thought or 
feeling has contributed so much as the thought and feeling of 
Jewish prophets to arouse the mysticism which we call com­
plete, that of the Christian mystics. The reason is that, if other 
currents carried certain souls towards a contemplative mys­
ticism and thereby deserved to be regarded as mystic, pure 
contemplation they remained, and nothing more. To cover the 
interval between thought and action an impetus was needed 
-and it was not forthcoming. We find this impetus in the 
prophets: they longed passionately for justice, demanded it 
in the name of the God of Israel; and Christianity, which 
succeeded Judaism, o,.,·ed largely to the Jewish prophets its 
active mysticism, capable of marching on to the conquest of 
the world. 
If mysticism is really what we have just said it is, it must 
furnish us with the means of approaching, as it were ex­
perimentally, the problem of the existence and the nature of 
God. Indeed we fail to see how philosophy could approach 
the problem in any other way. Generally speaking, we look 
upon an object as existing if it is perceived, or might be per­
ceived. Such an object is therefore presented in actual or 
possible experience. No doubt you may construct the idea of 
an object or of a being, as the geometrician does for a geo­
metrical figure; but experience alone will decide whether it ac-

230 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
tually exists outside the idea thus constructed. Now, you may 
assert that this is just the question, and that the problem pre­
cisely is to know whether a certain Being is not distinctive from 
all other beings in that He stands beyond the reach of our ex­
perience, and yet is as real as they are. 
Granted, for this once; 
although an assertion of this kind, with its attendant argu­
ments, appears to me to imply a fundamental illusion. But then 
you must prove that the Being thus defined, thus demonstrated, 
is indeed God. 
You may argue that He is so by definition, 
and that one is at liberty to confer any meaning one likes on 
words, provided one defines them first. 
Granted again; but if 
you attribute to a word a radically different meaning from 
that which it usually bears, it will apply to a new object; your 
reasoning no longer refers to the former one; it is therefore 
understood that you are speaking to us of something else. 
This is precisely what occurs in most cases when the philos­
opher speaks of God. 
So remote is this conception from the 
God most men have in mind that if, by some miracle, and con­
trary to the opinion of philosophers, God as thus defined 
should step down into the field of experience, none would 
recognize Him. 
For religion, be it static or dynamic, regards 
Him, above all, as a Being who can hold communication with 
us: now this is just what the God of Aristotle, adopted with a 
few modifications by most of his successors, is incapable of 
doing. Without going deeply here into an examination of the 
Aristotelian notion of the divinity, we shall simply say that 
it seems to us to raise a double question: ( 1) Why did Aristotle 
posit as first principle a motionless Mover, a Thought think­
ing itself, self-enclosed, operative only by the appeal of its 
perfection? ( 2) Why, having posited this principle, did he call 
it God? 
But in the one case as in the other the answer is easy: 
the Platonic theory of Ideas ruled over the thought of Greece 
and Rome ere ever it penetrated into modern philosophy; 
and the relation of the first principle of Aristotle to the world 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
231 
is the very same as that which Plato establishes between the 
Idea and the thing. For anyone who sees in ideas nothing but 
the product of social and individual intelligence, it is in no 
way surprising that a limited number of immutable ideas should 
correspond to the infinitely varied and changing things of 
our experience; for we contrive to find resemblances between 
things in spite of their diversity, and to take a stable view of 
them in spite of their instability; in this way we obtain ideas 
which we can control, whereas the actual things may elude 
our grasp. 
All this is the work of man. 
But he who starts 
philosophizing when society is already well advanced with its 
work, and finds the results stored up in language, may be 
struck with admiration for this system of ideas, which now 
seem to set the standard for all things. 
Are they not, in their 
immutability, models which things, changing and shifting as 
they are, merely imitate? 
May they not be true reality, and 
do not change and motion express the unceasing and unsuccess­
ful attempts of well-nigh non-existent things, running, as it 
were, after themselves, to coincide with the immutability of 
the Ideas? 
It is therefore understandable that, having placed 
above the world of the senses a hierarchy of Ideas with the 
Idea of Ideas, that is, the Idea of Good at its apex, Plato 
should have judged that the Ideas in general, and still more so 
the Good, acted through the attractive power of their perfec­
tion. 
Now this is exactly the sort of action that Aristotle 
ascribes to the Thought of Thought, which seems indeed akin 
to the Idea of Ideas. True, Plato did not identify this idea with 
God. The Demiurge of the Timaeus, who organizes the world, 
is distinct from the Idea of Good. 
But the Timaeus is a myth­
ical dialogue; the Demiurge has therefore only a semi-existence; 
and Aristotle, who abandons myths, surmises as coincident with 
the Divinity a Thought which, so it would seem, is barely a 
thinking Being, and which we should call rather Idea than 
Thought. Thus the God of Aristotle has nothing in common 

232 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
with the gods worshipped by the Greeks; nor has he much 
more in common with the God of the Bible, of the Gospels. 
Religion, whether static or dynamic, confronts the philosopher 
with a God who raises totally different problems. 
Yet it is 
to Aristotle's God that metaphysical thought has generally 
attached itself, even at the price of investing him with at­
tributes incompatible with his essence. 
\Vhy not have gone 
back to his origin? 
It would have seen him develop by the 
concentration of all ideas into one. 
\Vhy not have gone on to 
consider each of these ideas? 
It would have realized that they 
served to prepare the way for the action of society and of 
the individual on things, that society supplied them for this 
purpose to the individual, and that to set up their quintessence 
as a divinity is merely to deify the social. 
\Vhy not, lastly, 
have analysed the social conditions of this individual action, 
and the nature of the work done by the individual with the 
help of society? It would have seen that if, in order to simplify 
the work and also to facilitate co-operation, things are first 
reduced to a few categories, or ideas, translatable into words, 
each of these ideas stands for a stable property or condition 
culled from some stage or other in the process of becoming; 
the real is mobile, or rather movement itself, and we per­
ceive only continuities of change; but to have any action on 
the real, and especially to perform the constructive task which 
is the natural object of. human intelligence, we must con­
trive to have halts here and there, just as we wait for a 
momentary slowing down or standing still before firing at a 
moving target. 
But these halts, each of which is really the 
simultaneousness of two or more movements and not, as it 
seems to be, a suppression of movement, these qualities which 
are but snapshots of change, become in our eyes the real and 
essential, precisely because they are what concerns our action 
on things. 
Rest then becomes for us something anterior and 
superior to movement, motion being regarded only as agitation 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
233 
with a view to a standing still. 
Thus immutability is rated 
higher than mutability, which implies a deficiency, a lack, 
a quest of the unchanging form. 
Nay, more, it is by this gap 
between the point where a thing is and the point where 
it should be, where it aspires to be, that movement and change 
will be defined and even measured. On this showing, duration 
becomes a debasement of being, time a deprivation of eternity. 
This whole system of metaphysics is involved in the Aris­
totelian conception of Deity. 
It consists in deifying both 
the social work which paves the way for language and the 
individual work of construction which needs patterns and 
models: the dJos- (Idea or Form) is what corresponds to this 
twofold work; the Idea of Ideas or Thought of Thoughts is 
therefore Divinity itself. 
With the origin and meaning of 
Aristotle's God thus traced back we can but wonder how mod­
ern thinkers, when treating of the existence and the uature of 
God, hamper themselves with insoluble problems which arise 
only if God is studied from the Aristotelian point of view, and 
if they are pleased to call by that name a being whom mankind 
has never dreamed of invoking. 
Now, is mystical experience able to solve these problems? 
It is easy to see the obj ections that such a notion will arouse. 
We have disposed of those which consist in asserting that no 
mystic is sound in the head and that all mysticism is a patho­
logical state. The great mystics, the only ones that we arc deal­
ing with, have generally been men or women of action, en­
dowed with superior common sense: it matters little that 
some of them had imitators who well deserved to be called 
"crazy," or that there are cases when they themselves felt 
the effect of extreme and prolonged strain of mind and will; 
many a man of genius has been in the same condition. 
But 
there is another series of objections, which it is impossibic to 
overlook. 
For it is alleged that the experiences of the great 
mystics are individual and exceptional, that they cannot be 

234 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
verified by the ordinary man, that they cannot therefore be 
compared to a scientific experiment and cannot possibly solve 
problems. 
There is a great deal to be said on this point. 
In 
the first place, it is by no means certain that a scientific ex­
periment, or more generally an observation recorded by 
science, can always be repeated or verified. 
In the days when 
Central Africa was a terra incognita, geography trusted to the 
account of one single explorer, if his honesty and competence 
seemed to be above suspicion. 
The route of Livingstone's 
journeys appeared for a long time on the maps and atlases. 
You may object that verification was potentially, if not ac­
tually, feasible, that other travellers could go and see if they 
liked, and that the map based on the indications of one traveller 
was a provisional one, waiting for subsequent exploration to 
make it definitive. I grant this: but the mystic too has gone on 
a journey that others can potentially, if not actually, undertake; 
and those who are actually capable of doing so are at least 
as many as those who possess the daring and energy of a 
Stanley setting out to find Livingstone. 
Indeed, that is an 
understatement. 
Along with the souls capable of following 
the mystic way to the end there are many who go at least 
part of the way: how numerous are those who take a few 
steps, either by an effort of will or from a natural disposition! 
William James used to say he had never experienced mystic 
states; but he added that if he heard them spoken of by a man 
who had experienced them "something within him echoed 
the call." 
Most of us are probably in the same case. 
It is no 
usc invoking as evidence to the contrary the indignant pro­
tests of those who see nothing in mysticism but quackery and 
folly. Some people are doubtless utterly impervious to mystic 
experience, incapable of feeling or imagining anything of it. 
But we also meet with people to whom music is nothincr 
• 
0 
but n01se; and some of them will express their opinions of 
musicians with the same anger, the same tone of personal 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
235 
spite. 
No one would think of accepting this as an argument 
against music. 
Let us leave, then, these merely negative argu­
ments and see whether the most superficial examination of 
mystic experience will not incline us favourably towards it. 
We must first note the fact that mystics generally agree 
among themselves. This is striking in the case of the Christian 
mystics. 
To reach the ultimate identification with God, they 
go through a series of states. 
These may vary from mystic to 
mystic, but there is a strong resemblance between them. 
In 
any case, the path followed is the same, even admitting that 
the stopping-places by the way are at different intervals. 
They have in any case the same terminal point. 
In the de­
scriptions of the final state we find the same expressions, the 
same images, the same comparisons, although the authors 
\\'ere generally unknown to each other. 
It will be replied that 
in some cases they had known one another, that furthermore 
there is a mystic tradition, and that all mystics may have felt 
its influence. We grant this, but the fact must be noted that 
the great mystics give little thought to this tradition; each one 
has his own originality, \vhich is not intentional, which he has 
not sought, but which we feel is of fundamental importance 
to him; it means that he is the object of an exceptional favour, 
unmerited though it be. 
Now it may be objected that a com­
munity of religion suffices to explain the resemblance, that all 
Christian mystics have lived on the Gospels, that they all re­
ceived the same theological teaching. 
But this would be to 
forget that, if the resemblance between the visions is indeed 
explainable by a common religion, these visions occupy but a 
small place in the lives of the great mystics; they are soon left 
behind, and treated as if they had been merely symbolical. 
As 
to theological teaching in general, it is true that they seem to 
accept it with utter docility, and in particular to obey their 
confessors; but, as has been shrewdly remarked, "they obey 
themselves alone, and a sure instinct leads them straight to the 

236 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
very man who can be relied upon to guide them in the way 
they want to go. 
If he should happen to depart from it, our 
mystics would not hesitate to shake off his authority, and, on 
the strength of their direct contact with the Deity, place their 
own liberty above all else." 1 
It would indeed be interesting at 
this point to study closely the relations between the spiritual 
adviser and the soul seeking counsel. 
It would be found that, 
of the two, he that has meekly acquiesced in yielding to guid­
ance has more than once, no less meekly, become the guide. 
But this is not for us the important point. 
All we want to 
make clear is that, if external resemblances between Christian 
mystics may be due to a common tradition or a common train­
ing, their deep-seated agreement is a sign of an identity of 
intuition which would find its simplest explanation in the acrual 
existence of the Being with whom they believe themselves to 
hold intercourse. 
So much the more so, then, if we consider 
that the other mysticisms, ancient or modern, go more or less 
far, stopping at this or that stage, but all point in the same 
direction. 
Yet we may admit that mystical experience, left to itself, 
cannot provide the philosopher with complete certainty. 
It 
could be absolutely convincing only if he had come by an­
other way, such as a sensuous experience coupled with rational 
inference, to the conclusion of the probable existence of a 
privileged experience through which man could get into touch 
with a transcendent principle. 
The occurrence in mystics of 
just such an experience would then make it possible to add 
something to the results already established, whilst these estab­
lished results would reflect back on to the mystical experience 
something of their own objectivity. 
Experience is the only 
source of knowledge. But, since the intellectual record of the 
fact inevitably goes further than the raw fact, ali experiences 
1 M. de Montmorand, Psycbologie des mystiques catboliques ortho­
do:res (Paris, 1920), p. 17. 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
237 
are far from being equally conclusive and from justifying the 
same certainty. .Many lead us to merely probable conclusions. 
Yet probabilities may accumulate, and the sum-total be prac­
tically equivalent to cenainry. We have alluded elsewhere to 
those "lines of fact" each one indicating but the direction of 
truth, because it does not go far enough: truth itself, however, 
will be reached if two of them can be prolonged to the point 
where they intersect. A surveyor measures the distance to an 
unattainable point by taking a line on it, now from one, now 
from the other of two points which he can reach. In our 
opinion this method of intersection is the only one that can 
bring about a decisive advance in metaphysics. By this means 
collaboration between philosophers can be established; meta­
physics, like science, will progress by the gradual accumulation 
of results obtained, instead of being a complete take-it-or-leave­
it system, always in dispute and always doomed to stan afresh. 
Now it so happens that a thorough study of a cenain order 
of problems, entirely different from religious problems, has led 
us to a conclusion which makes probable the existence of a 
singular privileged experience, such as a mystic experience. 
And, on the other hand, the mystical experience, studied for its 
own sake, supplies us with pointers that can be added and 
fitted to the knowledge obtained in an entirely different field, 
by an entirely different method. It is a case, then, of one 
supponing and complementing the other. Let us begin with 
the first point. 
It was by following as closely as possible the evidence of 
biology that we reached the conception of a vital impetus and 
of a creative evolution. As we set it out at the beginning of the 
last chapter, this conception was by no means a hypothesis, 
such as can be found at the basis of any metaphysical system: 
it was a condensation of fact, a summing up of summings up. 
Now, whence carne the impetus, and what was the principle 
behind it? If it sufficed unto itself, what was it in itself, and 

238 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
what meaning were we to ascribe to its manifestations as a 
whole? 
To such questions the facts under consideration sup­
plied no direct answer; but we saw clearly from what direction 
the answer might come. 
For the energy thrown through 
matter appeared to us, as it were, below or above conscious­
ness, in any case of the same order as consciousness. 
It had 
had to get round many obstacles, squeeze itself through others; 
above all, divide itself between diverging lines of evolution: 
at the extremity of the nvo main lines we ultimately found two 
modes of knowledge into which it had resolved itself in order 
to materialize: the instinct of insects, the intelligence of man. 
Instinct was intuitive; intelligence reflected and reasoned. 
It 
is true that intuition had had to debase itself to become instinct; 
it had become intent, as though hypnotized, on the interest of 
the species, and what had survived of its consciousness had 
assumed a somnambulistic form. 
But just as there subsisted 
around animal instinct a fringe of intelligence, so human in­
telligence preserved a halo of intuition. 
The latter, in man, 
had remained fully disinterested and conscious, but it was only 
a faint glow and did not radiate very far. 
Yet it is from this 
that the light must come, if ever the inner working of the 
vital impetus were to be made clear in its significance and in its 
object. 
For this inruition was turned inward; and if, in a first 
intensification, beyond which most of us did not go, it made 
us realize the continuity of our inner life, a deeper intensifica­
tion might carry it to the roots of our being, and thus to the 
very principle of life in general. 
Now is not this precisely the 
privilege of the mystic soul? 
This brings us to what we have just stated as our second 
point. 
The first question was to find out whether or no the 
mystics were merely "queer," if the accounts of their ex­
periences were purely fanciful or not. 
But the question was 
soon settled, at least as far as the great mystics were concerned. 
The next thing was to find out whether mysticism was no 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
239 
more than a more fervent faith, an imaginative form such as 
traditional religion is capable of assuming in passionate souls, 
or whether, while assimilating as much as it can from this 
religion, while turning to it for confirmation, while borrowing 
its language, it did not possess an original content, drawn 
straight from the very well-spring of religion, independent of 
all that religion owes to tradition, to theology, to the Churches. 
In the first case, it would necessarily stand aloof from philos­
ophy, for the latter ignores revelation which has a definite 
date, the institutions \vhich have transmitted it, the faith that 
accepts it: it must confine itself to experience and inference. 
But, in the second case, it would suffice to take mysticism 
unalloyed, apart from the visions, the allegories, the theo­
logical language which express it, to make it a powerful help­
meet to philosophical research. 
Of these two conceptions of 
the relation that it maintains to religion, the second seems to 
us indubitably the right one. 
\Ve must then find out in what 
measure mystic experience is a continuation of the experience 
which led us to the doctrine of the vital impetus. 
All the 
information with which it would furnish philosophy, philos­
ophy would repay in the shape of confirmation. 
Let us first note that the mystics ignore what we ha\·e 
called "false problems." 
It may perhaps be obj ected that 
they ignore all problems, \vhether real or false, and this is true 
enough. 
It is none the less certain that they supply us with 
an implicit answer to questions which force themselves upon 
the attention of philosophers, and that difficulties which should 
ne\·er have perplexed philosophy are implicitly regarded by 
the mystic as non-existent. \ Ve have shown elsewhere that 
part of metaphysics moves, consciously or not, around the 
question of knowing why anything exists-why matter, or 
spirit, or God, rather than nothing at all? 
But the question 
presupposes that reality fills a void, that underneath Being 
lies nothingness, that de jure there should be nothing, that we 

240 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
must therefore explain why there is de facto something. 
And 
this presupposition is pure illusion, for the idea of absolute 
nothingness has not one jot more meaning than a square 
circle. 
The absence of one thing being always the presence 
of another-which we prefer to leave aside because it is not 
the thing that interests us or the thing we were expecting 
-suppression is never anything more than substitution, a 
two-sided operation which we agree to look at from one side 
only: so that the idea of the abolition of everything is self­
destructive, inconceivable; it is a pseudo-idea, a mirage con­
jured up by our imagination. 
But, for reasons we have stated 
elsewhere, the illusion is natural: its source lies in the depths 
of the understanding. 
It raises questions which are the main 
origin of metaphysical anguish. 
Now, for a mystic these 
questions simply do not exist, they arc optical illusions arising, 
in the inner world, from the structure of human intelligence, 
they recede and disappear as the mystic rises superior to the 
human point of view. 
And, for similar reasons, the mystic 
will no more worry about the difficulties accumulated by 
philosophy around the "metaphysical" attributes of Deity: 
he has nothing to do with properties which arc mere negations 
and can only be expressed negatively; he believes that he sees 
what God is, for him there is no seeing what God is not. 
It 
is therefore on the nature of God, immediately apprehended 
on the positive side, I mean on the side which is perceptible to 
the eyes of the soul, that the philosopher must question him. 
The philosopher could soon define this nature, did he wish 
to find a formula for mysticism. 
God is love, and the object 
of love: herein lies the whole contribution of mysticism. 
About this twofold love the mystic will never have done 
talking. 
His description is interminable, because what he 
wants to describe is ineffable. 
But what he does state clearly 
is that divine love is not a thing of God: it is God Himself. 
It 
is upon this point that the philosopher must fasten who holds 

D Y N A J\H C  R E L I G I O N 
241 
God to be a person, and yet wishes to avoid anything like a 
gross assimilation with man. 
He will think, for example, of 
the enthusiasms which can fire a soul, consume all that is 
within it, and henceforth fill the whole space. 
The individual 
then becomes one with the emotion; and yet he \\-as never so 
thoroughly himself; he is simplified, unified, intensified. 
Nor 
has he ever been so charged with thought, if it be true, as we 
have said, that there are two kinds of emotion, the one below 
intellect, which is mere disturbance following upon a repre­
sentation, the other above intellect, which precedes the idea and 
is more than idea, but which would burst into ideas if, pure soul 
that it is, it chose to give itself a body. \Vhat is there more sys­
tematically architectonic, more reflectively elaborate, than a 
Beethoven symphony? 
But all through the labour of arrang­
ing, rearranging, selecting, carried out on the intellectual plane, 
the composer was turning back to a point situated outside 
that plane, in search of acceptance or refusal, of a lead, an 
inspiration; at that point there lurked an indivisible emotion 
which intelligence doubtless helped to unfold into music, 
but which was in itself something more than music and more 
than intelligence. 
Just 
the 
opposite 
of infra-intellectual 
emotion, it remained dependent on the will. To refer to this 
emotion the artist had to make a constantly repeated effort, 
such as the eye makes to rediscover a star v,-hich, as soon as 
it is found, vanishes into the dark sky. 
An emotion of this 
kind doubtless resembles, though very remotely, the sublime 
love which is for the mystic the very essence of God. 
In any 
case, the philosopher must bear the emotion in mind when he 
compresses mystic intuition more and more in order to express 
it in terms of intelligence. 
He may not write music, but he generally writes books; and 
the analysis of his own state of mind when he writes will help 
him to understand how the lm-e in which the mystics see the 
very essence of divinity can be both a person and a creative 

242 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
power. 
He generally keeps, when writing, within the sphere 
of concepts and words. 
Society supplies ideas ready to hand, 
worked out by his predecessors and stored up in the language, 
ideas which he combines in a new way, after himself re­
shaping them to a certain extent so as to make them fit into 
his combination. This method will always produce some more 
or less satisfactory result, but still a result, and in a limited 
space of time. 
And the work produced may be original and 
vigorous; in many cases human thought will be enriched by 
it. 
Yet this \Vill be but an increase of that year's income; 
social intelligence will continue to lh•e on the same capital, 
the same stock. Now there is another method of composition, 
more ambitious, less certain, which cannot tell when it will 
succeed or even if it will succeed at all. 
It consists in working 
back from the intellectual and social plane to a point in the 
soul from which there springs an imperative demand for 
creation. 
The soul within which this demand dwells may 
indeed have felt it fully only once in its lifetime, but it is 
always there, a unique emotion, an impulse, an impetus 
received from the very depths of things. 
To obey it com­
pletely new words would have to be coined, new ideas would 
have to be created, but this would no longer be communicating 
something, it would not be writing. 
Yet the writer will at­
tempt to realize the unrealizable. 
He will revert to the simple 
emotion, to the form which yearns to create its matter, and 
will go with it to meet ideas already made, wdrds that already 
exist, briefly social segments of reality. 
All along the way 
he will feel it manifesting itself in signs born of itself, I mean 
in fragments of its own materialization. 
How can these 
elements, each unique of its kind, be made to coincide with 
words already expressing things? 
He will be driven to strain 
the words, to do violence to speech. 
And, even so, success can 
never be sure; the writer wonders at every step if it will be 
granted to him to go on to the end; he thanks his luck for 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
243 
every partial success, just as a punster might thank the words 
he comes across for lending themselves to his fun. 
But if he 
does succeed, he will have enriched humanity with a thought 
that can take on a fresh aspect for each generation, 'vith a 
capital yielding ever-renewed dividends, and not just with a 
sum down to be spent at once. 
These are the two methods of 
literary composition. 
They may not, indeed, utterly exclude 
each other, yet they are radically different. 
The second one, 
as providing the image of the creation of matter by form, is 
what the philosopher must have in mind in order to conceive 
as creative energy the love wherein the mystic sees the very 
essence of God. 
Has this love an object? 
Let us bear in mind that an emotion 
of a superior order is self-sufficient. 
Imagine a piece of music 
which expresses love. 
It is not love for any particular person. 
Another piece of music will express another love. 
Here we 
have two distinct emotional atmospheres, two different fra­
grances, and in both cases the quality of love will depend upon 
its essence and not upon its object. 
Nevertheless, it is hard 
to conceive a love which is, so to speak, at work, and yet 
applies to nothing. 
As a matter of fact, the mystics unan­
imously bear witness that God needs us, just as we need 
God. 
\Vhy should He need us unless it be to love us? 
And 
it is to this very conclusion that the philosopher who holds 
to the mystical experience must come. 
Creation will appear 
to him as God undertaking to create creators, that He may 
have, besides Himself, beings worthy of His love. 
\Ve should hesitate to admit this if it were merely a ques­
tion of humdrum dwellers on this corner of the universe called 
Earth. 
But, as we have said before, it is probable that life 
animates all the planets revolving round all the stars. 
It doubt­
less takes, by reason of the diversity of conditions in which 
it exists, the most varied forms, some very remote from what 
we imagine them to be; but its essence is everywhere the same, 

244 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
a slow accumulation of potential energy to be spent suddenly 
in free action. 
We might still hesitate to admit this, if we 
regarded as accidental the appearance amid the plants and ani­
mals that people the earth of a living creature such as man, 
capable of loving and making himself loved. 
But we have 
shown that this appearance, while not predetermined, was not 
accidental either. Though there were other lines of evolution 
runЇg alongside the line which led to man, and though much 
is incomplete in man himself, we can say, while keeping closely 
to what experience shows, that it is man who accounts for 
the presence of life on our planet. 
Finally, we might well go 
on hesitating if we believed that the universe is essentially 
raw matter, and that life has been super-added to matter. 
We 
have shown, on the contrary, that matter and life, as we de­
fine them, are coexistent and interdependent. 
This being the 
case, there is nothing to prevent the philosopher from follow­
ing to its logical conclusion the idea which mysticism suggests 
to him of a universe which is the mere visible and tangible 
aspect of love and of the need of loving, together with all the 
consequences entailed by this creative emotion: I mean the 
appearance of living creatures in which this emotion finds its 
complement; of an infinity of other beings without which 
they could not have appeared, and lastly of the unfathomable 
depths of material substance without which life would not have 
been possible. 
No doubt we are here going beyond the conclusions we 
reached in Creative Evolution. 
\Ve wanted then to keep as 
close as possible to facts. 
We stated nothing that could not 
in time be confirmed by the tests of biology. 
Pending that 
confirmation, we had obtained results which the philosophic 
method, as we understand it, justified us in holding to be true. 
Here we are in the field of probabilities alone. 
llut we cannot 
reiterate too often that philosophic certainty admits of degrees, 
that it calls for intuition as well as for reason, and that if 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
245 
intumon, backed up by science, is to be extended, such ex­
tension can be made only by mystical intuition. In fact, the 
conclusions just set out complete naturally, though not neces­
sarily, those of our former work. Granted the existence of a 
creative energy which is love, and which desires to produce 
from itself beings worthy to be loved, it might indeed sow 
space with worlds whose materiality, as the opposite of divine 
spirituality, would simply express the distinction between be­
ing created and creating, between the multifarious notes, strung 
like pearls, of a symphony and the indivisible emotion from 
which they sprang. In each of these worlds vital impetus and 
raw matter might thus be complementary aspects of creation, 
life owing to the matter it traverses its subdivision into dis­
tinct beings, and the potentialities it bears within it being 
mingled as much as the spatiality of the matter which dis­
plays them permits. This interpenetration has not been pos­
sible on our planet; everything conduces to the idea that 
whatever matter could be secured here for the embodiment 
of life was ill-adapted to favour life's impetus. The original 
impulsion therefore split into divergent lines of evolutionary 
progress, instead of remaining undivided to the end. Even 
along the line on which the essential of the impulsion travelled 
it ended by exhausting its effect, or rather the movement 
which started as straight ended as circular. 
In that circle 
humanity, the terminal point, revolves. Such was our con­
clusion. In order to carry it further otherwise than by mere 
guesswork, we should simply have to follow the lead of the 
mystic. That current of life which traverses matter, and which 
accounts for its existence, \Ve simply took for granted. As for 
humanity, which stands at the extremity of the main line, we 
did not ask whether it had any other purpose but itself. Now, 
this twofold question is contained in the very answer given 
to it by mystical intuition. Beings have been called into 
existence who were destined to love and be loved, since 

246 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
creative energy is to be defined as love. 
Distinct from God, 
Who is this energy itself, they could spring into being only 
in a universe, and therefore the universe sprang into being. 
In that portion of the universe which is our planet-probably 
in our whole planetary system-such beings, in order to appear, 
have had to be wrought into a species, and this species in­
volved a multitude of other species, which led up to it, or 
sustained it, or else formed a residue. 
It may be that in other 
systems there are only individuals radically differentiated­
assuming them to be multifarious and mortal-and maybe 
these creatures too were shaped at a single stroke, so as to be 
complete from the first. 
On Earth, in any case, the species 
which accounts for the existence of all the others is only 
partially itself. 
It would never for an instant have thought of 
becoming completely itself, if certain representatives of it had 
not succeeded, by an individual effort added to the general 
work of life, in breaking through the resistance put up by the 
instrument, in triumphing over materiality-in a word in 
getting back to God. These men are the mystics. They have 
blazed a trail along which other men may pass. 
They have, 
by this very act, shown to the philosopher the whence and 
whither of life. 
People are never tired of saying that man is but a minute 
speck on the face of the earth, the earth a speck in the 
universe. Yet, even physically, man is far from merely occupy­
ing the tiny space allotted to him, and with which Pascal 
himself was content when he condemned the "thinking reed" 
to be, materially, only a reed. 
For if our body is the matter 
to which our consciousness applies itself it is coextensive with 
our consciousness, it comprises all we perceive, it reaches to 
the stars. 
But this vast body is changing continually, some­
times radically, at the slightest shifting of one part of itself 
which is at its centre and occupies a small fraction of space. 
This inner and central body, relatively invariable, is ever pres-

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
247 
ent. 
It is not merely present, it is operative: It IS through 
this body, and through it alone, that we can move other 
pans of the large body. 
And, since action is what matters, 
since it is an understood thing that we are present where 
we act, the habit has grown of limiting consciousness to the 
small body and ignoring the vast one. 
The habit appears, 
moreover, to be justified by science, which holds outward 
perception to be an epiphenomenon of corresponding intra­
cerebral processes: so that all we perceive of the larger body 
is regarded as being a mere phantom externalized by the 
smaller one. 
We have previously exposed the illusion con­
tained in this metaphysical theory.1 
If the surface of our 
organized small body (organized precisely with a view to im­
mediate action) is the seat of all our actual movements, our 
huge inorganic body is the seat of our potential or theoretically 
possible actions: the perceptive centres of the brain being the 
pioneers that prepare the way for subsequent actions and 
plan them from within, everything happens as though our ex­
ternal perceptions were built up by our brain and launched 
by it into space. 
But the truth is quite different, and we are 
really present in everything we perceive, although through 
ever varying parts of ourselves which are the abode of no 
more than potential actions. 
Let us take matters from this 
angle and we shall cease to say, even of our body, that it is lost 
in the immensity of the universe. 
It is true that, when people speak of the littleness of man 
and the immensity of the universe, they are thinking of the 
complexity of the latter quite as much as of its size. A person 
appears as something simple; the material world is of a com­
plexity that defies imagination: even the tiniest visible particle 
of matter is a world in itself. 
How then can we believe that 
the latter exists only for the sake of the former? 
Yet we 
1 Matiere et Mbnoire (Paris, 1896) . 
See the whole of Chap. I. 

248 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
can and must. 
For, when we find ourselves confronted with 
parts which we can go on counting without ever coming to 
an end, it may be that the whole is simple, and that we 
are looking at it from the wrong point of view. 
Move your 
hand from one point to another: to you who perceive it from 
the inside this is an indivisible movement. 
But I who per­
ceive it from the outside, with my attention centred on the 
line followed, I say to myself that your hand has had to cover 
the first part of the interval, then the half of the second half, 
then the half of what was left, and so on: I could go on for 
millions of centuries, and never finish the enumeration of the 
acts into which, in my eyes, the movement you feel to be 
indivisible is split up. Thus the gesture which calls into being 
the human species, or, to use more general terms, the objects 
of love for the Creator, might well require conditions which 
require other conditions, and so on, endlessly, to infinity. We 
cannot think of this multiplicity without bewilderment; yet it 
is but the reverse of something indivisible. 
It is true that the 
infinite numbers into which we decompose a gesture of the 
hand are 
purely virtual, necessarily determined in their 
virtualness by the reality of the gesture, whereas the com­
ponent parts of the universe, and the parts of these parts, are 
realities: when they are living beings, they possess a spon­
taneity which may even attain to free activity. 
Hence we are 
not affirming that the relation between the complex and the 
simple is the same in both cases. 
\Ve only wanted to show by 
the comparison that complexity, even when unlimited, is no 
proof of importance, and that an existence that is simple may 
postulate a chain of conditions which never ends. 
Such then will be our conclusion. 
Attributing the place we 
do to man, and the significance we do to life, it may well 
appear optimistic. The vision at once rises before us of all the 
suffering with which life is fraught, from the lowest stage of 
consciousness up to man. It would be no use for us to contend 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
249 
that among animals this suffering is by no means as great as 
people think; without going so far as the Cartesian theory 
of animal-machine, we may presume that pain is much dim­
inished for beings possessing no active memory, who do not 
protract their past into their present, and who are not com­
plete personalities; their consciousness is of a somnambulistic 
nature; neither their pleasure nor their pain produce the same 
deep and enduring reverberations as ours: do we count as real 
the pain we feel in a dream? 
Even in man, is not physical 
distress often due to imprudence or carelessness, or to over­
refined tastes, or artificial needs? 
As for moral distress, it is 
as often as not our own fault, and in any case it would not be 
so acute if we had not exasperated our sensibility to the point 
of making it morbid; our pain is indefinitely protracted and 
multiplied by brooding over it. 
In a word, it would be easy 
to add a few paragraphs to the Tbeodicee of Leibmtz. 
But 
we have not the slightest inclination to do so. 
The philos­
opher may indulge in speculations of this kind in the solitude 
of his study; but what is he going to think about it in the 
presence of a mother who has just watched the passing of 
her child? 
No, suffering is a terrible reality, and it is mere 
unwarrantable optimism to define evil a priori, even reduced 
to what it actually is, as a lesser good. 
But there is an em­
pirical optimism, which consists simply in noting two facts: 
first that humanity finds life, on the whole, good, since it 
clings to it; and then, that there is an unmixed joy, lying 
beyond pleasure and pain, which is the final state of the 
mystic soul. 
In this twofold sense, and from both points of 
view, optimism must be admitted, without any necessity for 
the philosopher to plead the cause of God. 
It will be said, of 
course, that if life is good on the whole, yet it would have 
been better without suffering, and that suffering cannot have 
been willed by a God of love. 
But there is nothing to prove 
that suffering was willed. 
We have pointed out that what, 

250 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
looked at from one side, appears as an infinite multiplicity of 
things, of which suffering is indeed one, may look from an­
other side like an indivisible act, so that the elimination of 
one part would mean doing away with the whole. Now it will 
be suggested that the whole might have been different, and 
such that pain had no place in it; therefore that life, even if 
it is good, could have been better. 
And the conclusion will 
be drawn that, if a principle really exists, and if that principle 
is love, it is not omnipotent and it is therefore not God. 
But 
that is just the question. 
What exactly does "omnipotence" 
mean? 
We have shown that the idea of "nothing" is tanta­
mount to the idea of a square circle, that it vanished under 
analysis, leaving only an empty word behind it, in fine that 
it is a pseudo-idea. 
May not the same apply to the idea of 
"everything," if this name is given not only to the sum-total 
of the real, but also to the totality of the possible? 
I can, at a 
stretch, represent something in my mind when I hear of the 
sum-total of existing things, but in the sum-total of the non­
existent I can see nothing but a string of words. 
So that here 
again the objection is based on a pseudo-idea, a verbal entity. 
But we can go further still: the objection arises from a whole 
series of arguments implying a radical defect of method. 
A 
certain representation is built up a priori, and it is taken for 
granted that this is the idea of God; from thence are deduced 
the characteristics that the world ought to show; and if the 
world does not actually show them, we are told that God does 
not exist. 
Now, who can fail to see that, if philosophy is the 
work of experience and reasoning, it must follow just the 
reverse method, question experience as to what it has to 
teach us of a Being Who transcends tangible reality as He 
transcends human consciousness, and so appreciate the nature 
of God by reasoning on the facts supplied by experience? 
The nature of God will thus appear in the very reasons we 
have for believing in His existence: we shall no longer try 

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
251 
to deduce His existence o r  non-existence from a n  arbitrary 
conception of His nature. 
Let agreement be reached on this 
point, and there will be no objection to talking about divine 
omnipotence. 
We find such expressions used by these very 
mystics to whom we turn for experience of the divine. 
They 
obviously mean by this an energy to which no limit can be 
assigned, and a power of creating and loving which surpasses 
all imagination. 
They certainly do not evoke a closed con­
cept, still less a definition of God such as might enable us to 
conclude what the world is like or what it should be like. 
The same method applies to all problems of the after-life. 
It is possible, with Plato, to lay down a priori a definition of 
the soul as a thing incapable of decomposition because it is 
simple, incorruptible because it is indivisible, immortal by 
virtue of its essence. 
This leads, by a process of deduction, 
to the idea of souls falling into Time, and thence to that of a 
return into Eternity. 
But what is to be the answer to those 
who deny the existence of the soul thus defined? 
And how 
could the problems touching a real soul, its real origin, its 
real fate, be resolved in accordance with reality, or even 
posited in terms of reality, when one has merely been specu­
lating upon a possibly baseless conception of the soul, or, at 
the very best, defining conventionally the meaning of the word 
which society has inscribed on a slice of reality set apart for 
the convenience of conversation? 
The affirmation remains as 
sterile as the definition was arbitrary. 
The Platonic concep­
tion has not helped our knowledge of the soul by a single 
step, for all that it has been meditated upon for two thou­
sand years. 
It was as complete and final as that of the tri­
angle, and for the same reasons. 
How can we help seeing, 
however, that, if there really is a problem of the soul, it must 
be posited in terms of experience, and in terms of experience 
it must be progressively, and always partially, solved? 
\Ve 
shall not revert to this subject, which we have dealt with else-

252 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
where. Let us merely recall that the observation, by our senses 
and our consciousness, of nonnal facts and morbid states re­
veals to us the inadequacy of the physiological explanation of 
the memory, the impossibility of attributing the preservation 
of recollections to the brain, and, on the other hand, the pos­
sibility of following up, step by step, the successive expansions 
of memory, from the point where it contracts to allow the 
passage only of what is strictly necessary to the present action, 
up to the farthest plane where it spreads out a panorama of the 
whole indestructible past. 
We said metaphorically that we 
were proceeding thus from the summit to the base of the cone. 
It is only at its topmost point that the cone fits into matter; as 
soon as we leave the apex, we enter into a new realm. 
What 
is it? 
Let us call it the spirit, or again, if you will, let us refer 
to the soul, but in that case bear in mind that we are remoulding 
language and getting the word to encompass a series of ex­
periences instead of an arbitrary definition. This experimental 
searching will suggest the possibility and even probability of 
the survival of the soul, since even here below we shall have 
observed something of its independence of the body, indeed we 
shall have almost felt it. 
This will be only one aspect of that 
independence; we still remain imperfectly informed of the 
conditions of the after-life, and especially regarding its dura­
tion: is it for a time, or for all eternity? 
But we shall at least 
have found something upon which experience can get a grip, 
and one indisputable affinnation will be made possible, as 
well as a future advance of our knowledge. So much for what 
we might call the experience on the lower plane. 
Let us now 
betake ourselves to the higher plane: we shall find an experi­
ence of another type, mystic intuition. And this is presumably 
a participation in the divine essence. 
Now, do these two ex­
periences meet? 
Can the after-life, which is apparently as­
sured to our soul by the simple fact that, even here below, a 
great part of this activity is independent of the body, be ideo-

D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N 
2 53 
tical with that of the life into which, even here below, cenain 
privileged souls insert themselves? 
Only a prolongation and 
a profound investigation of these two experiences will tell 
us; the problem must remain open. 
Still it is something to 
have obtained, on essential points, a probability ·which is 
capable of being transformed into a cenainty, and for the 
rest, for the knowledge of the soul and of its destiny, the 
possibility of endless progress. 
It is true that at first this way 
out of the difficulty will satisfy neither of the two schools 
which do battle over the a priori definition of the soul, 
categorically assening or denying. 
Those who deny, because 
they refuse to set up as a reality what is perhaps a baseless 
construction of the mind, will stick to their negation i n  the 
very teeth of the experience put before them, believing 
that they are still dealing with the same thing. 
Those who 
affirm will have nothing but contempt for ideas which arc ad­
mittedly provisional and calling for improvement; they ·wil 
see in them nothing more than their own thesis, impaired and 
impoverished. 
It \viii take them some time to understand that 
their thesis had been extracted j ust as it stands from current 
language. 
Society doubtless follows cenain suggestions of 
inner experience when it talks of the soul; but it has made up 
this word, like all the others, for its own convenience. 
It has 
applied it to something distinct from the body. 
The more 
radical the distinction, the better the word answers its pur­
pose: now it cannot be more radical than when the qualities of 
the soul are taken to be purely and simply the negations of 
those of matter. 
Such is the idea that the philosopher has 
received only too often, ready made, from society through 
language. 
It appears to represent the acme of spirituality, just 
because it goes to the very end of something. 
But this some­
thing is only negation. 
There is nothing to be extracted from 
nothingness, and knowledge of such a soul is, of course, in­
capable of extension, nay, it rings hollow at the first blow of 

254 
D Y N A M I C  R E L I G I O N  
an opposing philosophy. 
How much better to tum back to 
the vague suggestions of consciousness from which we staned, 
to delve into them and follow them up till we reach a clear 
intuition! 
Such is the method we recommend. 
Once again, 
it will not please either side. 
To apply it is to risk getting 
caught between the bark and the tree. 
But no matter! 
The 
bark will split if the wood of the old tree swells with a new 
flow of sap. 

C H A P T E R  I V  
FINAL REMARKS 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
0:-.E of the results of our analysis has been to draw a sharp 
distinction, in the sphere of society, between the closed and 
the open. 
The closed society is that whose members hold 
together, caring nothing for the rest of humanity, on the 
alert for attack or defence, bound, in fact, to a perpetual 
readiness for battle. 
Such is human society fresh from the 
hands of nature. 
Man was made for this society, as the ant 
was made for the ant-heap. We must not overdo the analogy; 
we should note, however, that the hymenopterous com­
munities are at the end of one of the two principal lines of 
animal evolution, just as human societies are at the end of the 
other, and that they are in this sense counterparts of one 
another. 
True, the first are stereotyped, whereas the others 
vary; the former obey instinct, the latter intelligence. 
But if 
nature, and for the very reason that she has made us intelligent, 
has left us to some extent with freedom of choice in our type 
of social organization, she has at all events ordained that we 
should live in society. A force of unvarying direction, which 
is to the soul what force of gravity is to the body, ensures the 
cohesion of the group by bending all individual wills to the 
same end. 
That force is moral obligation. 
We have shown 
that it may extend its scope in societies that are becoming open, 
but that it was made for the closed society. 
And we have 
shown also how a closed society can live, resist this or that 
dissolving action of intelligence, preserve and communicate to 
255 

256 
J\1 E C H A N  I C S A N D  1\1 Y S T I C  I S M  
each of its members that confidence which is indispensable, 
only through a religion born of the myth-making function. 
This religion, which we have called static, and this obligation, 
which is tantamount to a pressure, are the ,·ery substance of 
closed society. 
Never shall we pass from the closed society to the open 
society, from the city to humanity, by any mere broadening 
out. 
The two things are not of the same essence. 
The open 
society is the society \vhich is deemed in principle to embrace 
all humanity. A dream dreamt, now and again, by chosen souls, 
it embodies on every occasion something of itself in creations, 
each of which, through a more or less far-reaching transforma­
tion of man, conquers difficulties hitherto unconquerable. 
But after each occasion the circle that has momentarily opened 
closes again. 
Pan of the new has flowed into the mould of 
the old; individual aspiration has become social pressure; and 
obligation covers the whole. 
Do these advances always take 
place in the same direction? 
'Vc can take it for granted that 
the direction is the same, the moment \ve agree that they 
are advances. 
For each one is thus defined as a step forward. 
But this can be no more than a metaphor, and if there were 
really a pre-existent direction along which man had simply 
to advance, moral renovation would be foreseeable; there 
would be no need, on each occasion, for a creative effort. 
The truth is that it is always possible to take the latest phase 
of renovation, define it by a concept, and say that the others 
contained a greater or lesser quantity of what the concept in­
cludes, that therefore they all led up to that renovation. 
But 
things assume this form only in retrospect; the changes were 
qualitative and not quantitative; they defied all anticipation. 
In one respect, howenr, they had, in themselves, and not 
merely through the medium of a conceptual interpretation, 
something in common. All aimed at opening what was closed; 
and the group, which after the last opening had closed on 

M E C H A N I C S A N D  1\I Y S T I C I S M  
257 
itself, was brought back every time to humanity. 
Let us go 
further: these successive efforts were not, strictly speaking, 
the progressive realization of an ideal, since no idea, forged 
beforehand, could possibly portray a series of accretions each 
of which, creating itself, would create its own idea; and yet 
the diversity of these efforts could be summed up into one 
and the same thing: an impetus, which had ended in closed 
societies because it could carry matter no further along, but 
which later on is destined to be sought out and recaptured, 
not by the species, but by some privileged individual. 
This 
impetus is thus carried forward through the medium of cer­
tain men, each of whom thereby constitutes a species com­
posed of a single individual. If the individual is fully conscious 
of this, if the fringe of intuition surrounding his intelligence 
is capable of expanding sufficiently to envelop its object, that 
is the mystic life. 
The dynamic religion which thus springs 
into being is the very opposite of the static religion born of 
the myth-making function, in the same 'vay as the open 
society is the opposite of the closed society. 
But just as the 
new moral aspiration takes shape only by borrowing from 
the closed society its natural form, which is obligation, so 
dynamic religion is propagated only through images and 
symbols supplied by the myth-making function. 
There is no 
need to go back over these different points. 
I wanted simply 
to emphasize the distinction I have made between the open 
and the closed society. 
\Ve only have to concentrate on this distinction, and we 
shall see some of the big problems vanish, others assume a 
new shape. 
\Vhether we champion or impeach a religion, do 
we always take into account what is specifically religious in 
religion? 
We cherish or we dismiss a story which may have 
been found necessary for inducing a certain state of soul which 
can be propagated; but religion is essentially that very state. 
We discuss its definitions and its theories; and it has, indeed, 

2 58 
J\1 E C H A ĥ I C S A  D .\1 Y S T I C I S lvl 
made use of a metaphysic to gi,·e itself bodily substance; but 
it might, at a stretch, have assumed a different corporeal 
fonn, or even none at all. 
The mistake is to believe that 
it is possible to pass, by a mere process of enlargement or 
improvement, from the static to the dynamic, from demon­
stration or fabulation, even though it bear the stamp of truth, 
to intuition. 
The thing itself is thus confused with its ex­
pression or its symbol. 
This is the usual error of a sheer 
intellectualism. 
\Ve find it, just the same, when we pass 
from religion to morality. 
There is a static morality, which 
exists, as a fact, at a given moment in a given society; it has 
become ingrained in customs, ideas, and institutions; its obliga­
tory character is to be traced to nature's demand for a life 
in common. 
There is, on the other hand, a dynamic morality 
which is impetus, and which is related to life in general, 
creative of nature which created the social demand. 
The 
first obligation, in so far as it is a pressure, is infra-rational. 
The second, in so far as it is aspiration, is supra-rational. 
But 
intelligence intervenes. 
It seeks out the motive, that is to say 
the intellectual content, of each of these prescriptions; and, 
since intelligence is systematic, it imagines that the problem 
consists in reducing all moral motives to one. 
Now, if so, 
it is merely a matter of choosing one of them. General interest, 
personal interest, self-love, sympathy, pity, logical consistency, 
etc., there is no principle of action from which it is not 
possible to deduce more or less the morality that is generally 
accepted. 
It is true that the easiness of the operation, and 
the purely approximate character of the result, should put 
us on our guard. 
If almost identical rules of conduct are 
indifferently deducible from such divers principles, this is 
probably because no one of the principles was reduced to its 
specific characteristics. 
The philosopher \vent in search of 
his quarry in the social environment, where everything inter­
penetrates everything, where egoism and vanity are impreg-

J\1 E C H A 1\' I C S A ӂ  D ɮɯ Y S T I C I S l\1 
2 59 
nated with sociability; it is in no way surprising, then, that 
he should find again in each principle the morality that he 
has put or left there. But morality itself he leaves unex­
plained, since he would ha,·e first had to deh-e into social 
life, in so far as it is a discipline demanded by nature, and 
then again to delve into nature herself taken as the creation 
of life in general. He would thus have reached the very root 
of morality, which eludes the search of a purely intellectualist 
philosophy; the latter can only proffer advice, adduce reasons, 
which we are perfectly free to combat with other reasons. 
As a matter of fact, such philosophy always implies that the 
motive it has taken up as a principle is "preferable" to the 
others, that there is a difference of value between motives, 
and that there exists a general ideal by reference to which 
the real is to be estimated. It thus provides itself with a refuge 
in the Platonic theoӃ·. with the Idea of Good dominating all 
others: the reasons for action could then, apparently, be 
ranged in order of merit beneath the Idea of Good, the best 
being those that come nearest to it, and the attraction of 
Good being the principle of obligation. But then the great 
difficulty is to say by what sign we are to recognize that 
this or that line of conduct is nearer or funher from the ideal 
Good; if the sign were known, it would be the essential, and 
the Idea of Good would become unnecessary. It would be 
equally hard to explain how the ideal in question creates an 
imperative obligation, especially the strictest obligation of all, 
the obligation which attaches to custom in primitive and 
essentially closed societies. The truth is that an ideal cannot 
become obligatory unless it is already active, in which case 
it is made obligatory, not by the idea contained in it, but by 
its action. Or rather it is only the name we gi,·e to the 
supposedly ultimate effect of that action, felt to be continu­
ous, the hypothetical terminal point of the movement which 
is already sweeping us forward. At the root of all theories, 

260 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
then, we find the two illusions we have time and again 
denounced. 
The first, a very general one, consists in the 
conception of movement as a gradual diminution of the space 
between the position of the moving object, which is immo­
bility, and its terminal point considered as reached, which is 
immobility also, whereas positions are but mental snapshots 
of the indivisible movement: whence the impossibility of re­
establishing the true mobility, that is to say, in this case, 
the aspirations and pressures directly or indirectly constituting 
obligation. 
The second illusion concerns more specially the 
evolution of life. 
Because an evolutionary process has been 
observed starting from a certain point, it is believed that this 
point must have beŵn reached by the same evolutionary 
process, whereas the evolution may have been quite different, 
whereas even there may have been previously no evolution at 
all. 
Because we note a gradual enrichment of morality, we 
are apt to think that there is no such thing as a primitive 
irreducible morality, contemporary with the appearance of 
man. 
Yet we must posit this original morality at the same 
time as the human species, and assume that there was at the 
beginning a closed society. 
Now, is the distinction between the closed and the open, 
which is necessary to resolve or remove theoretical problems, 
able to help us practically? 
It would be of little utility if the 
closed society had always been so constituted as to shut itself 
up again after each momentary opening. 
In that case, how­
ever untiringly we might delve back into the past, we should 
never reach the primitive; the natural would be a mere consoli­
dation of the acquired. 
But, as we have just said, the truth is 
quite different. 
There is such a thing as fundamental nature, 
and there are acquisitions which, as they are superadded to 
nature, imitate it without becoming merged into it. 
Work­
ing back step by step we should get back to an original closed 
society, the general plan of which fitted the pattern of our 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
261 
species as the ant-heap fits the ant, but with this difference 
that in the second case it is the actual detail of the social 
organization which is given in advance, whereas in the other 
there exists only the main outline, a few directions, just 
enough natural prefiguration to provide immediately for the 
individual a suitable social environment. 
A knowledge of 
this plan would doubtless be to-day of mere historical interest, 
if the several dispositions had been ousted by others. 
But 
nature is indestructible. 
The French poet was wrong when 
he said: "Expel nature, she comes back at the double." There 
is no expelling her, she is there all the time. 
We have dwelt 
on the question of the transmissibility of acquired character­
istics. 
It is highly improbable that a habit is ever transmitted; 
if this does occur, it is owing to a combination of many favour­
able conditions so accidental that it will cenainly not recur 
often enough to implant the habit in the species. 
It is in 
customs, institutions, even in language, that moral acquisitions 
are deposited; they are then transmitted by unceasing educa­
tion; it is in this way that habits which pass on from genera­
tion to generation end by being considered as hereditary. 
But everything conspires to encourage the wrong explanation: 
misdirected pride, superficial optimism, a mistaken idea of 
the real nature of progress, lastly and above all, a very wide­
spread confusion between the inborn tendency, which is 
indeed transmissible from parent to child, and the acquired 
habit that has frequently become grafted on to the natural 
tendency. 
There is no doubt but that this belief has influ­
enced positive science itself, which accepted it from common 
sense, in spite of the small number and the questionable char­
acter of the facts called upon to suppon it, and then handed 
it back to common sense after having reinforced it with its 
own undisputed authority. There is nothing more instructive 
on this point than the biological and psychological work of 
Herben Spencer. 
It is based almost entirely on the idea of 

262 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
the hereditary transmission of acquired characteristics. 
And, 
in the days of its popularity, it impregnated scientists' doc­
trines of evolution. 
Now, this idea was, in Spencer, noth­
ing more than the general application of a thesis, presented in 
his first works, on social progress: his interest had at first 
been exclusively centred on the study of societies; it was only 
later that he came to deal with the phenomena of life. 
So 
that a sociology which thinks it is borrowing from biology 
the idea of hereditary tranS'mission of the acquired is only 
taking back what it lent. This unproven philosophical theory 
has assumed a false air of scientific assurance on its way 
through science, but it remains mere philosophy, and is 
further than ever from being proved. 
So let us keep to 
ascertained facts and to the probabilities suggested by them: 
in our opinion, if you eliminated from the man of to-day 
what has been deposited in him by unceasing education, he 
would be found to be identical, or nearly so, with his remotest 
ancestors.1 
What conclusion are we to deduce from this? 
Since the 
dispositions of the species subsist, immutable, deep within 
all of us, it is impossible that moralists and sociologists should 
not find it necessary to take them into account. 
True, it 
has been given only to a chosen few to dig down, first beneath 
the strata of the acquired, then beneath nature, and so get 
back into the very impetus of life. 
If such an effort could be 
1 We say "nearly" because we must take into account the variations 
which the living creature plays, as it were, on the theme supplied by his 
progenitors. But these variations, being accidental, and taking place in 
any diretion, cannot be added together, in the lapse of time, to modify 
h spec1es. On the thesis of the transmissibility of acquired character­
IStics, and on the evolutionism which certain biologists would found 
upon it, see Creative E7.-·olution (Chap. I). 
et us add tat, as we have already remarked, the sudden leap forward 
wh1ch ende 1Ĥ the human species may have been anempted at more 
han _one pomt m space and time and only panially succeeded, thus giv­
mg nse to "men:• to whom we may, if we like, give that name, but who 
are not necessarily our ancestors. 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
263 
made general, the impetus would not have stopped short at 
the human species, nor consequently at the closed society, as 
if before a blank wall. 
It is none the less true that these 
privileged ones would fain draw humanity after them; since 
they cannot communicate to the world at large the deepest 
elements of their spiritual condition, they transpose it super­
ficially; they seek a translation of the dynamic into the static 
which society may accept and stabilize by education. 
Now 
they can succeed only in the measure in which they have taken 
nature into consideration. 
Humanity as a whole cannot bend 
nature to its '\vill. But it can get round it. And this is possible 
only if its general configuration is known. The task would be 
a difficult one if it obliged us to undertake the study of 
psychology in general. But we are dealing here with only one 
particular point, human nature in so far as it is predisposed 
to a certain social form. 
We suggest that there is a natural 
human society, vaguely prefigured in us, that nature has taken 
care to supply us with a diagram of it beforehand, while 
leaving all latitude to our intelligence and our will to follow 
its indications. 
The diagram, vague and incomplete, corre­
sponds, in the realm of reasonable and free activity, to what 
is, in the case of instinct, the clear-cut design of the ant-hill 
or the hive at the other terminal point of evolution. 
So that 
all we have to do is to get back to the simple original sketch. 
But how is it to be found, with the acquired overlaying the 
natural? 
\Ve should be at a loss to give the answer if we had 
to supply an automatically applicable method of research. 
The truth is that we have to grope our way tentatively, by 
a system of cross-checking, following simultaneously several 
methods, each of which v.rill lead only to possibilities or prob­
abilities: by their mutual interplay the results will neutralize 
or reinforce one another, leading to reciprocal verification and 
correction. 
Thus, we shall take "primitive peoples" into 
account, without forgetting that here also a layer of acquisi-

264 
i\l E C H A N  I C S A N D  1\I Y S T I C  I S M  
tions covers nature, though it may be thinner than in our 
own case. 
\Ve shall obsen·e children, but not forget that 
nature has made provision for differences of age, and that 
child narure is not necessarily human narure; above all, the 
child is imitative, and what appears to us as spontaneous is 
often the effect of an education we have unwittingly been 
giving him. 
But the main and essential source of information 
is bound to be introspection. 
\ Ve must search for the bed­
rock of sociabilitY, and also of unsociabilitY, which would be 
. 
. 
perceptible to our consciousness, if established society had 
not imbued us with habits and dispositions which adjust us 
to it. 
Of these strata we are no longer aware, save at rare 
inten·als, and then in a flash. \V e must recapture that moment 
of Yision and abide by it. 
Let us begin by saying that man was designed for very small 
societies. 
And it is generally admitted that primitive com­
munities were small. 
But we must add that the original state 
of mind survives, hidden away beneath the habits without 
which indeed there would be no civilization. 
Driven inwards, 
powerless, it yet lives on in the depths of consciousness. 
If it 
does not go so far as to determine acts, yet it manifests itself 
in words. 
In a great nation certain districts may be admin­
istered to the general satisfaction; but where is the govern­
ment that the go\·emed go so far as to call a good one? They 
think they have praised it quite enough when they say it is 
not so bad as the others and, in this sense only, the best. Here 
the disapproval is congenital. 
In fact, the art of governing a 
great people is the only one for which there exists no technical 
training, no effecti\·e education, especially when we come to 
the highest posts. 
The extreme scarcity of political leaders of 
any calibre is owing to the fact that they are called upon to 
decide at any moment, and in detail, problems which the 
increased size of societies may well have rendered insoluble. 

M E C H A N I C S A N D  l\1 Y S T I C I S M  
265 
Study the history of the great modem nations: you will find 
plenty of great scientists, great artists, great soldiers, great 
specialists in every line-but how many great statesmen? 
Yet nature, which ordained small societies, left them an 
opening for expansion. 
For she also ordained war, or at least 
she made the conditions of man's life such that war was in­
evitable. No\\·, the menace of war can detem1ine several small 
societies to unite against a common danger. 
It is true that 
these unions are rarely lasting. 
In any case they lead to an 
assemblage of societies which is of the same order of magni­
tude as each single unit. 
It is rather in another sense that 
war is the origin of empires. 
These are born of conquest. 
Even if the war at the outset was not one of conquest, that 
is what it becomes ultimately, because the victor will have 
found it so convenient to appropriate the lands of the van­
quished, and even their populations, and thus profit by their 
labour. In this way the great Eastern empires of bygone days 
were formed. 
They fell into decay under various influences, 
but in reality because they were too unwieldy to li\·e. 
\Vhen 
the victor grants to the conquered populations a semblance of 
independence, the grouping lasts longer: witness the Roman 
Empire. 
But that the primitive instinct persists, that it exer­
cises a disintegrating effect, there is no doubt. 
Lea\·e it to 
operate, and the political construction crumbles. 
It was thus 
that the feudal system came into being in different countries, 
as the result of different events, under different conditions; the 
only common factor was the suppression of the force which 
was preventing the breaking-up of society; the break-up then 
took place spontaneously. 
If great nations have been able to 
build themselves up firmly in modem times, this is because 
constraint, a cohesive force working from without and from 
above on the complex whole, has little by little given way to 
a principle of unity arising from the very heart of each of the 
elementary societies grouped together, that is to say, from 

266 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
the very seat of the disruptive forces to which an uninterrupted 
resistance has to be opposed. 
This principle, the only one 
that can possibly neutralize the tendency to disruption, is 
patriotism. 
The ancients were well acquainted with it; they 
adored their country, and it is one of their poets who said 
that it is sweet to die for her. 
But it is a far cry from that 
attachment to the city, a group still devoted to a god who 
stands by it in battle, to the patriotism which is as much a 
pacific as a warlike virtue, which may be tinged with mysti­
cism, which mingles no calculations with its religion, which 
overspreads a great country and rouses a nation, which draws 
to itself the best in all souls, which is slowly and reverently 
evolved out of memories and hopes, out of poetry and love, 
with a faint perfume of every moral beauty under heaven, 
like the honey distilled from flowers. 
It took as noble a senti­
ment as this, imitating the mystic state, to overcome so deep­
seated a sentiment as the selfishness of the tribe. 
Now what is the regime of a society fresh from the hands 
of nature? 
It is possible that humanity did in fact begin as 
scattered and isolated family groups. 
But these were mere 
embryonic societies, and the philosopher should no more seek 
in them the essential tendencies of social life than the naturalist 
should study the habits of a species by confining his attention 
to the embryo. 
We must take society when it is complete, 
that is to say, capable of defending itself, and consequently, 
however small, organized for war. 
What then, in this pre­
cise sense, will its natural government be? 
If it were not 
desecrating the Greek words to apply them to a state of sav­
agery, we should say that it is monarchic or oligarchic, prob­
ably both. 
These two systems are indistinguishable in the 
rudimentary state: there must be a chief, and there is no 
community without privileged individuals, who borrow from 
or give to the chief something of his prestige, or rather who 
draw it, as he does, from some supernatural power. Authority 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
267 
is absolute on one side, obedience absolute on the other. 
We 
have said time and again that human societies and hymen­
opterous societies stand at the extremities of the two principal 
lines of biological evolution. 
Heaven forbid that we should 
assimilate them to each other! 
Man is intelligent and free. 
But we must always remember that social life was part of the 
structural plan of the human species just as in that of the bee, 
that it was a necessary part, that nature could not rely ex­
clusively on our free will, that accordingly she had to see to 
it that one or a few individuals should command and the rest 
obey. 
In the insect world, the diversity of social function is 
bound up with a difference of organization; you have "poly­
morphism." 
Shall we then say that in human societies we 
have "dimorphism," no longer both physical and psychical as 
in the insect, but psychical only? 
We think so, though it 
must be understood that this dimorphism does not separate 
men into two hard and fast categories, those that are born 
leaders and those that are born subjects. 
Nietzsche's mistake 
was to believe in a separation of this kind: on the one hand 
"slaves," on the other "masters." The truth is that dimorphism 
generally makes of each of us both a leader with the instinct 
to command and a subject ready to obey, although the second 
tendency predominates to the extent of being the only one 
apparent in most men. 
It is comparable to that of insects in 
that it implies two organizations, two indivisible systems of 
qualities (certain of which would be defects in the moralist's 
eyes) : we plump for the one system or the other, not in detail, 
as would be the case if it were a matter of contracting habits, 
but at a single stroke, kaleidoscope-fashion, as is bound to 
result from a natural dimorphism exactly comparable to that 
of the embryo in its choice between two sexes. 
We have 
a clear vision of this in times of revolution. 
Unassuming 
citizens, up to that moment humble and obedient, wake up 
one fine day with pretensions to be leaders of men. 
The 

268 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
kaleidoscope which had been held steady has now shifted one 
notch and Io! a complete metamorphosis! 
The result is some­
times good: great men of action have been revealed who were 
themselves unaware of their real capacity. 
But it is generally 
unfortunate. 
Within honest and gentle men there rushes up 
from the depths a ferocious personality, that of the leader who 
is a failure. 
And here we have a characteristic trait of that 
"political animal," man. 
We shall not go so far, indeed, as to say that one of the 
attributes of the leader dormant within us is ferocity. 
But 
it is certain that nature, at once destructive of individuals and 
productive of species, must have willed the ruthless leader if 
she provided for leaders at all. 
The whole of history bears 
witness to this. 
Incredible wholesale slaughter, preceded by 
ghastly tortures, has been ordered in absolute cold blood by 
men who have themselves handed down the record of these 
things, graven in stone. 
It may be argued that such things 
happened in very remote times. But if the form has changed, 
if Christianity has put an end to certain crimes, or at least ob­
tained that they be not made a thing to boast of, murder has 
all too often remained the ratio ultima, if not prima, of politics. 
An abomination no doubt, but imputable to nature as much 
as to man. For nature has at her disposal neither imprisonment 
nor exile; she knows only sentence of death. 
We may be 
allowed perhaps to recall a memory. 
It so happened that 
we met certain distinguished foreigners, coming from far-off 
lands, but dressed as we were, speaking French as we did, 
moving about, affable and amiable, among us. 
Shortly after 
we learned from a daily paper that, once back in their country 
and affiliated to opposite parties, one of them had had the 
other hanged, with all the paraphernalia of justice, simply to 
get rid of an awkward opponent. 
The tale was illustrated 
with a photograph of the gallows. 
The accomplished man of 
the world was dangling, half-naked, before the gaping crowd. 

M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
269 
Horrible, most horrible! 
Civilized men all, but the original 
political instinct had blown civilization to the winds and laid 
bare the nature underneath. 
Men who would think them­
selves bound to make the punishment fit the offence, if they 
had to deal with a guilty man, go to the extreme of killing an 
innocent person at the ca11 of political expediency. 
Similarly 
do the worker bees stab the drones to death when they con­
sider that the hive needs them no longer. 
But let us leave aside the temperament of the "leader" and 
consider the respective sentiments of ruler and ruled. 
These 
sentiments will be clearer where the line of demarcation is 
more distinct, in a society already considerable, but which 
has grown without radically modifying the "natural society." 
The governing class, in which we include the king if there is 
a king, may have been recruited in the course of history by 
different methods; but it always believes itself to belong to a 
superior race. 
There is nothing surprising in this. 
\Vhat 
might surprise us more, if we were not familiar with the 
dimorphism of social man, is that the people themselves should 
be convinced 
of this innate 
superiority. 
Doubtless the 
oligarchy is careful to foster this sentiment; and if it owes its 
origin to war, it will have faith and compel others to have 
faith in its own congenital military virtues, handed down 
from father to son. And indeed it maintains a real superiority 
of strength, thanks to the discipline it imposes on itself, and 
to the measures it takes to prevent the inferior class from or­
ganizing itself in its turn. 
Yet, in such a case, experience 
should show the ruled that their rulers are men like them­
selves. But instinct resists. 
It begins to waver only when the 
upper class itself invites it to do so. 
Sometimes the upper 
class does this unwittingly, through obvious incapacity, or by 
such crying abuses that it undermines the faith placed in it. 
At other times the invitation is intentional, certain members 
of the class turning against it, often from personal ambition, 

2 70 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
sometimes from a sentiment of justice: by stooping down to­
wards the lower classes, they dispel the illusion fostered by 
distance. 
It was in this way that some of the nobles col­
laborated in the French Revolution of 1789, which abolished 
the privilege of binh. 
Generally speaking, the initiative of 
assaults against inequality-justified or unjustified-has come 
rather from the upper classes, from those that were better off, 
and not from the lower, as might have been expected if it 
were merely a matter of conflict between class interests. Thus 
it was the upper middle class, and not the working classes, who 
played the leading pan in the Revolutions of I 830 and I 848, 
aimed (the second in particular) against the privilege of 
wealth. 
Later it was men of the educated classes who de­
manded education for all. The truth is that, if an aristocracy 
believes narurally, religiously, in its native superiority, the 
respect it inspires is no less religious, no less narural. 
It is easy, then, to understand that humanity should have 
arrived at democracy as a later development (for they were 
false democracies, those cities of antiquity, based on slavery, 
relieved by this fundamental iniquity of the biggest and most 
excruciating problems) .  
Of all political systems, it is indeed 
the funhest removed from nature, the only one to transcend, 
at least in intention, the conditions of the "closed society." 
It confers on man inviolable rights. 
These rights, in order to 
remain inviolate, demand of all men an incorruptible fidelity 
to duty. 
It therefore takes for its matter an ideal man, who 
respects others as he docs himself, inserting himself into obliga­
tions which he holds to be absolute, making them coincide so 
closely with this absolute that it is no longer possible to say 
whether it is the duty that confers the right or the right which 
imposes the duty. The citizen thus defined is both "law-maker 
and subject," as Kant has it. 
The citizens as a whole, the 
people, are therefore sovereign. 
Such is democracy in theory. 
It proclaims liberty, demands equality, and reconciles these 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
2 7 1  
two hostile sisters by reminding them that they are sisters, by 
exalting above everything fraternity. 
Looked at from this 
angle, the republican motto shows that the third term dispels 
the oft-noted contradiction between the two others, and that 
the essential thing is fraternity: a fact which would make it 
possible to say that democracy is evangelical in essence and 
that its motive power is love. 
Its sentimental origins could be 
found in the soul of Rousseau, its philosophic principles in 
the works of Kant, its religious basis in both Kant and 
Rousseau: we know how much Kant owed to his pietism, and 
Rousseau to an interplay of Protestantism and Catholicism. 
The American Declaration of Independence ( 1776), which 
served as a model for the Declaration of the Rights of Man 
in 1791, has indeed a Puritan ring: "We hold these truths to 
be self-evident . . . that all men are endowed by their Creator 
with certain unalienable rights, etc." Objections occasioned by 
the vagueness of the democratic formula arise from the fact 
that the original religious character has been misunderstood. 
How is it possible to ask for a precise definition of liberty and 
of equality when the future must lie open to all sorts of 
progress, and especially to the creation of new conditions 
under which it will be possible to have forms of liberty and 
equality which are impossible of realization, perhaps of con­
ception, to-day? 
One can do no more than trace the general 
outlines; their content will improve as and when fraternity 
provides. 
Ama, et fac quod vis. 
The formula of non­
democratic society, wishing its motto to tally, word for word, 
with that of democracy, would be "authority, hierarchy, im­
mobility." 
There you have· then democracy in its essence. 
Of course it must be considered only as an ideal, or rather a 
signpost indicating the way in which humanity should progress. 
In the first place, it was more than anything else as a protest 
that it was introduced into the world. 
Every sentence of 
the Declaration of the Rights of Man is a challenge to some 

212 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
abuse. 
The main thing was to put an end to intolerable suf­
fering. 
Summing up the grievances set forth in the memoirs 
presented to the Etats Generaux, Emile Faguet has written 
somewhere that the French Revolution was not made for the 
sake of liberty and equdity, but simply because "people were 
starving." 
Supposing this to be true, we must explain why it 
was at a given time that people refused to go on "starving." 
It is none the less true that, if the French Revolution formu­
lated things as they should be, the object was to do away 
with things as they were. 
Now, it sometimes happens that 
the intention \Vith which an idea is started remains invisibly 
attached to it, like the direction to the arrow. 
The demo­
cratic precepts, first enunciated with a definite idea of protest, 
provide evidence of their origin. 
They are found convenient 
to prevent, to reject, to overthrow; it is not easy to gather 
from them the positive indiction of what is to be done. 
Above all, they are applicable only if transposed, absolute 
and semi-evangelical as they originally were, into terms of 
purely relative morality or rather of general utility; and the 
transposition always risks turning into an incurvation in the 
direction of private interest. 
But it is not necessary to cata­
logue the objections raised against democracy nor indeed the 
replies to those objections. 
\Ve merely wanted to show, in 
the democratic mind, a mighty effort in a direction contrary 
to that of nature. 
Now, we have pointed to certain features of natural society. 
Taken together, they compose a countenance whose expres­
sion can be easily interpreted. 
Self-centredness, cohesion, 
hierarchy, absolute authority of the chief, all this means dis­
cipline, the war-spirit. 
Did nature will war? 
Let us repeat 
once again that nature willed nothing at all, if we mean by 
will a faculty of making particular decisions. 
But she can­
not posit an animal species without implicitly outlining the 
attitudes and movement which arise from its structure and 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
2 73 
extend that structure. 
It is in this sense that she \Villed war. 
She endowed man with a tool-making intelligence. 
Instead of 
supplying him with tools, as she did for a considerable num­
ber of the animal species, she preferred that he should make 
them himself. 
Now man is necessarily the owner of his tools, 
at any rate while he is using them. 
But since they are things 
apart from him, they can be taken away from him; it is easier 
to take them ready-made than to make them. 
Above all, 
they are meant to act on some specific matter, meant to be 
used for hunting or fishing, for example; the group of which 
he is a member may have fixed its choice on a forest, a lake, 
a river; another group may find it more convenient to settle 
in that very same place than to look further afield. 
There is 
now nothing for it but to fight the matter out. 
We have taken 
the case of a hunting forest, or a lake for fishing; it may just 
as well be a matter of fields to be cultivated, women to be 
seized, slaves to be carried off. 
In the same way reasons will 
be brought forward to justify such dealings. 
But no matter 
the thing taken, the motive adduced: the origin of war is 
ownership, individual or collective, and since humanity is 
predestined to ownership by its structure, war is natural. 
So 
strong, indeed, is the \var instinct, that it is the first to appear 
when we scratch below the surface of civilization in search of 
nature. We all know how little boys love fighting. 
They get 
their heads punched. 
But they have the satisfaction of having 
punched the other fellow's head. 
It has been justly said that 
childhood's games are the preparatory training to which na­
ture prompts them, with a view to the task laid on grown 
men. 
But we can go further, and look on most of the wars 
recorded in history as preparatory training or sport. 
\Vhen 
we consider the futility of the motives which brought about 
a goodly number of them, we are reminded of the duellists in 
Marion Delorme running each other through the body "for 
no reason, for the fun of the thing," or else the Irishman 

2 74 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
cited by Lord Bryce, who could not see two men exchanging 
fisticuffs in the street without asking, "Is this a private affair, 
or may anyone join in? " On the other hand, if we put side by 
side with these casual scraps those decisive wars which led 
to the annihilation of a whole people, we realize that the 
second account for the first: a war-instinct was inevitable, 
and because it existed to meet the contingency of those savage 
wars, which we might call natural, a number of incidental 
wars have occurred, simply to prevent the sword from rust­
ing. Think now of the enthusiasm of a people at the outbreak 
of a war! 
This is doubtless, to a certain extent, a defensive 
reaction against fear, an automatic stimulation of courage. 
But there is also the feeling that we were made for a life of 
risk and adventure, as though peace were but a pause between 
two wars. The enthusiasm quickly dies down, for the suffer­
ing is considerable. 
If we leave out the last war, however, 
where the horror was beyond anything we believed possible, 
it is strange to see how soon the sufferings of war are for­
gotten in time of peace. 
It is asserted that woman is provided 
with a special psychical mechanism which causes her to forget 
the pains of childbirth: a too complete recollection might pre­
vent her from having another child. 
Some mechanism of 
the same order really seems to be operative in favour of the 
horrors of war, especially among young nations. 
Nature has 
taken yet further precautions in this direction. She has inter­
posed between foreigners and ourselves a cunningly woven 
veil of ignorance, preconceptions and prejudices. 
That we 
should know nothing about a country to which we have never 
been is not surprising. 
But that, being ignorant of it, we 
should criticize it, and nearly always unfavourably, is a fact 
which calls for explanation. 
Anyone who has lived outside 
his own country, and has later tried to initiate his country­
men into what we call a foreign "mentality," has felt in them 
an instinctive resistance. 
The resistance is not any stronger 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
2 75 
the more remote the country. 
Very much the contrary, it 
varies rather in inverse ratio to the distance. 
It is those whom 
we have the greatest chance of meeting whom we least want 
to know. 
Nature could have found no surer way of making 
every foreigner a virtual enemy, for if perfect mutual knowl­
edge does not necessarily conduce to a fellow-feeling, it at 
least precludes hate. 
We had examples of this during the 
war. 
A professor of German was just as patriotic as any 
other Frenchman, just as ready to lay down his life, just as 
"worked up" even against Germany; yet it was not the same 
thing. One corner was set apart. Anyone who is thoroughly 
familiar with the language and literature of a people cannot be 
wholly its enemy. 
This should be borne in mind when we 
ask education to pave the way for international understand­
ing. 
The mastery of a foreign tongue, by making possible 
the impregnation of the mind by the corresponding literature 
and civilization, may at one stroke do away with the prejudice 
ordained by nature against foreigners in general. 
But this is 
not the place to enumerate all the visible outward effects 
of the latent prejudice. 
Let us only say that the two oppos­
ing maxims, Homo bomini deus and Homo bomini lupus, are 
easily reconcilable. 
When we formulate the first, we are 
thinking of some fellow-countryman. 
The other applies to 
foreigners. 
\Vc have just said that besides incidental wars there are 
essential wars, for which the war-instinct, apparently, was 
made. 
Among these are the great conflicts of our own times. 
The object is less and less conquest for conquest's sake. 
Peoples no longer go to war for the sake of wounded pride, 
prestige or glory. 
They fight to avoid starvation, so they 
say-in reality to maintain a certain standard of living, below 
which they believe that life would not be worth while. 
Gone 
is the idea of the delegating of the fighting to a limited number 
of soldiers chosen to represent the nation. 
Gone anything 

276 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
resembling a duel. 
All must fight against all, as did the 
hordes of the early days. Only, the fighting is done with 
arms forged by our civilization, and the slaughter surpasses 
in horror anything the ancients could have even dreamed of. 
At the pace at which science is moving, that day is not far off 
when one of the two adversaries, through some secret process 
which he was holding in reserve, will have the means of anni­
hilating his opponent. The vanquished may vanish off the 
face of the earth. 
Are things bound to follow their natural course? 
Men 
whom we unhesitatingly rank among the benefactors of hu­
manity have fortunately interposed. Like all great optimists 
they began by assuming as solved the problem to be solved. 
They founded the League of Nations. 
Now, the results 
already obtained are more than we dared to hope. For the 
difficulty of abolishing war is greater even than is generally 
realized by most people who have no faith in its abolition. 
Pessimists though they are, they yet agree with the optimists 
in considering the case of two peoples on the verge of war as 
similar to that of two individuals with a quarrel; only in their 
opinion it will be materially impossible to compel the former, 
like the latter, to bring this difference before the court and 
accept its decision. Yet there is a radical distinction. Even 
if the League of Nations had at its disposal a seemingly ade­
quate armed force (and even so the recalcitrant nation would 
stil have over the League the advantage of the initial impetus; 
even so the unexpectedness of a scientific discovery would 
render increasingly unforeseeable the nature of the resistance 
the League of Nations would have to organize), it would 
come up against the deep-rooted war-instinct underlying 
civilization; whereas individuals who leave to the judge the 
business of settling a dispute are in some obscure way en­
couraged to do so by the instinct of discipline immanent in 
the closed society: a quarrel has momentarily upset their 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
277 
normal position which was a complete insenion into society; 
but they come back to this position, as the pendulum swings 
back to the venical. So that the difficulty is far greater. 
Is it 
vain, however, to try and overcome it? 
We think not. 
The object of the present work was to in­
vestigate the origins of morality and religion. 
We have been 
led to cenain conclusions. 
We might leave it at that. 
But 
since at the basis of our conclusions was a radical distinction 
between the closed and the open society, since the tendencies 
of the closed society have, in our opinion, persisted, inerad­
icable, in the society that is on the way to becoming an open 
one, since all these instincts of discipline originally converged 
towards the war-instinct, we are bound to ask to what extent 
the primitive instinct can be repressed or circumvented, and 
answer by a few supplementary considerations a question 
which occurs to us quite naturally. 
For, though the war-instinct does exist independently, it 
none the less hinges on rational motives. 
History tells us that 
these motives have been extremely varied. 
They become in­
creasingly few as war becomes more terrible. 
The last war, 
together with those future ones which we can dimly foresee, 
if we are indeed doomed to have more wars, is bound up 
with the industrial character of our civilization. 
If we want 
to get an outline, simplified and stylized, of modern conflicts, 
we shall have to begin by picturing nations as purely agricul­
tural populations. 
They live on the produce of their soil. 
Suppose they have just enough to feed themselves. 
They 
will increase in proponion as they obtain a higher yield from 
their soil. So far, so good. 
But if there be a surplus of popu­
lation, and if this surplus population refuses to overflow into 
the world outside, or cannot do so because foreign countries 
close their doors, where will it find its food? 
Industry is 
called upon to rectify the situation. 
The surplus population 
will become factory-workers. 
If the country does not possess 

278 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
the motive power for its machines, the iron to make them, 
the raw material for its manufactured goods, it will try to 
borrow them from foreign countries. 
It will pay its debts, 
and receive the food it cannot obtain through home produc­
tion, by sending back manufactured products to other coun­
tries. 
The factory-workers will thus become "internal emi­
grants." 
The foreign country provides them with employ­
ment, just as if they had actually settled within its frontiers; 
it prefers to leave them-or perhaps they prefer to stay-where 
they are; but on foreign countries they are dependent. 
If 
these countries cease to accept their products, or cease to 
supply them with the material for manufacture, they are just 
condemned to starve to death-unless they decide, carrying 
the whole country with them, to go and seize what is refused 
to them. 
That means war. 
It goes without saying that 
things never happen so simply as that. 
Without being exactly 
in danger of starving to death, people consider that life is nut 
worth living if they cannot have comforts, pleasures, luxuries; 
the national industry is considered insufficient if it provides 
for a bare existence, if it does not provide affluence; a country 
considers itself incomplete if it has not good ports, colonies, 
etc. 
All this may lead to war. 
But the outline we have just 
traced sufficiently emphasizes the main causes: increase in 
population, closing of markets, cutting off of fuel and raw 
materials. 
To eliminate these causes or mitigate their effect, such is 
the essential task of an international organism with the aboli­
tion of war as irs aim. 
The gravest of all is over-population. 
In a country with too low a birth-rate, like France, the State 
should doubtless encourage the increase of population: a 
certain French economist, though the most thorough-going 
opponent of State intervention, used to demand that a bonus 
be granted to families for every child after the third. 
But 
then, conversely, would it not be possible, in over-populated 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
279 
countries, to impose more or less heavy taxes on every super­
numerary child? 
The State would have the right to inter­
fere, to establish the paternity, in shon, take measures which 
under other circumstances would be inquisitorial, since the 
State is tacitly expected to guarantee the food supply of the 
country and hence that of the child that has been brought 
into the world. 
We recognize the difficulty of fixing an 
official limit to the population, even if the figure be elastic. 
If we give the outline of a solution, it is merely to point out 
that the problem does not strike us as insoluble: more compe­
tent thinkers will find something better. 
But one fact is cer­
tain: Europe is over-populated, the world will soon be in the 
same condition, and if the self-reproduction of man is not 
"rationalized," as his labour is beginning to be, we shall have 
war. In no other matter is it so dangerous to rely upon instinct. 
Antique mythology realized this when it coupled the goddess 
of love with the god of war. 
Let Venus have her way, and 
she will bring you Mars. 
You will not escape regimentation 
(an unpleasant word, but an unavoidable thing). 
What will 
happen when problems almost equally grave arise, such as the 
distribution of raw materials, the more or less unrestricted 
movement of products, the general problem of dealing j ustly 
with opposing demands represented by both sides as vital? 
It is a dangerous mistake to think that an international institu­
tion can obtain permanent peace without having the authority 
to intervene in the legislation of the various countries, and 
even perhaps in their government. 
Maintain the principle of 
the sovereignty of the State if you will: it is bound to be 
whittled down in its application to individual cases. 
We 
repeat, no single one of these difficulties is insurmountable, 
if an adequate ponion of humanity is determined to surmount 
them. 
But we must face up to them, and realize what has to 
be given up if war is to be abolished. 
Now, would it not be possible to shonen the road before 

280 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
us, or even to smooth away all the difficulties at once, instead 
of negotiating them one by one? 
Let us set aside the main 
question, that of population, which will have to be resolved for 
its own sake, whatever happens. 
The others arise principally 
from the direction taken by our existence since the great 
expansion of industry. 
We demand material comfort, ameni­
ties and luxuries. 
\Ve set out to enjoy ourselves. 
\Vhat if 
our life were to become more ascetic? 
Mysticism is un­
doubtedly at the origin of great moral transformations. 
And 
mankind seems to be as far away as ever from it. 
But who 
knows? 
In the course of our last chapter we fancied we had 
caught sight of a possible link between the mysticism of the 
\Vest and its industrial civilization. 
The matter needs to be 
gone into thoroughly. 
Everybody feels that the immediate 
future is going to depend largely on the organization of 
industry and the conditions it will impose or accept. 
We 
have just seen that the problem of peace between nations is 
contingent on this problem. 
That of peace at home depends 
on it just as much. 
Must we live in fear, or may we live in 
hope? 
For a long time it was taken for granted that indus­
trialism and mechanization would bring happiness to man­
kind. 
To-day one is ready to lay to their door all the ills 
from which we suffer. 
Never, it is said, was humanity more 
athirst for pleasure, luxury and wealth. 
An irresistible force 
seems to drive it more and more violently towards the satis­
faction of its basest desires. 
That may be, but let us go back 
to the impulsion at the origin. 
If it was a strong one, a slight 
deviation at the beginning may have been enough to produce 
a wider and wider divergence between the point aimed at 
and the object reached. 
In that case, we should not con­
cern ourselves so much with the divergence as with the 
impulsion. 
True, 
things 
never get 
done 
of themselves. 
Humanity will change only if it is intent upon changing. 
nut perhaps it has already prepared the means of doing so. 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
281 
Perhaps it is nearer the goal than it thinks. 
Since we have 
brought a charge against industrial effort, let us examine it 
more closely. 
This will form the conclusion of the present 
work. 
The alterations of ebb and flow in history have often been 
discussed. 
All prolonged action, it would seem, brings about 
a reaction in the opposite direction. 
Then it starts anew, and 
the pendulum swings on indefinitely. 
True, in this case the 
pendulum is endowed with memory, and is not the same 
when it swings back as on the outward swing, since it is then 
richer by all the intermediate experience. 
This is why the 
image of a spiral movement, which has sometimes been used, 
is perhaps more correct than that of the oscillations of a 
pendulum. 
As a matter of fact, there are psychological and 
social causes which we might a priori predict will be produc­
tive of such effects. 
The uninterrupted enjoyment of an eag­
erly-sought advantage engenders weariness or indifference; it 
seldom fulfils completely its promise; it brings with it unfore­
seen drawbacks; it ends by making conspicuous the good ӱide 
of what has been given up and arousing a desire to get it back. 
The desire will be found principally in the rising generations, 
who have not experienced the ills of the past, and have not 
had to extricate themselves from them. 
\Vhereas the parents 
congratulate themselves on the present state of things as an 
acquisition for which they remember paying dearly, the 
children give it no more thought than the air they breathe; on 
the other hand, they are alive to disadvantages which are 
nothing but the reverse side of the advantages so painfully 
won for them. 
Thus may arise a wish to put the clock back. 
Such actions and reactions are characteristic of the modern 
State, not by reason of any historical fatality, but because 
parliamentary government was conceived in part with the 
very object of providing a channel for discontent. 
The 

282 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
powers that be receive but moderate praise for the good they 
do; they are there to do it: but their slightest mistake is scored; 
and all mistakes are stored up until their accumulated weight 
causes the government to fall. If there are two opposing 
parties and two only, the game will go on with perfect 
regularity. Each team will come back into power, bringing 
with it the prestige of principles which have apparently re­
mained intact during the period in which it had no respon­
sibility to bear: principles sit with the Opposition. In reality 
the Opposition will have profited, if it is intelligent, by the 
experience it has left the party in power to work out; it will 
have more or less modified the content of its ideas and hence 
the significance of its principles. 
Thus progress becomes 
possible, in spite of the swing of the pendulum, or rather 
because of it, if only men care about it. But, in such cases, the 
oscillation between the two opposite extremes is the result of 
certain very simple contrivances set up by society, or certain 
very obvious tendencies of the individual. It is not the effect 
of a paramount necessity towering above the particular causes 
of alternation and dominating human events in general. Does 
such a necessity exist? 
We do not believe in the fatality of history. There is no 
obstacle which cannot be broken down by wills sufficiently 
keyed up, if they deal with it in time. There is thus no un­
escapable historic law. But there are biological laws; and the 
human societies, in so far as they are partly willed by nature, 
pertain to biology on this particular point. If the evolution 
of the organized world takes place according to certain laws, 
I mean by virtue of certain forces, it is impossible that the 
psychological evolution of individual and social man should 
entirely renounce these habits of life. Now we have shown 
elsewhere that the essence of a vital tendency is to develop 
fan-wise, creating, by the mere fact of its growth, divergent 
directions, each of which will receive a certain portion of the 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
283 
impetus. 
We added that there was nothing mysterious about 
this law. 
It simply expresses the fact that a tendency is the 
forward thrust of an indistinct multiplicity, which is, more­
over, indistinct, and multiplicity, only if we consider it in 
retrospect, when the multitudinous views taken of its past un­
divided character allow us to see it composed of elements 
which were actually created by its development. 
Let us 
imagine that orange is the only colour that has as yet made its 
appearance in the world. 
Would it be already a composite of 
yellow and red? 
Obviously not. 
But it will have been corn­
posed of yellow and red when these two colours arc born in 
their tum; from that hour the original orange colour can be 
looked at from the twofold point of view of red and yellow; 
and if we supposed, by a trick of fancy, that yellow and red 
appeared through an intensification of orange, we should have 
a very simple example of what we call fan-wise growth. 
But 
there is no real necessity for fancy and comparisons. 
All we 
need is to look at life without letting any idea of artificial 
synthesis supervene. 
Some psychologists hold the act of voli­
tion to be a composite reflex, others are inclined to see in the 
reflex activity a curtailment of volition. 
The truth is that the 
reflex and the voluntary actions embody t\vo views, now 
rendered possible, of a primordial, indivisible activity, which 
was neither the one nor the other, but which becomes retro­
actively, through them, both at once. 
We could say the same 
of instinct :nd intelligence, of animal life and vegetable life, 
of many other pairs of divergent and complementary tenden­
cies. 
Only, in the general evolution of life, the tendencies 
thus created by a process of dichotomy are to be found in 
species different from one another; they have set forth, each 
independently, to seck their fortunes in the world; and the 
material form they have assumed prevents them from re­
uniting to bring back again, stronger than it was, more com­
plex, more fully evolved, the original tendency. 
Not so in 

2 84 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
the evolution of the psychical and social life. 
Here the tend­
encies, born of the process of splitting, develop in the same 
individual, or in the same society. 
As a rule, they can be 
developed only in succession. 
If there are two of them, as is 
generally the case, one of them will be clung to first; with this 
one we shall move more or less forward, generally as far as 
possible; then, with what we have acquired in the course of 
this evolution, we shall come back to take up the one we left 
behind. 
That one will then be developed in its tum, the 
former being neglected, and our new effort will be continued 
until, reinforced by new acquisitions, we can take up the first 
one again and push it further forward still. 
Since, during the 
operation, we are entirely given up to one of the two tenden­
cies, since it alone counts, we are apt to say that it alone is 
positive and that the other was only its negation; if we like 
to put things in this way, the other is, as a matter of fact, its 
opposite. 
It will then be said-and this will be more or less 
true according to circumstances-that the progress was due to 
an oscillation between the two opposites, the situation more­
over not being the same and a gain having been realized by the 
time the pendulum has swung back to its original position. But 
it does sometimes happen that the expression is entirely accu­
rate, and that there is really oscillation between two opposites. 
This is when a tendency, advantageous in itself, cannot be 
moderated otherwise than by the action of a counter-tendency, 
which hence becomes advantageous also. 
It would seem as 
though the wise course, then, would be a co-operation of 
the two tendencies, the first intervening when circumstances 
require, the other restraining it when it threatens to go too 
far. 
Unfortunately, it is difficult to say where exaggeration 
and danger begin. 
Sometimes the mere fact of going further 
than appeared reasonable leads to new surroundings, creates a 
new situation which removes the danger, at the same time em­
phasizing the advantage. 
This is especially the case with the 

1\1 E C H A N  I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
285 
very general tendencies which detennine the trend of a society, 
and whose development necessarily extends over a more or less 
considerable number of generations. 
An intelligence, even a 
superhuman one, cannot say where this will lead to, since action 
on the move creates its own route, creates to a very great extent 
the conditions under which it is to be fulfilled, and thus baffles 
all calculation. 
In such a case, one pushes funher and funher 
afield, often stopping only on the very brink of disaster. 
The 
counter-tendency then steps into the place that has been 
vacated; alone, in its turn, it will go as far as it can go. 
If 
the other was called action, then this will be reaction. 
As 
the two tendencies, if they had journeyed together, would 
have moderated each other, as their interpenetration in an un­
divided primitive tendency is the very definition of modera­
tion, the mere fact of taking up all the room impans to each 
of them such an impetus that it bolts ahead as the barriers 
collapse one by one; there is something frenzied about it. 
Now we must not make exaggerated use of the word "law" 
in a field which is that of libeny, but we may use this con­
venient term when we are confronted with imponant facts 
which show sufficient regularity. 
So we will call law of 
dichotomy that law which apparently brings about a ma­
terialization, by a mere splitting up, of tendencies which 
began by being two photographic views, so to speak, of one 
and the same tendency. 
And we propose to designate law 
of twofold frenzy the imperative demand, fonhcoming from 
each of the two tendencies as soon as it is materialized by the 
splitting, to be pursued to the very end-as if there was an 
end! 
Once more, it is difficult not to wonder whether the 
simple tendency would not have done better to grow without 
dividing in two, thus being kept within bounds by the very 
coincidence of its propulsive force with the power of stop­
ping, which 'vould then have been virtually, but not actually, 

286 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
a distinct and contrary force of impulsion. There would have 
been, then, no risk of stumbling into absurdity; there would 
have been an insurance against disaster. Yes, but this would 
not have given the maximum of creation, in quantity and in 
quality. It is necessary to keep on to the bitter end in one 
direction, to find out what it will yield: when we can go no 
further, we turn back, with all we have acquired, to set off in 
the direction from which we had turned aside. Doubtless, 
looking from the outside at these comings and goings we see 
only the antagonism of the two tendencies, the futile attempt 
of the one to thwart the other, the ultimate defeat of the 
second and the revenge of the first: man loves the dram­
atic; he is strongly inclined to pick out from a whole more 
or less extended period of history those characteristics which 
make of it a struggle between two parties, two societies or 
two principles, each of them in tum coming off victorious. 
But the struggle is here only the superficial aspect of an 
advance. The truth is that a tendency on which two dif­
ferent views are possible can put forth its maximum, in quan­
tity or quality, only if it materializes these two possibilities 
into moving realities, each one of which leaps forward and 
monopolizes the available space, while the other is on the 
watch unceasingly for its own tum to come. Only thus will 
the content of the original tendency develop, if indeed we 
can speak of a content when no one, not even the tendency 
itself if it achieved consciousness, could tell what will issue 
from it. It supplies the effort, and the result is a surprise. 
Such are the workings of nature; the struggles which she 
stages for us do not indicate pugnacity so much as curiosity. 
And it is precisely when it imitates nature, when it yields to 
the original impulsion, that the progress of humanity assumes 
a certain regularity and conforms-though very imperfectly, 
be it said-to such laws as those we have stated. But the time 

M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
287 
has come to close this all too long parenthesis. 
Let us merely 
show how our two laws would apply in the case which led 
us to open it. 
We were dealing with the concern for comfort and luxury 
which has apparently become the main preoccupation of hu­
manity. 
In considering how it has developed the spirit of 
invention, how so many inventions are the application of 
science, and how science is destined to extend its scope in­
definitely, we should be tempted to believe in indefinitӲ 
progress in the same direction. 
Never, indeed, do the satis­
factions with which new inventions meet old needs induce 
humanity to leave things at that; new needs arise, just as 
imperious and increasingly numerous. 
We have seen the race 
for comfort proceeding faster and faster, on a track along 
which are surging ever denser crowds. 
To-day it is a stam­
pede. 
But should not this very frenzy open our eyes? 
Was 
there not some other frenzy to which it has succeeded, and 
which developed in the opposite direction an activity of 
which the present frenzy is the complement? 
In point of 
fact, it is from the fifteenth or si.xteenth century onward that 
men seemed to aspire to easier material conditions. 
Through­
out the Middle Ages, an ascetic ideal had predominated. 
There is no need to recall the exaggerations to which it led; 
here already you had frenzy. 
It may be alleged that asceticism 
was confined to a very small minority, and this is true. 
But 
just as mysticism, the privilege of a few, \vas popularized by 
religion, so concentrated asceticism, which was doubtless ex­
ceptional, became diluted for the rank and file of mankind 
into a general indifference to the conditions of daily existence. 
There was for one and all an absence of comfort which to us 
is astonishing. 
Rich and poor did without superfluities which 
we consider as necessities. 
It has been pointed out that if the 
lord lived better than the peasant, we must understand by this 

288 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
that he had more abundant food.1 
Otherwise, the difference 
was slight. 
Here we are, then, in the presence of two diver­
gent tendencies which have succeeded each other and have 
behaved, both of them, frantically. 
So, we may presume that 
they correspond to two opposing manifestations of one pri­
mordial tendency, which in this way contrived to evolve 
from itself, in quantity and quality, everything that it was 
capable of, even more than it had to give, proceeding along 
each of the two roads, one after the other, getting back 
into one direction with everything that had been picked up 
by the way in the other. 
That signifies oscillation and 
progress, progress by oscillation. 
And we should expect, 
after the ever-increasing complexity of life, a return to sim­
plicity. 
This return is obviously not a cenainty; the future of 
humanity remains indetenninate, precisely because it is on 
humanity that it depends. 
But if, ahead of us, lie only possi­
bilities or probabilities, which we shall examine presently, we 
cannot say the same for the past: the two opposite develop­
ments which we have just indicated arc indeed those of a 
single original tendency. 
And indeed the history of ideas bears witness to it. 
Out of 
Socratic thought, pursued in two different directions which 
in Socrates were complementary, came the Cyrenaic and the 
Cynic doctrines: the one insisted that we should demand 
from life the greatest possible number of satisfactions, the 
other that we should learn to do without them. 
They de­
veloped into Epicureanism and Stoicism with their two 
opposing tendencies, laxity and tension. 
If there were the 
least doubt about the common essence of the two mental 
attitudes to which these principles correspond, it would 
suffice to note that, in the Epicurean school itself, along with 
popular Epicureanism which 
was at times the unbridled 
1 Sec Gina Lombroso's interesting work, La Ran[on du macbinisme 
(Paris, 1930). 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
289 
pursuit of pleasure, there was the Epicureanism of Epicurus, 
according to which the supreme pleasure was to need no 
pleasures. 
The truth is that the two principles are at the heart 
of the traditional conception of happiness. 
Here is a word 
which is commonly used to designate something intricate and 
ambiguous, one of those ideas which humanity has intention­
ally left vague, so that each individual might interpret it 
after his own fashion. 
But in whatever sense it is understood, 
there is no happiness without security-! mean without the 
prospect of being able to rely on the permanence of a state 
into which one has settled oneself. 
This assurance is to be 
found either in the mastering of things, or in the mastering 
of self which makes one independent of things. 
In both cases 
there is delight in one's strength, whether inwardly perceived 
or outwardly manifested: the one may lead to pride, the other 
to vanity. 
But the simplification and complication of life do 
indeed follow from a "dichotomy," arc indeed apt to develop 
into "double frenzy," in fact have all that is required to alter­
nate periodically. 
This being so, as we have said above, there is nothing 
improbable in the return to a simpler life. 
Science itself 
might show us the way. 
'Whereas physics and chemistry help 
us to satisfy and encourage us to multiply our needs, it is 
conceivable that physiology and medical science may reveal 
more and more clearly to us all the dangers of this multiplica­
tion, all the disappointments which accompany the majority 
of our satisfactions. 
I enjoy a well-prepared dish of meat; to 
a vegetarian, who used to like it as much as I do, the mere 
sight of meat is sickening. 
It may be alleged that we arc both 
right, and that there is no more arguing about taste than about 
colour. 
Perhaps: but I cannot help noting that my vegetarian 
is thoroughly convinced he \viii never revert to his old inclina­
tions, whereas I am not nearly so sure that I shall always stick 
to mine. 
He has been through both experiments; I have only 

290 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  .M Y S T I C I S M  
tried one. 
His repulsion grows stronger as he fixes his atten­
tion on it, whereas my satisfaction is largely a matter of in­
attention and tends to pale in a strong light. 
I do believe it 
would fade away altogether, if decisive experiments came to 
prove, as it is not impossible they will, that I am directly and 
slowly poisoning myself by eating meat.1 
I was taught in my 
school days that the composition of foodstuffs was known, the 
requirements of our organs also, that it was possible to deduce 
from this the necessary and sufficient ration to maintain life. 
The master would have been very much surprised to hear 
that chemical analysis did not take into account "vitamins" 
whose presence in food is indispensable to health. 
It wil 
probably be found that more than one malady, for which 
medical science has no cure, takes its remote origin from 
"deficiencies" of which we have no inkling. 
The only sure 
means of absorbing all we need would be to have our food 
subjected to no preparation, perhaps even (who knows) not 
cooked at all. Here again the belief in the heredity of acquired 
habits has done great harm. 
It is commonly said that the 
human stomach has lost the habit, that we could not feed 
ourselves nowadays like primitive man. 
This is true, if taken 
as meaning that we have let certain natural tendencies lie 
dormant from our infancy, and that it would be difficult to 
reawaken them in middle age. 
But that we are born modified 
is hardly probable: even if our stomach is different from that 
of our prehistoric ancestors, the difference is not due to mere 
habit contracted down the ages. 
It \viii not be long before 
science enlightens us on all these points. 
Let us suppose that 
it docs so in the sense we foresee: the mere reform of our 
food supply would ha\"c immeasurable reactions on our in­
dustry, our trade, our agriculture, all of which it would 
1 :'-''e has;en to state that we have no particular knowledge of this 
subJeCt. " e  have chosen the example of meat as we might have that of 
any other usual food. 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
291 
considerably simplify. 
\Vhat about our other needs? 
The 
demands of the procreative senses arc imperious, but they 
would be quickly settled if we hearkened to nature alone. The 
trouble is that around a violent but paltry sensation, taken as 
the fundamental, humanity has made rise an endlessly increas­
ing number of overtones: so rich a variety of timbres that 
almost any object struck on some particular point now gives 
out the sound that has become an obsession. 
Thus the senses 
are constantly being roused by the imagination. 
Sex-appeal is 
the keynote of our whole civilization. 
Here again science has 
something to say, and it will say it one day so clearly that all 
must listen: there will no longer be pleasure in so much love of 
pleasure. Woman will hasten the coming of this time accord­
ing as she really and sincerely strives to become man's equal, in­
stead of remaining the instrument she still is, waiting to vibrate 
under the musician's bow. 
Let the transformation take place: 
our life will be both more purposeful and more simple. 
What 
woman demands i n  the way of luxuries in order to please 
man, and, at the rebound, to please herself, will become to a 
great extent unnecessary. 
There will be less waste, and less 
enviousness. 
Luxury, pleasure and comfort arc indeed closely 
akin, though the conncxion between them is not what it is 
generally supposed to be. 
It is our way to arrange them in a 
certain gradation, we arc supposed to move up the scale from 
comfort to luxury: when we have made sure of our comfort 
we want to cap it with pleasures, then comes love of luxury 
on top of all. 
But this is a purely intellectualist psychology, 
which imagines that our feelings can be measured exactly by 
their objects. 
Because luxuries cost more than mere conveni­
ences, and pleasure more than comfort, they arc supposed 
to be keeping pace with goodness knows what correspond­
ing desire. 
The truth is that it is generally for the sake 
of our luxuries that we want our comforts, because the com­
forts we lack look to us like luxuries, and because we wane to 

292 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
imitate and equal those people who can afford them. 
In the 
beginning was vanity. 
How many delicacies are sought after 
solely because they are expensive! 
For years civilized people 
spent a great part of their efforts abroad in procuring spices. 
It is amazing to think that this was the supreme object of 
navigation, so perilous in those days; that for this thousands 
of men risked their lives; that the courage, the energy and 
the spirit of adventure, of which the discovery of America 
was a mere incident, were mainly employed in the search for 
ginger, cloves, pepper and cinnamon. 
Who troubles about 
these flavourings which so long tasted delicious, now that they 
can be had for a few pence from the grocer round the comer? 
Such facts as these are sad reading for the moralist. 
But 
reflect a moment, they contain cause for hope as well. 
The 
continual craving for creature comforts, 
the pursuit of 
pleasure, the unbridled love of luxury, all these things which 
fill us with so much anxiety for the future of humanity, be­
cause it seems to find in them solid satisfactions, all this 
will appear as a balloon which man has madly inflated, and 
which will deflate j ust as suddenly. We know that one frenzy 
brings on the counter-frenzy. 
More particularly, the com­
parison of present-day facts with those of the past is a warning 
to us to regard as transient tastes which appear to be per­
manent. 
Since to-day the supreme ambition for so many 
men is to have a car, let us recognize the incomparable 
services 
rendered 
by motor-cars, 
admire 
the 
mechanical 
marvel they are, hope that they will multiply and spread 
wherever they are needed, but let us say to ourselves that a 
short time hence they may not be so greatly in demand just 
as an amenity or "for swank," though the chances are that 
they may not be quite so neglected, and we hope not, as 
cloves and cinnamon are to-day. 
Here we come to the essential point of our discussion. 
We 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
293 
have just cited an example of the craving for luxuries arising 
from a mechanical invention. Many are of the opinion that 
it is mechanical invention in general which has developed the 
taste for luxuries, and indeed for mere comfort. Nay, if it is 
generally admitted that our material needs will go on in­
definitely growing more numerous and more imperious, this 
is because there seems to be no reason why humanity should 
abandon the path of mechanical invention, once it has started 
on it. Let us add that, the more science advances, the more 
inventions are suggested by its discoveries; in many cases 
from theory to application is but a step; and since science 
cannot stop, it really does look indeed as though there could 
be no end to the satisfying of our old needs and the creation 
of new ones. But we must first ascertain whether the spirit 
of invention necessarily creates artificial needs, or whether 
in this case it is not the artificial need which has guided the 
spirit of invention. 
The second hypothesis is by far the more probable. It is 
confirmed by recent research on the origin of mechanization.1 
The fact has been recalled that man has always invented 
machines, that antiquity has remarkable ones to show, that 
many a clever mechanical device was thought of long before 
the development of modem science, and, at a later stage, inde­
pendently of it: even to-day a mere workman, without scien­
tific culture, will hit on improvements which have never 
occurred to skilled engineers. 
Mechanical invention is a 
natural gift. Doubtless its effects were limited so long as it 
was confined to utilizing actual, and as it were visible, forces: 
muscular effort, wind or water power. The machine de­
veloped its full efficiency only from the day when it became 
possible to place at its service, by a simple process of releasing, 
the potential energies stored up for millions of years, bor-
1 We again refer the reader to Gina Lombroso's fine work. 
Cf. also 
Mantoux. La Revolution industrielle au dix-huitieme siecle. 

294 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
rowed from the sun, deposited in coal, oil, etc. 
But that was 
the day when the steam-engine was invented, and we know 
that this invention was not the outcome of theoretical con­
siderations. 
Let us hasten to add that the progress made, 
slow enough at first, assumed giant proportions as soon as 
science took a hand. 
It is none the less true that the spirit of 
mechanical invention, which runs between narrow banks so 
long as it is left to itself, but expands indefinitely after its 
conjunction with science, remains distinct fr01r :t, and could, 
if need be, do without it. 
Similarly we have the Rhone 
entering the Lake of Geneva, apparently mingling with its 
waters, but showing, when it leaves it again, that it has pre­
served its independence. 
There h::s not been then, as some people are inclined to 
believe, a demand on the part of science, imposing on men, 
by the mere fact of its development, increasingly artificial 
needs. If that were so, humanity would be doomed to a grow­
ing materiality, for the progress of science will never cease. 
But the truth is that science has given what was asked of it, 
and has not in this case taken the initiative; it is the spirit of 
invention which has not always operated in the best interests 
of humanity. 
It has created a mass of new needs; it has not 
taken the trouble to ensure for the majority of men, for all 
if that were possible, the satisfaction of old needs. 
To put it 
more clearly: though not neglecting the necessary, it has 
thought too much about the superfluous. 
It may be said that 
these two terms are hard to define, and that what are luxuries 
to some people are necessities to others. 
True, and it would 
be easy enough here to lose one's way amid subtle and fine 
distinctions. 
But there are cases where subtlety should be 
cast aside and a broad view taken. 
Millions of men never get 
enough to eat. 
There are some who starve to death. 
If the 
land produced much more, there would be far fewer chances 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
295 
of not getting enough to eat/ or of starving to death. 
Over­
production here is but a deceptio vims. If mechanization is in 
any way to blame, it is for not having sufficiently devoted 
itself to helping man in his agricultural labour. 
It will be said 
that agricultural implements exist and are now widely used. 
I grant it, but all that mechanization has done here to lighten 
man's burden, all that science has done on its side to increase 
the yield of the soil, amounts to comparatively little. 
\Ve 
feel strongly that agriculture, which nourishes man, should 
dominate all else, in any case be the first concern of industry 
itself. 
Generally speaking, industry has not troubled enough 
about the greater or lesser importance of needs to be satisfied. 
It simply complied with public taste, and manufactured with 
no other thought than that of selling. 
Here as elsewhere, we 
should like to see a central, organizing intelligence, which 
would co-ordinate industry and agriculture and allot to the 
machine its proper place, I mean the place where it can best 
serve humanity. 
Thus, when the case against mechanization 
is stated, the main grievance is often left out. 
The charge is 
first that it converts the workman into a mere machine, and 
then that it leads to a uniformity of production which shocks 
the aesthetic sense. 
But if the machine procures for the work­
man more free time, and if the workman uses this increase 
of leisure for something else than the so-called pleasures 
which an ill-directed industry has put within the reach of all, 
he will develop his intelligence as he chooses, instead of 
remaining content with the development which would have 
been imposed upon him, and necessarily maintained within 
very narrow limits, by a return (impossible in fact) to tools, 
were machines abolished. 
As regards uniformity of products, 
1 There are doubtless periods of "over-production" which extend to 
agriculrural products and may even start from these. 
But they are 
obviously not due to the fact that there is too much food for the con­
sumption of mankind. 
The fact is simply that, production in general 
not being properly organized, there is no way of exchange. 

296 
i\1 E C H A N  I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
the disadvantage would be negligible, if the economy of time 
and labour thus realized by the mass of the nation pennitted 
the furtherance of intellectual culture and the development 
of true originality. An author, writing about the Americans, 
criticizes them for all wearing the same hat. But the head 
should come before the hat. Allow me to furnish the interior 
of my head as I please, and I shall put up with a hat like every­
body else's. Such is not our grievance against mechanization. 
Without disputing the services it has rendered to man by 
greatly developing the means of satisfying real needs, we 
reproach it with having too strongly encouraged artificial 
ones, with having fostered luxury, with having favoured the 
towns to the detriment of the countryside, lastly with having 
widened the gap and revolutionized the relations between 
employer and employed, between capital and labour. These 
effects, indeed, can all be corrected, and then the machine 
would be nothing but a great benefactor. But then, humanity 
must set about simplifying its existence with as much frenzy 
as it devoted to complicating it. The initiative can come from 
humanity alone, for it is humanity and not the alleged force 
of circumstances, still less a fatality inherent to the machine, 
which has started the spirit of invention along a certain track. 
But did humanity wholly intend this? Was the impulsion 
it gave at the beginning exactly in the same direction that 
industrialism has actually taken? What is at the outset only 
an imperceptible deviation becomes in the end a consider­
able divergence, if the road has been straight and the journey 
long. Now, there is no doubt that the earliest features of what 
was destined later to become mechanization were sketched 
out at the same time as the first yearnings after democracy. 
The connexion between the two tendencies becomes plainly 
visible in the eighteenth century. It is a striking feature of 
the "Encyclopaedists." Should we not, then, suppose that it 
was a breath of democracy which urged the spirit of inven-

M E  C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C  I S  1\1 
297 
tion onward, that spirit as old as humanity, but insufficiently 
active so long as it was not given the necessary scope? There 
was surely no thought then of luxuries for all, or even of 
comforts for all. But there might have been the desire of an 
assured material existence, of dignity in security for all. Was 
this a conscious wish? We do not believe in the unconscious 
in history: the great undercurrents of thought of which so 
much has been written arc due to the fact that masses of men 
have been carried along by one or several individuals. These 
individuals knew what they were doing, but did not foresee 
all the consequences. vV c, who know what followed, cannot 
help transferring back the image of it to the beginning: the 
present, reflected back into the past and perceived inside it 
as though in a mirror, is then what we call the unconscious 
of the past. The retroactivity of the present is at the origin 
of many philosophical delusions. We shall be careful, then, 
not to attribute to the fifteenth, sixteenth and eighteenth 
centuries (and still less the seventeenth, which is so different 
and has been considered as a sublime parenthesis) a concern 
for democratic ideas comparable to our own. Neither shall 
we attribute to them the vision of the power which lay hidden 
in the spirit of invention. It is none the less true that the 
Reformation, the Renaissance and the first symptoms or pre­
cursory signs of the great inventive impetus date from the 
same period. It is not impossible that there were here three 
reactions, interrelated, against the form taken until then by 
the Christian ideal. This ideal subsisted just the same, but it 
showed like a heavenly body that had up to then always 
turned the same face towards man: people now began to 
catch a glimpse of the other side, though they did not always 
realize that it was the same body. That mysticism evokes 
asceticism there is no doubt. Both the one and the other will 
ever be peculiar to the few. But that true, complete, active 
mysticism aspires to radiate, by virtue of the charity which is 

298 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
its essence, is none the less certain. How could it spread, even 
diluted and enfeebled as it must necessarily be, in a humanity 
obsessed by the fear of hunger? Man will rise above earthly 
things only if a powerful equipment supplies him with the 
requisite fulcrum. He must use matter as a support if he 
wants to get away from matter. In other words, the mystical 
summons up the mechanical. This has not been sufficiently 
realized, because machinery, through a mistake at the points, 
has been switched off on to a track at the end of which lies 
exaggerated comfort and luxury for the few, rather than 
liberation for all. We are struck by the accidental result, we 
do not see mechanization as it should be, as what it is in 
essence. Let us go further still. 
If our organs arc natural 
instruments, our instruments must then be artificial organs. 
The workman's tool is the continuation of his arm, the tool­
equipment of humanity is therefore a continuation of its 
body. Nature, in endowing us with an essentially tool-making 
intelligence, prepared for us in this way a certain expansion. 
But machines which run on oil or coal or "white coal," and 
which convert into motion a potential energy stored up for 
millions of years, have actually imparted to our organism an 
extension so vast, have endowed it with a power so mighty, 
so out of proportion to the size and strength of that organism, 
that surely none of all this was foreseen in this structural plan 
of our species: here was a unique stroke of luck, the greatest 
material success of man on the planet. A spiritual impulsion 
had been given, perhaps, at the beginning: the extension took 
place automatically, helped as it were by a chance blow of the 
pick-axe which struck against a miraculous treasure under­
ground.1 Now, in this body, distended out of all proportion, 
the soul remains what it was, too small to fill it, too weak to 
guide it. Hence the gap between the two. Hence the tremend-
1 We are speaking figuratively, of course. Coal was known long be­
fore the steam-engine turned it into a treasure. 

M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
299 
ous social, political and international problems which are just 
so many definitions of this gap, and which provoke so many 
chaotic and ineffectual efforts to fill it. What we need are new 
reserves of potential energy-moral energy this time. 
So 
let us not merely say, as we did above, that the mystical 
summons up the mechanical. We must add that the body, 
now larger, calls for a bigger soul, and that mechanism should 
mean mysticism. The origins of the process of mechanization 
are indضed more mystical than we might imagine. Machinery 
will find its true vocation again, it will render services in pro­
portion to its power, only if mankind, which it has bowed 
still lower to the earth, can succeed, through it, in standing 
erect and looking heavenwards. 
In a long series of writings, which for depth and forceful­
ness are beyond praise, 1\1. Ernest Seillicre shows how national 
ambitions claim for themselves divine missions: "imperial­
ism" naturally becomes "mysticism." If we give to this latter 
word the sense 1\1. Ernest Seillicre 1 attributes to it, and which 
his many books have made abundantly clear, the fact is un­
deniable; by noting it, by linking it up with its causes and 
following it in its effects, the author makes an invaluable 
contribution to the philosophy of history. But he himself 
would probably be of the opinion that mysticism taken in 
this sense, and indeed understood in this way by "imperialism" 
such as he exhibits it, is but a counterfeit of true mysticism, 
the mysticism of "dynamic religion" which we studied in the 
last chapter. \Ve believe the counterfeiting to have taken 
place in the following way. It was a borrowing from the 
"static religion" of the ancients, stripped of its old tags and left 
in its static form with the new label supplied by dynamic re­
ligion. There was indeed nothing fraudulent in this imitation; 
1 A meaning only part of which we deal with here, as also in the case 
of the word "imperialism." 

300 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
it was almost unintentional. For we must remember that 
"static religion" is natural to man, and that nature does not 
alter. The innate beliefs of our ancestors subsist in the depths 
of our inner selves; they reappear as soon as they are no longer 
inhibited by opposing forces. Now, one of the essential char­
acteristics of ancient religions was the idea of a link between 
the human groups and the deities attached to them. The gods 
of the city fought with and for the city. This belief is in­
compatible with true mysticism, I mean with the feeling which 
certain souls have that they are the instruments of God who 
loves all men with an equal love, and who bids them to love 
each other. But, rising from the darkest depths of the soul to 
the surface of consciousness, and meeting there with the image 
of true mysticism as the modem mystics have revealed it to the 
world, it instinctively decks itself out in this garb; it endows 
the God of the modem mystic with the nationalism of the 
ancient gods. It is in this sense that imperialism becomes mys­
ticism. So that if we keep to true mysticism, we shall judge 
it incompatible with imperialism. At the most it will be ad­
mitted, as we have just put it, that mysticism cannot be dis­
seminated without encouraging a very special "will to power." 
This will be a sovereignty, not over men, but over things, 
precisely in order that man shall no longer have so much 
sovereignty over man. 
Let a mystic genius but appear, he will draw after him a 
humanity already vastly grown in body, and whose soul he 
has tranfigured. He will yearn to make of it a new species, 
or rather deliver it from the necessity of being a species; for 
every species means a collective halt, and complete existence 
is mobility in individuality. The great breath of life which 
swept our planet had carried organization as far along as 
nature, alike docile and recalcitrant, permitted. Nature-let 
us repeat it-is the name we give to the totality of com­
pliances and resistances which life encounters in raw matter 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
301 
-a totality which we treat, just as the biologist does, as 
though intentions could be attributed to it. A body compact 
of creative intelligence, and, round about that intelligence, a 
fringe of intuition, was the most complete thing nature had 
found it possible to produce. Such was the human body. 
There the evolution of life stopped. But now intelligence, 
raising the construction of instruments to a degree of com­
plexity and perfection which nature (so incapable of mechan­
ical construction) had not even foreseen, pouring into these 
machines reserves of energy which nature (so heedless of 
economy) had never even thought of, has endowed us with 
powers beside which those of our body barely count: they 
will be altogether limitless when science is able to liberate 
the force which is enclosed, or rather condensed, in the slightest 
particle of ponderable matter. The material barrier then has 
well nigh vanished. To-morrow the way will be clear, in the 
very direction of the breath which had carried life to the 
point where it had to stop. Let once the summons of the hero 
come, we shall not all follow it, but we shall all feel that we 
ought to, and we shall see the path before us, which will 
become a highway if we pass along it. At the same time, for 
each and every philosophy the mystery of the supreme obliga­
tion will be a mystery no longer: a journey had been begun, it 
had had to be interrupted; by setting out once more we are 
merely willing again what ·we had willed at the start. It is 
always the stop which requires explanation, and not the 
movement. 
But perhaps it will be just as well not to count too much 
on the coming of a great privileged soul. Failing that, some 
other influences might divert our attention from the baubles 
that amuse us, and the vain shadows for which we fight. 
What influence? \Ve have seen how the talent of invention, 
assisted by science, put unsuspected energies at man's dis­
posal. \Ve were alluding here to physico-chemical energies, 

302 
M E C H A N I C S A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
and to a science that was concerned with matter. But what 
about things spiritual? 
Has spirit been scientifically inves­
tigated as thoroughly as it might have been? Do we know to 
what results such investigation might lead? Science attended 
first to matter; for three whole centuries it had no other 
object; even to-day, when we leave the word unqualified, it 
is understood that we mean the science of matter. We have 
given the reasons for this on another occasion. vVe have in­
dicated why the scientific study of matter preceded that of 
the spirit. TI1e most pressing needs had to be taken first. 
Geometry existed already; it had been considerably advanced 
by the ancients; the thing was to extract from mathematics 
all it could give in explanation of the world in which we 
live. Nor was it desirable, indeed, to begin by the science of 
the spirit; it would not have attained, unaided, the precision, 
the rigour, the demand for proof, which have spread from 
geometry to physics, to chemistry, to biology, until such 
time as they might rebound on to the science of the spirit. 
And yet, on the other hand, it has certainly suffered to some 
extent from coming so late. For human intelligence has thus 
been left time to get scientific support for, and thus invest 
with unquestionable authority, its habit of looking at things 
as if they all occupied so much space, of explaining every­
thing in terms of matter. Suppose, then, that it now turns its 
attention to the soul? It will picture the life of the soul too 
as if it were spread out in space; it will extend to this new 
object the image it kept of the old: hence the errors of an 
atomistic psychology, which does not take into account the 
mutual overlapping of psychic states; hence the futile efforts 
of a philosophy that claims to attain to the spirit without 
seeking it in enduring time. Suppose, again, that we take the 
relation of the body to the soul. The confusion is graver still. 
Not only has it started metaphysics on a false scent, it has 
diverted science from the observation of certain facts, or 

M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
303 
rather it has prevented certain sciences from being born, 
causing them to be excommunicated beforehand in the name 
of I know not what dogma. For it was agreed that the material 
accompaniment of mental activity was its equivalent: every 
reality being supposed to have its basis in space, nothing more 
is to be found in the mind, so they said, than what a super­
human physiologist could read in the corresponding brain. 
Note that this thesis is a pure metaphysical hypothesis, an 
arbitrary interpretation of facts. 
But no less arbitrary is the 
spiritualistic metaphysics opposed to it, according to which 
each mental state is supposed to usc a cerebral state which 
serves merely as its instrument; for this metaphysics, too, men­
tal activity is coextensive with cerebral activity and corre­
sponds to it at every point in our present life. 
The second 
theory is indeed influenced by the first, having always lain 
under its spell. Now, we have attempted to prove, by remov­
ing the preconceived ideas accepted on both sides, by adher­
ing as close as possible to the configuration of facts, that the 
part played by the body is something quite different. 
The ac­
tivity of the spirit has indeed a material concomitant, but one 
which corresponds only to part of it; the rest lies buried in the 
unconscious. 
The body is indeed for us a means of action, 
but it is also an obstacle to perception. 
Its role is to perform 
the appropriate action on any and every occasion; for this 
very reason it must keep consciousness clear both of such 
memories as would not throw any light on the present sit­
uation, and also of the perception of obj ects over which we 
have no controU 
It is, as you like to take it, a filter or a 
screen. 
It maintains in a virtual state anything likely to 
hamper the action by becoming actual. 
It helps us to see 
straight in front of us in the interests of what we have to 
1 We have shown above how a sense such as that of sight carries fur­
ther, because its instrument makes this extension inevitable (sec p. 16o. 
Cf. Matiere et mbnoire, the whole of Chap. I). 

304 
1\1 E C H A N  I C S A N D M Y S T I C I S M 
do; and, on the other hand, it prevents us from looking to 
right and left for the mere sake of looking. It plucks for us a 
real psychical life out of the immense field of dreams. In 
a word, our brain is intended neither to create our mental 
images nor to treasure them up; it merely limits them, so as 
to make them effective. It is the organ of attention to life. 
But this means that there must have been provided, either 
in the body or in the consciousness limited by the body, 
some contrivance expressly designed to screen from man's 
perception objects which by their nature are beyond the 
reach of man's action. If these mechanisms get out of order, 
the door which they kept shut opens a little way: there enters 
in something of a "without" which may be a "beyond." It is 
with these abnormal perceptions that "psychical research" is 
concerned. To a certain extent the opposition it encounters 
is intelligible. It is a science that rests on human evidence, 
and human evidence can always be disputed. The typical 
scientist is in our eyes the physicist; his attitude of fully 
justified confidence towards matter, which is obviously not 
out to deceive him, has become for us characteristic of all 
science. \Ve are reluctant to go on treating as scientific a form 
of investigation which requires of the investigators that they 
be ever on the lookout for trickery. Their distrust makes us 
uneasy, their trust still more so: we know how soon one is apt 
to relax one's guard; that it is so perilously easy to glide from 
curiosity to credulity. Consequently, certain reluctances, as 
we said just now, are readily explained. But the flat denial 
which some true scientists oppose to "psychical research" 
would never be understood, were it not that, above all, they 
regard the facts reported as "improbable"; "impossible" 
they would say, if they did not know that there exists no 
conceivable means of establishing the impossibility of a fact; 
they are none the less convinced, in the main, of that impos­
sibility. And they are convinced of it because they believe 

M E C H A N I C S A N  D M Y S T I C I S 1\1 
305 
to be undeniable, definitely established, a certain relation 
between the organism and consciousness, between body and 
spirit. Now we have just seen that this relation is purely 
hypothetical, that it is not proved by science, but postulated 
by a certain metaphysics. The facts suggest a very different 
hypothesis; and if this is admitted, the phenomena recorded 
by "psychical research," or at least some of them, become so 
likely that we should rather be surprised at the time they have 
had to wait before they were studied. \Ve shall not here go 
over again a matter we have discussed elsewhere. 
Let us 
merely say, to take what seems to us the most strongly 
established fact, that if, for example, the reality of "telepathic 
phenomena" is called in doubt after the mutual corroboration 
of thousands of statements which have been collected on the 
subject, it is human evidence in general that must, in the eyes 
of science, be declared to be null and void: what, then, is to 
become of history? The truth is that one must make a selec­
tion among the results which "psychical research" puts before 
us; that science itself by no means considers them all of equal 
value; it distinguishes between what seems to it as certain 
and what is simply probable or, at most, possible. I3ut, even 
if one retains only a portion of what it would fain look upon 
as certain, enough remains for us to divine the immensity of 
the terra incognita that it has just begun to explore. Suppose 
that a gleam from this unknown world reaches us, visible to 
our bodily eyes. \Vhat a transformation for humanity, gen­
erally accustomed, whatever it may say, to accept as existing 
only what it can see and touch! The inforn1ation which would 
then reach us \vould perhaps concern only the inferior 
portion of the souls, the lowest degree of spirituality. I3ut 
this would be sufficient to turn into a li\·c, acting reality a 
belief in the life beyond, \vhich is apparently met with in 
most men, but which for the most part remains ycrbal, ab­
stract, ineffectual. To know to what extent it docs count, it 

306 
M E C H A N I C S  A N D  M Y S T I C I S M  
suffices to see how we plunge into pleasure: we should not 
cling to it so desperately, did we not see in it so much ground 
gained over nothingness, a means whereby we can snap our 
fingers at death. In truth, if we were sure, absolutely sure, of 
survival, we could not think of anything else. Our pleasures 
would still remain, but drab and jejune, because their inten­
sity was merely the attention that we centred upon them. 
They would pale like our electric lamps before the morning 
sun. Pleasure would be eclipsed by joy. 
Joy indeed would be that simplicity of life diffused through­
out the world by an ever-,spreading mystic intuition; joy, too, 
that which would automatically follow a vision of the life 
beyond attained through the funherance of scientific experi­
ment. Failing so thoroughgoing a spiritual reform, we must 
be content with shifts and submit to more and more numer­
ous and vexatious regulations, intended to provide a means of 
circumventing each successive obstacle that our nature sets 
up against our civilization. But, whether we go bail for small 
measures or great, a decision is imperative. 
Mankind lies 
groaning, half crushed beneath the weight of its own progress. 
Men do not sufficiently realize that their future is in their 
own hands. 
Theirs is the task of determining first of all 
whether they want to go on living or not. Theirs the responsi­
bility, then, for deciding if they want merely to live, or intend 
to make just the extra effort required for fulfilling, even on 
their refractory planet, the essential function of the universe, 
which is a machine for the making of gods. 

I N D E X  
Altruism, 28 
Ant, •7 •
•
 9• 2o, 2 1, 73, s4, s5, 255 
Appeal, 26 
Automatism, 198, 199 
Biology, 91, 150, 237, 244, 282 
Buddhism, 26, 2 1 1  ff. 
Chance, 1 3  2 ff. 
Christianity: 26 
bridge from closed to open so­
ciety, 68 
creator of religious emotion, H 
message 
of universal 
brother­
hood,  
morality of, 51, 52 
relation to Greek philosophy, 
227 
City (the) : 
attachment to, 266 
of God, 89 
limit of obligations of social life, 
27, 48, 49· 256 
morality of, 50 
Collective (mind), 94, 95 
Common sense, 96 
Custom, 1 1 2, 1 1 3, 259 
Democracy, 270, 271, 272, 2L 
Dichotomy, law of, 285, 289 
Dimorphism, 267, 2K 
Ego, 6, 7, 8, 58 
Emotion, 3 1 ,  3 2, 33, 35· 36, 37, 38, 
39· 41, 86, 87, 1 28, 241 
Equality, 6o, 70, 71, 270, 271 
Family, 24, 25, 223 
Foreigners, 274 
Frenzy, 285, 289 
God, 25, 203, 204, 209, 210, 2 19, 
2 20, 221, 222, 229, 230, 2J I ,  232, 
240, 241, 249. 250 
Good (the) , 78, 79, 231 
Habits, 2, 5, 10, 14. 15, 1 8  
Humanity, 2 3 ,  24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 3 1, 
49· 222, 22J, 224, 256 
Hymenopterae, 19, 96, 106 
Ideas (theory of) , 5, 53. 2 30, 2 3 1  
Impetus: of life (vital) ,  49, IOI, 
102, !OJ, 104, 105, 1 20, 1 28, 237, 
238, 262, 263 
of the artist, 66 
connexion with mysticism, 200, 
201. 202 
equivalent to dynamic morality, 
258 
insufficient, 55 
of lm-e, 87, 2 2 5 
obligation deri\'ing from, 46, 47 
Impulse, vital, 1 28, 1 29 
Instinct, 17, 1 8, 19, 20, 46, 47, 86, 
87, 100, 101, 10], 108, I 10, I I 1, 
152· 154 
Intelligence, 1 5. 19, 36, 37, 38, 47, 
48, 49, 55, 56, 83, 84, 9'· 106, 
10], 108, 109, I I I, I I 2, 1 28, 129, 
152, ' 53· '9·h 196, 197· 238 
Intellectualism, p, uo, 258, 291 
Intuition, 9·h 201, 238, 3o6 
Judaism, 228, 2 29 
Justice, 6o ff. 
Language, 20, 63 
Leadership, 267, 268 
307 

308 
I N D E X 
League of Nations, 276 
Liberation, 44 
Life, 49, 85, 86, 9I, 104, Io7, I98, 
200, 245· 305 
Liberty, 71, 270, 271 
Love, 30, 3I, 34t 90, 2 25, 243 
Magic, 154 ff. 
Mana, 1 24, 1 25, 1 54, 155, I65 
Mechanization, n4, 293, 295, 296, 
298, 299 
Morality: of the open society, 24, 
26, 27, 28, so 
of the closed society, 6, 7, zo 
relation to philosophy, zs8, 259 
relation to reason, So 
relation to religion, I I 3  
two kinds of, z6, 27, 41, 42, 43, 
46, 47 
twofold origin of, 72, Sz 
Movement, so, 259, z6o 
Mysteries, zos, 2o6 
Mysticism, 34, 75, S9, 90, 201, 202, 
203, 209, 2 IO, 2 I6 ff., 2 3 J, 2 34t 
235, 236, 237, 23S, 2So, 299, 300 
Myth-making, faculty, function of, 
97· 9S, 109, I I4, I 22, 1 26, 154· 
I63, 1S3 ff., 199, 200, 257 
Mythology, 97, 1 14 
Nature, 4, 3 2, 3J, 46, 47, 48, 49, 62, 
z6o, 26I, 301 
Necessity, 4• 6, 2 I  
Obedience, 1 1  
Obligation: binding character of, 
6, ], ]4, 75 
composite, I I, 72 
definition of, I 2  
deriving from habits, 13, 14 
organic tendencies, 47, 4S 
relation to aspiration, 57, 2 sS 
relation to instinct, zo, 2 I  
relation to higher morality, 25 
relation to reason, So, S1 
pressure of, I4, 1 5, I6, I], S2, 258 
Organism, I, 2, 3, 5, 6, zo, 21, 29, 
]3t I OJ, 108 
Patriotism, 266 
PLOTINUS, 20S, 2 10 
Population, 27S, 279 
Pressure, 25, z6, 46, 57, S3 
Primitive: (man) (society) , 2 1 ,  73, 
74· 93· 94· 1 1 7, l i S, I 24, 125, 
1 26, I 3 2 ff. 
Psychology, 35, 36, 37, 95, 96, 97, 
9S 
Psychical Research, 109, uo, 304, 
ws 
Reason, 1 5, 16, 17, 25, 52, SJ, 6o, 76 
Religion: connexion with supersti-
tion, 92 
instrument of nature, 1 1 2, 1 1 3  
mixed, 203 
relation to intellect, 1 19 ff. 
relation to magic, I63, 1 64, 165 
relation to morality, 40, 89 
social role of, s. iS] 
Resistance, 1 2, 1 3, Ss 
RoussEAu, 33, 271 
Science, 78, I59• 160, I 61, 162, 2S7, 
2S9, JOI, 302 
Self-respect, 58, 59, 6o 
Sensibility, J S, 36 
SPENCER, 26I, 262 
Sociability, 106, IO], 259 
Society: closed, 22, 23, 24, 29, 4S, 
255. 256. 264 
mode of thinking, 94• 95 
open, 22, 2 3· 49· so. 2 s6. 2 57 
pressure deriving from habits, I, 
2 
relation to individual, 9, IO, 1 1, 
1 5, I6 
SocRATES, 52, SJ, 54• 55, 28S 
Soul, 30, 44• 45, so, 5 1 ,  55, 253, 302 
Spirit, 302 
Stoics, 52, 69 
Superstition, 92, 93, 94 
Survival (after death) , 1 22, 1 23, 125 
\Var, 49, z6s, 273 ff. 
Yoga, 2 1 2  

