
Henri Bergson 


Henri Bergson 
Key Writings 
Edited by 
KEITH ANSELL PEARSON 
and 
JOHN MULLARKEY 
M e!anges translated by 
MELISSA McMAHON 

CONTINUUM 
The Tower Building, 11 York Road, London SE1 7NX 
370 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10017-6503 
First published 2002 
Introduction and this selection of texts © Keith Ansell Pearson and 
John Mullarkey 2002 
Extracts © Presses Universitaires de France 2001 
Melanges extract translation © Continuum 2002 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or any information storage or retrieval 
system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
ISBN 0-8264-5728-2 (hardback) 
0-8264-5729-0 (paperback) 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
Typeset by Aaron type Limited, Easton, Bristol 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Bookcraft (Bath) Ltd 

Abbreviations 
Chronology of Life and Works 
Introduction 
Time and Free Will 
The Idea of Duration 
Matter and Memory 
Introduction 
Images and Bodies 
The Persistence of the Past 
Planes of Consciousness 
Mind-Energy 
Contents 
Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
Brain and Thought: A Philosophical Illusion 
Creative Evolution 
The Endurance of Life 
Mechanism and Finalism 
Life as Creative Change 
Duration and Simultaneity 
Concerning the Nature of Time 
The Creative Mind 
The Possible and the Real 
Philosophical Intuition 
The Perception of Change 
On the Pragmatism of William James: Truth and Reality 
Introduction to Metaphysics 
Vll 
Vlll 
49 
81 
86 
1 24 
136 
141 
157 
171 
187 
191 
205 
223 
233 
248 
267 
274 

VI 
Bergson and Kant 
Beyond the N oumenal 
Contents 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
Melanges 
Good Sense and Classical Studies 
Letter to G. Lechalas 
Bergson-James Correspondence 
Letter to Harald Hoffding 
Letter to Floris Delattre 
Message to the Descartes Congress, 1937 
Notes 
Guide to Further Reading 
Index 
285 
295 
329 
345 
354 
357 
366 
369 
372 
376 
389 
395 

CE 
CM 
DS 
EP 
M 
ME 
MM 
OE 
RDM 
TSMR 
TFW 
Abbreviations 
Creative Evolution 
The Creative Mind 
Duration and Simultaneity, with Refirence to Einstein s Theory 
Ecrits et Paroles 
Melanges 
Mind-Energy 
Matter and Memory 
Oeuvres 
Revue des Deux Mondes 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
Time and Free Will· An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness 

Chronology of Life and Works 
1 859 
18 October: Henri-Louis Bergson born, 18 rue Lamartine, Paris, the 
second son of four boys and three girls to Polish father, Michael 
Bergson (originally Berek-son) and English mother, from Doncaster 
in Yorkshire, Katherine Levison. 
1 869 
Bergson family move to London (21 Shirland Road), Bergson 
remains in Paris and educated at lycee Fontaine (lycee Condorcet). 
1 877 
Bergson wins first prize in mathematics for the Concours General, 
and the 'plane solution of Pascal' is published the following year in 
the Nouvelles Annates de Mathematiques. Bergson's teacher, Desboves, 
would recount the solution in his Etude sur Pascal et les geometres 
contemporains. At the time Bergson's future is seen to lie in geometry 
as he viewed things spatially. Bergson also distinguishes himself in 
philosophy, winning first prize with the essay 'Perceptions reelles et 
perceptions acquises'. Bergson expected to enter the Ecole Normale 
to study mathematics and his decision to study philosophy instead 
disappoints Desboves, who wrote to him, 'you will only be a philos­
opher and have missed your vocation'. 
1878 
Enters the Ecole Normale, in the same class as Jean Jaures, and 
Emile Durkheim is a fellow student. Bergson reads John Stuart Mill 
and Herbert Spencer, studying carefully the latter's First Principles, 
and initially attracted to materialism and mechanism. Bergson 
studying under the influence of his tutor, Emile Boutroux (author of 
works on the contingency of nature and the idea of natural law) and 
also Felix Ravaisson and Jules Lachelier. 
1881 
Leaves the Ecole Normale with an agrege de philosophie. Begins a 
teaching post in Angers and enrols for a doctorate at the University 
of Paris. 
1882 Takes up teaching post at the lycee Blaise-Pascal, Clermont-Ferrand. 
1883 
While at the lycee Blaise-Pascal publishes an edition of Lucretius' 
De Rerum Natura under the tide of Extraits de Lucrece with a com­
mentary and notes. 
In a letter to William James of 9 May 1908, Bergson singles out 
the years 188 1-3 as a decisive period in his intellectual development: 
'Until that point I had remained completely steeped in the mechan­
istic theories to which I had been introduced very early on by reading 
Herbert Spencer, the philosopher to whom I adhered more or less 

Chronology of Life and Works 
IX 
unreservedly'. 1 He tells James that he was awoken from his dogmatic 
mechanistic slumbers by the realization that 'scientific time has 
no duration'. 
1 886 
Bergson publishes his first essay, 'De Ia simulation inconsciente dans 
I' etat d'hypnotisme', in Revue Philosophique. 
1 888 
Returns to Paris to teach, first at the College Rollin, then at the lycee 
Henri-Quatre as Professor of Rhetoric, where he remains unril 1897. 
Submits two theses to the University of Paris: Quid Aristoteles de loca 
sensorit? (What is Aristotle's Conception of Place?) and Essai sur les 
donnees immediates de Ia conscience (Time and Free Will). 
1889 
Bergson marries Louise Neuburger, aged 19, and cousin of Marcel 
Proust, who was a page-boy at the wedding. Later, on the publication 
of Swann's Way, the first volume of A Ia recherche du temps perdu, 
Proust would resist attempts to describe him as a Bergsonian novelist. 
1 896 
Publishes Matter and Memory. William James wrote to Bergson that 
the work makes a Copernican Revolution and compares it to 
Berkeley's Principles of Human Knowledge and Kant's Critique of 
Pure Reason. 
1897 Applies unsuccessfully, and second time round, for a post at the 
Sorbonne. Assumes position of maitre de conferences at the Ecole 
Normale. 
1900 
Appointed Chair of Ancient Philosophy at the College de France, 
having been rejected the previous year, in favour of Gabriel Tarde, 
for the Chair of Modern Philosophy. 
Publication of Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic. 
1901 
Made a member of the Academie des sciences morales et politiques. 
20 March: Presents a lecture on 'Dreams' at the lnstitut Psycho­
logique, Paris. 
1903 
Publishes 'Introduction to metaphysics' in Revue de metaphysique et 
de morale. 
1904 
Transfers to Chair of Modern Philosophy at the College de France 
on the death of Gabriel Tarde. 
1907 
Publishes Creative Evolution. William James described the book as 
'a real wonder in the history of philosophy'. 
1908 
William James lectures on Bergson as part of his 'Hibbert Leccures' 
delivered at Manchester College, Oxford, attacking Oxford idealism 
and calling for a 'radical empiricism' (published as A Pluralistic 
Universe in 1909). 
191 1 
English translation of Creative Evolution appears, and in F ranee a 
translation ofJames's Pragmatism is published with an Introduction, 
'Verite et realite', by Bergson. 
Delivers a paper on 'Philosophical intuition' at the Fourth Interna­
tional Congress of Philosophy, held in Bologna. Papers also delivered 
by Hans Driesch, Paul Langevin and Henri Poincare. The same year 

x 
Chronology of Life and Works 
he visits England and gives lectures at Oxford, Birmingham and 
London. On 26- 7 May speaks at Oxford, in French, on the 'Percep­
tion of change', and receives an honorary doctorate. On 29 May gives 
the 'Huxley Lecture' on 'Life and consciousness' at Birmingham. 
October: lectures at University College London. Newspaper reports 
on the lectures speak of 'The new French philosophy' (Glasgow 
Herald), and of 'The Bergson cult' (South African News, Daily Mail). 
1912 On leave from the College de France. 
Bertrand Russell's article 'The philosophy of Bergson' is pub­
lished in The Monist. Russell notes that as Bergson's philosophy cuts 
across all recognized divisions, whether empiricist, realist or idealist, 
any attempt to classify it will not meet with much success. 
1913 January, makes the first of three visits to the United States, sailing to 
New York to gives lectures at Columbia University. Bergson is met 
on his arrival at Columbia by its librarian, who presents him with a 
pamphlet entitled 'A contribution to the bibliography of Henri Berg­
son' that lists hundreds of books and articles. Bergson also speaks at 
Princeton and Harvard in February. 
28 May: gives the Presidential Address to the Society for Psychical 
Research, London, with a paper entitled ' "Phantasms of the living" 
and psychical research'. 
1914 Bergson elected a member of the Academie franfaise, and resumes 
teaching duties at the College de France with courses on modern 
philosophy and the philosophy of Spinoza. 
April and May: delivers the Gifford Lectures on 'The problem of 
personality' at Edinburgh University. 
June: Bergson's philosophy is condemned by the Roman Catholic 
Church and his books are placed on the Index. 
1917 January to May, Bergson returns to the USA as a special envoy of 
the French government, and meets President Wilson and his special 
aide, urging the American government to enter the war. 
1918 
Bergson visits the USA once again as an envoy from May to 
September. 
1919 Publication of Mind-Energy. 
1920 
Bergson retires from the College de France (his Chair given to 
Edouard Le Roy). Receives honorary doctorate from Cambridge 
University. 
1 922 
Meets Einstein at the College de F ranee and publishes Duration and 
Simultaneity. 
Appointed President of the 'International Commission of Intel­
lectual Co-operation' set up by the League of Nations. 
1925 
Severe arthritis forces Bergson to retire from public life. 
1 928 
Awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature, though Bergson is unable to 
travel to Stockholm to receive it. 

Chronology of Life and Works 
XI 
1932 
Publishes his last major work, The Two Sources of Morality and 
Religion. 
1933 
A collection of essays, La Pensee et le Mouvant (The Creative Mind), 
published. 
1937 
February: Bergson prepares a will that prohibits the posthumous 
publication of any unedited papers. 
1 940 
Bergson offered exemption from anti-Semitic regulations promul­
gated by the Nazis, bur refuses and registers in Paris as a Jew. 
1 941 
3 January: Bergson dies from a severe cold and is buried in the 
cemetery of Garches on the outskirts of Paris. 


Introduction 
This selection of key writings is designed to contribute to the task of rein­
stating Bergson as a major figure in modern European thought. 1 Bergson 
makes a number of important contributions to the staging of philosophical 
problems, problems concerning the nature of time, of consciousness, percep­
tion, representation and memory, of life and evolution. These problems con­
tinue to inform thinking to this day, and the fact that Bergson's contribution 
to them remains a vitally important one means he can also be regarded 
as our contemporary. Some of the innovations his thinking makes include 
the following: 
( 1) To conceive of time in terms of duration and to insist that time not be 
confused with space. 
(2) To forge a distinction between two kinds of multiplicity, the contin­
uous (virtual) and the discrete (actual). 
(3) To approach questions of metaphysics in terms of diverse planes of 
experience and different fields of knowledge. 
(4) To demonstrate the need to situate the theory of knowledge in the 
wider context of a theory of life. 
In what follows we shall endeavour to illuminate something of the nature of 
these innovations and to do so by focusing largely on the material we have 
selected from the complete writings.2 
DURATION AND THE TWO MULTIPLICITIES 
Duration cannot be made the subject of a logical or mathematical treatment. 
This is owing to its character as a virtual multiplicity. Towards the end of 
part three of Creative Evolution Bergson turns to address the status of his 
construal of life in terms of an 'impetus' (the notorious if poorly understood 
elan vital). He explicitly conceives it in terms of a 'virtual multiplicity' 
(virtuellement multiple). He acknowledges that describing life in terms of an 
impetus is to offer little more than an image, an 'image of thought' as it 
were. The image, however, is intended to disclose something about the 
essential character of life, namely, that it is not of a mathematical or logical 
order but a psychological one. The term psychological might appear to be a 
troubling one to use in this context. But Bergson uses it for a specific reason, 

2 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
a.s the following reveals: 'In reality, life is of the psychological order, and it is 
of the essence of the psychical to enfold a confused plurality of interpene­
trating terms' (CE, p. 257). The contrast he is making is with space, in which 
the multiplicity posited or found therein will be of a distinct kind, that is, one 
made up of discrete elements or components that are related to one another in 
specific terms, namely, relations of juxtaposition and exteriority. Bergson 
argues that 'abstract unity' and 'abstract multiplicity' are determinations of 
space and categories of the understanding (that is, they are schemas imposed 
upon the real in order to make it something uniform, regular, and calcul­
able for us). He then goes on to argue that what is psychical in nature cannot 
entirely correspond with space or fit neatly into categories of the under­
standing (take, for example, the question: is a person at any moment one 
or manifold?). 
In his first published work Time and Free Wilt ( TFW) Bergson had 
sought to show that the actuality of our psychic states presupposes a virtual 
multiplicity of duration. The different degrees of a mental state correspond 
to qualitative changes, changes that do not admit of simple measure or num­
ber. When we ordinarily speak of time we think of a homogeneous medium 
in which our conscious states are placed alongside one another as in space, 
and so form a discrete multiplicity. The question is whether the multiplicity 
of our psychic states resembles the multiplicity of the units of number and 
whether duration has anything to do with space. If time is simply a medium 
in which our conscious states are strung out as a discrete series that can be 
counted, then time would indeed be space. The question Bergson poses is 
whether time can legitimately be treated as such a medium. 
It is in chapter 2 of TFW that Bergson will make cenrral to his argument 
the distinction between two kinds of multiplicity. This material has been 
extracted from the book and is presented here in full. The distinction Bergson 
draws between the discrete and the continuous represents a reworking of a 
distinction initially introduced by the mathematician G. B. Riemann, who 
had utilized the distinction in his 1 854 Habilitationsschrift entitled 'On the 
hypotheses which provide the grounds for geometry'. Riemann forged a 
distinction between a discrete multiplicity or manifoldness that contains the 
principle of its metrical division (the measure of one part is given by the num­
ber of elements in a multiplicity) and a continuous multiplicity in which the 
metrical principle is located in the binding forces which act upon it. Definite 
or distinct portions of a multiplicity are distinguished by a mark or a bound­
ary. In the case of both multiplicities, therefore, we are dealing with an issue 
of 'Quanta'. In the case of a discrete magnitude we make the comparison 
with quantity by counting, and in the case of a continuous one by measur­
ing. The measure consists either in the superposition of the magnitudes to 
be compared (which requires a means of using one magnitude to act as the 
standard for another) or, where this is not possible, comparing two magni­
tudes when one is a part of the other (in this case it is possible only to 

Introduction 
3 
determine the more or less and not the how much). This makes for an 
interesting case of magnitudes since it refers us to ones that cannot be treated 
independently of position or as ever expressible in terms of a unit, but rather 
as 'regions in a manifoldness'. 
Gilles Deleuze has argued that Bergson was well aware of the contribution 
of Riemann and that an indirect engagement with him informs the treat­
ment of Relativity in Duration and Simultaneity (DS) (Deleuze 1991, p. 39). 
Bergson's contribution is to transform the nature of the distinction between 
the two multiplicities by linking the continuous with the realm of duration. 
Deleuze's claim is that: 
for Bergson, duration was not simply the indivisible, nor was it the 
nonmeasurable. Rather, it was that which divided only by changing in 
kind, that which was susceptible to measurement only by varying its 
metrical principle at each stage of the division. Bergson did not confine 
himself to opposing a philosophical vision of duration to a scientific 
conception of space but took the problem into the sphere of two kinds of 
multiplicity. He thought that the multiplicity proper to duration had, for 
its parr, a 'precision' as great as that of science; moreover, that it should 
react upon science and open up a path for it that was not necessarily the 
same as that of Riemann and Einstein. (ibid., p. 40) 
Deleuze maintains that Bergson's usage of multiplicity is not parr of the 
traditional vocabulary, especially when thought in relation to a continuum. 
And as Robin Durie astutely points out, Bergson 'does not begin with a 
predetermined concept of time', from which could then be derived the nature 
of temporal relations. Instead, the procedure is to discover 'the formally 
determinate relations which determine the "objects" comprising differing 
provinces' and from this discovery the two concepts of time (duration and 
spatial time) are articulated on the basis of the relations determining the 
multiplicities.3 With a non-numerical multiplicity we can speak of 'indivis­
ibles' at each stage of the division: a multiplicity like a qualitative duration 
divides bur each time it does it changes in kind. In this way there 'is other 
without there being several'; number exists only potentially (Deleuze 1991, 
p. 42). There is more than is actually present at any single moment and a 
change will always be qualitative. In a non-numerical multiplicity not every­
thing is actual. In contrast, in a numerical multiplicity everything is actual 
although it may not be realized. Thus, when something does get realized it 
simply has existence added to it, it does not change its nature. 
IS TIME SPACE? 
Are states of consciousness external to one another and spread out in time as 
a spatial medium? Looked at from the perspective of pure duration our states 

4 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
can be seen to permeate and melt into one another without precise outlines 
and without any affiliation with number, in which past and present states 
form a whole, 'as happens when we recall the notes of a tune, melting, so to 
speak, into one another' ( TFW, p. 1 00; see below, p. 60). These are involved 
in qualitative changes that disclose a 'pure heterogeneity'. When we 
interrupt the rhythm of a tune by perhaps dwelling longer than is customary 
on one note, it is not the exaggerated length that signals the mistake to us 
but rather the qualitative change caused in the whole of the piece of music. 
We can thus conceive of succession without distinction, and think of it as 
a mutual penetration, an interconnexion and organization of elements, 
each one of which represents the whole, and cannot be distinguished or 
isolated from it except by abstract thought. (TFW, p. 101; see below, p. 60) 
Duration is non-representational, and as soon as we think it we necessarily 
spatialize it (which clearly presents a major, if not insuperable, problem for 
any thinking of duration). It could be called an intensive magnitude 'if 
intensities can be called magnitudes' (TFW, p. 106; see below, p. 62). 
Bergson hesitates on this point because he does not wish to treat duration as 
a quantity. Because we have the idea of space we set our states side by side so 
as to perceive them simultaneously: we project time into space, express 
duration in terms of extensity, and succession assumes the form of a 
continuous chain. A decisive movement or shift takes place in our thinking, 
albeit one we are ordinarily not aware of: 
Note that the mental image rhus shaped implies the perception, no longer 
successive, but simultaneous, of a before and after, and that it would be a 
contradiction to suppose a succession which was only a succession, and 
which nevertheless was contained in one and the same instant. ( TFW; see 
below, p. 60) 
The important point is this: we could not introduce order into terms 
without first distinguishing them and then comparing the places they 
occupy. As Bergson writes, 'if we introduce an order in what is successive, 
the reason is that succession is converted into simultaneity and is projected 
into space' (p. 102; see below, p. 60). Moreover, since the idea of a reversible 
series in duration, even of a certain order of succession in time, itself implies 
the representation of space, it cannot be used to define it. 
Reducing time to simple movement of position is to confuse time with 
space. It is this confusion between motion and the space traversed which 
explains the paradoxes of Zeno. The interval between two points is infinitely 
divisible, and if motion is said to consist of parts like those of the inter­
val itself, then the interval can never be crossed. But the truth of the matter 
is different: 

Introduction 
5 
each of Achilles' steps is a simple indivisible act . . .  after a given number 
of these acts, Achilles will have passed the tortoise. The mistake of the 
Eleatics arises from their identification of this series of acts, each of which 
is of a definite kind and indivisible, with the homogeneous space which 
underlies them. (p. 1 13; see below, p. 65) 
Because this space can be divided and put together again according co any 
kind of abstract law, the illusion arises that it is possible to reconstruct the 
movement of Achilles not with his step but with that of the tortoise. In truth, 
we have only two tortoises that agree to make the same kind of steps or 
simultaneous acts so never to catch one another. Let us now take the paradox 
of the flying arrow which at any point is not in flight. If the arrow is always at 
a point, when is it ever in flight or mobile? Instead, we might ask, what is it in 
this example that leads us to saying that the arrow is at any point in its course? 
(admittedly, it might be, but only in the sense of it passing and stopping 
at a particular point, at which point it would come to rest and its flight would 
cease). Within any posited motionless trajectory it is possible to count as 
many immobilities as we like. What we fail to see is that 'the trajectory is 
created in one stroke, although a certain rime is required for it; and that 
although we can divide at will the trajectory once created, we cannot divide its 
creation, which is an act in progress and not a thing' (CE, p. 309). 
The key insight concerns the difference between extensity and intensity: 
the space traversed is a matter of extension and quantity (it is divisible), but 
the movement is an intensive act and a quality. Bergson is insistent that it is 
'through the quality of quantity that we form the idea of quantity without 
quality', not the other way round. Qualitative operations are even at work in 
the formation of numbers (the addition of a third unit to two others alters 
the nature, the rhythm, of the whole, even though our spatial habits lead us 
to disregard the significance of these qualitative aspects) (TFW, p. 123; see 
below, p. 70). 
Bergson contrasts psychic time with clock time. It is rhe latter rhat treats 
time as a magnitude (pp. 107 -8; see below, p. 63). Motion, however, in so far 
as it is a passage from one point to another, 'is a mental synthesis, a psychic 
and therefore unextended process . . . If consciousness is aware of any­
thing more than positions, the reason is that it keeps the successive positions 
in mind and synthesizes them' (p. Ill; see below, p. 64). The conclusion is 
reached in TFW that 'the interval of duration exists only for us and on 
account of the interpenetration of our conscious states'. Outside ourselves we 
find only space, and consequently nothing bur simultaneities, 'of which we 
could not even say that they are objectively successive, since succession can 
only be thought through comparing the present with the past' (p. 1 16; see 
below, p. 67). The qualitative impression of change cannot, therefore, be felt 
outside consciousness. Duration and motion are not objects but 'mental 
syntheses' (p. 120; see below, p. 68). In our consciousness, states permeate 

6 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
one another, imperceptibly organize themselves into a whole, and bind the 
past to the present. Conceived as a virtual, qualitative multiplicity, this 
duration 'contains number only potentially, as Aristotle would have said' 
(p. 121 ;  see below, p. 69). Does this mean that duration, conceived as a pure 
heterogeneity, is simply an aspect of consciousness, that is, is it something 
solely phenomenological or psychological and peculiar to the way in which 
we experience the world? 
This restriction of duration to consciousness is one that Bergson will seek 
to overcome in subsequent texts. This requires breaking down the form/ 
matter opposition that structures his account of mind and the world in 
TFW. Even in this work Bergson is already aware of the problems connected 
with any account which construes the relation between mind and world in 
terms of a form simply being imposed upon matter: 'assuming that the 
forms alluded co, into which we fit matter, come entirely from the mind, it 
seems difficult to apply them constantly to objects without the latter soon 
leaving their mark on them . . .  forms applicable to things cannot be entirely 
our own work . . .  if we give much to matter we probably receive something 
from it . .  .' (p. 223). It is in Matter and Memory (MM) that Bergson will 
provide a very different account of matter and perception. He now seeks to 
show that the real is made up of both extensity and duration, but this 'extent' 
is not that of some infinite and infinitely divisible space, the space of a 
receptacle, that the intellect posits as the place in which and from which 
everything is built. It is necessary, then, to separate a concrete extension, 
diversified and organized at the same time, from 'the amorphous and inert 
space which subtends it' (MM, p. 187). This is the space that we divide 
indefinitely and within which we conceive movement as a multiplicity of 
instantaneous positions. Homogeneous space is not, then, logically anterior 
to material things but posterior to them. 
BERGSON AND RUSSELL ON CONTINUITY 
There have been a number of criticisms of Bergson's account of duration. 
Often these centre on privileging a mathematical treatment of continuity 
over a philosophical one. In Lecture V of his Our Knowledge of the External 
World on 'The theory of continuity', Bertrand Russell, for example, 
proclaims that continuity is a purely mathematical subject and not, strictly 
speaking, part of philosophy. A notion of change must fit into a logical 
framework, with the result that logical necessity compels us to a conception 
of 'instants without duration' (Russell 1922, p. 1 58). 
It needs to be made clear: in privileging a mathematical treatment of con­
tinuity Russell is not contesting Bergson's stress on continuity and falling 
back on discontinuous states; rather, the difference is over how continuity is 
to be thought and mapped out. This explains why he is able to appreciate the 
force of Bergson's exposition of Zeno' s paradoxes while at the same time 

Introduction 
7 
insisting on the need to think the continuity of motion in a different way to 
the 'interpenetration' argument of Bergson. For Russell, however, the force of 
Bergson's exposition only holds if we accept the initial force of Zeno's para­
doxes, and he doesn't: 'A cinematograph in which there are an infinite num­
ber of films, and in which there is never a next film because an infinite 
number come between any two, will perfectly represent a continuous motion. 
Wherein, then, lies the force of Zeno' s argument?' ( 1922, p. 339) .4 Before we 
explore this further by looking at the lecture on the theory of continuity, let 
us just pause to note the paradoxical nature of Russell's own position (he has 
answered Zeno by substituting one paradox for another). In evincing the 
argument that motion can be shown to be continuous because there is never 
anything that comes next, Russell has deprived the movement of time itself, 
as a movement of virtual time (the coexistence or immanence of past and 
present), of any efficacy and replaced this movement with an infinite number 
of discrete motions. In short, he is seeking to construct continuity out of 
discreteness. Russell has replaced a philosophical treatment of time (a virtual 
multiplicity) with a mathematical one (a numerical multiplicity). 
In this lecture Russell is concerned to reconcile the philosophical and the 
logical: how can the mathematical treatment of time in terms of points and 
instants be squared with our feeling, intimated at by many philosophers, 
that time is a continuity? His response is to say that while it is wrong to 
divide time into a finite number of points and instants, the correct way 
forward, one that will stop us from falling back into Bergson's confused 
response to Zeno, is to appeal to an infinite number of these points and 
instants. But surely won't infinitely numerous points and instants simply 
provide us with a jerky motion and a succession of different immobilities? 
Russell raises this question himself and answers it by saying that to assume 
this to be the case is to fail to realize, both imaginatively and abstractly, the 
nature of a continuous series as understood in mathematics. In short, we lack 
the intuition to conceive of such a continuity and we need to learn how, says 
Russell, to feel its complete adequacy and validity (1922, p. 136). 
Russell seeks to show that when mathematics thinks continuity it does so 
in terms of it being a property of a series of terms, which is to suppose an 
'order' or arrangement of time, in which something comes before something 
else (though this is not required, he notes, in the theory of cardinal number). 
Thus, continuity does not belong to a set of terms themselves but to a set in 
a certain order (in this case we can say that in the example of continuity the 
relations established are always external to their terms). Russell then intro­
duces his idea of'compacrness' as a way of accounting for the lowest degree of 
continuity within the arrangement of any series: 'A series is called "compact" 
when no two terms are consecutive, but between any two there are others' 
(p. 138), and he gives the simple example of a series of fractions in order 
of magnitude. Between any two fractions, however small the difference, 
there can be posited an infinite number of other fractions. Now while 

8 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
mathematical space and time have the property of compacrness, tt ts not 
clear that we can extend this to actual space and time. It seems as if mathe­
matics reaches an empirical limit at this point. But this is not enough to stop 
Russell from persisting with this logicizing of space and time. 
In short, Russell reaches the view that there are no discontinuous leaps in 
something changing from one state or position to another; rather, continuity 
is to be thought in terms of an infinite number of positions. This explains 
why it is illegitimate, he argues, to say what something will be at the next 
instant or where it will be in its next position - there are no such 'nexts'. 
The movement of time is to be conceived then not in terms of consecutive 
points and instants but rather in terms of a continuous series of infinite points 
and instants. It is important we get Russell right on this point and not 
commit a logical blunder. It would be mistaken to suppose that he is arguing 
with this model that between the positions and states of things there are 
infinitesimal distances in space or periods of time, and that it is this which 
allows us to multiply indefinitely the points and instants. This is clearly not 
the case. His argument is rather that in a continuous motion the interval 
between any two positions and instants is always finite; the continuity lies 
solely in the fact that, however near together the two positions or instants are 
taken to be, 'there are an infinite number of positions still nearer together, 
which are occupied at instants that are also still nearer together' (p. 142). 
This means that a moving body 'never jumps from one position to another, 
but always passes by a gradual transition through an infinite number of 
intermediaries' (ibid.). No instant, therefore, can be said to last for a finite 
time and neither can it be said that an instant has a beginning and an end. 
The conclusion is reached that although the facts or logic itself do not neces­
sitate this model of continuous motion in terms of a particular conception of 
points and instants, it is at least 'consistent' with the facts and with logic. 
Whether this defence rests on a vicious circle will not be discussed here; we 
simply wish to note that time has been thought away on this mathematical 
model, which, in spite of its criticism of the consecutive, is still a model of 
points and instants in accordance with a discrete or an actual multiplicity. 
We might now ask, what is the relation between this mathematical 
treatment of continuity and actual space and time? This is an issue that is 
raised by Russell himself. He adopts the position that while points and 
instants cannot be taken co be actual physically existing entities we can posit 
an analogy between the continuity of actual space and time and the 
continuity that mathematics works with. However, he also wishes to stress 
that the theory of mathematical continuity is an abstract logical theory, the 
validity of which is not dependent upon any properties of actual space and 
time (Russell 1922, pp. 1 35-58, p. 137). But this is not the whole of 
Russell's position, for he also argues that the logical theory has more 
empirical purchase than any other theory, including what he takes to be its 
major rival, that of Bergson. He speaks of translating the propositions of 

Introduction 
9 
physics into propositions about objects given to us in sensation 'by a sort of 
dictionary' (p. 147). Although he has no such basis upon which to make the 
claim, he argues that within the sphere of immediate sense-data it is both 
necessary and more consonant with the facts than any other view to 
distinguish states of objects as instantaneous ones which form a compact 
series. What he will not allow is that Bergson's conception of time as a 
virtual multiplicity has any empirical purchase whatsoever; it is rather co be 
understood solely in terms of an illusion of experience and a mistaken 
inference from available sense-data. Now, this is clear evidence of an 
outright dogmatism on the part of Russell's logicism. This is so because he 
has clearly stated that we know very little from the evidence of our sense­
data about the empirical character of space and time, and yet he is insistent 
that the choice to be made is not between a philosophical thinking of time 
and a mathematical one, but rather choosing between various mathematical 
alternatives. For Russell the empirical data can be read in all sores of ways, 
and this means chat we are simply dealing with certain logical difficulties, 
such as our failure of imagination and abstraction when it comes to 
appreciating how a continuous series can be thought in terms of infinite 
numbers within mathematics. This means, in effect, that while the 
mathematical account of continuity is not dependent for its validity upon 
any properties of actual space and time, it arrogates co itself the right co 
dictate what should be the proper philosophical account of space and time. 
TOWARDS AN ONTOLOGY OF DURATION 
Bergson's thinking of time undergoes some major and quite dramatic shifts 
after TFW. In the firsr work he is clearly adhering to the view that the 
experience of duration requires an act of mental synthesis and thus time is a 
phenomenon of consciousness and something solely inner or psychological 
(external reality is simply space). The innovation of chis work lies not in any 
new cosmology or theory of evolution but in its conception of time as a 
non-spatial and continuous multiplicity. In MM he speculates whether non­
spatial time or duration can be extended to external things - do they endure 
in their own way? - and although he ends producing a vision of matter char 
he believes will fatigue our intellect, he remains undecided on the issue. 
By the time of CE he has reached the view that duration is 'immanent co the 
universe', and aims to show that duration is the key notion for under­
standing the creative character of evolution. He seeks co show chat physics 
deals with closed and artificial systems in which time has been left our of the 
picture. Once we apply ourselves to the movement of the 'whole' then 
duration has to be admitted into our account of the evolution of life. 
Deleuze has argued that in Bergson duration comes to be seen less and less 
as reducible to a psychological experience and becomes instead the 'variable 

10 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
essence of things'; in short, it becomes an ontology (Deleuze 199 1 ,  p. 34). 
The question 'Do external things endure?' can only remain indeterminate 
from the standpoint of psychological experience. If external things do not 
endure and duration is a phenomenon of consciousness only, then the 
danger arises of it being readily treated as a subjective determination (that of 
a mere appearance). Deleuze cites Bergson himself on the issue: 'Although 
things do not endure as we do, nevertheless there must be some incom­
prehensible reason why phenomena are seen to succeed one another instead 
of being set out all at once' (ibid., p. 48; quoting from TFW, p. 227). If it 
can be demonstrated that movement belongs to things as much as to con­
sciousness then movement will not be confused with psychological duration; 
rather, as Deleuze put it in his Bergsonism, 'Psychological duration should 
be only a clearly determined case, an opening onto ontological duration' 
(ibid., pp. 48-9). 
The articulation of duration as immanent to the whole of the universe 
informs Bergson's stress in CE on the study of life or living systems over the 
claims of physics and chemistry, which, he contends, deal only with closed 
or isolated systems. Evolution has a history and an irreversibility to it. 
Whereas in the first book, TFW, he had seen only psychic states as non­
mechanical and non-determined, contesting in the process the application of 
the law of the conservation of energy to the domain of psychology, in C£ he 
now wants to extend this to claims about the evolution of life. 'The universe 
endures' is the key opening claim of the book. Bergson then writes: 'The 
more we study the nature of time, the more we shall comprehend that 
duration means invention, the creation of forms, the continual elaboration 
of the absolutely new' (that is, it is not a mere rearrangement of parts) 
( CE, p. 1 1; see below, p. 176). Just as key is this claim: 'There is no reason, 
therefore, why a duration, and so a form of existence like our own, should 
not be attributed to the systems that science isolates, provided such systems 
are reintegrated into the Whole' (p. 177). Consider the way in which our 
perception construes an object in terms of distinct outlines. This distinct 
individuality of an object is no more than the design of a certain kind of 
influence we exert on a certain point of space. The universal interaction 
between things is halted (this provides us with an insight into what Bergson 
means by the 'whole'). Science does the same in constituting isolable 
systems, that is it extracts them from the movement of the whole that they 
are implicated in: 'let me say I am perfectly willing to admit that the future 
states of a closed system of material points are calculable and hence visible 
in irs present state. But . . .  this system is extracted, or abstracted, from a 
whole which, in addition to inert and unorganised matter, comprises 
organization' (CM, p. 103; see below, p. 231). Now, Bergson does not deny 
that the material world is made up of individuated bodies (organisms) or 
that nature itself has carved out relatively closed systems, but this is not the 
whole of the picture and conforms in large part to our mental habits and 

Introduction 
11 
evolutionary needs, in short, to our diagrammatic designs upon reality. The 
categories of the understanding - categories that also inform science to a 
large degree - provide us with access to one line of the real but it also blocks 
off access to other lines, which are treated as merely 'metaphysical' and in 
need of a critique. 
What needs to be overcome, then, are certain ingrained habits of the 
mind, habits which also inform how science approaches the real, such as: 
(1) the view that change is reducible to an arrangement or rearrangement 
of parts or that change merely involves a change of position regarding 
unchangeable things; 
(2) that the irreversibility of rime is only an appearance relative to our ignor­
ance and that the impossibility of turning back is only a human inability 
to put things in place again (consider the illusion of time travel); 
(3) that time has only as much reality for a living system as an hour-glass. 
We are fixated on reducing time to instants (mathematical points). This 
is to deny time any positive reality and to think it spatially. In Einstein­
ian Relativity, for example, what is measured is the abstract and 
quantitative simultaneity of two clock readings according to a conven­
tion for determining under which circumstances they should be called 
simultaneous. 
With regard to our treatment of evolution the dominant conception we have 
is one where duration and invention are lacking; there are merely preformed 
possibilities which are then brought into being by being realized. Of course 
Bergson appreciates the important contribution Darwinism makes to a 
theory of evolution, but argues that every generation of form is bound up 
with a unique history that reflects specific durational conditions of existence. 
In other words, the Darwinian conditions of life, such as adaptation, are 
built into the evolving life-form, 'they are peculiar to that phase of its history 
in which life finds itself at the moment of producing the form' (CE, p. 28; 
see below, p. 184). Let us suppose that life is indeed mechanism. This still 
leaves the question of what kind of mechanism: 'is it the mechanism of parts 
artificially isolated within rhe whole of the universe, or is it the mechanism 
of the real whole?' What does Bergson mean? If we posit the 'real whole' as 
an indivisible continuity then the systems we cut out within it would not, 
strictly speaking, be parts but rather 'partial views of the whole' (p. 31; see 
below, p. 186). 
Bergson's thought is first and foremost a pluralism and an empiricism. s 
Its complicated character as a practice of philosophy stems from the fact that 
it also makes use of typically idealist categories like the 'whole' and the 
'image'. Such notions, however, are really part of an attempted 'superior' 
empiricism. The 'whole', for example, cannot be approached in terms of 
ready-made criteria of an organic totality. The pluralist and the empiricist 

12 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
will thus invoke and appeal to a whole that is only ever the whole of an 
acentred mobile continuity, a continuity of moving parts and wholes in 
which the 'whole' that they are implicated in does not denote an organic 
unity. Even when we think the whole on the level of life it is not necessary 
that we posit either a logical development or approach evolution with a set 
of organicist prejudices. 
Matter, perception and memory 
MM is a book that has perplexed and beguiled its readers since it was first 
published in 1896. William James compared its effect to a Copernican 
Revolution, making it a philosophical work to be ranked with Berkeley's 
Principles of Human Knowledge and Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Unlike 
the revolutions of Berkeley and Kant, however, that effected by Bergson in 
MM consists in neither reducing the world to our perception or idea of it 
nor restricting knowledge of it to our a priori sensible and cognitive forms. 
It is not until the final part of the book that the true nature of Bergson's 
revolution becomes clear when he insists that nature goes beyond our 
representation of it and aims to present a vision of matter that is fatiguing 
for the intellect. Indeed, the opening part of the book gives the impression 
that Bergson is a kind of idealist or empiricist in the Berkeleyean sense. The 
book cannot, then, be read without due regard for its complex movements 
of thought. MM is a text that anticipates many of the recent moves made in 
the philosophy of mind, such as the stress on approaching perception not 
in terms representational but rather as bound up with the action and move­
ment of a body, and on consciousness as an emergent property of a network 
or assemblage of components; it is only abstractly that we can separate brain, 
body and world.6 
Chapter 1 ,  reproduced here in full, unfolds the argument that perception is 
not an interior subjective vision, or some mysterious manifestation of matter. 
The perception of a consciousness has its basis in an impersonal percep­
tion that is common to matter in its simplest mode. To demonstrate this 
Bergson uses the notion of a 'pure perception', a perception without memory. 
It is also in the opening chapter that Bergson will approach the question 
of matter and its perception in terms of the notion of image. He uses this 
notion extensively: chapter 1 of the book is devoted to the 'selection of 
images', chapter 2 to the 'recognition of images', chapter 3 to the 'survival 
of images' (parts of which we have included in this reader) and chapter 4 to 
the 'delimiting and fixing of images'. All becomes image on his model, 
including the body, nerve centres, the brain, etc. (in the essay on 'Brain and 
thought' in Mind-Energy, which we have included here, these get described as 
'ideas'). The notion has more than one sense in Bergson, and the tensions 
within his usage reflect its complex application in the history of philosophy. 

Introduction 
13 
The difficulty in determining the precise character of Bergson's philosoph­
ical position in MM is compounded by the fact that he makes concessions to 
idealism - for example, in his very usage of the term image - and sees it an 
inevitable component in our thinking about the world. He ultimately wants 
to move beyond idealism, whether in its Berkeleyean or Kantian presen­
tation, and he aims to show how this is possible (Kant is depicted as both an 
idealist and a realist in the book so as not to equate his position with 
Berkeley's). One of the novel aspects of the book is how it aims to show that 
realism also ends up in an idealist trap. Briefly: for the idealist the world is the 
product of our ideas and cannot exist independently of them. For the realist 
(sometimes called a materialist) the mental is reduced to the cerebral and in 
this way the brain is made into the progenitor of our representations of the 
world. Bergson will take both to task for reducing the relation of the body to 
the world into one of speculative knowledge as opposed to viral activity. 
Realism becomes an idealism when it locates perception and consciousness in 
a centre or some detached isolated object, which has the effect of divorcing 
embodied cognition from its conditions of action in the world? Both 
idealism and realism err in making the presentation of the part - the mind or 
the brain - equivalent to the presentation of the whole (the real). 
Bergson is not committed to a strong Berkeleyean position (images exist 
only when perceived), for he will go on to argue that images exist when 
unperceived. By describing the objects of matter and of the world as images 
Bergson is suggesting that they have the potential to be perceived.8 A key 
question guides Bergson's analysis in chapter 1. He poses it as follows: What 
is the relation between the image I term my body, which is an image that 
occupies a centre, and the image I call the universe? Moreover, how is it 
possible for the same images to belong at one and the same time to two dif­
ferent systems, to one in which each image varies for itself and another in 
which images change for a single image that occupies a privileged centre? 
To see why Bergson should raise this question about the existence of these 
two systems of images we have to jump ahead a little in the unfolding of the 
argument and appreciate that Bergson gives primacy to a continuity of 
material extensity. In its aspects chis continuity changes from moment to 
moment and can be conceived in terms of a whole that changes like a kaleido­
scope: there is no centre since everything is bound together in relations. 
Indeed, Bergson argues that empiricism has only a vague conception of the 
artificial character of the relations uniting the terms, but it holds to these 
terms and neglects the relations (MM, p. 1 83). Once we have artificially 
broken up the moving continuity of the whole we seek to re-establish the 
unions and bonds that exist between things, but we do so by replacing a 
'living unity' with an empty diagram that is as 'lifeless as the parts which it 
holds together' in which relations are being conceived in logical and spatial 
terms. In addition to the moving whole of this material extensity we also 
speak of bodies with clearly defined outlines - they have their own substance 

14 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
and individuality - and which move in terms of their relations with each 
other. Bergson begins from the perspective of the continuity of a moving 
whole since he thinks this offers us the best chance of explaining the 
formation of individuated bodies (they first emerge from it as 'zones of 
indetermination'). At the same time, however, he is concerned to expose the 
illusions that the intellect generates for itself in its neglect of the whole: 
generating, for example, the illusion of bodies changing in homogeneous 
space, a space which is then extended to time itself. 
My body is unique in that I do not simply know it 'from without' in 
terms of perception but also 'from within', as it were, in terms of 'affections', 
which interpose themselves between the excitations a body receives from the 
outside and the movements it executes in response. My body exists, then, 
amidst the aggregate of images that makes up the material world, and, as 
such, it can only be regarded as one image amongst many which, like other 
images, receives movement and gives it back. It is at this point that Bergson 
begins to describe everything as image: afferent and efferent nerves, the 
brain, my body, and so on. If the brain is an image existing in the material 
world among other images, then it cannot be reified into the condition upon 
which the whole image of the world depends (that is, its part cannot be made 
equivalent to the whole): 'Neither nerves nor nerve centres can, then, condi­
tion the image of the universe' (MM, p. 19; see below, p. 87). Moreover, in 
claiming that the brain is part of the material world, and resisting the view 
that the material world is somehow contained in the physical entity we call 
the bounded brain, Bergson is aiming to show that if the image that is the 
material world is eliminated then we at the same time destroy the brain and 
its cerebral disturbances: the brain cannot exist in the absence of the images 
of the material world. This leads him to exposing what he calls 'the fiction of 
an isolated material object', which results in an absurd position, namely, that 
such an object as the nervous system, in its physical properties, can exist 
independently of its relations with the rest of the universe, such as the 
organism which nourishes it, the body that houses it and the atmosphere 
of the earth that envelops the organism, and so on. If we keep hold of 
the relations then it makes no sense to reduce perceptions to the molecular 
movements of the cerebral mass, simply because these movements remain 
bound up with the rest of the material world. In addition, Bergson advances 
the argument that on the model he has constructed it can be seen that the 
body, as a living centre, is first and foremost a centre of action and not a 
house of representation. It is not abstracted from the world, simply 
contemplative in relation to it; rather it is intimately bound up with it and 
with its movements, with actions and reactions. Replacing the self­
transparency of the Cartesian cogito with the isolated brain divorced from 
the images that inform it leads to the illusion that if we could penetrate into 
the inside of the brain it would be possible to understand the phenomenon 
of consciousness simply by observing the dance of the atoms of the cortex. 

Introduction 
1 5  
This is to commit the error of positing a simple, linear or automatic account 
of the relation between the cerebral and the mental. Bergson does not deny 
that there is a relation, only that it is one of either parallelism or epipheno­
menalism. Psychic life can be said to be highly varied, varying in accordance 
with the 'attention to life' and made up of diverse tones and rhythms. 
It is important to appreciate the unorthodox character of Bergson's utiliza­
tion of the notion of image. His usage does not conform to certain patterns 
that have established themselves within our thinking, such as the classic 
divisions of subject and object, mind and matter. He neither construes the 
problem of perception or consciousness in representational terms nor does he 
hold that images are simply in our heads.9 The person who might wish to 
claim that although the world is not dependent on our consciousness - it 
would still exist should the consciousness that reflects on the being of its 
being disappear - the images our minds produce of it are dependent on our 
consciousness, is not even entitled to say this on Bergson's model. But, we 
might ask, why construe the brain as an image or idea? Is this not already to 
concede too much to idealism (all that I know of the brain is what I perceive 
of it or what is available to me as an idea)? What sense does it make to 
describe nerve centres as images? Perhaps it is useful to bear in mind that in 
the opening chapter of the book Bergson is thinking in terms of common 
sense and has not yet, at this point in the book, developed an engagement 
with the realism of science. On an initial phenomenological level, therefore, 
matter is how it appears, simply as image. But this is not an adequate way to 
characterize Bergson's position, simply because his approach is not one which 
privileges an intentional consciousness. In the essay of 1904 on 'Brain and 
thought' Bergson picks up this conception again and speaks of nerve centres 
as images in the sense of 'moving pictures' that contain 'movable parts', 
taking in movements from the outside and producing in response internal 
movements. On this level, therefore, all that the brain is doing is receiving the 
influences from the movements of other images and responding to them. It 
exists only as a part in relation to the whole, it is not identical with this whole 
(the moving-images that compose the material universe). It is clear that 
Bergson has deployed an idealist category in an unconventional sense. For 
Bergson if the world is approached as an aggregate of images then it makes 
little sense to ask whether the world is within or without us. This is because 
'interiority and exteriority are only relations among images'. Thus, 'to ask 
whether the universe exists only in our thought, or outside of our thought, is 
to put the problem in terms that are insoluble, even if we suppose them to be 
intelligible' (p. 25; see below, p. 91). 
It is in the context of this insistence upon matter as image that Bergson 
begins to develop his claim that perception operates in a subtractive fashion. 
Although such a conception of perception is often held to be one of the 
distinctive features of Bergson's thought, it can already be found articulated 
in strikingly similar terms in earlier thinkers, such as Schopenhauer and 

Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
Nietzsche, for example. Bergson invites us to think about the difference 
between 'presence' and 'representation', a difference that seems to explain 
the 'interval' between matter and its conscious perception. He argues that if 
we were to move from the one to the other in terms of adding something -
the representation of matter being greater than its simple presence - then the 
passage from matter to perception becomes mysterious. If we make the less 
obvious move and construe perception as involving a narrowing or subtract­
ing of the real then the passage to perception can be rendered intelligible. 
Bergson does not deny that there is a relation between the cerebral and the 
mental, only that the two are completely identical. It is a category mistake to 
infer from an analysis of the brain that motor activity functions autono­
mously and can assume the role of some miraculous generator of our percep­
tion of the world. The character of movement differs in accordance with the 
differences between visual, audicory and tactile impressions. Perceptions do 
not spring from automatic sensory vibrations but rather from the kind of 
questions posed to motor activity. A great deal of neuroscience, and what 
passes for the philosophy of mind, inadvertently produces an idealism of the 
cerebral substance by severing motor activity from the processes of percep­
tion, localizing perception in the sensory nervous elements. But this is an 
error in thinking: 'the truth is that perception is no more in the sensory 
centres than in the motor centres; it measures the complexity of their rela­
tions, and is, in fact, where it appears to be' (p. 46; see below, p. 104). The 
view that Bergson wishes to combat most is that which would, in treating 
sensations merely as signals in which the office of each sense is to translate 
homogeneous and mechanical movements into its language, posit on the one 
hand homogeneous movements in space and, on the ocher, extended 
sensations in consciousness (a quantitative outside and a qualitative inside). 
In contrast with this view Bergson wishes to argue that the identity resides 
not between the cerebral and the mental or spiritual, but rather between the 
real action of sensory elements and the virtual action of perception (includ­
ing the motor diagrams).10 Thus, perception is a pare of things (it is not an 
interior, subjective vision), just as an affective sensation (such as the capacity 
to experience pain or pleasure) does not spring from the depths of inner 
consciousness by extending itself into an outer realm (affection is not a 
simple movement from an inner intensive state to an outer extensity), simply 
because it is intimately bound up with the modifications which inform the 
movement of one body with ocher bodies. 
In chapters 2 and 3 of the book Bergson shifts his attention co memory 
and develops his well-known claim that memory-images are not stored in 
the brain and unfolds his distinction between psychological memory, the 
memory of habit-formation (a bodily memory), and an ontological memory 
(the memory of pure recollection). The movement of his thought here is 
subtle and can easily mislead, for there are two phases to the presentation of 
his theory. On the one hand, Bergson gives us an explanation of recollection 

Introduction 
17 
that espouses a dualism between psychological-recollection and habit­
recollection (chapter 2); on the other, he gives us a three-part theory of 
memory involving these two types of recollection and one form of unrecol­
lected pure memory (chapter 3). This last memory, he tells us, is pure 
because of its unrecollected or virtual state, whereas any form of recollected 
or actual memory is one simplification or another of this virtuality. Even a 
hostile critic such as Russell could bring himself to credit Bergson with 
making a major contribution to our understanding of types of memory 
(Russell l91 2, p. 328).1 1 Moreover, the work of Gilles Deleuze makes exten­
sive use of the uncovering of a pure past/memory, locating within it a new 
image of time (see Deleuze 1989). 
In MM Bergson lays great stress on the importance of approaching 
consciousness in terms of a plurality of planes of existence (a plane of action, 
a plane of recollection, a plane of dreams, etc.).12 His thinking on memory 
can only be adequately understood when it is viewed in terms of the 
presentation of these different planes. Bergson's theory of memory argues 
that the past is preserved under two distinct forms, namely, motor 
mechanisms and independent recollections. This means that the usefulness 
of memory can manifest itself in different ways, sometimes through action, 
which will involve an automatic setting in motion of an adaptive 
mechanism, and sometimes through an intellectual effort when we place 
ourselves directly in the past and contract elements of it to suit a present 
requirement. A lived body is one embedded in a flux of time, but one in 
which it is the praxial requirements of the present that inform its constant 
movement within the dimension of the past and horizon of the future. If the 
link with the 'real' is severed, in this case the field of action in which a lived 
body is immersed, then it is not so much the past images that are destroyed 
but the possibility of their actualization, since they can no longer act on the 
real: 'It is in this sense, and in this sense only, that an injury to the brain can 
abolish any part of memory' (MM, p. 79). 
As Patrick McNamara shows in his recent study of mental Darwinism, for 
Bergson the contraction of the past takes place as a way of addressing the 
present. However, when a level of the past gets contracted the contraction is 
experienced by present consciousness as an expansion, simply because its 
repertoire of images and moments of duration are increased and intensified 
(McNamara 1999, p. 37). That Bergson's theory of memory rests on 
understanding these contractions and relaxations (memory in relation to the 
synthesis of past and present) is crucial to his argument and it is only when 
they are cast aside that we end up in confusion with respect to his thinking 
on time-memory. Bergson's realism about the pure past - a realism that is 
required in order to mark an ontological difference between perception and 
memory - leads one to wonder, however, how the present, being in part the 
actualized image of the past, can be anything more than the realization of 
some stored-away memory (see Mullarkey 1999a, p. 53). However, the 

1 8  
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
argument that Bergson has, in effect, negated or obliterated the present by 
folding it back within a virtual memory, in which it then becomes 
indistinguishable from a rearrangement of something pre-existent, could be 
seen to neglect what he says about the movement of time-memory, viz., con­
ractions, expansions and relaxations, a movement that determines that the 
junction of 'past' and 'present' happens in terms of an intersection of planes 
(planes of contemplation, of action, of dream-images, states of reverie, etc.). 
However, the crucial issue would remain whether these contractions and 
expansions are themselves truly qualitative changes or simply quantitative 
ones (rearrangements). This is, admittedly, one of the most difficult aspects 
of Bergson's theory to comprehend. 
When we learn something a kind of natural division takes place between 
the contractions of habit and the independent recollection of events that 
involve dating. If I wish to learn a poem by heart I have to repeat it again 
and again through an effort of learning, in which I decompose and recom­
pose a whole. In the case of specific bodily actions and movements habitual 
learning is stored in a mechanism that is set in motion by some initial impulse 
and that involves releasing automatic movements within a closed system of 
succession and duration. The operations of independent recollection, how­
ever, are altogether different. In the formation of memory-images the events 
of our daily life are recorded as they take place in a unique time and provide 
each gesture with a place and a date. This past is retained regardless of its 
utility and practical application. As beings of action and creatures of habit we 
are always remounting the slope of our past. The past is preserved in itself, 
providing a specific region of the becoming of being, and, at the same time, 
contracted in various states of virtuality by the needs of action that are always 
seated in a present. This repetition of memory-images through action merits 
the ascription of the word memory not because it is involved in the conser­
vation of past images but rather because it prolongs their utility into a present 
moment. The task of this kind of memory is to ensure that the storage of 
memory-images is rendered subservient to praxis, making sure that only those 
past images come into operation that can be coordinated with a present 
perception and so enabling a useful combination to emerge between past and 
present images: Thus is ensured the appropriate reaction, the correspon­
dence to environment - adaptation, in a word - which is the general aim 
of life' (MM, p. 84). An actual consciousness is one which simply reflects 
the adaptation of the nervous system to the present situation. Without this 
coordination of memory-images by the adaptive consciousness the practical 
character of life would be distorted and the plane of dreams would mingle 
with the plane of action (in fact, as Bergson fully concedes, the planes do 
communicate and cannot be treated as isolable dimensions of consciousness 
and unconsciousness; the issue is rather to be approached in terms of different 
tensions, different stresses and strains of time). Viewed as a virtual whole 
there is nothing that is mechanical or simply automatic about the interplay 

Introduction 
19 
between the different planes. The pure past - by which is simply meant the 
preservation of the past in and for itself, that is, independent of its 
actualization in a present - is inhibited from freely expressing itself by the 
practical bent of our bodily comportment, 'by the sensori-motor equilibrium 
of a nervous system connecting perception with action' (p. 95). Not only is 
there more than one kind of memory, but memory-images enjoy more than 
the one kind of existence, being actualized in multiple ways in accordance 
with their vinual plane of existence: 'Memory thus creates anew the present 
perception, or rather it doubles this perception by reflecting upon it either its 
own image or some other memory-image of the same kind' (p. 101). Our life 
moves - contracts, expands and relaxes - in terms of circuits, and it is the 
whole of memory that passes over into each of these circuits but always in a 
specific form or state of contraction. 
In chapter 3 of MM Bergson penetrates further into the internal mech­
anism of psychical and psycho-physical actions in order to show how the 
past actualizes itself and thus 'reconquers the influence it had lost' (p. 131). 
He has posited a unity made up of three processes: pure memory, memory­
images and perception. The last is never simply a contact of the mind with a 
present object but is impregnated with memory-images; in turn these images 
partake of a pure memory that they materialize or actualize and are bound 
up with the perception that provides it with an actual embodiment. Pure 
memory is, like pure perception, a theoretical hypothesis designed to enable 
a superior empiricism to pursue various lines of enquiry into questions 
of matter and mind and to overcome the limits of associationism. Pure 
memory shows us that there is a movement at work in the actualization 
of memory-images, we do not just pass from one isolated perception or 
memory to another. Bergson is thus proposing a truly innovative theory of 
the mind in which there are different planes and in which its operations and 
movements are approached in terms of virtual-actual circuits and processes. 
In this respect the movement of the mind is akin to the movement of life 
itself, involving a passage from the less realized to the more realized, from 
the intensive to the extensive, and from a reciprocal implication of parts and 
elements to their juxtaposition (ME, p. 230; see also p. 203). 
In order to develop this conception of the movement of mind and 
memory it is necessary to dispel a number of illusions, a key one being that 
memory only comes into being once an actual perception has taken place. 
This illusion is generated by the requirements of perception itself, which is 
always focused on the needs of a present. While the mind or consciousness 
is attending to things themselves it has no need of pure memory which it 
holds to be useless. Moreover, although each new perception requires the 
powers afforded by memory, a reanimated memory appears to us as the effect 
of perception. This leads us to suppose that the difference between percep­
tion and memory is simply one of intensity and degree, in which the 
remembrance of a perception is held to be nothing other than the same 

20 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
perception in a weakened state, resulting in the illegitimate inference that the 
remembrance of a perception cannot be created while the perception itself is 
being created or be developed at the same rime (pp. 160-1; see below, 
p. 145). It is, in fact, by recognizing the virtual character of pure memory and 
its images that we can begin to appreciate that the difference between percep­
tion and memory is one of kind and not merely degree; in short, memory has 
to be credited with its own specific and peculiar modality of being. Memory 
is made up of memory-images, bur the recollection of an image is not itself an 
image (it is closer to a concentrated act of intellectual effort). Bergson insists 
that To picture is not to remember' (MM, p. 135; see below, p. 126). As a 
recollection becomes actual it comes to live in an image, but 'the con­
verse is not true, and the image, pure and simple, will not be referred to the 
past unless, indeed, it was in the past that I sought it' (ibid.; see below, 
p. 126). The progress of memory consists in a process of materialization. 
The relation between memory and perception can be compared to that 
between an image reflected in a mirror and the actual object in front of the 
mirror. Such an object can be touched and it allows itself to be acted upon 
and it acts upon us. In this regard it can be said to be 'pregnant with possible 
actions'. Bur although it is pregnant with possibility such an object is always 
actual. The image, by contrast, is necessarily virtual, in that while it 
obviously resembles the object it is also fundamentally different from it since 
it is not capable of doing what the object does. Far from being chimerical or 
hallucinatory the virtual image is fully real, though clearly it can be assigned 
a specific mode of the real. This division between the actual object and the 
virtual image is what leads Bergson to claim that at every moment of our 
lives we are presented with two aspects, even though the virtual aspect may 
be imperceptible owing to the very nature of the operations of perception: 
Our actual existence then, whilst it is unrolled in time, duplicates itself all 
along with a virtual existence, a mirror-image. Every moment of our life 
presents two aspects, it is actual and virtual, perception on the one side 
and memory on the other. Each moment is split up as and when it is 
posited. Or rather, it consists in this very splitting, for the present 
moment, always going forward, fleeting limit between the immediate past 
which is now no more and the immediate future which is not yet, would 
be a mere abstraction were it not the moving mirror which continually 
reflects perception as a memory. (ME, p. 165; see below, p. 147) 
It is because the past does not simply follow the present bur coexists with it 
that we can develop an explanation of paramnesia or the illusion of false 
recognition, often named 'deja-vu'. As Deleuze nares, 'there is a recollection 
of the present, contemporaneous with the present itself, as closely coupled as 
a role to an actor' (1989, p. 79). Furthermore, it is from this simple idea of a 
splitting of time that we get the paradoxes of time. These paradoxes result 

Introduction 
21 
from the limit of the present and the need to implicate it in the movement 
of a virtual past, with the result that the passing of time can only be 
conceived as a virtual co-existence of past and present and not simply in 
terms of a straightforward succession (chronological time). 
Bergson insists that what is being duplicated at each moment in our lives 
into perception and memory is not simply the actual past of particular dates, 
times and places, but rather a totality. This is a totality, however, that only 
ever exists in states of contraction and expansion. There is always a virtual 
whole that is being actualized, but such a whole exists only in a confused 
intensive form. In life we never simply relive the past, that is, it is not a 
question of rendering actual what is simply virtual and making the two 
identical. Being is always of the order of difference, which explains why 
Bergson insists that our memory is always, in the element or dimension of its 
virtuality, and on the plane of action, a memory of the present. Memory, 
qua the virtual, is a movement of differences. 
LIFE AS A VIRTUAL MULTIPLICITY 
Bergson's CE is one of the first great books on systems (open and closed, 
natural and artificial), and it is a stress on the 'open' that informs his 
approach to the matter of a creative evolution. It is also in this text that 
Bergson will once again utilize the notion of a virtual multiplicity, and with 
novel results. 
A conception of the evolution of life in terms of a virtual multiplicity is 
opposed to the idea that we are only ever dealing with an actual kind. If we 
approach evolution in terms of an actual or spatial multiplicity then time 
becomes little more than the process of mechanically bringing about the reali­
zation of pre-existent possibilities. The notion of the virtual, then, is opposed 
to that of possibility. An application of the notion of possibility is to be 
delimited to closed systems; however, in the case of an open system, such as 
the evolution oflife, the notion of a virtual multiplicity is required in order to 
bring to light its characteristic features. Bergson's conception of a creative 
evolution can still be put to work today since a great deal of evolutionary 
thinking remains in the grip of spatialized habits and unknowingly operates 
on the level of actual multiplicities. 
Why is a thinking of evolution that focuses on the realization of the pos­
sible so inadequate? The simple answer to this is that it deprives evolution of 
any inventiveness or creativity. If the products of evolution are given in 
advance, in the form of pre-existent possibles, then the actual process of 
evolution is being treated as a pure mechanism which simply adds existence 
to something that already had being in the form of a possible. In effect, there 
is no difference between the possible and the real since the real is simply 
an image of the possible and indistinguishable from it. If the real merely 

22 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
resembles the possible then we are providing ourselves with a real that is 
ready-made (preformed) and that comes into existence by a series of succes­
sive limitations. In the case of the virtual, however, the situation is quite 
different, for here the process of differentiation does not proceed in terms of 
resemblance or limitation but rather in terms of divergent lines that require a 
process of invention. But there is another aspect to our construction of the 
possible and the real which plays a crucial role in Bergson's attempt to expose 
the operations involved when we think events in terms of space and not time 
(duration}: it is not simply the case that the real comes to resemble or mirror 
the possible but rather the other way round (the possible resembles the real). 
This is because our notion of the possible is arrived at by abstracting from the 
real once it has been made and then projected backwards. 
To what extent can we produce a coherent conception of evolution if we 
construe it solely and strictly in terms of a set or series of discrete mech­
anisms (including discrete informational units}, ones, it is alleged, chat will 
automatically produce successful adaptations solely through the exogenous 
workings of natural selection? (let us note chat it is selection that is doing all 
the work of finality in the theory}. Can a thinking of evolution be sustained 
on the basis of this privileging of actual or discrete multiplicities? Some key 
points are perhaps worth stressing: 
(1) The claim is not that the scientist has no right to deal with closed 
systems. Bergson's concern is with what happens when this focus on 
closed systems, systems from which duration has been artificially 
extracted, is extended to an explanation of life. His contention is that 
the focus on closed systems is itself the result of certain intellectual 
tendencies chat have become dominant in the history of our evolution, 
leading to the ironic result that the human intellect, on account of its 
spatial habits, which are highly useful for manipulating and regulating 
matter, is unable adequately to understand its own conditions of 
existence, that is, unable to comprehend its own creative evolution. 
Bergson does not deny that there are closed systems. Rather he wishes 
to point out that isolable systems that can be treated geometrically are 
the result of a certain tendency of matter itself but that this tendency 
never is fully actualized or reaches a point of completion. If science 
does isolate a system completely this is for convenience of study; it 
must still be recognized that a so-called isolated system remains subject 
to external influences. 
(2) There is a role for calculation and computability (aspects of the present 
can be calculable as functions of the past), such as in the realm of 
organic destruction, but this cannot be extended uncritically to all 
domains, such as organic creation and other evolutionary phenomena 
which elude mathematical treatment. 

Introduction 
23 
(3) It is necessary to distinguish between artificial and natural systems, 
or between the dead and the living. In the case of the living body of 
an organism the present moment cannot be explained by a preced­
ing moment since the whole past of an organism needs referring to. 
An artificial system is one in which time is reduced to a series of discrete 
instants. But the idea of the immediately preceding instant is a fiction 
and an abstraction. In effect it denotes that which is connected with a 
present instant by the interval dt: 'All that you mean to say . . .  is that the 
present state of the system is defined by the equations into which dif­
ferential coefficients enter, such as ds\dt, dv\dt, that is to say, at bottom, 
present velocities and present accelerations' ( CE, p. 22; see below, 
pp. 182-3). In short, in such systems we are only ever dealing with an 
instantaneous present, one that carries with it a tendency but which it 
treats as a number (in Bergson a tendency has number only potentially): 
'In short, the world the mathematician deals with is a world that dies and 
is reborn at every instant - the world which Descartes was thinking of 
when he spoke of continued creation' (ibid.; see below, p. 183). 
(4) A coherent conception of evolution requires the notion of duration in 
which there is a persistence and prolongation of the past in the present. 
In a natural system the interval denotes a concrete duration and not 
simply an extremity. However, duration is implicated in original 
situations. The novelty of evolution - the events of evolution, if one 
likes - is to be explained in terms of the interplay between 'organic 
memory' and new conditions or situations (this is in contrast to the 
research paradigm of neo-Darwinism, which conceives evolution tak­
ing place in terms of the mechanical sum of discrete genetic codes and 
the algorithmic process of natural selection). For Bergson the variation 
of evolution is being produced continuously and insensibly at every 
moment, although, of course, it is only within specific conditions 
and under specific circumstances that it gives rise to a new species. 
No amount of knowledge of elementary causes will suffice to foretell 
the evolution of a new life form. 
(5) Contrary to widespread misconception which has persisted from 
Gaston Bachelard onwards, Bergson's thinking of creative evolution 
places a notion of contingency at the centre of its concerns and con­
ceives duration precisely in terms of an interruption and discontinuity: 
duration involves 'incommensurability between what goes before and 
what follows' ( CE, p. 29; see below, p. 38 1). Indeed, it is only by 
thinking of time as duration that the features of rupture and discontin­
uity can be rendered intelligible. There is a common prejudice running 
from Bachelard to Badiou that Bergson cannot think discontinuity. 
Such as assumption fails to recognize that Bergsonism provides an 
account of continuity and discontinuity. 

24 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
Mechanism is not wholly illegitimate or simply false in Bergson's view. 
It is a reflection of our evolved habits of representation rather than an ade­
quate reflection of nature itself. These are habits that conform in large 
measure to certain tendencies of matter. Mechanism gives us only a partial 
view of reality and neglects other crucial aspects such as duration. Mechanism 
is often blind to its own mechanisms and ignorant of the fact that it is the 
product of a certain kind of impulse, namely, one towards utility. In con­
forming to the necessities of language and the symbolism of science most 
philosophy has been unable to identify positive attributes in time. Instead it 
has rested content with mechanism. The difference to be thought is between 
an 'evolution' in which continuous phases interpenetrate, and an 'unfurling' 
in which distinct parts are juxtaposed with each other. In the former case 
rhythm and tempo are constitutive of the kind of movement in play, so that 
a retardation or an acceleration are internal modifications in which content 
and duration are one and the same thing. Throughout his writings Bergson 
is insistent that states of consciousness and material systems can both be 
treated in this way. If we say that time merely 'glides over' these systems then 
we are speaking of simple systems that have been constituted as such only 
artificially through the operations of our own intellect. Such systems can be 
calculated ahead of time since they are being posited as existing prior to their 
realization in the form of possibles (when a possible is realized it simply gets 
existence added to it, its fundamental nature has not changed). The 
successive states of this kind of system can be conceived as moving at any 
speed, rather like the unrolling of a film: it does not matter at what speed the 
shots run, an 'evolution' is not being depicted. The reality here is more 
complex, however, but the complexity is concealed. An unrolling film, for 
example, remains attached to consciousness that has its own duration and 
which regulates its movemenr. If we pay attention to any closed system, such 
as a glass of sugared water where one has to wait for the sugar to dissolve, we 
discover that when we cut om from the universe systems for which time is an 
abstraction, a relation or a number, the universe itself continues to evolve as 
an open system. 
From the disposition of the intellect emerge the specific conceptions of 
matter that have characterized a great deal of Western metaphysics and 
science. Intelligence, for example, conceives the origin and evolution of the 
universe as an arrangement and rearrangement of parts which simply shift 
from one place to another. This is what Bergson calls the Laplacean dogma 
that has informed a great deal of modern enquiry, leading to a determinism 
and a mechanism in which, by positing a definite number of stable elements, 
all possible combinations can be deduced withom regard for the reality of 
duration (CE, p. 38; see below, p. 1 87). 
The study of life needs to be approached in terms of problems that are 
immanent to an evolutionary process or movement. The directionality and 

Introduction 
25 
movement of life are not, however, to be understood in terms of a simple 
mechanical realization of pre-existing goals. Rather, the problems of life are 
general ones, evolving within a virtual field that is responded to in terms of 
specific solutions (an example to illustrate this would be cases of convergent 
evolution, such as the eye, representing solutions to general problems that 
are common to different phylogenetic lineages, in this case that of light and 
the tendency 'co see', or vision, and which involve a heterogeneity in the 
mechanisms actually involved). Bergson is struck by the fact that evolution 
has taken place in terms of a dissociation of tendencies and through divergent 
lines that have not ceased to radiate new paths. The evolution of life 
becomes intelligible when it is viewed in terms of the continuation of this 
impetus that has split up into divergent lines. On Bergson's model no 
dominant tendency within evolution can be identified, and neither can the 
different forms of life be construed in terms of the development of one and 
the same tendency. 
The aim is one not of simply attacking mechanism but rather trying to 
determine the precise character of the mechanisms of life and the nature of 
adaptation. What is the notion of mechanism we are thinking with? For 
Bergson evolution can be thought in terms of a 'single indivisible history' 
(1983, p. 37; see below, p. 1 87). Mechanism errs in focusing attention only 
on those isolable systems that it has detached from the whole. A mechanical 
explanation is only possible through such an artificial extraction. Evolution 
cannot simply be made explicable in terms of a mechanical adjustment to 
external conditions or circumstances. Bergson argues, for example, that the 
theory of mechanism cannot adequately explain a crucial element in the 
evolution of the eye, namely, 'correlation'. On the one hand we have a com­
plex organ, and on the other we have a unity and simplicity of function. It is 
this contrast, says Bergson, which should make us pause for thought. If vision 
is 'one simple fact' how is it possible to account for its organization and 
operation in purely exogenous terms and in terms of chance modifications 
(1983, p. 88; see below, p. 196)? If we are to take seriously the idea that a 
complex organ like the eye was the result of a gradual formation, as well as of 
a process of highly complex correlation (which Bergson does believe), then it 
becomes necessary to attribute to organized matter the power of constructing 
complicated machines able to utilize the excitations that it undergoes (p. 72). 
Bergson makes it clear, in responding to a critical point on utility which 
would argue that the eye is not made to see but creatures see because they 
have eyes, that he is not simply referring to an eye that has the capacity to see 
when speaking of an eye that 'makes use of' light. Rather, he is saying that 
what needs paying attention to are the precise relations existing between the 
organ and the apparatus of locomotion. In other words, the problem is not 
that of a discrete organ, such as the eye, but the complexity of its evolution in 
relation to other systems of an organism. 

26 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
BERGSON AND RELATIVITY 
A meeting between Bergson and Einstein actually took place at the College 
de F ranee in Paris in April 1922, where the physicist and the philosopher 
attempted to exchange views on time. Einstein concluded the exchange by 
stating that there was an unbridgeable gulf between the time of the physicist 
and the time of the philosopher, the latter being a complete mystery to him. 
The gulf that divided them continues to inform the relation between 
philosophy and physics on the question of time. Relativity dealt a fatal blow 
to any theory that presupposed a definite present instant in which all matter 
is simultaneously real (an absolute present). The idea of a huge, instan­
taneous 'Now' spread transversally across the universe is well-entrenched in 
the human mind. But although Einstein did not believe in the reality of time, 
or the flow of time, he adhered to the fiction of the instant: the simultaneity 
of instants is what is relative. The question continues to persist and linger: did 
Einstein, along with much of the tradition, spatialize time? At the end of his 
book called About Time Paul Davies argues that the 'greatest outstanding 
riddle concerns the glaring mismatch between physical time and subjective or 
psychological time' (Davies 1995, p. 283). And he asks, in his determinism 
and denial of the flux of time, how different was Einstein from Newton and 
Laplace? Although these are valid and important questions it would be 
myopic on our part to suppose that the conflict between physics and phil­
osophy simply or solely turns around the competing claims of phenomen­
ology and cosmology. If the philosopher maintains, contra the physicist, that 
time flows then it can legitimately be asked: for whom does time flow? Is the 
experience of the flowing of time possible outside the domain of trans­
cendental (subjective) conditions of experience? Or might the delimitation 
of time to such conditions of possibility rest on a disavowal of time's reality? 
The physicist will rightly suspect that a philosophical thinking of duree 
has turned the 'observer' into a phenomenologist (which is pretty much 
what Bergson does in DS). But then the philosopher can come back to the 
physicist and ask: If time does not flow does this mean that its experience is 
merely the result of a psychological illusion? What conception of time are we 
left with once we have shown that time does not flow? Are we thinking time 
at all in physics? 
Bergson's response to Relativity is best seen in the wider context of his 
ontology of becoming, in which he seeks to show that our perception and 
understanding must presuppose as their basis a 'fluid' and moving 'continuity 
of the real'. Everything that lives perceives, from simple beings that vibrate to 
complex beings that are able co contract trillions of vibrations and oscillations 
within a single perception. Indeed, for Bergson the primary and primal 
function of perception is to grasp a series of elementary changes (movements 
in the environment) under the form of a quality or a single state and to do 
this through a work of condensation. Within the moving continuity of the 

Introduction 
27 
real we can posit and locate the boundaries of bodies that exist in varying 
degrees of individuation (again, from the contractions of a simple protoplasm 
to living systems with highly developed nervous systems). All these bodies 
change 'at every moment', resolving themselves into groups of qualities 
consisting of a succession of elementary movements ( CE, p. 302). The stabil­
ity of a body lies in its instability - it never ceases changing and it changes 
qualities without ceasing to be or become what it is. It is such a body, 
conceived as a relatively closed system, that we are entitled to isolate within 
the continuity of matter. What is 'real' are two things: the moving continuity 
of the whole and the continual change of form within a living body. We need 
to note here that 'form' as such is only 'a snapshot view of a transition'. And 
what our perception does is to solidify the fluid continuity of the real or the 
open whole into discontinuous or discrete images. It does this necessarily as a 
condition of irs evolution and adaptation. The changes taking place in the 
whole, however, are received by perceptual living systems as if on a surface. 
A system like ours, with its evolved habits of representation, either turns away 
from the movement of life or becomes interested only in the unmoveable part 
and plan of the movement rather than the movement itself. All kinds of acts 
are reduced to the image of simple movement or movement in general, and 
knowledge comes to bear on a state rather than a change. In short, we develop 
three kinds of representations that correspond to three categories of words: 
qualities (adjectives), forms of essences (substantives) and acts (verbs). While 
the first two are designed to capture states, the latter is related to movement 
but expresses something we find it hard to think. 
Bergson argues that 'becoming' is infinitely varied and yet we have 
fostered the habit of extracting from these variations in order to provide 
ourselves with an image of 'becoming in general'. He writes: 
An infinite multiplicity of becomings variously coloured . . .  passes before 
our eyes: we manage so that we see only differences of colour, that is to 
say, differences of state, beneath which there is supposed to flow, hidden 
from our view, a becoming always and everywhere the same, invariably 
colourless. (p. 304) 
In short, as a way of facilitating the exigencies of social life and linguistic 
communication, we have produced a 'cinematographic' model of the real: 
which is to say, we reconstitute and compose the mobility of the real in terms 
of a series of juxtaposed and successive immobilities, and so generate for 
ourselves the illusion of continuity. The real moving continuity of the whole 
is concealed from us, therefore, by our very habits of representation, which 
are largely spatial. For us movement is something impersonal, mechanical, 
abstract and simple. There is a good reason for the congruence between our 
knowledge of the operations of nature and its practical effectiveness. This is 
because the 'cinematographical character of our knowledge of things is due to 

28 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
the kaleidoscopic character of our adaptation to them' (p. 306). If our body is 
related to other bodies in terms of an arrangement that is like the pieces of 
glass in a kaleidoscope, we can say that each rime the kaleidoscope is given a 
shake what we detect or decode is not the shake in and for itself but rather 
only the new picture that has emerged from the transformation. In short, it is 
owing to the practical character of our understanding and intellect that there 
is generated the illusion that change is an illusion. For us change is decom­
posable, almost at will, into states, and out of this decomposition we pro­
duce a movement from out of a series of immobilities. 
For Bergson modern science is the daughter of astronomy. Its prime con­
cern is with calculating the positions of the objects or forces (planets, for 
example) of any material system and in which all moments are treated equally. 
Now, the key point for Bergson is that modern science aspires to treat time as 
an independent variable in its calculation of a system and to relate all other 
magnitudes to the magnitude of time. But, the question is, what is this 'time' 
of modern science? For Bergson it cannot be the time of duration, of a virtual 
qualitative multipliciry, which is characterized by a 'continuiry of inter­
penetration' and not discreteness (p. 341), simply because modern science 
treats all moments equally as 'virtual stopping-places' (p. 336), that is, as 
immobilities, in effect. Time can be divided at any moment and sliced or 
cut up as science pleases. What does not interest science is either the flux of 
time or the effect of this flux on a consciousness. Instead of intuiting or map­
ping out the flux, science deals with the counting of simultaneities. And for 
science the 'object' is always the simultaneity of instants, not that of fluxes 
(pp. 337-8). Modern physics deals with isolated systems, that is, with events 
and systems of events that have been detached from the whole, so that it 
counts 'simultaneities between the events that make up this time and the 
positions of the mobile T on its trajectory' (p. 342). So while modern physics 
differs from ancient science in considering any moment of rime, it still rests 
on a substitution of 'time-length' for 'time-invention'. 
Contra modern science, then, Bergson wishes to claim that there is an 
actual succession within things and that this succession is more than a 
number and not equivalent to space. Moreover, he wishes to point out that 
the time that is given all at once, or that can run at any speed, is not real 
duration. As he asks, why is not the life of the universe given at once as on 
the film of the cinematograph? Why do things take (their) time and why do 
we, as beings of duration implicated in other durations, have to learn time? 
Now, if time is not given, if the future of living systems and forms cannot be 
read off from the present state of the material universe, then there has to be a 
time of 'invention' or 'creative evolution'. Bergson, it should be noted, does 
not deny the validiry of modern science with respect to its calculation of 
time; rather, he wants to show how its 'image' of time still rests on a 
cinematographic model and to ask whether there can be any conciliation 
between the time of the physicist and the time of the philosopher. 

Introduction 
29 
Bergson tells us that he is convinced that Einstein has provided not only a 
new physics but new ways of thinking. He wishes to find out the extent to 
which the concept of duration is compatible with Einstein's views on time. 
Bergson, however, presents the encounter badly and confusedly. This is 
because he places the emphasis on the 'direct and immediate experience' of 
duration, rather than emphasizing what he has shown in texts such as MM 
and CE, namely, that time qua duration is not simply an 'immediate data 
of consciousness' or experience but equally a condition of the becoming of 
matter and of evolutionary life. In DS Bergson appears to be drawing mainly 
on arguments presented in his first book, TFW: that succession presup­
poses a consciousness able to synthesize the qualitative aspects of a duration 
(a 'before' and an 'after'). Because of this it is quite easy for critics of Bergson 
to argue that in his engagement with Relativity he has misconceived the 
'observer' issue by turning the observer (which, as we have already noted, 
could be a machine or a device) into a phenomenological consciousness. 
There is, we believe, a specific reason as to why Bergson presents his own 
case - the fact that he is posing more than a phenomenological challenge to 
science - so poorly in DS. This is owing to his placing on his own thought 
and on modern physics a restrictive empiricism. This empiricism consists, in 
short, in the argument that any time we can conceive has to be perceived and 
lived, or capable of being so (so we get the equation: conceived time = 
perceived time = lived time). This means that any time which we cannot 
perceive, that does not have the potential of being perceptible, is unreal and 
phantasmatic (such as the multiple times of Relativity). Appearances are real, 
says Bergson, until they have been proven to rest on illusions. In the essay on 
The perception of change' (191 1), however, he declares that philosophy is 
born from out of the insufficiency of our faculties of perception and insists 
that our experience and knowledge of the universe cannot be based on the 
claims of a natural perception (CM, pp. 1 32, 1 35; see below, p. 252). 
Philosophy, he says, must learn how to think 'beyond the human condition'. 
With the position he adopts in DS, however, Bergson not only places severe 
and unwarranted limits on the praxis of science, he also places unnecessary 
limits on his own thinking. 
Bergson has no desire to resurrect pre-Relativistic physics. There is much 
in the theories of Relativity that he accepts and that he finds compatible with 
his own thinking: he accepts the mathematical expression of the constancy of 
the speed or velocity of light; he too rejects the idea of there being any 
absolute frame of reference and appreciates the need to jettison the idea of a 
motionless ether (as a kind of carrier of motion within which the speed of 
light would be relative and not absolute). He brings to bear on Relativity the 
notion of a virtual multiplicity. The puzzling aspect of DS, however, resides 
in Bergson's claim that there is a 'single time' common to all times, 
including the multiple times of Relativity. How do we make sense of this 
notion of a single time? Is this not a simple refusal on his part to take 

30 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
seriously the claims of Relativity? The task is one of showing that the notion 
of a single time does not mean that everything that exists beats according to 
the same rhythm of time (in MM Bergson had argued that there are multiple 
tensions of duration and that our duration is simply one among many). 
Once we have understood how a virtual multiplicity can be a single time, the 
answer to the second question swiftly comes into view. It is important to get 
this right simply because Bergson argues in DS that Relativity itself shows us 
that the positing of a plurality of times supposes a single time. The error to 
be avoided - one that Bergson himself does not avoid in DS - is that of 
confusing single time with the claim that in the universe there is only a 
single tension of duration. This would take us back to the 'universal now' of 
pre-Einsteinian physics, or to one possible rendition of it. 
Deleuze points out that the confrontation Bergson stages with Relativity is, 
in part, necessitated by the fact that the theory invokes similar concepts, such 
as expansion, contraction, tension and dilation in relation to space and time. 
Moreover, the confrontation does not come about abstractly or arbitrarily but 
is prepared by the notion of multiplicity. Bergson reworked Riemann's 
distinction between the two multiplicities in TFW, and Einstein drew heavily 
on Riemann's new geometries (see Einstein 1 999, pp. 86, 108, 1 1 1, 1 54). 
Bergson's essential challenge emerges out of this common source: is time to be 
treated as a virtual and continuous multiplicity or an actual and discrete one? 
Moreover, does Relativity confuse the one with the other, namely, the virtual 
and the actual? Deleuze insists that the proper question to pose is not, 
'is duration one or many?', but rather, 'what is the multiplicity that is specific 
and peculiar to it?' Duration does not have to be construed as simply 
multiple; it can be a One but 'in conformity with its type of multiplicity' 
(Deleuze 199 1 ,  p. 85). Bergson's principal argument is that the fourth 
dimension of space-time serves the role of a 'supplementary dimension' in 
which the relativity of simultaneous instants can be fixed and placed. It is this 
which informs his criticism, not of Relativity's preoccupation with specializa­
tion as such (he acknowledges that this is the domain in which modern 
physics moves and makes its contribution), but with the specific speciali­
zation of time that the theory effects. Relativity knows and recognizes no 
other time than that of specialization. 
Science, Bergson argues, works exclusively with measurements, and the 
measuring of time consists in counting simultaneities (DS, p. 40; see below, 
p. 213). In dealing with time the concern of physics is with the extremities 
of time, and the illusion is generated that the extremities of an interval 
are identical with the interval itself. What takes place in the interval - an 
actual duration - is neglected and lost sight of, and this means that the 
counting of simultaneities can only take the form of a counting of instants. 
Bergson goes funher: it does not matter at what speed time runs, if 
the number of extremities is indefinitely increased, or if the intervals are 

Introduction 
3 1 
indefinitely narrowed, these changes would have no great impact on the 
calculations of time carried out by the physicist: 
The speed of unfolding of this external, mathematical time might become 
infinite; all the past, present, and future states of the universe might be 
found experienced at a stroke; in place of the unfolding there might be 
only the unfolded. The motion representative of time would then have 
become a line; to each of the divisions of this line there would correspond 
the same portion of the unfolded universe that corresponded to it before in 
the unfolding universe; nothing would have changed in the eyes of science. 
(DS, p. 41; see below, p. 214) 
But everything would have changed in terms of a qualitative duration that 
does not admit of measurement, such as that belonging to a living system 
whose duration, or spatio-temporal dynamics, are bound up with the flow of 
things in nature and its environment. Our question is this: is such a duration 
merely to be judged an illusion by physics, and is such an experience of 
duration no more than an appearance belonging to a phenomenological 
subject? Against rhe former, Bergson contends that irs simultaneities are 
instantaneities that have been artificially abstracted from a concrete duration 
and, moreover, are purely mental views and habits (2000, p. 42; see below, 
p. 215). Furthermore, he argues that the simultaneity of instants measured 
by the physicist is dependent upon a simultaneity of fluxes which it neglects 
as its condition (p. 37; see below, p. 2 1 1). The simultaneity of the instant is 
needed in order to fix the simultaneity with a clock moment. However, 
Bergson contends that unless the simultaneity of two motions outside us 
which are taken to measure time are connected to the moments of an 'inner 
duration', we would not even be able ro formulate an actual measurement of 
time. This leads Bergson ro ask whether the 'real' of Relativity exists 
anywhere else than in the equations of the physicist. 
It could be argued that Bergson is not, in fact, advocating the view that 
the time actually lived in a system has to be the same for every system. 
Rather, his point is that each system treats, and can only treat, its system as 
an absolute one. As he points out: 'if all motion is relative and if there 
is no absolute point of reference, no privileged system, the observer inside 
a system will obviously have no way of knowing whether his system is in 
motion or at rest' (p. 24). In other words, we are always inside a system, 
bounded by a specific perspective or horizon of space-time, and cannot 
freely move around different systems. As Robin Durie notes, Bergson is not 
suggesting that from the perspective of one observer the time lived by 
another is not real because it is different to that observer's lived time. His 
argument is rather that any time projected by one observer to another 
observer's system of reference is an imaginary time since it is not a time lived 

32 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
by any observer.13 But is this nor a platitude? Does it not completely miss 
the challenge of Relativity? For surely Relativity is not positing multiple 
times from the perspective of 'projection' (it is clear from the text that 
Bergson refuses in the example of the twins to climb the ascent to the 
viewpoint of the physicist).14 If we take Bergson's perspectivism seriously it 
means there is only a single time that can be lived, simply because there can 
only be the single system at any one rime. Is Bergson suggesting we cannot 
step outside our own system? 
The single time cannot name the fact that each system only lives its own 
time and acts as if its relative perspective were an absolute one. If this is the 
case then the single rime simply collapses back into an empty multiplicity of 
times (each one is relative but treats itself as absolute). Now, although the 
single time does not necessitate the idea that the same actual time is lived by 
all systems (in terms of its tension, rhythm, tempo, etc.), it does mean that 
the duration of any system - the system of nature or matter, the system of a 
life form such as ourselves - will have the features of a virtual multiplicity. 
So, whether the times of Relativity are declared to be real or phantasmatic is 
not the most relevant issue for negotiating the nature of Bergson's challenge. 
Again we think that a great deal of the most important work being done in 
Bergson's philosophy rests on the notion of a virtual multiplicity. 
INTUITION BEYOND KANT 
Scattered throughout Bergson's writings one finds an engagement with the 
legacy of Kant's Copernican Revolution. His response to Kant is as 
sophisticated as that we find in say Hegel or Schelling, and it deserves to be 
more widely known. It also provides us with one more context in which to 
comprehend the nature of his own project. 
In a letter to Christian Garve of September 1 798 Kant discloses that the 
origins of his critique lay in his consideration of the antinomies of pure 
reason, antinomies that arise when reason oversteps the bounds of sense and 
understanding and freely speculates on issues it is not equipped to ade­
quately deal with and that generate so many contradictions, such as: 'The 
world has a beginning in time. The world does not have a beginning in time,' 
or 'Man has complete freedom' pitted against the opposite and rival claim 
that 'There is no freedom since everything operates in accordance with 
natural necessity.' Bergson holds that Kant's philosophy 'lives and dies' by 
these antinomies. 15 His claim is that it is possible to think outside of their 
terms but to do this requires opening up the possibilities of thinking. Once 
we are able to think in terms of duration the antinomies dissolve since they 
only ensnare the mind when it thinks time in terms of space. The thesis and 
antithesis of an antinomy suppose the 'perfect coincidence of matter with 
geometrical space', and they vanish once 'we cease to extend to matter what is 

Introduction 
33 
true only of pure space', that is, when we think matter in terms other 
than parts that are absolutely external to one another ( CE, p. 205; see 
below, p. 286). 
Bergson goes much further than this in refusing to accept the terms under 
which the Critique has been laid down and put forward. He does not accept 
the thesis that knowledge is relative to our faculties of knowing, and he does 
not accept that metaphysics is impossible on the grounds that there can be 
no knowledge outside of science or that science has correctly determined the 
bounds of metaphysics. In short, Bergson does not accept Kant's delimita­
tion of metaphysics, bounded as it is by the privileging of Newtonian 
mechanism. A new relation between philosophy and science is called for and 
knowledge of the absolute is to be restored (CM, p. 65). Bergson makes two 
major claims contra Kant: first, that the mind cannot be restricted to the 
intellect since it 'overflows' it; and second, that duration has to be granted an 
'absolute existence', which requires thinking time on a different plane to 
space. A 'theory of knowledge' and a 'theory of life' are to be viewed as 
inseparable since if our thinking of life is not accompanied by a critique of 
knowledge it will blindly accept the concepts - of matter, of life, of time, 
etc. - which the understanding has placed at our disposal. We will not 
generate a thinking of life but simply enclose the facts within a set of pre­
existing frames. Thus, in order to think beyond the human condition it is 
necessary to provide a generative account of that condition. Once the under­
standing is situated within the evolutionary conditions of life it is possible to 
show how the frames of knowledge have been constructed and how they can 
be enlarged and gone beyond. 
Instead of resting content with this critique of the dogmatic tendency of 
metaphysics, and uncritically privileging Newtonian mechanism, the effort 
should be made to recover the mind's contact with the real. This requires 
providing a generarive account of the understanding (the abstract intellect), 
which would serve to show that homogeneous space and time are neither 
properties of things nor essential conditions of our faculty of knowing these 
things; rather their homogeneous character expresses 'the double work of 
solidification and division which we effect on the moving continuity of the 
real in order to obtain there a fulcrum for our action, in order to fix within it 
starting points for our operation, in short, to introduce into it real changes' 
(MM, p. 21 1). In other words, Kant's conception of space and time as forms 
of sensibility is shown to have an 'interest', one that is 'vital' and not merely 
'speculative'. Instead of ending up with a split between appearance and 
reality, or between phenomenon and noumenon, we approach epistemo­
logical issues in terms of the relation between parts (our parcial perspective 
on the real in accordance with our vital needs of adaptation) and a mobile 
whole (the moving continuity of the real). The sensible intuition of 
a homogeneous time and space presupposes for Bergson a 'real duration' and a 
'real extensity': the former are stretched out beneath the latter in order that the 

.H 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
moving continuity can be divided and a becoming can be fixed. There arises at 
this poinr the need for another way of thinking, another kind of intuition. 
Kanr himself enrertained the possibility of such an inruition but famously 
denies we, as human beings, can have access to it. Our mode of inruition can 
only be of a derivative kind and not an original one. We have no access to an 
intellectual intuition. Kanr allows for the fact that the way the human being 
inruits time and space may not be peculiar to it alone but may be something 
to be found among all finite beings that have a capacity of self-representation. 
But what he will not allow for is the possibility that we could overstep the 
bounds of our finitude and attain a higher intuition such as an intellectual 
one. This can only belong to the 'primordial being' (Critique of Pure Reason, 
B 72). The most we can do is to posit a 'transcendental object' ( Objekt) which 
may be the ground of the appearance we call matter, but this is an object 
without quantity or substance, it is 'a mere something of which we should 
not understand what it is, even if someone were in a position to tell us' 
(A 277/B 333). To be able to intuit things without the aid of our senses 
would mean that we could have knowledge 'altogether differenr from the 
human, and this not only in degree but as regards intuition likewise in kind' 
(A 278/B 334). But of such non-human beings we do not know them to be 
possible or how they would be constituted. Kant does not deny that through 
observation and analysis it is possible that we can penetrate into 'nature's 
recesses', but he insists that this is nature conceived only in the aspect or 
dimension of its appearance: 'with all this knowledge, and even if the whole of 
nature were revealed to us, we should still never be able to answer those 
transcendental questions which go beyond nature', that is, beyond nature qua 
appearance (ibid.). Admittedly, it is strange that Kant should in this passage 
speak of the recesses of nature if all we can ever develop knowledge of is 
of nature as appearance (this whole issue is bound up with his preference for 
laying out the field of experience and knowledge in terms of the image of a 
sphere and not a plane, A 762/B 790). Ultimately, Kant is led to positing 
a problematic noumenon, which is not the concept of any determinate object 
but rather bound up with the limitation of human sensibility. This provides a 
'place' for speculation with regard to there being objects outside of our 
specific field of intuition, objects 'other and different' to what we are able to 
intuit through our particular a priori intuitions of time and space, but of their 
existence nothing can be either denied or asserted (A288/B 344). 
The possibility of a supra-sensuous intuition is treated again by Kanr in 
the critique of teleological judgement. Its importance for an appreciation of 
Bergson is perhaps self-evident. Given the centrality of intuition to his 
thinking of duration it is imperative that he wrestles with Kant in order to 
demonstrate precisely how it is possible to think 'beyond the human 
condition'. Now, this does not mean turning ourselves into God or the 
primordial being, but it does email beginning at a different place and 

Introduction 
35 
showing that the possibilities of thinking are not limited to, or determined 
by, subjective conditions. If Bergson were to accept the territory on which 
Kant has established his Critique then the ambition of thinking beyond the 
human condition would be a vain and hopeless one. 
The abstract intellect, which has evolved as an organ of utility and 
calculability, proceeds by beginning with the immobile and simply 
reconstructs movement with juxtaposed immobilities. By contrast, intuition, 
as he conceives it, starts from movement and sees in immobility only a 
snapshot taken by our mind (CM, pp. 34-5). He argues that in order to 
reach this intuition it is not necessary, as Kant supposed, to transport 
ourselves outside the domain of the senses: 'After having proved by decisive 
arguments that no dialectical effort will ever introduce us into the beyond 
and that an effective metaphysics would necessarily be an intuitive 
metaphysics, he added that we lack this intuition and that this metaphysics 
is impossible. It would in fact be so if there were no other time or change 
than those which Kant perceived' (p. 128; see below, p. 246, our empha­
sis). So while Kant acknowledges the 'peculiar' character of 'our (human) 
understanding relative to our power of judgement in reflecting on things in 
nature', and concedes that this peculiarity implies the idea 'of a possible 
understanding different from the human' (he mentions a similar implication 
in the first Critique regarding its allowing for 'another possible form of 
intuition', Kant 1952, section 77, p. 61), it is this route intimated at bur 
blocked off by Kant that is pursued by Bergson. By recovering intuition 
Bergson hopes to save science from the charge of producing a relativity of 
knowledge (it is rather to be regarded as 'approximative') and metaphysics 
from the charge of indulging in empty and idle speculation. 
Bergson conceives intuition as a form of mental attentiveness, it is a 
special kind of 'attention that the mind gives to itself, over and above, while 
it is fixed upon matter, its object' (p. 79). It is an attention that can be 
'methodically cultivated and developed', forming the basis of a new science 
of the mind and a veritable metaphysics. Metaphysics will no longer be the 
activity of a pure intelligence, an intelligence that defined the mind by a set 
of negations. It is a gross error, Bergson wishes to point out, to confuse his 
method of inruition with instinct or feeling (p. 88). 16 This metaphysics will 
operate via 'differentiations and qualitative integrations', and in an effort to 
reverse the normal directions of the workings of thought it will have a 
rapport with modern mathematics, notably the infinitesimal calculus: 
Modern mathematics is precisely an effort to substitute for the ready-made 
what is in process of becoming, to follow the growth of magnitudes, to seize 
movement no longer from outside and in its manifest result, but from 
within and in its tendency towards change, in short, to adopt the mobile 
continuity of the pattern of things. (p. 1 90; see below, p. 275).17 

36 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
Metaphysics differs from modern mathematics (the science of magnitudes), 
however, in that it has no need to make the move from intuition to symbol. 
Its understanding of the real is potentially boundless because of this: 
'Exempt from the obligation of arriving at results useful from a practical 
standpoint, it will indefinitely enlarge the domain of its investigations' 
(p. 1 9 1 ;  see below, p. 276). Metaphysics can adopt the 'generative idea' of 
mathematics and seek to extend it to all qualities, 'to reality in general' 
(ibid.). The aim is not to effect another Platonism of the real, as in Kant's 
system, he contends, but rather to enable thought to re-establish contact 
with continuity and mobility. 18 A form of knowledge can be said to be 
relative when, through an act of forgetting, it ignores the basis of symbolic 
knowledge in intuition, and is forced to rely on pre-existing concepts and to 
proceed from the fixed to the mobile. Absolute knowledge by contrast 
refuses to accept what is pre-formed and instead cultivates 'fluid concepts', 
seeking to place itself in a mobile reality from the start and so adopting 'the 
life itself of things' (p. 1 92; see below, p. 276) and to follow 'the real in all its 
sinuosities' (1983, p. 363; see below, p. 291). To achieve this requires 
relinquishing the method of construction chat leads only to higher and 
higher generalities and thinking in terms of a concrete duration 'in which a 
radical recasting of the whole is always going on' (ibid.). 
Bergson argues that science operates with an 'unconscious metaphysics', 
while Kantianism rests on an uncritical acceptance of the diagrams for 
modelling reality that are specific to the tasks of science. In short, neither is 
able to produce a genesis of the intellect that would account for the relativity 
of our knowledge. Bergson cognizes the specific achievement of Kant's 
transcendental aesthetic: extension cannot be regarded as a material attribute 
of the same kind as others, simply because, while we cannot determine the 
modalities of heat, colour and weight without recourse to actual experiences 
of these things, it is quite different with the notion of space. Even if it is 
given empirically by sight and touch, this does not rule out the ability of 
the mind to cut out in it a priori figures, whose properties we also deter­
mine a priori. It is this transcendental ideality of space that infuses the whole 
of Kant's enterprise, including the antinomies. But this means not simply 
that intelligence bathes in an atmosphere of spatiality but that this 
atmosphere doses down the possibilities of thinking. If our perceptions are 
'impregnated by our geometry' we should not be surprised when thinking 
finds in matter the mathematical properties which the faculty of perception 
has already deposed there. Matter yields itself to the docility of our 
reasonings. Because any other knowledge of matter and the real has been 
denied, such as that offered by the intuition of mobility, we should also not 
be surprised if the result is a set of antinomies in which one affirmation 
immediately gives rise to a contrary affirmation equally plausible and equally 
demonstrable. 

Introduction 
37 
MORALITY AND SOCIOBIOLOGY 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion (TSMR) has been described as an 
attempt to temper the primacy given to the 'group mind' in modern soci­
ology by drawing greater attention to the role of the individual. 19 As such, 
what TSMR takes as two symptoms of this group mind, closed society and 
static religion, 'were the last entries', it has been said, 'in a column of partial 
negatives, beginning with mathematics and science generally'. 20 
The first noteworthy feature of TSMR is that it is primarily a work in 
sociobiology rather than metaphysics; indeed, as regards its analysis of 
religion, it is the sociobiological study, according to Charles Hartshorne.21 
Bergson's main claim is that the nature of social relations is not fixed, but an 
ongoing creation.22 This is not ro argue that it is a by-product of intrinsically 
individual human endeavour - at all times in this book Bergson tries to 
balance the claims of methodological and theoretical individualism with 
those of collectivism - bur rather that society and culture are evolutionary 
rather than self-explanatory.23 We must seek their origins or 'sources' in the 
biological exigencies of life, as a creator both of the species and of individuals: 
'all we have to do is to consider man again in his place among living things, 
and psychology as a part of biology'. Having done so, we will have replaced 
sociability back within the 'general evolurion of life'.24 
Two caveats must be added to this rather bare manifesto: first, that 
Bergson's is certainly not a reductive sociobiology; there is no hint here that 
he wishes to deflate culture to 'merely' animal, biological or generic forces. In 
tandem with his redemptive and anti-reductionist views in biology, his is, if 
anything, an inflationary discourse; biological influence merits much more 
worth than we give it: 'let us then give to the word biology the very wide 
meaning it should have, and will perhaps have one day'. Second, this will be a 
truly evolutionary sociobiology. Bergson's complaint against similar analyses 
of that time and earlier (one thinks of Herbert Spencer) was that they 'take 
society for granted', and end up using biology to aggrandize and consolidate a 
particular status quo: they are conformist rather than evolutionist. 25 It is 
irrelevant whether the analysis is liberal or conservative in political orienra­
tion: the error of false sociobiology is its search for legitimizing natural 
essences, when in truth the 'sources' of society only provide us with natural 
tendencies, one of which will actually be the tendency to renounce all notions 
of natural essence in favour of the continual creation of new social forms -
what Bergson will dub 'open morality'. Hence, Bergson sidesteps the frozen 
essentialism of reductive naturalists as well as the liquid relativism of 
culruralists: society is indeed moulded by nature, but by a creative nature 
which in part tries to break its own moulds! 
Irrespective of what form sociobiology takes, its main struggle will be with 
those who reject its premise altogether and seek to explain society and 

38 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
morality wholly in terms of rhe instruments of human intelligence. A part of 
the first chapter, which we have included in our selection, consists of two 
attacks Bergson makes on rhis intellectualist view. One of them rests on his 
earlier work in CE that shows that intelligence itself is the offspring of 
biology and so must 'correspond to vital needs'; this evolutionary 
epistemology shows that rationality cannot be the direct agency behind 
culture and ethics but acts at best by proxy for vital forces. Of course, 
Bergson is careful not to reduce reason to a parody of itself when rejecting its 
efficacy; it would be too simplistic to say that passion rules wholesale over 
rationality. He accepts that moral decisions must be channelled through 
reason in any particular situation. It is also true that the more 'economical' a 
society becomes (in the literal sense of that term), the more the dictates of its 
operative morality are logically integrated, ೐iving succour to the intellectual­
ists' conviction as to their ultimate origin. 2 The sources Bergson is invoking 
do nor bear down transparently on our every decision; indeed, it would be 
impossible to act if we did have to refer to them explicitly. The two sources 
are both varieties of proto-morality, as the term 'source' implies. They 
represent the conditions of possibility, so to speak, for making moral judge­
ments at all and for having a moral sensibility. But neither firs an intellec­
tualized model of ethics, for, as we will see, they are infra-rational and supra­
rational. TSMR does not set out an alternative system of ethics or 'morale'.27 
By an 'intellectualized model of ethics' Bergson does not mean a 
specifically rationalist ethics such as Kantianism, so much as any ethical 
model which systematically derives a set of codes from some initial premise 
or premises on the assumption that coherence is a facet of morality: 'general 
interest, personal interest, self-love, sympathy, pity, logical consistency, etc., 
there is no principle of action from which it is not possible to deduce more 
or less the morality that is generally accepted'. In each case, morality is 
deemed deducible from and reducible to an evidential base, whatever it may 
be. But the essential is thereby omitted. In other words, what is moral in 
morality, that is, what is 'moving' (in every sense), remains unexplained by 
intellectualism. This point relates to Bergson's second line of attack: the old 
idea that the virtue of coherence or consistency lacks any real impetus to 
practical action: 'reason can only put forward reasons, which we are 
apparently always at liberty to counter with other reasons'?8 
We should take care not to think that Bergson's meta-ethics is emotivist. 
At least in respect to sympathy, Bergson clearly argues against its adequacy as 
a starting point for ethics. 29 But something more complex again distances 
Bergson from any possible identification with emotivist theory: his con­
ception of emotion itself. One comprehends only one side of the affective 
realm by thinking of emotion in terms of sensations, hormonal processes or, 
less physiologically, simple blind impulses. Alongside such desiccated, 
spatialized feelings, Bergson will argue for the primacy of 'creative emotion' 

Introduction 
39 
in ethics, emotions that are opposed to neither reason nor representation but 
incubate a certain form of intentionality. At this level too, Bergson tries to 
reconcile (or reverse) the dichotomy of emotivism and rationalism in ethics 
by means of an inflationary or redemptive picture of emotion itself: 
alongside of the emotion which is a result of the representation and which 
is added to it, there is the emotion which precedes the image, which virtu­
ally contains it, and is to a certain extent irs cause . . .  an emotion capable 
of crystallising into representations and even into an ethical doctrine. 30 
There are, of course, 'natural', easily recognized emotions, ones which are 
inspired by thought, social convention and even nature itself; but a genuinely 
new, creative emotion is not caused by a representation or inspiration; it is 
'pregnant' with its own representations: it is supra-rational. 
The metaphysics of Bergson's theory of life must always be kept in mind 
when discussing his sociobiological examination of ethics and religion. That 
said, the first manifestation of this is the dualism evident in this work from 
the very beginning. There are two sources of morality and religion, and both 
are biological. They can both be biological because there are two major 
facets to Bergson's theory of evolution, what he describes as a virtual type of 
organization on the one hand and the expression of that order in actual 
organic forms on the other: evolution itself and fragments of the evolved. 
Two facets of time, in other words, time flowing and time flown. 
In TSMR, these biological influences appear in morality as two types of 
motivation: moral obligation and moral aspiration, each corresponding ro 
the evolved and the evolving respectively. The first acts as a type of pressure, a 
cenrripetal movement of closure, fostering a closed model of society (or 
association) and a static form of religion. The second is an outward, dissocia­
tive and centrifugal movement, bearing within it the seeds of open sociability 
and dynamic spirituality. As neither source of the two is 'strictly and 
exclusively moral' it would be foolish, Bergson writes, ro try ro explain either 
in terms of moral or religious theory.31 Our sociobiology must be biological. 
Bergson compares the first type of movement, that of moral obligation, to 
the integrative pressure that maintains the unity of cells within an organism, 
only in society it is habit that plays the role of the binding force. We must 
note that there is no causal agency implied going from the biological 
substratum to the sociological superstratum here: rather, both realms evince 
a type of movement which is not modelled on one or the other bur on a 
third principle we might call 'transcendental'. The force maintaining the 
unity of animal societies bound by instinct is another parallel given, though 
again instinct per se is not meant to be the 'cause' of our sense of obligation 
but simply another manifestation of this type of movement. 32 
As regards these social obligations, Bergson argues that no particular one 
has any superior value over the next in terms of irs being closer to a 

40 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
biological origin; the only social form which is significant to Bergson is the 
very general one that there are obligations as such, the 'rotality of obligation' 
that plays the role of an infra-rational social adhesive. However, we never 
feel the action of this rotality except when we depart from it: rarely is it that 
obligations or duties do not harmonize with our own habitual tendencies. 
It is only when we make a transgression that we become conscious of them, 
for consciousness is the very 'hesitation' (in the language of TFW) or 
'disruption of movement' (as MM would say) evinced when we struggle 
between social and personal motives. Deviating from accepted moral 
convention causes an internal resistance within ourselves which, 'if we resist 
this resistance', leads to a 'state of tension or contraction'. From this abnor­
mal, limit case stems the mistaken notion that obligation is an independent 
self-explanatory principle of ethics. Generalizing from the particular brings 
about the erroneous idea of the self-sufficiency of duty, set (at least 
potentially) within a rationalistic ethics. But at heart, this view confuses a 
perceived pressure to restore an obligation with the origin of the obligation. 
Intelligence only supplies the hesitation, the resistance to a resistance, not the 
bl. 
. 
. 
If 33 
o tgauon ttse . 
Arising from this obligation is a type of conscience that we properly call 
'social' in that it indicates the desire for socialization and the preservation of 
our social identity. One trait of social obligation is that it immediately 
installs a 'closed society, however large'. It is in its nature to form social 
groupings like the family, the nation, the race and so on, each of which acts 
as an intermediary reinforcement of habitual social mores. Society in general 
occupies the broadest and most abstract of these concentric circles surround­
ing the self. Within each circle, all are regarded in an equal light and all are 
allowed the same rights and freedoms. What is essential about such bounded 
domains, however, is that they are more or less closed to the outside. A social 
formation may be very broad and even continue to grow broader by 
incorporating previously ostracized minority groups; no matter, they remain 
closed in the type of movement they instantiate: 'their essential characteristic 
is nonetheless to include at any moment a certain number of individuals, and 
exclude others'. Every in-group requires an out-group or 'enemy' (as Bergson 
puts it) such that our bonds of social equality and tolerance are purchased 
through an act of exclusion 'against all other men'.34 It would not be going 
too far to say that closed morality barely deserves the name of morality at all if 
we mean by that some wholly un-self-interested altruism. 
Whatever feelings we have for the group, writes Bergson, 'imply a choice, 
therefore an exclusion; they may act as incentives to strife, they do not 
exclude hatred'. This is closed morality: a set of rules and balances, pressures 
and obligations bearing down on the individual, homogenizing him or her 
by removing his or her evolutionary alterity. In terms of religion, the closed 
society tends rowards a static form of faith, a codified, institutionalized 

Introduction 
41 
spirituality that expresses above all the interests of the group rather than a 
supposedly universal divinity. Static religion is not the same as closed 
morality, however, for the former can often demand acts of superstitious 
barbarism deemed immoral by the latter: yet it remains that the two serve 
the same form of social order and are often found together.35 
But alongside social obligation, social conscience and the closed societies 
they sustain, there is another type of conscience which responds, not to the 
need to be kept within the closed fold of society, but to the desire for 
openness, specifically the desire to be open towards openness: a welcome 
owed to those who are themselves 'opening'. Behind the command to 'love 
all' lies this other morality - biological too, but in another sense than 
'merely' naturalistic. Bergson talks now of a 'complete morality' or 'absolute 
morality' and describes the 'extreme limit' of its movement as follows.36 
The other attitude is that of the open soul. What, in that case, is allowed 
in? Suppose we say that it embraces all humanity: we should not be going 
too far, we should hardly be going far enough, since its love may extend to 
animals, to plants, to all nature. And yet no one of these things which 
would thus fill it would suffice to define the attitude taken by the soul, for 
it could, strictly speaking, do without all of them. Its form is not 
dependent on its content. We have just filled it; we could as easily empty 
it again. 'Charity' would persist in him who possesses 'charity', though 
there be no other living creature on earth. 37 
Pure openness sympathizes 'with the whole of nature', but it is also a contact 
with a principle of nature which expresses itself in quite a different 
attachment to life rhan that found in a sympathy for the other members of 
one's group. It is described as an objectless emotion that loves who or what it 
does only 'by passing through' rather than aiming for them.38 
Now it must be added that both these moralities, closed and open, are only 
'extreme limits', and are never found in any actual society in their pure form. 
The forces of openness and closure are present in varying degrees in every 
society and are intermixed in actual morality. Such actual morality encom­
passes what Bergson describes as a 'system of orders dictated by impersonal 
social requirements', as well as a 'series of appeals made to the conscience of 
each of us by persons who represent the best there is in humanity'. 39 
Nonetheless, the two remain distinct while being united in their difference, 
for they represent 'two complementary manifestations oflife'.40 There never 
has been nor could be either a truly open society or a fully closed one. These 
are ideal limits.41 
We've seen that open morality finds its inspiration in a personal appeal 
rather than through the impersonal pressure which regulates the morality of 
a closed society. Some form of direct or indirect interpersonal relationship is 

42 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
required. Where closed morality lies in obedience before the law, open 
morality lies in an 'appeal', 'attraction' or 'call'. But the call does not come 
from just any one: it requires a privileged personality. What is best in our 
society is bequeathed to us by individuals Bergson calls heroes, and each 
hero - living or dead - 'exerts on us a virtual attraction'. Bergson certainly is 
not asserting a hard and fast dimorphism between leaders and their followers 
here - every individual possesses within him or herself 'a leader with the 
instinct to command and a subject ready to obey' - it is simply that our 
dosed societies are configured to ensure a herd-mentality in the majority.42 
The heroism Bergson describes is of a religious variety, though one that is 
dynamic and wholly active rather than institutional and reified.43 Bergson 
also calls these heroes 'mystics', though, again, the notion of some ascetic 
contemplative is far from what he has in mind. These mystics are creators, 
transgressing the boundaries of life, mind and society in their inspirational 
morality. As an earlier essay puts it, their moral existence is nearest to life 
itself: such 'inventive and simple heroism' is 'the great success of life', being 
at once its 'culminating point' and most primitive 'source'.44 In crossing all 
frontiers, mysticism goes 'beyond the limits of intelligence', the ultimate end 
of mysticism being to establish a partial coincidence with the creative effort 
which life manifests. Such inherent creativity can appear as mental path­
ology, and Bergson takes time to spell our the differences between the 
symptoms of genuine mental transcendence and those of simple insanity.45 
Mental imbalance is frequently regarded by Bergson as an excess of mental 
power rather than a deficiency: the usual restrictive role of the brain has been 
weakened to allow a greater degree of consciousness to flood the subject. The 
weakness of such disorder lies in the inability to restore equilibrium between 
this new surplus and the surrounding environment.46 The mystic has that 
ability to restore the equilibrium. He or she has travelled the same route as the 
madman but has also discovered the way backY 
So, what is moral action? Oddly enough, what allows rhe hero to act as a 
model for others is described as a type of passivity before life. It entails 'the 
complete and mysterious gift of self'.48 What is termed 'complete mysticism' 
is wholly for the other rather than self-absorbed: 'true, complete, active 
mysticism aspires to radiate, by virtue of the charity which is its essence'.49 
How it actually radiates is through the contagious properties of a genuinely 
creative emotion: 'for heroism itself is a return to movement, and emanates 
from an emotion - infectious like all emotions - akin to the creative act'.50 
But again, the etymology of emotion should be taken into account: Bergson 
is not endorsing some private ecstasy but a type of movement rich in mean­
ing, a movement of openness. In one very interesting analysis, Bergson 
describes Socrates as a mystic and religious hero before being a philosophical 
model. When philosophers constructively engage with society, they do not 
follow the Socratic archetype so much as actualize the Socratic movement and 
thereby make him live again. 5 1  

Introduction 
43 
MELANGES 
Our first selection from Melanges - the collection of letters and rarer essays 
published in French in 1972 - is his 1895 lecture on 'good sense' or 'le bon 
sens', which has both an ethical and an intellectual function. In this respect 
we are dealing with a crucial harbinger of Bergson's later moral philosophy. 
While the other senses place us in relation with things, le bon sens, he 
observes, governs our relations with people, orienting our attention 'in the 
direction of life'. It is the principle of social justice, though it is a justice 
'living and acting' rather than 'theoretical and abstract'. Le bon sens is first 
and foremost a 'strength of feeling' of which theoretical justice is a derivative 
form. It is also described as an attention to life, though this attention is 
neither an extended experience, nor a more exact deduction, nor a more 
rigorous logic: it remains a spirit of justice. Nevertheless, le bon sens also has 
an intellectual role, demanding the sacrifice of our firmest convictions and 
best explanations in order to preserve us from 'intellectual automatism'.52 
Such beliefs must be made provisional if we are to remain open to the 
opinions and solutions of others. As one critic describes it: 'good sense 
demands both flexibiliry and ʽerpetual readaptation of means to ends: in a 
word, it demands openness'. 5 
It is when Le bon sens is addressed under the alternative designation of 
'common sense' that this notion enters the foreground of Bergson's thought. 
Now it is no longer only an attention to the sensibilities of human beings 
which depicts it accurately; it is an attention to otherness as such before the 
bifurcation between the enduring and the inert has been performed. 
Common sense becomes a trap when it is no longer a good sense, but is 
instead what only emphasizes the common. By this we mean that the good 
common sense, Le bon sens directed towards otherness as such, seems to 
retain the proportionality required to temper its own perspective with that of 
the other, whereas the bad common sense enforces the sacrifice of its own 
alteriry to the communal view: self-homogenization. Le bon sens is thereby 
the sense that equally demands that we adopt a position that will always and 
necessarily be ours alone. 54 
Our other selections from this 'mix' of Bergson's lesser-known texts is 
mostly composed of his correspondence, in particular with William 
James. The intellectual harmony and tension between the philosophies 
of James and Bergson is worthy of a book in itself: their joint 'discovery' of 
the stream or duration of consciousness, their pragmatist theory of knowl­
edge and their treatment of 'abnormal mental states' as modes of knowledge 
with genuine 'noetic value'55 are all hallmarks of their strong philosophical 
kinship. What is also worth taking away from reading their correspondence 
is their divergence (at least in Bergson's eyes), especially as regards the notion 
of truth, as can be seen from the following from Bergson's letter to James in 
June 1907: 

44 
Henri Bergson: Key Writings 
Would I go so far as to affirm with you that 'truth is mutable'? I believe in 
the mutability of reality rather than that of truth. If we can make our 
intuition accord with the mobility of the real, would not this accord be 
something stable, and would not truth - which can only be this accord 
itself - participate in this stability?56 
No less interesting than the distinction Bergson asserts here between himself 
and James's theory of truth is the inconsistency it creates with his own claim 
elsewhere that all thought, even 'erroneous' thought, stands for something: 
'Error itself', Bergson writes, 'is a source of truth': 'yes and no are sterile in 
philosophy. What is interesting . . .  is in what measure?'57 What starts out as 
merely a 'refractory' representation can become a given truth, clear and 
intelligible, simply in virtue of our historical acquaintance with the con­
cept. A true affirmation can thus have a 'retroactive' or 'retrograde' move­
ment: 'the paradox of today is often only the truth of tomorrow'. 58 Truth 
grows on us. If we give up on truth, it is only because we have a false 
conception of what truth should be, 'in virtue of the principle deep-rooted 
in our intellect, that all truth is eternal. If the judgement is true now, it 
seems to us it must always have been so.'59 But it is truth which is multiple 
for Bergson because it is an emergent process: 'the rrue growth of truth'. 
The other letters from Melanges reproduced here - to Lechalas, Hoffding 
and Delattre - throw extra light on the intrinsic meaning and overall philo­
sophical position of the key Bergsonian concepts of the body and perception, 
intuition and duration, and the elan vital respectively. These texts will reward 
close study while also helping to offset some of the myriad misconceptions 
surrounding Bergson's work. But we complete this particular selection and 
this volume of key writings with Bergson's message to the Descartes Congress 
of 19 3 7. It is perhaps ironic that our last text should focus on Descartes (who 
Bergson cites here as the spiritual founder of modern metaphysics), for one 
can read Bergson as the one philosopher who, straddling the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, did more than any other to subvert so many of the 
dogmas of modern Cartesian philosophy: the spatiality of time, the specula­
tive nature of reason, the mechanism of life - all of these philosophical 
tenets, fundamental to all thought for the last four hundred years, were 
devastingly critiqued by Bergson first, and with such success that to oppose 
them today is almost an inrellectual platitude. He transcended a great deal of 
the axioms and methodology of classicism and rationalism (though he also 
retained a number of their assumptions). Perhaps his style was too personal 
and at times too clear for his doctrine to transcend his own exposition of it. 
He did not leave a 'scientific' method as Husser! did upon which his followers 
might base a school. A philosopher of his own time, he was attacked by both 
the emerging Analytic tradition and the Thomist one. In many ways, he 
stands at a crossroads in philosophy: he reset the agenda of what our philo­
sophical questions should be and how they should be put. He was neither a 

Introduction 
45 
classical philosopher, for he rejected irs world-view, nor a full-blown 
'postmodernist', for he still retained a modern approach to the possibility 
and importance of metaphysics. Many lost sight of this and criticized 
Bergsonism only for what it lacked, to the exclusion of what it gave to our 
whole postmodern tradition as such. 
In a letter of 7 March 1914 to the editor of Le Figaro Bergson wrote (from 
London) of what he himself thought about Bergsonism. He says that the 
spread of what has become known as 'Bergsonism' is due to people seeing 
that they have here to do with a 
metaphysic moulded on experience (whether exterior or interior); with an 
unpretentious philosophy determined to base itself on solid ground; with 
a doctrine that is in no sense systematic, that is not provided with an 
answer to every question, and that distinguishes different problems to 
examine one by one - a philosophy capable, like science, of indefinite 
progress and advance . . .  
He then adds: 'Each of my books has cost me several years of scientific 
research; and each of them issues in no vague generalities but in conclusions 
which are able to throw light on some one aspect of very special problems.' 
Perhaps it is despite the early popularity of his work rather than because of 
it that we should return to his writings and rediscover rhe immense effort that 
went into creating each of his philosophical concepts, giving back to them the 
intellectual effort and dose attention they deserve. His was a philosophy 
whose ideological effect, being so all-pervasive that by name it became 
invisible, should not because of that be deemed any less important in fact. 
We hope that presenting the key texts from his writings in this collection will 
alert the contemporary reader of philosophy to the enormous - but often 
unacknowledged - significance of his arguments as well as the ongoing 
productivity of his ideas. 


Time and Free Wil/1 


The Idea of Duration2 
Number may be defined in general as a collection of units, or, speaking more 
exactly, as the synthesis of che one and che many. Every number is one, since 
it is brought before the mind by a simple intuition and is given a name; but 
the unity which attaches to it is that of a sum, it covers a multiplicity of parts 
which can be considered separately. Without attempting for the present any 
thorough examination of these conceptions of unity and multiplicity, let us 
inquire whether the idea of number does not imply the representation of 
something else as well. 
It is not enough to say that number is a collection of units; we muse add 
that these units are identical with one another, or at least that they are 
assumed to be identical when they are counted. No doubt we can count the 
sheep in a flock and say that there are fifty, although they are all different 
from one another and are easily recognized by the shepherd: but the reason 
is that we agree in that case to neglect their individual differences and co cake 
into account only what chey have in common. On the other hand, as soon as 
we fix our attention on the particular features of objects or individuals, we 
can of course make an enumeration of them, but not a total. We place 
ourselves at these two very different points of view when we count the 
soldiers in a battalion and when we call the roll. Hence we may conclude 
that the idea of number implies the simple intuition of a multiplicity of 
parts or units, which are absolutely alike. 3 
And yet they must be somehow distinct from one another, since otherwise 
they would merge into a single unit. Let us assume that all the sheep in the 
flock are identical; they differ at least by the position which they occupy 
in space, otherwise they would not form a flock. But now let us even set 
aside the fifty sheep themselves and retain only the idea of them. Either 
we include them all in the same image, and it follows as a necessary con­
sequence that we place them side by side in an ideal space, or else we repeat 
fifty times in succession the image of a single one, and in chat case it does 
seem, indeed, that the series lies in duration rather than in space. But we 
shall soon find out that it cannot be so. For if we picture co ourselves each of 
the sheep in the flock in succession and separately, we shall never have to do 
with more than a single sheep. In order that the number should go on 
increasing in proportion as we advance, we must retain the successive images 
and set them alongside each of the new units which we picture to ourselves: 
now, it is in space that such a juxtaposition takes place and not in pure 

50 
Time and Free Will 
duration. In fact, it will be easily granted that counting material objects 
means thinking all these objects together, thereby leaving them in space. But 
does this intuition of space accompany every idea of number, even of an 
abstract number? 
Any one can answer this question by reviewing the various forms which 
the idea of number has assumed for him since his childhood. It will be seen 
that we began by imagining e.g. a row of balls, that these balls afterwards 
became points, and, finally, this image itself disappeared, leaving behind it, 
as we say, nothing but abstract number. But at this very moment we ceased 
to have an image or even an idea of it; we kept only the symbol which is 
necessary for reckoning and which is the conventional way of expressing 
number. For we can confidently assert chat 12 is half of 24 without thinking 
either the number 12 or the number 24: indeed, as far as quick calculation is 
concerned, we have everything co gain by not doing so. But as soon as we 
wish to picture number to ourselves, and not merely figures or words, we are 
compelled to have recourse to an extended image. What leads to mis­
understanding on this point seems to be the habit we have fallen into of 
counting in time rather than in space. In order to imagine the number 50, 
for example, we repeat all the numbers starting from unity, and when we 
have arrived at the fiftieth, we believe we have built up the number in dura­
tion and in duration only. And there is no doubt that in this way we have 
counted moments of duration rather than points in space; but the question is 
whether we have not counted the moments of duration by means of points in 
space. It is certainly possible to perceive in time, and in time only, a succes­
sion which is nothing but a succession, but not an addition, i.e. a succession 
which culminates in a sum. For though we reach a sum by taking into 
account a succession of different terms, yet it is necessary that each of these 
terms should remain when we pass co the following, and should wait, so to 
speak, to be added to the others: how could it wait, if it were nothing but 
an instant of duration? And where could it wait if we did not localize it in 
space? We involuntarily fix at a point in space each of the moments which we 
count, and it is only on this condition that the abstract units come to form a 
sum. No doubt it is possible, as we shall show later, to conceive the succes­
sive moments of time independently of space; but when we add to the 
present moment those which have preceded it, as is the case when we are 
adding up units, we are not dealing with these moments themselves, since 
they have vanished for ever, but with the lasting traces which they seem to 
have left in space on their passage through it. It is true that we generally 
dispense with this mental image, and that, after having used it for the first 
two or three numbers, it is enough to know that it would serve just as well 
for the mental picturing of the others, if we needed it. But every clear idea of 
number implies a visual image in space; and the direct study of the units 
which go to form a discrete multiplicity will lead us to the same conclusion 
on this point as the examination of number itself. 

The Idea of Duration 
5 1  
Every number is a collection of units, as we have said, and on the other 
hand every number is itself a unit, in so far as it is a synthesis of the units 
which compose it. But is the word unit taken in the same sense in both 
cases? When we assert that number is a unit, we understand by this that we 
master the whole of it by a simple and indivisible intuition of the mind; this 
unity thus includes a multiplicity, since it is the unity of a whole. But when 
we speak of the units which go to form number, we no longer think of these 
units as sums, but as pure, simple, irreducible units, intended to yield the 
natural series of numbers by an indefinitely continued process of accumu­
lation. It seems, then, that there are two kinds of units, the one ultimate, 
out of which a number is formed by a process of addition, and the other 
provisional, the number so formed, which is multiple in itself, and owes its 
unity to the simplicity of the act by which the mind perceives it. And there is 
no doubt that, when we picture the units which make up number, we 
believe that we are thinking of indivisible components: this belief has a great 
deal to do with the idea that it is possible to conceive number independently 
of space. Nevertheless, by looking more closely into the matter, we shall see 
that all unity is the unity of a simple act of the mind, and that, as this is an 
act of unification, there must be some multiplicity for it to unify. No doubt, 
at the moment at which I think each of these units separately, I look upon 
it as indivisible, since I am determined to think of its unity alone. But as 
soon as I put it aside in order to pass to the next, I objectify it, and by that 
very deed I make it a thing, that is to say, a multiplicity. To convince oneself 
of this, it is enough to notice that the units by means of which arithmetic 
forms numbers are provisional units, which can be subdivided without limit, 
and that each of them is the sum of fractional quantities as small and as 
numerous as we like to imagine. How could we divide the unit, if it were 
here that ultimate unity which characterizes a simple act of the mind? How 
could we split it up into fractions whilst affirming irs unity, if we did not 
regard it implicitly as an extended object, one in intuition but multiple in 
space? You will never get out of an idea which you have formed anything 
which you have not put into it; and if the unity by means of which you 
make up your number is the unity of an act and not of an object, no effort of 
analysis will bring out of it anything bur unity pure and simple. No doubt, 
when you equate the number 3 to the sum of 1 + 1 + 1, nothing prevents 
you from regarding the units which compose it as indivisible: but the reason 
is that you do not choose to make use of the multiplicity which is enclosed 
within each of these units. Indeed, it is probable that the number 3 first 
assumes to our mind this simpler shape, because we think rather of the way 
in which we have obtained it than of the use which we might make of it. But 
we soon perceive that, while all multiplication implies the possibility of 
treating any number whatever as a provisional unit which can be added to 
itself, inversely the units in their turn are true numbers which are as big 
as we like, but are regarded as provisionally indivisible for the purpose of 

52 
Time and Free Will 
compounding them with one another. Now, the very admission that it is 
possible to divide the unit into as many parts as we like, shows that we 
regard it as extended. 
For we must understand what is meant by the discontinuity of number. 
It cannot be denied that the formation or construction of a number implies 
discontinuity. In other words, as we remarked above, each of the units with 
which we form the number 3 seems to be indivisible while we are dealing 
with it, and we pass abruptly from one to the other. Again, if we form the 
same number with halves, with quarters, with any units whatever, these 
units, in so far as they serve to form the said number, will still constitute 
elements which are provisionally indivisible, and it is always by jerks, by 
sudden jumps, so to speak, that we advance from one to the other. And the 
reason is that, in order to get a number, we are compelled to fix our 
attention successively on each of the units of which it is compounded. The 
indivisibility of the act by which we conceive any one of them is then 
represented under the form of a mathematical point which is separated from 
the following point by an interval of space. But, while a series of mathe­
matical points arranged in empty space expresses fairly well the process by 
which we form the idea of number, these mathematical points have a 
tendency to develop into lines in proportion as our attention is diverted 
from them, as if they were trying to reunite with one another. And when we 
look at number in irs finished state, this union is an accomplished fact: the 
points have become lines, the divisions have been blotted out, the whole 
displays all the characteristics of continuity. This is why number, although 
we have formed it according to a definite law, can be split up on any system 
we please. In a word, we must distinguish between the unity which we think 
of and the unity which we set up as an object after having thought of it, as 
also between number in process of formation and number once formed. The 
unit is irreducible while we are thinking it and number is discontinuous 
while we are building it up: but, as soon as we consider number in its 
finished state, we objectify it, and it then appears to be divisible to an 
unlimited extent. In fact, we apply the term subjective to what seems to be 
completely and adequately known, and the term objective to what is known 
in such a way that a constantly increasing number of new impressions could 
be substituted for the idea which we actually have of it. Thus, a complex 
feeling will contain a fairly large number of simple elements; but, as long as 
these elements do not stand out with perfect clearness, we cannot say that 
they were completely realized, and, as soon as consciousness has a distinct 
perception of them, the psychic state which results from their synthesis will 
have changed for this very reason. Bur there is no change in the general 
appearance of a body, however it is analysed by thought, because these 
different analyses, and an infinity of others, are already visible in the mental 
image which we form of the body, though they are not realized: this actual 
and not merely virtual perception of subdivisions in what is undivided is just 

The Idea of Duration 
53 
what we call objectivity. It then becomes easy to determine the exact part 
played by the subjective and the objective in the idea of number. What 
properly belongs to the mind is the indivisible process by which it concen­
trates attention successively on the different pans of a given space; but the 
parts which have thus been isolated remain in order to join with the others, 
and, once rhe addition is made, they may be broken up in any way whatever. 
They are therefore parrs of space, and space is, accordingly, the material with 
which the mind builds up number, the medium in which the mind places it. 
Properly speaking, it is arithmetic which teaches us to split up without 
limit the units of which number consists. Common sense is very much 
inclined to build up number with indivisibles. And this is easily understood, 
since the provisional simplicity of the component units is just what they owe 
to the mind, and the latter pays more attention to its own acts than to the 
material on which it works. Science confines itself, here, to drawing our 
attention to this material: if we did not already localize number in space, 
science would certainly not succeed in making us transfer it thither. From 
the beginning, therefore, we must have thought of number as of a juxta­
position in space. This is the conclusion which we reached at first, basing 
ourselves on the fact that all addition implies a multipliciry of parts simul­
taneously perceived. 
Now, if this conception of number is granted, it will be seen that every­
thing is not counted in the same way, and that there are two very different 
kinds of multiplicity. When we speak of material objects, we refer to the 
possibility of seeing and touching them; we localize them in space. In that 
case, no effort of the inventive faculty or of symbolical representation is 
necessary in order to count them; we have only to think them, at first 
separately, and then simultaneously, within the very medium in which they 
come under our observation. The case is no longer the same when we con­
sider purely affective psychic states, or even mental images other than those 
built up by means of sight and touch. Here, the terms being no longer given 
in space, it seems, a priori, that we can hardly count them except by some 
process of symbolical representation. In fact, we are well aware of a repre­
sentation of this kind when we are dealing with sensations the cause of 
which is obviously situated in space. Thus, when we hear a noise of steps in 
the street, we have a confused vision of somebody walking along: each of the 
successive sounds is then localized at a point in space where the passer-by 
might tread: we count our sensations in the very space in which their 
tangible causes are ranged. Perhaps some people count the successive strokes 
of a distant bell in a similar way, their imagination pictures the bell coming 
and going; this spatial sort of image is sufficient for the first two units, and 
the others follow naturally. Bur most people's minds do not proceed in this 
way. They range the successive sounds in an ideal space and then fancy that 
they are counting them in pure duration. Yet we must be clear on this point. 
The sounds of the bell certainly reach me one after the other; but one of two 

54 
Time and Free Will 
alternatives must be true. Either I retain each of these successive sensations in 
order to combine it with the others and form a group which reminds me of 
an air or rhythm which I know: in that case I do not count the sounds, I limit 
myself to gathering, so to speak, the qualitative impression produced by the 
whole series. Or else I intend explicitly to count them, and then I shall have 
to separate them, and this separation must take place within some homo­
geneous medium in which the sounds, stripped of their qualities, and in a 
manner emptied, leave traces of their presence which are absolutely a1ike.4 
The question now is, whether this medium is time or space. But a moment of 
time, we repeat, cannot persist in order to be added to others. If the sounds 
are separated, they must leave empty intervals between them. If we count 
them, the intervals must remain though the sounds disappear: how could 
these intervals remain, if they were pure duration and not space? It is in space, 
therefore, that rhe operation takes place. It becomes, indeed, more and more 
difficult as we penetrate furrher into the depths of consciousness. Here we 
find ourselves confronted by a confused multiplicity of sensations and 
feelings which analysis alone can distinguish. Their number is identical with 
the number of the moments which we take up when we count them; but 
these moments, as they can be added to one another, are again points in 
space. Our final conclusion, therefore, is that there are two kinds of multi­
plicity: that of material objects, to which the conception of number is 
immediately applicable; and the multiplicity of states of consciousness, 
which cannot be regarded as numerical without the help of some symbolical 
representation, in which a necessary element is space. 
As a matter of fact, each of us makes a distinction between these two kinds 
of multiplicity whenever he speaks of the impenetrability of matter. We some­
times set up impenetrability as a fundamental property of bodies, known in 
the same way and put on the same level as e.g. weight or resistance. Bur a 
purely negative property of this kind cannot be revealed by our senses; 
indeed, cerrain experiments in mixing and combining things might lead us 
ro call it in question if our minds were not already made up on the point. 
Try to picture one body penetrating another: you will at once assume that 
there are empty spaces in the one which will be occupied by the particles of 
the other; these particles in their turn cannot penetrate one another unless 
one of them divides in order to fill up the interstices of the other; and our 
thought will prolong this operation indefinitely in preference to picturing 
two bodies in the same place. Now, if impenetrability were really a quality of 
matter which was known by the senses, it is not at all clear why we should 
experience more difficulty in conceiving two bodies merging into one 
another than a surface devoid of resistance or a weightless fluid. In reality, it 
is not a physical bur a logical necessity which attaches to the proposition: 
'Two bodies cannot occupy the same place at rhe same time.' The contrary 
assertion involves an absurdity which no conceivable experience could 
succeed in dispelling. In a word, it implies a contradiction. Bur does not this 

The Idea of Duration 
55 
amount to recognizing that the very idea of the number 2, or, more gen­
erally, of any number whatever, involves the idea of juxtaposition in space? 
If impenetrability is generally regarded as a quality of matter, the reason is 
that the idea of number is thought to be independent of the idea of space. 
We thus believe that we are adding something to the idea of two or more 
objects by saying that they cannot occupy the same place: as if the idea of the 
number 2, even the abstract number, were not already, as we have shown, 
that of two different positions in space! Hence to assert the impenetrability 
of matter is simply to recognize the inter-connexion between the notions 
of number and space, it is to state a property of number rather than of 
matter. - Yet, it will be said, do we not count feelings, sensations, ideas, all 
of which permeate one another, and each of which, for its part, takes up the 
whole of the soul? - Yes, undoubtedly; but, just because they permeate one 
another, we cannot count them unless we represent them by homogeneous 
units which occupy separate positions in space and consequently no longer 
permeate one another. Impenetrability thus makes its appearance at the 
same time as number; and when we attribute this quality to matter in order 
w distinguish it from everything which is not matter, we simply state under 
another form the distinction established above between extended objects, to 
which the conception of number is immediately applicable, and states of 
consciousness, which have first of all to be represented symbolically in space. 
It is advisable to dwell on the last point. If in order to count states of 
consciousness, we have to represent them symbolically in space, is it not 
likely that this symbolical representation will alter the normal conditions of 
inner perception? Let us recall what we said a short time ago about the 
intensity of certain psychic states. Representative sensation, looked at in 
itself, is pure quality; but, seen through the medium of extensity, this quality 
becomes in a certain sense quantity, and is called intensity. In the same way, 
our projection of our psychic states into space in order to form a discrete 
multiplicity is likely to influence these states themselves and to give them in 
reflective consciousness a new form, which immediate perception did not 
attribute to them. Now, let us notice that when we speak of time, we gen­
erally think of a homogeneous medium in which our conscious states are 
ranged alongside one another as in space, so as to form a discrete multi­
plicity. Would not time, thus understood, be to the multiplicity of our 
psychic states what intensity is to certain of them, - a sign, a symbol, 
absolutely distinct from true duration? Let us ask consciousness to isolate 
itself from the external world, and, by a vigorous effort of abstraction, to 
become itself again. We shall then put this question to it: does the multipli­
city of our conscious states bear the slightest resemblance to the multiplicity 
of the units of a number? Has true duration anything to do with space? 
Certainly, our analysis of the idea of number could not but make us doubt 
this analogy, to say no more. For if time, as the reflective consciousness 
represents it, is a medium in which our conscious states form a discrete series 

56 
Time and Free Will 
so as to admit of being counted, and if on the other hand our conception 
of number ends in spreading out in space everything which can be directly 
counted, it is to he presumed that rime, understood in the sense of a medium 
in which we make distinctions and count, is nothing but space. That which 
goes to confirm this opinion is that we are compelled to borrow from space 
the images by which we describe what the reflective consciousness feels about 
time and even about succession; it follows that pure duration must he some­
thing different. Such are the questions which we have been led to ask by the 
very analysis of the notion of discrete multiplicity. But we cannot throw any 
light upon them except by a direct study of the ideas of space and time in 
their mutual relations. 
We shall not lay too much stress on the question of the absolute reality 
of space: perhaps we might as well ask whether space is or is not in space. 
In short, our senses perceive the qualities of bodies and space along with 
them: the great difficulty seems to have been to discover whether extensity is 
an aspect of these physical qualities - a quality of quality - or whether these 
qualities are essentially unextended, space coming in as a later addition, but 
being self-sufficient and existing without them. On the first hypothesis, space 
would be reduced to an abstraction, or, speaking more correctly, an extract; it 
would express the common element possessed by certain sensations called 
representative. In the second case, space would be a reality as solid as the 
sensations themselves, although of a different order. We owe the exact formu­
lation of this latter conception to Kant: the theory which he works out in 
the Transcendemal Aesthetic consists in endowing space with an existence 
independent of its content, in laying down as de jure separable what each 
of us separates de facto, and in refusing to regard extensity as an abstraction 
like the others. In this respect the Kantian conception of space differs less 
than is usually imagined from rhe popular belief. Far from shaking our faith 
in the reality of space, Kant has shown what it actually means and has even 
justified it. 
Moreover, the solution given by Kant does not seem to have been seriously 
disputed since his time: indeed, it has forced itself, sometimes without their 
knowledge, on the majority of those who have approached the problem anew, 
whether nativists or empiricists. Psychologists agree in assigning a Kantian 
origin to rhe nativistic explanation of}ohann Muller; but Lotze's hypothesis 
of local signs, Bain's theory, and the more comprehensive explanation 
suggested by Wundt, may seem at first sight quite independent of the Trans­
cendental Aesthetic. The authors of these theories seem indeed to have put 
aside the problem of the nature of space, in order to investigate simply by 
what process our sensations come to be situated in space and to be set, so to 
speak, alongside one another: bur this very question shows that they regard 
sensations as inextensive and make a radical distinction, just as Kant did, 
between the matter of representation and its form. The conclusion to he 
drawn from the theories of Lotze and Bain, and from Wundt's attempt to 

The Idea of Duration 
57 
reconcile them, is that the sensations by means of which we come to form the 
notion of space are themselves unextended and simply qualitative: extensity is 
supposed to result from their synthesis, as water from the combination of two 
gases. The empirical or genetic explanations have thus taken up the problem 
of space at the very point where Kant left it: Kant separated space from irs 
contents: the empiricists ask how these contents, which are taken out of space 
by our thought, manage to get back again. It is true that they have apparently 
disregarded the activity of the mind, and that they are obviously inclined to 
regard the extensive form under which we represent things as produced by a 
kind of alliance of the sensations with one another: space, without being 
extracted from the sensations, is supposed to result from their co-existence. 
But how can we explain such an origination without the active intervention 
of the mind? The extensive differs by hypothesis from the inexrensive: and 
even if we assume that extension is nothing but a relation between inextensive 
terms, this relation must still be established by a mind capable of thus 
associating several terms. It is no use quoting the example of chemical com­
binations, in which the whole seems to assume, of its own accord, a form and 
qualities which did not belong to any of the elementary atoms. This form and 
these qualities owe their origin just to the fact that we gather up the multi­
plicity of atoms in a single perception: get rid of the mine which carries out 
this synthesis and you will at once do away with the qualities, that is to say, 
the aspect under which the synthesis of elementary parts is presented to our 
consciousness. Thus inextensive sensations will remain what they are, viz., 
inextensive sensations, if nothing be added to them. For their co-existence ro 
give rise to space, there must be an act of the mind which takes them in all at 
the same time and sets them in juxtaposition: this unique act is very like 
what Kant calls an a priori form of sensibility. 
If we now seek to characterize this act, we see that it consists essentially in 
the intuition, or rather the conception, of an empty homogeneous medium. 
For it is scarcely possible ro give any other definition of space: space is what 
enables us to distinguish a number of identical and simultaneous sensations 
from one another; it is thus a principle of differentiation other than that of 
qualitative differentiation, and consequently it is a reality with no quality. 
Someone may say, with the believers in the theory of local signs, that 
simultaneous sensations are never identical, and that, in consequence of the 
diversity of the organic elements which they affect, there are no two points 
of a homogeneous surface which make the same impression on the sight or 
the touch. We are quite ready to grant it, for if these two points affected 
us in the same way, there would be no reason for placing one of them 
on the right rather than on the left. But, just because we afterwards interpret 
this difference of quality in the sense of a difference of situation, it follows 
that we must have a clear idea of a homogeneous medium, i.e. of a simul­
taneity of terms which, although identical in quality, are yet distinct from 
one another. The more you insist on the difference between the impressions 

58 
Time and Free Will 
made on our retina by two points of a homogeneous surface, the more do 
you thereby make room for the activity of the mind, which perceives under 
the form of extensive homogeneity what is given it as qualitative hetero­
geneity. No doubt, though the representation of a homogeneous space grows 
out of an effort of the mind, there must be within the qualities themselves 
which differentiate two sensations some reason why they occupy this or that 
definite position in space. We must thus distinguish between the perception 
of extensity and the conception of space: they are no doubt implied in one 
another, bur, rhe higher we rise in the scale of intelligent beings, the more 
clearly do we meet with the independent idea of a homogeneous space. It is 
therefore doubtful whether animals perceive the external world quite as we 
do, and especially whether they represent externality in the same way as 
ourselves. Naturalists have pointed out, as a remarkable fact, the surprising 
ease with which many vertebrates, and even some insects, manage to find 
their way through space. Animals have been seen to return almost in a 
straight line to their old home, pursuing a path which was hitherto unknown 
to them over a distance which may amount to several hundreds of miles. 
Attempts have been made to explain rhis feeling of direction by sight or 
smell, and, more recently, by the perception of magnetic currents which 
would enable the animal to rake its bearings like a living compass. This 
amounts to saying that space is not so homogeneous for the animal as for us, 
and that determinations of space, or directions, do not assume for it a purely 
geometrical form. Each of these directions might appear to it with its own 
shade, its peculiar quality. We shall understand how a perception of this 
kind is possible if we remember that we ourselves distinguish our right from 
our left by a natural feeling, and that these two parts of our own extensity do 
then appear to us as if they bore a different quality; in fact, this is the very 
reason why we cannot give a proper definition of right and left. In truth, 
qualitative differences exist everywhere in nature, and I do not see why 
two concrete directions should not be as marked in immediate perception 
as two colours. Bur the conception of an empty homogeneous medium is 
something far more extraordinary, being a kind of reaction against that 
heterogeneity which is the very ground of our experience. Therefore, instead 
of saying that animals have a special sense of direction, we may as well say 
that men have a special faculty of perceiving or conceiving a space with­
out quality. This faculty is not the faculty of abstraction: indeed, if we notice 
that abstraction assumes clean-cut distinctions and a kind of externality 
of the concepts or their symbols with regard to one another, we shall find that 
the faculty of abstraction already implies the intuition of a homogeneous 
medium. What we must say is that we have to do with two different kinds of 
reality, the one heterogeneous, that of sensible qualities, the other homo­
geneous, namely space. This latter, dearly conceived by the human intellect, 
enables us to use dean-cut distinctions, to count, to abstract, and perhaps 
also ro speak. 

The Idea of Duration 
59 
Now, if space is to be defined as the homogeneous, it seems that inversely 
every homogeneous and unbounded medium will be space. For, homo­
geneity here consisting in rhe absence of every quality, it is hard to see how 
two forms of the homogeneous could be distinguished from one another. 
Nevertheless it is generally agreed to regard time as an unbounded medium, 
different from space but homogeneous like the latter: the homogeneous is 
thus supposed to take two forms, according as its contents co-exist or follow 
one another. It is true that, when we make rime a homogeneous medium in 
which conscious states unfold themselves, we take it to be given all at once, 
which amounts to saying that we abstract it from duration. This simple 
consideration ought to warn us that we are thus unwittingly falling back 
upon space, and really giving up time. Moreover, we can understand that 
material objects, being exterior to one another and to ourselves, derive both 
exreriorities from the homogeneity of a medium which inserts intervals 
between them and sets off their outlines: but states of consciousness, even 
when successive, permeate one another, and in the simplest of them the 
whole soul can be reflected. We may therefore surmise that time, conceived 
under the form of a homogeneous medium, is some spurious concept, due 
to the trespassing of the idea of space upon rhe field of pure consciousness. 
At any rate we cannot finally admit two forms of the homogeneous, rime 
and space, without first seeking whether one of them cannot be reduced to 
the other. Now, externality is the distinguishing mark of things which 
occupy space, while states of consciousness are not essentially external to 
one another, and become so only by being spread out in time, regarded as 
a homogeneous medium. If, then, one of these two supposed forms of the 
homogeneous, namely rime and space, is derived from the other, we can 
surmise a priori that the idea of space is the fundamental datum. Bur, misled 
by the apparent simplicity of the idea of time, the philosophers who have 
tried to reduce one of these ideas to the other have thought that they could 
make extensity our of duration. While showing how they have been misled, 
we shall see that time, conceived under the form of an unbounded and homo­
geneous medium, is nothing but the ghost of space haunting the reflective 
COnSCiOUSness. 
The English school tries, in fact, to reduce relations of extensity to more 
or less complex relations of succession in time. When, with our eyes shut, we 
run our hands along a surface, the rubbing of our fingers against the surface, 
and especially the varied play of our joints, provide a series of sensations, 
which differ only by their qualities and which exhibit a certain order in time. 
Moreover, experience teaches us that this series can be reversed, that we can, 
by an effort of a different kind (or, as we shall call it later, in an opposite 
direction), obtain the same sensations over again in an inverse order: 
relations of position in space might then be defined as reversible relations of 
succession in time. But such a definition involves a vicious circle, or at least a 
very superficial idea of time. There are, indeed, as we shall show a little later, 

60 
Time and Free Will 
two possible conceptions of time, the one free from all alloy, the other 
surreptitiously bringing in the idea of space. Pure duration is the form which 
the succession of our conscious states assumes when our ego lets itself live, 
when it refrains from separating its present state from its former states. For 
this purpose it need not be entirely absorbed in the passing sensation or idea; 
for then, on the contrary, it would no longer endure. Nor need it forget its 
former states: it is enough that, in recalling these states, it does not set them 
alongside its actual state as one point alongside another, but forms both the 
past and the present states into an organic whole, as happens when we recall 
the notes of a tune, melting, so to speak, into one another. Might it not be 
said that, even if these notes succeed one another, yet we perceive them in 
one another, and that their totality may be compared to a living being whose 
parts, although distinct, permeate one another just because they are so 
closely connected? The proof is that, if we interrupt the rhythm by dwelling 
longer than is right on one note of the tune, it is not its exaggerated length, 
as length, which will warn us of our mistake, bur the qualitative change 
thereby caused in the whole of the musical phrase. We can thus conceive of 
succession without distinction, and think of it as a mutual penetration, an 
interconnexion and organization of elements, each one of which represents 
the whole, and cannot be distinguished or isolated from it except by abstract 
thought. Such is the account of duration which would be given by a being 
who was ever the same and ever changing, and who had no idea of space. 
But, familiar with the latter idea and indeed beset by it, we introduce it 
unwittingly into our feeling of pure succession; we set our states of con­
sciousness side by side in such a way as to perceive them simultaneously, no 
longer in one another, but alongside one another; in a word, we project time 
into space, we express duration in terms of extensity, and succession thus 
takes the form of a continuous line or a chain, the parts of which touch 
without penetrating one another. Note that the mental image thus shaped 
implies the perception, no longer successive, but simulcaneous, of a before and 
after, and that it would be a contradiction to suppose a succession which was 
only a succession, and which nevertheless was contained in one and the same 
instant. Now, when we speak of an order of succession in duration, and of the 
reversibility of this order, is the succession we are dealing with pure 
succession, such as we have just defined it, without any admixture of exten­
sity, or is it succession developing in space, in such a way that we can take in 
at once a number of elements which are both distinct and set side by side? 
There is no doubt about the answer: we could not introduce order among 
terms without first distinguishing them and then comparing the places 
which they occupy; hence we must perceive them as multiple, simultaneous 
and distinct; in a word, we set them side by side, and if we introduce an 
order in what is successive, the reason is that succession is converted into 
simultaneity and is projected into space. In short, when the movement of 
my finger along a surface or a line provides me with a series of sensations 

The Idea of Duration 
61 
of different qualities, one of two things happens: either I picture these sensa­
tions to myself as in duration only, and in that case they succeed one another 
in such a way that I cannot at a given moment perceive a number of them as 
simultaneous and yet distinct; or else I make out an order of succession, but 
in that case I display the faculty not only of perceiving a succession of 
elements, but also of setting them out in line after having distinguished them: 
in a word, I already possess the idea of space. Hence the idea of a reversible 
series in duration, or even simply of a certain order of succession in time, itself 
implies the representation of space, and cannot be used to define it. 
To give this argument a stricter form, let us imagine a straight line of 
unlimited length, and on this line a material point A, which moves. If this 
point were conscious of itself, it would feel itself change, since it moves: it 
would perceive a succession; but would this succession assume for it the 
form of a line? No doubt it would, if it could rise, so to speak, above the line 
which it traverses, and perceive simultaneously several points of it in juxta­
position: but by doing so it would form the idea of space, and it is in space 
and not in pure duration that it would see displayed the changes which it 
undergoes. We here pur our finger on the mistake of those who regard pure 
duration as something similar to space, bur of a simpler nature. They are fond 
of setting psychic states side by side, of forming a chain or a line of them, and 
do not imagine that they are introducing into this operation the idea of space 
properly so called, the idea of space in its totality, because space is a medium 
of three dimensions. But how can they fail to notice that, in order to perceive 
a line as a line, it is necessary to take up a position outside it, to take account 
of the void which surrounds it, and consequently to think a space of three 
dimensions? If our conscious point A does not yet possess the idea of space -
and this is the hypothesis which we have agreed to adopt - the succession of 
states through which it passes cannot assume for it the form of a line; but its 
sensations will add themselves dynamically to one another and will organize 
themselves, like the successive notes of a tune by which we allow ourselves to 
be lulled and soothed. In a word, pure duration might well be nothing but a 
succession of qualitative changes, which melt into and permeate one another, 
without precise outlines, without any tendency to externalise themselves in 
relation to one another, without any affiliation with number: it would be 
pure heterogeneity. But for the present we shall not insist upon this point; 
it is enough for us to have shown that, from the moment when you attribute 
the least homogeneity to duration, you surreptitiously introduce space. 
It is true that we count successive moments of duration, and that, because 
of its relations with number, rime at first seems to us to be a measurable 
magnitude, just like space. But there is here an important distinction to be 
made. I say, e.g., that a minute has just elapsed, and I mean by this that a 
pendulum, beating the seconds, has completed sixty oscillations. If I picture 
these sixty oscillations to myself all at once by a single mental perception, 
I exclude by hypothesis the idea of a succession. I do not think of sixty 

()2 
Time and Free Will 
strokes which succeed one another, but of sixty points on a fixed line, each 
one of which symbolizes, so to speak, an oscillation of the pendulum. If, on 
the other hand, I wish to picture these sixty oscillations in succession, but 
without altering the way they are produced in space, I shall be compelled to 
think of each oscillation to the exclusion of the recollection of the preceding 
one, for space has preserved no rrace of it; but by doing so I shall condemn 
myself to remain for ever in the present; I shall give up the attempt to think 
a succession or a duration. Now if, finally, I retain the recollection of the 
preceding oscillation together with the image of the present oscillation, one 
of two things will happen. Either I shall set the two images side by side, and 
we then fall back on our first hypothesis, or I shall perceive one in the other, 
each permeating the other and organizing themselves like the notes of a 
rune, so as to form what we shall call a continuous or qualitative multiplicity 
with no resemblance to number. I shall thus get the image of pure duration; 
but I shall have entirely got rid of rhe idea of a homogeneous medium or a 
measurable quantity. By carefully examining our consciousness we shall 
recognize that it proceeds in this way whenever it refrains from representing 
duration symbolically. When the regular oscillations of the pendulum make 
us sleepy, is it the last sound heard, the last movement perceived, which 
produces this effect? No, undoubtedly not, for why then should not the first 
have done the same? Is it the recollection of the preceding sounds or 
movements, set in juxtaposition to the last one? But this same recollection, if 
it is later on set in juxtaposition to a single sound or movement, will remain 
without effect. Hence we must admit that the sounds combined with one 
another and acted, not by their quantity as quantity, bur by the quality 
which their quantity exhibited, i.e. by the rhythmic organization of the 
whole. Could the effect of a slight bur continuous stimulation be understood 
in any other way? If the sensation remained always the same, it would 
continue to be indefinitely slight and indefinitely bearable. But the fact is 
thar each increase of stimulation is taken up into the preceding stimulations, 
and that the whole produces on us the effect of a musical phrase which is 
constantly on the point of ending and constantly altered in its totality by the 
addition of some new note. If we assert that it is always the same sensation, 
the reason is that we are thinking, not of the sensation itself, but of its 
objective cause situated in space. We then set it out in space in irs turn, and 
in place of an organism which develops, in place of changes which permeate 
one another, we perceive one and the same sensation stretching itself out 
lengthwise, so to speak, and setting itself in juxtaposition to itself without 
limit. Pure duration, that which consciousness perceives, must thus be reck­
oned among the so-called intensive magnitudes, if intensities can be called 
magnitudes: srricdy speaking, however, it is not a quantity, and as soon as 
we try to measure it, we unwittingly replace it by space. 
But we find ir extraordinarily difficult to think of duration in its original 
purity; this is due, no doubt, to the fact that we do not endure alone; external 

The Idea of Duration 
63 
objects, it seems, endure as we do, and time, regarded from this point of view, 
has every appearance of a homogeneous medium. Not only do the moments 
of this duration seem to be external to one another, like bodies in space, 
but the movement perceived by our senses is, so to speak, the palpable sign 
of a homogeneous and measurable duration. Nay more, time enters into the 
formulae of mechanics, into the calculations of the astronomer, and even of 
the physicist, under the form of a quantity. We measure the velocity of a 
movement, implying that time itself is a magnitude. Indeed, the analysis 
which we have just attempted requires to be completed, for if duration 
properly so-called cannot be measured, what is it that is measured by the 
oscillations of the pendulum? Granted that inner duration, perceived by 
consciousness, is nothing else bur the melting of states of consciousness into 
one another, and the gradual growth of the ego, it will be said, norwith­
standing, that the time which the astronomer introduces into his formulae, 
the time which our clocks divide into equal portions, this time, at least, is 
something different: it must be a measurable and therefore homogeneous 
magnitude. - lr is nothing of the sort, however, and a close examination will 
dispel this last illusion. 
When I follow with my eyes on the dial of a clock the movement of the 
hand which corresponds to the oscillations of the pendulum, I do not 
measure duration, as seems to be thought; I merely count simultaneities, 
which is very different. Outside of me, in space, there is never more than a 
single position of the hand and the pendulum, for nothing is left of the past 
positions. Within myself a process of organization or interpenetration of 
conscious states is going on, which constitutes true duration. It is because I 
endure in rhis way that I picture to myself what I call the past oscillations of 
the pendulum at the same rime as I perceive the present oscillation. Now, let 
us withdraw for a moment the ego which thinks these so-called successive 
oscillations: there will never be more than a single oscillation, and indeed 
only a single position, of the pendulum, and hence no duration. Withdraw, 
on the other hand, the pendulum and its oscillations; there will no longer 
be anything but the heterogeneous duration of the ego, without moments 
external to one another, without relation to number. Thus, within our ego, 
there is succession without mutual externality; outside the ego, in pure 
space, mutual externality without succession: mutual externality, since the 
present oscillation is radically distinct from the previous oscillation, which 
no longer exists; but no succession, since succession exists solely for a 
conscious spectator who keeps the past in mind and sets the two oscillations 
or their symbols side by side in an auxiliary space. Now, between this 
succession without externality and this externality without succession, a kind 
of exchange takes place, very similar ro what physicists call the phenomenon 
of endosmosis. As the successive phases of our conscious life, although inter­
penetrating, correspond individually to an oscillation of the pendulum which 
occurs at the same time, and as, moreover, these oscillations are sharply 

64 
Time and Free Will 
distinguished from one another, we get into the habit of setting up the same 
distinction between the successive moments of our conscious life: the oscil­
lations of the pendulum break it up, so to speak, into parts external to one 
another: hence the mistaken idea of a homogeneous inner duration, similar to 
space, the moments of which are identical and follow, without penetrating, 
one another. But, on the other hand, the oscillations of the pendulum, which 
are distinct only because one has disappeared when the other appears on the 
scene, profit, as it were, from rhe influence which they have rhus exercised 
over our conscious life . Owing to the fact that our consciousness has 
organized them as a whole in memory, they are first preserved and afterwards 
disposed in a series: in a word, we create for them a fourth dimension of 
space, which we call homogeneous time, and which enables the movement 
of rhe pendulum , although taking place at one spot, to be continually set in 
juxtaposition to itself. Now, if we try to determine the exact part played by 
the real and the imaginary in this very complex process, this is what we find. 
There is a real space, without duration, in which phenomena appear and 
disappear simultaneously with our states of consciousness. There is a real 
duration, rhe heterogeneous moments of which permeate one another; each 
moment, however, can be brought into relation with a state of the external 
world which is contemporaneous with it, and can be separated from the other 
moments in consequence of this very process. The comparison of these two 
realities gives rise to a symbolical representation of duration, derived from 
space. Duration thus assumes the illusory form of a homogeneous medium, 
and the connecting link between these two terms, space and duration, is 
simultaneity, which might be defined as the intersection of time and space. 
If we analyse in the same way the concept of motion, the living symbol of 
this seemingly homogeneous duration, we shall be led to make a distinction 
of the same kind. We generally say that a movement takes place in space, and 
when we assert that motion is homogeneous and divisible, it is of the space 
traversed that we are thinking, as if it were interchangeable with the motion 
itself. Now, if we reflect further, we shall see that the successive positions of 
the moving body really do occupy space, but that the process by which it 
passes from one position to the other, a process which occupies duration and 
which has no reality except for a conscious spectator, eludes space. We have 
to do here not with an object but with a progress: motion, in so far as it is a 
passage from one point to another, is a mental synthesis, a psychic and there­
fore unextended process. Space contains only parts of space, and at whatever 
point of space we consider the moving body, we shall get only a position. 
If consciousness is aware of anything more than positions, the reason is that it 
keeps the successive positions in mind and synthesizes them. Bur how does 
it carry out a synthesis of this kind? It cannot be by a fresh setting out of these 
same positions in a homogeneous medium, for a fresh synthesis would be 
necessary to connect the positions with one another, and so on indefinitely. 
We are thus compelled to admit that we have here to do with a synthesis 

The Idea of Duration 
65 
which is, so to speak, qualitative, a gradual organization of our successive 
sensations, a unity resembling that of a phrase in a melody. This is just the 
idea of motion which we form when we think of it by itself, when, so to 
speak, from motion we extract mobility. Think of what you experience on 
suddenly perceiving a shooting star: in this extremely rapid motion there is a 
natural and instinctive separation between the space traversed, which appears 
to you under the form of a line of fire, and the absolutely indivisible sensation 
of motion or mobility. A rapid gesture, made with one's eyes shut, will 
assume for consciousness the form of a purely qualitative sensation as long as 
there is no thought of the space traversed. In a word, there are two elements 
to be distinguished in motion, the space traversed and the act by which we 
traverse it, the successive positions and the synthesis of these positions. The 
first of these elements is a homogeneous quantity: the second has no reality 
except in a consciousness: it is a quality or an intensity, whichever you prefer. 
But here again we meet with a case of endosmosis, an intermingling of the 
purely intensive sensation of mobility with the extensive representation of 
the space traversed. On the one hand we attribute to the motion the divisi­
bility of the space which it traverses, forgetting that it is quite possible to 
divide an object, but not an act: and on the other hand we accustom 
ourselves to projecting this act itself into space, to applying it to the whole of 
the line which the moving body traverses, in a word, to solidifying it: as if 
this localizing of a progress in space did not amount to asserting that, even 
outside consciousness, the past co-exists along with the present! 
It is to this confusion between motion and the space traversed that the 
paradoxes of the Eleatics are due; for the interval which separates two points 
is infinitely divisible, and if motion consisted of parts like those of the 
interval itself, the interval would never be crossed. But the truth is that each 
of Achilles' steps is a simple indivisible act, and that, after a given number of 
these acts, Achilles will have passed the tortoise. The mistake of the Eleatics 
arises from their identification of this series of acts, each of which is of a 
definite kind and indivisible, with the homogeneous space which underlies 
them. As this space can be divided and put together again according to any 
law whatever, they think they are justified in reconstructing Achilles' whole 
movement, not with Achilles' kind of step, but with the tortoise's kind: in 
place of Achilles pursuing the tortoise they really put two tortoises, regulated 
by each other, two tortoises which agree to make the same kind of steps or 
simultaneous acts, so as never to catch one another. Why does Achilles 
outstrip the tortoise? Because each of Achilles' steps and each of the tortoise's 
steps are indivisible acts in so far as they are movements, and are different 
magnitudes in so far as they are space: so that addition will soon give a 
greater length for the space traversed by Achilles than is obtained by adding 
together the space traversed by the tortoise and the handicap with which 
it started. This is what Zeno leaves out of account when he reconstructs 
the movement of Achilles according to the same law as the movement of the 

66 
Time and Free Will 
tortoise, forgetting that space alone can be divided and put together again in 
any way we like, and rhus confusing space with motion. Hence we do not 
think it necessary to admit, even after the acute and profound analysis of a 
contemporary thinker, 5 that the meeting of the two moving bodies implies a 
discrepancy berween real and imaginary motion, berween space in itself and 
indefinitely divisible space, berween concrete time and abstract time. Why 
resort to a metaphysical hypothesis, however ingenious, about the nature of 
space, time, and motion, when immediate intuition shows us motion within 
duration, and duration outside space? There is no need to assume a limit to 
the divisibility of concrete space; we can admit that it is infinitely divisible, 
provided that we make a distinction between the simultaneous positions of 
the two moving bodies, which are in fact in space, and their movements, 
which cannot occupy space, being duration rather than extent, quality and 
not quantity. To measure the velocity of a movement, as we shaii see, is 
simply to ascertain a simultaneity; to introduce this velocity into calculations 
is simply to use a convenient means of anticipating a simultaneity. Thus 
mathematics confines itself to its own province as long as it is occupied with 
determining the simultaneous positions of Achilles and the tortoise at a 
given moment, or when it admits a priori that the rwo moving bodies meet 
at a point X - a meeting which is itself a simultaneity. But it goes beyond 
its province when it claims to reconstruct what takes place in the interval 
berween two simultaneities; or rather it is inevitably led, even then, to 
consider simultaneities once more, fresh simultaneities, the indefinitely 
increasing number of which ought to be a warning that we cannot make 
movement out of immobilities, nor time out of space. In short, just as noth­
ing will be found homogeneous in duration except a symbolical medium with 
no duration at all, namely space, in which simultaneities are set out in line, in 
the same way no homogeneous element will be found in motion except that 
which least belongs to it, the traversed space, which is motionless. 
Now, just for this reason, science cannot deal with time and motion except 
on condition of first eliminating the essential and qualitative element -
of time, duration, and of motion, mobility. We may easily convince our­
selves of this by examining the part played in astronomy and mechanics by 
considerations of time, motion, and velocity. 
Treatises on mechanics are careful ro announce that they do not intend to 
define duration itself but only the equality of two durations. 'Two intervals of 
time are equal when rwo identical bodies, in identical conditions at the 
beginning of each of these intervals and subject to the same actions and 
influences of every kind, have traversed the same space at the end of these 
intervals.' In other words, we are to note the exact moment at which the 
motion begins, i.e. the coincidence of an external change with one of our 
psychic states: we are to note the moment at which the motion ends, that is to 
say, another simultaneity; finally we are to measure the space traversed, the 
only thing, in fact, which is really measurable. Hence there is no question 

The Idea of Duration 
67 
here of duration, bur only of space and simultaneities. To announce that 
something will take place at the end of a time t is to declare that consciousness 
will note between now and then a number t of simultaneities of a certain 
kind. And we must not be led astray by the words 'between now and then,' 
for the interval of duration exists only for us and on account of the 
interpenetration of our conscious states. Outside ourselves we should find 
only space, and consequently nothing but simultaneities, of which we could 
not even say that they are objectively successive, since succession can only be 
thought through comparing the present with the past. - That the interval of 
duration itself cannot be taken into account by science is proved by the fact 
that, if all the motions of the universe took place twice or thrice as quickly, 
there would be nothing to alter either in our formulae or in the figures which 
are to be found in rhem. Consciousness would have an indefinable and as it 
were qualitative impression of the change, but the change would not make 
itself felt outside consciousness, since the same number of simultaneities 
would go on taking place in space. We shall see, later on, that when the 
astronomer predicts, e.g., an eclipse, he does something of this kind: he 
shortens infinitely the intervals of duration, as these do not count for science, 
and rhus perceives in a very short time - a few seconds at the most - a suc­
cession of simultaneities which may take up several centuries for rhe concrete 
consciousness, compelled to live through the intervals instead of merely 
counting their extremities. 
A direct analysis of the notion of velocity will bring us to the same con­
clusion. Mechanics gets this notion through a series of ideas, the connexion of 
which it is easy enough to uace. It first builds up the idea of uniform motion 
by picturing, on the one hand, the path AB of a certain moving body, and, on 
the other, a physical phenomenon which is repeated indefinitely under the 
same conditions, e.g., a srone always falling from the same height on ro 
the same spot. If we mark on the path AB the points M, N, P . . .  reached by 
the moving body at each of the moments when the stone touches the 
ground, and if the intervals AM, MN and NP are found to be equal to one 
another, the motion will be said to be uniform: and any one of these 
intervals will be called the velocity of the moving body, provided that it is 
agreed to adopt as unit of duration the physical phenomenon which has 
been chosen as the term of comparison. Thus, the velocity of a uniform 
motion is defined by mechanics without appealing to any other notions than 
those of space and simultaneity. Now let us turn to the case of a variable 
motion, that is, to rhe case when rhe elements AM, MN, NP . . .  are found 
to be unequal. In order ro define the velocity of the moving body A at the 
point M, we shall only have to imagine an unlimited number of moving 
bodies A1 , A2, A3 . . .  all moving uniformly with velocities V1, V2, V3 
.
.
•
 
which are arranged, e.g., in an ascending scale and which correspond to all 
possible magnitudes. Let us then consider on the path of the moving body A 
two points M' and M", situated on either side of the point M but very near 

68 
Time and Free Will 
ir. At the same time as this moving body reaches the points M', M, M", the 
other moving bodies reach points M; M1 M݄', M݅M2M݆ . . .  on their 
respective paths; and there must be two moving bodies Ah and Ap such 
that we have on the one hand M'M = M݇Mh and on the other hand 
MM" = MPM. We shalf then agree to say that the velocity of the moving 
body A at the point M lies between Vh and v,. But nothing prevents our 
assuming that the points M' and M" are still nearer the point M, and it will 
rhen be necessary to replace Vh and VP by two fresh velocities V1 and Vn , the 
one greater than V" and rhe other less than Vr And in proportion as we 
reduce the two intervals M'M and MM", we shall lessen the difference 
between the velocities of the uniform corresponding movements. Now, the 
two intervals being capable of decreasing right down to zero, there evidently 
exists between VI and V, a certain velocity Vm , such that the differ­
ence between this velocity and Vh, VI . . .  on the one hand, and VP' Vn, . . .  
on the other, can become smaller than any given quantity. It is this com­
mon limit V,., which we shall call the velocity of the moving body A at the 
point M. - Now, in this analysis of variable motion, as in that of uniform 
motion, it is a question only of spaces once traversed and of simultaneous 
positions once reached. We were rhus justified in saying that, while all that 
mechanics retains of time is simultaneity, all that it retains of motion itself ­
restricted, as it is, to a measurement of motion - is immobility. 
This result might have been foreseen by noticing that mechanics neces­
sarily deals with equations, and that an algebraic equation always expresses 
something already done. Now, it is of the very essence of duration and 
motion, as they appear to our consciousness, to be something that is unceas­
ingly being done; rhus algebra can represent the results gained at a certain 
moment of duration and the positions occupied by a certain moving body in 
space, bur not duration and motion themselves. Mathematics may, indeed, 
increase the number of simultaneities and positions which it takes into con­
sideration by making the intervals very small: it may even, by using the 
differential instead of the difference, show that it is possible to increase 
without limit the number of these intervals of duration. Nevertheless, how­
ever small the interval is supposed co be, it is the extremity of the interval at 
which mathematics always places itself. As for the interval itself, as for the 
duration and the motion, they are necessarily left out of the equation. The 
reason is that duration and motion are mental syntheses, and not objects; 
that, although the moving body occupies, one after the other, points on a 
line, motion itself has nothing to do with a line; and finally that, although 
the positions occupied by the moving body vary with the different moments 
of duration, though it even creates distinct moments by the mere fact of 
occupying different positions, duration properly so called has no moments 
which are identical or external to one another, being essentially hetero­
geneous, continuous, and with no analogy to number. 

The Idea of Duration 
69 
It follows from this analysis that space alone is homogeneous, that objects 
in space form a discrete multiplicity, and that every discrete multiplicity is 
got by a process of unfolding in space. It also follows that there is neither 
duration nor even succession in space, if we give to these words the meaning 
in which consciousness takes them: each of the so-called successive states of 
the external world exists alone; their multiplicity is real only for a conscious­
ness that can first retain them and then set them side by side by externalising 
them in relation to one another. If it retains them, it is because these distinct 
states of the external world give rise to states of consciousness which 
permeate one another, imperceptibly organize themselves into a whole, and 
bind the past to the present by this very process of connexion. If it exter­
nalises them in relation to one another, the reason is that, thinking of their 
radical distinctness (the one having ceased to be when the other appears on 
the scene), it perceives them under the form of a discrete multiplicity, which 
amounts to setting them out in line, in the space in which each of them 
existed separately. The space employed for this purpose is just that which is 
called homogeneous time. 
But another conclusion results from this analysis, namely, that the 
multiplicity of conscious states, regarded in its original purity, is not at all like 
the discrete multiplicity which goes to form a number. In such a case there is, 
as we said, a qualitative multiplicity. In short, we must admit two kinds of 
multiplicity, two possible senses of the word 'distinguish,' two conceptions, 
the one qualitative and the other quantitative, of the difference between same 
and other. Sometimes this multiplicity, this distinctness, this heterogeneity 
contains number only potemially, as Aristotle would have said. Conscious­
ness, then, makes a qualitative discrimination without any further thought 
of counting the qualities or even of distinguishing them as set,eral. In such a 
case we have multiplicity without quamity. Sometimes, on the other hand, it 
is a question of a multiplicity of terms which are counted or which are con­
ceived as capable of being counted; but we think then of the possibility of 
externalising them in relation to one another, we set them out in space. 
Unfortunately, we are so accustomed to illusrrate one of these two meanings 
of the same word by the other, and even to perceive the one in the other, 
that we find it extraordinarily difficult to distinguish between them or at 
least to express this distinction in words. Thus I said that several conscious 
states are organized into a whole, permeate one another, gradually gain a 
richer content, and might thus give any one ignorant of space the feeling of 
pure duration; but the very use of the word 'several' shows that I had already 
isolated these states, externalised them in relation to one another, and, in a 
word, set them side by side; thus, by the very language which I was com­
pelled to use, I betrayed the deeply ingrained habit of setting out time in 
space. From this spatial setting out, already accomplished, we are compelled 
to borrow the terms which we use to describe the state of a mind which has 

70 
Time and Free Will 
not yet accomplished it: these terms are thus misleading from the very 
beginning, and the idea of a multiplicity without relation to number or 
space, although clear for pure reflective thought, cannot be translated into 
the language of common sense. And yet we cannot even form the idea 
of discrete multiplicity without considering at the same time a qualitative 
multiplicity. When we explicitly count units by stringing them along a spatial 
line, is it not the case that, alongside this addition of identical terms standing 
out from a homogeneous background, an organization of these units is going 
on in the depths of the soul, a wholly dynamic process, not unlike the purely 
qualitative way in which an anvil, if it could feel, would realize a series of 
blows from a hammer? In this sense we might almost say that the numbers in 
daily use have each their emotional equivalent. Tradesmen are well aware 
of it, and instead of indicating the price of an object by a round number of 
shillings, they will mark the next smaller number, leaving themselves to insert 
afterwards a sufficient number of pence and farthings. In a word, the process 
by which we count units and make them into a discrete multiplicity has two 
sides; on the one hand we assume that they are identical, which is conceivable 
only on condition that these units are ranged alongside each other in a 
homogeneous medium; bur on the other hand the third unit, for example, 
when added to the other two, alters the nature, the appearance and, as it were, 
the rhythm of the whole; without this interpenetration and this, so to speak, 
qualitative progress, no addition would be possible. Hence it is through 
the quality of quantity that we form the idea of quantity without quality. 
It is therefore obvious that if it did not betake itself to a symbolical 
substitute, our consciousness would never regard time as a homogeneous 
medium, in which the terms of a succession remain outside one another. But 
we naturally reach this symbolical representation by the mere fact that, in a 
series of identical terms, each term assumes a double aspect for our con­
sciousness: one aspect which is the same for all of them, since we are thinking 
then of the sameness of the external object, and another aspect which is 
characteristic of each of them, because the supervening of each term brings 
about a new organization of the whole. Hence the possibility of setting out in 
space, under the form of numerical multiplicity, what we have called a quali­
tative multiplicity, and of regarding the one as the equivalent of the other. 
Now, this twofold process is nowhere accomplished so easily as in the percep­
tion of the external phenomenon which takes for us the form of motion. Here 
we certainly have series of identical terms, since it is always the same moving 
body; but, on the other hand, the synthesis carried out by our consciousness 
between the actual position and what our memory calls the former positions, 
causes these images to permeate, complete, and, so to speak, continue one 
another. Hence, it is principally by the help of motion that duration assumes 
the form of a homogeneous medium, and that time is projected into space. 
But, even if we leave out motion, any repetition of a well-marked external 

The Idea of Duration 
7 1  
phenomenon would suggest to consciousness the same mode of representa­
tion. Thus, when we hear a series of blows of a hammer, the sounds form an 
indivisible melody in so far as they are pure sensations, and, here again, give 
rise to a dynamic progress; bur, knowing that the same objective cause is at 
work, we cur up this progress into phases which we then regard as identical; 
and this multiplicity of elements no longer being conceivable except by being 
set out in space, since they have now become identical, we are necessarily led 
to the idea of a homogeneous time, the symbolical image of real duration. In 
a word, our ego comes in contact with the external world at its surface; our 
successive sensations, although dissolving into one another, retain something 
of the mutual externality which belongs to their objective causes; and thus our 
superficial psychic life comes to be pictured without any great effort as set out 
in a homogeneous medium. But the symbolical character of such a picture 
becomes more striking as we advance further into the depths of conscious­
ness: the deep-seated self which ponders and decides, which heats and blazes 
up, is a self whose states and changes permeate one another and undergo a 
deep alteration as soon as we separate them from one another in order to set 
them out in space. But as this deeper self forms one and the same person with 
the superficial ego, the two seem co endure in the same way. And as the 
repeated picture of one identical objective phenomenon, ever recurring, cuts 
up our superficial psychic life into parts external to one another, the moments 
which are thus determined determine in their turn distinct segments in the 
dynamic and undivided progress of our more personal conscious states. Thus 
the mutual externality which material objects gain from their juxtaposition in 
homogeneous space reverberates and spreads into the depths of conscious­
ness: litrle by little our sensations are distinguished from one another like the 
external causes which gave rise to them, and our feelings or ideas come to be 
separated like the sensations with which they are contemporaneous. 
That our ordinary conception of duration depends on a gradual incursion 
of space into the domain of pure consciousness is proved by the fact that, in 
order to deprive the ego of the faculty of perceiving a homogeneous time, it 
is enough to take away from it this outer circle of psychic states which it uses 
as a balance-wheel. These conditions are realized when we dream; for sleep, 
by relaxing the play of the organic functions, alters the communicating 
surface between the ego and eX£ernal objects. Here we no longer measure 
duration, but we feel it; from quantity it remrns co the state of quality; we 
no longer estimate past time mathematically: the mathematical estimate 
gives place to a confused instinct, capable, like all instincts, of committing 
gross errors, bur also of acting at times with extraordinary skill. Even in the 
waking state, daily experience ought to teach us to distinguish between dura­
tion as quality, that which consciousness reaches immediately and which is 
probably what animals perceive, and time so to speak materialized, time that 
has become quantity by being set out in space. Whilst I am writing these 

72 
Time and Free Will 
lines, the hour strikes on a neighbouring clock, but my inattentive ear does 
not perceive it until several strokes have made themselves heard. Hence I 
have not counted them; and yet I only have to turn my attention backwards 
to count up the four strokes which have already sounded and add them to 
those which I hear. If, then, I question myself carefully on what has just 
taken place, I perceive that the first four sounds had struck my ear and even 
affected my consciousness, but that the sensations produced by each one of 
them, instead of being set side by side, had melted into one another in such 
a way as to give the whole a peculiar quality, to make a kind of musical 
phrase out of it. In order, then, to estimate retrospectively the number of 
strokes sounded, I tried to reconstruct this phrase in thought: my imagi­
nation made one stroke, then two, then three, and as long as it did not reach 
the exact number four, my feeling, when consulted, answered that the total 
effect was qualitatively different. It had thus ascertained in its own way the 
succession of four strokes, but quite otherwise than by a process of addition, 
and without bringing in the image of a juxtaposition of distinct terms. In a 
word, the number of strokes was perceived as a quality and not as a quantity: 
it is thus that duration is presented to immediate consciousness, and it 
retains this form so long as it does not give place to a symbolical represen­
tation derived from extensity. 
We should therefore distinguish two forms of multiplicity, two very 
different ways of regarding duration, two aspects of conscious life. Below 
homogeneous duration, which is the extensive symbol of true duration, 
a close psychological analysis distinguishes a duration whose heterogeneous 
moments permeate one another; below the numerical multiplicity of con­
scious states, a qualitative multiplicity; below the self with well-defined states, 
a self in which succeeding each other means melting into one another and for­
ming an organic whole. But we are generally content with the first, i.e. with 
the shadow of the self projected into homogeneous space. Consciousness, 
goaded by an insatiable desire to separate, substitutes the symbol for the 
reality, or perceives the reality only through the symbol. As the self thus 
refracted, and thereby broken to pieces, is much better adapted to the 
requirements of social life in general and language in particular, conscious­
ness prefers it, and gradually loses sight of the fundamental self. 
In order to recover this fundamental self, as the unsophisticated con­
sciousness would perceive it, a vigorous effort of analysis is necessary, which 
will isolate the fluid inner states from their image, first refracted, then 
solidified in homogeneous space. In other words, our perceptions, sensations, 
emotions and ideas occur under two aspects: rhe one clear and precise, but 
impersonal; the other confused, ever changing, and inexpressible, because 
language cannot get hold of it without arresting irs mobility or fit it into its 
common-place forms without making it into public property. If we have been 
led to distinguish two forms of multiplicity, rwo forms of duration, we must 
expect each conscious state, taken by itself, to assume a different aspect 

The Idea of Duration 
73 
according as we consider it within a discrete multiplicity or a confused 
multiplicity, in the time as quality, in which it is produced, or in the time as 
quantity, into which it is projected. 
When e.g. I take my first walk in a town in which I am going to live, my 
environment produces on me two impressions at the same time, one of 
which is destined to last while the other will constantly change. Every day I 
perceive the same houses, and as I know that they are the same objects, 
I always call them by the same name and I also fancy that they always look 
the same to me. But if I recur, at the end of a sufficiently long period, to the 
impression which I experienced during the first few years, I am surprised at 
the remarkable, inexplicable, and indeed inexpressible change which has 
taken place. It seems that these objects, continually perceived by me and 
constantly impressing themselves on my mind, have ended by borrowing 
from me something of my own conscious existence; like myself they have 
lived, and like myself they have grown old. This is not a mere illusion; for if 
to-day's impression were absolutely identical with that of yesterday, what 
difference would there be between perceiving and recognizing, between 
learning and remembering? Yet this difference escapes the attention of most 
of us; we shall hardly perceive it, unless we are warned of it and then carefully 
look into ourselves. The reason is that our outer and, so to speak, social life 
is more practically important to us than our inner and individual existence. 
We instinctively tend to solidifY our impressions in order to express them in 
language. Hence we confuse the feeling itself, which is in a perpetual state of 
becoming, with its permanent external object, and especially with the word 
which expresses this object. In the same way as the fleeting duration of our 
ego is fixed by its projection in homogeneous space, our constantly changing 
impressions, wrapping themselves round the external object which is their 
cause, take on its definite outlines and its immobility. 
Our simple sensations, taken in their natural state, are still more fleeting. 
Such and such a flavour, such and such a scent, pleased me when I was a 
child though I dislike them to-day. Yet I still give the same name to the 
sensation experienced, and I speak as if only my taste had changed, whilst 
the scent and the flavour have remained the same. Thus I again solidifY the 
sensation; and when its changeableness becomes so obvious that I cannot 
help recognizing it, I abstract this changeableness to give it a name of its own 
and solidifY it in the shape of a taste. But in reality there are neither identical 
sensations nor multiple tastes: for sensations and tastes seem to me to be 
objects as soon as I isolate and name them, and in the human soul there are 
only processes. What I ought to say is that every sensation is altered by 
repetition, and that if it does not seem to me to change from day to day, it is 
because I perceive it through the object which is its cause, through the word 
which translates it. This influence of language on sensation is deeper than is 
usually thought. Not only does language make us believe in the unchange­
ableness of our sensations, but it will sometimes deceive us as to the nature of 

74 
Time and Free Will 
the sensation felt. Thus, when I partake of a dish that is supposed to be 
exquisite, the name which it bears, suggestive of the approval given to it, 
comes between my sensation and my consciousness; I may believe that the 
flavour pleases me when a slight effort of attention would prove the contrary. 
In short, the word with well-defined outlines, the rough and ready word, 
which stores up the stable, common, and consequently impersonal element in 
the impressions of mankind, overwhelms or at least covers over the delicate 
and fugitive impressions of our individual consciousness. To maintain the 
struggle on equal terms, the latter ought to express themselves in precise 
words; but these words, as soon as they were formed, would turn against the 
sensation which gave birth to them, and, invented to show that the sensation 
is unstable, they would impose on it their own stability. 
This overwhelming of the immediate consciousness is nowhere so striking 
as in the case of our feelings. A violent love or a deep melancholy takes 
possession of our soul: here we feel a thousand different elements which 
dissolve into and permeate one another without any precise outlines, without 
the least tendency to exrernalise themselves in relation to one another; hence 
their originality. We distort them as soon as we distinguish a numerical 
multiplicity in their confused mass: what will it be, rhen, when we set them 
our, isolated from one another, in this homogeneous medium which may be 
called either time or space, whichever you prefer? A moment ago each of 
them was borrowing an indefinable colour from its surroundings: now we 
have it colourless, and ready to accept a name. The feeling itself is a being 
which lives and develops and is therefore constantly changing; otherwise how 
could it gradually lead us to form a resolution? Our resolution would be 
immediately taken. But it lives because the duration in which it develops is a 
duration whose moments permeate one another. By separating these 
moments from each other, by spreading out time in space, we have caused 
this feeling to lose its life and its colour. Hence, we are now standing before 
our own shadow: we believe that we have analysed our feeling, while we have 
really replaced it by a juxtaposition of lifeless states which can be translated 
into words, and each of which constitutes the common element, the 
impersonal residue, of the impressions felt in a given case by rhe whole of 
society. And this is why we reason about these states and apply our simple 
logic to them: having set them up as genera by the mere fact of having isolated 
them from one another, we have prepared them for use in some future 
deduction. Now, if some bold novelist, rearing aside the cleverly woven 
curtain of our conventional ego, shows us under this appearance of logic a 
fundamental absurdity, under this juxtaposition of simple states an infinite 
permeation of a thousand different impressions which have already ceased to 
exist the instant they are named, we commend him for having known us 
better than we knew ourselves. This is not the case, however, and the very fact 
that he spreads out our feeling in a homogeneous time, and expresses its 
elements by words, shows that he in his turn is only offering us its shadow: 

The Idea of Duration 
75 
but he has arranged this shadow in such a way as to make us suspect the 
extraordinary and illogical nature of the object which projects it; he has made 
us reflect by giving outward expression to something of that contradiction, 
that interpenetration, which is the very essence of the elements expressed. 
Encouraged by him, we have put aside for an instant the veil which we 
interposed between our consciousness and ourselves. He has brought us back 
mto our own presence. 
We should experience the same sort of surprise if we strove to seize our 
ideas themselves in their natural state, as our consciousness would perceive 
them if it were no longer beset by space. This breaking up of the constituent 
elements of an idea, which issues in abstraction, is roo convenient for us to 
do without it in ordinary life and even in philosophical discussion. But when 
we fancy that the parts thus artificially separated are the genuine threads with 
which the concrete idea was woven, when, substituting for the interpenetra­
tion of the real terms the juxtaposition of their symbols, we claim to make 
duration out of space, we unavoidably fall into the mistakes of association­
ism. We shall not insist on the latter point, which will be rhe subject of a 
thorough examination in the next chapter. Let it be enough to say that the 
impulsive zeal with which we take sides on certain questions shows how our 
intellect has its instincts - and what can an instinct of this kind be if not an 
impetus common to all our ideas, i.e. their very interpenetration? The beliefs 
to which we most strongly adhere are those of which we should find it most 
difficult to give an account, and the reasons by which we justify them are 
seldom those which have led us to adopt them. In a certain sense we have 
adopted them without any reason, for what makes them valuable in our eyes 
is that they match the colour of all our other ideas, and that from the very first 
we have seen in them something of ourselves. Hence they do not take in our 
minds that common-looking form which they will assume as soon as we try 
to give expression to them in words; and, although they bear the same name 
in other minds, they are by no means the same thing. The fact is that each of 
them has the same kind of life as a cell in an organism: everything which 
affects the general state of the self affects it also. But while the cell occupies a 
definite point in the organism, an idea which is truly ours fills the whole of 
our self. Not all our ideas, however, are thus incorporated in the fluid mass 
of our conscious states. Many float on the surface, like dead leaves on the 
water of a pond: the mind, when it thinks them over and over again, finds 
them ever the same, as if they were external to it. Among these are the ideas 
which we receive ready made, and which remain in us without ever being 
properly assimilated, or again the ideas which we have omitted to cherish 
and which have withered in neglect. If, in proportion as we get away from 
the deeper strata of the self, our conscious states rend more and more to 
assume the form of a numerical multiplicity, and to spread out in a homo­
geneous space, it is just because these conscious states tend to become more 
and more lifeless, more and more impersonal. Hence we need not be 

76 
Time and Free Will 
surprised if only those ideas which least belong to us can be adequately 
expressed in words: only to these, as we shall see, does the associationist 
theory apply. External to one another, they keep up relations among 
themselves in which the inmost nature of each of them counts for nothing, 
relations which can therefore be classified. It may thus be said that they are 
associated by contiguity or for some logical reason. But if, digging below the 
surface of contact between the self and external objects, we penetrate into 
the depths of the organized and living intelligence, we shall witness the 
joining together or rather the blending of many ideas which, when once 
dissociated, seem to exclude one another as logically contradictory terms. The 
strangest dreams, in which two images overlie one another and show us at 
the same time two different persons, who yet make only one, will hardly give 
us an idea of the interweaving of concepts which goes on when we are awake. 
The imagination of the dreamer, cut off from the external world, imitates 
with mere images, and parodies in its own way, the process which constantly 
goes on with regard to ideas in the deeper regions of the intellectual life. 
Thus may be verified, rhus, too, will be illustrated by a further study 
of deep-seated psychic phenomena, the principle from which we started: 
conscious life displays two aspects according as we perceive it directly or 
by refraction through space. Considered in themselves, the deep-seated 
conscious states have no relation to quantity, they are pure quality; they inter­
mingle in such a way that we cannot tell whether they are one or several, nor 
even examine them from this point of view without at once altering their 
nature. The duration which they thus create is a duration whose moments do 
not constitute a numerical multiplicity: to characterize these moments by 
saying that they encroach on one another would still be to distinguish them. 
If each of us lived a purely individual life, if there were neither society nor 
language, would our consciousness grasp the series of inner states in this 
unbroken form? Undoubtedly it would not quite succeed, because we should 
still retain the idea of a homogeneous space in which objects are sharply 
distinguished from one another, and because it is too convenient to set out in 
such a medium the somewhat cloudy states which first attract the attention 
of consciousness, in order to resolve them imo simpler terms. But mark that 
the intuition of a homogeneous space is already a step towards social life. 
Probably animals do not picture to themselves, beside their sensations, as we 
do, an external world quite distinct from themselves, which is the common 
property of all conscious beings. Our tendency to form a dear picture of this 
externality of things and the homogeneity of their medium is the same as the 
impulse which leads us to live in common and to speak. But, in proportion as 
the conditions of social life are more completely realized, the current which 
carries our conscious states from within outwards is strengthened; little by 
little these states are made into objects or things; they break off not only from 
one another, but from ourselves. Henceforth we no longer perceive them 
except in the homogeneous medium in which we have set their image, and 

The Idea of Duration 
77 
through the word which lends them its commonplace colour. Thus a second 
self is formed which obscures the first, a self whose existence is made up of 
distinct moments, whose states are separated from one another and easily 
expressed in words. I do not mean, here, to split up the personality, nor to 
bring back in another form the numerical multiplicity which I shut out at the 
beginning. It is the same self which perceives distinct states at first, and which, 
by afterwards concentrating its attention, will see these states melt into one 
another like the crystals of a snow-flake when touched for some time with the 
finger. And, in truth, for the sake of language, the self has everything to gain 
by not bringing back confusion where order reigns, and in not upsetting this 
ingenious arrangement of almost impersonal states by which it has ceased to 
form 'a kingdom within a kingdom.' An inner life with well distinguished 
moments and with clearly characterized states will answer better the require­
ments of social life. Indeed, a superficial psychology may be content with 
describing it without thereby falling into error, on condition, however, that it 
restricts itself to the study of what has taken place and leaves out what is going 
on. But if, passing from statics to dynamics, this psychology claims to reason 
about things in the making as it reasoned about things made, if it offers us the 
concrete and living self as an association of terms which are distinct from one 
another and are set side by side in a homogeneous medium, it will see 
difficulty after difficulty rising in irs path. And these difficulties will multiply 
the greater the efforts it makes to overcome them, for all its efforts will only 
bring into clearer light the absurdity of the fundamental hypothesis by which 
it spreads out time in space and puts succession at the very centre of 
simultaneity. We shall see that the contradictions implied in the problems 
of causality, freedom, personality, spring from no other source, and that, if 
we wish to get rid of them, we have only to go back to the real and concrete 
self and give up its symbolical substitute. 


Matter and Memory 


Introduction 1 
This book affirms the reality of spirit and the reality of matter, and tries to 
determine the relation of the one to the other by the study of a definite 
example, that of memory. It is, then, frankly dualistic. But, on the other 
hand, it deals with body and mind in such a way as, we hope, to lessen 
greatly, if not to overcome, the theoretical difficulties which have always 
beset dualism, and which cause it, though suggested by the immediate 
verdict of consciousness and adopted by common sense, to be held in small 
honour among philosophers. 
These difficulties are due, for the most part, to the conception, now 
realistic, now idealistic, which philosophers have of matter. The aim of our 
first chapter is to show that realism and idealism both go too far, that it is a 
mistake to reduce matter to the perception which we have of it, a mistake also 
to make of it a thing able to produce in us perceptions, but in itself of another 
nature than they. Matter, in our view, is an aggregate of 'images.' And by 
'image' we mean a certain existence which is more than that which the idealist 
calls a representation, but less than that which the realist calls a thing - an 
existence placed halfway between the 'thing' and the 'representation.' This 
conception of matter is simply that of common sense. It would greatly 
astonish a man unaware of the speculations of philosophy if we told him that 
the object before him, which he sees and touches, exists only in his mind and 
for his mind or even, more generally, exists only for mind, as Berkeley held. 
Such a man would always maintain that the object exists independently of the 
consciousness which perceives it. But, on the other hand, we should astonish 
him quite as much by telling him that the object is entirely different from that 
which is perceived in it, that it has neither the colour ascribed to it by the eye 
nor the resistance found in it by the hand. The colour, the resistance, are, for 
him, in the object: they are not states of our mind; they are part and parcel of 
an existence really independent of our own. For common sense, then, the 
object exists in itself, and, on the other hand, the object is, in itself, pictorial, 
as we perceive it: image it is, but a self-existing image. 
This is just the sense in which we use the word image in our first chapter. 
We place ourselves at the point of view of a mind unaware of the disputes 
between philosophers. Such a mind would naturally believe that matter 
exists just as it is perceived; and, since it is perceived as an image, the mind 
would make of it, in itself, an image. In a word, we consider matter before 

82 
Matter and Memory 
the dissociation which idealism and realism have brought about between its 
existence and its appearance. No doubt it has become difficult to avoid this 
dissociation now chat philosophers have made it. To forget it, however, is 
what we ask of the reader. If, in the course of this first chapter, objections 
arise in his mind against any of the views that we put forward, let him ask 
himself whether these objections do not imply his return to one or the other 
of the two points of view above which we urge him to rise. 
Philosophy made a great step forward on the day when Berkeley proved, 
as against the 'mechanical philosophers,' that the secondary qualities of 
matter have at least as much reality as the primary qualities. His mistake lay 
in believing that, for this, it was necessary to place matter within the mind 
and make it into a pure idea. Descartes, no doubt, had put matter too far 
from us when he made it one with geometrical extensity. But, in order to 
bring it nearer to us, there was no need to go to the point of making it one 
with our own mind. Because he did go as far as this, Berkeley was unable to 
account for the success of physics, and, whereas Descartes had set up the 
mathematical relations between phenomena as their very essence, he was 
obliged to regard the mathematical order of the universe as a mere accident. 
So the Kantian criticism became necessary, to show the reason of this 
mathematical order and to give back to our physics a solid foundation -
a task in which, however, it succeeded only by limiting the range and value 
of our senses and of our understanding. The criticism of Kant, on this point 
at least, would have been unnecessary; the human mind, in this direction at 
least, would not have been led to limit its own range; metaphysics would not 
have been sacrificed to physics, if philosophy had been content to leave 
matter half way between the place to which Descartes had driven it and that 
to which Berkeley drew it back - to leave it, in fact, where it is seen by 
common sense. 
There we shall try to see it ourselves. Our first chapter defines this way of 
looking at matter; the last sets forth the consequences of such a view. But, as 
we said before, we treat of matter only in so far as it concerns the problem 
dealt with in our second and third chapters, that which is the subject of chis 
essay: the problem of the relation between soul and body. 
This relation, though it has been a favourite theme throughout the history 
of philosophy, has really been very little studied. If we leave on one side the 
theories which are content to state the 'union of soul and body' as an irre­
ducible and inexplicable fact, and those which speak vaguely of the body as 
an instrument of the soul, there remains hardly any other conception of the 
psychophysiological relation than the hypothesis of 'epiphenomenalism' or 
that of 'parallelism,' which in practice - I mean in the interpretation of par­
ticular facts - both end in the same conclusions. For whether, indeed, 
thought is regarded as a mere function of the brain and the state of con­
sciousness as an epiphenomenon of the state of the brain, or whether mental 
states and brain states are held to be two versions, in two different languages, 

Introduction 
83 
of one and the same original, in either case it is laid down that, could we 
penetrate into the inside of a brain at work and behold the dance of the 
atoms which make up the cortex, and if, on the other hand, we possessed 
the key to psychophysiology, we should know every detail of what is going 
on in the corresponding consciousness. 
This, indeed, is what is most commonly maintained by philosophers as 
well as by men of science. Yet it would be well to ask whether the facts, when 
examined without any preconceived idea, really suggest an hypothesis of this 
kind. That there is a close connection between a state of consciousness and 
the brain we do not dispute. But there is also a close connection between a 
coat and the nail on which it hangs, for, if the nail is pulled out, the coat falls 
to the ground. Shall we say, then, that the shape of the nail gives us the 
shape of the coat, or in any way corresponds to it? No more are we entitled 
to conclude, because the psychical fact is hung onto a cerebral state, that 
there is any parallelism between the two series psychical and physiological. 
When philosophy pleads that the theory of parallelism is borne out by the 
results of positive science, it enters upon an unmistakably vicious circle; for, 
if science interprets connection, which is a fact, as signifying parallelism, 
which is an hypothesis (and an hypothesis to which it is difficult to attach an 
intelligible meaning2), it does so, consciously or unconsciously, for reasons 
of a philosophic order: it is because science has been accustomed by a certain 
type of philosophy to believe that there is no hypothesis more probable, 
more in accordance with the interests of scientific inquiry. 
Now, as soon as we do, indeed, apply to positive facts for such infor­
mation as may help us to solve the problem, we find it is with memory that 
we have to deal. This was to be expected, because memory - we shall try to 
prove it in the course of this work - is just the intersection of mind and 
matter. But we may leave out the reason here: no one, at any rate, will deny 
that, among all the facts capable of throwing light on the psychophysio­
logical relation, those which concern memory, whether in the normal or in 
the pathological state, hold a privileged position. Not only is the evidence 
here extremely abundant (consider the enormous mass of observations 
collected in regard to the various kinds of aphasia), but nowhere else have 
anatomy, physiology and psychology been able to lend each other such valu­
able aid. Anyone who approaches, without preconceived ideas and on the 
firm ground of facts, the classical problem of the relations of soul and body, 
will soon see this problem as centring upon the subject of memory, and, 
even more particularly, upon the memory of words: it is from this quarter, 
undoubtedly, that will come the light which will illumine the obscurer parts 
of the problem. 
The reader will see how we try to solve it. Speaking generally, the psych­
ical state seems to us to be, in most cases, immensely wider than the cerebral 
state. I mean that the brain state indicates only a very small part of the 
mental state, that part which is capable of translating itself into movements 

84 
Matter and Memory 
of locomotion. Take a complex thought which unrolls itself in a chain of 
abstract reasoning. This thought is accompanied by images, that are at least 
nascent. And these images themselves are not pictured in consciousness 
without some foreshadowing, in the form of a sketch or a tendency, of the 
movements by which these images would be acted or played in space -
would, that is to say, impress particular attitudes upon the body, and set free 
all that they implicitly contain of spatial movement. Now, of all the thought 
which is unrolling, this, in our view, is what the cerebral state indicates at 
every moment. He who could penetrate into the interior of a brain and see 
what happens there, would probably obtain full details of these sketched-out, 
or prepared, movements; there is no proof that he would learn anything else. 
Were he endowed with a superhuman intellect, did he possess the key to 
psychophysiology, he would know no more of what is going on in the corre­
sponding consciousness than we should know of a play from the comings 
and goings of the actors upon the stage. 
That is to say, the relation of the mental to the cerebral is not a constant, 
any more than it is a simple, relation. According to the nature of the play 
that is being acted, the movements of the players tell us more or less about it: 
nearly everything, if it is a pantomime; next to nothing, if it is a delicate 
comedy. Thus our cerebral state contains more or less of our mental state in 
the measure that we reel off our psychic life into action or wind it up into 
pure knowledge. 
There are then, in short, divers tones of mental life, or, in other words, our 
psychic life may be lived at different heights, now nearer to action, now 
further removed from it, according to the degree of our attention to life. Here 
we have one of the ruling ideas of this book - the idea, indeed, which served 
as the starting point of our inquiry. That which is usually held to be a greater 
complexity of the psychical state appears to us, from our point of view, to be a 
greater dilatation of the whole personality, which, normally narrowed down 
by action, expands with the unscrewing of the vice in which it has allowed 
itself to be squeezed, and, always whole and undivided, spreads itself over a 
wider and wider surface. That which is commonly held to be a disturbance of 
the psychic life itself, an inward disorder, a disease of the personality, appears 
to us, from our point of view, to be an unloosing or a breaking of the tie 
which binds this psychic life to its motor accompaniment, a weakening or an 
impairing of our attention to outward life. This opinion, as also that which 
denies the localization of the memory-images of words and explains aphasia 
quite otherwise than by such localization, was considered paradoxical at the 
date of the first publication of the present work (1896). It will appear much 
less so now. The conception of aphasia then classical, universally admitted, 
believed to be unshakeable, has been considerably shaken in the last few years, 
chiefly by reasons of an anatomical order, but partly also by reasons of the 
same kind as those which we then advanced. 3 And the profound and original 
study of neuroses made by Professor Pierre Janet has led him, of late years, to 

Introduction 
85 
explain all psychasthenic forms of disease by these same considerations 
of psychic 'tension' and of attention to reality which were then presumed to 
be metaphysical.4 
In truth, it was not altogether a mistake to call them by that name. 
Without denying to psychology, any more than to metaphysics, the right to 
make itself into an independent science, we believe that each of these two 
sciences should set problems to the other and can, in a measure, help it to 
solve them. How should it be otherwise, if psychology has for its object the 
study of the human mind working for practical utility, and if metaphysics is 
but this same mind striving ro transcend the conditions of useful action and 
to come back to itself as to a pure creative energy? Many problems, which 
appear foreign to each other as long as we are bound by the letter of the 
terms in which these two sciences state them, are seen to be very near akin, 
and to be able to solve each other when we thus penetrate into their inner 
meaning. We little thought, at the beginning of our inquiry, that there could 
be any connection between the analytical study of memory and the question, 
which is debated between realists and idealists or between mechanists and 
dynamists, with regard to the existence or the essence of matter. Yet this 
connection is real, it is even intimate; and, if we take it into account, a 
cardinal metaphysical problem is carried into the open field of observation, 
where it may be solved progressively, instead of forever giving rise to fresh 
disputes of the schools within the closed lists of pure dialectic. The com­
plexity of some parts of the present work is due to the inevitable dovetailing 
of problems which results from approaching philosophy in such a way. But 
through this complexity, which is due to the complexity of reality itself, we 
believe that the reader will find his way if he keeps a fast hold on the two 
principles which we have used as a clue throughout our own researches. The 
first is that in psychological analysis we must never forget the utilitarian 
character of our mental functions, which are essentially turned toward 
action. The second is that the habits formed in action find their way up ro 
the sphere of speculation, where they create fictitious problems, and that 
metaphysics must begin by dispersing this artificial obscurity. 
H. BERGSON 
PARIS, 
October 1910 

Images and Bodies5 
We will assume for the moment that we know nothing of theories of matter 
and theories of spirit, nothing of the discussions as to the reality or ideality 
of the external world. Here I am in the presence of images, in the vaguest 
sense of the word, images perceived when my senses are opened to them, 
unperceived when they are closed. All these images act and react upon one 
another in all their elementary parts according to constant laws which I call 
laws of nature, and, as a perfect knowledge of these laws would probably 
allow us to calculate and to foresee what will happen in each of these images, 
the future of the images must be contained in their present and will add to 
them nothing new. 
Yet there is one of them which is distinct from all the others, in that I do 
not know it only from without by perceptions, but from within by 
affections: it is my body. I examine the conditions in which these affections 
are produced: I find that they always interpose themselves between the 
excitations that I receive from without and the movements which I am about 
to execute, as though they had some undefined influence on the final issue. 
I pass in review my different affections: it seems to me that each of them 
contains, after its kind, an invitation to act, with at the same time leave to 
wait and even to do nothing. I look closer: I find movements begun, but not 
executed, the indication of a more or less useful decision, but not that 
constraint which precludes choice. I call up, I compare my recollections: 
I remember that everywhere, in the organic world, I have thought I saw this 
same sensibility appear at the very moment when nature, having conferred 
upon the living being the power of mobility in space, gives warning to the 
species, by means of sensation, of the general dangers which threaten it, 
leaving to the individual the precautions necessary for escaping from them. 
Lastly, I interrogate my consciousness as to the part which it plays in affec­
tion: consciousness replies that it is present indeed, in the form of feeling or 
of sensation, at all the steps in which I believe that I take the initiative, and 
that it fades and disappears as soon as my activity, by becoming automatic, 
shows that consciousness is no longer needed. Therefore, either all these 
appearances are deceptive, or the act in which the affective state issues is 
not one of those which might be rigorously deduced from antecedent 
phenomena, as a movement from a movement; and, hence, it really adds 
something new to the universe and to its history. Let us hold to the 
appearances; I will formulate purely and simply what I feel and what I see: 

Images and Bodies 
87 
All seems to take place as if, in this aggregate of images which I call the universe, 
nothing really new could happen except through the medium of certain par­
ticular images, the type of which is furnished me by my body. 
I pass now to the study, in bodies similar to my own, of the structure of 
that particular image which I call my body. I perceive afferent nerves which 
transmit a disturbance to the nerve centres; then efferent nerves which start 
from the centre, conduct the disturbance to the periphery, and set in motion 
parts of the body or the body as a whole. I question the physiologist and the 
psychologist as to the purpose of both kinds. They answer that, as the 
centrifugal movements of the nervous system can call forth a movement of 
rhe body or of parts of the body, so the centripetal movements, or at least 
some of them, give birth to the representation6 of the external world. What 
are we to think of this? 
The afferent nerves are images, the brain is an image, the disturbance 
travelling through the sensory nerves and propagated in the brain is an 
image too. If the image which I term cerebral disturbance really begot 
external images, it would contain them in one way or another, and the 
representation of the whole material universe would be implied in that of 
this molecular movement. Now to state this proposition is enough to show 
its absurdity. The brain is part of the material world; the material world is 
not part of the brain. Eliminate the image which bears the name material 
world, and you destroy at the same time the brain and the cerebral 
disturbance which are parts of it. Suppose, on the contrary, that these two 
images, the brain and the cerebral disturbance, vanish: ex hypothesi you efface 
only these, that is to say very little, an insignificant detail from an immense 
picture. The picture in its totality, that is to say the whole universe, remains. 
To make of the brain the condition on which the whole image depends is, in 
truth, a contradiction in terms, since the brain is by hypothesis a part of this 
image. Neither nerves nor nerve centres can, then, condition the image of 
the universe. 
Let us consider this last point. Here are external images, then my body, 
and, lastly, the changes brought about by my body in the surrounding 
images. I see plainly how external images influence the image that I call my 
body: they transmit movement to it. And I also see how this body influences 
external images: it gives back movement to them. My body is, then, in the 
aggregate of the material world, an image which acts like other images, 
receiving and giving back movement, with, perhaps, this difference only, 
that my body appears to choose, within certain limits, the manner in which 
it shall restore what it receives. But how could my body in general, and my 
nervous system in particular, beget the whole or a part of my representation 
of the universe? You may say that my body is matter, or that it is an image: 
the word is of no importance. If it is matter, it is a part of the material world; 
and the material world, consequently, exists around it and without it. If it 
is an image, that image can give but what has been put into it, and since it is, 

88 
Matter and Memory 
by hypothesis, the image of my body only, it would be absurd to expect to 
get from it that of the whole universe. My body, an object destined to move 
other objects, is, then, a centre of action; it cannot give birth to a representation. 
But if my body is an object capable of exercising a genuine and therefore a 
new action upon the surrounding objects, it must occupy a privileged 
position in regard to them. As a rule, any image influences other images in a 
manner which is determined, and even calculable, through what are called 
the laws of nature. As it has not to choose, so neither has it any need to 
explore the region round about it, nor to try its hand at several merely 
eventual actions. The necessary action will take place automatically, when its 
hour strikes. But I have supposed that the office of the image which I call my 
body was to exercise on other images a real influence, and, consequently, to 
decide which step to take among several which are all materially possible. 
APd since these steps are probably suggested to it by the greater or lesser 
advantage which it can derive from the surrounding images, these images 
must display in some way, upon the aspect which they present to my body, 
the profit which my body can gain from them. In fact, I note that the size, 
shape, even the colour, of external objects is modified as my body 
approaches or recedes from them; that the strength of an odour, the 
intensity of a sound, increases or diminishes with distance; finally, that this 
very distance represents, above all, the measure in which surrounding bodies 
are insured, in some way, against the immediate action of my body. To the 
degree that my horizon widens, the images which surround me seem to be 
painted upon a more uniform background and become to me more 
indifferent. The more I narrow this horizon, the more the objects which it 
circumscribes space themselves out distinctly according to the greater or 
lesser ease with which my body can touch and move them. They send back, 
then, to my body, as would a mirror, its eventual influence; they take rank in 
an order corresponding to the growing or decreasing powers of my body. 
The objects which surround my body reflect its possible action upon them. 
I will now, without touching the other images, modify slightly that image 
which I call my body. In this image I cut asunder, in thought, all the afferent 
nerves of the cerebro-spinal system. What will happen? A few curs with the 
scalpel have severed a few bundles of fibres: the rest of rhe universe, and even 
the rest of my body, remain what they were before. The change effected is 
therefore insignificant. As a matter of fact, my perception has entirely 
vanished. Let us consider more closely what has just occurred. Here are the 
images which compose the universe in general, then those which are near to 
my body, and finally my body itself. In this last image the habitual office 
of the centripetal nerves is to transmit movements to the brain and to the 
cord; the centrifugal nerves send back this movement to the periphery. 
Sectioning of the centripetal nerves can, therefore, produce only one 
intelligible effect: that is, to interrupt the current which goes from the 
periphery to the periphery by way of the centre, and, consequently, to make 

Images and Bodies 
89 
it impossible for my body ro extract, from among all the things which 
surround it, the quantity and quality of movement necessary in order to act 
upon them. Here is something which concerns action, and action alone. Yet 
it is my perception which has vanished. What does this mean, if not that 
my perception displays, in the midst of the image world, as would their 
outward reflection or shadow, the eventual or possible actions of my body? 
Now the system of images in which the scalpel has effected only an insig­
nificant change is what is generally called the material world; and, on the other 
hand, that which has just vanished is 'my perception' of matter. Whence, 
provisionally, these two definitions: I call matter the aggregate of images, and 
perception of matter these same images referred to the eventual action of one 
particular image, my body. 
Let us go more deeply into this reference. I consider my body, with its 
centripetal and centrifugal nerves, with its nerve centres. I know that external 
objects make in the afferent nerves a disturbance which passes onward to the 
centres, that the centres are the theatre of very varied molecular movements, 
and that these movements depend on the nature and position of the objects. 
Change the objects, or modifY their relation ro my body, and everything is 
changed in the interior movements of my perceptive centres. But everything 
is also changed in 'my perception.' My perception is, then, a function of 
these molecular movements; it depends upon them. But how does it depend 
upon them? It will perhaps be said that it translates them, and that, in the 
main, I represent to myself nothing but the molecular movements of 
cerebral substance. But how should this have any meaning, since the image 
of the nervous system and of its internal movements is only, by hypothesis, 
that of a certain material object, whereas I represent to myself the whole 
material universe? It is true that many philosophers attempt to evade the dif­
ficulty. They show us a brain, analogous in its essence to the rest of the 
material universe, an image, consequently, if the universe is an image. Then, 
since they want the internal movements of this brain to create or determine 
the representation of the whole material world - an image infinitely greater 
than that of the cerebral vibrations - they maintain that these molecular 
movements, and movement in general, are not images like others, but some­
thing which is either more or less than an image - in any case is of another 
nature than an image - and from which representation will issue as by a 
miracle. Thus matter is made into something radically different from repre­
sentation, something of which, consequently, we have no image; over against 
it they place a consciousness empty of images, of which we are unable to 
form any idea; lastly, to fill consciousness, they invent an incomprehensible 
action of this formless matter upon this matterless thought. But the truth is 
that the movements of matter are very clear, regarded as images, and that 
there is no need to look in movement for anything more than what we see 
in it. The sole difficulty would consist in bringing forth from these very 
particular images the infinite variety of representations; but why seek to do 

90 
Matter and Memory 
so, since we all agree that the cerebral vibrations are contained in the material 
world, and that these images, consequently, are only a part of the represen­
tation? What then are these movements, and what part do these particular 
images play in the representation of the whole? The answer is obvious: they 
are, within my body, the movements intended to prepare, while beginning it, 
the reaction of my body to the action of external objects. Images themselves 
cannot create images; but they indicate at each moment, like a compass that 
is being moved about, the position of a certain given image, my body, in 
relation to the surrounding images. In the totality of representation they are 
very little; but they are of capital importance for that part of representation 
which I call my body, since they foreshadow at each successive moment its 
virtual acts. There is, then, only a difference of degree - there can be no 
difference in kind - between what is called the perceptive faculty of the 
brain and the reflex functions of the spinal cord. The cord transforms into 
movements the stimulation received; the brain prolongs them into reactions 
which are merely nascent; but, in the one case as in the other, the function of 
the nerve substance is to conduct, to coordinate, or to inhibit movements. 
How then does it come about that 'my perception of the universe' appears to 
depend upon the internal movements of the cerebral substance, to change 
when they vary, and to vanish when they cease? 
The difficulty of this problem is mainly due to the fact that the grey 
matter and its modifications are regarded as things which are sufficient ro 
themselves and might be isolated from the rest of the universe. Materialists 
and dualists are fundamentally agreed on this point. They consider certain 
molecular movements of the cerebral matter apart: then, some see in our 
conscious perception a phosphorescence which follows these movements and 
illuminates their track; for others, our perceptions succeed each other like an 
unwinding scroll in a consciousness which expresses continuously, in its own 
way, the molecular vibrations of the cortical substance: in the one case, as in 
the other, our perception is supposed to translate or to picture the states of 
our nervous system. But is it possible to conceive the nervous system as 
living apart from the organism which nourishes it, from the atmosphere in 
which the organism breathes, from the earth which that atmosphere envel­
opes, from the sun round which the earth revolves? More generally, does not 
the fiction of an isolated material object imply a kind of absurdity, since this 
object borrows its physical properties from the relations which it maintains 
with all others, and owes each of its determinations, and, consequently, its 
very existence, to the place which it occupies in the universe as a whole? Let 
us no longer say, then, that our perceptions depend simply upon the 
molecular movements of the cerebral mass. We must say rather that they 
vary with them, but that these movements themselves remain inseparably 
bound up with the rest of the material world. The question, then, is not only 
how our perceptions are connected with the modifications of the grey 
matter. The problem widens, and can also be put in much clearer terms. 

Images and Bodies 
9 1  
It might be stated as follows: Here is a system of images which I term my 
perception of the universe, and which may be entirely altered by a very slight 
change in a certain privileged image - my body. This image occupies the 
centre; by it all the others are conditioned; at each of its movements 
everything changes, as though by a turn of a kaleidoscope. Here, on the 
other hand, are the same images, but referred each one to itself, influencing 
each other no doubt, but in such a manner that the effect is always in 
proportion to the cause: this is what I term the universe. The question is: 
how can these two systems coexist, and why are the same images relatively 
invariable in the universe and infinitely variable in perception? The problem 
at issue between realism and idealism, perhaps even between materialism 
and spiritualism, should be stated, then, it seems to us, in the following 
terms: How is it that the same images can belong at the same time to two 
different systems: one in which each image varies for itself and in the well­
defined measure that it is patient of the real action of surrounding images; and 
another in which ail images change for a single image and in the varying 
measure that they reflect the eventual action of this privileged image? 
Every image is within certain images and without others; but of the 
aggregate of images we cannot say that it is within us or without us, since 
interiority and exteriority are only relations among images. To ask whether 
the universe exists only in our thought, or outside of our thought, is to put 
the problem in terms that are insoluble, even if we suppose them to be 
intelligible; it is to condemn ourselves to a barren discussion, in which the 
terms thought, being, universe, will always be taken on either hand in entirely 
different senses. To settle the matter, we must first find a common ground 
where combatants may meet; and since on both sides it is agreed that we can 
only grasp things in the form of images, we must state the problem in terms 
of images, and of images alone. Now no philosophical doctrine denies that 
the same images can enter at the same time into two distinct systems, one 
belonging to science, wherein each image, related only to itself, possesses an 
absolute value; and the other, the world of consciousness, wherein all the 
images depend on a central image, our body, the variations of which they 
follow. The question raised between realism and idealism then becomes 
quite clear: what are the relations which these two systems of images main­
tain with each other? And it is easy to see that subjective idealism consists in 
deriving the first system from the second, materialistic realism in deriving 
the second from the first. 
The realist startS, in fact, from the universe, that is to say from an 
aggregate of images governed, as to their mutual relations, by fixed laws, in 
which effects are in strict proportion to their causes, and of which the char­
acter is an absence of centre, all the images unfolding on one and the same 
plane indefinitely prolonged. Bur he is at once bound to recognize that, 
besides this system, there are perceptions, that is to say, systems in which 
these same images seem ro depend on a single one among them, around 

92 
Matter and Memory 
which they range themselves on different planes, so as to be wholly rrans­
formed by the slightest modification of this central image. Now this 
perception is j ust what the idealist starts from: in the system of images which 
he adopts there is a privileged image, his body, by which the other images are 
conditioned. But as soon as he attempts to connect the present with the past 
and to foretell the future, he is obliged to abandon this central position, to 
replace all the images on the same plane, to suppose that they no longer 
vary for him, but for themselves; and to treat them as though they made part 
of a system in which every change gives the exact measure of its cause. 
On this condition alone a science of the universe becomes possible; and, since 
this science exists, since it succeeds in foreseeing the future, its fundamental 
hypothesis cannot be arbitrary. The first system alone is given to present 
experience; but we believe in the second, if only because we affirm the 
continuity of the past, present and future. Thus in idealism, as in realism, we 
posit one of the two systems and seek to deduce the other from it. 
But in this deduction neither realism nor idealism can succeed, because 
neither of the two systems of images is implied in the other, and each of 
them is sufficient to itself. If you posit the system of images which has no 
centre, and in which each element possesses its absolute dimensions and 
value, I see no reason why to this system should accrue a second, in which 
each image has an undetermined value, subject to all the vicissitudes of a 
central image. You must, then, to engender perception, conjure up some 
deus ex machina, such as the materialistic hypothesis of the epiphenomenal 
consciousness, whereby you choose, among all the images that vary 
absolutely and that you posited to begin with, the one which we term our 
brain - conferring on the internal states of this image the singular and 
inexplicable privilege of adding to itself a reproduction, this time relative 
and variable, of all the others. It is true that you afterwards pretend to attach 
no importance to this representation, to see in it a mere phosphorescence 
which the cerebral vibrations leave behind them: as if the cerebral matter and 
cerebral vibrations, set in the images which compose this representation, 
could be of another nature than they are! All realism is thus bound to make 
perception an accident, and, consequently, a mystery. But, inversely, if you 
posit a system of unstable images disposed about a privileged centre, and 
profoundly modified by trifling displacements of this centre, you begin by 
excluding the order of nature, that order which is indifferent to the point at 
which we take our stand and to the particular end from which we begin. You 
will have to bring back this order by conjuring up in your turn a deus ex 
machina; I mean that you will have to assume, by an arbitrary hypothesis, 
some sort of pre-established harmony between things and mind, or, at least 
(to use Kant's terms), between sense and understanding. It is science now 
that will become an accident, and its success a mystery. You cannot, then, 
deduce the first system of images from the second, nor the second from the 
first; and these two antagonistic doctrines, realism and idealism, as soon as 

Images and Bodies 
93 
they decide to enter the same lists, hurl themselves from opposite directions 
against the same obstacle. 
If we now look closely at the two doctrines, we shall discover in them a 
common postulate, which we may formulate thus: perception has a wholly 
speculative interest; it is pure knowledge. The whole discussion turns upon the 
importance to be attributed to this knowledge as compared with scientific 
knowledge. The one doctrine starts from the order required by science, and 
sees in perception only a confused and provisional science. The other puts 
perception in the first place, erects it into an absolute, and then holds science 
to be a symbolic expression of the real. But, for both parties, to perceive 
means above all to know. 
Now it is just this postulate that we dispute. Even the most superficial 
examination of the structure of the nervous system in the animal series gives 
it the lie. And it is not possible to accept it without profoundly obscuring the 
threefold problem of matter, consciousness and their relation. 
For if we follow, step by step, the progress of external perception from the 
monera to the higher vertebrates, we find that living matter, even as a simple 
mass of protoplasm, is already irritable and contractile, that it is open to the 
influence of external stimulation, and answers to it by mechanical, physical 
and chemical reactions. As we rise in the organic series, we find a division of 
physiological labour. Nerve cells appear, are diversified, tend to group them­
selves into a system; at the same time, the animal reacts by more varied 
movements to external stimulation. But even when the stimulation received 
is not at once prolonged into movement, it appears merely to await its 
occasion; and the same impression, which makes the organism aware of 
changes in the environment, determines it or prepares it to adapt itself 
to them. No doubt there is in the higher vertebrates a radical distinction 
between pure automatism, of which the seat is mainly in the spinal cord, and 
voluntary activity, which requires the intervention of the brain. It might be 
imagined that the impression received, instead of expanding into more 
movements, spiritualises itself into consciousness. Bur as soon as we compare 
the structure of the spinal cord with that of the brain, we are bound to infer 
that there is merely a difference of complication, and not a difference in 
kind, between the functions of rhe brain and the reflex activity of the 
medullary system. For what takes place in reflex action? The centripetal 
movement communicated by the stimulus is reflected at once, by the 
intermediary of the nerve centres of the spinal cord, in a centrifugal move­
ment determining a muscular contraction. In what, on the other hand, does 
the function of the cerebral system consist? The peripheral excitation, 
instead of proceeding directly to the motorcells of the spinal cord and 
impressing on the muscle a necessary contraction, mounts first to the brain, 
and then descends again to the very same motor cells of the spinal cord 
which intervened in the reflex action. Now what has it gained by this 
roundabout course, and what did it seek in the so-called sensory cells of the 

94 
Matter and Memory 
cerebral cortex? I do not understand, I shall never understand, that it draws 
thence a miraculous power of changing itself into a representation of things; 
and, moreover, I hold this hypothesis to be useless, as will shortly appear. 
But what I do see clearly is that the cells of the various regions of the cortex 
which are termed sensory - cells interposed between the terminal branches 
of the centripetal fibres and the motor cells of the Rolandic area - allow 
the stimulation received to reach at will this or that motor mechanism of the 
spinal cord, and so to choose its effect. The more these intercalated cells are 
multiplied and the more they project amoeboid prolongations which are 
probably capable of approaching each other in various ways, the more 
numerous and more varied will be the paths capable of opening to one and 
the same disturbance from the periphery, and, consequently, the more 
systems of movements will there be among which one and the same 
stimulation will allow of choice. In our opinion, then, the brain is no more 
than a kind of central telephonic exchange: its office is to allow communi­
cation or to delay it. It adds nothing to what it receives; bur, as all the organs 
of perception send to it their ultimate prolongations, and, as all the motor 
mechanisms of the spinal cord and of the medulla oblongata have in it their 
accredited representatives, it really constitutes a centre, where the peripheral 
excitation gets into relation with this or that motor mechanism, chosen and 
no longer prescribed. Yet, as a great multitude of motor tracks can open 
simultaneously in this substance to one and the same excitation from the 
periphery, this disturbance may subdivide to any extent, and consequently 
dissipate itself in i nnumerable motor reactions which are merely nascent. 
Hence the office of the brain is sometimes to conduct the movement 
received to a chosen organ of reaction, and sometimes to open to this move­
ment the totality of the motor tracts, so that it may manifest there all the 
potential reactions with which it is charged, and may divide and so disperse. 
In other words, the brain appears to us to be an instrument of analysis in 
regard to the movement received and an instrument of selection in regard 
to the movement executed. But, in the one case as in the other, its office is 
limited to the transmission and division of movement. And no more in the 
higher centres of the cortex than in the spinal cord do the nervous elements 
work with a view to knowledge: they do but indicate a number of possible 
acrions at once, or organize one of them. 
That is to say that the nervous system is in no sense an apparatus which 
may serve to fabricate, or even to prepare, representations. Irs function is to 
receive stimulation, to provide motor apparatus, and to present the largest 
possible number of these apparatuses to a given stimulus. The more it 
develops, the more numerous and the more distant are the points of space 
which it brings into relation with ever more complex motor mechanisms. 
In this way the scope which it allows to our action enlarges: its growing 
perfection consists in nothing else. But, if the nervous system is rhus con­
structed, from one end of the animal series to the other, in view of an action 

Images and Bodies 
95 
which is less and less necessary, must we not think that perception, of which 
the progress is regulated by that of the nervous system, is also entirely 
directed toward action, and not toward pure knowledge? And, if this be so, 
is not the growing richness of this perception likely to symbolize the wider 
range of indetermination left to the choice of the living being in its conduct 
with regard to things? Let us start, then, from this indetermination as from 
the true principle, and try whether we cannot deduce from it the possibility, 
and even the necessity, of conscious perception. In other words, let us posit 
that system of closely-linked images which we call the material world, and 
imagine here and there, within the system, centres of real action, represented 
by living matter: what we mean to prove is that there must be, ranged round 
each one of these centres, images that are subordinated to its position and 
variable with it; that conscious perception is bound to occur, and that, 
moreover, it is possible to understand how it arises. 
We note, in the first place, that a strict law connects the amount of 
conscious perception with the intensity of action at the disposal of the living 
being. If our hypothesis is well founded, this perception appears at the precise 
moment when a stimulation received by matter is not prolonged into a 
necessary action. In the case of a rudimentary organism, it is true that 
immediate contact with the object which interests it is necessary to produce 
the stimulation and that reaction can then hardly be delayed. Thus, in the 
lower organisms, touch is active and passive at one and the same time, 
enabling them to recognize their prey and seize it, to feel a danger and make 
the effort to avoid it. The various prolongations of the protozoa, the 
ambulacra of the echinodermata, are organs of movement as well as of tactile 
perception; the stinging apparatus of the coelenterata is an instrument of per­
ception as well as a means of defence. In a word, the more immediate the 
reaction is compelled to be, the more must perception resemble a mere 
contact; and the complete process of perception and of reaction can then 
hardly be distinguished from a mechanical impulsion followed by a necessary 
movement. But in the measure that the reaction becomes more uncertain, 
and allows more room for suspense, does the distance increase at which the 
animal is sensible of the action of that which interests it. By sight, by hearing, 
it enters into relation with an ever greater number of things, and is subject 
to more and more distant influences; and, whether these objects promise an 
advantage or threaten a danger, both promises and threats defer the date 
of their fulfilment. The degree of independence of which a living being is 
master, or, as we shall say, the zone of indetermination which surrounds its 
activity, allows, then, of an a priori estimate of the number and the distance 
of the things with which it is in relation. Whatever this relation may be, 
whatever be the inner nature of perception, we can affirm that its amplitude 
gives the exact measure of the indeterminarion of the act which is to follow. 
So that we can formulate this law: perception is master of space in the exact 
measure in which action is master of time. 

96 
Matter and Memory 
But why does this relation of the organism to more or less distant objects 
take the particular form of conscious perception? We have examined what 
takes place in the organized body, we have seen movements transmitted or 
inhibited, metamorphosed into accomplished actions or broken up into 
nascent actions. These movements appear to us to concern action, and 
action alone; they remain absolutely foreign to the process of representation. 
We then considered action itself, and the indetermination which surrounds 
it and is implied in the structure of the nervous system - an indetermination 
to which this system seems to point much more than to representation. 
From this indetermination, accepted as a fact, we have been able to infer the 
necessity of a perception, that is to say, a variable relation between the living 
being and the more-or-less distant influence of the objects which interest it. 
How is it that this perception is consciousness, and why does everything 
happen as if this consciousness were born of the internal movements of the 
cerebral substance? 
To answer this question, we will first simplify considerably the conditions 
under which conscious perception takes place. In fact, there is no perception 
which is not full of memories. With the immediate and present data of our 
senses, we mingle a thousand details out of our past experience. In most 
cases these memories supplant our actual perceptions, of which we then 
retain only a few hints, thus using them merely as 'signs' that recall to us 
former images. The convenience and the rapidity of perception are bought 
at this price; but hence also springs every kind of illusion. Let us, for the 
purposes of study, substitute for this perception, impregnated with our past, 
a perception that a consciousness would have if it were supposed to be ripe 
and full-grown, yet confined to the present and absorbed, to the exclusion of 
all else, in the task of moulding itself upon the external object. It may be 
urged that this is an arbitrary hypothesis, and that such an ideal perception, 
obtained by the elimination of individual accidents, has no correspondence 
with reality. But we hope to show that the individual accidents are merely 
grafted on to this impersonal perception, which is at the very root of our 
knowledge of things; and that just because philosophers have overlooked it, 
because they have not distinguished it from that which memory adds to or 
subtracts from it, they have taken perception as a whole for a kind of interior 
and subjective vision, which would then differ from memory only by its 
greater intensity. This will be our first hypothesis. But it leads naturally to 
another. However brief we suppose any perception to be, it always occupies 
a certain duration, and involves, consequently, an effort of memory which 
prolongs, one into another, a plurality of moments. As we shall endeavour to 
show, even the 'subjectivity' of sensible qualities consists above all else in a 
kind of contraction of the real, effected by our memory. In short, memory 
in these two forms, covering as it does with a cloak of recollections a core of 
immediate perception, and also contracting a number of external moments 
into a single internal moment, constitutes the principal share of individual 

Images and Bodies 
97 
consciousness in perception, the subjective side of the knowledge of things; 
and, since we must neglect this share in order to make our idea clearer, we 
shall go too far along the path we have chosen. But we shall only have to 
retrace our steps and to correct, especially by bringing memory back again, 
whatever may be excessive in our conclusions. What follows, therefore, must 
be regarded as only a schematic rendering, and we ask that perception 
should be provisionally understood to mean not my concrete and complex 
perception - that which is enlarged by memories and offers always a certain 
breadth of duration - but a pure perception. By this I mean a perception 
which exists in theory rather than in fact and would be possessed by a being 
placed where I am, living as I live, but absorbed in the present and capable, 
by giving up every form of memory, of obtaining a vision of matter both 
immediate and instantaneous. Adopting this hypothesis, let us consider how 
conscious perception may be explained. 
To deduce consciousness would be, indeed, a bold undertaking; but it is 
really not necessary here, because by positing the material world we assume 
an aggregate of images, and, moreover, because it is impossible to assume 
anything else. No theory of matter escapes this necessity. Reduce matter to 
atoms in motion: these atoms, though denuded of physical qualities, are 
determined only in relation to an eventual vision and an eventual contact, the 
one without light and the other without materiality. Condense atoms into 
centres of force, dissolve them into vortices revolving in a continuous fluid: 
this fluid, these movements, these centres, can themselves be determined only 
in relation to an impotent touch, an ineffectual impulsion, a colourless light; 
they are still images. It is true that an image may be without being perceived ­
it may be present without being represented - and the distance between these 
two terms, presence and representation, seems just to measure the interval 
berween matter itself and our conscious perception of matter. But let us 
examine the point more closely and see in what this difference consists. 
If there were more in the second term than in the first, if, in order to pass 
from presence to representation, it were necessary to add something, the 
barrier would indeed be insuperable, and the passage from matter to 
perception would remain wrapped in impenetrable mystery. It would not be 
the same if it were possible to pass from the first term to the second by way 
of diminution, and if the representation of an image were less than its 
presence; for it would then suffice that the images present should be 
compelled to abandon something of themselves in order that their mere 
presence should convert them into representations. Now, here is the image 
which I call a material object; I have the representation of ir. How then does 
it not appear to be in itself that which it is for me? It is because, being bound 
up with all other images, it is continued in those which follow it, just as it 
prolonged those which preceded it. To transform its existence into repre­
sentation, it would be enough to suppress what follows it, what precedes it, 
and also all that fills it, and to retain only its external crust, its superficial skin. 

98 
Matter and Memory 
That which distinguishes it as a present image, as an objective reality, from a 
represented image is the necessity which obliges it to act through every one 
of its points upon all the points of all other images, to transmit the whole of 
what it receives, to oppose to every action an equal and contrary reaction, to 
be, in short, merely a road by which pass, in every direction, the modifica­
tions propagated throughout the immensity of the universe. I should convert 
it into representation if l could isolate it, especially if I could isolate its shell. 
Representation is there, but always virtual - being neutralized, at the very 
moment when it might become actual, by the obligation to continue itself 
and to lose itself in something else. To obtain this conversion from the virtual 
to the actual, it would be necessary, not to throw more light on the object, 
but, on the contrary, to obscure some of its aspects, to diminish it by the 
greater part of itself, so that the remainder, instead of being encased in its 
surroundings as a thing, should detach itself from them as a picture. Now, if 
living beings are, within the universe, just 'centres of indetermination,' and 
if the degree of this indetermination is measured by the number and rank of 
their functions, we can conceive that their mere presence is equivalent to the 
suppression of all those parts of objects in which their functions find no 
interest. They allow to pass through them, so to speak, those external influ­
ences which are indifferent to them; the others isolated, become 'perceptions' 
by their very isolation. Everything thus happens for us as though we reflected 
back to surfaces the light which emanates from them, the light which, had it 
passed on unopposed, would never have been revealed. The images which 
surround us will appear to turn toward our body the side, emphasized by the 
light upon it, which interests our body. They will detach from themselves 
that which we have arrested on its way, that which we are capable of 
influencing. Indifferent to each other because of the radical mechanism 
which binds them together, they present each to the others all their sides at 
once: which means that they act and react mutually by all their elements, and 
that none of them perceives or is perceived consciously. Suppose, on the 
contrary, that they encounter somewhere a certain spontaneity of reaction: 
their action is so far diminished, and this diminution of their action is just 
the representation which we have of them. Our representation of things 
would thus arise from the fact that they are thrown back and reflected by 
our freedom. 
When a ray of light passes from one medium into another, it usually 
traverses it with a change of direction. But the respective densities of the two 
media may be such that, for a given angle of incidence, refraction is no 
longer possible. Then we have total reflection. The luminous point gives rise 
to a virtual image which symbolizes, so to speak, the fact that the luminous 
rays cannot pursue their way. Perception is just a phenomenon of the same 
kind. That which is given is the totality of the images of the material world, 
with the totality of their internal elements. But, if we suppose centres of real, 
that is to say of spontaneous, activity, the rays which reach it, and which 

Images and Bodies 
99 
interest that activity, instead of passing through those centres, will appear 
to be reflected and thus to indicate the outlines of the object which emits 
them. There is nothing positive here, nothing added to the image, nothing 
new. The objects merely abandon something of their real action in order to 
manifest their virtual influence of the living being upon them. Perception 
therefore resembles those phenomena of reflexion which result from an 
impeded refraction; it is like an effect of mirage. 
This is as much as to say that there is for images merely a difference of 
degree, and not of kind, between being and being consciously perceived. The 
reality of matter consists in the totality of its elements and of their actions of 
every kind. Our representation of matter is the measure of our possible 
action upon bodies: it results from the discarding of what has no interest for 
our needs, or more generally, for our functions. In one sense we might say 
that the perception of any unconscious material point whatever, in its 
instantaneousness, is infinitely greater and more complete than ours, since 
this point gathers and transmits the influences of all the points of the 
material universe, whereas our consciousness only attains to certain parts and 
to certain aspects of those pans. Consciousness - in regard to external 
perception - lies in just this choice. But there is, in this necessary poverty of 
our conscious perception, something that is positive, that foretells spirit: it 
is, in the etymological sense of the word, discernment. 
The whole difficulty of the problem that occupies us comes from the fact 
that we imagine perception to be a kind of photographic view of things, 
taken from a fixed point by that special apparatus which is called an organ of 
perception - a photograph which would then be developed in the brain­
matter by some unknown chemical and psychical process of elaboration. But 
is it not obvious that the photograph, if photograph there be, is already 
taken, already developed in the very heart of things and at all the points of 
space? No metaphysics, no physics even, can escape this conclusion. Build 
up the universe with atoms: each of them is subject to the action, variable in 
quantity and quality according to the distance, exerted on it by all material 
atoms. Bring in Faraday's centres of force: the lines of force emitted in every 
direction from every cenrre bring to bear upon each the influences of the 
whole material world. Call up rhe Leibnizian monads: each is the mirror of 
the universe. All philosophers, then, agree on this point. Only if, when we 
consider any other given place in the universe, we can regard the action of 
all matter as passing through it without resistance and without loss, and 
the photograph of the whole as translucent: here there is wanting behind the 
plate the black screen on which the image could be shown. Our 'zones of 
indetermination' play in some sort the part of the screen. They add nothing 
to what is there; they effect merely this: that the real action passes through, 
the virtual action remains. 
This is no hypothesis. We contenr ourselves with formulating data with 
which no theory of perception can dispense. For no philosopher can begin 

100 
Matter and Memory 
the study of external perception without assuming the possibility at least of a 
material world, that is to say, in the main, the virtual perception of all 
things. From this merely possible material mass he will then isolate the 
particular object which I call my body, and, in this body, centres of 
perception: he will show me the disturbance coming from a certain point in 
space, propagating itself along the nerves, and reaching the centres. But here 
I am confronted by a transformation scene from fairyland. The material 
world, which surrounds the body; the body, which shelters the brain; the 
brain, in which we distinguish centres; he abruptly dismisses, and, as by a 
magician's wand, he conjures up, as a thing entirely new the representation 
of what he began by postulating. This representation he drives out of space, 
so that it may have nothing in common with the matter from which he 
started. As for matter itself, he would fain go without it, but cannot, because 
its phenomena present relatively to each other an order so strict and so 
indifferent as to the point of origin chosen, that this regularity and this 
indifference really constitute an independent existence. So he must resign 
himself to retaining at least the phantasm of matter. But then he manages to 
deprive it of all the qualities which give it life. In an amorphous space he 
carves out moving figures; or else (and it comes to nearly the same thing), 
he imagines relations of magnitude which adjust themselves one to another, 
mathematical functions which go on evolving and developing their own 
content: representation, laden with the spoils of matter, thenceforth displays 
itself freely in an unextended consciousness. But it is not enough to cut out, 
it is necessary to sew the pieces together. You must now explain how those 
qualities which you have detached from their material support can be joined 
to it again. Each attribute which you take away from matter widens the 
interval between representation and its object. If you make matter 
unextended, how will it acquire extension? If you reduce it to homogeneous 
movements, whence arises quality? Above all, how are we to imagine a 
relation between a thing and its image, between matter and thought, since 
each of these terms possesses, by definition, only that which is lacking to the 
other? Thus difficulties spring up beneath our feet; and every effort that you 
make to dispose of one of them does but resolve it into many more. What 
then do we ask of you? Merely to give up your magician's wand, and to 
continue along the path on which you first set out. You showed us external 
images reaching the organs of sense, modifYing the nerves, propagating their 
influence in the brain. Well, follow the process to the end. The movement 
will pass through the cerebral substance (although not without having 
tarried there), and will then expand into voluntary action. There you have 
the whole mechanism of perception. As for perception itself, in so far as it is 
an image, you are not called upon to retrace its genesis, since you posited 
it to begin with, and since, moreover, no other course was open to you. 
In assuming the brain, in assuming the smallest portion of matter, did you 
not assume the totality of images? What you have to explain, then, is not how 

Images and Bodies 
101 
perception arises, but how it is limited, since it should be the image of the whole, 
and is in fact reduced to the image of that which interests you. But if it differs 
from the mere image, precisely in that its parts range themselves with 
reference to a variable centre, its limitation is easy to understand: unlimited 
de jure, it confines itself de facto to indicating the degree of indetermination 
allowed to the acts of the special image which you call your body. And, 
inversely, it follows that the indetermination of the movements of your 
body, such as it results from the structure of the grey matter of the brain, 
gives the exact measure of the extent of your perception. It is no wonder, 
then, that everything happens as though your perception were a result of the 
internal motions of the brain and issued in some sort from the cortical 
centres. It could not actually come from them, since the brain is an image 
like others, enveloped in the mass of other images, and it would be absurd 
that the container should issue from the content. But since the structure 
of the brain is like the detailed plan of the movements among which you 
have the choice, and since that part of the external images which appears ro 
return upon itself in order to constirute perception includes precisely all the 
points of the universe which these movements could affect, conscious 
perception and cerebral movement are in strict correspondence. The 
reciprocal dependence of these two terms is therefore simply due to the fact 
that both are functions of a third, which is the indetermination of the will. 
Take, for example, a luminous point P, of which the rays impinge on the 
different parts a, b, c, of the retina. At this point P, science localizes vibrations 
of a certain amplitude and duration. At the same point P, consciousness 
perceives light. We propose to show, in the course of this study, that bmh 
are right; and that there is no essential difference between the light and the 
movements, provided we restore to movement the unity, indivisibility, and 
qualitative heterogeneity denied to it by abstract mechanics; provided also 
that we see in sensible qualities contractions effected by our memory. Science 
and consciousness would then coincide in the instantaneous. For the moment 
all we need say, without examining too closely the meaning of the words, is 
that the point P sends to the retina vibrations of light. What happens then? 
If the visual image of the point P were not already given, we should indeed 
have to seek the manner in which it had been engendered, and should soon be 
confronted by an insoluble problem. Bur, whatever we do, we cannot avoid 
assuming it w begin with: the sole question is, then, to know how and why 
this image is chosen to form part of my perception, while an infinite number 
of other images remain excluded from it. Now I see that the vibrations 
transmitted from the point P to the various parts of the retina are conducted 
to the subcortical and cortical optic centres, often to other centres as well, and 
that these centres sometimes transmit them to motor mechanisms, sometimes 
provisionally arrest them. The nervous elements concerned are, therefore, 
what give efficacy to the disturbance received; they symbolize the indeter­
mination of the will; on their soundness this indetermination depends; 

102 
Matter and Memory 
consequently, any lfiJUry to these elemems, by diminishing our possible 
action, diminishes perception in the same degree. In other words, if there 
exist in the material world places where the vibrations received are not 
mechanically transmitted, if there are, as we said, zones of indetermination, 
these zones must occur along the path of what is termed the sensori-motor 
process; and hence all must happen as though the rays Pa, Pb, Pc were 
perceived along this path and afterwards projected into P. Further, while the 
indetermination is something which escapes experiment and calculation, this 
is not the case with the nervous elements by which the impression is received 
and transmitted. These elements are the special concern of the physiologist 
and the psychologist; on them all the details of external perception would 
seem to depend and by them they may be explained. So we may say, if we 
like, that the disturbance, after having travelled along these nervous elements, 
after having gained the centre, there changes into a conscious image which is 
subsequently exteriorised at the point P. But, when we so express ourselves, 
we merely bow to the exigencies of the scientific method; we in no way 
describe the real process. There is not, in fact, an unextended image which 
forms itself in consciousness and then projects itself into P. The truth is that 
the point P, the rays which it emits, the retina and the nervous elements 
affected, form a single whole; that the luminous point P is a part of this 
whole; and that it is really in P, and not elsewhere, that the image of P is 
formed and perceived. 
When we represent things to ourselves in this manner, we do but return 
to the simple convictions of common sense. We all of us began by believing 
that we grasped the very object, that we perceived it in itself and not in us. 
When philosophers disdain an idea so simple and so close to reality, it is 
because the intracerebral process - that diminutive part of perception -
appears to them the equivalent of the whole of perception. If we suppress 
the object perceived and keep the internal process, it seems to them that the 
image of the object remains. And their belief is easily explained: there are 
many conditions, such as hallucination and dreams, in which images arise 
that resemble external perception in all their details. Because as, in such 
cases. the object has disappeared while the brain persists, he holds that the 
cerebral phenomenon is sufficiem for the production of the image. But it 
must not be forgotten that in all psychical states of this kind memory plays 
the chief parr. We shall try to show later that, when perception, as we under­
stand it, is once admitted, memory must arise, and that this memory has not, 
any more than perception itself, a cerebral state as its true and complete 
condition. But, without as yet entering upon the examination of these two 
points, we will content ourselves with a very simple observation which has 
indeed no novelty. In many people who are blind from birth, the visual 
centres are intact; yet they live and die without having formed a single visual 
image. Such an image, therefore, cannot appear unless the external object 
has, at least, once played its part: it must, once at any rate, have been part 

Images and Bodies 
103 
and parcel with representation. Now this is what we claim and for the 
moment all that we require, for we are dealing here with pure perception, 
and not with perception complicated by memory. Reject then the share of 
memory, consider perception in its unmixed state, and you will be forced to 
recognize that there is no image without an object. But, from the moment 
that you thus posit the intracerebral processes in addition to the external 
object which causes them, we can dearly see how the image of that object is 
given with it and in it: how the image should arise from the cerebral 
movement we shall never understand. 
When a lesion of the nerves or of the centres interrupts the passage of the 
nerve vibration, perception is to that extent diminished. Need we be 
surprised? The office of the nervous system is to utilize that vibration, to 
convert it into practical deeds, really or virrually accomplished. If, for one 
reason or another, the disturbance cannot pass along, it would be strange if 
the corresponding perception still took place, since this perception would 
then connect our body with points of space which no longer directly invite it 
to make a choice. Sever the optic nerve of an animal: the vibrations issuing 
from the luminous point can no longer be transmitted to the brain and 
thence to the motor nerves; the thread, of which the optic nerve is a parr and 
which binds the external object to the motor mechanisms of the animal, is 
broken: visual perception has therefore become impotent, and this very 
impotence is unconsciousness. That matter should be perceived without the 
help of a nervous system and without organs of sense, is not theoretically 
inconceivable; but it is practically impossible because such perception would 
be of no use. It would suit a phantom, not a living, and, therefore, acting, 
being. We are too much inclined to regard the living body as a world within 
a world, the nervous system as a separate being, of which the function is, 
first, ro elaborate perceptions, and, then, to create movements. The truth is 
that my nervous system, interposed between the objects which affect my 
body and those which I can influence, is a mere conductor, transmitting, 
sending back or inhibiting movement. This conductor is composed of an 
enormous number of threads which stretch from the periphery to the centre, 
and from the centre to the periphery. As many threads as pass from the 
periphery to the centre, so many points of space are there able to make an 
appeal to my will and to put, so to speak, an elementary question to my 
motor activity. Every such question is what is termed a perception. Thus 
perception is diminished by one of irs elements each time one of the threads 
termed sensory is cut, because some parr of the external object then becomes 
unable to appeal to activity; and it is also diminished whenever a stable habit 
has been formed, because this time the ready-made response renders the 
question unnecessary. What disappears in either case is the apparent 
reflection of the stimulus upon itself, the return of the light on the image 
whence it comes; or rather that dissociation, that discernment, whereby the 
perception is disengaged from the image. We may therefore say that while 

1 04 
Matter and Memory 
the detail of perception is moulded exactly upon that of the nerves termed 
sensory, perception as a whole has its true and final explanation in the 
tendency of the body to movement. 
The cause of the general illusion on this point lies in the apparent indif­
ference of our movements to the stimulation which excites them. It seems 
that the movement of my body in order to reach and to modify an object 
is the same, whether I have been told of its existence by the ear or whether it 
has been revealed to me by sight or touch. My motor activity thus appears as 
a separate entity, a sort of reservoir whence movements issue at will, always 
the same for the same action, whatever the kind of image which has called it 
inro being. But the truth is that the character of movements which are 
externally identical is internally different, according as they respond to a 
visual, an auditory or a tactile impression. Suppose I perceive a multitude of 
objects in space; each of them, inasmuch as it is a visual form, solicits my 
activity. Now I suddenly lose my sight. No doubt I still have at my disposal 
the same quantity and the same quality of movements in space; but these 
movements can no longer be coordinated to visual impressions; they must 
in future follow tactile impressions, for example, and a new arrangement 
will take place in the brain. The protoplasmic expansions of the motor 
nervous elements in the cortex will now be in relation with a much smaller 
number of the nervous elements termed sensory. My activity is then really 
diminished, in the sense that although I can produce the same movements, 
the occasion comes more rarely from the external objects. Consequently, the 
sudden interruption of optical continuity has brought with it, as irs essential 
and profound effect, the suppression of a large part of the queries or 
demands addressed to my activity. Now such a query or demand is, as we 
have seen, a perception. Here we put our finger on the mistake of those who 
maintain that perception springs from what is properly called the sensory 
vibration, and nor from a sort of question addressed to motor activity. They 
sever this motor activity from the perceptive process; and, as it appears to 
survive the loss of perception, they conclude that perception is localized 
in the nervous elements termed sensory. But the truth is that perception is 
no more in the sensory centres than in the motor centres; it measures the 
complexity of their relations, and is, in fact, where it appears to be. 
Psychologists who have srudied infancy are well aware that our represen­
tation is at first impersonal. Only little by little, and as a result of experience, 
does it adopt our body as a centre and become our representation. The 
mechanism of this process is, moreover, easy to understand. As my body 
moves in space, all the other images vary, while that image, my body, 
remains invariable. I must, therefore, make it a centre, to which I refer all the 
other images. My belief in an external world does not come, cannot come, 
from the fact that I project outside myself sensations that are unextended: 
how could these sensations ever acquire extension, and whence should I get 
the notion of exterioriry? But, if we allow that, as experience testifies, the 

Images and Bodies 
105 
aggregate of images is given to begin with, I can see clearly how my body 
comes to occupy, within this aggregate, a privileged position. And I under­
stand also whence arises the notion of interiority and exteriority, which is, to 
begin with, merely the distinction between my body and other bodies. For, 
if you start from my body, as is usually done, you will never make me 
understand how impressions received on the surface of my body, impres­
sions which concern that body alone, are able to become for me independent 
objects and form an external world. But if, on the contrary, all images are 
posited at the outset, my body will necessarily end by standing out in the 
midst of them as a distinct thing, since they change unceasingly, and it does 
not vary. The distinction between the inside and the outside will then be 
only a distinction between the part and the whole. There is, first of all, the 
aggregate of images; and, then, in this aggregate, there are 'centres of action,' 
from which the interesting images appear to be reflected: thus perceptions 
are born and actions made ready. My body is that which stands out as the 
centre of these perceptions; my personality is the being to which these actions 
must be referred. The whole subject becomes clear if we travel thus from the 
periphery to the centre, as the child does, and as we ourselves are invited to 
do by immediate experience and by common sense. On the contrary every­
thing becomes obscure, and problems are multiplied on all sides, if we 
attempt, with the theorists, to travel from the centre to the periphery. 
Whence arises, then, this idea of an external world constructed artificially, 
piece by piece, out of unextended sensations, though we can neither 
understand how they come to form an extended surface, nor how they are 
subsequently projected outside our body? Why insist, in spite of appear­
ances, that I should go from my conscious self to my body, then from my 
body to other bodies, whereas in fact I place myself at once in the material 
world in general, and then gradually cut out within it the centre of action 
which I shall come to call my body and to distinguish from all others? There 
are so many illusions gathered round this belief in the originally unexrended 
character of our external perception; there are, in the idea that we project 
outside ourselves states which are purely internal, so many misconceptions, 
so many lame answers to badly stated questions, that we cannot hope to 
throw light on the whole subject at once. We believe that light will increase, 
as we show more clearly, behind these illusions, the metaphysical error 
which confounds 'pure perception' with memory. But these illusions are, 
nevertheless, connected with real facts, which we may here indicate in order 
to correct their interpretation. 
The first of these facts is that our senses require education. Neither sight 
nor touch is able at the outset to localize impressions. A series of compar­
isons and inductions is necessary, whereby we gradually coordinate one 
impression with another. Hence philosophers may jump to the belief that 
sensations are in their essence inextensive and that they constitute extensity 
by their juxtaposition. But is it not clear that, upon the hypothesis just 

106 
Matter and Memory 
advanced, our senses are equally in need of education - not, of course, in 
order to accommodate themselves to each other? Here, in the midst of all 
the images, there is a certain image which I term my body and of which the 
virtual action reveals itself by an apparent reflection of the surrounding 
images upon themselves. Suppose there are so many kinds of possible action 
for my body: there must be an equal number of systems of reflection for 
other bodies; each of these systems will be just what is perceived by one of 
my senses. My body, then, acts like an image which reflects others, and 
which, in so doing, analyses them along lines corresponding to the different 
actions which it can exercise upon them. And, consequently, each of the 
qualities perceived in the same object by my different senses symbolizes a 
particular direction of my activity, a particular need. Now, will all these 
perceptions of a body by my different senses give me, when united, the 
complete image of that body? Certainly nor, because they have been 
gathered from a larger whole. To perceive all the influences from all the 
points of all bodies would be to descend to the condition of a material 
object. Conscious perception signifies choice, and consciousness mainly con­
sists in this practical discernment. The diverse perceptions of the same 
object, given by my different senses, will not, then, when put together, 
reconstruct the complete image of the object; they will remain separated from 
each other by intervals which measure, so to speak, the gaps in my needs. 
It is to fill these intervals that an education of the senses is necessary. The aim 
of this education is to harmonize my senses with each other, to restore 
between their data a continuity which has been broken by the discontinuity 
of the needs of my body, in short, to reconstruct, as nearly as may be, the 
whole of the material object. This, on our hypothesis, explains the need for 
an education of the senses. Now let us compare it with the preceding 
explanation. In the first, unextended sensations of sight combine with 
unex:tended sensations of touch and of the other senses to give, by their 
synthesis, the idea of a material object. But, to begin with, it is not easy to see 
how these sensations can acquire extension, nor how, above all, when 
extension in general has been acquired, we can explain in particular the 
preference of a given one of these sensations for a given point of space. And 
then we may ask: by what happy agreement, in virtue of what pre-established 
harmony, do these sensations of different kinds coordinate themselves to 
form a stable object, henceforth solidified, common to my experience and 
to that of all men, subject, in its relation to other objects, to those inflexible 
rules which we call the laws of nature? In the second, 'the data of our different 
senses' are, on the contrary, the very qualities of things, perceived first in the 
things rather than in us: is it surprising that they come together, since 
abstraction alone has separated them? On the first hypothesis, the material 
object is nothing of all that we perceive: you put, on one side, the conscious 
principle with the sensible qualities and, on the other, a matter of which you 
can predicate nothing, which you define by negations because you have 

I mages and Bodies 
107 
begun by despoiling it of all that reveals ir ro us. On the second hypothesis, an 
ever-deepening knowledge of matter becomes possible. Far from depriving 
matter of anything perceived, we must on the contrary, bring together all 
sensible qualities, restore their relationship, and re-establish among them the 
continuity broken by our needs. Our perception of matter is, then, no longer 
either relative or subjective, at least in principle, and apart, as we shall see 
presently, from affection and especially from memory; it is merely dissevered 
by the multiplicity of our needs. On the first hypothesis, spirit is as 
unknowable as matter, for (we) attribute to it the indefinable power of 
evoking sensations we know not whence, and of projecting them, we know 
not why, into a space where they will form bodies. On the second, the part 
played by consciousness is clearly defined: consciousness means virtual 
action, and the forms acquired by mind, those which hide the essence of 
spirit from us, should, with the help of this second principle, be removed 
as so many concealing veils. Thus, on our hypothesis, we begin to see the 
possibility of a dearer distinction between spirit and matter, and of a 
reconciliation between them. But we will leave this first point and come to 
the second. 
The second fact brought forward consists of what was long termed the 
'specific energy of the nerves.' We know that stimulation of the optic nerve by 
an external shock or by an electric current will produce a visual sensation and 
that this same electric current applied to the acoustic or to the glosso­
pharyngeal nerve will cause a sound to be heard or a taste to be perceived. 
From these very particular facts have been deduced two very general laws: that 
different causes acting on the same nerve excite the same sensation and that 
the same cause, acting on different nerves, provokes different sensations. And 
from these laws it has been inferred that our sensations are merely signals and 
that the office of each sense is to translate into its own language homogeneous 
and mechanical movements occurring in space. Hence, as a conclusion, the 
idea of cutting our perception into two distinct pans, thenceforth incapable 
of uniting: on the one hand, homogeneous movements in space and, on the 
other hand, unextended sensations in consciousness. Now it is not our part to 
enter into an examination of the physiological problems raised by the 
interpretation of the two laws: in whatever way these laws are understood, 
whether the specific energy is arrribured to the nerves or whether it is referred 
to the centres, insurmountable difficulties arise. Bur the very existence of the 
laws themselves appears more and more problematical. Lotze himself already 
suspected a fallacy in them. He awaited, before putting faith in them, 'sound 
waves which should give to the eye the sensation of light, or luminous 
vibrations which should give to the ear a sound.'7 The truth is that all the 
facts alleged can be brought back to a single type: the one stimulus capable of 
producing different sensations, the multiple stimuli capable of inducing the 
same sensation, are either an electric current or a mechanical cause capable of 
determining in the organ a modification of electrical equilibrium. Now we 

108 
Matter and Memory 
may well ask whether the electrical stimulus does not include different 
components, answering objectively ro sensations of different kinds, and 
whether the office of each sense is not merely to extract from the whole the 
component that concerns it. We should then have, indeed, the same stimuli 
giving the same sensations and different stimuli provoking different sen­
sations. To speak more precisely, it is difficult to admit, for instance, that 
applying an electrical stimulus to the tongue would not occasion chemical 
changes, and these changes are what, in all cases, we term tastes. On the 
other hand, while the physicist has been able to identify light with an 
electromagnetic disturbance, we may say, inversely, that what he calls here 
an electromagnetic disturbance is light, so that it is really light that the optic 
nerve perceives objectively when subject to electrical stimulus. The doctrine 
of specific energy appears to be nowhere more firmly based than in the case 
of the ear: nowhere also has the real existence of the thing perceived become 
more probable. We will not insist on these facts, because they will be found 
stated and exhaustively discussed in a recent work.8 We will only remark 
that the sensations here spoken of are not images perceived by us outside our 
body, but rather affections localized within the body. Now it results from 
the nature and use of our body, as we shall see, that each of its so-called 
sensory elements has its own real action, which must be of the same kind as 
its virtual action on the external objects which it usually perceives; and thus 
we can understand how it is that each of the sensory nerves appears to 
vibrate according to a fixed manner of sensation. But to elucidate this point 
we must consider the nature of affection. Thus we are led to the third and 
last argument which we have to examine. 
This third argument is drawn from the fact that we pass by insensible 
degrees from the representative state, which occupies space, to the affective 
state which appears to be unextended. 
Hence it is inferred that all sensation is naturally and necessarily un­
extended, so that extensity is superimposed upon sensation, and the process 
of perception consists in an exteriorisation of internal states. The psychologist 
starts, in fact, from his body, and, as the impressions received at the periphery 
of this body seem to him sufficient for the reconstitution of the entire 
material universe, to his body he at first reduces the universe. But this first 
position is not tenable; his body has not, and cannot have, any more or any 
less reality than all other bodies. So he must go farther, follow to the end the 
consequences of his principle, and, after having narrowed the universe to 
the surface of the living body, contract this body itself into a centre which he 
will end by supposing unextended. Then, from this centre will start 
unextended sensations, which will swell, so to speak, will grow into extensity, 
and will end by giving extension first to his body and afterwards to all other 
material objects. But this strange supposition would be impossible if there 
were not, in point of fact, between images and ideas - the former extended 
and the latter unextended - a series of intermediate states, more or less 

Images and Bodies 
109 
vaguely localized, which are the affective states. Our understanding, yielding 
to its customary illusion, poses the dilemma that a thing either is or is not 
extended, and as the affective state participates vaguely in extension, is in fact 
imperfectly localized, we conclude that this state is absolutely unextended. 
But then the successive degrees of extension, and extensity itself, will have to 
be explained by I know not what acquired property of unextended states; the 
history of perception will become that of internal unextended states which 
acquire extension and project themselves without. Shall we put the argument 
in another form? There is hardly any perception which may not, by the 
increase of the action of its object upon our body, become an affection, and, 
more particularly, pain. Thus we pass insensibly from the contact with a pin 
to its prick. Inversely the decreasing pain coincides with the lessening 
perception of its cause, and exteriorises itself, so to speak, into a represen­
tation. So it does seem, then, as if there were a difference of degree and not 
of nature between affection and perception. Now the first is intimately 
bound up with my personal existence: what, indeed, would be a pain 
detached from the subject that feels it? It seems, therefore, that it must be so 
with the second and that external perception is formed by projecting into 
space an affection which has become harmless. Realists and idealists are 
agreed in this method of reasoning. The latter see in the material universe 
nothing but a synthesis of subjective and unextended states; the former add 
that, behind this synthesis, there is an independent reality corresponding 
to it, but both conclude, from the gradual passage of affection to repre­
sentation, that our representation of the material universe is relative and 
subjective and that it has, so to speak, emerged from us, rather than that we 
have emerged from it. 
Before criticizing this questionable interpretation of an unquestionable 
fact, we 
may show that it does not succeed in explaining, or even in 
throwing light upon, the nature either of pain or of perception. That 
affective states, essentially bound up with my personality, and vanishing if 
I disappear, should acquire extensity by losing intensity, should adopt a 
definite position in space, and build up a firm, solid experience, always 
in accord with itself and with the experience of other men - is very difficult 
to realize. Whatever we do, we shall be forced to give back to sensations, in 
one form or another, first the extension and then the independence which 
we have tried to do without. But, what is more, affection, on this hypothesis, 
is hardly clearer than representation. For if it is not easy to see how 
affections, by diminishing in intensity, become representations, neither can 
we understand how the same phenomenon, which was given at first as 
perception, becomes affection by an increase of intensity. There is in pain 
something positive and active, which is ill explained by saying, as do some 
philosophers, that it consists in a confosed representation. But still this is not 
the principal difficulty. That the gradual augmentation of the stimulus ends 
by transforming perception into pain, no one will deny; it is none the less 

1 10 
Matter and Memory 
true that this change arises at a definite moment: why at this moment rather 
than at another? And what special reason causes a phenomenon of which I 
was at first only an indifferent spectator to suddenly acquire for me a vital 
interest? Therefore, on this hypothesis I fail to see either why, at a given 
moment, a diminution of intensity in the phenomenon confers on it a right 
to extension and to an apparent independence, or why an increase of inten­
sity should create, at one moment rather than at another, this new property, 
the source of positive action, which is called pain. 
Let us return now to our hypothesis and show that affection must, at a 
given moment, arise out of the image. We shall thus understand how it is 
that we pass from a perception, which has extensity, to an affection which 
is believed to be unextended. But some preliminary remarks on the real 
significance of pain are indispensable. 
When a foreign body touches one of the prolongations of the amoeba, 
that prolongation is retracted; every part of the protoplasmic mass is equally 
able to receive a stimulation and to react against it; perception and 
movement being here blended in a single property - contractility. But, as 
the organism grows more complex, there is a division of labour; functions 
become differentiated, and the anatomical elements thus determined forego 
their independence. In such an organism as our own, the nerve fibres termed 
sensory are exclusively empowered to transmit stimulation to a central 
region whence the vibration will be passed on to motor elements. It would 
seem then that they have abandoned individual action to take their share, as 
outposts, in the manoeuvres of the whole body. But nonetheless they remain 
exposed, singly, to the same causes of destruction which threaten the 
organism as a whole, and while this organism is able to move - and thereby 
to escape a danger or to repair a loss - the sensitive element retains the 
relative immobility to which the division of labour condemns it. Thence 
arises pain, which, in our view, is nothing but the effort of the damaged 
element to set things right - a kind of motor tendency in a sensory nerve. 
Every pain, then, must consist in an effort - an effort which is doomed to be 
unavailing. Every pain is a local effort, and in its very isolation lies the cause 
of its impotence, because the organism, by reason of the solidarity of its 
parrs, is able ro move only as a whole. It is also because the effort is local that 
pain is entirely disproportioned to the danger incurred by the living being. 
The danger may be mortal and the pain slight; the pain may be unbearable 
(as in a toothache) and the danger insignificant. There is then, there must 
be, a precise moment when pain intervenes: it is when the interested part of 
the organism, instead of accepting the stimulation, repels it. And it is not 
merely a difference of degree that separates perception from affection but a 
difference in kind. 
Now we have considered the living body as a kind of centre whence is 
reflected on the surrounding objects the action which these objects exercise 
upon it: in that reflection external perception consists. But this centre is not 

Images and Bodies 
1 1 1  
a mathematical point; it is a body, exposed, like all natural bodies, to the 
action of external causes which threaten to disintegrate it. We have just seen 
that it resists the influence of these causes. It does not merely reflect action 
received from without; it struggles, and rhus absorbs some part of this 
action. Here is the source of affection. We might therefore say, meta­
phorically, that while perception measures the reflecting power of the body, 
affection measures its power to absorb. 
Bur this is only a metaphor. We must consider the matter more carefully 
in order to understand clearly that the necessity of affection follows from the 
very existence of perception. Perception, understood as we understand it, 
measures our possible action upon things, and thereby, inversely, the 
possible action of things upon us. The greater the body's power of action 
(symbolized by a higher degree of complexity in the nervous system), the 
wider is the field that perception embraces. The distance which separates our 
body from an object perceived really measures, therefore, the greater or less 
imminence of a danger, the nearer or more remote fulfilment of a promise. 
And, consequently, our perception of an object distinct from our body, 
separated from our body by an interval, never expresses anything but a 
virtual action. Bur the more distance decreases between this object and our 
body (the more, in other words, the danger becomes urgent or the promise 
immediate), the more does virtual action tend to pass into real action. 
Suppose the distance reduced to zero, that is to say that the object to be 
perceived coincides with our body, that is to say again, that our body is the 
object to be perceived. Then it is no longer virtual action, but real action, 
that this specialized perception will express, and this is exactly what affection 
is. Our sensations are, then, to our perceptions that which the real action of 
our body is to its possible, or virtual, action. Its virtual action concerns other 
objects and is manifested within those objects; irs real action concerns itself, 
and is manifested within its own substance. Everything then will happen as 
if, by a true return of real and virtual actions to their points of application or 
of origin, the external images were reflected by our body into surrounding 
space and the real actions arrested by it within itself. And that is why its 
surface, the common limit of the external and the internal, is the only 
portion of space which is both perceived and felt. 
That is to say once more, that my perception is outside my body and my 
affection within it. Just as external objects are perceived by me where they 
are, in themselves and not in me, so my affective states are experienced 
where they occur, that is, at a given point in my body. Consider the system 
of images which is called the material world. My body is one of them. 
Around this image is grouped the representation, i.e., its eventual influence 
on the others. Within it occurs affection, i.e., its actual effort upon itself. 
Such is indeed the fundamental difference which every one of us naturally 
makes between an image and a sensation. When we say that the image exists 
outside us, we signify by this that it is external to our body. When we speak 

1 12 
Matter and Memory 
of sensation as an imernal state, we mean that it arises within our body. 
And this is why we affirm that the totality of perceived images subsists, even 
if our body disappears, whereas we know that we cannot annihilate our body 
without destroying our sensations. 
Hence we begin to see that we must correct, at least in this particular, our 
theory of pure perception. We have argued as though our perception were a 
part of the images, detached, as such, from their emirety, as though, 
expressing the virtual action of the object upon our body, or of our body 
upon the object, perception merely isolated from the total object that aspect 
of it which interests us. But we have to take into account the fact that our 
body is not a mathematical point in space, that its virtual actions are 
complicated by, and impregnated with, real actions, or, in other words, that 
there is no perception without affection. Mfection is, then, that part or aspect 
of the inside of our body which we mix with the image of external bodies; it is 
what we must first of all subtract from perception to get the image in its 
purity. Bur the psychologist who shuts his eyes to the difference of function 
and nature berween perception and sensation - the latter involving a real 
action, and the former a merely possible action - can only find berween them 
a difference of degree. Because sensation (on account of the confosed effort 
which it involves) is only vaguely localized, he declares it unextended, and 
thence makes sensation in general the simple elemem from which we obtain 
by composition all external images. The truth is that affection is not the 
primary matter of which perception is made; it is rather the impurity with 
which perception is alloyed. 
Here we grasp, at its origin, the error which leads the psychologist to con­
sider sensation as unextended and perception as an aggregate of sensations. 
This error is reinforced, as we shall see, by illusions derived from a false 
conception of the role of space and of the nature of extensity. But it has also 
the support of misinterpreted facts, which we must now examine. 
It appears, in the first place, as if the localization of an affective sensation 
in one part of the body were a matter of gradual training. A certain time 
elapses before the child can touch with the finger the precise point where it 
has been pricked. The fact is indisputable, but all that can be concluded 
from it is that some tentative essays are required to coordinate the painful 
impressions on the skin, which has received the prick, with the impres­
sions of the muscular sense, which guides the movemem, of arm and hand. 
Our imernal affections, like our external perceptions, are of differem kinds. 
These kinds of affections, like those of perception, are discontinuous, 
separated by intervals which are filled up in the course of education. Bur it 
does not at all follow that there is not, for each affection, an immediate 
localization of a certain kind, a local colour which is proper to it. We may go 
further: if the affection has not this local colour at once, it will never have it. 
For all that education can do is to associate with the actual affective sensation 

Images and Bodies 
1 13 
the idea of a certain potential perception of sight and touch, so that a 
definite affection may evoke the image of a visual or tactile impression, 
equally definite. There must be, therefore, in this affection itself, something 
which distinguishes it from other affections of the same kind and permits of 
its reference to this or that potential datum of sight or touch rather than to 
any ocher. But is not this equivalent to saying that affection possesses, from 
the outset, a certain determination of extensity? 
Again, it is alleged that there are erroneous localizations, for example, the 
illusion of chose who have lost a limb (an illusion which requires, however, 
further examination). But what can we conclude from this beyond the fact 
chat education, once acquired, persists and that such data of memory as are 
more useful in practical life supplant those of immediate consciousness? It is 
indispensable, in view of action, that we should translate our affective 
experience into eventual data of sight, touch and muscular sense. When this 
translation is made, the original pales, but it never could have been made if 
the original had not been there to begin with, and if sensation had not been, 
from the beginning, localized by its own power and in its own way. 
But the psychologist has much difficulty in accepting rhis idea from 
common sense. Just as perception, in his view, could be in the things 
perceived only if they had perception, so a sensation cannot be i11 the nerve 
unless the nerve feels. Now it is evident that the nerve does not feel. So he 
takes sensation away from the point where common sense localizes it, carries 
it toward the brain, on which, more than on the nerve, it appears to depend, 
and logically should end by placing it in the brain. But it soon becomes clear 
that if it is not at the point where it appears to arise, neither can it be 
anywhere else: if it is not in the nerve, neither is it in the brain; for to explain 
its projection from the centre to the periphery a certain force is necessary, 
which must be attributed to a consciousness that is to some extent active. 
Therefore, he must go further, and, after having made sensations converge 
toward the cerebral centre, must push them out of the brain and thereby out 
of space. So he has co imagine, on the one hand, sensations that are 
absolutely unextended, and, on the other hand, an empty space indifferent 
to the sensations which are projected into it: henceforth he will exhaust 
himself in efforts of every kind to make us understand how unextended 
sensations acquire extensity and why they choose for their abode chis or that 
point of space rather than any other. But this doctrine is not only incapable 
of showing us clearly how the unextended takes on extension; it renders 
affection, extension and representation equally inexplicable. It must assume 
affective states as so many absolutes, of which it is impossible to say why 
they appear in or disappear from consciousness at definite moments. The 
passage from affection to representation remains wrapped in an equally 
impenetrable mystery because, once again, you will never find in internal 
states, which are supposed to be simple and unextended, any reason why 

1 14 
Matter and Memory 
they should prefer this or that particular order in space. And, finally, 
representation itself must be posited as an absolute: we cannot guess either 
its origin or its goal. 
Everything becomes clearer, on the other hand, if we start from 
representation itself, that is to say, from the totality of perceived images. My 
perception, in its pure state, isolated from memory, does not go on from my 
body to other bodies; it is, to begin with, in the aggregate of bodies, then 
gradually limits itself and adopts my body as a centre. And it is led to do so 
precisely by experience of the double faculty, which this body possesses, of 
performing actions and feeling affections; in a word, it is led to do so by 
experience of the sensori-motor power of a certain image, privileged among 
other images. For, on the one hand, this image always occupies the centre of 
representation, so that the other images range themselves round it in the very 
order in which they might be subject to its action; on the other hand, I know 
it from within, by sensations which I term affective, instead of knowing 
only, as in the case of the other images, its outer skin. There is, then, in the 
aggregate of images, a privileged image, perceived in its depths and no 
longer only on the surface - the seat of affection and, at the same time, the 
source of action: it is this particular image which I adopt as the centre of my 
universe and as the physical basis of my personality. 
But before we go on to establish the precise relation between the per­
sonality and the images in which it dwells, let us briefly sum up, contrasting 
it with the analyses of current psychology, the theory of pure perception 
which we have just sketched out. 
We will return, for the sake of simplicity, to the sense of sight, which we 
chose as our example. Psychology has accustomed us to assume the 
elementary sensations corresponding to the impressions received by the rods 
and cones of the retina. With these sensations it goes on to reconstitute 
visual perception. But, in the first place, there is not one retina, there are 
two; so that we have to explain how two sensations, held to be distinct, 
combine to form a single perception corresponding to what we call a point 
m space. 
Suppose this problem is solved. The sensations in question are unextended; 
how will they acquire extension? Whether we see in extensity a framework 
ready to receive sensations, or an effect of the mere simultaneity of sensations 
coexisting in consciousness without coalescing, in either case something new 
is introduced with extensity, something unaccounted for: the process by 
which sensation arrives at extension, and the choice by each elementary 
sensation of a definite point in space, remain alike unexplained. 
We will leave this difficulty, and suppose visual extension constituted. 
How does it in its turn reunite with tactile extension? All that my vision 
perceives in space is verified by my touch. Shall we say that objects are 
constituted by just the cooperation of sight and touch and that the agreement 
of the two senses in perception may be explained by the fact that the object 

Images and Bodies 
1 1 5  
perceived is their common product? But how could there be anything 
common, in the matter of quality, between an elementary visual sensation 
and a tactile sensation, since they belong to two different genera? The 
correspondence between visual and tactile extension can only be explained, 
therefore, by the parallelism of the order of the visual sensations with the 
order of the tactile sensations. So we are now obliged to suppose, over and 
above visual sensations, over and above tactile sensations, a certain order 
which is common to both and which, consequently, must be independent of 
either. We may go further: this order is independent of our individual 
perception, since it is the same for all men and constitutes a material world in 
which effects are linked with causes, in which phenomena obey laws. We are 
thus led at last to the hypothesis of an objective order, independent of 
ourselves, that is to say, of a material world distinct from sensation. 
We have had, as we advanced, to multiply our irreducible data and to 
complicate more and more the simple hypothesis from which we started. 
But have we gained anything by it? Though the matter which we have been 
led to posit is indispensable in order to account for the marvellous accord of 
sensations among themselves, we still know nothing of it, since we must 
refuse to it all the qualities perceived, all the sensations of which it has only 
to explain the correspondence. It is not, then, it cannot be, anything of what 
we know, anything of what we imagine. It remains a mysterious entity. 
But our own nature, the office and the function of our personality, remain 
enveloped in equal mystery. For these elementary unextended sensations 
which develop themselves in space, whence do they come, how are they 
born, what purpose do they serve? We must posit them as so many absolutes, 
of which we see neither the origin nor the end. And even supposing that we 
must distinguish, in each of us, between the spirit and the body, we can 
know nothing either of body or of spirit or of the relation between them. 
Now in what does this hypothesis of ours consist, and at what precise 
point does it part company with the other? Instead of starting from affection, 
of which we can say nothing, since there is no reason why it should be what 
it is rather than anything else, we start from action, that is to say from our 
faculty of effecting changes in things, a faculty attested to by consciousness 
and toward which all the powers of the organized body are seen to converge. 
So we place ourselves at once in the midst of extended images, and in this 
material universe we perceive centres of indetermination, characteristic of 
life. In order that actions may radiate from these centres, the movements 
or influences of the other images must be, on the one hand, received and, on 
the other hand, utilized. Living matter, in its simplest form and in a 
homogeneous state, accomplishes this function simultaneously with those of 
nourishment and repair. The progress of such matter consists in sharing this 
double labour between two categories of organs, the purpose of the first, 
called organs of nutrition, being to maintain the second: the second, in their 
turn, are made for action; they have as their simple type a chain of nervous 

1 16 
Matter and Memory 
elements, connecting two extremities, of which the one receives external 
impressions and the other executes movements. Thus, to return to the 
example of visual perception, the office of the rods and cones is merely to 
receive excitations which will be subsequently elaborated into movements, 
either accomplished or nascent. No perception can result from this, and 
nowhere in the nervous system are there conscious centres, but perception 
arises from the same cause which has brought into being the chain of 
nervous elements, with the organs which sustain them and with life in 
general. It expresses and measures the power of action in the living being, 
the indetermination of the movement or of the action which will follow the 
receipt of the stimulus. This indetermination, as we have shown, will express 
itself in a reflection upon themselves or, better, in a division, of the images 
which surround our body, and, as the chain of nervous elements which 
receives, arrests and transmits movements is the seat of this indetermination 
and gives its measure, our perception will follow all the detail and will 
appear to express all the variations of the nervous elements themselves. 
Perception, in its pure state, is, then, in very truth, a part of things. And, as 
for affective sensation, it does not spring spontaneously from the depths of 
consciousness to extend itself, as it grows weaker, in space; it is one with the 
necessary modifications to which, in the midst of the surrounding images 
that influence it, the particular image that each one of us terms his body 
is subject. 
Such is our simplified, schematic theory of external perception. It is the 
theory of pure perception. If we went no further, the part of consciousness in 
perception would thus be confined to threading on the continuous string of 
memory an uninterrupted series of instantaneous visions, which would be a 
part of things rather than of ourselves. That this is the chief office of 
consciousness in external perception is indeed what we may deduce a priori 
from the very definition of living bodies. For though the function of these 
bodies is to receive stimulations in order to elaborate them into unforeseen 
reactions, still the choice of the reaction cannot be the work of chance. This 
choice is likely to be inspired by past experience, and the reaction does not 
rake place without an appeal to the memories which analogous situations 
may have left behind them. The indetermination of acts to be accomplished 
requires, then, if it is not to be confounded with pure caprice, the 
preservation of the images perceived. It may be said that we have no grasp of 
the future without an equal and corresponding outlook over the past, that 
the onrush of our activity makes a void behind it into which memories flow, 
and that memory is thus the reverberation, in the sphere of consciousness, of 
the indetermination of our will. But the action of memory goes further and 
deeper than this superficial glance would suggest. The moment has come to 
reinstate memory in perception, to correct in chis way the element of 
exaggeration in our conclusions, and so to determine with more precision 

Images and Bodies 
1 17 
the point of contact between consciousness and things, between the body 
and the spirit. 
We assert, at the outset, that if there be memory, that is, the survival of 
past images, these images must constantly mingle with our perception of the 
present and may even take its place. For if they have survived, it is with a 
view to utility; at every moment they complete our present experience, 
enriching it with experience already acquired, and, as the latter is ever 
increasing, it must end by covering up and submerging the former. It is 
indisputable that the basis of real, and so to speak instantaneous, intuition, 
on which our perception of the external world is developed, is a small matter 
compared with all that memory adds to it.9 Just because the recollection of 
earlier analogous intuitions is more useful than the intuition itself, being 
bound up in memory with the whole series of subsequent events and capable 
thereby of throwing a better light on our decision, it supplants the real 
intuition of which the office is then merely - we shall prove it later - to call 
up the recollection, to give it a body, to render it active and thereby actual. 
We had every right, then, to say that the coincidence of perception with the 
object perceived exists in theory rather than in fact. We must take into 
account that perception ends by being merely an occasion for remembering, 
that we measure in practice the degree of reality by the degree of utility, and, 
finally, that it is our interest to regard as mere signs of the real those 
immediate intuitions which are, in fact, part and parcel of realiry. But here 
we discover the mistake of those who say that to perceive is to project 
externally unextended sensations, which have been drawn from our own 
depths, and then to develop them in space. They have no difficulty in 
showing that our complete perception is filled with images which belong to 
us personally, with exteriorised (that is to say, recollected) images, but they 
forget that an impersonal basis remains in which percepiion coincides with 
the object perceived and which is, in fact, externaliry itself. 
The capital error, the error which, passing over from psychology into 
metaphysic, shuts us out in the end from the knowledge both of body and 
spirit, is that which sees only a difference of intensiry instead of a difference 
of nature, between pure perception and memory. Our perceptions are 
undoubtedly interlaced with memories, and, inversely, a memory, as we shall 
show later, only becomes actual by borrowing the body of some perception 
into which it slips. These two acts, perception and recollection, always 
interpenetrate each other, are always exchanging something of their substance 
as by a process of endosmosis. The proper office of psychologists would be to 
dissociate them, to give back to each its natural purity; in this way many 
difficulties raised by psychology, and perhaps also by metaphysics, might be 
lessened. But they will have it that these mixed states, compounded, in 
unequal proportions, of pure perception and pure memory, are simple. And 
so we are condemned to an ignorance both of pure memory and of pure 

1 18 
Matter and Memory 
perception; to knowing only a single kind of phenomenon which will be 
called now memory and now perception, according to the predominance in it 
of one or other of the two aspects; and, consequently, to finding between 
perception and memory only a difference in degree, and not in kind. The first 
effect of this error, as we shall see in detail, is to vitiate profoundly the theory 
of memory; for, if we make recollection merely a weakened perception, we 
misunderstand the essential difference between the past and the present, we 
abandon all hope of understanding the phenomena of recognition, and, more 
generally, the mechanism of the unconscious. But, inversely, if recollection is 
regarded as a weakened perception, perception must be regarded as a stronger 
recollection. We are driven to argue as though it was given to us after the 
manner of a memory, as an internal state, a mere modification of our person­
ality; and our eyes are closed to the primordial and fundamental act of 
perception - the act, constituting pure perception, whereby we place our­
selves in the very heart of things. And thus the same error, which manifests 
itself in psychology by a radical incapacity to explain the mechanism of 
memory, will in metaphysics profoundly influence the idealistic and realistic 
conceptions of matter. 
For realism, in fact, the invariable order of the phenomena of nature lies 
in a cause distinct from our perceptions, whether this cause must remain 
unknowable, or whether we can reach it by an effort (always more or less 
arbitrary) of metaphysical construction. For the idealist, on the contrary, 
these perceptions are the whole of reality, and the invariable order of the 
phenomena of nature is but the symbol whereby we express, alongside of 
real perceptions, perceptions that are possible. But, for realism as for 
idealism, perceptions are 'veridical hallucinations,' states of the subject, 
projected outside himself, and the two doctrines differ merely in this: that, 
in the one, these states constitute reality; in the other, they are sent forth to 
unite with it. 
But behind this illusion lurks yet another that extends to the theory of 
knowledge in general. We have said that the material world is made up of 
objects, or, if you prefer it, of images, of which all the parts act and react 
upon each other by movements. And that which constitutes our pure per­
ception, is our dawning action, in so far as it is prefigured in those images. 
The actuality of our perception thus lies in its activity, in the movements 
which prolong it, and not in its greater intensity: the past is only idea, the 
present is ideo-motor. But this is what our opponents are determined not to 
see because they regard perception as a kind of contemplation, attribute to it 
always a purely speculative end, and maintain that it seeks some strange 
disinterested knowledge, as though, by isolating it from action, and thus 
severing its links with the real, they were not rendering it both inexplicable 
and useless. But thenceforward all difference between perception and 
recollection is abolished, since the past is essentially that which acts no longer, 
and since, by misunderstanding this characteristic of the past, they become 

Images and Bodies 
1 19 
incapable of making a real distinction between it and the present, i.e., that 
which is acting. No difference but that of mere degree will remain between 
perception and memory and neither in the one nor in the other will the 
subject be acknowledged to pass beyond himself. Restore, on the contrary, 
the true character of perception; recognize in pure perception a system of 
nascent acts which plunges roots deep into the real; and at once perception 
is seen to be radically distinct from recollection; the reality of things is 
no more constructed or reconstructed, but rouched, penetrated, lived, and 
the problem at issue between realism and idealism, instead of giving rise 
to interminable metaphysical discussions, is solved, or rather, dissolved, 
by intuition. 
In this way also we shall plainly see what position we ought to take up 
between idealism and realism, which are both condemned to see in a matter 
only a construction or a reconstruction executed by the mind. For if we 
follow to the end the principle according to which the subjectivity of our 
perception consists, above all, in the share taken by memory, we shall 
say that even the sensible qualities of matter would be known in themselves, 
from within and not from without, could we but disengage them from that 
particular rhythm of duration which characterizes our consciousness. Pure 
perception, in fact, however rapid we suppose it to be, occupies a certain 
depth of duration, so that our successive perceptions are never the real 
moments of things, as we have hitherto supposed, but are moments of our 
consciousness. Theoretically, we said, the part played by consciousness in 
external perception would be to join together, by the continuous thread of 
memory, instantaneous visions of the real. But, in fact, there is for us 
nothing that is instantaneous. In all that goes by that name there is already 
some work of our memory, and consequently, of our consciousness, which 
prolongs into each orher, so as to grasp them in one relatively simple 
intuition, an endless number of moments of an endlessly divisible time. 
Now what is, in truth, the difference between matter as the strictest realism 
might conceive it and the perception which we have of it? Our perception 
presents us wirh a series of pictorial, but discontinuous, views of the 
universe; from our present perceptions we could not deduce subsequent 
perceptions because there is nothing in an aggregate of sensible qualities 
which foretells the new qualities into which they will change. On the 
contrary, matter, as realism usually posits it, evolves in such a manner that 
we can pass from one moment to the next by a mathematical deduction. It is 
true that, between this matter and this perception, scientific realism can find 
no point of contact because it develops matter into homogeneous changes in 
space, while it contracts perception into unextended sensations within 
consciousness. But, if our hypothesis is correct, we can easily see how 
perception and matter are distinguished and how they coincide. The 
qualitative heterogeneity of our successive perceptions of the universe results 
from the fact that each, in itself, extends over a certain depth of duration and 

120 
Matter and Memory 
that memory condenses in each an enormous multiplicity of vibrations 
which appear to us all at once, although they are successive. If we were only 
to divide, ideally, this undivided depth of time, to distinguish in it the 
necessary multiplicity of moments, in a word, to eliminate all memory, we 
should pass thereby from perception to matter, from the subject to the 
object. Then matter, becoming more and more homogeneous as our 
extended sensations spread themselves over a greater number of moments, 
would tend more and more toward that system of homogeneous vibrations 
of which realism tells us, although it would never coincide entirely with 
them. There would be no need to assume, on the one hand, space with 
unperceived movements, and, on the other, consciousness with unextended 
sensations. Subject and object would unite in an extended perception, the 
subjective side of perception being the contraction effected by memory, and 
the objective reality of matter fusing with the multitudinous and successive 
vibrations into which this perception can be internally broken up. Such at 
least is the conclusion which, we hope, will issue clearly from the last part of 
this essay. Questions relating to subject and object, to their distinction and their 
union, should be put in terms of time rather than of space. 
But our distinction between 'pure perception' and 'pure memory' has yet 
another aim. Just as pure perception, by giving us hints as to the nature of 
matter, allows us to take an intermediate position between realism and 
idealism, so pure memory, on the other hand, by opening to us a view of 
what is called spirit should enable us to decide between those other two 
doctrines, materialism and spiritualism. 10 Indeed, it is this aspect of the 
subject which will first occupy our attention in the two following chapters 
because it is in this aspect that our hypothesis allows some degree of 
experimental verification. 
For it is possible to sum up our conclusions as to pure perception by 
saying that there is in matter something more than, but not something diferent 
from, that which is actually given. Undoubtedly, conscious perception does 
not compass the whole of matter, since it consists, in as far as it is conscious, 
in the separation, or the 'discernment,' of that which, in matter, interests our 
various needs. Bur between this perception of matter and matter itself there 
is but a difference of degree and not of kind, pure perception standing 
toward matter in the relation of the part to the whole. This amounts to 
saying that matter cannot exercise powers of any kind other than those 
which we perceive. It has no mysterious virtue; it can conceal none. To take 
a definite example, one, moreover, which interests us most nearly, we may 
say that the nervous system, a material mass presenting certain qualities of 
colour, resistance, cohesion, etc., may well possess unperceived physical 
properties, but physical properties only. And hence it can have no other 
office than to receive, inhibit or transmit movement. 
Now the essence of every form of materialism is to maintain the contrary, 
since it holds that consciousness, with all its functions, is born of the mere 

Images and Bodies 
121 
interplay of material elements. Hence it is led to consider even the perceived 
qualities of matter - sensible, and consequently felt, qualities - as so many 
phosphorescences which follow the track of the cerebral phenomena in the 
act of perception. Matter, thus supposed capable of creating elementary facts 
of consciousness, might therefore just as well engender intellectual faces of the 
highest order. It is, then, the essence of materialism to assert the perfect rela­
tivity of sensible qualities, and it is not without good reason that this thesis, 
which Democritus has formulated in precise terms, is as old as materialism. 
But spiritualism has always followed materialism along this path. As if 
everything lost to matter must be gained by spirit, spiritualism has never 
hesitated to despoil matter of the qualities with which it is invested in our 
perception, and which, on this view, are subjective appearances. Matter has 
thus too often been reduced to a mysterious entity which, j ust because all we 
know of it is an empty show, might as well engender thought as well as any 
other phenomenon. 
The truth is that there is one, and only one, method of refuting 
materialism: it is to show that matter is precisely that which it appears to be. 
Thereby we eliminate all virtuality, all hidden power, from matter and 
establish the phenomena of spirit as an independent reality. But to do this 
we must leave to matter chose qualities which materialists and spiritualists 
alike scrip from it: the latter chat they may make of them representations of 
the spirit, the former that they may regard them only as the accidental garb 
of space. 
This, indeed, is the attitude of common sense with regard to matter, and 
for this reason common sense believes in spirit. It seems to us that philosophy 
should here adopt the attitude of common sense, although correcting it in 
one respect. Memory, inseparable in practice from perception, imports the 
past into the present, contracts into a single intuition many moments of 
duration, and thus by a twofold operation compels us, de facto, to perceive 
matter in ourselves, whereas we, de jure, perceive matter within matter. 
Hence the capital importance of the problem of memory. If it is memory 
above all that lends to perception its subjective character, the philosophy of 
matter must aim, in the first instance, we said, at eliminating the contri­
butions of memory. We must now add that, as pure perception gives us the 
whole or at least the essential part of matter (since the rest comes from 
memory and is superadded to matter), it follows that memory must be, in 
principle, a power absolutely independent of matter. If, then, spirit is a 
reality, it is here, in the phenomenon of memory, that we may come into 
touch with it experimentally. And hence any attempt to derive pure memory 
from an operation of the brain should reveal on analysis a radical illusion. 
Let us put the same statement in clearer language. We maintain that 
matter has no occult or unknowable power and that it coincides, in 
essentials, with pure perception. Therefore we conclude that the living body 
in general, and the nervous system in particular, are only channels for the 

122 
Matter and Memory 
transmission of movements, which, received in the form of stimulation, are 
transmitted in the form of action, reflex or voluntary. That is to say, it is 
vain to attribute to the cerebral substance the property of engendering 
representations. Now the phenomena of memory, in which we believe that 
we can grasp spirit in its most tangible form, are precisely those of which a 
superficial psychology is most ready to find the origin in cerebral activiry 
alone; just because they are at the point of contact between consciousness 
and matter, and because even the adversaries of materialism have no objec­
tion to treating the brain as a storehouse of memories. But if it could be 
positively established that the cerebral process answers only to a very small 
part of memory, that it is rather the effect than the cause, that matter is here as 
elsewhere the vehicle of an action and not the substratum of a knowledge, then 
the thesis which we are maintaining would be demonstrated by the very 
example which is commonly supposed to be most unfavorable to it, and the 
necessiry might arise of erecting spirit into an independent reality. In this way 
also, perhaps some light would be thrown on the nature of what is called 
spirit and on the possibility of the interaction of spirit and matter. For a 
demonstration of this kind could not be purely negative. Having shown what 
memory is not, we should have to try to discover what it is. Having attributed 
to the body the sole function of preparing actions, we are bound to enquire 
why memory appears to be one with this body, how bodily lesions influence 
it, and in what sense it may be said to mold itself upon the state of the brain 
matter. It is, moreover, impossible that this enquiry should fail to give us 
some information as to the psychological mechanism of memory and the 
various mental operations connected therewith. And, inversely, if the 
problems of pure psychology seem to acquire some light from our hypothesis, 
this hypothesis itself will thereby gain in certainty and weight. 
But we must present this same idea in yet a third form, so as to make it 
quite clear why the problem of memory is in our eyes a privileged problem. 
From our analysis of pure perception issue two conclusions, which are in 
some sort divergent, one of them going beyond psychology in the direction 
of psycho-physiology and the other in that of metaphysics, bur neither 
allowing of immediate verification. The first concerns the office of the brain 
in perception: we maintain that the brain is an instrument of action, and not 
of representation. We cannot demand from facts the direct confirmation of 
this thesis, because pure perception bears, by definition, upon present objects, 
acting on our organs and our nerve centres; and because everything always 
happens, in consequence, as though our perceptions emanated from our 
cerebral state and were subsequently projected upon an object which differs 
absolutely from them. In other words, with regard to external perception, 
the thesis which we dispute and that which we substitute for it lead to 
precisely the same consequence, so that it is possible to invoke in favour of 
either the one or the other its greater intelligibility, but not the authority of 
experience. On the contrary, the empirical study of memory may and must 

Images and Bodies 
123 
decide between them. For pure recollection is, by hypothesis, the represen­
tation of an absent object. If the necessary and sufficient cause of perception 
lies in a certain activity of the brain, this same cerebral activity, repeating 
itself more or less completely in the absence of the object, will suffice to 
reproduce perception: memory will be entirely explicable by the brain. But if 
we find that the cerebral mechanism does indeed in some sort condition 
memories, but is in no way sufficient to ensure their survival; if it concerns, 
in remembered perception, our action rather than our representation; we 
shall be able to infer that it plays an analogous part in perception itself and 
that its office is merely to ensure our effective action on the object present. 
Our first conclusion may thus find its verification. There would still remain 
this second conclusion, which is of a more metaphysical order - viz.: that in 
pure perception we are actually placed outside ourselves; we touch the reality 
of the object in an immediate intuition. Here also an experimental verifica­
tion is impossible, since the practical results are absolutely the same whether 
the reality of the object is inruirively perceived or whether it is rationally 
constructed. But here again a study of memory may decide between rhe two 
hypotheses. For, in the second, there is only a difference of intensity, or 
more generally, of degree, between perception and recollection, since they 
are both self-sufficient phenomena of representation. But if, on the contrary, 
we find that the difference between perception and recollection is not merely 
in degree, bur is a radical difference in kind, the presumption will be in 
favour of the hypothesis which finds in perception something which is 
entirely absent from memory, a reality intuitively grasped. Thus the problem 
of memory is in very truth a privileged problem, in that it must lead to the 
psychological verification of two theses which appear to be insusceptible to 
proof, and of which the second, being of a metaphysical order, appears to go 
far beyond the borders of psychology. 
The road which we have to follow, then, lies clear before us. We shall first 
review evidence of various kinds borrowed from normal and from patho­
logical psychology, by which philosophers might hold themselves justified in 
maintaining a physical explanation of memory. This examination must 
needs be minute or it would be useless. Keeping as close as possible to facts, 
we must seek to discover where, in rhe operations of memory, the office of 
the body begins and where it ends. And should we, in the course of this 
inquiry, find confirmation of our own hypothesis, we shall not hesitate to go 
further and, considering in itself rhe elementary work of the mind, complete 
the theory thereby sketched out, of the relation of spirit with matter. 

The Persistence of the Past11 
To sum up briefly the preceding chapters: we have distinguished three 
processes, pure memory, memory-image and perception, of which none of 
them, in fact, occurs apart from the others. Perception is never a mere 
contact of the mind with the object present; it is impregnated with memory­
images which complete it as they interpret it. The memory-image, in its 
turn, partakes of the 'pure memory,' which it begins to materialize, and of 
the perception in which it tends to embody itself: regarded from the latter 
point of view, it might be defined as a nascent perception. Lastly, pure 
memory, though independent in theory, manifests itself as a rule only in the 
coloured and living image which reveals it. Symbolizing these three terms by 
the consecutive segments AB, BC, CD, of the same straight line AD, we may 
say that our thought describes this line in a single movement, which goes 
from A to D, and that it is impossible to say precisely where one of the terms 
ends and another begins. 
In fact, this is just what consciousness bears witness to whenever, in order 
to analyse memory, it follows the movement of memory at work. Whenever 
we are trying to recover a recollection, to call up some period of our history, 
we become conscious of an act sui generis by which we detach ourselves from 
the present in order to replace ourselves, first, in the past in general, then, in a 
M 
Pure memory 
Memory-image 
Perception 
A 
8 
0 
c 
D 
p 
Figure 1 

The Persistence of the Past 
125 
certain region of the past - a work of adjustment, something like the 
focusing of a camera. But our recollection still remains virtual; we simply 
prepare ourselves to receive it by adopting the appropriate attitude. Little by 
little it comes into view like a condensing cloud; from the virtual state it 
passes into the actual; and as its outlines become more distinct and its surface 
takes on colour, it tends to imitate perception. But it remains attached to the 
past by its deepest roots, and if, when once realized, it did not retain some­
thing of its original virtuality, if, being a present state, it were not also 
something which stands out distinct from the present, we should never 
know it for a memory. 
The capital error of associationism is that it substitutes for this continuity 
of becoming, which is the living reality, a discontinuous multiplicity of 
elements, inert and juxtaposed. Just because each of the elements so 
constituted contains, by reason of its origin, something of what precedes and 
also of what follows, it must take to our eyes the form of a mixed and, so to 
speak, impure state. But the principle of associationism requires that each 
psychical state should be a kind of atom, a simple element. Hence the neces­
sity for sacrificing, in each of the phases we have distinguished, the unstable to 
the stable, that is to say, the beginning to the end. If we are dealing with 
perception, we are asked to see in it nothing but the agglomerated sensations 
which colour it and to overlook the remembered images which form its dim 
nucleus. If it is the remembered image that we are considering, we are bidden 
to take it already made, realized in a weak perception, and to shut our eyes to 
the pure memory which this image has progressively developed. In the rivalry 
which associationism rhus sets up between the stable and the unstable, 
perception is bound to expel the memory-image, and the memory-image to 
expel pure memory. And thus the pure memory disappears altogether. 
Associationism, cutting in two, by a line MO, the totality of the progress AD, 
sees, in the part OD, only the sensations which terminate it and which have 
been supposed to constitute the whole of perception; yet it also reduces the 
part AO to the realized image which pure memory attains to as it expands. 
Psychical life, then, is entirely summed up in these two elements, sensation 
and image. And as, on the one hand, this theory drowns in the image the pure 
memory, which makes the image into an original state, and, on the other 
hand, brings the image yet closer to perception by putting into perception, in 
advance, something of the image itself, it ends up by finding between these 
two states only a difference of degree, or of intensity. Hence the distinction 
between strong states and weak states, of which the first are supposed to be set 
up by us as perceptions of the present, and the second (why, no man knows) 
as representations of the past. But the truth is that we shall never reach the 
past unless we frankly place ourselves within it. Essentially virtual, it cannot 
be known as something past unless we follow and adopt the movement by 
which it expands into a present image, thus emerging from obscurity into the 
light of day. In vain do we seek its trace in anything actual and already 

126 
Matter and Memory 
realized: we might as well look for darkness beneath the light. This is, in fact, 
the error of associationism: placed in the acrual, it exhausts itself in vain 
attempts to discover in a realized and present state the mark of its past origin, 
to distinguish memory from perception, and to erect into a difference in kind 
that which it condemned in advance to be but a difference of magnitude. 
To picture is not to remember. No doubt a recollection, as it becomes 
actual, tends to live in an image; however, the converse is not true, and the 
image, pure and simple, will not be referred to the past unless, indeed, it was 
in the past that I sought it, thus following the continuous progress which 
brought it from darkness into light. This is what psychologists too often 
forget when they conclude, from the fact that a remembered sensation 
becomes more actual the more we dwell upon it, that the memory of the 
sensation is the sensation itself beginning to be. The fact which they allege is 
undoubtedly true: the more I strive to recall a past pain, the nearer I come ro 
feeling it in reality. But this is easy to understand, since the progress of a 
memory precisely consists, as we have said, in its becoming materialized. 
The question is: was the memory of a pain, when it began, really pain? 
Because the hypnotized subject ends by feeling hot when he is repeatedly 
told that he is hot, it does not follow that the words of the suggestion were 
themselves hot. Neither must we conclude that, because the memory of a 
sensation prolongs itself into that very sensation, the memory was a nascent 
sensation: perhaps, indeed, this memory plays, with regard to the sensation 
which follows it, precisely the part of the hypnotiser who makes the 
suggestion. The argument we are criticizing, presented in this form, is then 
already of no value as proof; still, it is not yet a vicious argument, because it 
profits by the incontestable truth that memory passes into something else by 
becoming actual. The absurdity becomes patent when the argument is 
inverted (although this ought to be legitimate on the hypothesis adopted), 
that is to say, when the intensity of the sensation is decreased instead of the 
intensity of pure memory being increased. For then, if the two states differ 
merely in degree, there should be a given moment at which the sensation 
changed into a memory. If the memory of an acute pain, for instance, is but 
a slight pain, inversely, an intense pain which I feel, will end, as it grows 
less, by being an acute pain remembered. Now the moment will come, 
undoubtedly, when it is impossible for me to say whether what I feel is a 
slight sensation, which I experience, or a slight sensation, which I imagine 
(and this is natural, because the memory-image is already partly sensation), 
but never will this weak state appear to me to be the memory of a strong 
stare. Memory, chen, is something quite different. 
But the illusion which consists in establishing only a difference of degree 
between memory and perception is more than a mere consequence of 
associationism, more than an accident in the history of philosophy. Its roots 
lie deep. It rests, in the last analysis, on a false idea of the nature and of the 
object of external perception. We are bent on regarding perception as only 

The Persistence of the Past 
127 
an instruction addressed to a pure spirit, as having a purely speculative 
interest. Then, as memory is itself essentially a knowledge of this kind, since 
its object is no longer present, we can only find between perception and 
memory a difference of degree - perceptions being then supposed to throw 
memories back into the past, and thus to reserve to themselves the present 
simply because right is might. But there is much more between past and 
present than a mere difference of degree. My present is that which interests 
me, which lives for me, and in a word, that which summons me to action; in 
contrast, my past is essentially powerless. We must dwell further on this 
point. By contrasting it with present perception we shall better understand 
the nature of what we call 'pure memory.' 
For we should endeavour in vain to characterize the memory of a past 
state unless we began by defining the concrete note, accepted by conscious­
ness, of present reality. What is, for me, the present moment? The essence of 
time is that it goes by; time already gone by is the past, and we call the 
present the instant in which it goes by. But there can be no question here of 
a mathematical instant. No doubt there is an ideal present - a pure 
conception, the indivisible limit which separates past from future. But the 
real, concrete, live present - that of which I speak when I speak of my 
present perception - that present necessarily occupies a duration. Where 
then is this duration placed? Is it on the nearer or on the further side of the 
mathematical point which I determine ideally when I think of the present 
instant? Quite evidently, it is both on this side and on that, and what I call 
'my present' has one foot in my past and another in my future. In my past, 
first, because 'the moment in which I am speaking is already far from me'; in 
my future, next, because this moment is impending over the future: it is to 
the future that I am tending, and could I fix this indivisible present, this 
infinitesimal element of the curve of time, it is the direction of the future 
that it would indicate. The psychical state, then, that I call 'my present,' 
must be both a perception of the immediate past and a determination of the 
immediate future. Now the immediate past, in so far as it is perceived, is, as 
we shall see, sensation, since every sensation translates a very long succession 
of elementary vibrations, and the immediate fmure, in so far as it is being 
determined, is action or movement. My present, then, is both sensation and 
movement; since my present forms an undivided whole, then the move­
ment must be linked with the sensation, must prolong it in action. Whence 
I conclude that my present consists in a joint system of sensations and 
movements. My present is, in its essence, sensori-motor. 
This is to say that my present consists in the consciousness I have of my 
body. Having extension in space, my body experiences sensations and at the 
same time executes movements. Sensations and movements being localized 
at determined points of this extended body, there can only be, at a given 
moment, a single system of movements and sensations. That is why my 
present appears to me to be a thing absolutely determined, and contrasting 

128 
Matt" and Memory 
with my past. Situated between the matter which influences it and that on 
which it has influence, my body is a centre of action, the place where the 
impressions received choose intelligently the path they will follow to trans• 
form themselves into movements accomplished. Thus it, indeed, represents 
the actual state of my becoming, that part of my duration which is in proces 
of growth. More generally, in that continuity of becoming which is reality 
itself, the present moment is constituted by the quasi-instantaneous section 
effected by our perception in the flowing mass, and this section is precisely 
that which we call the material world. Our body occupies its centre; it is, in 
this material world, that part of which we directly feel the flux; in its actual 
state the actuality of our present lies. If matter, so far as extended in space, is 
to be defined (as we believe it must) as a present which is always beginning 
again, inversely, our present is the very materiality of our existence, that is to 
say, a system of sensations and movements and nothing else. And this system 
is determined, unique for each moment of duration, just because sensations 
and movements occupy space, and because there cannot be in the same place 
several things at the same time. Why is it that it has been possible to mis­
understand so simple, so evident a truth, one which is, moreover, the very 
idea of common sense? 
The reason lies simply in the fact that philosophers insist on regarding the 
difference between actual sensations and pure memory as a mere difference 
in degree, and not in kind. In our view the difference is radical. My actual 
sensations occupy definite portions of the surface of my body; pure memory, 
on the other hand, interests no part of my body. No doubt, it will beget 
sensations as it materializes, but at that very moment it will cease to be a 
memory and pass into the state of a present thing, something actually lived. 
I shall then only restore to it its character of memory by carrying myself back 
to the process by which I called it up, as it was virtual, from the depths of my 
past. It is just because I made it active that it has become actual, that is to 
say, a sensation capable of provoking movements. But most psychologists see 
in pure memory only a weakened perception, an asembly of nascent sen­
sations. Having thus effaced, to begin with, all difference in kind between 
sensation and memory, they are led by the logic of their hypothesis to 
materialize memory and to idealize sensation. They perceive memory only in 
the form of an image, that is to say, already embodied in nascent sensations. 
Having thus attributed to it that which is essential to sensation, and refusing 
to see in the ideality of memory something distinct, something contrasted 
with sensation itself, they are forced, when they come back to pure sensation, 
to leave to it that ideality with which they have thus implicitly endowed 
nascent sensations. For if the past, which by hypothesis is no longer active, 
can subsist in the form of a weak sensation, there must be sensations that are 
powerless. If pure memory, which by hypothesis interests no definite part of 
the body, is a nascent sensation, then sensation is not essentially localized in 
any point of the body. Hence the illusion that consists in regarding sensation 

The Persistence of the Past 
129 
as an ethereal and unextended state which acquires extension and consoli· 
dates in the body by mere accident: an illusion which vitiates profoundly, as 
we have seen, the theory of external perception and raises a great number of 
the questions at issue between the various metaphysics of matter. We must 
make up our minds to it: sensation is, in its essence, extended and localized; 
it is a source of movement. Pure memory, being inextensive and powerless, 
does not in any degree share the nature of sensation. 
That which I call my present is my attitude with regard to the immediate 
future; it is my impending action. My present is, then, sensori·motor. Of my 
past, that alone becomes image and, consequently, sensation, at least nascent, 
which can collaborate in that action, insen itself in that attitude, in a word 
make itself useful; but, from the moment that it becomes image, the past 
leaves the state of pure memory and coincides with a cenain pan of my 
present. Memory actualised in an image differs, then, profoundly from pure 
memory. The image is a present state, and its sole share in the past is the 
memory from which it arose. Memory, on the contrary, powerless as long as 
it remains without utility, is pure from all admixture of sensation, is without 
attachment to the present, and is, consequently, unextended. 
This radical powerlessness of pure memory is just what will enable us to 
understand how it is preserved in a latent state. Without as yet going to the 
bean of the matter, we will confine ourselves to the remark that our unwil· 
lingness to conceive unconscious psychical states is due, above all, to the fact 
that we hold consciousness to be the essential propeny of psychical states: so a 
psychical state cannot, it seems, cease to be conscious without ceasing to exist. 
But if consciousness is but the characteristic note of the present, that is to say, 
of the actually lived, in shan, of the active, then that which does not act may 
cease to belong to consciousness without therefore ceasing to exist in some 
manner. In other words, in the psychological domain, consciousness may not 
be the synonym of existence, but only of real action or of immediate efficacy; 
limiting thus the meaning of the term, we shall have less difficulty in 
representing to ourselves a psychical state which is unconscious, that is to say, 
ineffective. Whatever idea we may frame of consciousness in itself, such as it 
would be if it could work untrammelled, we cannot deny that, in a being 
which has bodily functions, the chief office of consciousness is to preside over 
action and to enlighten choice. Therefore, it throws light on the immediate 
antecedents of the decision, and on those past recollections which can 
usefully combine with it; all else remains in shadow. 
[ . . .  ] 
But we are so much accustomed to reverse, for the sake of action, the real 
order of things, we are so strongly obsessed by images drawn from space, 
that we cannot hinder ourselves from asking where memories are stored up. 
We understand that physico·chemical phenomena take place in the brain, 
that the brain is in the body, the body in the air which surrounds it, etc.; but 
the past, once achieved, if it is retained, where is it? To locate it in the 

130 
Matter and Memory 
cerebral substance, in the state of molecular modification, seems clear and 
simple enough because then we have a receptacle, actually given, which we 
have only to open in order to let the latent images flow into consciousness. 
But if the brain cannot serve such a purpose, in what warehouse shall we 
store the accumulated images? We forget that the relation of container to 
content borrows its apparent clearness and universality from the necessity 
laid upon us of always opening out space in from of us and of always dosing 
duration behind us. Because it has been shown that one thing is within 
another, the phenomenon of its preservation is not thereby made any 
clearer. We may even go further: let us admit for a moment that the past 
survives in the form of a memory stored in the brain; it is then necessary that 
the brain, in order to preserve the memory, should preserve itself. But the 
brain, insofar as it is an image extended in space, never occupies more than 
the present moment: it constitutes, with all the rest of the material universe, 
an ever-renewed section of universal becoming. Either, then, you must 
suppose that this universe dies and is born again miraculously at each 
moment of duration, or you must attribute to it that continuity of existence 
which you deny to consciousness, and make of its past a reality which 
endures and is prolonged into its present. So that you have gained nothing 
by depositing the memories in matter, and you find yourself, on the con­
trary, compelled to extend to the totality of the states of the material world 
that complete and independent survival of the past which you have j ust 
refused to psychical states. This survival of the past per se forces itself upon 
philosophers, then, under one form or another; the difficulty that we have in 
conceiving it comes simply from the fact that we extend to the series of 
memories, in time, that obligation of containing and being contained which 
applies only to the collection of bodies instantaneously perceived in space. 
The fundamental illusion consists in transferring to duration itself, in its 
continuous flow, the form of the instantaneous sections which we make in it. 
But how can the past, which, by hypothesis, has ceased to be, preserve 
itself? Have we not here a real contradiction? We reply that the question is 
just whether the past has ceased to exist or whether it has simply ceased to be 
useful. You define the present in an arbitrary manner as that which is, 
whereas the present is simply what is being made. Nothing is less than the 
present moment, if you understand by that the indivisible limit which 
divides the past from the future. When we think this present as going to be, 
it exists not yet, and when we think it as existing, it is already past. If, on the 
other hand, what you are considering is the concrete present such as it is 
actually lived by consciousness, we may say that this present consists, in large 
measure, in the immediate past. In the fraction of a second which covers the 
briefest possible perception of light, billions of vibrations have taken place, 
of which the first is separated from the last by an interval which is 
enormously divided. Your perception, however instantaneous, consists then 
in an incalculable multitude of remembered elements; in truth, every 

The Persistence of the Past 
131 
perception is already memory. Practically, we perceive only the past, the pure 
present being the invisible progress of the past gnawing into the furure. 
Consciousness, then, illumines, at each moment of time, that immediate 
part of the past which, impending over the fumre, seeks to realize and to 
associate with it. Solely preoccupied in thus determining an undetermined 
future, consciousness may shed a little of its light on those of our states, 
more remote in the past, which can be usefully combined with our present 
state, that is to say, with our immediate past: the rest remains in the dark. 
It is in this illuminated part of our history that we remain seated, in virtue of 
the fundamental law of life, which is a law of action: hence the difficulty we 
experience in conceiving memories which are preserved in the shadow. Our 
reluctance to admit the integral survival of the past has its origin, then, in the 
very bent of our psychical life - an unfolding of states wherein our interest 
prompts us to look at that which is unrolling, and not at that which is 
entirely unrolled. 
So we return, after a long digression, to our point of departure. There are, 
we have said, two memories which are profoundly distinct: the one, fixed 
in the organism, is nothing else but the complete set of intelligently 
constructed mechanisms which ensure the appropriate reply to the various 
possible demands. This memory enables us to adapt ourselves to the present 
situation; through it the actions to which we are subject prolong themselves 
into reactions that are sometimes accomplished, sometimes merely nascent, 
but always more or less appropriate. Habit rather than memory, it acts our 
past experience but does not call up its image. The other is the true memory. 
Coextensive with consciousness, ir retains and ranges alongside of each other 
all our states in the order in which they occur, leaving to each fact its place 
and, consequently, marking its date, truly moving in the past and nor, like 
the first, in an ever renewed present. But, in marking the profound 
distinction between these two forms of memory, we have not shown their 
connecting link. Above the body, with its mechanisms which symbolize the 
accumulated effort of past actions, the memory which imagines and repeats 
has been left to hang, as it were, suspended in the void. Now, if it be true 
that we never perceive anything but our immediate past, if our consciousness 
of the present is already memory, the two terms which had been separated to 
begin with cohere closely together. Seen from this new point of view, 
indeed, our body is nothing but that part of our representation which is ever 
being born again, the part always present, or rather that which, at each 
moment, is just past. Itself an image, the body cannor store up images, since 
it forms a part of the images, and this is why it is a chimerical enterprise to 
seek to localize past or even present perceptions in the brain: they are nor in 
it; it is the brain that is in them. Bur this special image which persists in the 
midst of the others, and which I call my body, constitutes at every moment, 
as we have said, a section of the universal becoming. It is then the place of 
passage of the movements received and thrown back, a hyphen, a connecting 

132 
Matter and Memory 
A 
B 
p 
s 
Figure 2 
link between the things which act upon me and the things upon which I 
act - the seat, in a word, of the sensori-motor phenomena. If I represent by 
a cone SAB, the totality of the recollections accumulated in my memory, the 
base AB, situated in the past, remains motionless, while the summit S, which 
indicates at all times my present, moves forward unceasingly, and 
unceasingly also touches the moving plane P of my actual representation 
of the universe. At S, the image of the body is concentrated, and, since it 
belongs to the plane P, this image does but receive and restore actions 
emanating from all the images of which the plane is composed. 
The bodily memory, made up of the sum of the sensori-motor systems 
organized by habit, is then a quasi-instantaneous memory to which the true 
memory of the past serves as base. Since they are not two separate things, 
since the first is only, as we have said, the pointed end, ever moving, inserted 
by the second in the shifting plane of experience, it is natural that the two 
functions should lend each other a mutual support. So, on the one hand, the 
memory of the past offers to the sensori-motor mechanisms all the recol­
lections capable of guiding them in their task and of giving to the motor 
reaction the direction suggested by the lessons of experience. It is in just this 
that the associations of contiguity and likeness consist. But, on the other 
hand, the sensori-motor apparatus furnish to ineffective, that is unconscious, 
memories, the means of raking on a body, of materializing themselves, 
in short of becoming present. For, that a recollection should reappear in 
consciousness, ir is necessary that it should descend from the heights of pure 
memory down to the precise point where action is taking place. In other 

The Persistence of the Past 
133 
words, it is from the present that the appeal to which memory responds 
comes, and it is from the sensori-motor elements of present action that a 
memory borrows the warmth which gives it life. 
Is it not by the constancy of this agreement, by the precision with which 
these two complementary memories insert themselves each into the other, 
that we recognize a 'well-balanced' mind, that is to say, in fact, a man nicely 
adapted to life? The characteristic of the man of action is the promptitude 
with which he summons to the help of a given situation all the memories 
which have reference to it; yet it is also the insurmountable barrier which 
encounters, when they present themselves on the threshold of his con­
sciousness, memories that are useless or indifferent. To live only in the 
present, to respond to a stimulus by the immediate reaction which prolongs 
it, is the mark of the lower animals: the man who proceeds in this way is a 
man of impulse. But he who lives in the past for the mere pleasure of living 
there, and in whom recollections emerge into the light of consciousness 
without any advantage for the present situation, is hardly better fitted for 
action: here we have no man of impulse, but a dreamer. Between these two 
extremes lives the happy disposition of memory docile enough to follow 
with precision all the outlines of the present situation, but energetic enough 
to resist all other appeal. Good sense, or practical sense, is probably nothing 
but this. 
The extraordinary development of spontaneous memory in most children 
is due to the fact that they have not yet persuaded their memory to remain 
bound up with their conduct. They usually follow the impression of the 
moment, and as with them action does not bow to the suggestions of 
memory, so neither are their recollections limited to the necessities of action. 
They seem to retain with greater facility only because they remember with 
less discernment. The apparent diminution of memory, as intellect develops, 
is then due to the growing organization of recollections with acts. Thus 
conscious memory loses in range what it gains in force of penetration: it had 
at first the facility of the memory of dreams, but then it was actually 
dreaming. Indeed we observe this same exaggeration of spontaneous 
memory in men whose intellectual development hardly goes beyond that of 
childhood. A missionary, after preaching a long sermon to some African 
savages, heard one of them repeat it textually, with the same gestures, from 
b . 
. 
d 1 2  
egmnmg to en . 
But, if almost the whole of our past is hidden from us because it is 
inhibited by the necessities of present action, it will find strength to cross the 
threshold of consciousness in all cases where we renounce the interests of 
effective action to replace ourselves, so to speak, in the life of dreams. Sleep, 
natural or artificial, brings about an indifference of just this kind. It has been 
recently suggested that in sleep there is an interruption of the contact between 
the nervous elements, motor and sensory. u Even if we do not accept this 
ingenious hypothesis, it is impossible not ro see in sleep a relaxing, even if 

134 
Matter and Memory 
only functional, of the tension of the nervous system, ever ready, during 
waking hours, to prolong by an appropriate reaction the stimulation received. 
Now the exaltation of the memory in certain dreams and in certain som­
nambulistic stares is well known. Memories, which we believed abolished, 
then reappear with striking completeness; we live over again, in all their 
detail, forgotten scenes of childhood; we speak languages which we no longer 
even remember to have learned. But there is nothing more instructive in this 
regard than what happens in cases of sudden suffocation, in men drowned 
or hanged. Such a man, when brought to life again, states that he saw, in a 
very short rime, all the forgotten events of his life passing before him with 
great rapidity, with their smallest circumstances and in the very order in 
which they occurred.14 
A human being who should dream his life instead of living it would no 
doubt thus keep before his eyes at each moment the infinite multitude of the 
details of his past history. And, conversely, the man who should repudiate 
this memory with all that it begets would be continually acting his life 
instead of truly representing it to himself: a conscious automaton, he would 
follow the lead of useful habits which prolong into an appropriate reaction 
the stimulation received. The first would never rise above the particular, 
or even above the individual; leaving to each image irs date in time and its 
position in space, he would see wherein it difers from others and not how it 
resembles them. The other, always swayed by habit, would only distinguish 
in any situation that aspect in which it practically resembles former situa­
tions; incapable, doubtless, of thinking universals, since every general idea 
implies the representation, at least virtual, of a number of remembered 
images, he would, nevertheless, move in the universal, habit being to action 
what generality is to thought. But these two extreme states, the one of an 
entirely contemplative memory which apprehends only the singular in its 
vision, the other of a purely motor memory which stamps the note 
of generality on its action, are really separate and are fully visible only in 
exceptional cases. In normal life they are interpenetrating, so that each has to 
abandon some part of its original purity. The first reveals itself in the recol­
lection of differences, the second in the perception of resemblances: at the 
meeting of the two currents appears the general idea. 
[ . . .  ] 
The essence of the general idea, in fact, is to be unceasingly going 
backwards and forwards between the plane of action and that of pure 
memory. Let us refer once more to the diagram we traced above. At S is the 
present perception which I have of my body, that is to say, of a certain 
sensori-motor equilibrium. Over the surface of the base AB are spread, we 
may say, my recollections in their totality. Within the cone so determined, 
the general idea oscillates continually between the summit S and the base 
AB. In S, it would take the clearly defined form of a bodily attitude or of an 
uttered word; at AB, it would wear the aspect, no less defined, of the 

The Persistence of the Past 
135 
A 
8 
A' 
p 
s 
Figure 3 
thousand individual images into which its fragile unity would break up. And 
that is why a psychology which abides by the already done, which considers 
only that which is made and ignores that which is in the making, will never 
perceive in this movement anything more than the two extremities between 
which it oscillates; it makes the general idea coincide sometimes with the 
action which manifests it or the word which expresses it and at other times 
with the multitudinous images, unlimited in number, which are its 
equivalent in memory. But the truth is that the general idea escapes us as 
soon as we try to fix it at either of the two extremities. It consists in the 
double current which goes from the one to the other - always ready either 
to crystallize into uttered words or to evaporate into memories. 
This amounts to saying that between the sensori-motor mechanisms 
figured by the point S and the totality of the memories disposed in AB there 
is room, as we indicated in the preceding chapter, for a thousand repetitions 
of our psychical life, figured by as many sections A'B', A"B", etc., of the 
same cone. We tend to scatter ourselves over AB in the measure that we 
detach ourselves from our sensory and motor state to live in the life of 
dreams; we tend to concentrate ourselves in S in the measure that we attach 
ourselves more firmly to the present reality, responding by motor reactions 
to sensory stimulation. In point of fact, the normal self never stays in either 
of these extreme positions; it moves between them, adopts in turn the 
positions corresponding to the intermediate sections, or, in other words, 
gives to its representations just enough image and just enough idea for them 
to be able to lend useful aid to the present action. 

Planes of Consciousness 15 
[ . . .  ] 
What is the cardinal error of associationism? It is to have set all recollections 
on the same plane, to have misunderstood the greater or lesser distance 
which separates them from the present bodily state, that is from action. Thus 
associationism is unable to explain either how the recollection clings to the 
perception which evokes it, or why association is effected by similarity or 
contiguity rather than in any other way, or, finally, by what caprice a par­
ticular recollection is chosen among the thousand others which similarity or 
contiguity might equally well attach to the present perception. This means 
that associationism has mixed and confounded all the different planes of 
consciousness and that it persists in regarding a less complete recollection as 
one that is less complex, whereas it is in reality a recollection less dreamed, 
more impersonal, nearer to action and, therefore, more capable of moulding 
itself - like a ready-made garment - upon the new character of the present 
situation. The opponents of associationism have, moreover, followed it onto 
this ground. They combat the theory because it explains the higher opera­
tions of the mind by association, but not because it misunderstands the true 
nature of association itself. Yet this is the original vice of associationism. 
Between the plane of action - the plane in which our body has condensed 
its past into motor habits - and the plane of pure memory, where our mind 
retains in all its details the picture of our past life, we believe that we can 
discover thousands of different planes of consciousness, a thousand integral 
and yet diverse repetitions of the whole of the experience through which we 
have lived. To complete a recollection by more personal details does not at all 
consist in mechanically juxtaposing other recollections to this, but in trans­
porting ourselves to a wider plane of consciousness, in going away from 
action in the direction of dream. Neither does the localizing of a recollection 
consist in inserting it mechanically among other memories, but in describing, 
by an increasing expansion of the memory as a whole, a circle large enough to 
include this detail from the past. These planes, moreover, are not given 
as ready-made things superposed the one on the other. Rather they exist 
virtually, with that existence which is proper to things of the spirit. The 
intellect, forever moving in the interval which separates them, unceasingly 
finds them again or creates them anew: the life of intellect consists in this very 
movement. Then we understand why the laws of association are similarity 
and contiguity rather than any other laws, and why memory chooses among 

Planes of Consciousness 
137 
recollections which are similar or contiguous certain images rather than other 
images, and, finally, how by the combined work of body and mind the 
earliest general ideas are formed. The interest of a living being lies in 
discovering in the present situation that which resembles a former situation, 
and then in placing alongside of that present situation what preceded and 
followed the previous one, in order to profit by past experience. Of all the 
associations which can be imagined, those of resemblance and contiguity are 
therefore at first the only associations that have a vital utility. But, in order to 
understand the mechanism of these associations and above all the apparently 
capricious selection which they make of memories, we must place ourselves 
alternately on the two extreme planes of consciousness which we have called 
the plane of action and the plane of dream. In the first are displayed only 
motor habits; these may be called associations which are acted or lived, rather 
than represented. Here resemblance and contiguity are fused together, for 
analogous external situations, as they recur, and have ended by connecting 
together certain bodily movements; thenceforth, the same automatic reac­
tion, in which we unfold these contiguous movements, will also draw from 
the situation which occasions them its resemblance to former situations. But, 
as we pass from movements to images and from poorer to richer images, 
resemblance and contiguity part company: they end by contrasting sharply 
with each other on that other extreme plane where no action is any longer 
affixed to the images. The choice of one resemblance among many, of one 
contiguity among others, is, therefore, not made at random: it depends on 
the ever-varying degree of the tension of memory, which, according to its 
tendency to insert itself in the present act or to withdraw from it, transposes 
itself as a whole from one key into another. And this double movement of 
memory between its two extreme limits also sketches out, as we have shown, 
the first general ideas - motor habits ascending to seek similar images, in 
order to extract resemblances from them, and similar images coming down 
toward motor habits, to fuse themselves, for instance, in the automatic 
utterance of the word which makes them one. The nascent generality of the 
idea consists, then, in a certain activity of the mind, in a movement between 
action and representation. And this is why, as we have said, it will always be 
easy for a certain philosophy to localize the general idea at one of the two 
extremities, to make it crystallize into words or evaporate into memories, 
whereas it really consists in the transit of the mind as it passes from one term 
to the other. 


Mind-Energy 


Memory of the Present and 
False Recognition 
An Article in the Revue Philosophique, December 1908. 1 
[ . . .  ] 
However, a remark must first be made concerning all psychical facts that are 
morbid or abnormal. Among them are some which evidently point to an 
impoverishment of the normal life. Such are the anaesthesias, the amnesias, 
the aphasias, the paralyses, all chose states, in fact, which are characterized by 
the loss of particular sensations, particular memories, or particular move­
ments. In order to define these states we simply have to indicate what has 
disappeared from consciousness. They consist in an absence. We all agree in 
seeing in them a psychic deficiency. 
On the contrary, there are morbid or abnormal states which appear to add 
something to normal life and enrich it instead of impoverishing it. A delirium, 
a hallucination, an obsession, are positive facts. They consist in the presence, 
not in the absence, of something. They seem to introduce into the mind 
certain new ways of feeling and thinking. To define them, we have to 
consider what they are and what they bring, instead of what they are nor and 
what they take away. If most of the symptoms of insanity belong to chis 
second category, so also do a great many psychical anomalies and singu­
larities. False recognition is one. As we shall see later, it presents an aspect sui 
generis, far different from that of true recognition. 
However, the philosopher may very well question whether, in the mental 
domain, disorder and degeneration can really be capable of creating 
something, and whether the apparently positive characters which give the 
abnormal phenomenon an aspect of novelty are not, when we come to study 
their nature, reducible to an internal void, a shortcoming of normality. 
Disease, we generally say, is a diminution. True; but this is a vague way 
of expressing it, and we should indicate precisely, when no actual part of 
consciousness is missing, wherein the consciousness is diminished. I made an 
attempt of this kind in a former work to which I have already referred. 
I pointed out that, besides the diminution which affects the number of the 
states of consciousness, there is another which concerns their solidity or their 
weight. In the first case, the disorder simply and only eliminates some states 

142 
Mind-Energy 
without affecting others. In the second, no psychical state disappears but all 
are affected, all lose something of their ballast, that is to say, of their power 
of insertion and penetration into the reality. (See Matter and Memory, 
Chapter III.) It is the 'attention to life' which is diminished, and the new 
phenomena which are started are only the visible aspect, the outward 
appearance of this detachment. 
I recognize, however, that even under this form the idea is still too general 
to be applied to the explanation of particular psychical facts. But it points 
the direction we must follow to find an explanation. 
For, if we accept this principle, we shall not, in the case of a morbid or 
abnormal phenomenon presenting special characters, have to seek any active 
cause, because the phenomenon, despite appearances, has nothing positive 
and nothing new about it. It was already being manufactured while the 
conditions were normal; but it was prevented from emerging, when about to 
appear, by one of those continually active inhibitory mechanisms which 
secure attention to life. This means that normal psychical life, as I conceive it, 
is a system of functions, each with its own psychic organ. Were each of these 
organs to work by itself, there would result a host of useless or untoward 
effects, liable to disturb the functioning of the others and so upset that 
adjustable equilibrium by which our adaptation to the environment is con­
tinually maintained. But a work of elimination, of correction, of bringing 
back to the point, is constantly going on, and it is precisely this work which 
secures a healthy mind. Wherever this work is slackened, symptoms seem to 
be created, fresh and new, but in reality they were always there, or rather 
would have been there if nothing had interfered. I quite understand that the 
investigator should be struck with the sui generis character of the morbid 
facts. As they are complex and yet present a certain order in their compli­
cation, his first inclination is to relate them to an acting cause, capable of 
organizing the elements of them. But if, in the mental domain, disease is 
unable co create, it can only consist in the slackening or stopping of certain 
mechanisms which in the normal state prevent others from having their full 
effect. If this be so, then, in this case the principal task of psychology is not to 
explain why certain phenomena are produced in disordered minds, but why they 
are not found in the normally healthy mind. 
Already I have applied that method to the study of dreams. We are coo 
much inclined to look upon dreams as if they were phantoms superadded to 
the solid perceptions and conceptions of our waking life, will-o-the-wisps 
which hover above it. They are supposed to be facts of a special order, to 
which psychology ought simply to devote a special chapter and then be quit 
of them. And it is natural they should appear so, because the waking state is 
what matters to us, whilst the dreaming state is most foreign to action and 
most useless. From the practical point of view dream is merely an accessory, 
so from the theoretical point of view we come to regard it as an accident. 
But let us set aside this preconceived idea, and the dream-state will then be 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
143 
seen, on the contrary, to be the substratum of our normal state. The dream 
is not something fantastic hovering above and additional to the reality of 
being awake; on the contrary, that reality of the waking state is gained by 
limitation, by concentration and by tension of a diffuse psychical life, which 
is the dream-life. In a sense, the perception and memory we exercise in the 
dream-state are more natural than those in the waking state: there does 
consciousness disport itself, perceiving just to perceive, remembering just to 
remember, with no care for life, that is, for the action to be accomplished. 
But the waking state consists in eliminating, in choosing, in concentrating 
unceasingly the totality of the diffuse dream-life at the point where a 
practical problem is presented. To be awake means to will. Cease to will, 
detach yourself from life, disinterest yourself, and by that mere abstention 
you pass from the awake-self to the dream-self - less tense but more 
extended. The mechanism of the awake-state is, then, the more complex, 
more delicate and more positive of the two, and it is the awake-state, rather 
than the dream-state, which requires explanation. 
Now, if dreams are in every respect an imitation or counterfeit of insanity, 
we may expect our remarks on dreams to apply as well to many forms of 
insanity. Of course, we must avoid approaching the study of mental diseases 
with anything like a stereotyped system. It is doubtful if all the phenomena 
of insanity are to be explained on one and the same principle. And for many 
of them, still undefined, it is hardly possible yet to attempt an explanation. 
As I said at first, I offer my view simply as a methodological indication, with 
no other object than that of pointing a direction for theoretical inquiry. 
There are, however, some pathological or abnormal facts to which I believe 
it is even now applicable. One of the chief of these is false recognition. For 
the mechanism of perception and the mechanism of memory seem to me 
such that false recognition would arise naturally from the joint play of the 
two faculties, were there not a special mechanism intervening at the same 
time in order to prevent it. The important thing to know, then, is not why it 
arises in certain persons at particular moments, but why it is not being 
produced at every moment in everybody. 
How is a recollection formed? Let it first be clear, however, that the 
recollections of which I am going to speak are always psychical, although 
they may be more often unconscious than conscious or semi-conscious. 
Concerning recollections considered as traces left in the brain, I have given 
my view in Matter and Memory, the work to which I have had frequent 
occasion to refer. I have attempted there to prove that the various memories 
are indeed localized in the brain, in the meaning that the brain possesses for 
each category of memory-images a special contrivance whose purpose is to 
convert the pure memory into a nascent perception or image; but if we go 
further than this, and suppose every recollection to be localized in the matter 
of the brain, we are simply translating undoubted psychical facts into very 
questionable anatomical language, and we end in consequences which are 

144 
Mind-Energy 
contradicted by obsetvation. Indeed, when we speak of our recollections, we 
think of something our consciousness possesses or can always recover by 
drawing in, so to say, the thread which holds it. The recollection, in fact, 
passes to and fro from consciousness to unconsciousness, and the transition 
from one to the other is so continuous, the limit between the two states so 
little marked, that we have no right to suppose a radical difference of nature 
between them. It is memory in this purely psychical meaning of which I am 
going to speak. On the other hand, let us agree to call 'perception' the con­
sciousness of anything that is present, whether it be an internal or an external 
object. Both definitions being granted, I hold that the formation of memory 
is never posterior to the formation of perception; it is contemporaneous with it. 
Step by step, as perception is created, the memory of it is projected beside 
it, as the shadow falls beside the body. But, in the normal condition, there is 
no consciousness of it, just as we should be unconscious of our shadow were 
our eyes to throw light on it each time they turn in that direction. 
For suppose memory is not created at the same moment as the percep­
tion: at what moment will it begin to exist? Does it wait till the perception is 
vanished that it may then arise? This is what we usually suppose, whether we 
think unconscious recollections are psychical states or cerebral modifica­
tions. In the one case we suppose a present psychical state, the perception, 
then, when that no longer exists, the remembrance of that absent percep­
tion. In the other case, we think that when certain cells come into play there 
is perception, and that the action of those cells has left traces so that, when 
the perception has vanished, there is memory. But, if things happen in this 
way, the course of our conscious existence must be composed of clear-cut 
states, each of which must begin objectively, and also objectively end. Now, 
is it not clear that dividing psychical life into states, as we divide a play into 
scenes, is relative to the varied and changing interpretations we give of our 
past and has nothing absolute about it? According to the point of view in 
which I am placed, or the centre of interest which I choose, I divide yester­
day differently, discovering several very different series of situations or states 
in it. Though these divisions are not all equally artificial, not one existed in 
itself, because the unrolling of psychical life is continuous. The afternoon 
I happen to have spent in the country with friends has broken up into 
luncheon + walk + dinner, or into conversation + conversation + conversa­
tion, etc., and of none of these conversations, treading as it were on the 
heels of another, could it be said that it forms a distinct entity. Scores of 
systems of catving are possible; no system corresponds with joints of reality. 
What right have we, then, to suppose that memory chooses one particular 
system, or that it divides psychical life into definite periods and awaits the 
end of each period in order ro rule up its accounts with perception? 
Is it alleged that the perception of an external object begins when the object 
appears, and ends when it disappears, and that therefore we can, in this case at 
least, mark the precise moment when memory replaces perception? But this is 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
145 
to ignore the fact that the perception is ordinarily composed of successive 
parts, and that these parts have just as much individuality, or rather just 
as little, as the whole. Of each of them we can as well say that its object 
is disappearing all along: how, then, could the recollection arise only 
when everything is over? And how could memory know, at any particular 
moment of the operation, that everything was not over yet, that perception 
was still incomplete? 
The more we reflect, the more impossible it is to imagine any way in 
which the recollection can arise if it is not created step by step with the 
perception itself. Either the present leaves no trace in memory, or it is 
twofold at every moment, its very up-rush being in two jets exactly sym­
metrical, one of which falls back towards the past whilst the other springs 
forward towards the future. But the forward-springing one, which we call 
perception, is that alone which interests us. We have no need of the memory 
of things whilst we hold the things themselves. Practical consciousness 
throwing this memory aside as useless, theoretical reflexion holds it to be 
non-existent. Thus the illusion arises that memory succeeds perception. But 
this illusion has another source deeper still. 
The main cause is that the reanimated and conscious memory produces on 
us the effect of the perception itself, and appears to be the resurrection of the 
perception, feebler but nor substantially different. Between the perception 
and the memory there seems to be a difference of intensity or degree, but not 
of nature. The perception being defined a strong state and the remembrance a 
weak state, the remembrance of a perception being necessarily then nothing 
else than that same perception weakened, it seems to us that memory, in 
order to register a perception in the unconscious, must wait until the whole 
of it goes to sleep. And so we suppose the remembrance of a perception 
cannot be created while the perception is being created nor be developed at 
the same time. 
But the theory that present perception is a strong state, and revived 
recollection a feeble state, that perception passes into recollection by way of 
diminution, is contradicted by the most elementary observation of fact. 
Take an intense sensation and make it gradually decrease to zero. If there is 
only a difference of degree between the remembrance of the sensation and 
the sensation itself, the sensation will become memory before it disappears. 
Now, a moment may come when you are unable to say whether you are 
dealing with a weak sensation experienced or a weak sensation imagined, bur 
the weak state never becomes the recollection, thrown back into the past, 
of the strong state. The recollection, then, is a totally different thing. 
The recollection of a sensation is capable of suggesting the sensation, I mean 
of causing it to be born again, feeble at first, then stronger and stronger in 
proportion as the attention is more fixed upon it. But the recollection is dis­
tinct from the sensation it suggests; and it is precisely because we feel it 
behind the sensation it suggests, as the hypnotiser is behind the hallucination 

146 
Mind-Energy 
he provokes, that we localize its cause in the past. Sensation is essentially what 
is actual and now; but the recollection which suggests it from the depths of 
the unconscious, hardly emerging upwards, has that power sui generis 
of suggestion which belongs to things that are no more and would fain exist 
again. Hardly has the suggestion touched the imagination chan the thing 
suggested is outlined in its nascent state, and this is why it is so difficult to 
distinguish between a weak sensation experienced and a weak sensation 
which we remember without dating it. But the suggestion is in no degree 
what it suggests. The pure recollection of a sensation or of a perception is 
not a degree of the sensation or the perception itself. To suppose it so would 
be like saying that the word of the hypnotiser, in order to suggest to the 
hypnotized patient that he has in his mouth sugar or salt, must already itself 
be a little sugared or salted. 
If we try to discover the source and purpose of chis illusion, we find that 
innate in our mind is the need to represent our whole inner life as modelled 
on that very small part of ourself which is inserted into the present reality, 
the part which perceives it and acts upon it. Our perceptions and our sensa­
tions are at once what is clearest in us and most important for us; they note at 
each moment the changing relation of our body to other bodies; they 
determine or direct our conduct. Thence our tendency to see in the other 
psychical facts nothing but perceptions or sensations obscured or diminished. 
Those, indeed, among us who resist this tendency, who believe thought to be 
something other chan a play of images, yet have some trouble in persuading 
themselves that the remembrance of a perception is radically different from 
the perception itself. The remembrance must at any rate, it seems to them, be 
expressible in terms of perception. It must then be obtained by some 
operation effected on the image. What is the operation? Here a process of 
natural reasoning intervenes. We can say a priori that the operation must 
effect an alteration in the quality of the content of the image, or in its 
quantity, or in both at. once. Now, it is certainly not in the quality, since 
memory must represent the past to us without altering it. It must be then in 
the quantity. But quantity, in irs rum, may be extensive or intensive, for the 
image comprehends a definite number of parts and it presents a certain 
degree of force. Does, chen, memory modify the extension of the image? 
Evidently not, for if it added anything to the past, it would be unfaithful to 
it, and if it subtracted something from the past, it would be incomplete. 
We conclude, then, that the modification bears on the intensity; and as it is 
evidently not an increase, it must be a diminution. Such is the instinctive, 
scarcely conscious dialectic by which we are led, from elimination to elimi­
nation, to see in the remembrance an enfeeblement of the image. 
When once we have reached chis conclusion, our whole psychology of 
memory is inspired by it; even our physiology feels the effect of it. In what­
ever way we then conceive the cerebral mechanism of perception, we see in 
recollection nothing but the same mechanism set going anew, an attenuated 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
147 
repetition of the same fact. Facts stand before us, however, and seem to 
point to the opposite direction. They evidence that a man can lose visual 
recollections without ceasing to see and auditory recollections without 
ceasing to hear, that psychic blindness and deafness do not necessarily imply 
loss of sight or of hearing: how would this be possible if perception and 
memory were concerned with the same centres, and put in play the same 
mechanisms? But we turn aside or pass on, rather than assent to a radical 
distinction between perception and memory. 
In so far, then, as our reason reconstructs psychical life out of conscious 
states sharply delineated, and in so far as it judges that all those stares are 
expressible in terms of images, it is following two paths which converge in 
making memory an enfeebled perception, something which follows the 
perception instead of being contemporaneous with it. Set aside this natural 
dialectic of the intellect, convenient though it be for expression in language, 
possibly indispensable in practice, but not suggested by inward observation, 
and observe what actually takes place. The memory will be seen to duplicate 
the perception at every moment, to arise with it, to be developed at the same 
time, and to survive it precisely because it is of a quite different nature. 
What, then, is a memory? Every clear description of a psychical state is 
made up of images, and we are saying that the recollection of an image is not 
an image. The pure recollection, then, can only be described in a vague 
manner and in metaphoric terms. Let me repeat, then, an explanation I sug­
gested in Matter and Memory. The memory seems to be to the perception 
what the image reflected in the mirror is to the object in front of it. The 
object can be touched as well as seen; acts on us as well as we on it; is pregnant 
with possible actions; it is actual. The image is virtual, and though it 
resembles the object, it is incapable of doing what the object does. Our actual 
existence then, whilst it is unrolled in rime, duplicates itself all along with a 
virtual existence, a mirror-image. Every moment of our life presents two 
aspects, it is actual and virtual, perception on the one side and memory on the 
other. Each moment of life is split up as and when it is posited. Or rather, it 
consists in this very splitting, for the present moment, always going forward, 
fleeting limit between the immediate past which is now no more and the 
immediate future which is not yet, would be a mere abstraction were it not 
the moving mirror which continually reflects perception as a memory. 
Let us imagine a mind to become conscious of this duplicating. Suppose 
the reflexion of our perception and of our action comes to consciousness not 
when the perception is complete and the action accomplished, but con­
tinuously and simultaneously, step by step, as we perceive and act. We must 
then see, at one and the same time, our real existence and its virtual image, 
the object on one side and its reflexion on the other. Moreover, the reflexion 
can not be confused with the object, for the object has all the characters of 
perception whilst the reflexion is already memory: were it not memory from 
the first, it never could become so. Later on, when performing its normal 

148 
Mind-Energ;y 
function, it will represent our past to us with the mark of the past; discerned 
at the very moment in which it is formed, it is already with the mark of the 
past, which is constitutive of its essence, that it appears to us. What past? 
A past that has no date and can have none; it is the past in general, it cannot 
be any past in particular. No doubt, if it were merely a past scene or a past 
emotion, we might be actually deceived and believe that we have already 
perceived the scene we are actually perceiving, that we have already experi­
enced the motion we are experiencing. But it is far more than this. What is 
duplicating itself at each moment into perception and memory is the totality 
of what we are seeing, hearing and experiencing, all that we are with all that 
surrounds us. As we are becoming conscious of this duplication, it is the 
entirety of our present which must appear to us at once as perception and as 
memory. And yet we know full well that no life goes twice through the same 
moment of its history, that time does not remount its course. What is to be 
done? The case is most extraordinary and bewildering. It contradicts 
everything that we have been accustomed to. We feel that we are confronted 
with a recollection: a recollection it must be, for it bears the characteristic 
mark of states we usually call by this name and which only appear when 
their object has disappeared. And yet it does not present to us something 
which has been, but simply something which is; it advances pari passu with 
the perception which it reproduces. It is a recollection of the present 
moment in that actual moment itself. It is of the past in its form and of the 
present in its matter. It is a memory of the present. 
Step by step, as the situation progresses, the memory which keeps pace 
with it gives to each of its stages the aspect of 'already seen,' the feeling of 
already known. But the situation, even before it has come to an end, seems 
to us something which must form a whole, being cut out of the continuity of 
our experience by the interest of the moment. Now, how could we have 
already lived a part of the situation if we had not lived the whole of it? Could 
we recognize what is being unrolled if we did not know what is still rolled 
up? Are we not able at each moment to anticipate at least the following 
moment? The instant which is about to come is already broken into by the 
instant which now is; the content of the one is inseparable from the content 
of the other: therefore, if the present instant belongs already to my past, 
must not the coming instant belong to it equally? If I recognize the present 
instant, am I not quite as surely going to recognize the coming one? So I am 
unceasingly, towards what is on the point of happening, in the attitude of a 
person who will recognize and who consequently knows. But this is only the 
attitude of knowledge, the form of it without the matter. As I cannot predict 
what is going to happen, I quite realize that I do not know it; but I foresee 
that I am going to have known it, in the sense that I shall recognize it when 
I shall perceive it; and this recognition to come, which I feel inevitable on 
account of the rush of my faculty of recognizing, exercises in advance 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
149 
a retroactive effect on my present, placing me in the strange position of a 
person who feels he knows what he knows he does not know. 
Suppose we catch ourselves repeating mechanically something we once 
knew by heart but had long forgotten. As we recognize each word the 
moment we pronounce it, we have a feeling that we possess it before pro­
nouncing it; and yet we only get it back while we pronounce it. Whoever 
becomes conscious of the continual duplicating of his present into perception 
and memory will be in the same state. If even slightly capable of self-analysis, 
he will compare himself to an actor playing his part automatically, listening 
to himself and beholding himself play. The more deeply he analyses his 
experience, the more he will split into two personages, one of which moves 
about on the stage while the other sits and looks. On the one hand, he knows 
that he continues to be what he was, a self who thinks and acts conform­
ably to what the situation requires, a self inserted into real life and adapting 
itself to it by a free effort of will; this is what his perception of the present 
assures him. But the memory of this present, which is equally there, makes 
him believe that he is repeating what has been said already, seeing again what 
has been seen already, and so transforms him into an actor reciting his part. 
Thence two different selves, one of which, conscious of its liberty, erects 
itself into an independent spectator of a scene which the other seems to be 
playing in a mechanical way. But this duplication does not go through to the 
end. It is rather an oscillation between two standpoints from which one 
views oneself, a going and coming of the mind between perception which is 
only perception and perception duplicated with memory. The first implies 
the habitual feeling we have of our freedom and quite naturally inserts itself 
into the real world. The second makes us believe we are repeating a part we 
have learned, converts us into automata, transports us into a stage-world or a 
world of dream. Whoever has experienced during a few seconds a pressing 
danger, from which he has only been able to escape by a rapid series of 
actions imperatively called for and boldly executed, knows something of the 
kind. It is a duplication rather virtual than actual. We act and yet 'are acted.' 
We feel that we choose and will, but that we are choosing what is imposed 
on us and willing the inevitable. Thence a compenetration of states which 
melt into one another and even coincide in immediate consciousness, but 
which are none the less logically incompatible. Because they are logically 
incompatible, reflective consciousness will represenr them by a duplication 
of the self into two different personages, one of which appropriates freedom, 
the other necessity: the one, a free spectator, beholds the other automatically 
playing his part. 
To sum up: I have imagined a mind, in its normal state, to become 
conscious of the duplication which is constantly but unconsciously going on, 
and I have described, in the last three pages, the three principal aspects under 
which that mind would appear to itself if it could thus witness the splitting 

1 50 
Mind-Energy 
of its present. Now, these are the very characteristics of false recognition. 
We find them the more accentuated the more definite the phenomenon is, 
the more complete it is, and the more profoundly analysed it is by the 
person who experiences it. 
Several of those who have experienced it have spoken, to begin with, of a 
feeling of automatism, and of a state comparable to that of an actor playing 
a part. What is said and what is done, what the person himself says and 
does, appear 'inevitable.' He is looking on at his own movements, thoughts 
and actions. 2 Things happen as though his personality were duplicated, 
without, however, there being actual duplication. One of them writes: 'This 
feeling of duplication only exists in the sensation; the two persons are only 
one from the material standpoint.' He means probably that he experiences a 
feeling of duality, but accompanied with the consciousness that there is only 
on.;: person. 3 
On the other hand, as I said at the beginning of this essay, the subject of 
this experience often finds himself in the singular state of mind of a person 
who believes he knows what is about to happen at the same time that he feels 
quite unable to predict it. 'It seems always to me,' says one, 'that I am 
foreseeing what is going to happen, yet I cannot actually announce it.' 
Another recalls what is going to happen 'as one recalls a name which is at the 
uttermost ends of memory.'" One of the earliest observations is that of one 
who believed he knew beforehand what the people around him would do. 5 
We have in this a second characteristic of false recognition. 
But the most general characteristic of all is the one to which I first called 
attention. The memory evoked is a loose memory, with no point of 
attachment in the past. It does not correspond with any former experience. 
The subject knows it, is convinced of it, and the conviction is not the effect 
of reasoning, it is immediate. It is a feeling that the recollection evoked must 
be simply a duplicate of the actual perception. Is it, then, a 'memory of the 
present'? If he does nor use these words, it is probably because the expression 
would appear to him contradictory, because he only conceives memory as a 
repetition of the past, because it does not seem possible that a representation 
can bear the mark of the past independently of what it represents. In fact, he 
theorizes without knowing it, and holds all memory to have been formed 
after the perception which it reproduces. Yet he affirms something very like 
it when he speaks of a past which no interval separates from the present. 
'I felt within me a kind of click which did away with all the past lying between 
that minute of long ago and the minute in which I then was.'6 These words 
give expression to the most distinctive mark of the phenomenon. When we 
speak of it as 'false recognition,' we ought to add that it is a process which 
does not really counterfeit true recognition and which does not give the 
illusion of it. What, in fact, is normal recognition? It may be produced in two 
ways, either by a feeling of familiarity which accompanies the present per­
ception, or by the evoking of a past perception which the present perception 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
1 5 1  
seems to repeat. Now false recognition is neither of these two operations. 
What characterizes the first kind of recognition is that it excludes any recall of 
a definite personal situation in which the recognized object had formerly been 
perceived. My desk, my table, my books form around me an atmosphere of 
familiarity only so long as they do not call up the recollection of any definite 
event of my history. If they evoke the exact recollection of an incident in 
which they have been mixed up, I recognize them as having been a part of 
that incident, but this recognition is superadded to the first and is fun­
damentally distinct from it, as distinct as the personal from the impersonal. 
Now false recognition is something quite different from this feeling of 
familiarity. It always bears on a personal situation, which we are convinced is 
the identical reproduction of another personal situation, just as precise and 
as definite. It would seem, then, that it must be recognition of the second 
kind, one which implies the recall of a former situation like the present one. 
But then it should be noticed that we have always to do in such cases with 
situations similar and not identical. Recognition of the second kind is 
brought about by the idea of what differentiates the two situations and not 
only of what is common to them. If I am at a play which I have seen before, 
I recognize one by one each of the words and each of the scenes; at last I 
recognize the whole piece and recall having seen it before; but I had then a 
different seat, and other neighbours, and was taken up with other pre­
occupations; in any case I could not have been then what I am today, since 
I have lived in the meanwhile. If, then, the two images are the same, they are 
not presented in the same frame, and the vague feeling of the difference of 
the frames surrounds, like a fringe, the consciousness I have of the identity 
of the images, and allows me at every moment to distinguish them. In false 
recognition, on the contrary, the frames are just as identical as the images 
themselves. I am present at the same play with the same sensations, the same 
preoccupations, I am at this very moment in the very same position, at the 
same date, at the same instant of my history where and when I then was. 
It is, then, hardly fit to speak here of illusion, since the illusory knowledge is 
the imitation of a real knowledge, and since the phenomenon with which we 
are dealing imitates no other phenomenon of our experience. And it is hardly 
fit to speak of false recognition, since there is no true recognition, of the one 
kind or of the other, of which it could be the exact counterfeit. We are in fact 
dealing with a phenomenon unique of its kind, the very phenomenon which 
the memory of the present would produce, were it to rise up instantaneously 
from the unconscious where it must lie. It would appear as memory, since 
memory bears a distinctive mark, different from that of perception; but it 
could not be carried back to any past experience, because each of us knows 
indeed that we do not live twice through one and the same moment of 
our history. 
I turn now to the problem why this memory is ordinarily concealed, and 
how it is revealed in extraordinary cases. In a general way, or by right, the 

1 52 
Mind-Energy 
past only reappears to consciousness in the measure in which it can aid us to 
understand the present and to foresee the future. It is the forerunner of 
action. We go wrong when we study the functions of thought in their 
isolated state as if they were an end in themselves, and we pure minds 
occupied in contemplating ideas and images. The present perception would 
in that case attract to itself a resembling memory with no suspicion of utility, 
without purpose, for mere pleasure - the pleasure of introducing into the 
mental world a law of attraction analogous to that which governs the 
material world. Without questioning the 'law of similarity,' I may point out 
that any two ideas and any two images taken at random, however distant 
from one another we may suppose them to be, must have some relation of 
similarity since we can always find a common genus into which to make 
them enter: so that any perception would recall any recollection if there were 
no೏hing more, here, than a mechanical attraction of like for like. But the fact 
is that if a perception recalls a memory, it is in order that the circumstances 
which have preceded, accompanied and followed the past situation, should 
throw some light on the present situation and indicate the way out of it. 
Thousands and thousands of memories evoked by resemblance are possible, 
but the memory which tends to reappear is the one which resembles the 
perception by a particular side, that namely which may illumine and direct 
the action in preparation. Even this memory need not show itself; it is 
enough if, without showing itself, it recall the circumstances which have 
been given in contiguity with it, what has preceded and what has followed, 
what in short it is important to know in order to understand the present and 
anticipate the future. We may even suppose that the contiguous circum­
stances need not be manifested to consciousness, so long as the conclusion 
can appear, that is to say, the exact suggestion of a certain thing to do. It is in 
this mode, probably, that consciousness works in most animals. But the 
more the consciousness is developed, the more it illumines the work of 
the memory, and the more, too, it lets association by resemblance, which 
is the means, shine through association by contiguity, which is the end. 
When once the association has had official recognition in consciousness, it 
allows the introduction of a crowd of fancy memories, which resemble the 
present state but may be devoid of actual interest. In this way we may 
explain why we can dream as well as act; but it is the needs of action which 
determine the laws of recall; they alone hold the keys of consciousness, 
and fancy memories only slip in by taking advantage of what is lax and 
ill-defined in the relation of resemblance which legally entitles to a pass. 
In short, if the totality of our recollections be at every moment pushing 
upward from the depth of the unconscious, consciousness, attentive to life, 
only admits, legally, those which can offer their assistance to the present 
action, although, in fact, many others slip in because there must be a general 
rule, and because the rule, here, is that resemblance secures admittance. 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
153 
But what can be more unavailing for our present action than memory of 
the present? Rather would any other kind of memory be entitled to lay a 
claim, for it at least brings with it some information, though it be of no 
actual interest. Alone, memory of the present has nothing to teach us, being 
only the double of perception. We have the real object, what are we to do 
with the virtual image of it? As well let go the substance for the shadow. This 
is why there is no memory from which our attention is more obstinately 
turned away. 
By attention, of course, I do not mean here that individual attention 
which varies in its intensity, direction and duration according to personal 
temperament. I am alluding to what I should call racial attention, an 
attention naturally turned towards certain regions of psychical life, naturally 
turned away from others. Within each of these regions our individual 
attention may be directed, no doubt by its own caprice, but it then simply 
supervenes on that racial attention, as the choice that the individual eye 
makes of particular visual objects is superposed on the choice which the 
human eye has made once for all, of a certain definite region of the spectrum 
in which it sees light. Now, while a slight failure of individual attention is 
only absent-mindedness, - a normal thing - any failure of racial attention 
takes the form of a pathological or abnormal fact. 
False recognition is such an anomaly. It indicates a temporary enfeebling 
of general attention to life: consciousness, no longer turning in its natural 
direction, allows itself to look at what it has no interest in perceiving. But 
what are we to understand here by 'attention to life'? What is the particular 
kind of inattention which ends in false recognition? Attention and inatten­
tion are vague terms. Can we define them more exactly in this particular 
case? Let me try to do so, without claiming, however, to attain in so obscure 
a subject complete clearness and definite precision. 
We hardly notice the extent to which our present consists in an anticipa­
tion of our future. The vision reflective consciousness gives us of our inner life 
is that of one state succeeding another state, each commencing at one point, 
finishing at another, and provisionally self-sufficing. Consciousness, in this 
reflective vision, is preparing the way for language; it is distinguishing, 
separating and juxtaposing; it is only at its ease in the definite and the 
immobile; it stops at a static conception of reality. But immediate con­
sciousness grasps quite another thing. Immanent in the inward life, it feels 
rather than sees it, but feels it as a movement, as a continual treading on a 
future which recoils without ceasing. Indeed, this feeling becomes very clear 
when it concerns a definite act we are called on to perform. The end of the 
action appears to us immediately; and, during the whole time that we are 
acting, we are conscious not so much of the successive states as of a 
decreasing distance between our actual position and the end towards which 
we are approaching. This end, moreover, is perceived only as a provisional 

1 54 
Mind-Energy 
end; we know there is something else behind; in the spring we take to leap 
the first obstacle we are already preparing to leap a second, until other leaps 
will take place and succeed one another indefinitely. Again, when we listen 
to a sentence, we need not pay attention to each word taken separately, it is 
the meaning of the whole which matters: from the very beginning we are 
reconstructing this meaning hypothetically; our mind darts forward in a 
certain general direction, only having to inflect it here and there according 
as the sentence, unrolling, pushes our attention towards one meaning or 
another. Here again the present is perceived in the future on which it treads, 
rather than apprehended in itself. This vital impulse gives to all the psychical 
states it causes us to pass or leap over, a particular aspect which is so constant 
and to which we are so accustomed that we only become aware of it when it 
is missing. Every one may have observed the strange character a familiar 
word sometimes takes when we fix our attention on it. The word appears 
new, and really is so, for till then our consciousness had not made it a 
stopping place; we had always passed it by to come to the end of a sentence. 
We cannot compress the impulse of our whole psychical life as completely as 
we compress that of our speech; but whenever the general impulse is 
enfeebled, the situation passed through must appear as strange as the sound 
of a word immobilized in the course of the movement of the sentence. It is 
no longer part and parcel of real life. Looking in our past experience for 
what resembles it most, we are likely to compare it with dream. 
Now, it is remarkable that most of the recorded cases of false recognition 
just describe the experience as an impression of dream. Paul Bourget, for 
example, observes that the illusion is accompanied by 'a kind of unanalysable 
feeling that reality is a dream.'7 And an English writer some years ago, 
describing his own experience, applied the epithet 'shadowy' to the whole 
phenomenon, adding that it appeared later, when it was recollected, as 'the 
half-forgotten relic of a dream.' Thus we have observers, unknown to one 
another, speaking differem languages, expressing themselves in actually 
equivalent terms. The impression of dream, then, is almost general. 
It is also remarkable that persons subject to false recognition are often 
liable to finding a familiar word strange. An inquiry instituted by G. Hey­
mans has shown that these two dispositions are connected together. He adds 
very justly that current theories of the first phenomenon do not explain why 
it is associated with the second. 
In these conditions, ought we not to look for the initial cause of false 
recognition in a momentary stop of the impulse of our consciousness, a stop 
which, no doubt, does not change anything in the materiality of our present, 
but detaches it from the future to which it cleaves and from the action which 
would be its normal conclusion, so giving it the aspect of a mere picture, of a 
play which is being presented to the player, of a reality transposed into 
dream? Let me now describe an impression derived from my own personal 
experience. I am not subject to false recognition, but I have tried very often, 

Memory of the Present and False Recognition 
1 55 
since I have studied it, to place myself in the state of mind described by 
observers and to induce experimentally the phenomenon in myself. I have 
never quite succeeded, but I have obtained on various occasions something 
approaching it, although very fugitive. The scene in which I find myself 
must be not only new to me, but in strong contrast with the course of my 
habitual life. It may be, for example, a scene when I am on a journey, but 
this journey must have been improvised, not premeditated. The first condi­
tion is, then, that I should experience a certain quite peculiar astonishment, 
which I will call the astonishment at finding myself there. On this astonish­
ment there comes to be grafted a feeling rather different from it, but yet in 
relationship with it, the feeling that the future is closed, that the situation is 
detached from everything although I am attached to it. In the degree that 
these emotions interpenetrate, the reality loses its solidity and my perception 
of the present tends to duplicate itself with something which is behind it. 
Is this the memory of the present appearing through? I do not venture to say 
so; but it seems to me that I am then verily on the road to false recognition, 
and that a very little would bring me to it. 
Now, why does memory of the present wait, before it can be revealed, for 
the impulse of consciousness to slacken or to stop? We know nothing of the 
mechanism by which an idea comes out of the unconscious or falls back into 
it. All we can do is to have recourse to a provisional scheme by which we can 
symbolize the operation. Let us come back to the one which we have already 
used. Let us imagine the totality of unconscious recollections pressing 
against consciousness, - consciousness laying down the general rule that 
only what can serve action is allowed to pass. The memory of the present is 
striving like the rest; moreover, it is nearer to us than any other memory. 
Hanging on to our perception of the present, it is always on the point of 
entering into it. Perception only escapes from it by a continual movement 
forward to keep itself in front. In other words, a memory can only be 
actualised by means of a perception: the memory of the present would 
therefore penetrate into consciousness, could it insinuate itself into the 
perception of the present. But this is always in advance of it: thanks to 
the impulse which animates it, perception is less in the present than in the 
future. Suppose now the impulse suddenly to stop: memory rejoins 
perception, the present is cognised and recognised at the same time. 
False recognition seems then to be, upon the whole, the most harmless 
form of inattention to life. A constant lowering of tone of the fundamental 
attention is expressed outwardly by actual disorder or disease, more or less 
enduring, more or less severe. But it may happen that this attention is main­
tained ordinarily at its normal tone, and that its insufficiency is manifested 
in a quite different manner, namely by temporary arrests of functioning, 
generally very short, separated and far apart. As soon as the arrest occurs, 
false recognition overtakes consciousness, covers it for some instants and 
then falls back, like a wave. 

156 
Mind-Energy 
Let me conclude with a final hypothesis, at which I hinted in the beginning 
of this essay. If inattention to life can take two forms unequally severe, should 
we not be right in supposing that the more benign form is nature's means of 
preserving the individual from the more severe form? In cases when funda­
mental attention is insufficient and when, therefore, there is a perpetual risk 
of passing completely from the state of waking to the state of dream, 
consciousness localizes the evil at a few points where attention stops for a 
short time and resigns entirely: attention is thus made able, all the rest of the 
time, to remain steadily fixed on reality. Certain distinct cases of false 
recognition appear to confirm this hypothesis. The patient begins by feeling 
himself detached from everything, as in a dream. He experiences false 
recognition immediately afterwards, as he begins to be self-possessed again. 8 
Such then seems to be the defect in will which occasions false recognition. 
Such, at least, seems to be its deep source and furthest origin. As for its actual 
cause and mechanism, it must be sought in the combined play of perception 
and memory. False recognition results from the natural functioning of these 
two faculties, each allowed its own way. It would take place at every moment 
if the will, unceasingly striving towards action, did not prevent the present 
turning back on itself by continually pressing it forward into the future. The 
darting forward of consciousness, which reveals the life-impetus, escapes 
analysis by its simplicity. We can however study, in the moments when it 
slackens, the conditions of mobile equilibrium which till then it had main­
tained, and so analyse a manifestation which foreshadows its essence. 

Brain and Thought: 
A Philosophical Illusion 9 
A paper read at the International Congress of Philosophy at Geneva in 1904, 
and published in the Revue de metaphysique et de morale under the title 
'Le Paralogisme psycho-physiologique. ' 
The idea that there is an equivalence between a psychic state and its correspon­
ding cerebral state is widely accepted in modern philosophy. Philosophers 
have discussed the causes and the significance of this equivalence rather than 
the equivalence itself. By some, it has been held that the cerebral state is 
reduplicated in certain cases by a psychical phosphorescence which illumines 
its outline. By others, it is supposed that the cerebral state and the psychic 
state form respectively two series of phenomena which correspond point to 
point, without it being necessary to attribute to the cerebral series the creation 
of the psychic. All, however, agree in admitting an equivalence or, as it is 
more usual to say, a parallelism of the rwo series. In order to express the idea, 
I will formulate it as a thesis: 'Given a cerebral state, there will ensue a 
definite psychic state.' Or it may be stated rhus: 'A super-human intelli­
gence, watching the dance of the atoms of which the human brain consists 
and possessing the psycho-physiological key, would be able to read, in the 
working of the brain, all that is occurring in the corresponding conscious­
ness.' Or, finally, it may be put in this way: 'Consciousness tells no more 
than what is going on in the brain; it only tells it in a different language.' 
There can be no doubt that the origin of this thesis is entirely meta­
physical. It comes to us in a direct line from the Cartesian philosophy of the 
seventeenth century. Implicitly contained (with certain restrictions, it is 
true) in the philosophy of Descartes, accepted and pushed to extremes by his 
successors, it has passed from them, through the 'medical philosophers' of 
the eighteenth century, to the psycho-physiology of today. 
It is easy to understand why the physiologists should have accepted it 
without demur. In the first place they had no choice, for the problem came to 
them from metaphysics, and the metaphysicians proposed no other solution. 
And, secondly, it was in the interest of physiology to rally to it, and to 
proceed as ifit were some day to give us a complete translation of psychical 
activity into physiological language. Only on some such supposition could 

l"i8 
Mind-Energy 
physiology advance, pushing ever farther its analysis of the cerebral condi­
tions of thought. It was, and it still is, an excellent principle of research, 
signifying that we ought not to be too hasty in assigning limits to physiology, 
any more indeed than to any other scientific investigation. But the dogmatic 
affirmation of psycho-physiological parallelism is another matter altogether. 
It is no longer a scientific rule, but a metaphysical hypothesis. In so far as it is 
intelligible, it is the metaphysics of science as science was conceived in the 
time of Descartes, that is, in a purely mathematical framework. I believe that 
rhe facts, examined without prejudice and without the bias towards a 
mathematical mechanism, suggest a more subtle hypothesis concerning the 
correspondence between the psychic and the cerebral state. The latter only 
expresses the action which is pre-figured in the former; it marks out, so to say, 
the motor articulations of thought. Posit a psychical fact, and no doubt you 
therewith determine the concomitant cerebral state. But the converse is not 
true, for to the same cerebral state there may equally well correspond many 
different psychic facts. I have expounded this theory in Matter and Memory, 
and I will not repeat it here. The argument I propose to bring forward now is 
independent of it altogether. I am not going to substitute another hypothesis 
for that of psycho-physiological parallelism; what I want to show is that this 
hypothesis itself implies, in its usual form, a fundamental self-contradiction. 
It is, moreover, a self-contradiction full of instruction. In the perception that 
there is a self-contradiction we are given the clue to the direction in which to 
seek the solution of the problem, at the same time that the mechanism of a 
most subtle metaphysical illusion is exposed. In poinring it out, we are not 
therefore engaged merely in critical and destructive work. 
My contention is that the thesis rests on an ambiguity in the terms, that 
it cannot be stated in correct language without crumbling to pieces, that it 
implies a dialectical artifice, the surreptitious passing from one definite 
notation-system to an opposite notation-system without giving or raking 
notice of the substitution. Need I add that the fallacy is in one respect 
voluntary? It is suggested by the very terms in which the question is put; and 
it comes so naturally to our mind that we have no way of avoiding it except 
by forcing ourselves to formulate the thesis, by turns, in each of the two 
notation-systems of which philosophy makes use. 
When we speak of external objects, we have to choose, in fact, between 
two notation-systems. We can treat external objects, and the changes they 
exhibit, as a system of things or as a system of ideas. And either of these two 
systems will work provided we keep strictly to the one we have chosen. 
Let us, first of all, try to distinguish the two systems with precision. When 
realism speaks of things and idealism of ideas, it is not merely a dispute 
about words; realism and idealism are two different notation-systems, that is 
to say, two different ways of setting about the analysis of reality. For the 
idealist, there is nothing in reality over and above what appears to his 
consciousness or to consciousness in general. It would be absurd to speak of 

Brain and Thought: A Philosophical Illusion 
1 59 
a property of matter which could not be represented in idea. There is no 
virtuality, or, at least, nothing definitely virtual; whatever exists is actual or 
could become so. Idealism is, then, a notation-system which implies that 
everything essential in matter is displayed or displayable in the idea which 
we have of it, and that the real world is articulated in the very same way as it 
is presented in idea. The hypothesis of realism is the exact reverse. When 
realism affirms that matter exists independently of the idea, the meaning is 
that beneath our idea of matter there is an inaccessible cause of that idea, 
that behind perception, which is actual, there are hidden powers and 
virtualities; in short, realism assumes that the divisions and articulations 
visible in our perception are purely relative to our manner of perceiving. 
I am not questioning that pro founder definitions could be given of the two 
tendencies, realist and idealist, such as they are to be found throughout the 
history of philosophy. I have myself indeed used the words 'realism' and 
'idealism' in a somewhat different meaning. This is as much as to say that I 
have no particular liking for the definitions I have just given. They may 
characterize an idealism like that of Berkeley and the realism opposed to 
it. They may also fairly well represent our ordinary notion of the two 
tendencies - the tendency of idealism to include the whole reality in what 
can be presented to our mind, the tendency of realism to claim to pass 
beyond what is presented to our mind. But the argument I am about to put 
forward is independent of any historical conception of realism and idealism. 
If any one is inclined to dispute the generality of my two definitions, I simply 
ask him to accept the words realism and idealism as conventional terms 
by which I intend to indicate, in the course of this study, two notations 
of reality, one of which implies the possibility, the other the impossibility, of 
identifying things with their ideas, that is with the presentations, spread our 
and articulated in space, which they offer to a human consciousness. That 
these two postulates are mutually exclusive, that consequently it is illegitimate 
to apply the two notation-systems at the same time to the same object, every 
one will agree. Now, I require nothing more for my present purpose. 
I propose to establish the three following points: (1) If we choose the 
idealist notation, the affirmation of parallelism (in the meaning of equiva­
lence) between the psychic state and the cerebral state is a self-conrradicrion. 
(2) If, on the other hand, we choose the realist notation, there is the same 
contradiction, but transposed. (3) The thesis of parallelism appears consistent 
only when we employ at the same time, in the same proposition, both 
notation-systems together. That is to say, the thesis is intelligible only 
because, by an unconscious trick of intellectual conjuring, we pass instantly 
from realism to idealism and from idealism to realism, showing ourselves in 
the one at the very moment when we are going to be caught in the act of self­
contradiction in the other. The trick, moreover, is quite natural; we are, in 
this case, born conjurors, because the problem we are concerned with, the 
psycho-physiological problem of the relation of brain and thought, itself 

160 
Mind-Energy 
suggests by its vety terms the two points of view of realism and idealism, -
the term 'brain' making us think of a thing, the term 'thought' of an idea. 
By the vety wording of the question is prepared the double meaning which 
vitiates the answer. 
First of all, then, we will place ourselves at the idealist standpoint, and 
consider, as an example, the perception of the objects which at any given 
moment occupy the visual field. These objects act on the visual centres in the 
brain through the retina and the optic nerve. There they bring about a 
modification of atomic and molecular dispositions. 'What is the relation of 
this cerebral modification to the external objects? 
The thesis of parallelism is that the cerebral state caused by the objects, 
and not the objects themselves, determines conscious perception, and there­
fore, so long as the cerebral state exists, all the objects perceived might, by a 
touch as it were of a magic wand, cease to exist, it would in no way alter what 
is going on in consciousness. But it is obvious that on the idealist hypothesis 
such a proposition is absurd. External objects are for the idealist images, and 
the brain is one of them. There is nothing in things themselves over and 
above what is displayed or displayable in the images. There is nothing, then, 
in the dancing about of cerebral atoms over and above a dance of atoms. 
Since this is all we have supposed to be in the brain, it is all that will be found 
there or that can be got out of it. To say that an image of the surrounding 
world issues from this image of a dance of atoms, or that the image of the one 
expresses the image of the other, or that given the one the other is also given, 
is self-contradictory, since these two images - the external world and the 
intra-cerebral movement - have been assumed to be oflike nature, and since 
the latter image is, by the vety hypothesis, a tiny part of the field of images 
presented, while the external world is that field in its entirety. To say that 
the cerebral movements contain virtually the image presentation which is the 
external world may indeed seem intelligible if we hold the doctrine that 
movement is something underlying the idea of it, a mysterious power whose 
effect upon us is alone perceived. But this is evidently self-contradictory if 
we hold the doctrine that movement is itself idea, for it amounts to saying 
that a small patch of the field of presentation is the whole of presentation. 
I can understand, assuming the idealist hypothesis, that cerebral 
modifications may be an efect of the action of external objects; they may 
be movements received by the organism which lead it to prepare the appro­
priate reactions. The nerve-centres, - images in the midst of images, moving 
pictures like all the other pictures, - contain movable pans which take in 
certain movements from outside and turn them into internal movements of 
reaction, either carried out or simply starred. But, then, the work of the 
brain - a picture - is limited to receiving the influence of the other pictures 
and to marking out, as I said, their motor articulations. In this, and in this 
alone, is the brain indispensable to the remainder of our world presentation, 
and that is why it cannot be injured without there resulting a partial or total 

Brain and Thought: A Philosophical Illusion 
161 
destruction of that presentation. Bur it does not provide or exhibit the presen­
tation, because, itself idea, it could not present the whole of the presentation 
unless it ceased to be a part of the presentation and became the whole. 
Formulated in strictly idealist language, the thesis of parallelism would there­
fore have to be summed up in the self-contradictory proposition: the part is 
the whole. 
But the truth is that the philosopher unconsciously passes from the idealist to a 
pseudo-realist point of view. He began by viewing the brain as an idea or 
picture exactly like all other ideas or pictures, encased in the other pictures 
and inseparable from them: the internal motion of the brain, being then 
a picture in the midst of pictures, was not required to provide the other 
pictures, since these were given with it and around it. But insensibly he comes 
to changing the brain and the intra-cerebral motion into things, that is to say, 
into causes hidden behind a particular picture and whose power extends far 
beyond what is presented. Whence this sliding from idealism to realism? It is 
favoured by many subtle fallacies; yet it would not be so smooth and easy 
were there not facts that seem to point in the same direction. 
For, besides perception, there is memory. When I remember objects once 
perceived, the objects may be gone. One only has remained, my body; and yet 
the other objects may become visible again in the form of memory-images. 
Surely, then, it seems, my body, or some part of my body, has the power of 
evoking these images. Let us assume it does not create them; at least it is able 
to arouse them. How could it do this, were it not that to definite cerebral 
states correspond definite memory-images, and were there not, in this precise 
meaning, a parallelism between cerebral work and thought? 
The reply is obvious: in the idealist hypothesis it is impossible for an 
object to be presented as an idea in the complete absence of the object itself. 
If there be nothing in the object over and above what is ideally present, if the 
presence of the object coincide with the idea we have of it, any part of 
the idea of the object must be in some sort a part of its presence. The 
recollection is no longer the object itself, I grant. Many things are wanted 
before it can be that. In the first place, it is fragmentary, for usually the 
recollection retains only some elements of the primitive perception. Again, it 
exists only for the person who evokes it, whereas rhe object forms parr of a 
common experience. Lastly, when the memory-image arises, the accompany­
ing modifications of the brain-image are no longer, as in perception, 
movements strong enough to excite the organism-image to react immedi­
ately. The body no longer feels uplifted by the perceived object, and since it is 
in the suggestion of activity that the fieling of actuality consists, the object 
presented no longer appears actual: this is what we express by saying that it is 
no longer present. The fact is that, in the idealist hypothesis, the memory­
image can only be a pellicle detached from the primitive presentation or, 
what amounts to the same thing, from the object. It is always present, but 
consciousness turns irs attention away from it so long as there is no reason for 

162 
Mind-Energy 
consciousness to consider it. Consciousness has an interest in perceiving it 
only when it feels itself capable of making use of it, that is to say, when the 
present cerebral state already outlines some of the nascent motor reactions 
which the real object (that is, the complete idea) would have determined: this 
beginning of bodily activity confers on the idea a beginning of actuality. But, 
then, there is no such thing as 'parallelism' or 'equivalence' between the 
memory-image and the cerebral state. For the nascent motor reacdons 
portray some of the possible effects of the idea which is about to reappear, but 
they do not portray the idea; and as the same motor reaction may follow 
many very different recollections, it is not a definite recollection which is 
evoked by a definite bodily state; on the contrary, many different recollec­
tions are equally possible, and among them consciousness exercises a choice. 
They are subject to only one common condition - that of entering the same 
motor frame: in this lies their 'resemblance,' a term which is vague in current 
association theories, bur which acquires a precise meaning when we define it 
by the identity of motor articulations. However, I shall not press this. I am 
content to say that in the idealist hypothesis the perceived objects are 
coincident with the complete and completely acting presentation, the 
remembered objects with the same, but incomplete and incompletely acting, 
presentation, and that neither in the case of perception nor in the case of 
memory is the cerebral state equivalent to the presentation, for the simple 
reason that it is part of it. Let us turn, then, to realism and see whether it will 
make the thesis of psycho-physiological parallelism clearer. 
Again, objects fill my visual field; my brain is in the midst of them; in my 
sensory nerve-centres are displacements of molecules and atoms occasioned 
by the action of external objects. From the idealist standpoint, I had no right 
to attribute to these internal movements a mysterious power of duplicating 
themselves with the idea of external things, for they were supposed to be in 
reality what they are in idea, and since, by the hypothesis, they present 
themselves as movements of certain atoms of the brain, they are move­
ments of atoms of the brain and nothing else. But it is the essence of realism 
to suppose that behind ideas is a cause which is not idea. There seems no 
reason, then, why realism should not hold that the idea of external objects is 
implied in the cerebral modifications. According to some theories, the 
cerebral states are actually the creators of the ideas, which are then only their 
'epiphenomenon.' According to other theories it is supposed, following the 
Cartesian distinction, that the cerebral movements are the occasion, not 
the cause, of the apparition of conscious perceptions, or even that the per­
ceptions and the movements are only two aspects of a reality which is neither 
movement nor perception. All, however, believe that to a definite cerebral 
state there corresponds a definite conscious state, and that the internal 
movements of the cerebral substance, considered by themselves, would reveal 
to one who should possess the cipher the complete detail of whatever might 
be going on in the corresponding consciousness. 

Brain and Thought: A Philosophical Illusion 
163 
But is it not at once clear that to consider the brain separately, and 
separately also the movement of its atoms, involves now an actual self­
contradiction? An idealist has the right to declare any object isolable which 
gives him an isolated idea, because for him the object is not distinct from the 
idea. But realism consists precisely in the rejection of this view; it holds that 
the lines of separation which we draw in the field of presentation are artificial 
or relative; it supposes that beneath presentations there is a system of 
reciprocal actions and entangled potentialities; in short, it defines the object 
not by its entry into our presentation, but by its solidarity with the whole of a 
reality supposed to be unknowable. The more science investigates the nature 
of the body in the direction of its 'reality,' the more it sees each property of 
the body, consequently its very existence, melt into the relations in which 
it stands with the matter outside it capable of influencing it. Indeed, the 
terms which reciprocally influence one another (whatever the names we give 
them: atoms, material points, centres of force, etc.) are only, for science, 
provisional terms; it is the reciprocal influence, or interaction, which is for it 
the final reality. 
Now, - should I say to rhe realist, - you began by giving yourself a brain, 
and saying that objects external to it modify it in such a way as to raise up 
ideas of themselves. Then you did away with these objects external to the 
brain, and ascribed to the cerebral modification the power of providing by its 
own resources the idea of the objects. But, in withdrawing the objects which 
encase it, you are withdrawing also, whether you will or no, the cerebral state, 
for it owes to them all its properties and its reality. You only preserve this 
cerebral state because you pass surreptitiously to the idealist notation-system, 
where you can posit as isolable by right what is isolated in idea. 
Keep to your hypothesis. External objects and the brain being com present, 
the idea is produced. You ought to say that this idea is a function not of the 
cerebral state alone, but of cerebral state and the objects determining it, 
cerebral state and external objects now forming together one indivisible 
block. Here again, then, the thesis of parallelism that the cerebral states, 
detached from the external objects, are themselves alone able to create, 
occasion or at least express the ideas of the objects, cannot be stated without 
falling to pieces. In strictly realist language it would be formulated thus: 
A part, which owes all that it is to the remainder of the whole, can be conceived 
as subsisting when the remainder of the whole has vanished. Or, still more 
simply: A relation between two terms is the equivalent of one of them. 
Either the movements of atoms going on in the brain are just what they 
purport to be in our idea of them, or rhey are different. In the first 
hypothesis, they are perceived as they are, and whatever else we perceive is 
then another thing: between the cerebral movements and the rest of what we 
perceive there is, consequently, the relation of contained to container. This 
is the idealist standpoint. In the second hypothesis, the fundamental reality 
of the cerebral movements consists in their solidarity with all that is behind 

164 
Mind-Energy 
the totality of our other perceptions, and by the very fact of considering this 
fundamental reality we consider the whole of the reality with which the 
cerebral movements form an undivided system: which amounts to saying 
that the intra-cerebral movement, envisaged as an isolated phenomenon, has 
vanished, and that there can be no longer any pretence of making into the 
substratum of presentation, as a whole, a phenomenon which is only a part, 
and a part artificially carved our of the middle of it. 
But the fact is that realism never does maintain itself in a pure unalloyed 
state. We can posit the existence of the real in general behind the ideas; but 
as soon as we begin to speak of particular reals, we must, whether we will or 
no, assume that things more or less coincide with the ideas we have of them. 
In front of the hidden background which he assumes to be reality itself, and 
where everything must be implied in everything, since it is behind space, the 
realist sets side by side, just as the idealist does, the distinct and explicit ideas 
or pictures which make up the whole of presentation. Realist when he posits 
the real, he becomes idealist directly he affirms anything concerning it, 
because realist-notation, when applied to explanations of detail, can hardly 
consist in anything else bur inscribing, beneath each term of idealist 
notation, a mark which indicates its provisional character. Be it so: but then, 
what we have just said of idealism now applies to realism which has taken up 
idealism on its own account. And therefore, by whatever name we denote 
the system, to say that cerebral stares are the equivalent of perceptions and 
memories comes always to affirming that rhe part is the whole. 
Comparing the two systems, we see that it is essential to idealism to stop at 
what is displayed and spread our in space and at spatial divisions, whilst 
realism regards the display as superficial and the divisions as artificial: realism 
assumes behind the juxtaposed ideas a system of reciprocal actions, conse­
quently a mutual implication of the pictures or ideas. Now, as our knowledge 
of matter can never get clean away from space, and as the reciprocal 
implication with which realism deals, however deep it be, can never become 
extraneous to space without becoming extraneous to science, realism in its 
explanations can never get beyond idealism. We are always more or less 
in idealism (in the sense defined) when we have to do with knowledge or 
science: were we not, we should not even think of taking isolated parts of 
reality and relating them to each other, - which is the very essence of science. 
The hypothesis of the realist is therefore here only an ideal, whose purpose is 
to remind him that he has never gone deep enough down in his explanation 
of reality, and that he must discover more and more fundamental relations 
between the parts of the real which to our eyes are juxtaposed in space. But 
the realist cannot help hypostatising this ideal. He hypostatises it in the ideas 
or pictures, set side by side, which for the idealist are reality itself. These 
ideas become therefore for the realist so many things - that is to say, reser­
voirs of hidden potentialities - and he can now think of the intra-cerebral 
movement (no longer simple ideas, but things) as enclosing potentially the 

Brain and Thought: A Philosophical Illusion 
165 
whole complete world as idea. In this consists his affirmation of psycho­
physiological parallelism. He forgers that he had placed his reservoir outside 
the world of idea and not within it, our of space and not within it, and that 
in any case his original hypothesis consisted in supposing reality either 
undivided or articulated in itself otherwise than it is in idea. In making a 
particular part of the world as reality correspond to each part of the world 
as idea, he articulates the real as he articulates the idea, he displays reality in 
space, and abandons his realism in order to enter into idealism, in which the 
relation of the brain as idea ro the rest of the world as idea is clearly that of 
the part to the whole. 
You began by speaking - should I say again to the philosopher - of the 
brain such as we see it, such as ir stands our in the midst of the presentation: 
so you assumed it to be a part of presentation, an idea, and you were in 
idealism. There, I repeat, the relation of the brain to the rest of presentation 
can only be the relation of part to whole. Thence, all of a sudden, you have 
fled to a reality supposed to lie beneath the presentation. Very good: but such 
reality is subspatial, which amounts to saying that the brain is no more an 
independent entity. What you have ro do with now is the totality of the real, 
in itself unknowable, over which is spread the totality of the presentation. 
You are now, indeed, in realism; and no more in this realism than in the 
idealism of a moment ago are the cerebral states the equivalent of the whole 
of presentation: it is - I must repeat it - the whole world of things which is 
again implied (but, this time, concealed and unknowable) in the whole of 
perception. But lo! taking the brain apart and dealing with things separately, 
you are actually continuing to decompose and recompose reality along the 
same lines and according to the same laws as presentation, which means that 
you no longer distinguish the one from the other. Back you are, then, in 
idealism; there you ought to remain. But not at all! You do indeed preserve 
the brain as it is given in presentation, therefore as an idea, but you forget 
that if the real is rhus spread out in the presentation, if it is extension and not 
tension, it can no longer compress within irself the powers and virtualities 
postulated by realism; unheedingly you erect the cerebral movements into 
the equivalent of the whole of presentation. You are therefore oscillating 
from idealism to realism and from realism to idealism, but so quickly that 
you do not perceive the see-saw motion and you think yourself all the time 
astride the two systems joined into one. This apparent reconciliation of two 
irreconcilable affirmations is rhe very essence of the thesis of parallelism. 
I have tried ro dissipate the illusion. It is not likely that I have entirely suc­
ceeded, because so many sympathetic ideas are grouped around the thesis of 
parallelism and protect it. Some of these ideas were born of the thesis itself; 
others, on the contrary, preceded it and were the instigators of the illegiti­
mate union which gave it birth; others again, with no blood relationship, 
have modelled themselves on it by constantly living beside it. All form round 
it today an imposing line of defence, which, when broken through on 

166 
Mind-Energy 
one point, calls up renewed resistance on another. I may specify some of 
these in particular. 
1 .  There is the implicit (I might even say the unconscious) hypothesis of 
a cerebral soul, I mean the hypothesis that the world as idea is concentrated 
in the cortical substance. As our presentation-world seems to accompany us 
when our body moves, we reason that there must be, inside that body, the 
equivalent of the world-presentation. The cerebral movements are thought 
to be this equivalent. Consciousness, then, can perceive the whole of the 
universe without purring itself our of the way; it has only to range within 
the limited space of the cerebral cortex, - a camera obscura where a minia­
ture reproduction is to be found of the whole world. 
2. There is the idea that all causality is mechanical and that there is 
nothing in the universe which is not mathematically calculable. Then, as our 
actions result from our ideas (past as well as present), we must, under pain of 
admitting a breach in mechanical causality, suppose that the brain, from 
which the action is started, contains the equivalent of perception, memory 
and even thought itself. But the idea that the whole world, including the 
living beings in it, can be treated as the subject of pure mathematics, is an 
a priori view of mind which goes back to the Cartesians. We may express it 
in modern terms, we may translate it into the language of present science, we 
may call in support of it an ever-increasing number of actual observations 
(the idea itself has prompted us to make them) and so attribute to it an 
experimental origin, the effectively measurable part of reality remains 
limited none the less, and the law, regarded as absolute, retains the character 
of a metaphysical hypothesis, which it already had in the time of Descartes. 
3. There is the idea that all that is required, in order to pass from the 
idealist standpoint of image-presentation to the realist standpoint of thing in 
itself, is to substitute for the pictorial presented image that same image 
reduced to a colourless design and to the mathematical relations of irs parts 
to one another. Hypnotized, so to speak, by the void which our mental 
power of abstraction is creating, we accept the suggestion that some, I know 
not what, marvellous significance is inherent in the mere motion of material 
points in space, that is to say, in an impoverished perception. We endow this 
blank abstraction with a virtue we should never have thought of bestowing 
on the concrete image, far richer, given in our immediate perception. But 
the truth is that we have to choose between the conception of reality which 
represents it spread out in space and consequently in idea, thus considering 
it as altogether actual or ready to become so, and the conception of reality 
which represents it as a reservoir of potentialities shrunk into itself, so to say, 
and outside space. No work of abstracting, of eliminating, - in short, of 
impoverishing, - performed on the first conception brings us any nearer to 
the second. Whatever you say concerning the relation of the brain to the 
idea from the standpoint of a pictorial idealism, which cakes immediate 
presentations as they are, coloured and living, applies a fortiori to an abstruse 

Brain and Thought: A Philosophical Illusion 
167 
idealism which reduces them to their mathematical skeleton, and which, 
by emphasizing the spatial character and reciprocal externality of the ideas, 
only shows more clearly how impossible it is for one of them to include all the 
others. Because, by rubbing extensive presentations against one another, you 
have blotted out the qualities which differentiated them in perception, 
you have not thereby advanced one step towards a reality which you assumed 
to be tension, not extension, and consequently so much the more real as it 
is more inextensive. As well might we imagine that a worn-out coin, by 
losing the precise mark which denotes its value, had gained an unlimited 
purchasing power. 
4. Lastly, there is the idea that if two wholes are solidary, each part of the 
one is solidary with a definite part of the other. And so, as there is no state of 
consciousness without its cerebral accompaniment, as a variation of this 
cerebral state does not take place without bringing on a variation of the 
conscious state (although the converse is not necessarily true in all cases), as 
an injury which interferes with cerebral activity may entail an injury to 
conscious activity, we conclude that to any fraction whatsoever of the state 
of consciousness there corresponds a definite pan of the cerebral state, and 
then that one of the two terms can be substituted for the other. As though we 
had the right to extend to the detail of rhe parts, rhus supposing them to be 
related each to each, what has only been observed or inferred of the two 
wholes, and so convert a relation of solidarity into a relation of equivalent to 
equivalent! The presence or absence of a screw may decide whether or not a 
machine will work: does it follow that each part of the screw corresponds to 
a particular part of the machine, and that the equivalent of the machine is the 
screw? The relation of the cerebral state to the idea or presentation may very 
well be that of the screw to the machine, that is, of the part to the whole. 
These four ideas themselves imply a great number of others, which it 
would be interesting to analyse in their turn, because they would be found to 
be, in a kind of way, so many harmonics the fundamental tone of which is 
the thesis of parallelism. In this study I have only tried to bring to light the 
contradiction inherent in the thesis itself. Just because the consequences to 
which it leads, and the postulates which it contains, cover, so to say, the 
whole domain of philosophy, it has seemed to me that this critical examin­
ation is incumbent on, and may serve as the starting-point of, a theory of the 
mind considered in its relation to the determinism of nature. 


Creative Evolution 


The Endurance of Life1 
The existence of which we are most assured and which we know best is 
unquestionably our own, for of every other object we have notions which 
may be considered external and superficial, whereas, of ourselves, our per­
ception is internal and profound. What, then, do we find? In this privileged 
case, what is the precise meaning of the word 'exist'? Let us recall here briefly 
the conclusions of an earlier work. 
I find, first of all, that I pass from state to state. I am warm or cold, I am 
merry or sad, I work or I do nothing, I look at what is around me or I think of 
something else. Sensations, feelings, volitions, ideas - such are the changes 
into which my existence is divided and which colour it in rums. I change, 
then, without ceasing. But this is not saying enough. Change is far more 
radical than we are at first inclined to suppose. 
For I speak of each of my states as if it formed a block and were a separate 
whole. I say indeed that I change, but the change seems to me to reside in the 
passage from one state to the next: of each state, taken separately, I am apt to 
think that it remains the same during all the time that it prevails. Never­
theless, a slight effort of attention would reveal to me that there is no feeling, 
no idea, no volition which is not undergoing change every moment: if a 
mental state ceased to vary, irs duration would cease to flow. Let us take the 
most stable of internal stares, the visual perception of a motionless external 
object. The object may remain the same, I may look at it from the same side, 
at the same angle, in the same light; nevertheless the vision I now have of it 
differs from that which I have just had, even if only because the one is an 
instant older than the other. My memory is there, which conveys something 
of the past into the present. My mental state, as it advances on the road of 
time, is continually swelling with the duration which it accumulates: it goes 
on increasing - rolling upon itself, as a snowball on the snow. Still more is 
this the case with states more deeply internal, such as sensations, feelings, 
desires, etc., which do not correspond, like a simple visual perception, to an 
unvarying external object. But it is expedient to disregard this uninterrupted 
change, and to notice it only when it becomes sufficient to impress a new 
attitude on the body, a new direction on the attention. Then, and then only, 
we find that our state has changed. The truth is that we change without 
ceasing, and that the state itself is nothing but change. 
This amounts to saying that there is no essential difference between 
passing from one state to another and persisting in the same state. If the state 

172 
Creative Evolution 
which 'remains the same' is more varied than we think, on the other hand 
the passing from one state to another resembles, more than we imagine, 
a single state being prolonged; the transition is continuous. But, just because 
we close our eyes to the unceasing variation of every psychical state, we are 
obliged, when the change has become so considerable as to force itself on 
our attention, to speak as if a new state were placed alongside the previous 
one. Of this new state we assume that it remains unvarying in its turn, and 
so on endlessly. The apparent discontinuity of the psychical life is then due 
to our attention being fixed on it by a series of separate acts: actually there is 
only a gentle slope; but in following the broken line of our acts of attention, 
we think we perceive separate steps. True, our psychic life is full of the 
unforeseen. A thousand incidents arise, which seem to be cut off from those 
which precede them, and to be disconnected from those which follow. 
Discontinuous though they appear, however, in point of fact they stand out 
against the continuity of a background on which they are designed, and to 
which indeed they owe the intervals that separate them; they are the beats of 
the drum which break forth here and there in the symphony. Our attention 
fixes on them because they interest it more, but each of them is borne by the 
fluid mass of our whole psychical existence. Each is only the best illuminated 
point of a moving zone which comprises all that we feel or think or will -
all, in short, that we are at any given moment. It is this entire zone which in 
reality makes up our state. Now, states thus defined cannot be regarded as 
distinct elements. They continue each other in an endless flow. 
But, as our attention has distinguished and separated them artificially, it is 
obliged next to reunite them by an artificial bond. It imagines, therefore, a 
formless ego, indifferent and unchangeable, on which it threads the psychic 
states which it has set up as independent entities. Instead of a flux of fleeting 
shades merging into each other, it perceives distinct and, so to speak, solid 
colours, set side by side like the beads of a necklace; it must perforce then 
suppose a thread, also itself solid, to hold the beads together. But if this 
colourless substratum is perpetually coloured by that which covers it, it is for 
us, in its indeterminateness, as if it did not exist, since we only perceive what 
is coloured, or, in other words, psychic states. As a matter of fact, this sub­
stratum has no reality; it is merely a symbol intended to recall unceasingly to 
our consciousness the artificial character of the process by which the atten­
tion places clean-cut states side by side, where actually there is a continuity 
which unfolds. If our existence were composed of separate states with an 
impassive ego to unite them, for us there would be no duration. For an ego 
which does not change does not endure, and a psychic state which remains 
the same so long as it is not replaced by the following state does not endure 
either. Vain, therefore, is the attempt to range such states beside each other 
on the ego supposed to sustain them: never can these solids strung upon a 
solid make up that duration which flows. 'What we actually obtain in this 
way is an artificial imitation of the internal life, a static equivalent which will 

The Endurance of Life 
173 
lend itself better to the requirements of logic and language, just because we 
have eliminated from it the element of real time. But, as regards the psych­
ical life unfolding beneath the symbols which conceal it, we readily perceive 
that time is just the stuff it is made of. 
There is, moreover, no stuff more resistant nor more substantial. For our 
duration is not merely one instant replacing another; if it were, there would 
never be anything but the present - no prolonging of the past into the actual, 
no evolution, no concrete duration. Duration is the continuous progress of 
the past which gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances. And 
as the past grows without ceasing, so also there is no limit to its preservation. 
Memory, as we have tried to prove,2 is not a faculty of purring away 
recollections in a drawer, or of inscribing them in a register. There is no 
register, no drawer; there is nor even, properly speaking, a faculty, for a 
faculty works intermittently, when it will or when it can, whilst the piling up 
of the past upon the past goes on without relaxation. In reality, the past is 
preserved by itself, automatically. In its entirety, probably, it follows us at 
every instant; all that we have felt, thought and willed from our earliest 
infancy is there, leaning over the present which is about to join it, pressing 
against the portals of consciousness that would fain leave it outside. The 
cerebral mechanism is arranged just so as to drive back into the unconscious 
almost the whole of this past, and to admit beyond the threshold only that 
which can cast light on the present situation or further the action now being 
prepared - in short, only that which can give usefol work. At the most, a few 
superfluous recollections may succeed in smuggling themselves through the 
half-open door. These memories, messengers from the unconscious, remind 
us of what we are dragging behind us unawares. But, even though we may 
have no distinct idea of it, we feel vaguely that our past remains present to 
us. What are we, in fact, what is our character, if not the condensation of the 
history that we have lived from our birth - nay, even before our birth, since 
we bring with us prenatal dispositions? Doubtless we think with only a small 
part of our past, but it is with our entire past, including the original bent of 
our soul, that we desire, will and act. Our past, then, as a whole, is made 
manifest to us in its impulse; it is felt in the form of tendency, although a 
small part of it only is known in the form of idea. 
From this survival of the past it follows that consciousness cannot go 
through the same state twice. The circumstances may still be the same, but 
they will act no longer on the same person, since they find him at a new 
moment of his history. Our personality, which is being built up each instant 
with its accumulated experience, changes without ceasing. By changing, 
it prevents any state, although superficially identical with another, from 
ever repeating it in its very depth. That is why our duration is irreversible. 
We could not live over again a single moment, for we should have to begin 
by effacing the memory of all that had followed. Even could we erase this 
memory from our intellect, we could not from our will. 

174 
Creative Evolution 
Thus our personality shoots, grows and ripens without ceasing. Each of its 
moments is something new added to what was before. We may go further: 
it is not only something new, but something unforeseeable. Doubtless, my 
present state is explained by what was in me and by what was acting on me a 
moment ago. In analysing it I should find no other elements. But even 
a superhuman intelligence would not have been able to foresee the simple 
indivisible form which gives to these purely abstract elements their concrete 
organization. For to foresee consists of projecting into the future what has 
been perceived in the past, or of imagining for a later time a new grouping, in 
a new order, of elements already perceived. But that which has never been 
perceived, and which is at the same time simple, is necessarily unforesee­
able. Now such is the case with each of our states, regarded as a moment in 
a history that is gradually unfolding: it is simple, and it cannot have 
been already perceived, since it concentrates in its indivisibility all that has 
been perceived and what the present is adding to it besides. It is an original 
moment of a no less original history. 
The finished portrait is explained by the features of the model, by the 
nature of the artist, by the colours spread out on the palette; but, even with 
the knowledge of what explains it, no one, not even the artist, could have 
foreseen exactly what the portrait would be, for to predict it would have been 
to produce it before it was produced - an absurd hypothesis which is its own 
refutation. Even so with regard to the moments of our life, of which we are 
the artisans. Each of them is a kind of creation. And just as the talent of the 
painter is formed or deformed - in any case, is modified - under the very 
influence of the works he produces, so each of our states, at the moment of its 
issue, modifies our personality, being indeed the new form that we are just 
assuming. It is then right to say that what we do depends on what we are; but 
it is necessary to add also that we are, to a certain extent, what we do, and that 
we are creating ourselves continually. This creation of self by self is the more 
complete, the more one reasons on what one does. For reason does not 
proceed in such matters as in geometry, where impersonal premises are given 
once for all, and an impersonal conclusion must perforce be drawn. Here, on 
the contrary, the same reasons may dictate to different persons, or to the same 
person at different moments, acts profoundly different, although equally 
reasonable. The truth is that they are not quite the same reasons, since they 
are not those of the same person, nor of the same moment. That is why we 
cannot deal with them in the abstract, from outside, as in geometry, nor solve 
for another the problems by which he is faced in life. Each must solve them 
from within, on his own account. But we need not go more deeply into this. 
We are seeking only the precise meaning that our consciousness gives to this 
word 'exist,' and we find that, for a conscious being, to exist is to change, to 
change is to mature, to mature is to go on creating oneself endlessly. Should 
the same be said of existence in general? 

The Endurance of Life 
175 
A material object, of whatever kind, presents opposite characters to those 
which we have just been describing. Either it remains as it is, or else, if it 
changes under the influence of an external force, our idea of this change is 
that of a displacement of parts which themselves do not change. If these parts 
took to changing, we should split them up in their turn. We should thus 
descend to the molecules of which the fragments are made, to the atoms that 
make up the molecules, to the corpuscles that generate the atoms, to the 
'imponderable' within which the corpuscle is perhaps a mere vortex. In short, 
we should push the division or analysis as far as necessary. Bur we should stop 
only before the unchangeable. 
Now, we say that a composite object changes by the displacement of its 
parts. But when a part has left its position, there is nothing to prevent 
its return to it. A group of elements which has gone through a state can there­
fore always find irs way back to that state, if not by itself, at least by means of 
an external cause able to restore everything to its place. This amounts to 
saying that any state of the group may be repeated as often as desired, and 
consequently that the group does not grow old. It has no history. 
Thus nothing is created therein, neither form nor matter. What the group 
will be is already present in what it is, provided 'what it is' includes all the 
points of the universe with which it is related. A superhuman intellect could 
calculate, for any moment of time, the position of any point of the system in 
space. And as there is nothing more in the form of the whole than the 
arrangement of its parts, the future forms of the system are theoretically 
visible in its present configuration. 
All our belief in objects, all our operations on the systems that science 
isolates, rest in fact on the idea that time does not bite into them. We have 
touched on this question in an earlier work, and shall return to it in the course 
of the present study. For the moment, we will confine ourselves to pointing 
out that the abstract time t attributed by science to a material object or to an 
isolated system consists only in a certain number of simultaneities or more 
generally of correspondences, and that this number remains the same, 
whatever be the nature of the intervals between the correspondences. With 
these intervals we are never concerned when dealing with inert matter; or, if 
they are considered, it is in order to count therein fresh correspondences, 
between which again we shall not care what happens. Common sense, which 
is occupied with detached objects, and also science, which considers isolated 
systems, are concerned only with the ends of the intervals and not with the 
intervals themselves. Therefore the flow of time might assume an infinite 
rapidity, the entire past, present, and future of material objects or of isolated 
systems might be spread out all at once in space, without there being anything 
to change either in the formulae of the scientist or even in the language 
of common sense. The number t would always stand for the same thing; it 
would still count the same number of correspondences between the states of 

176 
Creative Evolution 
the objects or systems and the poims of the line, ready drawn, which would 
be then the 'course of time.' 
Yet succession is an undeniable fact, even in the material world. Though 
our reasoning on isolated systems may imply that their history, past, presem, 
and future, might be instantaneously unfurled like a fan, this history, in 
poim of fact, unfolds itself gradually, as if it occupied a duration like our 
own. If I want to mix a glass of sugar and water, I must, willy nilly, wait 
until the sugar melts. This lirtle fact is big with meaning. For here the time I 
have to wait is not that mathematical time which would apply equally well 
to the entire history of the material world, even if that history were spread 
out instantaneously in space. It coincides with my impatience, that is to say, 
with a certain portion of my own duration, which I cannot protract or 
contract as I like. It is no longer something thought, it is something Lived. 
It is no longer a relation, it is an absolute. What else can this mean than that 
the glass of water, the sugar, and the process of the sugar's melting in the 
water are abstractions, and that the Whole within which they have been cut 
out by my senses and understanding progresses, it may be, in the manner of 
a consciousness? 
Certainly, the operation by which science isolates and closes a system is 
not altogether artificial. If it had no objective foundation, we could not 
explain why it is clearly indicated in some cases and impossible in others. 
We shall see that matter has a tendency to constitute isolable systems, that 
can be treated geometrically. In fact, we shall define matter by just this 
tendency. But it is only a tendency. Matter does not go to the end, and the 
isolation is never complete. If science does go to the end and isolate 
completely, it is for convenience of study; it is understood that the so-called 
isolated system remains subject to certain external influences. Science merely 
leaves these alone, either because it finds them slight enough to be negligible, 
or because it intends to take them into account later on. It is none the less 
true that these influences are so many threads which bind up the system to 
another more extensive, and to this a third which includes both, and so on 
to the system most objectively isolated and most independent of all, the solar 
system complete. But, even here, the isolation is not absolute. Our sun 
radiates heat and light beyond the farthest planet. And, on the other hand, 
it moves in a certain fixed direction, drawing with it the planets and their 
satellites. The thread attaching it to the rest of the universe is doubtless very 
tenuous. Nevertheless it is along this thread that is transmitted down to the 
smallest particle of the world in which we live the duration immanent to 
the whole of the universe. 
The universe endures. The more we study the nature of time, the more we 
shall comprehend that duration means invention, the creation of forms, the 
continual elaboration of the absolutely new. The systems marked off by 
science endure only because they are bound up inseparably with the rest of 
the universe. It is true that in the universe itself two opposite movements are 

The Endurance of Life 
177 
to be distinguished, as we shall see later on, 'descent' and 'ascent.' The first 
only unwinds a roll ready prepared. In principle, it might be accomplished 
almost instantaneously, like releasing a spring. But the ascending movement, 
which corresponds to an inner work of ripening or creating, endures 
essentially, and imposes its rhythm on the first, which is inseparable from it. 
There is no reason, therefore, why a duration, and so a form of existence 
like our own, should not be attributed to the systems that science isolates, 
provided such systems are reintegrated into the Whole. But they must be so 
reintegrated. The same is even more obviously true of the objects cut out by 
our perception. The distinct outlines which we see in an object, and which 
give it its individuality, are only the design of a certain kind of influence that 
we might exert on a certain point of space: it is the plan of our eventual 
actions that is sent back to our eyes, as though by a mirror, when we see the 
surfaces and edges of things. Suppress this action, and with it consequently 
those main directions which by perception are traced out for it in the 
entanglement of the real, and the individuality of the body is re-absorbed in 
the universal interaction which, without doubt, is reality itself. 
Now, we have considered material objects generally. Are there not some 
objects privileged? The bodies we perceive are, so to speak, cut out of the 
stuff of nature by our perception, and the scissors follow, in some way, 
the marking of lines along which action might be taken. But the body which 
is to perform this action, the body which marks out upon matter the design 
of its eventual actions even before they are actual, the body that has only to 
point its sensory organs on the flow of the real in order to make that flow 
crystallize into definite forms and thus to create all the other bodies - in 
short, the living body - is this a body as others are? 
Doubtless it, also, consists in a portion of extension bound up with the rest 
of extension, an intimate part of the Whole, subject to the same physical and 
chemical laws that govern any and every portion of matter. But, while the 
subdivision of matter into separate bodies is relative to our perception, while 
the building up of closed-off systems of material points is relative to our 
science, the living body has been separated and closed off by nature herself. 
It is composed of unlike parts that complete each other. It performs diverse 
functions that involve each other. It is an individual, and of no other object, 
not even of the crystal, can this be said, for a crystal has neither difference of 
parts nor diversity of functions. No doubt, it is hard ro decide, even in the 
organized world, what is individual and what is not. The difficulty is great, 
even in the animal kingdom; with plants it is almost insurmountable. This 
difficulty is, moreover, due to profound causes, on which we shall dwell 
later. We shall see that individuality admits of any number of degrees, and 
that it is not fully realized anywhere, even in man. But that is no reason for 
thinking it is not a characteristic property oflife. The biologist who proceeds 
as a geometrician is too ready to take advantage here of our inability to give a 
precise and general definition of individuality. A perfect definition applies 

178 
Creative Evolution 
only to a completed reality; now, vital properties are never emirely realized, 
though always on the way co become so; they are not so much states as 
tendencies. And a tendency achieves all that it aims at only if it is not 
thwarted by another tendency. How, then, could this occur in the domain of 
life, where, as we shall show, the interaction of antagonistic tendencies is 
always implied? In particular, it may be said of individuality that, while the 
tendency to individuate is everywhere present in the organized world, it is 
everywhere opposed by the tendency towards reproduction. For the indi­
viduality to be perfect, it would be necessary that no detached part of the 
organism could live separately. But then reproduction would be impossible. 
For what is reproduction, but the building up of a new organism with a 
detached fragment of the old? Individuality therefore harbours its enemy at 
home. Its very need of perpetuating itself in time condemns it never to be 
complete in space. The biologist must take due account of both tendencies 
in every instance, and it is therefore useless to ask him for a definicion of 
individuality that shall fit all cases and work automatically. 
But too often one reasons about the things of life in the same way as about 
the conditions of crude matter. Nowhere is the confusion so evidem as in 
discussions about individuality. We are shown the stumps of a Lumbriculus, 
each regenerating its head and living thenceforward as an independent 
individual; a hydra whose pieces become so many fresh hydras; a sea-urchin's 
egg whose fragments develop complete embryos: where then, we are asked, 
was the individuality of the egg, the hydra, the worm? - But, because there 
are several individuals now, it does not follow that there was not a single 
individual just before. No doubt, when I have seen several drawers fall from a 
chest, I have no longer the right to say that the article was all of one piece. But 
the fact is that there can be nothing more in the present of the chest of 
drawers than there was in its past, and if it is made up of several different 
pieces now, it was so from the date of its manufacture. Generally speaking, 
unorganised bodies, which are what we have need of in order that we may ace, 
and on which we have modelled our fashion of thinking, are regulated by this 
simple law: the present contaim nothing more than the past, and what is found in 
the efect was already in the cause. But suppose that the distinctive feature of 
the organized body is that it grows and changes without ceasing, as indeed the 
most superficial observation testifies, there would be nothing astonishing in 
the fact that it was one in the first instance, and afterwards many. The 
reproduction of unicellular organisms consists in just this - the living being 
divides into two halves, of which each is a complete individual. True, in the 
more complex animals, nature localizes in the almost independent sexual cells 
the power of producing the whole anew. But something of this power may 
remain diffused in the rest of the organism, as the facts of regeneration prove, 
and it is conceivable that in certain privileged cases the faculty may persist 
integrally in a latent condition and manifest itself on the first opportunity. 
In truth, that I may have the right to speak of individuality, it is not necessary 

The Endurance of Lift 
179 
that the organism should be without the power to divide into fragments that 
are able to live. It is sufficient that it should have presented a certain 
systematisation of parts before the division, and that the same systematisation 
tend to be reproduced in each separate portion afterwards. Now, that is 
precisely what we observe in the organic world. We may conclude, then, that 
individuality is never perfect, and that it is often difficult, sometimes 
impossible, to tell what is an individual, and what is not, but that life never­
theless manifests a search for individuality, as if it strove to constitute systems 
naturally isolated, naturally closed. 
By this is a living being distinguished from all that our perception or our 
science isolates or closes artificially. It would therefore be wrong to compare 
it to an object. Should we wish to find a term of comparison in the inorganic 
world, it is not to a determinate material object, but much rather to the 
totality of the material universe that we ought to compare the living 
organism. It is true that the comparison would not be worth much, for a 
living being is observable, whilst the whole of the universe is constructed or 
reconstructed by thought. But at least our attention would thus have been 
called to the essential character of organization. Like the universe as a whole, 
like each conscious being taken separately, the organism which lives is a 
thing that endures. Its past, in its entirety, is prolonged into its present, and 
abides there, actual and acting. How otherwise could we understand that it 
passes through distinct and well-marked phases, that it changes its age - in 
short, that it has a history? If I consider my body in particular, I find that, 
like my consciousness, it matures little by little from infancy to old age; like 
myself, it grows old. Indeed, maturity and old age are, properly speaking, 
attributes only of my body; it is only metaphorically that I apply the same 
names to the corresponding changes of my conscious self. Now, if I pass 
from the top to the bottom of the scale of living beings, from one of the 
most to one of the least differentiated, from the multicellular organism of 
man to the unicellular organism of the Infusorian, I find, even in this simple 
cell, the same process of growing old. The Infusorian is exhausted at the 
end of a certain number of divisions, and though it may be possible, by 
modifying the environment, to put off the moment when a rejuvenation 
by conjugation becomes necessary, this cannot be indefinitely postponed.3 
It is true that between these two exrreme cases, in which the organism is 
completely individualized, there might be found a multitude of others in 
which the individuality is less well marked, and in which, although there 
is doubtless an ageing somewhere, one cannot say exactly what it is that grows 
old. Once more, there is no universal biological law which applies precisely 
and automatically to every living thing. There are only directions in which life 
throws out species in general. Each particular species, in the very act by which 
it is constituted, affirms its independence, follows its caprice, deviates more or 
less from the straight line, sometimes even remounts the slope and seems to 
turn its back on its original direction. It is easy enough to argue that a tree 

180 
Creative Evolution 
never grows old, since the tips of its branches are always equally young, always 
equally capable of engendering new trees by budding. But in such an 
organism - which is, after all, a society rather than an individual - something 
ages, if only the leaves and the interior of the trunk. And each cell, considered 
separately, evolves in a specific way. Wherever anything lives, there is, open 
somewhere, a register in which time is being inscribed 
This, it will be said, is only a metaphor. - It is of the very essence of 
mechanism, in fact, to consider as metaphorical every expression which 
attributes to time an effective action and a reality of its own. In vain does 
immediate experience show us that the very basis of our conscious existence is 
memory, that is to say, the prolongation of the past into the present, or, in a 
word, duration, acting and irreversible. In vain does reason prove to us that 
the more we get away from the objects cut out and the systems isolated by 
common sense and by science and the deeper we dig beneath them, the more 
we have to do with a reality which changes as a whole in its inmost states, as 
if an accumulative memory of the past made it impossible to go back again. 
The mechanistic instinct of the mind is stronger than reason, stronger than 
immediate experience. The metaphysician that we each carry unconsciously 
within us, and the presence of which is explained, as we shall see later on, 
by the very place that man occupies amongst the living beings, has its 
fixed requirements, its ready-made explanations, its irreducible propositions: 
all unite in denying concrete duration. Change must be reducible to an 
arrangement or rearrangement of parts; the irreversibility of rime must be 
an appearance relative to our ignorance; the impossibility of turning back 
must be only the inability of man to put things in place again. So growing old 
can be nothing more than the gradual gain or loss of certain substances, 
perhaps both together. Time is assumed to have just as much reality for a 
living being as for an hour-glass, in which the top part empties while the lower 
fills, and all goes where it was before when you turn the glass upside down. 
True, biologists are not agreed on what is gained and what is lost between 
the day of birth and the day of death. There are those who hold to the 
continual growth in the volume of protoplasm from the birth of the cell right 
to irs death. 4 More probable and more profound is the theory according to 
which the diminution bears on the quantity of nutritive substance con­
rained in that 'inner environment' in which the organism is being renewed, 
and the increase on the quantity of unexcreted residual substances which, 
accumulating in the body, finally 'crust it over.'5 Must we however - with 
an eminent bacteriologist - declare any explanation of growing old insuf­
ficient that does not rake account of phagocyrosis?6 We do not feel qualified 
to settle the question. But the fact that the two theories agree in affirming the 
constant accumulation or loss of a certain kind of matter, even though they 
have little in common as to what is gained and lost, shows pretty well that the 
frame of the explanation has been furnished a priori. We shall see this more 

The Endurance of Life 
1 8 1  
and more as we proceed with our study: it is not easy, in thinking of time, to 
escape the image of the hour-glass. 
The cause of growing old must lie deeper. We hold that there is unbroken 
continuity between the evolution of the embryo and that of the complete 
organism. The impetus which causes a living being to grow larger, to develop 
and to age, is the same that has caused it to pass through the phases of the 
embryonic life. The development of the embryo is a perpetual change of 
form. Any one who attempts to note all its successive aspects becomes lost in 
an infinity, as is inevitable in dealing with a continuum. Life does but prolong 
this prenatal evolution. The proof of this is that it is often impossible for us to 
say whether we are dealing with an organism growing old or with an embryo 
continuing to evolve; such is the case, for example, with the larvae of insects 
and crustacea. On the other hand, in an organism such as our own, crises like 
puberty or the menopause, in which the individual is completely trans­
formed, are quite comparable to changes in the course of larval or embryonic 
life - yet they are part and parcel of the process of our aging. Although they 
occur at a definite age and within a time that may be quite short, no one 
would maintain that they appear then ex abrupto, from without, simply 
because a certain age is reached, just as a legal right is granted to us on our 
one-and-twentieth birthday. It is evident that a change like that of puberty is 
in course of preparation at every instant from birth, and even before birth, 
and that the aging up to that crisis consists, in part at least, of this gradual 
preparation. In short, what is properly vital in growing old is the insensible, 
infinitely graduated, continuance of the change of form. Now, this change is 
undoubtedly accompanied by phenomena of organic destruction: to these, 
and to these alone, will a mechanistic explanation of aging be confined. It will 
note the facts of sclerosis, the gradual accumulation of residual substances, the 
growing hypertrophy of the protoplasm of the cell. Bur under these visible 
effects an inner cause lies hidden. The evolution of the living being, like that 
of the embryo, implies a continual recording of duration, a persistence of the 
past in the present, and so an appearance, at least, of organic memory. 
The present state of an unorganised body depends exclusively on what 
happened at the previous instant; and likewise the position of the material 
points of a system defined and isolated by science is determined by the 
position of these same points at the moment immediately before. In other 
words, the laws chat govern unorganised matter are expressible, in principle, 
by differential equations in which time (in the sense in which the 
mathematician takes this word) would play the role of independent variable. 
Is it so with the laws of life? Does the state of a living body find its complete 
explanation in the state immediately before? Yes, if it is agreed a priori 
to liken the living body to other bodies, and to identify it, for the sake of 
the argument, with the artificial systems on which the chemist, physicist, 
and astronomer operate. But in astronomy, physics, and chemistry the 

182 
Creative Evolution 
proposition has a perfectly definite meaning: it signifies chat cenain aspects 
of the present, important for science, are calculable as functions of the 
immediate past. Nothing of the sort in the domain of life. Here calculation 
touches, at most, certain phenomena of organic destruction. Organic creation, 
on the contrary, the evolutionary phenomena which properly constitute life, 
we cannot in any way subject to a mathematical treatment. It will be said that 
this impotence is due only to our ignorance. But it may equally well express 
the fact that the present moment of a living body does not find its explanation 
in the moment immediately before, that all the past of the organism must 
be added to that moment, its heredity - in fact, the whole of a very long 
history. In the second of these two hypotheses, not in the first, is really 
expressed the present state of the biological sciences, as well as their direction. 
As for the idea chat the living body might be treated by some superhuman 
calculator in the same mathematical way as our solar system, this has gradu­
ally arisen from a metaphysic which has taken a more precise form since the 
physical discoveries of Galileo, but which, as we shall show, was always 
the natural metaphysic of the human mind. Its apparent dearness, our 
impatient desire to find it true, the enthusiasm with which so many excellent 
minds accept it without proof - all the seductions, in short, that it exercises 
on our thought, should put us on our guard against it. The attraction it has 
for us proves well enough char it gives satisfaction to an innate inclination. 
But, as will be seen further on, rhe intellectual tendencies innate ro-day, 
which life must have created in the course of its evolution, are not at all meant 
to supply us with an explanation of life: they have something else to do. 
Any attempt to distinguish between an artificial and a natural system, 
between the dead and the living, runs counter to this tendency at once. Thus 
it happens that we find it equally difficult to imagine that the organized has 
duration and that the unorganised has not. When we say that the state of an 
artificial system depends exclusively on its state at the moment before, does 
it not seem as if we were bringing rime in, as if the system had something to 
do with real duration? And, on the other hand, though the whole of the past 
goes into the making of the living being's present moment, does not organic 
memory press it into the moment immediately before the present, so that 
the moment immediately before becomes the sole cause of the present 
one? - To speak rhus is co ignore the cardinal difference between concrete 
time, along which a real system develops, and that abstract time which enters 
into our speculations on artificial systems. What does it mean, to say that the 
state of an artificial system depends on what it was at the moment 
immediately before? There is no instant immediately before another instant; 
there could not be, any more than there could be one mathematical point 
touching another. The instant 'immediately before' is, in reality, that which 
is connected with the present instant by the interval dt. All that you mean to 
say, therefore, is chat the present state of the system is defined by equations 
into which differential coefficients enter, such as ds!dt, dv!dt, chat is to say, at 

The Endurance of Life 
183 
bottom, present velocities and present accelerations. You are therefore really 
speaking only of the present - a present, it is true, considered along with its 
tendency. The systems science works with are, in fact, in an instantaneous 
present that is always being renewed; such systems are never in that real, 
concrete duration in which the past remains bound up with the present. 
When the mathematician calculates the future state of a system at the end of 
a time t, there is nothing to prevent him from supposing that the universe 
vanishes from this moment till that, and suddenly reappears. It is the t-th 
moment only that counts - and that will be a mere instant. What will flow 
on in the interval - that is to say, real time - does not count, and cannot 
enter into the calculation. If the mathematician says that he puts himself 
inside this interval, he means that he is placing himself at a certain point, at a 
particular moment, therefore at the extremity again of a certain time t1; with 
the interval up to T' he is not concerned. If he divides the interval into 
infinitely small parts by considering the differential dt, he thereby expresses 
merely the fact that he will consider accelerations and velocities - that is to 
say, numbers which denote tendencies and enable him to calculate the state 
of the system at a given moment. But he is always speaking of a given 
moment - a static moment, that is - and not of flowing time. In short, the 
world the mathematician deals with is a world that dies and is reborn at every 
instant - the world which Descartes was thinking of when he spoke of continued 
creation. But, in time thus conceived, how could evolution, which is the very 
essence of life, ever take place? Evolution implies a real persistence of the 
past in the present, a duration which is, as it were, a hyphen, a connecting 
link. In other words, to know a living being or natural system is to get at the 
very interval of duration, while the knowledge of an artificial or mathe­
matical system applies only to the extremity. 
Continuity of change, preservation of the past in the present, real 
duration - the living being seems, then, to share these attributes with 
consciousness. Can we go further and say that life, like conscious activity, is 
invention, is unceasing creation? 
[ .
. . ] 
[W]e think the language of transformism forces itself now upon all philos­
ophy, as the dogmatic affirmation of transformism forces itself upon science. 
But then, we must no longer speak of life in general as an abstraction, or as 
a mere heading under which all living beings are inscribed. At a certain 
moment, in certain points of space, a visible current has taken rise; this 
current of life, traversing the bodies it has organized one after another, 
passing from generation to generation, has become divided amongst species 
and distributed amongst individuals without losing anything of its force, 
rather intensifying in proportion to its advance. It is well known that, on the 
theory of the 'continuity of the germ-plasm,' maintained by Weismann,? 
the sexual elements of the generating organism pass on their properties 
directly to the sexual elements of the organism engendered. In this extreme 

1 84 
Creative Evolution 
form, the theory has seemed debatable, for it is only in exceptional cases that 
there are any signs of sexual glands at the time of segmentation of the 
fertilized egg. But, though the cells that engender the sexual elements do not 
generally appear at the beginning of the embryonic life, it is none the less 
true that they are always formed out of those tissues of the embryo which 
have not undergone any particular functional differentiation, and whose 
cells are made of unmodified protoplasm. 8 In other words, the genetic 
power of the fertilized ovum weakens, the more it is spread over the growing 
mass of the tissues of the embryo; but, while it is being thus diluted, it is 
concentrating anew something of itself on a certain special point, to wit, the 
cells, from which the ova or spermatozoa will develop. It might therefore be 
said that, though the germ-plasm is not continuous, there is at least 
continuity of genetic energy, this energy being expended only at certain 
instants, for just enough time to give the requisite impulsion to the embry­
onic life, and being recouped as soon as possible in new sexual elements, in 
which, again, it bides its time. Regarded from this point of view, lifo is Like a 
current passing from germ to germ through the medium of a developed organism. 
It is as if the organism itself were only an excrescence, a bud caused to sprout 
by the former germ endeavouring to continue itself in a new germ. The 
essential thing is the continuous progress indefinitely pursued, an invisible 
progress, on which each visible organism rides during the short interval of 
time given it to live. 
Now, the more we fix our attention on this continuity of life, the more we 
see that organic evolution resembles the evolution of a consciousness, in 
which the past presses against the present and causes the upspringing of a 
new form of consciousness, incommensurable with irs antecedents. That the 
appearance of a vegetable or animal species is due to specific causes, nobody 
will gainsay. But this can only mean that if, after the fact, we could know 
these causes in detail, we could explain by them the form that has been 
produced; foreseeing the form is out of the question.9 It may perhaps be said 
that the form could be foreseen if we could know, in all their derails, the 
conditions under which it will be produced. But these conditions are built 
up into it and are parr and parcel of its being; they are peculiar to that phase 
of its history in which life finds itself at the moment of producing the form: 
how could we know beforehand a situation that is unique of its kind, that 
has never yet occurred and will never occur again? Of the future, only that is 
foreseen which is like the past or can be made up again with elements like 
those of the past. Such is the case with astronomical, physical and chemical 
facts, with all facts which form pan of a system in which elements supposed 
to be unchanging are merely put together, in which the only changes are 
changes of position, in which there is no theoretical absurdity in imagining 
that things are restored to their place; in which, consequently, the same total 
phenomenon, or at least the same elementary phenomena, can be repeated. 
But an original situation, which imparts something of its own originality to 

The Endurance of Life 
1 85 
its elements, that is to say, to the partial views that are taken of it, how can 
such a situation be pictured as given before it is actually produced? 10 All that 
can be said is that, once produced, it will be explained by the elements that 
analysis will then carve out of it. Now, what is true of the production of a 
new species is also true of the production of a new individual, and, more 
generally, of any moment of any living form. For, though the variation must 
reach a certain importance and a certain generality in order to give rise to a 
new species, it is being produced every moment, continuously and insen­
sibly, in every living being. And it is evident that even the sudden 'mutations' 
which we now hear of are possible only if a process of incubation, or rather of 
maturing, is going on throughout a series of generations that do not seem to 
change. In this sense it might be said of life, as of consciousness, that at every 
moment it is creating something. 
1 1  
But against this idea of the absolute originality and unforeseeability of 
forms our whole intellect rises in revolt. The essential function of our 
intellect, as the evolution of life has fashioned it, is to be a light for our 
conduct, to make ready for our action on things, to foresee, for a given situa­
tion, the events, favourable or unfavourable, which may follow thereupon. 
Intellect therefore instinctively selects in a given situation whatever is like 
something already known; it seeks this out, in order that it may apply its 
principle that 'like produces like.' In just this does the prevision of the future 
by common sense consist. Science carries this faculty to the highest possible 
degree of exactitude and precision, but does not alter its essential character. 
Like ordinary knowledge, in dealing with things science is concerned only 
with the aspect of repetition. Though the whole be original, science will 
always manage to analyse it into elements or aspects which are approximately 
a reproduction of the past. Science can work only on what is supposed to 
repeat itself - that is to say, on what is withdrawn, by hypothesis, from 
the action of real time. Anything that is irreducible and irreversible in the 
successive moments of a history eludes science. To get a notion of this 
irreducibility and irreversibility, we must break with scientific habits which 
are adapted to the fundamental requirements of thought, we must do 
violence to the mind, go counter to the natural bent of the intellect. But that 
is just the function of philosophy. 
In vain, therefore, does life evolve before our eyes as a continuous creation 
of unforeseeable form: the idea always persists that form, unforeseeability and 
continuity are mere appearance - the outward reflection of our own 
ignorance. What is presented to the senses as a continuous history would 
break up, we are told, into a series of successive states. 'What gives you the 
impression of an original state resolves, upon analysis, into elementary facts, 
each of which is the repetition of a fact already known. What you call an 
unforeseeable form is only a new arrangement of old elements. The 
elementary causes, which in their totality have determined this arrangement, 
are themselves old causes repeated in a new order. Knowledge of the elements 

1 86 
Creative Evolution 
and of the elementary causes would have made it possible to foretell the living 
form which is their sum and their resultant. When we have resolved the 
biological aspect of phenomena into physico-chemical factors, we will leap, if 
necessary, over physics and chemistry themselves; we will go from masses to 
molecules, from molecules to atoms, from atoms to corpuscles: we must 
indeed at last come to something that can be treated as a kind of solar system, 
astronomically. If you deny it, you oppose the very principle of scientific 
mechanism, and you arbitrarily affirm that living matter is not made of 
the same elements as other matter.' - We reply that we do not question the 
fundamental identity of inert matter and organized matter. The only 
question is whether the natural systems which we call living beings must be 
assimilated to the artificial systems that science cuts out within inerr matter, 
or whether they must not rather be compared to that natural system which is 
the whole of the universe. That life is a kind of mechanism I cordially agree. 
But is it the mechanism of parts artificially isolated within the whole of the 
universe, or is it the mechanism of the real whole? The real whole might well 
be, we conceive, an indivisible continuity. The systems we cur out within it 
would, properly speaking, not then be parts at all; they would be partial 
views of the whole. And, with these partial views put end to end, you will 
not make even a beginning of the reconstruction of the whole, any more 
than, by multiplying photographs of an object in a thousand different 
aspects, you will reproduce the object itself. So of life and of the physico­
chemical phenomena to which you endeavour to reduce it. Analysis will 
undoubtedly resolve the process of organic creation into an ever-growing 
number of physico-chemical phenomena, and chemists and physicists will 
have to do, of course, with nothing but these. But it does not follow that 
chemistry and physics will ever give us the key to life. 

Mechanism and Finalism 1 2  
The more duration marks the living being with its imprint, the more 
obviously the organism differs from a mere mechanism, over which duration 
glides without penetrating. And the demonstration has most force when it 
applies to the evolution of life as a whole, from its humblest origins to its 
highest forms, inasmuch as chis evolution constitutes, through the unity and 
continuity of the animated matter which supports it, a single indivisible 
history. Thus viewed, the evolutionist hypothesis does not seem so closely 
akin to the mechanistic conception of life as it is generally supposed to be. 
Of this mechanistic conception we do not claim, of course, to furnish a 
mathematical and final refutation. But the refutation which we draw from 
the consideration of real time, and which is, in our opinion, the only 
refutation possible, becomes the more rigorous and cogent the more frankly 
the evolutionist hypothesis is assumed. We must dwell a good deal more on 
this point. But let us first show more clearly the notion of life to which we 
are leading up. 
The mechanistic explanations, we said, hold good for the systems that our 
thought artificially detaches from the whole. But of the whole itself and of the 
systems which, within chis whole, seem to take after it, we cannot admit a 
priori that they are mechanically explicable, for then time would be useless, 
and even unreal. The essence of mechanical explanation, in fact, is to regard 
the future and the past as calculable functions of the present, and thus to 
claim that ali is given. On chis hypothesis, past, present and furure would be 
open at a glance to a superhuman intellect capable of making the calculation. 
Indeed, the scientists who have believed in the universality and perfect 
objectivity of mechanical explanations have, consciously or unconsciously, 
acted on a hypothesis of this kind. Laplace formulated it with the greatest 
precision: 'An intellect which at a given instant knew all the forces with which 
nature is animated, and the respective situations of the beings that compose 
nature - supposing the said intellect were vast enough to subject these data to 
analysis - would embrace in the same formula the motions of the greatest 
bodies in the universe and those of the slightest atom: nothing would be 
uncertain for it, and the future, like the past, would be present to its eyes.' 13 
And Du Bois-Reymond: 'We can imagine the knowledge of nature arrived 
at a point where the universal process of the world might be represented by 
a single mathematical formula, by one immense system of simultaneous 
differential equations, from which could be deduced, for each moment, the 

1 88 
Creative Evolution 
position, direction, and velocity of every atom of the world.'14 Huxley has 
expressed the same idea in a more concrete form: 15 'If the fundamental 
proposition of evolution is true, that the entire world, living and not living, is 
the result of the mutual interaction, according to definite laws, of the forces 
possessed by the molecules of which the primitive nebulosity of the universe 
was composed, it is no less certain that the existing world lay, potentially, in 
the cosmic vapour, and that a sufficient intellect could, from a knowledge 
of the properties of the molecules of that vapour, have predicted, say the 
state of the Fauna of Great Britain in 1 869, with as much certainty as one can 
say what will happen to the vapour of the breath in a cold winter's day.' 
In such a doctrine, time is still spoken of: one pronounces the word, but one 
does not think of the thing. For time is here deprived of efficacy, and if it does 
nothing, it is nothing. Radical mechanism implies a metaphysic in which the 
totality of the real is postulated complete in eternity, and in which the appar­
ent duration of things expresses merely the infirmity of a mind that cannot 
know everything at once. But duration is something very different from this 
for our consciousness, that is to say, for that which is most indisputable in 
our experience. We perceive duration as a stream against which we cannot 
go. It is the foundation of our being, and, as we feel, the very substance of 
the world in which we live. It is of no use to hold up before our eyes the 
dazzling prospect of a universal mathematic; we cannot sacrifice experience 
to the requirements of a system. That is why we reject radical mechanism. 
But radical finalism is quite as unacceptable, and for the same reason. The 
doctrine of teleology, in its extreme form, as we find it in Leibniz for example, 
implies that things and beings merely realize a programme previously 
arranged. But if there is nothing unforeseen, no invention or creation in the 
universe, time is useless again. As in the mechanistic hypothesis, here again it 
is supposed that all is given. Finalism thus understood is only inverted 
mechanism. It springs from the same postulate, with this sole difference, that 
in the movement of our finite intellects along successive things, whose 
successiveness is reduced to a mere appearance, it holds in front of us the light 
with which it claims to guide us, instead of putting it behind. It substitutes 
the attraction of the future for the impulsion of the past. But succession 
remains none the less a mere appearance, as indeed does movement itself. 
In the doctrine of Leibniz, time is reduced to a confused perception, relative 
to the human standpoint, a perception which would vanish, like a rising 
mist, for a mind seated at the centre of things. 
Yet finalism is not, like mechanism, a doctrine with fixed rigid outlines. 
It admits of as many inflections as we like. The mechanistic philosophy is to 
be taken or left: it must be left if the least grain of dust, by straying from the 
path foreseen by mechanics, should show the slightest trace of spontaneity. 
The doctrine of final causes, on the contrary, will never be definitively 
refuted. If one form of it be put aside, it will take another. Its principle, 
which is essentially psychological, is very flexible. It is so extensible, and 

Mechanism and Finalism 
189 
thereby so comprehensive, that one accepts something of it as soon as one 
rejects pure mechanism. The theory we shall put forward in this book will 
therefore necessarily partake of finalism to a certain extent. For that reason it 
is important to intimate exactly what we are going to take of it, and what we 
mean to leave. 
Let us say at once that to thin out the Leibnizian finalism by breaking it 
into an infinite number of pieces seems to us a step in the wrong direction. 
This is, however, the tendency of the doctrine of finality. It fully realizes that 
if the universe as a whole is the carrying out of a plan, this cannot be 
demonstrated empirically, and that even of the organized world alone it is 
hardly easier to prove all harmonious: facts would equally well testify to 
the contrary. Nature sets living beings at discord with one another. She 
everywhere presents disorder alongside of order, retrogression alongside 
of progress. But, though finality cannot be affirmed either of the whole of 
matter or of the whole of life, might it not yet be true, says the finalist, 
of each organism taken separately? Is there not a wonderful division of 
labour, a marvellous solidarity among the parts of an organism, perfect order 
in infinite complexity? Does not each living being thus realize a plan 
immanent in its substance? - This theory consists, at bottom, in breaking 
up the original notion of finality into bits. It does not accept, indeed it 
ridicules, the idea of an external finality, according to which living beings are 
ordered with regard to each other: to suppose the grass made for the cow, 
the lamb for the wolf - that is all acknowledged to be absurd. But there is, 
we are told, an internal finality: each being is made for itself, all its pans 
conspire for the greatest good of the whole and are intelligently organized in 
view of that end. Such is the notion of finality which has long been classic. 
Finalism has shrunk to the point of never embracing more than one living 
being at a time. By making itself smaller, it probably thought it would offer 
less surface for blows. 
The truth is, it lay open to them a great deal more. Radical as our own 
theory may appear, finality is external or it is nothing at all. 
Consider the most complex and the most harmonious organism. All the 
elements, we are told, conspire for the greatest good of the whole. Very well, 
but let us not forget that each of these elements may itself be an organism in 
certain cases, and that in subordinating the existence of this small organism to 
the life of the great one we accept the principle of an external finality. The 
idea of a finality that is always internal is therefore a self-destructive notion. 
An organism is composed of tissues, each of which lives for itself. The cells of 
which the tissues are made have also a certain independence. Strictly 
speaking, if the subordination of all the elements of the individual to the 
individual itself were complete, we might contend that they are not orga­
nisms, reserve the name organism for the individual, and recognize only 
internal finality. But every one knows that these elements may possess a true 
autonomy. To say nothing of phagocytes, which push independence to the 

190 
Creative Evolution 
point of attacking the organism that nourishes them, or of germinal cells, 
which have their own life alongside the somatic cells - the facts of regenera­
tion are enough: here an element or a group of elements suddenly reveals 
that, however limited its normal space and function, it can transcend them 
occasionally; it may even, in certain cases, be regarded as the equivalent of 
the whole. 
There lies the stumbling-block of the vitalistic theories. We shall not 
reproach them, as is ordinarily done, with replying to the question by the 
question itself: the 'vital principle' may indeed not explain much, but it is at 
least a sort of label affixed to our ignorance, so as to remind us of this 
occasionally, 16 while mechanism invites us to ignore that ignorance. But the 
position of vitalism is rendered very difficult by the fact that, in nature, there 
is neither purely internal finality nor absolutely distinct individuality. The 
organized elements composing the individual have themselves a certain 
individuality, and each will claim its vital principle if the individual pretends 
to have its own. But, on the other hand, the individual itself is not sufficiently 
independent, not sufficiently cut off from other things, for us to allow it a 
'viral principle' of its own. An organism such as a higher vertebrate is the most 
individuated of all organisms; yet, if we take into account that it is only the 
development of an ovum forming part of the body of its mother and of a 
spermatozoon belonging to the body of its father, that the egg (i.e. the ovum 
fertilized) is a connecting link between the two progenitors since it is com­
mon to their two substances, we shall realize that every individual organism, 
even that of a man, is merely a bud that has sprouted on the combined body 
of both its parents. Where, then, does the vital principle of the individual 
begin or end? Gradually we shall be carried further and further back, up to 
the individual's remotest ancestors: we shall find him solidary with each of 
them, solidary with that little mass of protoplasmic jelly which is probably 
at rhe root of the genealogical tree of life. Being, to a certain extent, one with 
this primitive ancestor, he is also solidary with all that descends from the 
ancestor in divergent directions. In this sense each individual may be said to 
remain united with the totality of living beings by invisible bonds. So it is of 
no use to try to restrict finality to the individuality of the living being. If there 
is finality in the world of life, it includes the whole of life in a single 
indivisible embrace. This life common to all the living undoubtedly presents 
many gaps and incoherences, and again it is not so mathematically one that 
it cannot allow each being to become individualized to a certain degree. But it 
forms a single whole, none the less; and we have to choose between the out­
and-out negation of finality and the hypothesis which co-ordinates not only 
the parts of an organism with the organism itself, but also each living being 
with the collective whole of all others. 

Life as Creative Change 17 
Such is the philosophy of life to which we are leading up. I t  claims to 
transcend both mechanism and finalism; but, as we announced at the 
beginning, it is nearer the second doctrine than the first. It will not be amiss 
to dwell on this point, and show more precisely how far this philosophy of 
life resembles finalism and wherein it is different. 
Like radical finalism, although in a vaguer form, our philosophy 
represents the organized world as a harmonious whole. But this harmony is 
far from being as perfect as it has been claimed to be. It admits of much 
discord, because each species, each individual even, retains only a certain 
impetus from the universal vital impulsion and tends to use this energy in its 
own interest. In this consists adaptation. The species and the individual thus 
think only of themselves - whence arises a possible conflict with other forms 
of life. Harmony, therefore, does not exist in fact; it exists rather in 
principle; I mean that the original impetus is a common impetus, and the 
higher we ascend the stream of life the more do diverse tendencies appear 
complementary to each other. Thus the wind at a street-corner divides into 
diverging currents which are all one and the same gust. Harmony, or rather 
'complementarity,' is revealed only in the mass, in tendencies rather than in 
states. Especially (and this is the point on which finalism has been most 
seriously mistaken) harmony is rather behind us than before. It is due to an 
identity of impulsion and not to a common aspiration. It would be futile 
to try to assign to life an end, in the human sense of the word. To speak of an 
end is to think of a pre-existing model which has only to be realized. It is to 
suppose, therefore, that all is given, and rhat the future can be read in the 
present. It is to believe that life, in its movement and in its entirety, goes to 
work like our intellect, which is only a motionless and fragmentary view of 
life, and which naturally takes its stand outside of time. Life, on the contrary, 
progresses and endures in time. Of course, when once the road has been 
travelled, we can glance over it, mark its direction, note this in psychological 
terms and speak as if there had been pursuit of an end. Thus shall we speak 
ourselves. But, of the road which was going to be travelled, the human mind 
could have nothing to say, for the road has been created pari passu with the 
act of travelling over it, being nothing but the direction of this act itself. 
At every instant, then, evolution must admit of a psychological interpretation 
which is, from our point of view, the best interpretation; but this explanation 
has neither value nor even significance except retrospectively. Never could the 

192 
Creative Evolution 
finalistic interpretation, such as we shall propose it, be taken for an antici­
pation of the fucure. It is a particular mode of viewing the past in the light of 
the present. In short, the classic conception of finality postulates at once too 
much and too little: it is both too wide and too narrow. In explaining life by 
intellect, it limits too much the meaning of life: intellect, such at least as we 
find it in ourselves, has been fashioned by evolution during the course of 
progress; it is cut out of something larger, or, rather, it is only the projection, 
necessarily on a plane, of a reality that possesses both relief and depth. It is 
this more comprehensive reality that true finalism ought to reconstruct, or, 
rather, if possible, embrace in one view. But, on the other hand, just because 
it goes beyond intellect - the faculty of connecting the same with the same, 
of perceiving and also of producing repetitions - this reality is undoubtedly 
creative, i.e., productive of effects in which it expands and transcends its own 
being. These effects were therefore not given in it in advance, and so it could 
not take them for ends, although, when once produced, they admit of a 
rational interpretation, like that of the manufactured article that has repro­
duced a model. In short, the theory of final causes does not go far enough 
when it confines itself to ascribing some intelligence to nature, and it goes roo 
far when it supposes a pre-existence of the future in the present in the form of 
idea. And the second theory, which sins by excess, is the outcome of the first, 
which sins by defect. In place of intellect proper must be substituted the more 
comprehensive reality of which intellect is only the contraction. The future 
then appears as expanding the present: it was not, therefore, contained in the 
present in the form of a represented end. And yet, once realized, it will 
explain the present as much as the present explains it, and even more; it must 
be viewed as an end as much as, and more than, a result. Our intellect has a 
right to consider the future abstractly from its habitual point of view, being 
itself an abstract view of the cause of its own being. 
It is true that the cause may then seem beyond our grasp. Already the 
finalist theory oflife eludes all precise verification. What if we go beyond it in 
one of its directions? Here, in fact, after a necessary digression, we are back at 
the question which we regard as essential: can rhe insufficiency of mechanism 
be proved by facts? We said that if this demonstration is possible, it is on 
condition of frankly accepting the evolutionist hypothesis. We must now 
show that if mechanism is insufficient to account for evolution, the way of 
proving this insufficiency is not to stop at the classic conception of finality, 
still less to contract or attenuate it, but, on the contrary, to go further. 
Let us indicate at once the principle of our demonstration. We said of life 
that, from its origin, it is the continuation of one and the same impetus, 
divided into divergent lines of evolution. Something has grown, something 
has developed by a series of additions which have been so many creations. 
This very development has brought about a dissociation of tendencies which 
were unable to grow beyond a certain point without becoming mutually 
incompatible. Strictly speaking, there is nothing to prevent our imagining 

Life as Creative Change 
193 
that the evolution of life might have taken place in one single individual 
by means of a series of transformations spread over thousands of ages. 
Or, instead of a single individual, any number might be supposed, succeeding 
each other in a unilinear series. In both cases evolution would have had, so to 
speak, one dimension only. But evolution has actually taken place through 
millions of individuals, on divergent lines, each ending at a crossing from 
which new paths radiate, and so on indefinitely. If our hypothesis is justified, 
if the essential causes working along these diverse roads are of psychological 
nature, they must keep something in common in spite of the divergence 
of their effects, as school-fellows long separated keep the same memories of 
boyhood. Roads may fork or by-ways be opened along which dissociated 
elements may evolve in an independent manner, but nevertheless it is in 
virtue of the primitive impetus of the whole that the movement of the parts 
continues. Something of the whole, therefore, must abide in the parts; and 
this common element will be evident to us in some way, perhaps by the 
presence of identical organs in very different organisms. Suppose, for an 
instant, that the mechanistic explanation is the true one: evolution must then 
have occurred through a series of accidents added to one another, each new 
accident being preserved by selection if it is advantageous to that sum of 
former advantageous accidents which the present form of the living being 
represents. \X!hat likelihood is there that, by two entirely different series of 
accidents being added together, two entirely different evolutions will arrive at 
similar results? The more two lines of evolution diverge, the less probability is 
there that accidental outer influences or accidental inner variations bring 
about the construction of the same apparatus upon them, especially if there 
was no trace of this apparatus at the moment of divergence. But such similar­
ity of the two products would be natural, on the contrary, on a hypothesis like 
ours: even in the latest channel rhere would be something of the impulsion 
received at the source. Pure mechanism, then, would be refUtable, and finality, 
in the special sense in which we understand it, would be demonstrable in a certain 
aspect, if it could be proved that life may manufocture the like apparatus, by 
unlike means, on divergent lines of evolution; and the strength of the proof would 
be proportional both to the divergency between the lines of evolution thus chosen 
and to the complexity of the simi!dr structures found in them. 
It will be said that resemblance of structure is due to sameness of the 
general conditions in which life has evolved, and that these permanent outer 
conditions may have imposed the same direction on the forces constructing 
this or that apparatus, in spite of the diversity of transient outer influences 
and accidental inner changes. We are not, of course, blind to the role which 
the concept of adaptation plays in the science of to-day. Biologists certainly 
do not all make the same use of it. Some think the outer conditions capable 
of causing change in organisms in a direct manner, in a definite direction, 
through physico-chemical alterations induced by them in the living sub­
stance; such is the hypothesis of Eimer, for example. 18 Others, more faithful 

194 
Creative Evolution 
to the spirit of Darwinism, believe the influence of conditions works 
indirectly only, through favoring, in the struggle for life, those representatives 
of a species which the chance of birth has best adapted to the environment. 
In other words, some attribute a positive influence to outer conditions, and 
say that they actually give rise to variations, while the others say these 
conditions have only a negative influence and merely eliminate variations. 
But, in both cases, the outer conditions are supposed to bring about a precise 
adjustment of the organism to its circumstances. Both parties, then, will 
attempt to explain mechanically, by adaptation to similar conditions, the 
similarities of structure which we think are the strongest argument against 
mechanism. So we must at once indicate in a general way, before passing to 
the detail, why explanations from 'adaptation' seem to us insufficient. 
Let us first remark that, of the two hypotheses just described, the latter is 
the only one which is not equivocal. The Darwinian idea of adaptation by 
automatic elimination of the unadapted is a simple and clear idea. But, just 
because it attributes to the outer cause which controls evolution a merely 
negative influence, it has great difficulty in accounting for the progressive 
and, so to say, rectilinear development of complex apparatus such as we are 
about to examine. How much greater will this difficulty be in the case of the 
similar structure of two extremely complex organs on two entirely different 
lines of evolution! An accidental variation, however minute, implies the 
working of a great number of small physical and chemical causes. An accu­
mulation of accidental variations, such as would be necessary to produce a 
complex structure, requires therefore the concurrence of an almost infinite 
number of infinitesimal causes. Why should these causes, entirely accidental, 
recur the same, and in the same order, at different points of space and time? 
No one will hold that this is the case, and the Darwinian himself will 
probably merely maintain that identical effects may arise from different 
causes, that more than one road leads to the same spot. Bur let us not be 
fooled by a metaphor. The place reached does not give the form of the road 
that leads there; while an organic structure is just the accumulation of those 
small differences which evolution has had to go through in order to achieve 
it. The struggle for life and natural selection can be of no use to us in solving 
this part of the problem, for we are not concerned here with what has 
perished, we have to do only with what has survived. Now, we see that 
identical structures have been formed on independent lines of evolution by a 
gradual accumulation of effects. How can accidental causes, occurring in an 
accidental order, be supposed to have repeatedly come to the same result, the 
causes being infinitely numerous and the effect infinitely complicated? 
The principle of mechanism is that 'the same causes produce the same 
effects.' This principle, of course, does not always imply that the same effects 
must have the same causes; but it does involve this consequence in the 
particular case in which the causes remain visible in the effect that they 
produce and are indeed its constitutive elements. That two walkers starting 

Life as Creative Change 
195 
from different points and wandering at random should finally meet, is no 
great wonder. But that, throughout their walk, they should describe two 
identical curves exactly superposable on each other, is altogether unlikely. 
The improbability will be the greater, the more complicated the routes; and 
it will become impossibility, if the zigzags are infinitely complicated. Now, 
what is this complexity of zigzags as compared with that of an organ in 
which thousands of different cells, each being itself a kind of organism, are 
arranged in a definite order? 
Let us turn, then, to the other hypothesis, and see how it would solve the 
problem. Adaptation, it says, is not merely elimination of the unadapted; it is 
due to the positive influence of outer conditions that have moulded the 
organism on their own form. This time, similarity of effects will be explained 
by similarity of cause. We shall remain, apparently, in pure mechanism. But 
if we look closely, we shall see that the explanation is merely verbal, that we 
are again the dupes of words, and that the trick of the solution consists in 
taking the term 'adaptation' in two entirely different senses at the same time. 
Ifl pour into the same glass, by turns, water and wine, the two liquids will 
take the same form, and the sameness in form will be due to the sameness in 
adaptation of content to container. Adaptation, here, really means mechan­
ical adjustment. The reason is that the form to which the matter has adapted 
itself was there, ready-made, and has forced its own shape on the matter. But, 
in the adaptation of an organism to the circumstances it has to live in, where 
is the pre-existing form awaiting its matter? The circumstances are not a 
mould into which life is inserted and whose form life adopts: this is indeed to 
be fooled by a metaphor. There is no form yet, and the life must create a form 
for itself, suited to the circumstances which are made for it. It will have to 
make the best of these circumstances, neutralize their inconveniences and 
utilize their advantages - in short, respond to outer actions by building up a 
machine which has no resemblance to them. Such adapting is not repeating, 
but replying, - an entirely different thing. If there is still adaptation, it will be 
in the sense in which one may say of the solution of a problem of geometry, 
for example, that it is adapted to the conditions. I grant indeed that 
adaptation so understood explains why different evolutionary processes result 
in similar forms: the same problem, of course, calls for the same solution. But 
it is necessary then to introduce, as for the solution of a problem of geometry, 
an intelligent activity, or at least a cause which behaves in the same way. This 
is to bring in finality again, and a finality this time more than ever charged 
with anthropomorphic elements. In a word, if the adaptation is passive, if it 
is mere repetition in the relief of what the conditions give in the mould, 
it will build up nothing that one tries to make it build; and if it is active, 
capable of responding by a calculated solution to the problem which is set 
out in the conditions, that is going further than we do - too far, indeed, in 
our opinion - in the direction we indicated in the beginning. But the truth 
is that there is a surreptitious passing from one of these two meanings to the 

1% 
Creative Evolution 
other, a flight for refuge to the first whenever one is about to be caught in 
flagrante delicto of finalism by employing the second. It is really the second 
which serves the usual practice of science, but it is the first that generally 
provides its philosophy. In any particular case one talks as if the process of 
adaptation were an effort of the organism to build up a machine capable 
of turning external circumstances to the best possible account: then one 
speaks of adaptation in general as if it were the vety impress of circumstances, 
passively received by an indifferent matter. 
[ .
. . ] 
So we come back, by a somewhat roundabout way, to the idea we started 
from, that of an original impetus of life, passing from one generation of 
germs to the following generation of germs through the developed 
organisms which bridge the interval between the generations. This impetus, 
sustained right along the lines of evolution among which it gets divided, is 
the fundamental cause of variations, at least of those that are regularly passed 
on, that accumulate and create new species. In general, when species have 
begun to diverge from a common stock, they accentuate their divergence as 
they progress in their evolution. Yet, in certain definite points, they may 
evolve identically; in fact, they must do so if the hypothesis of a common 
impetus be accepted. This is just what we shall have to show now in a more 
precise way, by the same example we have chosen, the formation of the eye 
in molluscs and vertebrates. The idea of an 'original impetus,' moreover, will 
thus be made clearer. 
Two points are equally striking in an organ like the eye: the complexity of 
its structure and the simplicity of its function. The eye is composed of distinct 
parts, such as the sclerotic, the cornea, the retina, the ctystalline lens, etc. 
In each of these parts the detail is infinite. The retina alone comprises three 
layers of nervous elements - multipolar cells, bipolar cells, visual cells - each 
of which has its individuality and is undoubtedly a very complicated 
organism: so complicated, indeed, is the retinal membrane in its intimate 
structure, that no simple description can give an adequate idea of it. The 
mechanism of the eye is, in short, composed of an infinity of mechanisms, all 
of extreme complexity. Yet vision is one simple fact. As soon as the eye opens, 
the visual act is effected. Just because the act is simple, the slightest negligence 
on the part of nature in the building of the infinitely complex machine would 
have made vision impossible. This contrast between the complexity of the 
organ and the unity of the function is what gives us pause. 
A mechanistic theory is one which means to show us the gradual building­
up of the machine under the influence of external circumstances intervening 
either directly by action on the tissues or indirectly by the selection of better­
adapted ones. But, whatever form this theory may take, supposing it avails at 
all to explain the detail of the parts, it throws no light on their correlation. 
Then comes the doctrine of finality, which says that the parts have been 
brought together on a preconceived plan with a view to a certain end. In this 

Life as Creative Change 
197 
it likens the labour of nature to that of the workman, who also proceeds by 
the assemblage of parts with a view to the realization of an idea or the 
imitation of a model. Mechanism, here, reproaches finalism with its anthro­
pomorphic character, and rightly. But it fails to see that itself [sic] proceeds 
according to this method - somewhat mutilated! True, it has got rid of the 
end pursued or the ideal model. But it also holds that nature has worked like 
a human being by bringing parts together, while a mere glance at the devel­
opment of an embryo shows that life goes to work in a very different way. 
Life does not proceed by the association and addition of elements, but by 
dissociation and division. 
We must get beyond both points of view, both mechanism and finalism 
being, at bottom, only standpoints to which the human mind has been led 
by considering the work of man. But in what direction can we go beyond 
them? We have said that in analysing the structure of an organ, we can go on 
decomposing for ever, although the function of the whole is a simple thing. 
This contrast between the infinite complexity of the organ and the extreme 
simplicity of the function is what should open our eyes. 
In general, when the same object appears in one aspect as simple and in 
another as infinitely complex, the two aspects have by no means the same 
importance, or rather the same degree of reality. In such cases, the simplicity 
belongs to the object itself, and the infinite complexity to the views we take in 
turning around it, to the symbols by which our senses or intellect represent it 
to us, or, more generally, to elements of a different order, with which we try to 
imitate it artificially, but with which it remains incommensurable, being of a 
different nature. An artist of genius has painted a figure on his canvas. We can 
imitate his picture with many-coloured squares of mosaic. And we shall 
reproduce the curves and shades of the model so much the better as our 
squares are smaller, more numerous and more varied in tone. But an infinity 
of elements infinitely small, presenting an infinity of shades, would be neces­
sary to obtain the exact equivalent of the figure that the artist has conceived as 
a simple thing, which he has wished to transport as a whole to the canvas, and 
which is the more complete the more it strikes us as the projection of an 
indivisible intuition. Now, suppose our eyes so made that they cannot help 
seeing in the work of the master a mosaic effect. Or suppose our intellect so 
made that it cannot explain the appearance of the figure on the canvas except 
as a work of mosaic. We should then be able to speak simply of a collection of 
little squares, and we should be under the mechanistic hypothesis. We might 
add that, beside the materiality of the collection, there must be a plan on 
which the artist worked; and then we should be expressing ourselves as 
finalists. But in neither case should we have got at the real process, for there 
are no squares brought together. It is the picture, i.e. the simple act, projected 
on the canvas, which, by the mere fact of entering into our perception, is 
decomposed before our eyes into thousands and thousands of little squares 
which present, as recomposed, a wonderful arrangement. So the eye, with its 

198 
Creative Evolution 
marvellous complexity of structure, may be only the simple act of vision, 
divided for us into a mosaic of cells, whose order seems marvellous to us 
because we have conceived the whole as an assemblage. 
If I raise my hand from A to B, this movement appears to me under two 
aspects at once. Felt from within, it is a simple, indivisible act. Perceived from 
without, it is the course of a certain curve, AB. In this curve I can distinguish 
as many positions as I please, and the Line itself might be defined as a certain 
mutual coordination of these positions. But the positions, infinite in number, 
and the order in which they are connected, have sprung automatically from 
the indivisible act by which my hand has gone from A to B. Mechanism, here, 
would consist in seeing only the positions. Finalism would take their order 
into account. But both mechanism and finalism would leave on one side the 
movement, which is reality itself. In one sense, the movement is more than 
the positions and than their order; for it is sufficient to make it in its 
indivisible simplicity to secure that the infinity of the successive positions as 
also their order be given at once - with something else which is neither order 
nor position but which is essential, the mobility. But, in another sense, the 
movement is less than the series of positions and their connecting order; for, 
to arrange points in a certain order, it is necessary first to conceive the order 
and then to realize it with points, there must be the work of assemblage and 
there must be intelligence, whereas the simple movement of the hand 
contains nothing of either. It is not intelligent, in the human sense of the 
word, and it is not an assemblage, for it is not made up of elements. Just so 
with the relation of the eye to vision. There is in vision more than the 
component cells of the eye and their mutual coordination: in this sense, 
neither mechanism nor finalism go far enough. But, in another sense, 
mechanism and finalism both go too far, for they attribute to Nature the 
most formidable of the labours of Hercules in holding that she has exalted to 
the simple act of vision an infinity of infinitely complex elements, whereas 
Nature has had no more trouble in making an eye than I have in lifting my 
hand. Nature's simple act has divided itself automatically into an infinity of 
elements which are then found to be coordinated to one idea, just as the 
movement of my hand has dropped an infinity of points which are then 
found to satisfy one equation. 
We find it very hard to see things in that light, because we cannot help con­
ceiving organization as manufacturing. But it is one thing to manufacture, 
and quite another to organize. Manufacturing is peculiar to man. It consists 
in assembling parts of matter which we have cut out in such manner that we 
can fir them together and obtain from them a common action. The parts are 
arranged, so to speak, around the action as an ideal centre. To manufacture, 
therefore, is to work from the periphery to the centre, or, as the philosophers 
say, from the many to the one. Organization, on the contrary, works from 
the centre to the periphery. It begins in a point that is almost a mathematical 
point, and spreads around this point by concentric waves which go on 

Life as Creative Change 
199 
enlarging. The work of manufacturing is the more effective, the greater the 
quantity of matter dealt with. It proceeds by concentration and compres­
sion. The organizing act, on the contrary, has something explosive about it: 
it needs at the beginning the smallest possible place, a minimum of matter, 
as if the organizing forces only entered space reluctantly. The spermatozoon, 
which sets in motion the evolutionary process of the embryonic life, is one 
of the smallest cells of the organism; and it is only a small part of the 
spermatozoon which really takes pan in the operation. 
But these are only superficial differences. Digging beneath them, we 
think, a deeper difference would be found. 
A manufactured thing delineates exactly the form of the work of 
manufacturing it. I mean that the manufacturer finds in his product exactly 
what he has put into it. If he is going to make a machine, he cuts out its 
pieces one by one and then puts them together: the machine, when made, 
will show both the pieces and their assemblage. The whole of the result 
represents the whole of the work; and to each part of the work corresponds a 
part of the result. 
Now I recognize that positive science can and should proceed as if organi­
zation was like making a machine. Only so will it have any hold on 
organized bodies. For its object is not to show us the essence of things, but 
to furnish us with the best means of acting on them. Physics and chemistry 
are well advanced sciences, and living matter lends itself to our action only 
so far as we can treat it by the processes of our physics and chemistry. 
Organization can therefore only be studied scientifically if the organized 
body has first been likened to a machine. The cells will be the pieces of the 
machine, the organism their assemblage, and the elementary labours which 
have organized the parts will be regarded as the real elements of the labour 
which has organized the whole. This is the standpoint of science. Quite 
different, in our opinion, is that of philosophy. 
For us, the whole of an organized machine may, strictly speaking, represent 
the whole of the organizing work (this is, however, only approximately true), 
yet the parts of the machine do not correspond to parts of the work, because 
the materiality of this machine does not represent a sum of means employed, but a 
sum of obstacles avoided: it is a negation rather than a positive reality. So, as we 
have shown in a former study, vision is a power which should attain by right 
an infinity of things inaccessible to our eyes. But such a vision would not be 
continued into action; it might suit a phantom, but not a living being. The 
vision of a living being is an effictive vision, limited ro objects on which the 
being can act: it is a vision that is canalised, and the visual apparatus simply 
symbolizes the work of canalising. Therefore the creation of the visual 
apparatus is no more explained by the assembling of its anatomic elements 
chan the digging of a canal could be explained by the heaping-up of the earth 
which might have formed its banks. A mechanistic theory would maintain 
that the earth had been brought cart-load by cart-load; finalism would add 

200 
Creative Evolution 
that it had not been dumped down at random, that the carters had followed a 
plan. But both theories would be mistaken, for the canal has been made in 
another way. 
With greater precision, we may compare the process by which nature 
constructs an eye to the simple act by which we raise the hand. But we 
supposed at first that the hand met with no resistance. Let us now imagine 
that, instead of moving in air, the hand has to pass through iron filings 
which are compressed and offer resistance to it in proportion as it goes 
forward. At a certain moment the hand will have exhausted its effort, and, at 
this very moment, the filings will be massed and coordinated in a certain 
definite form, to wit, that of the hand that is stopped and of a part of the 
arm. Now, suppose that the hand and arm are invisible. Lookers-on will seek 
the reason of the arrangement in the filings themselves and in forces within 
the mass. Some will account for the position of each filing by the action 
exerted upon it by the neighbouring filings: these are the mechanists. Others 
will prefer to think that a plan of the whole has presided over the detail of 
these elementary actions: they are the finalists. But the truth is that there has 
been merely one indivisible act, that of the hand passing through the filings: 
the inexhaustible detail of the movement of the grains, as well as the order of 
their final arrangement, expresses negatively, in a way, this undivided move­
ment, being the unitary form of a resistance, and not a synthesis of positive 
elementary actions. For this reason, if the arrangement of the grains is 
termed an 'effect' and the movement of the hand a 'cause,' it may indeed be 
said that the whole of the effect is explained by the whole of the cause, but to 
parts of the cause parts of the effect will in no wise correspond. In other 
words, neither mechanism nor finalism will here be in place, and we must 
resort to an explanation of a different kind. Now, in the hypothesis we 
propose, the relation of vision ro the visual apparatus would be very nearly 
that of the hand to the iron filings that follow, canalise and limit its motion. 
The greater the effort of the hand, the farther it will go into the filings. But 
at whatever point it stops, instantaneously and automatically the filings 
coordinate and find their equilibrium. So with vision and its organ. Accord­
ing as the undivided act constituting vision advances more or less, the 
materiality of the organ is made of a more or less considerable number of 
mutually coordinated elements, but the order is necessarily complete and 
perfect. It could not be partial, because, once again, the real process which 
gives rise to it has no parts. That is what neither mechanism nor finalism takes 
into account, and it is what we also fail to consider when we wonder at the 
marvellous structure of an instrument such as the eye. At the bottom of our 
wondering is always this idea, that it would have been possible for a part only 
of this coordination to have been realized, that the complete realization is a 
kind of special favour. This favour the finalists consider as dispensed to them 
all at once, by the final cause; the mechanists claim to obtain it little by little, 
by the effect of natural selection; but both see something positive in this 

Life as Creative Change 
201 
coordination, and consequently something fractionable in its cause, -
something which admits of every possible degree of achievement. In reality, 
the cause, though more or less intense, cannot produce its effect except in one 
piece, and completely finished. According as it goes further and further in the 
direction of vision, it gives the simple pigmentary masses of a lower organism, 
or the rudimentary eye of a Serpula, or the slightly differentiated eye of the 
Alciope, or the marvellously perfected eye of the bird; but all these organs, 
unequal as is their complexity, necessarily present an equal coordination. For 
this reason, no matter how distant two animal species may be from each 
other, if the progress toward vision has gone equally far in both, there is the 
same visual organ in each case, for the form of the organ only expresses the 
degree in which the exercise of the function has been obtained. 
But, in speaking of a progress toward vision, are we not coming back to 
the old notion of finality? It would be so, undoubtedly, if this progress 
required the conscious or unconscious idea of an end to be attained. But it is 
really effected in virtue of the original impetus of life; it is implied in this 
movement itself, and that is just why it is found in independent lines of 
evolution. If now we are asked why and how it is implied therein, we reply 
that life is, more than anything else, a tendency ro act on inert matter. The 
direction of this action is not predetermined; hence the unforeseeable variety 
of forms which life, in evolving, sows along its path. But this action always 
presents, to some extent, the character of contingency; it implies at least a 
rudiment of choice. Now a choice involves the anticipatory idea of several 
possible actions. Possibilities of action must therefore be marked out for 
the living being before the action itself. Visual perception is nothing else: 1 9  
the visible outlines of bodies are the design of our eventual action on them. 
Vision will be found, therefore, in different degrees in the most diverse 
animals, and it will appear in the same complexity of structure wherever it 
has reached the same degree of intensity. 


Duration and Simultaneity 1 


Concerning the Nature of Time 
There is no doubt but that for us time is at first identical with the continuity 
of our inner life. What is this continuity? That of a flow or passage, but a 
self-sufficient flow or passage, the flow not implying a thing that Rows, and 
the passing not presupposing states through which we pass; the thing and the 
state are only artificially taken snapshots of the transition; and this transition, 
all that is naturally experienced, is duration itself. It is memory, but not 
personal memory, external to what it retains, distinct from a past whose 
preservation it assures; it is a memory within change itself, a memory that 
prolongs the before into the after, keeping them from being mere snapshots 
and appearing and disappearing in a present ceaselessly reborn. A melody 
to which we listen with our eyes closed, heeding it alone, comes close to 
coinciding with this time which is the very fluidity of our inner life; but it 
still has too many qualities, too much definition, and we must first efface the 
difference among the sounds, then do away with the distinctive features of 
sound itself, retaining of it only the continuation of what precedes into what 
follows and the uninterrupted transition, multiplicity without divisibility 
and succession without separation, in order finally to rediscover basic time. 
Such is immediately perceived duration, without which we would have no 
idea of time. 
How do we pass this inner time to the time of things? We perceive the 
physical world and this perception appears, rightly or wrongly, to be inside 
and outside us at one and the same time; in one way, it is a state of 
consciousness; in another, a surface film of matter in which perceiver and 
perceived coincide. To each moment of our inner life there thus corresponds 
a moment of our body and of all environing matter that is 'simultaneous' 
with it; this matter then seems to participate in our conscious duration. 2 
Gradually, we extend this duration to the whole physical world, because we 
see no reason to limit it to the immediate vicinity of our body. The universe 
seems to us to form a single whole; and, if the part that is around us endures 
in our manner, the same must hold, we think, for that part by which it, in 
turn, is surrounded, and so on indefinitely. Thus is born the idea of a 
duration of the universe, that is to say, of an impersonal consciousness that is 
the link among all individual consciousnesses, as berween these conscious­
nesses and the rest of nature.3 Such a consciousness would grasp, in a single, 
instantaneous perception, multiple events lying at different points in space; 
simultaneity would be precisely the possibility of rwo or more events entering 

206 
Duration and Simultaneity 
within a single, instamaneous perception. What is true and what illusory, in 
this way of seeing things? 'What matters at the momem is not allotting it 
shares of truth or error bur seeing clearly where experience ends and theory 
begins. There is no doubt that our consciousness feels itself enduring, that 
our perception plays a pan in our consciousness, and that something of our 
body and environing matter enters into our perception. 4 Thus, our duration 
and a certain felt, lived participation of our physical surroundings in this 
inner duration are facts of experience. But, in the first place, the nature of 
this participation is unknown, as we once demonstrated; it may relate to a 
property that things outside us have, without themselves enduring, of mani­
festing themselves in our duration in so far as they act upon us, and of 
thus scanning or staking out the course of our conscious life.5 Next, in 
assuming that this environment 'endures', there is no strict proof that we may 
find the same duration again when we change our surroundings; different 
durations, differently rhythmed, might coexist. We once advanced a theory of 
that kind with regard to living species. We distinguished durations of higher 
and lower tension, characteristic of different levels of consciousness, ranging 
over the animal kingdom. Still, we did not perceive then, nor do we see even 
today, any reason for extending this theory of a multiplicity of durations to the 
physical universe. We had left open the question of whether or not the uni­
verse was divisible into independent worlds; we were sufficiently occupied 
with our own world and the particular impetus that life manifests there. But 
if we had to decide the question, we would, in our present state of know­
ledge, favour the hypothesis of a physical time that is one and universal. 6 
This is only a hypothesis, but it is based upon an argument by analogy that 
we must regard as conclusive as long as we are offered nothing more satis­
factory. We believe this scarcely conscious argument reduces to the follow­
ing: All human consciousnesses are of like nature, perceive in the same way, 
keep in step, as it were, and live the same duration. But, nothing prevems us 
from imagining as many human consciousnesses as we please, widely 
scattered through the whole universe, but brought close enough to one 
another for any two consecutive ones, taken at random, to overlap the 
fringes of their fields of outer experience. Each of these two outer experiences 
participates in the duration of each of the two consciousnesses. And, since 
the two consciousnesses have the same rhythm of duration, so must the two 
experiences. But the two experiences have a part in common. Through this 
connecting link, then, they are reunited in a single experience, unfolding in a 
single duration which will be, at will, that of either of the two conscious­
nesses. Since the same argument can be repeated step by step, a single 
duration will gather up the events of the whole physical world along its way; 
and we shall then be able to eliminate the human consciousness that we had 
at first laid our at wide intervals like so many relays for the motion of 
our thought; there will be nothing more than an impersonal time in which 
all things will pass. In rhus formulating mankind's belief, we are perhaps 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
207 
putting more precision into it than is proper. Each of us is generally content 
with indefinitely enlarging, by a vague effort of imagination, his immediate 
physical environment, which, being perceived by him, participates in the 
duration of his consciousness. But as soon as this effort is precisely stated, as 
soon as we seek to justify it, we catch ourselves doubling and multiplying 
our consciousness, transporting it to the limits of our outer experience, then, 
to the edge of the new field of experience that it has thus disclosed, and so on 
indefinitely - they are really multiple consciousnesses sprung from ours, 
similar to ours, which we entrust with forging a chain across the immensity 
of the universe and with attesting, through the identity of their inner dura­
tions and the contiguity of their outer experiences, the singleness of an 
impersonal time. Such is the hypothesis of common sense. We maintain that 
it could as readily be considered Einstein's and that the theory of relativity 
was, if anything, meant to bear out the idea of a time common to all things. 
This idea, hypothetical in any case, even appears to us to take on special rigor 
and consistency in the theory of relativity, correctly understood. Such is the 
conclusion that will emerge from our work of analysis. But that is not the 
important point at the moment. Let us put aside the question of a single time. 
What we wish to establish is that we cannot speak of a reality that endures 
without inserting consciousness into it. The metaphysician will have a 
universal consciousness intervene directly. Common sense will vaguely 
ponder it. The mathematician, it is true, will not have to occupy himself with 
it, since he is concerned with the measurement of things, not their nature. 
But if he were to wonder what he was measuring, if he were to fix his atten­
tion upon time itself, he would necessarily picture succession, and therefore 
a before and after, and consequently a bridge between the two (otherwise, 
there would be only one of the two, a mere snapshot); but, once again, it is 
impossible to imagine or conceive a connecting link between the before and 
after without an element of memory and, consequently, of consciousness. 
We may perhaps feel averse to rhe use of the word 'consciousness' if an 
anthropomorphic sense is attached ro it. But to imagine a thing that endures, 
there is no need to take one's own memory and transport it, even attenuated, 
into the interior of the thing. However much we may reduce the intensity of 
our memory, we risk leaving in it some degree of the variety and richness 
of our inner life; we are then preserving the personal, at all events, human 
character of memory. It is the opposite course we must follow. We shall 
have to consider a moment in the unfolding of the universe, that is, a 
snapshot that exists independently of any consciousness, then we shall try 
conjointly to summon another moment brought as close as possible to the 
first, and thus have a minimum of time enter into the world without allowing 
the faintest glimmer of memory to go with it. We shall see that this is 
impossible. Without an elementary memory that connects the two moments, 
there will be only one or the other, consequently a single instance, no before 
or after, no succession, no time. We can bestow upon this memory just what 

208 
Duration and Simultaneity 
is needed to make the connection; it will be, if we like, this very connection, 
a mere continuing of the before into the immediate after with a perpetually 
renewed forgetfulness of what is not the immediately prior moment. We shall 
nonetheless have introduced memory. To tell the truth, it is impossible to 
distinguish between the duration, however short it may be, that separates two 
instants and a memory that connects them, because duration is essentially a 
continuation of what no longer exists into what does exist. This is real time, 
perceived and lived. This is also any conceived time, because we cannot 
conceive a time without imagining it as perceived and lived. Duration 
therefore implies consciousness; and we place consciousness at the heart of 
things for the very reason that we credit them with a time that endures. 
However, the time that endures is not measurable, whether we think of it 
as within us or imagine it outside of us. Measurement that is not merely 
conventional implies, in effect, division and superimposition. But we cannot 
superimpose successive durations to test whether they are equal or unequal; 
by hypothesis, the one no longer exists when the other appears; the idea of 
verifiable equality loses all meaning here. Moreover if real duration becomes 
divisible, as we shall see, by means of the community that is established 
between it and the line symbolizing it, it consists in itself of an indivisible 
and total progress. Listen to a melody with your eyes closed, thinking of it 
alone, no longer juxtaposing on paper or an imaginary keyboard notes which 
you thus preserved one for the other, which then agreed to become 
simultaneous and renounced their fluid continuity in time to congeal in 
space; you will rediscover, undivided and indivisible, the melody or portion 
of the melody that you will have replaced within pure duration. Now, our 
inner duration, considered from the first to the last moment of our con­
scious life, is something like this melody. Our attention may turn away from 
it and, consequently, from its indivisibility; but when we try to cut it, it is 
as if we suddenly passed a blade through a flame - divide only the space it 
occupied. When we witness a very rapid motion, like that of a shooting star, 
we quite clearly distinguish its fiery line divisible at will, from the indivisible 
mobility that it subtends; it is this mobility that is pure duration. Impersonal 
and universal time, if it exists, is in vain endlessly prolonged from past to 
future; it is all of a piece; the parts we single out in it are merely those of a 
space that delineates its track and becomes its equivalent in our eyes; we are 
dividing the unfolded, not the unfolding. How do we first pass from the 
unfolding to the unfolded, from pure duration to measurable time? It is easy 
to reconstruct the mechanism of this operation. 
If I draw my finger across a sheet of paper without looking at it, the 
motion I perform is, perceived from within, a continuity of consciousness, 
something of my own flow, in a word, duration. If I now open my eyes, I see 
that my finger is tracing on the sheet of paper a line that is preserved, where 
all is juxtaposition and no longer succession; this is the unfolded, which is 
the record of the result of motion, and which will be its symbol as well. 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
209 
Now, this line is divisible, measurable. In dividing and measuring it, I can 
then say, if it suits me, that I am dividing and measuring the duration of the 
motion that is tracing it out. It is therefore quite true that time is measured 
through the intermediary of motion. But it is necessary to add that, if this 
measurement of time by motion is possible, it is, above all, because we are 
capable of performing motions ourselves and because these motions then 
have a dual aspect. As muscular sensation, they are a part of the stream of 
our conscious life, they endure; as visual perception, they describe a 
trajectory, they claim a space. I say 'above all' because we could, at a pinch, 
conceive of a conscious creature reduced to visual perception who would yet 
succeed in framing the idea of measurable time. Its life would then have to 
be spent in the contemplation of an outside motion continuing without end. 
It would also have to be able to extract from the motion perceived in space 
and sharing the divisibility of its trajectory, the 'pure mobility,' the uninter­
rupted solidarity of the before and after that is given in consciousness as an 
indivisible fact. We drew this distinction just before when we were speaking 
of the fiery path traced out by the shooting star. Such a consciousness would 
have a continuity of life constituted by the uninterrupted sensation of an 
external, endlessly unfolding mobility. And the uninterruption of unfolding 
would still remain distinct from the divisible track left in space, which is still 
of the unfolded. The latter is divisible and measurable because it is space. 
The other is duration. Without the continual unfolding, there would be 
only space, and a space that, no longer subtending a duration, would no 
longer represent time. 
Now, nothing prevents us from assuming that each of us is tracing an 
uninterrupted motion in space from the beginning to the end of his con­
scious life. We could be walking day and night. We would thus complete a 
journey coextensive with our conscious life. Our entire history would then 
unfold in a measurable time. 
Are we thinking of such a journey when we speak of an impersonal time? 
Not entirely, for we live a social and even cosmic life. Quite naturally we 
substitute any other person's journey for the one we would make, then any 
uninterrupted motion that would be contemporaneous with it. I call two 
flows 'contemporaneous' when they are equally one or two for my conscious­
ness, the latter perceiving them together as a single flowing if it sees fit to 
engage in an undivided act of attention, and, on the other hand, separating 
them throughout if it prefers to divide its attention between them, even 
doing both at one and the same time if it decides to divide its attention and 
yet not cut it in two. I call two instantaneous perceptions 'simultaneous' that 
are apprehended in one and the same mental act, the attention here again 
being able to make one or two out of them at will. This granted, it is easy to 
see that it is entirely in our interest to take for the 'unfolding of time' a 
motion independent of that of our own body. In truth, we find it already 
taken. Society has adopted it for us. It is the earth's rotational motion. But if 

210 
Duration and Simultaneity 
we accept it, if we understand it as time and nor just space, it is because a 
journey of our own body is always virtual in it, and could have been for us the 
unfolding of time. 
It matters little, moreover, what moving body we adopt as our recorder of 
time. Once we have exteriorised our own duration as motion in space, the 
rest follows. Thenceforth, time will seem to us like the unwinding of a 
thread, that is, like the journey of the mobile entrusted with computing it. 
We shall say that we have measured the time of this unwinding and, 
consequently, that of the universal unwinding as well. 
But all things would not seem to us to be unwinding along with the 
thread, each actual moment of the universe would not be for us the tip of 
the thread, if we did not have the concept of simultaneity at our disposal. 
We shall soon see the role of this concept in Einstein's theory. For the time 
being, we would like to make clear its psychological origin, about which we 
have already said something. The theoreticians of relativity never mention 
any simultaneity but that of two instants. Anterior to that one, however, is 
another, the idea of which is more natural: the simultaneity of two flows. 
We stated that it is of the very essence of our attention to be able to be 
divided without being split up. When we are seated on the bank of a river, 
the flowing of the water, the gliding of a boat or the flight of a bird, the 
ceaseless murmur in our life's deeps are for us three separate things or only 
one, as we choose. We can interiorise the whole, dealing with a single 
perception that carries along the three flows, mingled, in its course; or we 
can leave the first two outside and then divide our attention between the 
inner and the outer; or, better yet, we can do both at one and the same time, 
our attention uniting and yet differentiating the three flows, thanks to its 
singular privilege of being one and several. Such is our primary idea of 
simultaneity. We therefore call two external flows that occupy the same 
duration 'simultaneous' because they both depend upon the duration of a 
like third, our own; this duration is ours only when our consciousness is 
concerned with us alone, but it becomes equally theirs when our attention 
embraces the three flows in a single indivisible act. 
Now from the simultaneity of two flows, we would never pass to that of 
two instants, if we remained within pure duration, for every duration is thick; 
real time has no instants. But we naturally form the idea of instant, as well as 
of simultaneous instants, as soon as we acquire the habit of converting time 
into space. For, if a duration has no instants, a line terminates in points? 
And, as soon as we make a line correspond to a duration, to portions of this 
line there must correspond 'portions of duration' and to an extremity of 
the line, an 'extremity of duration'; such is the instant - something that does 
not exist actually, but virtually. The instant is what would terminate duration 
if the latter came to a halt. But it does not halt. Real time cannot therefore 
supply the instant; the latter is born of the mathematical point, that is to say, 
of space. And yet, without real time, the point would be only a point, not an 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
2 1 1  
instant. Instantaneity thus involves two things, a continuity of real time, that 
is, duration, and a Spatialised time, that is, a line which, described by a 
motion, has thereby become symbolic of time. This spatialised time, which 
admits of points, ricochets onto real time and there gives rise to the instant. 
This would not be possible without the tendency - fertile in illusions -
which leads us co apply the motion against the distance travelled, to make the 
trajectory coincide with the journey, and then to decompose the motion over 
the line as we decompose the line itself; if it has suited us to single out points 
on the line, these points will then become 'positions' of the moving body (as 
if the latter, moving, could ever coincide with something at rest, as if it would 
not thus stop moving at once!). Then, having dotted the path of motion with 
positions, that is, with the extremities of the subdivisions of the line, we have 
them correspond to 'instants' of the continuity of the motion - mere virtual 
stops, purely mental views. We once described the mechanism of this process; 
we have also shown how the difficulties raised by philosophers over the 
question of motion vanish as soon as we perceive the relation of the instant to 
spatialised time, and that of spatialised time to pure duration. Let us confine 
ourselves here to remarking that no matter how much this operation appears 
learned, it is native to the human mind; we practice it instinctively. Its recipe 
is deposited in the language. 
Simultaneity of the instant and simultaneity of flow are therefore distinct 
but complementary things. Without simultaneity of flow, we would not 
consider these three terms interchangeable: continuity of our inner life, con­
tinuity of a voluntary motion which our mind indefinitely prolongs, and 
continuity of any motion through space. Real duration and spatialised time 
would not then be equivalent, and consequently time in general would no 
longer exist for us; there would be only each one's duration. But, on the 
other hand, this time can be computed thanks only to the simultaneity of 
the instant. We need this simultaneity of the instant in order (1) co note the 
simultaneity of a phenomenon with a clock moment, (2) to point off, all 
along our own duration, the simultaneities of these moments with moments 
of our duration which are created in the very act of pointing. Of these two 
acts, the first is the essential one in the measurement of time. But without 
the second, we would have no particular measurement, we would end up 
with a figure t representing anything at all, we would not be thinking of 
time. It is therefore the simultaneity between two instants of two motions 
outside of us that enables us to measure time; bur it is the simultaneity of 
these moments with moments pricked by them along our inner duration 
that makes this measurement one of time. 
We shall have to dwell upon these two points. But let us first open a 
parenthesis. We have just distinguished between two 'simultaneities of the 
instant'; neither of the two is the simultaneity most in question in the theory 
of relativity, namely, the simultaneity between readings given by two 
separated clocks. Of that we have spoken in our first chapter; we shall soon 

212 
Duration and Simultaneity 
be especially occupied with it. But it is clear that the theory of relativity itself 
cannot help acknowledging the two simultaneities that we have just 
described; it confines itself to adding a third, one that depends upon a 
synchronizing of clocks. Now we shall no doubt show how the readings of 
two separated clocks C and C', synchronized and showing the same time, 
are or are not simultaneous according to one's point of view. The theory of 
relativity is correct in so stating; we shall see upon what condition. But it 
thereby recognizes that an event E occurring beside clock C is given in 
simultaneity with a reading on clock C in a quite different sense - in the 
psychologist's sense of the word simultaneity. And likewise for the simul­
taneity of event E' with the reading on its 'neighbouring' dock C'. For if we 
did not begin by admitting a simultaneity of this kind, one which is abso­
lute and has nothing to do with the synchronizing of clocks, the clocks 
would serve no purpose. They would be bits of machinery wich which 
we would amuse ourselves by comparing them with one another; chey would 
not be employed in classifying events; in short, they would exist for their 
own sake and not to serve us. They would lose their raison d'hre for the 
theoretician of relativity as for everyone else, for he too calls them in only to 
designate the time of an event. Now, it is very true that simultaneity thus 
understood is easily established between moments in two flows only if the 
flows pass by 'at the same place.' It is also very true that common sense and 
science itself until now have, a priori, extended this conception of simul­
taneity to events separated by any distance. They no doubt imagined, as we 
said further back, a consciousness coextensive with the universe, capable of 
embracing the two events in a unique and instantaneous perception. But, 
more than anything else, they applied a principle inherent in every 
mathematical representation of things and asserting itself in the theory of 
relativity as well. We find in it the idea that the distinction between 'small' 
and 'large,' 'not far apart' and 'very far apart,' has no scientific validity and 
that if we can speak of simultaneity outside of any synchronizing of clocks, 
independently of any point of view, when dealing with an event and a clock 
not much distant from one another, we have this same right when the 
distance is great between the clock and the event or between the two clocks. 
No physics, no astronomy, no science is possible if we deny the scientist 
the right to represent the whole universe schematically on a piece of paper. 
We therefore implicitly grant the possibility of reducing without disror­
ting. We believe that size is not an absolute, that there are only relations 
among sizes, and that everything would turn out the same in a universe 
made smaller at will, if the relations among parts were preserved. But in that 
case how can we prevent our imagination, and even our understanding, from 
treating the simultaneity of the readings of two very widely separated clocks 
like the simultaneity of two clocks slightly separated, that is, situated 'at the 
same place'? A thinking microbe would find an enormous interval between 
two 'neighbouring' clocks. And it would not concede the existence of an 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
213 
absolute, intuitively perceived simultaneity between their readings. More 
Einsteinian than Einstein, it would see simultaneity here only if it had been 
able to note identical readings on two microbial clocks, synchronized by 
optical signals, which it had substituted for our two 'neighbouring' clocks. 
Our absolute simultaneity would be its relative simultaneity because it 
would refer our absolute simultaneity to the readings on irs two microbial 
clocks which it would, in its turn, perceive (which it would, moreover, be 
equally wrong to perceive) 'at the same place.' But chis is of small concern 
at the moment; we are not criticizing Einstein's conception; we merely wish 
to show to what we owe rhe natural extension chat has always been made of 
the idea of simultaneity, after having actually derived it from the ascertain­
ment of two 'neighbouring' events. This analysis, which has until now hardly 
been attempted, reveals a fact that the theory of relativity could make use of. 
We see that if our understanding passes here so easily from a short to a long 
distance, from simultaneity between neighbouring events to simultaneity 
between widely-separated events, if it extends to the second case the absolute 
character of rhe first, it is because it is accustomed to believing that we can 
arbitrarily modify the dimensions of all things on condition of retaining their 
relations. But it is time to close the parenthesis. Let us return to rhe intuitively 
perceived simultaneity which we first mentioned and the two propositions we 
had set forth: (1) it is the simultaneity between two instants of two motions 
outside us that allows us to measure an interval of time; (2) it is the 
simultaneity of these moments with moments dotted by them along our 
inner duration that makes this measurement one of time. 
The first point is obvious. We saw above how inner duration exteriorises 
itself as sparialised time and how the latter, space rather than time, is 
measurable. Ic is henceforth through the intermediary of space that we shall 
measure every interval of time. As we shall have divided it into parts 
corresponding to equal spaces, equal by definition, we shall have at each 
division point an extremity of the interval, an instant, and we shall regard the 
interval itself as the unit of time. We shall then be able to consider any 
motion, any change, occurring beside this model motion; we shall point off 
the whole length of its unfolding with 'simultaneities of the instant.' As many 
simultaneities as we shall have established, so many units of time shall we 
record for the duration of the phenomenon. Measuring time consists 
therefore in counting simultaneities. All other measuring implies the possi­
bility of directly or indirectly laying the unit of measurement over the object 
measured. All other measuring therefore bears upon the interval between 
the extremities even though we are, in fact, confined to counting these 
extremities. But in dealing with time, we can only count extremities; we 
merely agree to say that we have measured the interval in this way. If we now 
observe that science works exclusively with measurements, we become aware 
that, with respect to time, science counts instants, takes note of simul­
taneities, but remains without a grip on what happens in the intervals. 

21-i 
Duration and Simultaneity 
It may indefinitely increase the number of extremities, indefinitely narrow the 
intervals; but always the interval escapes it, shows ir only its extremities. 
If every motion in the universe was to accelerate in proportion, including the 
one thar serves as the measure of time, something would change for a con­
sciousness not bound up with intracerebral molecular motions; it would not 
receive the same enrichment between sunup and sundown; it would therefore 
detect a change; in fact, the hypothesis of a simultaneous acceleration of every 
motion in the universe makes sense only if we imagine a spectator­
consciousness whose completely qualitative duration admits of a more or a 
less without being thereby accessible to measurement. 8 But the change would 
exist only for that consciousness able to compare the flow of things with that 
of the inner life. In the view of science nothing would have changed. Let us go 
further. The speed of unfolding of this external, mathematical time might 
be(:ome infinite; all the past, present, and future stares of the universe might 
be found experienced at a stroke; in place of the unfolding there might be 
only the unfolded. The motion representative of time would then have 
become a line; to each of the divisions of this line there would correspond 
the same portion of the unfolded universe that corresponded to it before 
in the unfolding universe; nothing would have changed in the eyes of science. 
Its formulae and calculations would remain what they were. 
It is true that exactly at the moment of our passing from the unfolding to 
the unfolded, it would have been necessary to endow space with an extra 
dimension. More than thirty years ago,9 we pointed out that spatialised time 
is really a fourth dimension of space. Only this fourth dimension allows us 
to juxtapose what is given as succession: without it, we would have no room. 
Whether a universe has three, two, or a single dimension, or even none at all 
and reduces to a point, we can always convert the indefinite succession of 
all its events into instantaneous or eternal juxtaposition by the sole act 
of granting it an additional dimension. If it has none, reducing to a point 
that changes quality indefinitely, we can imagine the rapidity of succession 
of the qualities becoming infinite and these points of quality being given all at 
once, provided we bring to this world without dimension a line upon which 
the points are juxtaposed. If it already had one dimension, if it were linear, 
two dimensions would be needed to juxtapose the lines of quality - each one 
indefinite - which were the successive moments of its history. The same 
observation again if it had two dimensions, if it were a surface universe, an 
indefinite canvas upon which flat images would indefinitely be drawn, each 
one covering it completely; the rapidity of succession of these images will 
again be able to become infinite, and we shall again go over from a universe 
that unfolds to an unfolded universe, provided that we have been accorded 
an extra dimension. We shall then have all the endless, piled-up canvases 
giving us all the successive images that make up the entire history of the 
universe; we shall possess them all together; but we shall have had to pass 
from a flat to a volumed universe. It is easy to understand, therefore, why the 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
2 1 5  
sole act of attributing an infinite speed to time, of substituting the unfolded 
for the unfolding, would require us to endow our solid universe with a 
fourth dimension. Now, for the very reason that science cannot specify the 
'speed of unfolding' of time, that it counts simultaneities but necessarily 
neglects intervals, it deals with a time whose speed of unfolding we may as 
well assume to be infinite, thereby virtually conferring an additional dimen­
sion upon space. 
Immanent in our measurement of time, therefore, is the tendency to 
empty its content into a space of four dimensions in which past, present, and 
future are juxtaposed or superimposed for all eternity. This tendency simply 
expresses our inability mathematically to translate time itself, our need to 
replace it, in order to measure it, by simultaneities which we count. These 
simultaneities are instantaneities; they do not partake of the nature of real 
time; they do not endure. They are purely mental views that stake out 
conscious duration and real motion with virtual stops, using for this purpose 
the mathematical point that has been carried over from space to time. 
But if our science rhus attains only to space, it is easy to see why the 
dimension of space that has come to replace time is still called time. It is 
because our consciousness is there. It infuses living duration into a rime dried 
up as space. Our mind, interpreting mathematical rime, retraces the path it 
has travelled in obtaining it. From inner duration it had passed to a certain 
undivided motion which was still closely bound up with it and which had 
become the model motion, the generator or computer of time; from what 
there is of pure mobility in this motion, that mobility which is the link 
between motion and duration, it passed to the trajectory of the motion, 
which is pure space; dividing the trajectory into equal parts, it passed from 
the points of division of this trajectory to the corresponding or 'simultaneous' 
points of division of the trajectory of any other motion. The duration of this 
last motion was thus measured; we have a definite number of simultaneities; 
this will be the measure of time; it will henceforth be time itself. But this 
is time only because we can look back ar what we have done. From the 
simultaneities staking out the continuity of motions, we are always prepared 
to reascend the motions themselves and, through them, the inner duration 
that is contemporaneous with them, thus replacing a series of simultaneities 
of the instant, which we count bur which are no longer time, by the 
simultaneity of flows that leads us back to inner, real duration. 
Some will wonder whether it is useful to return to it, and whether science 
has not, as a matter of fact, correned a mental imperfection, brushed aside a 
limitation of our nature, by spreading out 'pure duration' in space. These 
will say: 'Time, which is pure duration, is always in the course of flowing; we 
apprehend only its past and its present, which is already past; the future 
appears dosed to our knowledge, precisely because we believe it open to our 
action - it is the promise or anticipation of unforeseeable novelty. But the 
operation by which we convert time into space for the purpose of measuring 

Duration and Simultaneity 
it informs us implicitly of its content. The measurement of a thing is 
sometimes the revealer of its nature, and precisely at this point mathematical 
expression turns out to have a magical property: created by us or risen at our 
bidding, it does more than we asked of it; for we cannot convert into space 
the time already elapsed without treating all of time the same way. The act 
by which we usher the past and present into space spreads out the future 
there without consulting us. To be sure, this future remains concealed from 
us by a screen; but now we have it there, all complete, given along with the 
resr. Indeed, what we called the passing of time was only the steady sliding of 
the screen and the gradually obtained vision of what lay waiting, globally, in 
eternity. Let us then take this duration for what it is, for a negation, a barrier 
to seeing all, steadily pushed back; our acts themselves will no longer seem 
like a contribution of unforeseeable novelty. They will be parr of the 
universal weave of things, given at one stroke. We do not introduce them 
into the world; it is the world that introduces them ready-made into us, into 
our consciousness, as we reach them. Yes, it is we who are passing when we 
say time passes; it is the motion before our eyes which, moment by moment, 
actualises a complete history given virtually.' Such is the metaphysic 
immanent in the spatial representation of time. It is inevitable. Clear or 
confused, it was always the natural metaphysic of the mind speculating upon 
becoming. We need not discuss it here, still less replace it by another. 
We have explained elsewhere why we see in duration the very stuff of our 
existence and of all things, and why, in our eyes, the universe is a continuity 
of creation. We thus kept as close as possible to the immediate; we asserted 
nothing that science could not accept and use; only recently, in an admirable 
book, a philosopher-mathematician affirmed the need to admit of an 
'advance of Nature' and linked this conception with ours.1° For the present, 
we are confining ourselves to drawing a demarcation line between what is 
theory, metaphysical construction, and what is purely and simply given in 
experience; for we wish to keep to experience. Real duration is experienced; we 
learn that time unfolds and, moreover, we are unable to measure it without 
converting it into space and without assuming all we know of it to be 
unfolded. But, it is impossible mentally to spatialize only a part; the act, once 
begun, by which we unfold the past and thus abolish real succession involves 
us in a total unfolding of time; inevitably we are then led to blame human 
imperfection for our ignorance of a future that is present and to consider 
duration a pure negation, a 'deprivation of eternity.' Inevitably we come back 
to the Platonic theory. Bur since this conception must arise because we have 
no way of limiting our spatial representation of elapsed time to the past, it 
is possible that the conception is erroneous, and in any case certain that it is 
purely a mental construction. Let us therefore keep to experience. 
If time has a positive reality, if the delay of duration at instantaneity 
represents a certain hesitation or indetermination inherent in a certain part of 
things which holds all the rest suspended within it; in short, if there is a 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
217 
creative evolution, I can very well understand how the portion of time already 
unfolded may appear as juxtaposition in space and no longer as pure 
succession; I can also conceive how every part of the universe which is 
mathematically linked to the present and past - that is, the future unfolding 
of the inorganic world - may be representable in the same schema (we once 
demonstrated that in astronomical and physical matters prevision is really a 
vision). We believe that a philosophy in which duration is considered real and 
even active can quite readily admit Minkowski's and Einstein's space-time (in 
which, it must be added, the fourth dimension called time is no longer, as 
in our examples above, a dimension completely similar to the others). On the 
other hand, you will never derive the idea of a temporal flow from 
Minkowski's schema. Is it not better, in that case, to confine ourselves, until 
further notice, to that one of the two points of view which sacrifices nothing 
of experience, and therefore - not to prejudge the question - nothing of 
appearances? Besides, how can a physicist wholly reject inner experience if he 
operates with perceptions and, therefore, with the data of consciousness? It is 
true that a certain doctrine accepts the testimony of the senses, that is, of 
consciousness, in order to obtain terms among which to establish relations, 
then retains only the relations and regards the terms as nonexistent. Bur this is 
a metaphysic grafted upon science, it is not science. And, to tell the truth, it 
is by abstraction that we distinguish both terms and relations: a continual 
flow from which we simultaneously derive both terms and relations and 
which is, over and above all that, fluidity; chis is the only immediate datum 
of experience. 
But we must close this overly long parenthesis. We believe we have 
achieved our purpose, which was to describe the salient features of a time in 
which there really is succession. Abolish these features and there is no longer 
succession, but juxtaposition. You can say that you are still dealing with 
time - we are free to give words any meaning we like, as long as we begin by 
defining that meaning - but we shall know that we are no longer dealing 
with an experienced time; we shall be before a symbolic and conventional 
time, an auxiliary magnitude introduced with a view to calculating real 
magnitudes. It is perhaps for not having first analysed our mental view of the 
time that flows, our feeling of real duration, that there has been so much 
trouble in determining the philosophical meaning of Einstein's theories, that 
is, their relation to reality. Those whom the paradoxical appearance of the 
theories inconvenienced have declared Einstein's multiple times to be purely 
mathematical entities. Bur those who would like to dissolve things into 
relations, who regard every reality, even ours, as a confusedly perceived 
mathematics, are apr to declare that Minkowski's and Einstein's space-time 
is reality itself, that all of Einstein's times are equally real, as much and 
perhaps more so than the time that flows along with us. We are too hasty in 
both instances. We have just stated, and we shall soon demonstrate in greater 
detail, why the theory of relativity cannot express all of reality. But it is 

218 
Duration and Simultaneity 
impossible for it not to express some. For the time that intervenes in the 
Michelson-Morley experiment is a real time - real again is the time to 
which we return with the application of the Lorentz formulae. If we leave 
real time to end with real time, we have perhaps made use of mathematical 
artifices in between, but these must have some connection with things. It is 
therefore a question of allotting shares to the real and to the conventional. 
Our analyses were simply intended to pave the way for this task. 
But we have just uttered the word 'reality'; and in what follows, we shall 
constantly be speaking of what is real and not real. What shall we mean by 
that? If it were necessary to define reality in general, to say by what sign we 
recognize it, we could not do so without classifying ourselves within a school; 
philosophers are not in agreement, and the problem has received as many 
solutions as there are shades of realism and idealism. We would, besides, have 
to distinguish between the standpoints of philosophy and science; the former 
rather regards the concrete, all charged with quality, as the real; the latter 
extracts or abstracts a certain aspect of things and retains only size or relation 
among sizes. Very happily, we have only to be occupied, in all that follows, 
with a single reality, time. This being so, it will be easy for us to follow the 
rule we have imposed upon ourselves in the present essay, that of advancing 
nothing that cannot be accepted by any philosopher or scientist - even noth­
ing that is not implied in all philosophy and science. 
Everyone will surely agree that time is not conceived without a before and 
an after - time is succession. Now we have just shown that where there is not 
some memory, some consciousness, real or virtual, established or imagined, 
actually present or ideally introduced, there cannot be a before and an after; 
there is one or the other, not both; and both are needed to constitute time. 
Hence, in what follows, whenever we shall wish to know whether we are 
dealing with a real or an imaginary time, we shall merely have to ask ourselves 
whether the object before us can or cannot be perceived, whether we can or 
cannot become conscious of it. The case is privileged; it is even unique. If it is 
a question of colour, for example, consciousness undoubtedly intervenes at 
the beginning of the study in order to give the physicist the perception of the 
thing; but the physicist has the right and the duty to substitute for the datum 
of consciousness something measurable and numerable with which he will 
henceforward work while granting it the name of the original perception 
merely for greater convenience. He can do so because, with this original 
perception eliminated, something remains, or at the very least, is deemed to 
remain. But what will be left of time if you take succession out of it? And 
what is left of succession if you remove even the possibility of perceiving a 
before and an after? I grant you the right to substitute, say, a line for time, 
since to measure it is quite in order. But a line can be called time only when 
the juxtaposition it affords is convertible into succession; otherwise you are 
arbitrarily and conventionally giving that line the name of time. We must be 
forewarned of this so as not to lay ourselves open to a serious error. What will 

Concerning the Nature of Time 
219 
happen if you introduce into your reasoning and figuring the hypothesis that 
the thing you called 'rime' cannot, on pain of contradiction, be perceived by a 
consciousness, either real or imaginary? Will you not then be working, by 
definition, with an imaginary, unreal time? Now such is the case with the 
times with which we shall often be dealing in the theory of relativity. We shall 
meet with perceived or perceptible ones - those will be considered real. But 
there are others that the theory prohibits, as it were, from being perceived or 
becoming perceptible: if rhey became so, they would change in scale, so that 
measurement, correct if it bears upon what we do not perceive, would be false 
as soon as we do perceive. Why nor declare these latter un-real, at least as far as 
their being 'temporal' goes? I admit that the physicist still finds it convenient 
to call them time; we shall soon see why. But if we liken these times to the 
other, we fall into paradoxes that have certainly hurt rhe theory of relativity, 
even if they have helped popularise it. It will therefore be no surprise if, in the 
present study, we require the property of being perceived or perceptible for 
everything held up as real. We shall nor be deciding the question of whether 
all realiry possesses this salient feature. We are only dealing here with the 
reality of rime. 


The Creative Mind1 


The Possible and the Rea/2 
I should like to come back to a subject on which I have already spoken, the 
continuous creation of unforeseeable novelty which seems to be going on in 
the universe. As far as I am concerned, I feel I am experiencing it constantly. 
No matter how I try to imagine in detail what is going to happen to me, still 
how inadequate, how abstract and stilted is the thing I have imagined in 
comparison to what actually happens! The realization brings along with it an 
unforeseeable nothing which changes everything. For example, I am to be 
present at a gathering; I know what people I shall find there, around what 
table, in what order, to discuss what problem. But let them come, be seated 
and chat as I expected, let them say what I was sure they would say: the 
whole gives me an impression at once novel and unique, as if it were but 
now designed at one original stroke by the hand of an artist. Gone is the 
image I had conceived of it, a mere prearrangeable juxtaposition of things 
already known! I agree that the picture has not the artistic value of a 
Rembrandt or a Velasquez: yet it is just as unexpected and, in this sense, 
quite as original. It will be alleged that I did not know the circumstances in 
detail, that I could not control the persons in question, their gestures, their 
attitudes, and that if the thing as a whole provided me with something new 
it was because they produced additional factors. But I have the same 
impression of novelry before the unrolling of my inner life. I feel it more 
vividly than ever, before the action I willed and of which I was sole master. 
If I deliberate before acting, the moments of deliberation present themselves 
to my consciousness like the successive sketches a painter makes of his 
picture, each one unique of its kind; and no matter whether the act itself in its 
accomplishment realizes something willed and consequently foreseen, it has 
none the less its own particular form in all irs originality. - Granted, 
someone will say; there is perhaps something original and unique in a state of 
soul; but matter is repetition; the external world yields to mathematical laws; 
a superhuman intelligence which would know the position, the direction, and 
the speed of all the atoms and electrons of the material universe at a given 
moment could calculate any future state of this universe as we do in the case 
of an eclipse of the sun or the moon. - I admit all this for the sake of 
argument, if it concerns only the inert world and at least with regard to 
elementary phenomena, although this is beginning to be a much debated 
question. But this 'inert' world is only an abstraction. Concrete reality 
comprises those living, conscious beings enframed in inorganic matter. I say 

224 
The Creative Mind 
living and conscious, for I believe that the living is conscious by right; it 
becomes unconscious in fact where consciousness falls asleep, but even in the 
regions where consciousness is in a state of somnolence, in the vegetable 
kingdom for example, there is regulated evolution, definite progress, aging; in 
fact, all the external signs of the duration which characterizes consciousness. 
And why must we speak of an inert matter into which life and consciousness 
would be inserted as in a frame? By what right do we put the inert first? The 
ancients had imagined a World Soul supposed to assure the continuity of 
existence of the material universe. Stripping this conception of its mythical 
element, I should say that the inorganic world is a series of infinitely rapid 
repetitions or quasi-repetitions which, when totalled, constitute visible and 
previsible changes. I should compare them to the swinging of the pendulum 
of a clock: the swingings of the pendulum are coupled to the continuous 
unwinding of a spring linking them together and whose unwinding they 
mark; the repetitions of the inorganic world constitute rhythm in the life 
of conscious beings and measure their duration. Thus the living being 
essentially has duration; it has duration precisely because it is continuously 
elaborating what is new and because there is no elaboration without 
searching, no searching without groping. Time is this very hesitation, or it is 
nothing. Suppress the conscious and the living (and you can do this only 
through an artificial effort of abstraction, for the material world once again 
implies perhaps the necessary presence of consciousness and of life), you 
obtain in fact a universe whose successive states are in theory calculable in 
advance, like the images placed side by side along the cinematographic film, 
prior to its unrolling. Why, then, the unrolling? Why does reality unfurl? 
Why is it not spread out? What good is time? (I refer to real, concrete time, 
and not to that abstract time which is only a fourth dimension of spacei 
This, in days gone by, was the starting-point of my reflections. Some fifty 
years ago I was very much attached to the philosophy of Spencer. I perceived 
one fine day that, in it, time served no purpose, did nothing. Nevertheless, 
I said to myself, time is something. Therefore it acts. What can it be doing? 
Plain common sense answered: time is what hinders everything from being 
given at once. It retards, or rather it is retardation. It must, therefore, be 
elaboration. Would it not then be a vehicle of creation and of choice? Would 
not the existence of time prove that there is indetermination in things? 
Would not time be that indetermination itself? 
If such is not the opinion of most philosophers, it is because human 
intelligence is made precisely to take things by the other end. I say intelli­
gence, I do not say thought, I do not say mind. Alongside of intelligence 
there is in effect the immediate perception by each of us of his own activity 
and of the conditions in which it is exercised. Call it what you will; it is the 
feeling we have of being creators of our intentions, of our decisions, of our 
acts, and by that, of our habits, our characters, ourselves. Artisans of our life, 
even artists when we so desire, we work continually, with the material 

The Possible and the Real 
225 
furnished us by the past and present, by heredity and opportunity, to mould 
a figure unique, new, original, as unforeseeable, as the form given by the 
sculptor to the clay. Of this work and what there is unique about it we are 
warned, no doubt, even while it is being done, but the essential thing is that 
we do it. It is up to us to go deeply into it; it is not even necessary that we be 
fully conscious of it, any more than the artist needs to analyse his creative 
ability; he leaves that to the philosopher to worry about, being content, 
himself, simply to create. On the other hand, the sculptor must be familiar 
with the technique of his art and know everything that can be learned about 
it: this technique deals especially with what his work has in common with 
other works; it is governed by the demands of the material upon which he 
operates and which is imposed upon him as upon all artists; it concerns in 
art what is repetition or fabrication, and has nothing to do with creation 
itself. On it is concentrated the attention of the artist, what I should call his 
intellectuality. In the same way, in the creation of our character we know 
very little about our creative ability: in order to learn about it we should have 
to turn back upon ourselves, to philosophise, and to climb back up the slope 
of nature; for nature desired action, it hardly thought about speculation. The 
moment it is no longer simply a question of feeling an impulse within 
oneself and of being assured that one can act, but of turning thought upon 
itself in order that it may seize this ability and catch this impulse, the diffi­
culty becomes great, as if the whole normal direction of consciousness had to 
be reversed. On the contrary we have a supreme interest in familiarizing 
ourselves with the technique of our action, that is to say in extracting from the 
conditions in which it is exercised, all that can furnish us with recipes and 
general rules upon which to base our conduct. There will be novelty in our 
acts thanks only to the repetition we have found in things. Our normal 
faculty of knowing is then essentially a power of extracting what stability and 
regularity there is in the flow of reality. Is it a question of perceiving? 
Perception seizes upon the infinitely repeated shocks which are light or heat, 
for example, and contracts them into relatively invariable sensations: trillions 
of external vibrations are what the vision of a colour condenses in our eyes 
in the fraction of a second. Is it a question of conceiving? To form a general 
idea is to abstract from varied and changing things a common aspect which 
does not change or at least offers an invariable hold to our action. The 
invariability of our attitude, the identity of our eventual or virtual reaction 
to the multiplicity and variability of the objects represented is what first 
marks and delineates the generality of the idea. Finally, is it a question of 
understanding? It is simply finding connections, establishing stable relations 
between transitory facts, evolving laws; an operation which is much more 
perfect as the relation becomes more definite and the law more mathematical. 
All these functions are constitutives of the intellect. And the intellect is in the 
line of truth so long as it attaches itself, in its penchant for regularity and 
stability, to what is stable and regular in the real, that is to say to materialiry. 

226 
The Creative Mind 
In so doing it touches one of the sides of the absolute, as our consciousness 
touches another when it grasps within us a perpetual efflorescence of novelty 
or when, broadening out, it comes into sympathy with that effort of nature 
which is constantly renewing. Error begins when the intellect claims to think 
one of the aspects as it thought the other, directing its powers on something 
for which it was not intended. 
I believe that the great metaphysical problems are in general badly stated, 
that they frequently resolve themselves of their own accord when correctly 
stated, or else are problems formulated in terms of illusion which disappear as 
soon as the terms of the formula are more closely examined. They arise in fact 
from our habit of transposing into fabrication what is creation. Reality is 
global and undivided growth, progressive invention, duration: it resembles a 
gradually expanding rubber balloon assuming at each moment unexpected 
forms. But our intelligence imagines its origin and evolution as an arrange­
ment and rearrangement of parts which supposedly merely shift from one 
place to another; in theory therefore, it should be able to foresee any one 
state of the whole: by positing a definite number of stable elements one has, 
predetermined, all their possible combinations. That is not all. Reality, as 
immediately perceived, is fullness constantly swelling out, to which empti­
ness is unknown. It has extension just as it has duration; but this concrete 
extent is not the infinite and infinitely divisible space the intellect takes as a 
place in which to build. Concrete space has been extracted from things. They 
are not in it; it is space which is in them. Only, as soon as our thought reasons 
about reality, it makes space a receptacle. As it has the habit of assembling 
parts in a relative vacuum, it imagines that reality fills up some absolute kind 
of vacuum. Now, if the failure to recognize radical novelty is the original 
cause of those badly stated metaphysical questions, the habit of proceeding 
from emptiness to fullness is the source of problems which are non-existent. 
Moreover, it is easy to see that the second mistake is already implied in the 
first. But I should like first of all to define it more precisely. 
I say that there are pseudo-problems, and that they are the agonizing 
problems of metaphysics. I reduce them to rwo. One gave rise to theories of 
being, the other to theories of knowledge. The first false problem consists in 
asking oneself why there is being, why something or someone exists. The 
nature of what is is of little importance; say that it is matter, or mind, or both, 
or that matter and mind are nor self-sufficient and manifest a transcendent 
Cause: in any case, when existences and causes are brought into consideration 
and the causes of these causes, one feels as if pressed into a race - if one calls a 
halt, it is to avoid dizziness. But just the same one sees, or thinks one sees, that 
the difficulty still exists, that the problem is still there and will never be 
solved. It will never, in fact, be solved, but it should never have been raised. 
It arises only if one posits a nothingness which supposedly precedes being. 
One says: 'There could be nothing,' and then is astonished that there should 

The Possible and the Real 
227 
be something - or someone. But analyse that sentence: 'There could be 
nothing.' You will see you are dealing with words, not at all with ideas, and 
that 'nothing' here has no meaning. 'Nothing' is a term in ordinary language 
which can only have meaning in the sphere, proper to man, of action and 
fabrication. 'Nothing' designates the absence of what we are seeking, we 
desire, expect. Let us suppose that absolute emptiness was known to our 
experience: it would be limited, have contours, and would therefore be 
something. But in reality there is no vacuum. We perceive and can conceive 
only occupied space. One thing disappears only because another replaces it. 
Suppression rhus means substitution. We say 'suppression,' however, when 
we envisage, in the case of substitution, only one of irs two halves, or rather 
the one of its two sides which interests us; in this way we indicate a desire to 
turn our attention to the object which is gone, and away from the one 
replacing it. 
We say then that there is nothing more, meaning by that, that what exists 
does not interest us, that we are interested in what is no longer there or in 
what might have been there. The idea of absence, or of nothingness, or of 
nothing, is therefore inseparably bound to that of suppression, real or even­
tual, and the idea of suppression is itself only an aspect of the idea of 
substitution. Those are the ways of thinking we use in practical life; it is 
particularly essential to our industry that our thought should be able to lag 
behind reality and remain attached, when need be, to what was or to what 
might be, instead of being absorbed by what is. But when we go from the 
domain of fabrication to that of creation, when we ask ourselves why there is 
being, why something or someone, why the world or God, exists and why not 
nothingness, when, in short, we set ourselves the most agonizing of 
metaphysical problems, we virtually accept an absurdity; for if all suppression 
is a substitution, if the idea of a suppression is only the truncated idea of 
a substitution, then to speak of a suppression of everything is to posit a 
substitution which would not be one, (hat is, to be self-contradictory. Either 
the idea of a suppression of everything has just about as much existence as 
that of a round square - the existence of a sound, flatus vocis - or else, if it 
does represent something, it translates a movement of the intellect from one 
object to another, preferring the one it has just left to the object it finds before 
it, and designates by 'absence of the first' the presence of the second. We have 
posited the whole, then made each of its parts disappear one by one, without 
consenting to see what replaced it; it is therefore the totality of presences, 
simply arranged in a new order, that one has in mind in attempting to total 
up the absences. In other words, this so-called representation of absolute 
emptiness is, in reality, that of universal fullness in a mind which leaps 
indefinitely from part to part, with the fixed resolution never to consider 
anything but the emptiness of its dissatisfaction instead of the fullness of 
things. All of which amounts to saying that the idea of Nothing, when it is 

22H 
The Creative Mind 
not that of a simple word, implies as much matter as the idea of All, with, 
in addition, an operation of thought. 
I should say as much of the idea of disorder. Why is the universe well­
ordered? How is rule imposed upon what is without rule, and form upon 
matter? How is it that our thought recognizes itself in things? This problem, 
which among rhe moderns has become the problem of knowledge after 
having been, among the ancients, the problem of being, was born of an 
illusion of the same order. It disappears if one considers that the idea of 
disorder has a definite meaning in the domain of human industry or, as we 
say, of fabrication, bur not in that of creation. Disorder is simply the order 
we are not looking for. You cannot suppress one order even by thought, 
without causing another to spring up. If there is not finality or will, it is 
because there is mechanism; if the mechanism gives way, so much the gain 
for will, caprice, finaliry. But when you expect one of these two orders and 
you find the other, you say there is disorder, formulating what is in terms of 
what might or should be, and objectifying your regret. All disorder thus 
includes two things: outside us, one order; within us, the representation of a 
different order which alone interests us. Suppression therefore again signifies 
substitution. And the idea of a suppression of all order, that is to say, the 
idea of an absolute disorder, then contains a veritable contradiction, because 
it consists in leaving only a single aspect to the operation which, by 
hypothesis, embraced two. Either the idea of an absolute disorder represents 
no more than a combination of sounds, flatus vocis, or else, if it corresponds 
to something, it translates a movement of the mind which leaps from 
mechanism to finaliry, from finality to mechanism, and which, in order to 
mark the spot where it is, prefers each time to indicate the point where it is 
not. Therefore, in wishing to suppress order, you find yourself with two or 
more 'orders.' This is tantamount to saying that the conception of an order 
which is superadded to an 'absence of order' implies an absurdity, and that 
the problem disappears. 
The two illusions I have just mentioned are in reality only one. They 
consist in believing that there is less in the idea of the empty than in the idea 
of the full, less in the concept of disorder than in that of order. In reality, 
there is more inrellecrual content in the ideas of disorder and nothingness 
when they represent something than in those of order and existence, because 
they imply several orders, several existences and, in addition, a play of wit 
which unconsciously juggles with them. 
Very well then, I find the same illusion in the case in point. Underlying the 
doctrines which disregard the radical novelty of each moment of evolution 
there are many misunderstandings, many errors. But there is especially 
the idea that the possible is less than the real, and that, for this reason, the 
possibility of things precedes their existence. They would thus be capable of 
representation beforehand; they could be thought of before being realized. 

The Possible and the Real 
229 
But it is the reverse that is true. If we leave aside the closed systems, subjected 
to purely mathematical laws, isolable because duration does not act upon 
them, if we consider the totality of concrete reality or simply the world of life, 
and still more that of consciousness, we find there is more and nor less in the 
possibility of each of the successive states than in their reality. For the possible 
is only the real with the addition of an act of mind which throws its image 
back into the past, once it has been enacted. But that is what our intellectual 
habits prevent us from seeing. 
During the great war certain newspapers and periodicals sometimes turned 
aside from the terrible worries of the day to think of what would happen later 
once peace was restored. They were particularly preoccupied with the future 
of literature. Someone came one day to ask me my ideas on the subject. 
A little embarrassed, I declared I had none. 'Do you not at least perceive,' 
I was asked, 'certain possible directions? Let us grant that one cannot foresee 
things in detail; you as a philosopher have at least an idea of the whole. How 
do you conceive, for example, the great dramatic work of tomorrow?' I shall 
always remember my interlocumr's surprise when I answered, 'If I knew 
what was to be the great dramatic work of the future, I should be writing it.' 
I saw distinctly that he conceived the future work as being already stored up 
in some cupboard reserved for possibles; because of my long-standing 
relations with philosophy, I should have been able to obtain from it the key 
to the storehouse. 'But,' I said, 'the work of which you speak is not yet 
possible.' - 'Bur it must be, since it is to take place.' - 'No, it is not. I grant 
you, at most, that it will have been possible.' 'What do you mean by that?' -
'It's quite simple. Let a man of talent or genius come forth, let him create a 
work: it will then be real, and by that very fact it becomes retrospectively or 
retroactively possible. It would not be possible, it would not have been so, if 
this man had not come upon the scene. That is why I tell you that it will 
have been possible today, but that it is not yet so.' 'You're not serious! You 
are surely not going to maintain that the future has an effect upon the 
present, that the present brings something into the past, that action works 
back over the course of time and imprints its mark afterwards?' - 'That 
depends. That one can put reality into the past and thus work backwards in 
time is something I have never claimed. Bur that one can put the possible 
there, or rather that the possible may put itself there at any moment, is not 
to be doubted. As reality is created as something unforeseeable and new, its 
image is reflected behind it into the indefinite past; thus it finds that it has 
from all time been possible, but it is at this precise moment that it begins to 
have been always possible, and that is why I said that its possibility, which 
does not precede its reality, will have preceded it once the reality has 
appeared. The possible is therefore the mirage of the present in the past; and 
as we know the future will finally constitute a present and the mirage effect is 
continually being produced, we are convinced that the image of tomorrow 

230 
The Creative Mind 
is already contained in our actual present, which will be the past of tomorrow, 
although we did not manage to grasp it. That is precisely the illusion. It is as 
though one were to fancy, in seeing his reflection in the mirror in front of 
him, that he could have touched it had he stayed behind it. Thus in judging 
that the possible does not presuppose the real, one admits that the realization 
adds something to the simple possibility: the possible would have been there 
from all time, a phantom awaiting its hour; it would therefore have become 
reality by the addition of something, by some transfusion of blood or life. 
One does not see that the contrary is the case, that the possible implies the 
corresponding reality with, moreover, something added, since the possible is 
the combined effect of reality once it has appeared and of a condition which 
throws it back in time. The idea immanent in most philosophies and natural 
to the human mind, of possibles which would be realized by an acquisition of 
existence, is therefore pure illusion. One might as well claim that the man in 
flesh and blood comes from the materialization of his image seen in the 
mirror, because in that real man is everything found in this virtual image 
with, in addition, the solidity which makes it possible to touch it. But the 
truth is that more is needed here to obtain the virtual than is necessary for 
the real, more for the image of the man than for the man himself, for the 
image of the man will not be portrayed if the man is not first produced, and 
in addition one has to have the mirror.' 
That is what my interlocutor was forgetting as he questioned me on the 
theatre of tomorrow. Perhaps too he was unconsciously playing on the mean­
ing of the word 'possible.' Hamlet was doubtless possible before being 
realized, if that means that there was no insurmountable obstacle to its reali­
zation. In the particular sense one calls possible what is not impossible; and it 
stands to reason that this non-impossibility of a thing is the condition of its 
realization. But the possible thus understood is in no degree virtual, some­
thing ideally pre-existent. If you close the gate you know no one will cross the 
road; it does not follow that you can predict who will cross when you open 
it. Nevertheless, from the quite negative sense of the term 'impossible' you 
pass surreptitiously, unconsciously to the positive sense. Possibility signified 
'absence ofhindrance' a few minutes ago: now you make of it a 'pre-existence 
under the form of an idea,' which is quite another thing. In the first meaning 
of the word it was a truism to say that the possibility of a thing precedes its 
reality: by that you meant simply that obstacles, having been surmounted, 
were surmountable. 4 But in the second meaning it is an absurdity, for it is 
clear that a mind in which the Hamlet of Shakespeare had taken shape in the 
form of the possible would by that fact have created its reality: it would thus 
have been, by definition, Shakespeare himself. In vain do you imagine at first 
that this mind could have appeared before Shakespeare; it is because you are 
not thinking then of all the details in the play. As you complete them the 
predecessor of Shakespeare finds himself thinking all that Shakespeare will 
think, feeling all he will feel, knowing all he will know, perceiving therefore 

The Possible and the Real 
231 
all he will perceive, and consequently occupying the same point in space and 
time, having the same body and the same soul: it is Shakespeare himself. 
But I am putting too much stress on what is self-evident. We are forced to 
these considerations in discussing a work of art. I believe in the end we shall 
consider it evident that the artist in executing his work is creating the 
possible as well as the real. Whence comes it then that one might hesitate to 
say the same thing for nature? Is not the world a work of art incomparably 
richer than that of the greatest artist? And is there not as much absurdity, if 
not more, in supposing, in the work of nature, that the future is outlined in 
advance, that possibility existed before reality? Once more let me say I am 
perfectly willing to admit that the future states of a closed system of material 
points are calculable and hence visible in its present state. But, and I repeat, 
this system is extracted, or abstracted, from a whole which, in addition to 
inert and unorganised matter, comprises organization. Take the concrete 
and complete world, with the life and consciousness it encloses; consider 
nature in its entirety, nature the generator of new species as novel and 
original in form as the design of any artist: in these species concentrate upon 
individuals, plants or animals, each of which has its own character - I was 
going to say its personality (for one blade of gr.ass does not resemble another 
blade of grass any more than a Raphael resembles a Rembrandt); lift your 
attention above and beyond individual man to societies which disclose 
actions and situations comparable to those of any drama: how can one still 
speak of possibles which would precede their own realization? How can we 
fail to see that if the event can always be explained afterwards by an arbitrary 
choice of antecedent events, a completely different event could have been 
equally well explained in the same circumstances by another choice of 
antecedents - nay, by the same antecedents otherwise cut out, otherwise 
distributed, otherwise perceived - in short, by our retrospective attention? 
Backwards over the course of time a constant remodelling of the past by the 
present, of the cause by the effect, is being carried out. 
We do not see it, always for the same reason, always a prey to the same 
illusion, always because we treat as the more what is the less, as the less what 
is the more. If we put the possible back into irs proper place, evolution 
becomes something quite different from the realization of a program: the 
gates of the future open wide; freedom is offered an unlimited field. The 
faulr of those doctrines - rare indeed in the history of philosophy - which 
have succeeded in leaving room for indetermination and freedom in the 
world, is to have failed to see what their affirmation implied. When they 
spoke of indetermination, of freedom, they meant by indetermination a 
competition between possibles, by freedom a choice between possibles - as 
if possibility was not created by freedom itself! As if any other hypothesis, by 
affirming an ideal pre-existence of the possible to the real, did not reduce the 
new to a mere rearrangement of former elements! As if it were not thus to be 
led sooner or later to regard that rearrangement as calculable and foreseeable! 

232 
The Creative Mind 
By accepting the premise of the contrary theory one was letting the enemy 
in. We must resign ourselves to the inevitable: it is the real which makes 
itself possible, and not the possible which becomes real. 
But the truth is that philosophy has never frankly admitted this 
continuous creation of unforeseeable novelty. The ancients already revolted 
against it because, Platonists to a greater or less degree, they imagined that 
Being was given once and for all, complete and perfect, in the immutable 
system of Ideas: the world which unfolds before our eyes could therefore add 
nothing to it; it was, on the contrary, only diminution or degradation; its 
successive states measured as it were the increasing or decreasing distance 
between what is, a shadow projected in time, and what ought to be, Idea set 
in eternity; they would outline the variations of a deficiency, the changing 
form of a void. It was Time which, according to them, spoiled everything. 
The moderns, it is true, take a quite different point of view. They no longer 
treat Time as an intruder, a disturber of eternity; but they would very much 
like to reduce it to a simple appearance. The temporal is, then, only the 
confused form of the rational. What we perceive as being a succession of 
states is conceived by our intellect, once the fog has settled, as a system 
of relations. The real becomes once more the eternal, with this single differ­
ence, that it is the eternity of the Laws in which the phenomena are resolved 
instead of being the eternity of the Ideas which serve them as models. But 
in each case, we are dealing with theories. Let us stick to the facts. Time is 
immediately given. That is sufficient for us, and until its inexistence or 
perversity is proved to us we shall merely register that there is effectively a 
flow of unforeseeable novelty. 
Philosophy stands to gain in finding some absolute in the moving world 
of phenomena. But we shall gain also in our feeling of greater joy and 
strength. Greater joy because the reality invented before our eyes will give 
each one of us, unceasingly, certain of the satisfactions which art at rare 
intervals procures for the privileged; it will reveal to us, beyond the fixity and 
monotony which our senses, hypnotized by our constant needs, at first 
perceived in it, ever-recurring novelty, the moving originality of things. But 
above all we shall have greater strength, for we shall feel we are participating, 
creators of ourselves, in the great work of creation which is the origin of all 
things and which goes on before our eyes. By getting hold of itself, our 
faculty for acting will become intensified. Humbled heretofore in an artirude 
of obedience, slaves of certain vaguely-felt natural necessities, we shall once 
more stand erect, masters associated with a greater Master. To such a 
conclusion will our study bring us. In this speculation on the relation 
between the possible and the real, let us guard against seeing a simple game. 
It can be a preparation for the art of living. 

Philosophical Intuition 
Lecture given at the Philosophical Congress in Bologna, April 10th, 1911 
I should like to submit to you some reflections on the philosophical mind. 
It seems to me - and more than one report presented at this Congress bears 
witness to the fact - that metaphysics at present is tending to become more 
simplified, to draw closer to life. I think this tendency is a correct one, and 
that it is along this line we should work. But in so doing we shall be doing 
nothing revolutionary; we shall merely be giving the most appropriate form 
to what is the foundation of all philosophy - I mean of any philosophy 
which is fully conscious of its function and destination. For the complication 
of the letter must not allow the simplicity of the spirit to be lost to view. If we 
confine ourselves entirely to doctrines already formulated, to the synthesis in 
which they then appear to embrace the conclusions of earlier philosophies 
and all the forms of acquired knowledge, we run the risk of underestimating 
the essentially spontaneous aspect of philosophical thought. 
There is a remark that those of us who teach the history of philosophy 
might make, those who frequently have occasion to come back to the study 
of the same doctrines and to go ever more deeply into them. A philosophical 
system seems at first to appear as a complete edifice, expertly designed, 
where arrangements have been made for the commodious lodging of all 
problems. In contemplating it in that form we experience an aesthetic joy 
intensified by a professional satisfaction. Not only, in fact, do we find here 
order in complexity (an order to which we sometimes like to add our little 
word as we describe it) but we also have the satisfaction of telling ourselves 
that we know from whence come the materials and how the building is 
done. In the problems the philosopher has stated we recognize the questions 
that were being discussed around him. In the solutions he gives to them we 
think we recognize, arranged or disarranged, but only slightly modified, the 
elements of previous or contemporary philosophies. Such a view must have 
been given to him by this one, another has been suggested by someone else. 
With what we read, heard and learned we could doubtless reproduce most 
of what he did. We therefore set to work, we go back to the sources, we 
weigh the influences, we extract the similitudes, and in the end we distinctly 
see in the doctrine what we were looking for: a more or less original synthesis 
of the ideas among which the philosopher lived. 

234 
The Creative Mind 
But if we go on constantly renewing contact with the philosopher's 
thought, we can, by a gradual impregnation, be brought to an entirely differ­
ent view. I do not say that the work of comparison undertaken at the outset 
was time lost: without this preliminary effort to recompose a philosophy out 
of what is other than itself, and to link it up to the conditions which 
surrounded it, we should perhaps never succeed in grasping what it actually 
is; for the human mind is so constructed that it cannot begin to understand 
the new until it has done everything in its power to relate it to the old. But, as 
we seek to penetrate more fully the philosopher's thought instead of circling 
around its exterior, his doctrine is transformed for us. In the first place its 
complication diminishes. Then the various parts fit into one another. Finally 
the whole is brought together into a single point, which we feel could be 
ever more closely approached even though there is no hope of reaching 
it completely. 
In this point is something simple, infinitely simple, so extraordinarily 
simple that the philosopher has never succeeded in saying it. And that is why 
he went on talking all his life. He could not formulate what he had in mind 
without feeling himself obliged to correct his formula, then to correct his 
correction: thus, from theory to theory, correcting when he thought he was 
completing, what he has accomplished, by a complication which provoked 
more complication, by developments heaped upon developments, has been 
to convey with an increasing approximation the simplicity of his original 
intuition. All the complexity of his doctrine, which would go on ad infinitum, 
is therefore only the incommensurability between his simple intuition and 
the means at his disposal for expressing it. 
What is this intuition? If the philosopher has not been able to give the 
formula for it, we certainly are not able to do so. But what we shall manage to 
recapture and to hold is a certain intermediary image between the simplicity 
of the concrete intuition and the complexity of the abstractions which trans­
late it, a receding and vanishing image, which haunts, unperceived perhaps, 
the mind of the philosopher, which follows him like his shadow through the 
ins and outs of his thought and which, if it is not the intuition itself, 
approaches it much more closely than the conceptual expression, of necessity 
symbolical, to which the intuition must have recourse in order to furnish 
'explanation.' Let us look closely at this shadow: by doing so we shall divine 
the attitude of the body which projects it. And if we try to imitate this 
attitude, or better still to assume it ourselves, we shall see as far as it is possible 
what the philosopher saw. 
What first of all characterizes this image is the power of negation it 
possesses. You recall how the demon of Socrates proceeded: it checked the 
philosopher's will at a given moment and prevented him from acting rather 
than prescribing what he should do. It seems to me that intuition often 
behaves in speculative matters like the demon of Socrates in practical life; 
it is at least in this form that it begins, in this form also that it continues to 

Philosophical Intuition 
235 
give the most clear-cut manifestations: it forbids. Faced with currently­
accepted ideas, theses which seemed evident, affirmations which had up to 
that time passed as scientific, it whispers into the philosopher's ear the word: 
Impossible! Impossible, even though the facts and the reasons appeared to 
invite you to think it possible and real and certain. Impossible, because a 
certain experience, confused perhaps but decisive, speaks to you through my 
voice, because it is incompatible with the facts cited and the reasons given, 
and because hence these facts must have been badly observed, these 
reasonings false. What a strange force this intuitive power of negation is! How 
is it that the historians of philosophy have not been more greatly struck by it? 
Is it not obvious that the first step the philosopher takes, when his thought is 
still faltering and there is nothing definite in his doctrine, is to reject certain 
things definitively? Later he will be able to make changes in what he affirms; 
he will vary only slightly what he denies. And if he varies in his affirmations, it 
will still be in virtue of the power of negation immanent in intuition or in its 
image. He will have allowed himself lazily to deduce consequences according 
to the rules of a rectilinear logic; and then suddenly, in the face of his own 
affirmation he has the same feeling of impossibility that he had in the first 
place in considering the affirmations of others. Having in fact left the curve of 
his thought, to follow straight along a tangent, he has become exterior to 
himself. He returns to himself when he gets back to intuition. Of these 
departures toward an affirmation and these returns to the primary intuition 
are constituted the zigzaggings of a doctrine which 'develops,' that is to say 
which loses itself, finds itself again, and endlessly corrects itself. 
Let us get rid of this complication and get back to the simple intuition, or 
at least to the image which translates it: in so doing we see the doctrine freed 
of those conditions of time and place upon which it seemed to depend. 
Doubtless the problems which the philosopher worked upon were the 
problems which presented themselves in his day; the science he used or 
criticized was the science of his time; in the theories he expounds one might 
even find, by looking for them, the ideas of his comemporaries and his 
predecessors. How could it be otherwise? In order to have the new under­
stood, it must be expressed in terms of the old; and the problems already 
stated, the solutions provided, the philosophy and science of the times in 
which he lived, all these have been for each great thinker the material he was 
obliged to use to give a concrete form to his thought. Not to mention that it 
has been traditional, from anciem times, to present all philosophy as a com­
plete system, which includes everything one knows. But it would be a 
strange mistake to rake for a constitutive element of doctrine what was only 
the means of expressing it. Such is the first error to which we are exposed, 
as I was just saying, when we undertake the study of a system. So many partial 
resemblances strike us, so many parallels seem to be indicated, so many 
pressing appeals to our ingenuity and erudition are sent out from all 
directions, that we are tempted to recompose the philosopher's thought with 

236 
The Creative Mind 
fragments of ideas gathered here and there, praising him afterwards, of course, 
for having been able - as we have just shown ourselves to be - to execute a 
pretty piece of mosaic. But the illusion does not last long, for we soon perceive 
that in the very places where the philosopher seems to be repeating things 
already said, he is thinking them in his own way. We then abandon the idea of 
recomposing; but in so doing we tumble more often than not into another 
illusion, less serious perhaps but more tenacious than the first. We are 
inclined to imagine the doctrine - even though it be that of a master - as 
growing out of earlier philosophies and representing 'a moment of an evolu­
tion.' This time, to be sure, we are not completely wrong, for a philosophy 
resembles an organism rather than an assemblage, and it is still better to speak 
of evolution in this case than of composition. But this new comparison, in 
addition to the fact that it attributes more continuity to the history of 
thought than is really in it, has the disadvantage of keeping our attention 
fixed upon the external complication of the system and upon what its 
superficial form allows us to foresee, instead of inviting us to put our finger 
on the novelty and simplicity of the inner content. A philosopher worthy of 
the name has never said more than a single thing: and even then it is 
something he has tried to say, rather than actually said. And he has said only 
one thing because he has seen only one point: and at that it was not so much 
a vision as a contact: this contact has furnished an impulse, this impulse a 
movement, and if this movement, which is as it were a kind of swirling of 
dust taking a particular form, becomes visible to our eyes only through what 
it has collected along its way, it is no less true that other bits of dust might as 
well have been raised and that it would still have been the same whirlwind. 
Thus a thought which brings something new into the world is of course 
obliged to manifest itself through the ready-made ideas it comes across and 
draws into its movement; it seems thus, as it were, relative to the epoch in 
which the philosopher lived; but that is frequently merely an appearance. The 
philosopher might have come several centuries earlier; he would have had to 
deal with another philosophy and another science; he would have given 
himself other problems; he would have expressed himself by other formulas; 
not one chapter perhaps of the books he wrote would have been what it is; 
and nevertheless he would have said the same thing. 
Let me take an example. I have appealed to your professional memories: 
with your permission I am going to recall some of my own. As professor in 
the College de France I devote one of my courses each year to the history of 
philosophy. In that way I have been able, during several consecutive years, 
to practice at length upon Berkeley and Spinoza the experiment I have 
just described. I shall not discuss Spinoza; he would take us too far afield. 
Nevertheless I know of nothing more instructive than the contrast between 
the form and the matter of a book like the Ethics: on the one hand those 
tremendous things called Substance, Attribute and Mode, and the formidable 
array of theorems with the close nerwork of definitions, corollaries and 

Philosophical Intuition 
237 
scholia, and that complication of machinery, that power to crush which 
causes the beginner, in the presence of the Ethics, to be struck with admira­
tion and terror as though he were before a battleship of the Dreadnought 
class; on the other hand, something subtle, very light and almost airy, which 
flees at one's approach, but which one cannot look at, even from afar, with­
out becoming incapable of attaching oneself to any part whatever of the 
remainder, even to what is considered essential, even to the distinction 
between Substance and Attribute, even to the duality of Thought and Exten­
sion. What we have behind the heavy mass of concepts of Cartesian and 
Aristotelian parentage, is that intuition which was Spinoza' s, an intuition 
which no formula, no matter how simple, can be simple enough to express. 
Let us say, to be content with an approximation, that it is the feeling of a 
coincidence between the act by which our mind knows truth perfectly, and 
the operation by which God engenders it; the idea that the 'conversion' of 
the Alexandrians, when it becomes complete, is indistinguishable from their 
'procession,' that when man, sprung from divinity, succeeds in returning to 
it, he perceives that what he had at first taken to be two opposed movements 
of corning and going are in fact a single movement - moral experience in 
this case undertaking to resolve a logical contradiction and to fuse, by an 
abrupt suppression of Time, the movement of corning with that of going. 
The closer we get to this original intuition the better we understand that if 
Spinoza had lived before Descartes he would doubtless have written some­
thing other than what he wrote, but that given Spinoza living and writing, 
we were certain to have Spinozism in any case. 
I come to Berkeley, and since it is he whom I take as example you will not 
think it amiss that I analyse him in detail: brevity here could only be at the 
expense of a strict examination of the subject. A mere glance over the work of 
Berkeley is enough to see that, as if of itself, it resolves into four fundamental 
theses. The first, which defines a certain idealism and to which is linked up 
the new theory of vision (although the philosopher had judged it wise to 
present the latter as independent), the first, I say, would be formulated thus: 
'Matter is a cluster of ideas.' The second consists in the claim that abstract 
and general ideas are merely words: that is nominalism. The third thesis 
affirms the reality of minds and characterizes them by the will: let us say that 
it is spiritualism and voluntarism. The last, which we might call theism, 
posits the existence of God, basing itself principally on the consideration of 
matter. Now, nothing would be easier than to find these four theses, formu­
lated in practically the same terms, among the contemporaries or predecessors 
of Berkeley. The fourth is found among the theologians. The third was 
in Duns Scotus; Descartes said somewhat the same thing. The second fed 
the controversies of the Middle Ages before becoming an integral part of the 
philosophy of Hobbes. As to the first, it greatly resembles the 'occasionalism' 
of Malebranche, the idea and even the formula of which we should already 
discover in certain texts of Descartes; nor, for that matter had Descartes been 

238 
The Creative Mind 
the first to point out that dreams have every appearance of reality and that 
there is nothing in any of our perceptions taken separately which guarantees 
us the existence of a thing outside us. Thus, with the philosophers of already 
distant times or even, if we do not care to go back too far, with Descartes 
and Hobbes to whom Locke might be added, we shall have the elements 
necessary for the external reconstitution of Berkeley's philosophy: we shall at 
most leave him his theory of vision, which would then constitute his own 
individual work and whose originality, reflected through the rest, would give 
to the doctrine as a whole its original aspect. Let us then take these slices of 
ancient and modern philosophy, put them in the same bowl, add by way 
of vinegar and oil a certain aggressive impatience with regard to mathema­
tical dogmatism and the desire, natural in a philosopher bishop, to reconcile 
reason with faith, mix well and turn it over and over conscientiously, and 
sprinkle over the whole, like so many savoury herbs, a certain number of 
aphorisms culled from among the Neo-Platonists: we shall have - if I may 
be pardoned the expression - a salad which, at a distance, will have certain 
resemblance to what Berkeley accomplished. 
Well, anyone who went about it in this way would be incapable of 
penetrating Berkeley's thought. I am not speaking of the difficulties and 
impossibilities which he would come up against in explaining the details: 
a strange sort of 'nominalism' that was, which ended by raising a number of 
general ideas to the dignity of eternal essences, immanent in the divine 
Intelligence! a strange negation of the reality of bodies that which is expressed 
by a positive theory of the nature of matter, a fertile theory, as far removed as 
possible from the sterile idealism which tries to assimilate perception to 
dreaming! What I mean to say is that it is impossible for us to examine 
Berkeley's philosophy carefully without seeing the four theses we have 
discovered in it first approach, then penetrate one another, in such a way that 
each of them seems to become pregnant with the other three, to take on 
breadth and depth, and become radically distinguished from the earlier or 
contemporary theories with which one could superficially identify it. Perhaps 
this second point of view from which the doctrine appears as an organism and 
not as a mere assemblage, is still not the definitive point of view. It is at least 
closer to the truth. I cannot go into all the details; but nevertheless I must 
indicate for at least one or two of the four theses, how any of the others could 
be extracted from them. 
Let us take idealism. It does not consist merely in saying that bodies are 
ideas. What good would that do? We should indeed be obliged to continue to 
affirm everything about these ideas that experience has led us to affirm about 
bodies, and we should simply have substituted one word for another; for 
Berkeley surely does not think that matter will cease to exist when he has 
stopped living. What Berkeley's idealism signifies is that matter is co­
extensive with our representation of it; that it has no interior, no underneath; 
that it hides nothing, contains nothing; that it possesses neither power nor 

Philosophical Intuition 
239 
virtuality of any kind; that it is spread out as mere surface and that it is no 
more than what it presents to us at any given moment. The word 'idea' 
ordinarily indicates an existence of this kind, I mean to say a completely 
realized existence, whose being is indistinguishable from its seeming, while 
the word 'thing' makes us think of a reality which would be at the same time a 
reservoir of possibilities; that is why Berkeley prefers to call bodies ideas 
rather than things. But if we look upon his 'idealism' in that light, we see that 
it coincides with his 'nominalism'; for the more clearly this second thesis 
takes shape in the philosopher's mind, the more evidently it is restricted to 
the negation of general abstract ideas - abstracted, that is, extracted from 
matter: it is clear in fact that one cannot extract something from what con­
tains nothing, nor consequently make a perception yield something other 
than the perception itself. Colour being but colour, resistance being only 
resistance, you will never find anything in common between resistance and 
colour, you will never discover in visual data any element shared by the data 
of touch. If you claim to abstract from the data of either something which will 
be common to all, you will perceive in examining that something that you are 
dealing with a word: therein lies the nominalism of Berkeley; but there also, 
at the same time, is the 'new theory of vision.' If an extension which would 
be at once visual and tactile is only a word, it is all the more so with an 
extension which would involve all the senses at once: there again is nom­
inalism, but there too is the refutation of the Cartesian theory of matter. Let 
us not even talk any more about extension; let us simply note that in view of 
the structure oflanguage the two expressions 'I have this perception' and 'this 
perception exists' are synonymous, but that the second, introducing the same 
word 'existence' into the description of totally different perceptions, invites 
us to believe that they have something in common between them and to 
imagine that their diversity conceals a fundamental unity, the unity of a 
'substance' which is, in reality, only the word existence hypostasised: there you 
have the whole idealism of Berkeley; and this idealism, as I was saying, is 
identical with his nominalism. - Let us go on now, with your permission, to 
the theory of God and the theory of minds. If a body is made of 'ideas' or, in 
other words, if it is entirely passive and determinate, having neither power 
nor virtuality, it cannot act on other bodies; and consequently the movements 
of bodies must be the effect of an active power, which has produced these 
bodies themselves and which, because of the order which the universe reveals, 
can only be an intelligent cause. If we are mistaken when under the name of 
general ideas we set up as realities the names that we have given to groups 
of objects or perceptions more or less artificially constituted by us on the 
plane of matter, such is not the case when we think we discover, behind this 
plane, the divine intentions: the general idea which exists only on the surface 
and which links body to body is no doubt only a word, but the general idea 
which exists in depth, relating bodies to God or rather descending from God 
to bodies, is a reality; and thus the nominalism of Berkeley quite naturally 

240 
The Creative Mind 
calls for this development of the doctrine as found in the Siris, and which 
has wrongly been considered a Neo-Plaronic fantasy; in other words, the 
idealism of Berkeley is only one aspect of the theory which places God 
behind all the manifestations of matter. Finally, if God imprints in each one 
of us perceptions, or as Berkeley says, 'ideas,' the being which gathers up 
these perceptions, or rather which goes to meet them, is quite the reverse of 
an idea: it is a will, though one which is constantly limited by divine will. 
The meeting-place of these two wills is precisely what we call matter. If the 
percipi is pure passivity the percipere is pure activity. Human mind, matter, 
divine mind therefore become terms which we can express only in terms of 
one another. And the spiritualism of Berkeley is itself found to be only an 
aspect of any one of the other three theses. 
Thus the various parts of the system interpenetrate, as in a living being. 
But, as I was saying at the beginning, the spectacle of this reciprocal 
penetration doubtless gives us a more precise idea of the body of the doctrine; 
it still does not enable us to reach the soul. 
We shall get closer to it, if we can reach the mediating image referred 
to above - an image which is almost matter in that it still allows itself to 
be seen, and almost mind in that it no longer allows itself to be touched -
a phantom which haunts us while we turn about the doctrine and to which 
we must go in order to obtain the decisive signal, the indication of the 
attitude to take and of the point from which to look. Did the mediating 
image which takes shape in the mind of the interpreter, as he progresses in 
his study of the work, exist originally in the same form in the master's 
thought? If it was not that particular one, it was another, which could belong 
to a different order of perceptions and have no material resemblance 
whatsoever to it, but which nevertheless would equal it in value as two trans­
lations of the same work in different languages equal one another. Perhaps 
these two images, perhaps even other images, still equivalent, were present 
all at once, following the philosopher step by step in procession through the 
evolutions of his thought. Or perhaps he did not perceive any one of them 
clearly, being content only at rare intervals to make contact directly with that 
still more subtle thing, intuition itself; but then we are indeed forced, as 
interpreters, to re-establish the intermediary image, unless we are prepared 
to speak of the 'original intuition' as a vague thought and of the 'spirit of the 
doctrine' as an abstraction, whereas this spirit is as concrete and this 
intuition as precise as anything in the system. 
In Berkeley's case, I think I see two different images and the one which 
strikes me most is not the one whose complete indication we find in 
Berkeley himself. It seems to me that Berkeley perceives matter as a thin 
transparent film situated between man and God. It remains transparent as 
long as the philosophers leave it alone, and in that case God reveals Himself 
through it. But let the metaphysicians meddle with it, or even common 
sense in so far as it deals in metaphysics: immediately the film becomes dull, 

Philosophical Intuition 
241 
thick and opaque, and forms a screen because such words as Substance, 
Force, abstract Extension, etc. slip behind it, settle there like a layer of dust, 
and hinder us from seeing God through the transparency. The image is 
scarcely indicated by Berkeley himself though he has said in so many words 
'that we first raise a dust and then complain we cannot see.' But there is 
another comparison, often evoked by the philosopher, which is only the 
auditory transposition of the visual image I have just described: according to 
this, matter is a language which God speaks to us. That being so, the 
metaphysics of matter thickening each one of the syllables, marking it off, 
setting it up as an independent entity, turns our attention away from the 
meaning to the sound and hinders us from following the divine word. But, 
whether we attach ourselves to the one or to the other, in either case we are 
dealing with a simple image that we must keep in view, because if it is not 
the intuition generating the doctrine, it is immediately derived from it, and 
approximates it more than any of the theses taken individually, more even 
than the combination of all of them. 
Is it possible for us to recapture this intuition itself? We have just two 
means of expression, concept and image. It is in concepts that the system 
develops; it is into an image that it contracts when ir is driven back to the 
intuition from which it comes: so that, if one wishes to go beyond the image 
by rising above it, one necessarily falls back on concepts, and on concepts 
more vague, even more general than those from which one started in search 
of the image and the intuition. Reduced to this form, bottled as it were the 
moment it comes from the spring, the original intuition will then become 
superlatively insipid and uninteresting: it will be banal in the extreme. If we 
were to say for example that Berkeley considers the human soul as partially 
united with God and partially independent, that it is conscious of itself at 
every moment as of an imperfect activity which would join a higher activity 
if there were not, interposed between the two, something which is absolutely 
passive, we should be expressing all of the original intuition of Berkeley that 
can be directly translated into concepts, and still we should have something 
so abstract as to be almost empty. Let us stick to these formulas since we 
cannot find better ones, bur let us try to put a little life into them. Let us 
take all that the philosopher has written, let us bring back these scattered 
ideas to the image from which they had descended; and let us raise them, 
enclosed now in the image, up to the abstract formula enlarged by its 
absorption of the image and ideas, let us now attach ourselves to this 
formula and watch it, simple as it is, grow simpler still, all the more simple 
for our having pushed into it a greater number of things; finally let us rise 
with it, go up to the point where everything that was given extended in the 
doctrine contracts in tension: we shall picture to ourselves this time how 
from this centre of force, which is moreover inaccessible, there springs the 
impulse which gives the impetus, that is to say the intuition itself. It is from 
this that the four theses of Berkeley came, because this movement mer on 

242 
The Creative Mind 
its way the ideas and problems the contemporaries of Berkeley were raising. 
In other times Berkeley would doubtless have formulated other theses; but, 
the movement being the same, these theses would have been situated in the 
same way with regard to one another; they would have had the same relation­
ship to one another, like new words of a new sentence through which runs 
the thread of an old meaning: and it would have been the same philosophy. 
The relation of a philosophy to earlier and contemporary philosophies is 
not, then, what a certain conception of the history of systems would lead 
us to assume. The philosopher does not take pre-existing ideas in order to 
recast them into a superior synthesis or combine them with a new idea. One 
might as well believe that in order to speak we go hunting for words that we 
string together afterwards by means of a thought. The truth is that above the 
word and above the sentence there is something much more simple than a 
sentence or even a word: the meaning, which is less a thing thought than 
a movement of thought, less a movement than a direction. And just as the 
impulsion given to the embryonic life determines the division of an original 
cell into cells which in turn divide until the complete organism is formed, so 
the characteristic movement of each act of thought leads this thought, by an 
increasing sub-division of itself, to spread out more and more over the 
successive planes of the mind until it reaches that of speech. Once there it 
expresses itself by means of a sentence, that is, by a group of pre-existing 
elements; but it can almost arbitrarily choose the first elements of the group 
provided that the others are complementary to them; the same thought is 
translated just as well into diverse sentences composed of entirely different 
words, provided these words have the same connection between them. Such 
is the process of speech. And such also is the operation by which a 
philosophy is constituted. The philosopher does not start with pre-existing 
ideas; at most one can say that he arrives at them. And when he gets there 
the idea thus caught up into the movement of his mind, being animated 
with a new life like the word which receives its meaning from the sentence, is 
no longer what it was outside the vortex. 
One would find the same kind of relationship between a philosophical 
system and the whole body of scientific knowledge of the epoch in which the 
philosopher lived. There is a certain conception of philosophy which 
requires that all the effort of the philosopher should be to embrace in one 
large synthesis the results of the particular sciences. Indeed, the philosopher, 
for a long time, was he who possessed universal knowledge; and today even, 
when the multiplicity of particular sciences, the diversity and complexity of 
methods, the enormous mass of facts collected make the accumulation of all 
human knowledge in a single mind impossible, the philosopher remains the 
man of universal knowledge, in this sense, that if he can no longer know 
everything, there is nothing that he should not have put himself in a position 
to learn. But does it necessarily follow, that his task is to take possession of 
existing science to bring it to increasing degrees of generality, and to 

Philosophical Intuition 
243 
proceed, from condensation to condensation, ro what has been called the 
unification of knowledge? May I be pardoned if I consider it strange that this 
conception of philosophy is proposed to us in the name of science, out of 
respect for science: I know of no conception more offensive to science or 
more injurious to the scientist. Here, if you like, is a man who, over a long 
period of time, has followed a certain scientific method and laboriously 
gained his results, who says to us: 'Experience, with the help of reasoning, 
leads to this point; scientific knowledge begins here, it ends there; such are 
my conclusions'; and the philosopher would have the right to answer: 'Very 
well, leave it to me, and I'll show you what I can do with it! The knowledge 
you bring me unfinished, I shall complete. What you put before me in bits I 
shall put together. With the same materials, since it is understood that I shall 
keep to the facts which you have observed, with the same kind of work, since 
I must restrict myself as you did to induction and deduction, I shall do more 
and better than you have done.' Truly a very strange pretension! How could 
the profession of philosopher confer upon him who exercises it the power of 
advancing farther than science in the same direction as science? That certain 
scientists are more inclined than others to forge ahead and to generalize their 
results, more inclined also to turn back and to criticize their methods, that in 
this particular meaning of the word they should be dubbed philosophers, 
moreover that each science can and should have its own philosophy thus 
understood, I am the first to admit. But that particular philosophy is still 
science, and he who practices it is still a scientist. It is no longer a question, 
as it was a moment ago, of setting up philosophy as a synthesis of the 
positive sciences and of claiming, in virtue of the philosopher's mind alone, 
to raise oneself above science in the generalization of the same facts. 
Such a conception of the role of the philosopher would be unfair to 
science. But how much more unfair to philosophy! Is it not evident that if the 
scientist stops at a certain point along the road of generalization and synthesis 
it is because beyond that point objective experience and sure reasoning do not 
permit us to advance? And hence in claiming to go further in the same 
direction, should we not be placing ourselves systematically in the arbitrary or 
at least the hypothetical? To make of philosophy an ensemble of generalities 
which goes beyond scientific generalization, is to insist that the philosopher 
be content with the plausible and that probability be sufficient for him. I am 
perfectly well aware that for most of those who follow our discussions from a 
distance, our domain is in fact that of the simple possible, at most that of the 
probable; they would be very much inclined to say that philosophy begins 
where certitude leaves off. But who among us would like philosophy to be in 
such a situation? Doubtless everything is not equally verified or verifiable 
in what a philosophy brings us, and it is the essence of the philosophical 
method to demand that at many moments, on many points, the mind should 
take risks. But the philosopher runs these risks only because he has insured 
himself and because there are things of which he feels himself unshakeably 

244 
The Creative Mind 
certain. He will make us certain in our turn to the extent that he is able to 
communicate to us the intuition from whence he draws his strength. 
The truth is that philosophy is not a synthesis of particular sciences, and 
that if it often places itself on the terrain of science, if it sometimes embraces 
in a simpler vision the objects of science, it is not by intensifying science, it is 
not by carrying the results of science to a higher degree of generality. There 
would not be place for two ways of knowing, philosophy and science, if 
experience did not present itself to us under two different aspects; on the one 
hand in the form of facts side by side with other facts, which repeat 
themselves more or less, which can to a certain extent be measured, and 
which in fact open our in the direction of distinct multiplicity and spatiality; 
on the other hand in the form of a reciprocal penetration which is pure 
duration, refractory to law and measurement. In both cases, experience 
signifies consciousness; but in the first case, consciousness unfolds outward 
and externalises itself in relation to itself in the exact measure tO which it 
perceives things as external to one another; in the second, it turns back 
within itself, it rakes possession of itself and develops in depth. In thus 
probing its own depth does it penetrate more deeply into the interior of 
matter, of life, or reality in general? One could dispute this if consciousness 
had been superadded to matter as an accident; but I believe I have shown 
that such a hypothesis, according to the way in which it is generally taken, is 
absurd or false, self-contradictory or contradicted by the facts. One might 
still dispute it, if human consciousness, although related to a higher and 
vaster consciousness, had been put aside, as if man had to stand in a corner 
of nature like a child being punished. But no! the matter and life which fill 
the world are equally within us; the forces which work in all things we feel 
within ourselves; whatever may be the inner essence of what is and what is 
done, we are of that essence. Let us then go down into our own inner selves: 
the deeper the point we touch, the stronger will be the thrust which sends us 
back to the surface. Philosophical intuition is this contact, philosophy is this 
impetus. Brought back to the surface by an impulsion from the depth, we 
shall regain contact with science as our thought opens out and disperses. 
Philosophy then must be able to model itself upon science, and an idea of 
so-called intuitive origin which could not manage, by dividing itself and 
subdividing its divisions, to cover the facts observed outwardly and the laws 
by which science joins them to each ocher, which would not be capable even 
of correcting certain generalizations and of rectifying certain observations, 
would be pure fantasy; it would have nothing in common with intuition. 
But on che other hand the idea which succeeds in fitting perfectly this 
dispersion of itself upon the faces and laws, was not obtained by a unification 
of external experience; for the philosopher did not arrive at unity, he started 
from it. I am speaking, naturally, of a unity which is at once restricted and 
relative, like the unity which marks off a living being from the rest of the 
universe. The process by which philosophy seems to assimilate the results of 

Philosophical Intuition 
245 
posmve science, like the operation in the course of which a philosophy 
appears to re-assemble in itself the fragments of earlier philosophies, is not a 
synthesis bur an analysis. 
Science is the auxiliary of action. And action aims at a result. The scientific 
intelligence asks itself therefore what will have to be done in order that a 
certain desired result be attained, or more generally, what conditions should 
obtain in order that a certain phenomenon take place. It goes from an 
arrangement of things to a rearrangement, from a simultaneity to a simul­
taneity. Of necessity it neglects what happens in the interval; or if it does 
concern itself with it, it is in order to consider other arrangements in it, still 
more simultaneities. With methods meant to seize the ready-made, it cannot 
in general enter into what is being done, it cannot follow the moving reality, 
adopt the becoming which is the life of things. This last task belongs to 
philosophy. While the scientist, obliged to take immobile views of movement 
and to gather repetitions along a path where nothing is repeated, intent also 
on dividing reality conveniently on successive planes where it is deployed in 
order to submit it to the action of man, is obliged to use craft with nature, to 
adopt toward it the wary attitude of an adversary, the philosopher treats 
nature as a comrade. The rule of science is the one posited by Bacon: obey in 
order to command. The philosopher neither obeys nor commands; he seeks 
to be at one with nature. From this point of view, moreover, the essence of 
philosophy is the spirit of simplicity. Whether we contemplate the philo­
sophical spirit in itself or in its works, whether we compare philosophy to 
science or one philosophy with other philosophies, we always find that any 
complication is superficial, that the construction is a mere accessory, 
synthesis a semblance: the act of philosophising is a simple one. 
The more we become imbued with this truth, the more we shall be 
inclined to take philosophy om of the school and bring it into closer contact 
with life. No doubt the attitude of common-sense, as it results from the struc­
ture of the senses, of intelligence and of language, is nearer to the attitude of 
science than to that of philosophy. By that I do not mean only that the 
general categories of our thought are the very categories of science, that 
the highways traced by our senses across the continuity of the real are those 
along which science will travel, that perception is a science in the process of 
being born, science an adult perception, and that ordinary knowledge and 
scientific knowledge, both destined to prepare our action upon things, are 
necessarily two visions of a kind, although of unequal precision and range; 
what I wish panicularly to say, is that ordinary knowledge is forced, like 
scientific knowledge and for the same reasons, to take things in a time 
broken up into an infinity of particles, pulverized so to speak, where an 
instant which does not endure follows another equally without duration. 
Movement is for it a series of positions, change a series of qualities, and 
becoming, generally, a series of states. It starts from immobility (as though 
immobility could be anything but an appearance, comparable to the special 

246 
The Creative Mind 
effect that one moving body produces upon another when both move at the 
same rate in the same direction), and by an ingenious arrangement of 
immobilities it recomposes an imitation of movement which it substitutes 
for movement itself: an operation which is convenient from a practical 
standpoint but is theoretically absurd, pregnant with all the contradictions, 
all the pseudo-problems that Metaphysics and Criticism find before them. 
But precisely because it is right there that common sense turns its back 
upon philosophy, all we shall have to do is to have it make a volte-foce on that 
point in order to head it again in the direction of philosophical thought. 
Intuition doubtless admits of many degrees of intensity, and philosophy 
many degrees of depth; but the mind once brought back to real duration will 
already be alive with intuitive life and its knowledge of things will already 
be philosophy. Instead of a discontinuity of moments replacing one another 
in an infinitely divided time, it will perceive the continuous fluidity of real 
time which Rows along, indivisible. Instead of surface states covering succes­
sively some neutral stuff and maintaining with it a mysterious relationship of 
phenomenon to substance, it will seize upon one identical change which keeps 
ever lengthening as in a melody where everything is becoming but where the 
becoming, being itself substantial, has no need of support. No more inert 
states, no more dead things; nothing but the mobility of which the stability 
of life is made. A vision of this kind, where reality appears as continuous and 
indivisible, is on the road which leads to philosophical intuition. 
For, in order to reach intuition it is not necessary to transport ourselves 
outside the domain of the senses and of consciousness. Kant's error was to 
believe that it was. After having proved by decisive arguments that no 
dialectical effort will ever introduce us into the beyond and that an effective 
metaphysics would necessarily be an intuitive metaphysics, he added that we 
lack this intuition and that this metaphysics is impossible. It would in fact be 
so if there were no other time or change than those which Kant perceived 
and which, moreover, we too must reckon with; for our usual perception 
cannot get out of time nor grasp anything else than change. But the time in 
which we are naturally placed, the change we habitually have before us, are a 
time and change that our senses and our consciousness have reduced to dust 
in order to facilitate our action upon things. Undo what they have done, 
bring our perception back to its origins, and we shall have a new kind of 
knowledge without having been obliged to have recourse to new faculties. 
If this knowledge is generalized, speculation will not be the only thing to 
profit by it. Everyday life can be nourished and illuminated by it. For the 
world into which our senses and consciousness habitually introduce us is no 
more than the shadow of itself: and it is as cold as death. Everything in it is 
arranged for our maximum convenience, but in it, everything is in a present 
which seems constantly to be starting afresh; and we ourselves, fashioned 
artificially in the image of a no less artificial universe, see ourselves in the 
instantaneous, speak of the past as of something done away with, and see in 

Philosophical Intuition 
247 
memory a fact strange or in any case foreign to us, an aid given to mind by 
matter. Let us on the contrary grasp ourselves afresh as we are, in a present 
which is thick, and furthermore, elastic, which we can stretch indefinitely 
backward by pushing the screen which masks us from ourselves farther and 
farther away; let us grasp afresh the external world as it really is, not 
superficially, in the present, but in depth, with the immediate past crowding 
upon it and imprinting upon it its impetus; let us in a word become 
accustomed to see all things sub specie durationis: immediately in our 
galvanized perception what is taut becomes relaxed, what is dormant 
awakens, what is dead comes to life again. Satisfactions which art will never 
give save to those favoured by nature and fortune, and only then upon rare 
occasions, philosophy thus understood will offer to all of us, at all times, 
by breathing life once again into the phantoms which surround us and by 
revivifYing us. In so doing philosophy will become complementary to 
science in practice as well as in speculation. With its applications which aim 
only at the convenience of existence, science gives us the promise of well­
being, or at most, of pleasure. But philosophy could already give us joy. 

The Perception of Change 
FIRST LECTURE 
My first words are words of thanks to the University of Oxford for the great 
honour she has done me in inviting me to address her. I have always thought 
of Oxford as one of the few sanctuaries where, reverently maintained, passed 
on by each generation to the next, the warmth and radiance of ancient 
thought are preserved. But I also know that this attachment to antiquity 
does not prevent your University from being very modern and very much 
alive. More especially in what concerns philosophy, am I struck to see with 
what profundity and what originality the ancient philosophers are studied 
here (did not one of your most eminent masters only recently touch up the 
interpretation of the Platonic theory of Ideas on its essential points?); and I 
am also struck, on the other hand, by the fact that Oxford is in the vanguard 
of the philosophical movement with the two extreme conceptions of the 
nature of truth: integral rationalism and pragmatism. This alliance of past 
and present is fruitful in all fields, nowhere more so than in philosophy. 
To be sure, we have something new to do, and perhaps the moment has come 
to be fully alive to it; but the fact that it is new does not mean that it must be 
revolutionary. Let us rather study the ancients, become imbued with their 
spirit and try to do, as far as possible, what they themselves would be doing 
were they living among us. Endowed with our knowledge (I do not refer so 
much to our mathematics and physics, which would perhaps not radically 
alter their way of thinking, but especially our biology and psychology), they 
would arrive at very different results from those they obtained. That is what 
particularly strikes me in the problem I have undertaken to deal with here, 
that of change. 
I chose it, because I consider it fundamental, and because I believe that if 
one were convinced of the reality of change and if one made an effort to grasp 
it, everything would become simplified, philosophical difficulties, considered 
insurmountable, would fall away. Not only would philosophy gain by it, but 
our everyday life - I mean the impression things make upon us and the 
reaction of our intelligence, our sensibility and our will upon things - would 
perhaps be transformed and, as it were, transfigured. The point is that usually 
we look at change but we do not see it. We speak of change, but we do not 
think about it. We say that change exists, that everything changes, that 
change is the very law of things: yes, we say it and we repeat it; but those are 

The Perception of Change 
249 
only words, and we reason and philosophise as though change did not exist. 
In order to think change and see it, there is a whole veil of prejudices to brush 
aside, some of them artificial, created by philosophical speculation, the others 
natural to common sense. I believe we shall end by coming to an agreement 
about them, and shall thus form a philosophy in which everyone will 
collaborate, upon which everyone will be able to agree. That is why I should 
like to fix two or three points upon which it seems to me agreement has 
already been reached; it will gradually be extended to the rest of them. The 
first lecture therefore will deal less with change itself than with the general 
characteristics of a philosophy attached to the intuition of change. 
Here, first of all, is a point upon which every one will agree. If the senses 
and consciousness had an unlimited scope, if in the double direction of 
matter and mind the faculty of perceiving was indefinite, one would not need 
to conceive any more than to reason. Conceiving is a make-shift when 
perception is not granted us, and reasoning is done in order to fill up the gaps 
of perception or to extend its scope. I do not deny the utility of abstract and 
general ideas - any more than I question the value of bank-notes. But just as 
the note is only a promise of gold, so a conception has value only through the 
eventual perceptions it represents. It is not, of course, merely a question of 
the perception of a thing, or a quality, or a state. One can conceive an order, 
a harmony, and more generally a truth, which then becomes a reality. I say 
that we agree on this point. Everyone could see for himself, in fact, that the 
most ingeniously assembled conceptions and the most learnedly constructed 
reasonings collapse like a house of cards the moment the fact - a single fact 
really seen - collides with these conceptions and these reasonings. There is 
not a single metaphysician, moreover, not one theologian, who is not ready 
to affirm that a perfect being is one who knows all things intuitively without 
having co go through reasoning, abstraction and generalization. There is no 
difficulty therefore about the first point. 
And there will not be any more about the second, which we come to now. 
The insufficiency of our faculties of perception - an insufficiency verified by 
our faculties of conception and reasoning - is what has given birth to 
philosophy. The history of doctrines attests it. The conceptions of the earliest 
Greek thinkers were certainly very close to perception, since it was by the 
transformations of a sensible element like water, air or fire, that they com­
pleted the immediate sensation. But from the time the philosophers of the 
school of Elea, criticizing the idea of transformation, had shown or thought 
they had shown the impossibility of keeping so close to the sense-data, 
philosophy starred off along the road it has since travelled, the road leading 
to a 'supra-sensible' world: one was to explain things henceforth with pure 
'ideas.' It is true that for the ancient philosophers the intelligible world was 
situated outside and above the one our senses and consciousness perceive: 
our faculties of perception showed us only shadows projected in time and 
space by immutable and eternal Ideas. For the moderns, on the contrary, 

250 
The Creative Mind 
these essences are constitutive of sensible things themselves; they are veritable 
substances, of which phenomena are only the surface covering. But all of 
them, ancient and modern, are agreed in seeing in philosophy a substitution 
of the concept for the percept. They all appeal from the insufficiency of our 
senses and consciousness to the faculties of the mind no longer perceptive, 
I mean to the functions of abstraction, generalization and reasoning. 
On the second point we can therefore be agreed. I come then to the third, 
which, I imagine, will not occasion any discussion either. 
If such is really the philosophical method, there is not, there cannot be a 
philosophy as there is a science; on the contrary there will always be as many 
different philosophies as there are original thinkers. How could it be other­
wise? No matter how abstract a conception may be it always has its starting 
point in a perception. The intellect combines and separates; it arranges, 
disarranges and co-ordinates; it does not create. It must have a matter, and 
this matter can only reach it through the senses or consciousness. A philos­
ophy which constructs or completes reality with pure ideas will therefore only 
be substituting for or adding to our concrete perceptions as a whole, some 
particular one of them it has elaborated, thinned down, refined and thereby 
converted into an abstract and general idea. But there will always be 
something arbitrary in its choice of that privileged perception, for positive 
science has taken for itself all that is incontestably common to different 
things; or in other words quantity, and all that remains for philosophy there­
fore is the domain of quality, where everything is heterogeneous to everything 
else, and where a part will never represent the whole except in virtue of a 
contestable if not arbitrary decree. One can always oppose other decrees to 
this one. And many different philosophies will spring up, armed with differ­
ent concepts. They will struggle indefinitely with one another. 
Here, then, is the question which arises, and which I consider essential. 
Since any attempt at purely conceptual philosophy calls forth antagonistic 
efforts, and since, in the field of pure dialectics there is no system to which 
one cannot oppose another, should we remain in that field or (without, of 
course, ceasing to exercise our faculties of conception and reasoning), ought 
we not rather return to perception, getting it to expand and extend? I was 
saying that it is the insufficiency of natural perception which has driven 
philosophers to complete perception by conception - the latter having as its 
function to fill in the spaces between the data of the senses or of con­
sciousness and in that way to unify and systematize our knowledge of things. 
But the examination of doctrines shows us that the faculty of conceiving, as 
it advances in this work of integration, is forced to eliminate from the real a 
great number of qualitative differences, to extinguish in part our percep­
tions, and to weaken our concrete vision of the universe. For the very reason 
that each philosophy is led, willy-nilly, to proceed in this way, it gives rise to 
opposing philosophies, each of which picks up something of what the other 
has dropped. The method, therefore, goes contrary to the purpose: it should 

The Perception of Change 
251 
in theory extend and complete perception; it is obliged in fact to require that 
many perceptions stand aside so that some one of them may become 
representative of the others. - But suppose that instead of trying to rise above 
our perception of things we were to plunge into it for the purpose of 
deepening and widening it. Suppose that we were to insert our will into it, 
and that this will, expanding, were to expand our vision of things. We should 
obtain this time a philosophy where nothing in the data of the senses or 
consciousness would be sacrificed: no quality, no aspect of the real would be 
substituted for the rest ostensibly to explain it. But above all we should have a 
philosophy to which one could not oppose others, for it would have left 
nothing outside of itself that orher doctrines could pick up; it would have 
taken everything. It would have taken every thing that is given, and even 
more, for the senses and consciousness, urged on by this philosophy to 
an exceptional effort, would have given it more than they furnish naturally. 
To the multiplicity of systems contending with one another, armed with 
different concepts, would succeed the unity of a doctrine capable of recon­
ciling all thinkers in the same perception - a perception which moreover 
would grow ever larger, thanks to the combined effort of philosophers in a 
common direction. 
It will be said that this enlarging is impossible. How can one ask the eyes 
of the body, or those of the mind, to see more than they see? Our attention 
can increase precision, clarifY and intensifY; it cannot bring forth in the field 
of perception what was not there in the first place. That's the objection. -
It is refuted in my opinion by experience. For hundreds of years, in fact, 
there have been men whose function has been precisely to see and to make 
us see what we do not naturally perceive. They are the artists. 
What is the aim of art if not to show us, in nature and in the mind, 
outside of us and within us, things which did not explicitly strike our senses 
and our consciousness? The poet and the novelist who express a mood 
certainly do not create it out of nothing; they would not be understood by us 
if we did not observe within ourselves, up to a certain point, what they say 
about others. As they speak, shades of emotion and thought appear to us 
which might long since have been brought out in us but which remained 
invisible; just like the photographic image which has not yet been plunged 
into the bath where it will be revealed. The poet is this revealing agent. But 
nowhere is the function of the artist shown as clearly as in that art which 
gives the most important place to imitation, I mean painting. The great 
painters are men who possess a certain vision of things which has or will 
become the vision of all men. A Corot, a Turner - not to mention others ...: 
have seen in nature many an aspect that we did not notice. Shall it be said 
that they have not seen but created, that they have given us products of their 
imagination, that we adopt their inventions because we like them and that 
we get pleasure from looking at nature through the image the great painters 
have traced for us? It is true to a certain extent; but, if it were only that, why 

252 
The Creative Mind 
should we say of certain works - those of the masters - that they are true? 
Where would the difference be between great art and pure fancy? If we 
reflect deeply upon what we feel as we look at a Turner or a Co rot, we shall 
find that, if we accept them and admire them, it is because we had already 
perceived something of what they show us. But we had perceived without 
seeing. It was, for us, a brilliant and vanishing vision, lost in the crowd of 
those visions, equally brilliant and equally vanishing, which become overcast 
in our ordinary experience like 'dissolving views' and which constitute, by 
their reciprocal interference, the pale and colourless vision of things that is 
habitually ours. The painter has isolated it; he has fixed it so well on the 
canvas that henceforth we shall not be able to help seeing in reality what he 
himself saw. 
Art would suffice then to show us that an extension of the faculties of 
perceiving is possible. But how does this extension work? - Let us notice 
that the artist has always been considered an 'idealist.' We mean by that that 
he is less preoccupied than ourselves with the positive and material side of 
life. He is, in the real sense of the word, 'absent-minded.' Why then, being 
detached from reality to a greater degree, does he manage to see in it more 
things? We should not understand why if the vision we ordinarily have of 
externaJ objects and of ourselves were not a vision which we had been 
obliged to narrow and drain by our attachment to reality, our need for living 
and acting. As a matter of fact, it would be easy to show that the more we are 
preoccupied with living, the less we are inclined to contemplate, and that the 
necessities of action tend to limit the field of vision. I cannot go into a 
demonstration of this point; I am of the opinion that an entirely new light 
would illuminate many psychologicaJ and psycho-physiological questions if 
we recognized that distinct perception is merely cut, for the purposes 
of practical existence, out of a wider canvas. In psychology and elsewhere, 
we like to go from the part to the whole, and our customary system of 
explanation consists in reconstructing ideaJiy our menta! life with simple 
elements, then in supposing that the combination of these elements has 
really produced our mental life. If things happened this way, our perception 
would as a matter of fact be inextensible; it would consist of the assembling 
of certain specific materials, in a given quantity, and we should never find 
anything more in it than what had been pur there in the first place. 
But the facts, taken as they are, without any mental reservation about 
providing a mechanicaJ explanation of the mind, suggest an entirely differ­
ent interpretation. They show us, in normal psychological life, a constant 
effort of the mind to limit its horizon, to turn away from what it has a 
material interest in not seeing. Before philosophising one must live; and life 
demands that we put on blinders, that we look neither to the right, nor to 
the left nor behind us, but straight ahead in the direction we have to go. Our 
knowledge, far from being made up of a gradual association of simple 
elements, is the effect of a sudden dissociation: from the immensely vast field 

The Perception of Change 
253 
of our virtual knowledge, we have selected, in order to make it into actual 
knowledge, everything which concerns our action upon things; we have 
neglected the rest. The brain seems to have been constructed with a view to 
this work of selection. That could easily be shown by the way in which the 
memory works. Our past, as we shall see in our next lecture, is necessarily 
automatically preserved. It survives complete. But our practical interest is to 
thrust it aside, or at least to accept of it only what can more or less usefully 
illuminate and complete the situation in the present. The brain serves to 
bring about this choice: it actualises the useful memories, it keeps in the 
lower strata of the consciousness those which are of no use. One could say as 
much for perception. The auxiliary of action, it isolates that part of reality 
as a whole that interests us; it shows us less the things themselves than the use 
we can make of them. It classifies, it labels them beforehand; we scarcely look 
at the object, it is enough for us to know to which category it belongs. But 
now and then, by a lucky accident, men arise whose senses or whose 
consciousness are less adherent w life. Nature has forgotten to attach their 
faculty of perceiving to their faculty of acting. When they look at a thing, they 
see it for itself, and not for themselves. They do not perceive simply with a 
view w action; they perceive in order to perceive - for nothing, for the 
pleasure of doing so. In regard to a certain aspect of their nature, whether it 
be their consciousness or one of their senses, they are born detached; and 
according to whether this detachment is that of a certain particular sense, or 
of consciousness, they are painters or sculptors, musicians or poets. It is 
therefore a much more direct vision of reality that we find in the different 
arts; and it is because the artist is less intent on utilizing his perception that he 
perceives a greater number of things. 
Well, what nature does from time to time, by distraction, for certain 
privileged individuals, could not philosophy on such a matter attempt, in 
another sense and another way, for everyone? Would not the role of philos­
ophy under such circumstances be to lead us to a completer [sic] perception 
of reality by means of a certain displacement of our attention? It would be 
a question of turning this attention aside from the part of the universe 
which interests us from a practical viewpoint and turning it back toward 
what serves no practical purpose. This conversion of the attention would be 
philosophy itself. 
At first glance it would seem that this has long since been done. More 
than one philosopher has in fact said that in order w philosophise he had to 
be detached, and that speculation was the reverse of action. We were 
speaking a few moments ago of the Greek philosophers: not one of them 
expressed the idea more forcefully than Plotinus. 'All action,' he said (and he 
even added 'all fabrication') 'weakens contemplation.' 
And, faithful to the spirit of Plaro, he thought that the discovery of truth 
demanded a conversion of the mind, which breaks away from the appear­
ances here below and attaches itself to the realities above: 'Let us flee to our 

254 
The Creative Mind 
beloved homeland!' - But as you see, it was a question of 'fleeing.' More 
precisely, for Plato and for all those who understand metaphysics in that 
way, breaking away from life and converting one's attention consisted in 
transponing oneself immediately into a world different from the one we 
inhabit, in developing other faculties of perception than the senses and 
consciousness. They did not believe that this education of the attention 
might most frequently consist in removing its blinders, in freeing it from the 
contraction that it is accustomed to by the demands of life. They were not of 
the opinion that the metaphysician, for at least half of his speculations, 
should continue to look at what everyone looks at: no, he had always to turn 
toward something else. That is why they invariably call upon faculties of 
vision other than those we constantly exercise in the knowledge of the 
external world and of ourselves. 
And precisely because he disputed the existence of these transcendent 
faculties, Kant believed metaphysics to be impossible. One of the most 
profound and important ideas in the Critique of Pure Reason is this: if 
metaphysics is possible, it is through a vision and not through a dialectic. 
Dialectics leads to contrary philosophies; it demonstrates the thesis as well as 
the antithesis of antinomies. Only a superior intuition (which Kant calls an 
'intellectual' intuition), that is, a perception of metaphysical reality, would 
enable metaphysics to be constituted. The most obvious result of the Kantian 
Critique is thus to show that one could only penetrate into the beyond by a 
vision, and that a doctrine has value in this domain only to the extent that it 
contains perception: take this perception, analyse it, recompose it, turn 
it round and round in all directions, cause it to undergo the most subtle 
operations of the highest intellectual chemistry, you will never get from your 
crucible anything more than you have put into it; as much vision as you have 
put into it, just so much will you find; and reasoning will not have made you 
go one step beyond what you had perceived in the first place. That is what 
Kant brought out so clearly and that, it seems to me, is the greatest service he 
rendered to speculative philosophy. He definitively established that, if meta­
physics is possible, it can be so only through an effort of intuition. - Only, 
having proved that intuition alone would be capable of giving us a meta­
physics, he added: this intuition is impossible. 
Why did he consider it impossible? Precisely because he pictured a vision of 
the kind - I mean a vision of reality 'in itself' - that Plotinus had imagined, 
as those who have appealed to metaphysical intuition have imagined it. 
By that they all understood a faculty of knowing which would differ radically 
from consciousness as well as from the senses, which would even be 
orientated in the opposite direction. They have all believed that to break away 
from practical life was to turn one's back upon it. 
Why did they believe that? Why did Kant, their adversary, share their 
mistake? How is it they one and all had this conception even if they drew 

The Perception of Change 
255 
opposite conclusions from it - they constructing a metaphysics, and he 
declaring metaphysics impossible? 
They believed it because they imagined that our senses and consciousness, 
as they function in everyday life, make us grasp movement directly. They 
believed that by our senses and consciousness, working as they usually work, 
we actually perceive the change which takes place in things and in ourselves. 
Then, as it is incontestable that in following the usual data of our senses and 
consciousness we arrive in the speculative order at insoluble contradictions, 
they concluded that contradiction was inherent in change itself and that in 
order to avoid this contradiction one had to get out of the sphere of change 
and lift oneself above Time. Such is the position taken by the metaphysician 
as well as by those who, along with Kant, deny the possibility of metaphysics. 
Metaphysics, as a matter of fact, was born of the arguments of Zeno of 
Elea on the subject of change and movement. It was Zeno who, by drawing 
attention to the absurdity of what he called movement and change, led the 
philosophers - Plato first and foremost - to seek the true and coherent 
reality in what does not change. And it is because Kant believed that our 
senses and consciousness are in fact exerted in a real Time, that is, in a Time 
which changes continuously, in a duration which endures; it is because, on 
the other hand, he took into account the relativity of the usual data of our 
senses and consciousness (a relativity which he laid down, furthermore, long 
before the transcendent conclusion of his endeavour that he considered 
metaphysics impossible without an entirely different kind of vision from 
that of the senses and consciousness - a  vision, moreover, no trace of which 
he found in man). 
But if we could prove that what was considered as movement and change 
by Zeno first, and then by metaphysicians in general, is neither change nor 
movement, that of change they retained what does not change, and of move­
ment what does not move, that they took for an immediate and complete 
perception of movement and change a crystallization of this perception, 
a solidification with an eye to practice - and if we could show on the other 
hand, that what Kant took for time itself was a time which neither flows nor 
changes nor endures - then, in order to avoid such contradictions as those 
which Zeno pointed out and to separate our everyday knowledge from the 
relativity ro which Kant considered it condemned, we should not have to get 
outside of time (we are already outside of it!), we should not have to free 
ourselves of change (we are already only too free of it!); on the contrary, what 
we should have to do is to grasp change and duration in their original 
mobility. Then we should not only see many difficulties drop away one by 
one, and more than one problem disappear; but through the extension and 
revivification of our faculty of perceiving, perhaps also (though for the 
moment it is not a question of rising to such heights) through a prolongation 
which privileged souls will give to intuition, we should re-establish continuity 

256 
The Creative Mind 
in our knowledge as a whole - a continuity which would no longer be 
hypothetical and constructed, bur experienced and lived. Is a work of this 
kind possible? That is what we shall seek to determine, at least as far as the 
knowledge of our surroundings is concerned, in our second lecture. 
SECOND LECTURE 
You gave me such sustained attention yesterday that you must not be 
surprised if I am tempted to take advantage of it today. I am going to 
ask you to make a strenuous effort to put aside some of the artificial schema 
we interpose unknowingly between reality and us. What is required is 
that we should break with certain habits of thinking and perceiving that have 
become natural to us. We must return to the direct perception of change 
and mobility. Here is an immediate result of this effort. We shall think of all 
change, all movement, as being absolutely indivisible. 
Let us begin with movement. I have my hand at point A. I move it over to 
point B, traversing the interval AB. I say that this movement from A to B is 
by nature simple. 
Bur of this each one of us has the immediate sensation. No doubt while 
we are moving our hand from A to B we say to ourselves that we could stop 
it at an intermediary point, but in that case we should not have to do with 
the same movement. There would no longer be a single movement from 
A to B; there would be, by hypothesis, two movements, with an interval. 
Neither from within, through the muscular sense, nor from without through 
sight, should we still have the same perception. If I leave my movement from 
A to B as it is, I feel it undivided and must declare it to be indivisible. 
It is true that, when I watch my hand going from A to B and describing 
the interval AB, I say: 'The interval AB can be divided into as many parts as 
I wish, therefore the movement from A to B can be divided into as many 
parts as I like, since this movement is applied exactly upon this interval.' 
Or again: 'At each instant of its trajection, the mobile passes through a certain 
point, therefore one can distinguish in the movement as many stages as one 
likes, therefore the movement is infinitely divisible.' Bur let us reflect for a 
moment. How could the movement be applied upon the space it traverses? 
How can something moving coincide with something immobile? How could 
the moving object be in a point of its trajectory passage? It passes through, or in 
other terms, it could be there. It would be there if it stopped; but if it should 
stop there, it would no longer be the same movement we were dealing with. 
It is always by a single bound that a passing is completed, when there is no 
break in the passage. The bound may last a few seconds, or days, months, 
years: it matters little. The moment it is one single bound, it is indecom­
posable. Only, once the passage is effected, as the trajectory is space and 
space is indefinitely divisible, we imagine that movement itself is indefinitely 

The Perception of Change 
257 
divisible. We like to imagine it because, in a movement, it is not the change 
of position which interests us, it is the positions themselves, the one the 
movemem has left, the one it will take, the one it would take if it stopped on 
the way. We need immobility, and the more we succeed in imagining 
movement as coinciding with the immobilities of the points of space 
through which it passes, the better we think we understand it. To tell the 
truth, there never is real immobility, if we understand by that an absence of 
movement. Movement is reality itself, and what we call immobility is a 
certain state of things analogous to that produced when two trains move at 
the same speed, in the same direction, on parallel tracks: each of the two 
trains is then immovable to the travellers seated in the other. But a situation 
of this kind which, after all, is exceptional, seems to us to be the regular and 
normal situation, because it is what permits us to act upon things and also 
permits things to act upon us: the travellers in the two trains can hold our 
their hands to one another through the door and talk to one another only 
if they are 'immobile,' rhat is to say, if they are going in the same direction at 
the same speed. 'Immobility' being rhe prerequisite for our action, we set 
it up as a reality, we make of it an absolute, and we see in movement 
something which is superimposed. Nothing is more legitimate in practice. 
But when we transport this habit of mind into the domain of speculation, 
we fail to recognize the true reality, we deliberately create insoluble 
problems, we close our eyes to what is most living in the real. 
I need not recall the arguments of Zeno of Elea. They all involve the 
confusion of movement with the space covered, or at least the conviction that 
one can treat movement as one treats space, divide it without taking account 
of its articulations. Achilles, they say, will never overtake the tortoise he is 
pursuing, for when he arrives at the point where the tortoise was the latter will 
have had time to go further, and so on indefinitely. Philosophers have refuted 
this argument in numerous ways, and ways so difficult that each of these 
refutations deprives the others of the right to be considered definitive. There 
would have been, nevertheless, a very simple means of making short work of 
the difficulty: that would have been to question Achilles. For since Achilles 
finally catches up to the tortoise and even passes it, he must know better than 
anyone else how he goes about it. The ancient philosopher who demonstrated 
the possibility of movement by walking was right: his only mistake was 
to make the gesture without adding a commentary. Suppose then we ask 
Achilles to comment on his race: here, doubtless, is what he will answer: 
'Zeno insists that I go from the point where I am to the point the tortoise has 
left, from that point to the next point it has left, etc., etc.; that is his procedure 
for making me run. But I go about it otherwise. I take a first step, then a 
second, and so on: finally, after a certain number of steps, I take a last one by 
which I skip ahead of the tortoise. I thus accomplish a series of indivisible 
acts. My course is the series of these acts. You can distinguish its parts by 
the number of steps it involves. But you have not the right ro disarticulate 

258 
The Creative Mind 
it according to another law, or w suppose it articulated in another way. 
To proceed as Zeno does is to admit that the race can be arbitrarily broken 
up like the space which has been covered; it is to believe that the passage is in 
reality applied to the trajectory; it is making movement and immobility 
coincide and consequently confusing one with the other.' 
But that is precisely what our usual method consists in. We argue about 
movement as though it were made of immobilities and, when we look at it, 
it is with immobilities that we reconstitute it. Movement for us is a position, 
then another position, and so on indefinitely. We say, it is true, that there 
must be something else, and that from one position to another there is the 
passage by which the interval is cleared. But as soon as we fix our attention 
on this passage, we immediately make of it a series of positions, even though 
we still admit that between two successive positions one must indeed assume 
a passage. We put this passage off indefinitely the moment we have to 
consider it. We admit that it exists, we give it a name; that is enough for us: 
once that point has been satisfactorily settled we turn to the positions 
preferring to deal with them alone. We have an instinctive fear of those 
difficulties which the vision of movement as movement would arouse in our 
thought; and quite rightly, once we have loaded movement down with 
immobilities. If movement is not everything, it is nothing; and if to begin 
with we have supposed that immobility can be a reality, movement will slip 
through our fingers when we think we have it. 
I have spoken of movement; but I could say the same for any change 
whatever. All real change is an indivisible change. We like to treat it as a 
series of distinct states which form, as it were, a line in time. That is perfectly 
natural. If change is continuous in us and also in things, on the other hand, 
in order that the uninterrupted change which each of us calls 'me' may act 
upon the uninterrupted change that we call a 'thing,' these two changes must 
find themselves, with regard to one another, in a situation like that of the 
two trains referred to above. We say, for example, that an object changes 
colour, and that change here consists in a series of shades which would be 
the constitutive elements of change and which, themselves, would not 
change. But in the first place, if each shade has any objective existence at all, 
it is an infinitely rapid oscillation, it is change. And in the second place, the 
perception we have of it, to the extent that it is subjective, is only an isolated, 
abstract aspect of the general state of our person, and this state as a whole is 
constantly changing and causing this so-called invariable perception to parti­
cipate in its change; in fact, there is no perception which is not constantly 
being modified. So that colour, outside of us, is mobility itself, and our own 
person is also mobility. But the whole mechanism of our perception of 
things, like the mechanism of our action upon things, has been regulated in 
such a way as to bring about, between the external and the internal mobility, 
a situation comparable to that of our two trains - more complicated, per­
haps, but of the same kind: when the two changes, that of the object and 

The Perception of Change 
259 
that of the subject, take place under particular conditions, they produce the 
particular appearance that we call a 'state.' And once in possession of 'states,' 
our mind recomposes change with them. I repeat, there is nothing more 
natural: the breaking up of change into states enables us to act upon things, 
and it is useful in a practical sense to be interested in the states rather than in 
the change itself. But what is favourable to action in this case would be fatal 
to speculation. If you imagine a change as being really composed of states, 
you at once cause insoluble metaphysical problems to arise. They deal only 
with appearances. You have closed your eyes to true reality. 
I shall not press the point. Let each of us undertake the experiment, let 
him give himself the direct vision of a change, of a movement: he will have a 
feeling of absolute indivisibility. I come then to the second point, closely 
allied to the first. There are changes, but there are underneath the change no 
things which change: change has no need of a support. There are movements, but 
there is no inert or invariable object which moves: movement does not imply 
a mobile.5 
It is difficult to picture things in this way, because the sense 'par excellence' 
is the sense of sight, and because the eye has developed the habit of separating, 
in the visual field, the relatively invariable figures which are then supposed to 
change place without changing form, movement is taken as super-added 
to the mobile as an accident. It is, in fact, useful to have to deal in daily life 
with objects which are stable and, as it were, responsible, to which one can 
address oneself as to persons. The sense of sight contrives to take things in this 
way: as an advance-guard for the sense of touch, it prepares our action upon 
the external world. But we already have less difficulty in perceiving move­
ment and change as independent realities if we appeal to the sense of hearing. 
Let us listen to a melody, allowing ourselves to be lulled by it: do we not have 
the clear perception of a movement which is not attached to a mobile, of a 
change without anything changing? This change is enough, it is the thing 
itself. And even if it takes time, it is still indivisible; if the melody stopped 
sooner it would no longer be the same sonorous whole, it would be another, 
equally indivisible. We have, no doubt, a tendency to divide it and to picrure, 
instead of the uninterrupted continuity of melody, a juxtaposition of distinct 
notes. But why? Because we are thinking of the discontinuous series of efforts 
we should be making to recompose approximately rhe sound heard if we were 
doing the singing, and also because our auditory perception has acquired the 
habit of absorbing visual images. We therefore listen to the melody through 
the vision which an orchestra-leader would have of it as he watched its score. 
We picture notes placed next to one another upon an imaginary piece of 
paper. We think of a keyboard upon which someone is playing, of the 
bow going up and down, of the musicians, each one playing his part along 
with the others. If we do not dwell on these spatial images, pure change 
remains, sufficient unto itself, in no way divided, in no way attached to a 
'thing' which changes. 

260 
The Creative Mind 
Let us come back, then, to the sense of sight. In further concentrating our 
attention upon it we perceive that even here movement does not demand a 
vehicle nor change a substance in the ordinary meaning of the word. A sug­
gestion of this vision of material things already comes to us from physical 
science. The more it progresses the more it resolves matter into actions 
moving through space, into movements dashing back and forth in a constant 
vibration so that mobility becomes reality itself. No doubt science begins by 
assigning a support to this mobility. But as it advances, the support recedes; 
masses are pulverized into molecules, molecules into atoms, atoms into 
electrons or corpuscles: finally, the support assigned to movement appears 
merely as a convenient schema - a simple concession on the part of the 
scholar to the habits of our visual imagination. But there is no need to go so 
far. What is the 'mobile' to which our eye attaches movement as to a vehicle? 
Simply a coloured spot which we know perfectly well amounts, in itself, to a 
series of extremely rapid vibrations. This alleged movement of a thing is in 
reality only a movement of movements. 
Bur nowhere is the substantiality of change so visible, so palpable as in the 
domain of the inner life. Difficulties and contradictions of every kind to 
which the theories of personality have led come from our having imagined, 
on the one hand, a series of distinct psychological states, each one invariable, 
which would produce the variations of the ego by their very succession, and 
on the other hand an ego, no less invariable, which would serve as support for 
them. How could this unity and this multiplicity meet? How, without either 
of them having duration - the first because change is something superadded, 
the second because it is made up of elements which do nor change - how 
could they constitute an ego which endures? But the truth is that there is 
neither a rigid, immovable substratum nor distinct states passing over it like 
actors on a stage. There is simply the continuous melody of our inner life -
a melody which is going on and will go on, indivisible, from the beginning 
to the end of our conscious existence. Our personality is precisely that. 
This indivisible continuity of change is precisely what constitutes true 
duration. I cannot here enter into the detailed examination of a question I 
have dealt with elsewhere. I shall confine myself therefore to saying, in reply 
to those for whom this 'real duration' is something inexpressible and 
mysterious, that it is the clearest thing in the world: real duration is what we 
have always called time, but time perceived as indivisible. That time implies 
succession I do not deny. But that succession is first presented to our 
consciousness, like the distinction of a 'before' and 'after' set side by side, is 
what I cannot admit. When we listen to a melody we have the purest 
impression of succession we could possibly have - an impression as far 
removed as possible from that of simultaneity - and yet it is the very con­
tinuity of the melody and' the impossibility of breaking it up which make that 
impression upon us. If we cut it up into distinct notes, into so many 'befores' 
and 'afters,' we are bringing spatial images into it and impregnating the 

The Perception of Change 
261 
succession with simultaneity: in space, and only in space, is there a clear­
cut distinction of parts external to one another. I recognize moreover that it 
is in spatialised time that we ordinarily place ourselves. We have no interest 
in listening to the uninterrupted humming of life's depths. And yet, that 
is where real duration is. Thanks to it, the more or less lengthy changes 
we witness within us and in the external world, take place in a single 
identical time. 
Thus, whether it is a question of the internal or the external, of ourselves 
or of things, reality is mobility itself. That is what I was expressing when I 
said that there is change, but that there are not things which change. 
Before the spectacle of this universal mobility there may be some who will 
be seized with dizziness. They are accustomed to terra firma; they cannot get 
used to the rolling and pitching. They must have 'fixed' points to which they 
can attach thought and existence. They think that if everything passes, 
nothing exists; and that if reality is mobility, it has already ceased to exist at 
the moment one thinks it - it eludes thought. The material world, they say, 
is going to disintegrate, and the mind will drown in the torrent-like flow of 
things. - Let them be reassured! Change, if they consent to look directly at it 
without an interposed veil, will very quickly appear to them to be the most 
substantial and durable thing possible. Its solidity is infinitely superior to that 
of a fixity which is only an ephemeral arrangement between mobilities. I have 
come, in fact, to the third point to which I should like to draw your attention. 
It is this: if change is real and even constitutive of reality, we must 
envisage the past quite differently from what we have been accustomed to 
doing through philosophy and language. We are inclined to think of our 
past as inexistent, and philosophers encourage this natural tendency in us. 
For them and for us the present alone exists by itself: if something of the past 
does survive it can only be because of help given it by the present, because of 
some act of charity on the part of the present, in short - to get away from 
metaphor - by the intervention of a certain particular function called 
memory, whose role is presumed to be to preserve certain parts of the past, 
for which exception is made, by storing them away in a kind of box. - This 
is a profound mistake! A useful one, I admit, perhaps necessary to action, 
but fatal to speculation. One could find in it, 'in a nutshell' as you say, most 
of the illusions capable of vitiating philosophical thought. 
Let us reflect for a moment on this 'present' which alone is considered to 
have existence. What precisely is the present? If it is a question of the 
present - I mean, of a mathematical instant which would be to time what 
the mathematical point is to the line - it is clear that such an instant is a 
pure abstraction, an aspect of the mind; it cannot have real existence. You 
could never create time out of such instants any more than you could make a 
line out of mathematical points. Even if it does exist, how could there be an 
instant anterior to it? The two instants could not be separated by an interval 
of time since, by hypothesis, you reduce time to a j uxtaposition of instants. 

262 
The Creative Mind 
Therefore they would not be separated by anything, and consequently they 
would be only one: two mathematical points which touch are identical. But 
let us put such subtleties aside. Our consciousness tells us that when we 
speak of our present we are thinking of a certain interval of duration. What 
duration? It is impossible to fix it exactly, as it is something rather elusive. 
My present, at this moment, is the sentence I am pronouncing. But it is so 
because I want to limit the field of my attention to my sentence. This 
attention is something that can be made longer or shorter, like the interval 
between the two points of a compass. For the moment, the points are just far 
enough apart to reach from the beginning to the end of my sentence; but if 
the fancy took me to spread them further my present would embrace, in 
addition to my last sentence, the one that preceded it: all I should have had 
to do is to adopt another punctuation. Let us go further: an attention which 
could be extended indefinitely would embrace, along with the preceding 
sentence, all the anterior phrases of the lecture and the events which 
preceded the lecture, and as large a portion of what we call our past as 
desired. The distinction we make between our present and past is therefore, 
if not arbitrary, at least relative to the extent of the field which our attention 
to life can embrace. The 'present' occupies exactly as much space as this 
effort. As soon as this particular attention drops any part of what it held 
beneath its gaze, immediately that portion of the present thus dropped 
becomes ipso facto a part of the past. In a word, our present falls back into 
the past when we cease to attribute to it an immediate interest. What holds 
good for the present of individuals holds also for the present of nations: an 
event belongs to the past, and enters into history, when it is no longer of any 
direct interest to the politics of the day and can be neglected without the 
affairs of the country being affected by it. As long as its action makes itself 
felt, it adheres to the life of a nation and remains present to it. 
Consequently nothing prevents us from carrying back as far as possible 
the line of separation between our present and our past. An attention to life, 
sufficiently powerful and sufficiently separated from all practical interest, 
would rhus include in an undivided present the entire past history of the 
conscious person - not as instantaneity, not like a cluster of simultaneous 
parts, bur as something continually presenr which would also be something 
continually moving: such, I repeat, is the melody which one perceives as 
indivisible, and which constitutes, from one end to the other - if we wish to 
extend the meaning of the word - a perpetual present, although this 
perpetuity has nothing in common with immutability, or this indivisibility 
with instantaneity. What we have is a present which endures. 
That is not a hypothesis. It happens in exceptional cases that the attention 
suddenly loses the interest it had in life: immediately, as though by magic, the 
past once more becomes present. In people who see the threat of sudden 
death unexpectedly before them, in the mountain climber falling down a 
precipice, in drowning men, in men being hanged, it seems that a sharp 

The Perception of Change 
263 
conversion of the attention can take place - something like a change of 
orientation of the consciousness which, up until then turned toward the 
future and absorbed by the necessities of action, suddenly loses all interest 
in them. That is enough to call to mind a thousand different 'forgotten' 
details and to unroll the whole history of the person before him in a moving 
panorama. 
Memory therefore has no need of explanation. Or rather, there is no 
special faculty whose role is to retain quantities of the past in order to pour it 
into the present. The past preserves itself automatically. Of course, if we 
shut our eyes to the indivisibility of change, to the fact that our most distant 
past adheres to our present and constitutes with it a single and identical 
uninterrupted change, it seems that the past is normally what is abolished and 
that there is something extraordinary about the preservation of the past: we 
think ourselves obliged to conjure up an apparatus whose function would be 
to record the parts of the past capable of reappearing in our consciousness. 
But if we take into consideration the continuity of the inner life and 
consequently of its indivisibility, we no longer have to explain the preserva­
tion of the past, but rather its apparent abolition. We shall no longer have to 
account for remembering, but for forgetting. The explanation moreover will 
be found in the structure of the brain. Nature has invented a mechanism for 
canalising our attention in the direction of the future, in order to turn it away 
from the past - I mean of that part of our history which does not concern our 
present actions - in order to bring to it at most, in the form of 'memories,' 
one simplification or another of anterior experience, destined to complete the 
experience of the moment; it is in this that the function of the brain consists. 
We cannot here undertake the discussion of that theory which claims that the 
brain is useful for the preservation of the past, that it stores up memories like 
so many photographic plates from which we afterward develop proofs, or 
like so many phonograms destined to become sounds again. We have 
examined this thesis elsewhere. This doctrine was largely inspired by a certain 
metaphysics with which contemporary psychology and psycho-physiology 
are imbued, and which one accepts naturally: this accounts for its apparent 
clarity. But as we consider it more closely, we see what difficulties and impos­
sibilities accumulate in it. Let us take the case most favourable to the thesis, 
that of a material object making an impression on the eye and leaving a visual 
memory in the mind. What can this memory possibly be, if it is really the 
result of the fixation in the brain of the impression received by the eye? 
The slightest movement on the part of the object or the eye and there would 
be not one image but ten, a hundred, a thousand images, as many and more 
than on a cinematographic film. Were the object merely considered for a 
certain time, or seen at various moments, the different images of that object 
could be counted by millions. And we have taken the simplest example! Let 
us suppose all those images are stored up; what good will they serve? which 
one shall we use? Let us grant that we have our reasons for choosing one of 

264 
The Creative Mind 
them, why, and how, shall we throw it back into the past when we perceive 
it? But to pass over these difficulties, how shall we explain the diseases of the 
memory? In those diseases which correspond to local lesions of the brain, 
that is in the various forms of aphasia, the psychological lesion consists less 
in an abolition of the memories than in an ability to recall them. An effort, 
an emotion, can bring suddenly to consciousness words believed definitely 
lost. These facts, with many others, unite to prove that in such cases the 
brain's function is to choose from the past, to diminish it, to simplifY it, to 
utilize it, but not to preserve it. We should have no trouble in looking upon 
things from this angle if we had not acquired the habit of believing that the 
past is abolished. Then its partial reappearance creates the effect of an 
extraordinary event which demands an explanation. And that is why we 
imagine here and there in the brain, memory 'pigeon-holes' for preserving 
fragments of the past - the brain, moreover, being self-preserving. As 
though that were not postponing the difficulty and simply putting off the 
problem! As though, by positing that cerebral matter is preserved through 
time, or more generally that all matter endures, one did not attribute to it 
precisely the memory one claimed to explain by it! Whatever we do, even if 
we imagine that the brain stores up memories, we do not escape the 
conclusion that the past can preserve itself automatically. 
This holds not only for our own past, but also for the past of any change 
whatsoever, always providing that it is a question of a single and therefore 
indivisible change: the preservation of the past in the present is nothing 
else than the indivisibility of change. It is true that, with regard to the changes 
which take place outside of us we almost never know whether we are dealing 
with a single change or one composed of several movements interspersed with 
stops (the stop never being anything but relative). We would have to be inside 
beings and things as we are inside ourselves before we could express our 
opinion on this point. But that is not where the importance lies. It is enough 
to be convinced once and for all that reality is change, that change is 
indivisible, and that in an indivisible change the past is one with the present. 
Let us imbibe this truth and we shall see a good many philosophical 
enigmas melt away and evaporate. Certain great problems such as that of 
substance, of change, and of their relation to one another, will no longer 
arise. All the difficulties raised around these points - difficulties which 
caused substance to recede little by little to the regions of the unknowable -
came from the fact that we shut our eyes to the indivisibility of change. 
If change, which is evidently constitutive of all our experience, is the fleeting 
thing most philosophers have spoken of, if we see in it only a multiplicity of 
states replacing orher states, we are obliged to re-establish the continuity 
between these states by an artificial bond; but this immobile substratum of 
immobility, being incapable of possessing any of the attributes we know -
since all are changes - recedes as we try to approach it: it is as elusive as 
the phantom of change it was called upon to fix. Let us, on the contrary, 

The Perception of Change 
265 
endeavour to perceive change as it is in its natural indivisibility: we see that it 
is the very substance of things, and neither does movement appear to us any 
longer under the vanishing form which rendered it elusive to thought, nor 
substance with the immutability which made it inaccessible to our experi­
ence. Radical instability and absolute immutability are therefore mere 
abstract views taken from outside of the continuity of real change, abstrac­
tions which the mind then hypostatises into multiple states on the one hand, 
into thing or substance on the other. The difficulties raised by the ancients 
around the question of movement and by the moderns around the question 
of substance disappear, the former because movement and change are 
substantial, the latter because substance is movement and change. 
At the same time that theoretical obscurities disappear we get a glimpse of 
the possible solution of more than one reputedly unsolvable problem. The 
discussions on the subject of free will would come to an end if we saw 
ourselves where we are really, in a concrete duration where the idea of 
necessary determination loses all significance, since in it the past becomes 
identical with the present and continuously creates with it - if only by the 
fact of being added to it - something absolutely new. And we could gradu­
ally acquire a deeper appreciation of the relation of man to the universe if we 
took into account the true nature of states, of qualities, in fact of everything 
which presents itself to us with the appearance of stability. In such a case the 
object and the subject should be, with regard to one another, in a situation 
analogous to that of the two trains we spoke of at the beginning: it is a 
certain regulating of mobility on mobility which produces the effect of 
immobility. Let us then become imbued with this idea, let us never lose sight 
of the particular relation of the object to the subject translated by a static 
vision of things: everything that experience reaches us of the one will increase 
the knowledge we had of the other, and the light the latter receives will in 
turn be able, by reflection, to illuminate the former. 
But as I said in the beginning, pure speculation will not be the only thing 
to benefit by this vision of universal becoming. We shall be able to make it 
penetrate into our everyday life, and through it, obtain from philosophy 
satisfactions similar to those we receive from art, but more frequent, more 
continual and more accessible to the majority of men. Art enables us, no 
doubt, to discover in things more qualities and more shades than we 
naturally perceive. It dilates our perception, but on the surface rather than in 
depth. It enriches our present, but it scarcely enables us to go beyond it. 
Through philosophy we can accustom ourselves never to isolate the present 
from the past which it pulls along with it. Thanks to philosophy, all things 
acquire depth - more than depth, something like a fourth dimension which 
permits anterior perceptions to remain bound up with present perceptions, 
and the immediate future itself to become partly outlined in the present. 
Reality no longer appears then in the static state, in its manner of being; it 
affirms itself dynamically, in the continuity and variability of its tendency. 

266 
The Creative Mind 
What was immobile and frozen in our perception is warmed and set in 
motion. Everything comes to life around us, everything is revivified in us. 
A great impulse carries beings and things along. We feel ourselves uplifted, 
carried away, borne along by it. We are more fully alive and this increase of 
life brings with it the conviction that grave philosophical enigmas can be 
resolved or even perhaps that they need not be raised, since they arise from a 
frozen vision of the real and are only the translation, in terms of thought, of 
a certain artificial weakening of our vitality. In fact, the more we accustom 
ourselves to think and to perceive all things sub specie durationis, the more 
we plunge into real duration. And the more we immerse ourselves in it, the 
more we set ourselves back in the direction of the principle, though it 
be transcendent, in which we participate and whose eternity is not to be 
an eternity of immutability, but an eternity of life: how, otherwise, could we 
live and move in it? In ea vivimus et movemur et sumus. 

On the Pragmatism of William james: 
Truth and Reality6 
To talk about pragmatism after William James might well seem superfluous. 
And indeed what is there for me to say about it that has not already been 
said, and much better, in the fascinating and delightful book for which we 
now have an excellent translation? I should in fact refrain from saying 
anything were it not that James's thought is frequently impoverished and 
falsified by the way in which it is interpreted. There are many ideas in 
circulation which threaten to come between the reader and the book and to 
cast an artificial obscurity over a work which is clarity itself. 
One would have a mistaken idea of James's pragmatism if one did not 
begin by modifying the idea usually held of reality in general. We speak of 
the 'world' or the 'cosmos'; and these words, according to their origin, 
designate something simple or at least well composed. We say 'universe' and 
the word makes us think of a possible unification of things. One can be a 
spiritualist, a materialist, a pantheist, just as one can be indifferent to 
philosophy and satisfied with common sense: the fact remains that one 
always conceives of one or several simple principles by which the whole of 
material and moral things might be explained. 
This is because our intelligence loves simplicity. It seeks to reduce effort, 
and insists that nature was arranged in such a way as to demand of us, in 
order to be thought, the least possible labour. It therefore provides itself with 
the exact minimum of elements and principles with which to recompose the 
indefinite series of objects and events. 
But if instead of reconstructing things ideally for the greater satisfaction of 
our reason we confine ourselves purely and simply to what is given us by 
experience, we should think and express ourselves in quite another way. 
While our intelligence with its habits of economy imagines effects as strictly 
proportioned to their causes, nature, in its extravagance, puts into the cause 
much more than is required to produce the effect. While our motto is 
Exactly what is necessary, nature's motto is More than is necessary - too much 
of this, too much of that, too much of everything. Reality, as James sees it, is 
redundant and superabundant. Between this reality and the one constructed 
by the philosophers, I believe he would have established the same relation as 
between the life we live every day and the life which actors portray in the 
evening on the stage. On the stage, each actor says and does only what has to 

268 
The Creative Mind 
be said and done; the scenes are clear-cut; the play has a beginning, a middle 
and an end; and everything is worked out as economically as possible with a 
view to an ending which will be happy or tragic. But in life, a multitude of 
useless things are said, many superfluous gestures made, there are no sharply­
drawn situations; nothing happens as simply or as completely or as nicely as 
we should like; the scenes overlap; things neither begin nor end; there is no 
perfectly satisfying ending, nor absolutely decisive gesture, none of those 
telling words which give us pause: all the effects are spoiled. Such is human 
life. And such, no doubt, in James's eyes, is reality in general. 
To be sure, our experience is not incoherent. At the same time as it 
presents us with things and facts it shows us relationships between the things 
and connections between the facts: these relations are as real, as directly 
observable, according to William James, as the things and facts themselves. 
But the relations are fluctuating and the things fluid. This is vastly different 
from that dry universe constructed by the philosophers with elements that 
are clear-cut and well-arranged, where each part is not only linked to another 
part, as experience shows us, but also, as our reason would have it, is 
coordinated to the whole. 
The 'Pluralism' of William James means little else than this. Antiquity had 
imagined a world shut off, arrested, finite: it is a hypothesis which answers 
certain demands of our reason. The moderns think rather of an infinite: it is 
another hypothesis which satisfies other needs of our reason. From the point 
of view taken by James, which is that of pure experience or of 'radical 
empiricism,' reality no longer appears as finite or as infinite, but simply as 
indefinite. It flows without our being able to say whether it is in a single 
direction, or even whether it is always and throughout the same river flowing. 
Our reason is less satisfied. It feels less at ease in a world where it no longer 
finds, as in a mirror, irs own image. And certainly the importance of human 
reason is diminished. But the importance of man himself - the whole of 
man, will and sensibility quite as much as intelligence - will thereby be 
immeasurably enhanced! 
The universe our reason conceives is, in fact, a universe which extends 
infinitely beyond human experience, the characteristic of reason being to 
prolong the data of experience, to extend them by way of generalization, in 
order to make us conceive many more things than we shall ever perceive. 
In such a universe man is expected to do very little and to occupy very little 
space: what he gives to his intelligence he takes away from his will. Above all, 
having attributed co his thought the power of embracing everything, he is 
obliged to imagine all things in terms of thought; of his aspirations, his 
desires, his enthusiasms he cannot ask enlightenment in a world in which 
everything accessible to him has been first considered by him as translatable 
into pure ideas. His sensibility cannot enlighten his intelligence, for it is with 
his intelligence that he has made what light there is. 

On the Pragmatism of William james 
269 
Most philosophies, therefore, restrict our experience on the side of feeling 
and will, as at the same time they indefinitely prolong it on the side of 
thought. What James asks of us is not to add too much to experience 
through hypothetical considerations, and also not to mutilate it in its solid 
elements. We are absolutely sure only of what experience gives us; but we 
should accept experience wholly, and our feelings are a part of it by the same 
right as our perceptions, consequently, by the same right as 'things.' In the 
eyes of William James, the whole man counts. 
In fact, he counts for a great deal in a world which no longer overwhelms 
him with its immensity. Considerable surprise has been expressed at the 
importance James attributes, in one of his books/ to the curious theory of 
Fechner which makes of the Earth an independent being, endowed with 
a divine soul. He did so because he saw in it a convenient means of 
symbolizing - perhaps even of expressing - his own thought. The things and 
facts which make up our experience constitute for us a human world,8 no 
doubt connected with others, but so far removed from them and so close to 
us that we must consider it, in practice, as sufficient for man and sufficient 
unto itself. We are an integral part of these things and these events - we, that 
is to say, all that we are conscious of being, all that we experience. The 
powerful feelings which stir the soul at certain special moments are forces as 
real as those that interest the physicist; man does nor create them any more 
than he creates heat or light. According to James, we bathe in an atmosphere 
traversed by great spiritual currents. If many of us resist, others allow 
themselves to be carried along. And there are certain souls which open wide 
to the beneficent breeze. Those are the mystical souls. We know with what 
sympathy James studied them. When his book Religious Experience appeared, 
many saw in it only a series of very vivid descriptions and very penetrating 
analyses - a psychology, they said, of religious feeling. This was a complete 
misinterpretation of the author's thought. The truth is that James leaned out 
upon the mystic soul as, on a spring day, we lean out to feel the caress of the 
breeze on our cheek, or as, at the sea-side, we watch the coming and going of 
sail-boats to know how the wind blows. Souls filled with religious enthusiasm 
are truly uplifted and carried away: why could they not enable us to 
experience directly, as in a scientific experiment, this uplifting and exalting 
force? That is undoubtedly the origin, the inspiring idea of the 'pragmatism' 
of William James. For him those truths it is most important for us to know, 
are truths which have been felt and experienced before being thought.9 
It has at all times been said that there are truths which have to do with 
feeling as much as with reason; and that along with those truths we find 
already made there are also others we assist in the making, which depend in 
part on our will. But it must be said that in James this idea takes on a new 
strength and significance. Thanks to his particular conception of reality it 
blossoms into a general theory of truth. 

270 
The Creative Mind 
What constitutes a true judgment? If an affirmation agrees with reality we 
say that it is true. But in what does this agreement consist? Our inclination is 
to see in it something like the resemblance of a portrait to the model: the 
true affirmation would be the one which would copy reality. Upon reflection, 
however, we shall see that it is only in rare and exceptional cases that this 
definition of the true finds its application. What is real is any determined 
fact taking place at any point in space and time, it is singular - it is 
changing. On the contrary, most of our affirmations are general and imply a 
certain stability on the part of their object. Let us take a truth as dose to 
experience as possible, for instance: 'heat expands bodies.' Of what model is 
this truth a copy? It is possible, in a certain sense, to copy the expansion of a 
specific body at particular moments, by photographing it in its various 
stages. Even by metaphor I can still say that the affirmation, 'that iron bar 
is expanding,' is the copy of what happens when I watch the expansion of 
the iron bar. But a truth which is applied to all bodies without concerning 
any one in particular that I have seen, copies nothing, reproduces nothing. 
We insist however that it copy something and as far back as one can go 
philosophy has always sought to give us satisfaction on this point. For the 
ancient philosophers there was, above time and space, a world in which were 
located from all eternity all possible truths: the truth of human affirmations 
was measured by the degree of faithfulness with which they copied these 
eternal truths. Modern philosophers have brought truth from heaven down 
to earth; but they still see in it something which is pre-existent to our affir­
mations. According to them, truth is lodged in things and facts: our science 
seeks it in them, draws it from irs hiding-place and exposes it to the light of 
day. An affirmation, such as 'heat expands bodies,' would then be a law 
governing facts, which is enthroned if nor above them, at least in their midst, 
a law veritably contained in our experience; all we should have to do would 
be to extract it therefrom. Even a philosophy like that of Kant, which insists 
that all scientific truth is relative to the human mind, considers true affirma­
tions as given in advance in human experience: once that experience is 
organized by human thought in general, all the work of science consists, so 
to speak, in piercing the resisting envelope of the facts inside which the truth 
is lodged, like a nut in its shell. 
This conception of truth is natural to our mind and natural also to 
philosophy, because it is natural to picture reality as a perfectly coherent and 
systematized whole sustained by a logical armature. This armature would be 
truth itself; all that our science does is to rediscover it. But experience pure 
and simple tells us nothing of the kind, and James confines himself to 
experience. Experience presents us a flow of phenomena: if a certain affirma­
tion relating to one of them enables us to master those which follow or even 
simply to foresee them, we say of this affirmation that it is true. A proposition 
such as 'heat expands bodies,' a proposition suggested by seeing a certain 
body expand, means that we foresee how other bodies will act when exposed 

On the Pragmatism of William james 
271 
to heat; it helps us to proceed from a past experience to new experiences; it is a 
clue conducting to what will happen, nothing more. Reality flows; we flow 
with it; and we call true any affirmation which, in guiding us through moving 
reality, gives us a grip upon it and places us under more favourable conditions 
for acting. 
The difference between this conception of the truth and the traditional 
one is plain to see. We ordinarily define the true by its conformity to what 
already exists; James defines it by its relation to what does not yet exist. The 
true, according to William James, does not copy something which has been 
or which is: it announces what will be, or rather it prepares our action upon 
what is going to be. Philosophy has a natural tendency to have truth look 
backward: for James, it looks ahead. 
More precisely, other doctrines make of truth something anterior to 
the dearly-determined act of the man who formulates it for the first time. 
He was the first to see it, we say, but it was waiting for him, just as America 
was waiting for Christopher Columbus. Something hid it from view and, so 
to speak, covered it up: he uncovered it. - Quite different is William James's 
conception. He does not deny that reality is independent, at least to a great 
extent, of what we say or think of it; but the truth, which can be attached 
only to what we affirm about reality, is, for him, created by our affirmation. 
We invent the truth to utilize reality, as we create mechanical devices to 
utilize the forces of nature. It seems to me one could sum up all that is 
essential in the pragmatic conception of truth in a formula such as this: while 
for other doctrines a new truth is a discovery, for pragmatism it is an invention. 10 
It does not follow, of course, that the truth is arbitrary. The value of a 
mechanical invention lies solely in its practical usefulness. In the same way 
an affirmation, because it is true, should increase our mastery over things. 
It is no less the creation of a certain individual mind, and it was no more 
pre-existent to the effort of that mind than the phonograph, for example, 
existed before Edison. No doubt the inventor of the phonograph had to 
study the properties of sound, which is a reality. But his invention was 
superadded to that reality as a thing absolutely new, which might never have 
been produced had he not existed. Thus a truth, if it is to endure, should 
have its roots in realities; but these realities are only the ground in which that 
truth grows, and other flowers could just as well have grown there if the 
wind had brought other seeds. 
Truth, according to pragmatism, has come little by little into being, 
thanks to the individual contributions of a great number of inventors. 
If these inventors had not existed, if there had been others in their place, we 
should have had an entirely different body of truths. Reality would evidently 
have remained what it is, or approximately the same; but quite different 
would have been the paths we should have traced in reality, for our 
convenience in finding our way about it. And this has to do not only with 
scientific truths. We cannot construct a sentence, we cannot even today 

272 
The Creative Mind 
pronounce a word, without accepting certain hypotheses which were created 
by our ancestors and which might have been very different from what they 
are. When I say: 'My pencil has just fallen under the table,' I am certainly 
not enunciating a fact of experience, for what sight and touch show me is 
simply that my hand opened and let fall what it held: the baby tied in his 
high-chair, who sees his plaything fall, probably does not imagine that this 
object continues to exist; or rather he has not the clear idea of an 'object,' 
that is to say, of something which subsists, invariable and independent, 
through the diversity and mobility of the appearances which pass before 
him. The first to venture to believe in this invariability and independence 
made a hypothesis: it is that hypothesis which we currently adopt every time 
we use a substantive, every time we speak. Our grammar would have been 
different, the articulations of our thought would have been other than what 
they are, had humanity in the course of its evolution preferred to adopt 
hypotheses of another kind. 
The structure of our mind is therefore to a great extent our work, or at 
least the work of some of us. That, it seems to me, is the most important 
thesis of pragmatism, even though it has not been explicitly stated. It is in 
this way that pragmatism continues Kantianism. Kant had said that truth 
depends upon the general structure of the human mind. Pragmatism adds, 
or at least implies, that the structure of the human mind is the effect of the 
free initiative of a certain number of individual minds. 
That, again, does not mean that truth depends upon each one of us: we 
might as well believe that each of us could invent the phonograph. But it 
does mean that of the various kinds of truth, the one which most nearly 
coincides with its object is not scientific truth, nor is it the truth of common 
sense, nor more generally truth of an intellectual order. Every truth is a path 
traced through reality: but among these paths there are some to which we 
could have given an entirely different turn if our attention had been 
orientated in a different direction or if we had aimed at another kind of 
utility; there are some, on the contrary, whose direction is marked out by 
reality itself: there are some, one might say, which correspond to currents of 
reality. Doubtless these also depend upon us to a certain extent, for we are 
free to go against the current or to follow it, and even if we follow it, we can 
variously divert it, being at the same time associated with and submitted to 
the force manifest within it. Nevertheless these currents are not created by 
us; they are part and parcel of reality. Pragmatism thus results in a reversal of 
the order in which we are accustomed to place the various kinds of truth. 
Apart from the truths which translate mere sensations, it is, according to 
pragmatism, the truths of feeling which would push their roots deepest into 
reality. If we agree to say that all truth is an invention, I believe we must, if 
we wish to remain faithful to the thought of William James, establish 
between the truths of feeling and the scientific truths the same kind of 
difference as there is, for example, between the sail-boat and the steamer: 

On the Pragmatism of William james 
273 
both are human inventions; but the first makes only slight use of artificial 
means - it takes the direction of the wind and makes the natural force it 
utilizes perceptible to the eye; on the contrary, in the second the artificial 
mechanism holds the most important place; it covers the force it puts into 
play and assigns to it a direction which we ourselves have chosen. 
The definition that James gives to truth, therefore, is an integral part of 
his conception of reality. If reality is not that economic and systematic 
universe our logic likes to imagine, if it is not sustained by a framework of 
intellectuality, intellectual truth is a human invention whose effect is to 
utilize reality rather than to enable us to penetrate it. And if reality does not 
form a single whole, if it is multiple and mobile, made up of cross-currents, 
truth which arises from contact with one of these currents - truth felt before 
being conceived - is more capable of seizing and storing up reality than 
truth merely thought. 
Therefore it is, in fact, with this theory of reality that a critique of 
pragmatism should first grapple. One may raise objections to it - and I 
myself should make certain reservations concerning it: but no one will 
challenge its depth and originality. Neither will anyone, after having closely 
examined the conception of truth allied with it, fail to recognize its high 
moral value. People have said that the pragmatism of James was only a form 
of scepticism, that it lowered truth, that it subordinated truth to material 
utility, that it advised against and discouraged disinterested scientific 
research. Such an interpretation will never enter rhe heads of those who read 
his work attentively. And it will greatly astonish those who have had the 
pleasure of knowing the man. No one loved truth with a more ardent love. 
No one sought it with greater passion. He was stirred by an immense unrest, 
and went from science to science, from anatomy and physiology to psychol­
ogy, from psychology to philosophy, tense over great problems, heedless of 
anything else, forgetful of himself. All his life he observed, experimented, 
meditated. And as if he had not done enough, he still dreamed, as he fell 
into his last slumber, of extraordinary experiments and superhuman efforts 
by which he could continue even beyond death to work with us for the 
greater good of science, and the greater glory of truth. 

Introduction to Metaphysics11 
[ . . .  ) 
Of the propositions I am about co set forth, most have received in the 
present work a beginning of proof. I hope to demonstrate them more 
completely when we attack other problems. 
I. There is an external reality which is given immediateLy to our mind. 
Common sense is right on this point against the idealism and realism of the 
philosophers. 
II. This reality is mobiliry.12 There do not exist things made, but only 
things in the making, not states that remain fixed, but only states in process 
of change. Rest is never anything but apparent, or rather, relative. The 
consciousness we have of our own person in its continual flowing, 
introduces us to the interior of a reality on whose model we must imagine 
the others. All reality is, therefore, tendency, if we agree to call tendency a 
nascent change of direction. 
III. Our mind, which seeks solid bases of operation, [points d'appui 
solides] has as its principal function, in the ordinary course of life, co imagine 
states and things. Now and then it takes quasi-instantaneous views of the 
undivided mobility of the real. It thus obtains sensations and ideas. By that 
means it substitutes for the continuous the discontinuous, for mobility 
stability, for the tendency in process of change it substitutes fixed points 
which mark a direction of change and tendency. This substitution is neces­
sary to common sense, to language, to practical life, and even, to a certain 
extent which we shall try to determine, to positive science. Our intelligence, 
when it follows its natural inclination, proceeds by solid perceptions on the one 
hand, and by stable conceptions on the other. It stares from the immobile and 
conceives and expresses movement only in terms of immobility. It places 
itself in ready-made concepts and tries to catch in them, as in a net, some­
thing of the passing reality. It does not do so in order to obtain an internal 
and metaphysical knowledge of the real. It is simply to make use of them, 
each concept (like each sensation) being a practical question which our activity 
asks of reality and to which reality will answer, as is proper in things, by a yes 
or a no. But in so doing it allows what is the very essence of the real to escape. 
IV. The difficulties inherent in metaphysics, the antinomies it raises, the 
contradictions into which it falls, the division into opposing schools and 
the irreducible oppositions between systems, are due in large part to the fact 

Introduction to Metaphysics 
275 
chat we apply to the disinterested knowledge of the real the procedures we 
use currently with practical utiliry as the aim. They are due principally to the 
fact chat we place ourselves in the immobile to watch for the moving realiry 
as it passes instead of putting ourselves back into the moving realiry to 
traverse with it the immobile positions. They come from the fact chat we 
claim to reconstitute realiry, which is tendency and consequently mobiliry, 
with the percepts and concepts which have as their function to immobilize 
it. One will never create mobiliry with halts, however numerous: if one 
begins with mobiliry, one can draw from it through thought as many halts as 
one wishes. In other words, it is understood that fixed concepts can be extracted 
by our thought from the mobile reality; but there is no means whatever of recon­
stituting with the fixity of concepts the mobility of the real. Dogmatism, as the 
constructor of systems, has nevertheless always attempted chis reconstitution. 
V. It was bound to fail. This is the impotence, and this alone, pointed 
out by the sceptical, idealistic and critical doctrines, all those doctrines, in 
fact, which question our mind's abiliry to attain the absolute. But it does not 
follow from the fact that we fail to reconstitute living realiry with concepts 
chat are rigid and ready-made, that we could not grasp it in any other 
manner. The demonstrations which have been given of the relativity of our 
knowledge are therefore tainted with an original vice: they assume, like the 
dogmatism they attack, that all knowledge must necessarily start from rigidly 
defined concepts in order to grasp by their means the flowing reality. 
VI. But the truth is that our mind is able w follow the reverse procedure. 
It can be installed in the mobile realiry, adopt its ceaselessly changing direc­
tion, in short, grasp it intuitively. But to do that, it must do itself violence, 
reverse the direction of the operation by which it ordinarily thinks, con­
tinually upsetting its categories, or rather, recasting them. In so doing it will 
arrive at fluid concepts, capable of following reality in all its windings and of 
adopting the very movement of the inner life of things. Only in that way will 
a progressive philosophy be constituted, freed from the disputes which arise 
between the schools, capable of resolving problems naturally because it will 
be rid of the arrificial terms chosen in stating them. To philosophise means to 
reverse the normal direction of the workings of thought. 
VII. This reversal has never been practiced in a methodical manner; bur a 
careful study of the history of human thought would show chat to it we owe 
the greatest accomplishments in the sciences, as well as whatever living 
quality there is in metaphysics. The most powerful method of investigation 
known to the mind, infinitesimal calculus, was born of that very reversal.13 
Modern mathematics is precisely an effort to substitute for the ready-made 
what is in process of becoming, to follow the growth of magnitudes, to seize 
movement no longer from outside and in irs manifest result, but from 
within and in its tendency cowards change, in short, to adopt the mobile 
continuity of the pattern of things. It is true that it contents itself with the 
pattern, being but the science of magnitudes. It is also true that it has been 

276 
The Creative Mind 
able co realize these marvellous applications only through the invention of 
certain symbols, and that, if the intuition we have just mentioned is at the 
origin of the invention, it is the symbol alone which intervenes in the appli­
cation. But metaphysics, which does not aim at any application, can and 
for the most part ought to abstain from converting intuition into symbol. 
Exempt from the obligation of arriving at results useful from a practical 
standpoint, it will indefinitely enlarge the domain of its investigations. What 
it will have lost with regard to science, in utility and occurrence, it will regain 
in scope and range. If mathematics is only the science of magnitudes, if 
mathematical procedures only apply to quantities, it must not be forgotten 
that quantity is always nascent quality: it is, one might say, its limiting case. 
It is therefore natural that metaphysics should adopt the generative idea of 
our mathematics in order to extend it to all qualities, that is, to reality in 
general. In so doing, it will in no way proceed to universal mathematics, that 
chimera of modern philosophy. Quite the contrary, as it makes more 
headway, it will meet with objects less and less translatable into symbols. But 
it will at least have begun by making contact with the continuity and mobility 
of the real exactly where this contact happens to be the most utilizable. It will 
have looked at itself in a mirror which sends back an image of itself no doubt 
very reduced, but also very luminous. It will have seen with a superior clarity 
what mathematical procedures borrow from concrete reality, and it will 
continue in the direction of concrete reality, not of mathematical methods. 
Let us say, then, with all due qualifications to what might seem either too 
modest or roo ambitious in this formula, that one ofthe objects of metaphysics is 
to operate diferentiations and qualitative integrations. 
VIII. What has caused this object to be lost sight of, and misled science 
itself about the origin of certain methods it employs, is that intuition once 
grasped must find a mode of expression and application which conforms to 
our habits of thought and which furnishes us, in well-defined concepts, the 
solid basis [points d'appui so/ides] we so greatly need. That is the condition of 
what we call strictness, precision, and indefinite extension of a general 
method to particular cases. Now this extension and this work of logical 
perfectioning can be carried on for centuries, while the generative act of the 
method lasts only an instant. That is why we so often take the logical 
apparatus of science for science itself, 14 forgetting the intuition from which 
the rest was able to ensue. 1 5  
All that has been said by the philosophers and by scientists themselves 
about the 'relativity' of scientific knowledge is due to forgetting this intuition. 
Relative is symbolic knowledge through pre-existing concepts, which goes from 
the fixed to the moving, but not so intuitive knowledge which establishes itself 
in the moving reality and adopts the life itself of things. This intuition attains 
the absolute. 
Science and metaphysics then meet in intuition. A truly intuitive philos­
ophy would realize the union so greatly desired, of metaphysics and science. 

Introduction to Metaphysics 
277 
At the same time that it constituted metaphysics in positive science - I mean 
progressive and indefinitely perfectible - it would lead the positive sciences, 
properly speaking, to become conscious of their true bearing, which is often 
very superior to what they suppose. It would pur more of science into 
metaphysics and more of metaphysics into science. Its result would be to re­
establish the continuity between the intuitions which the various positive 
sciences have obtained at intervals in the course of their history, and which 
they have obtained only by strokes of genius. 
IX. That there are not two different ways of knowing things thoroughly, 
that the various sciences have their roots in metaphysics, is what the 
philosophers of antiquity, in general, believed. Not in that lay their error. 
It consisted in adopting the belief so natural to the human mind, that a 
variation can only express and develop invariabilities. The resulr of this was 
that Action was a weakened Contemplation, duration a false, deceptive and 
mobile image of immobile eternity, the Soul a fall of the Idea. The whole of 
that philosophy which begins with Plato and ends with Plotinus is the 
development of a principle that we should formulate rhus: 'There is more in 
the immutable than in the moving, and one passes from the stable to the 
unstable by a simple diminution.' Now the contrary is the truth. 
Modern science dates from the day when mobility was set up as an 
independent reality. It dates from the day when Galileo, rolling a ball down 
an inclined plane, made the firm resolution to study this movement from 
high to low for itself, in itself, instead of seeking its principle in the concepts 
of the high and the low, two immobilities by which Aristotle thought he 
sufficiently explained its mobility. And that is not an isolated fact in the his­
tory of science. I take the view that several of the great discoveries, of those at 
least which have transformed the positive sciences or created new ones, have 
been so many soundings made in pure duration. The more living was the 
reality touched, the more profound had been the sounding. 
Bur the sounding made on the sea floor brings up a fluid mass which the 
sun very quickly dries into solid and discontinuous grains of sand. And 
the intuition of duration, when exposed to the rays of the understanding, 
also quickly congeals into fixed, distinct and immobile concepts. In the 
living mobility of things, the understanding undertakes to mark our real or 
virtual stations, it notes arrivals and departures; that is all that is important 
to the thought of man in its natural exercise. But philosophy should be an 
effort to go beyond the human state. 
On the concepts with which they have blazed the trail of intuition scholars 
have preferred to fix their glance. The more they considered these residua 
which have reached the state of symbols, the more they attributed to all 
science a symbolic character. 16 And the more they believed in the symbolic 
character of science, the more they effected it and emphasized it. It was not 
long before they noticed no difference, in positive science, between the data 
of immediate intuition and the immense work of analysis that the 

278 
The Creative Mind 
understanding pursues around intuition. Thus they prepared the way for a 
doctrine which affirms the relativity of all our forms of knowledge. 
But metaphysics has also worked roward that. 
Why did the masters of modern philosophy, who were renovators of 
science in addition to being metaphysicians, not have the feeling of the 
mobile continuity of the real? Why did they not place themselves in what we 
call concrete duration? They did so more than they thought, and much more 
than they said they did. If any attempt is made to connect by continuous 
links the intuitions around which systems are organized, one finds, along 
with several other convergent or divergent lines, a well-determined direction 
of thought and feeling. What is this latent thought? How is this feeling to be 
expressed? To borrow once more the language of the Platonists, and strip­
ping the words of their psychological meaning, by calling Idea a certain 
assurance of easy intelligibility and Soul a certain preoccupation with life, we 
shall say that an invisible current makes modern philosophy tend to lift the 
Soul above the Idea. In this, as in modern science and even more so, it tends 
to move in the opposite direction from ancient thought. 
But this metaphysics, like this science, has deployed around its inner life a 
rich tissue of symbols, occasionally forgetting that if science needs symbols in 
its analytical development, the principal justification for metaphysics is a 
break with symbols. Here again the understanding has pursued its work of 
fixing, dividing, reconstructing. True, it has pursued it under a somewhat 
different form. Without emphasizing a point I propose to develop elsewhere, 
let me confine myself to saying that the understanding, whose role is to oper­
ate on stable elements, can seek stability either in relatiom or in things. In so 
far as it works on relational concepts, it ends in scientific symbolism. In so far 
as it operates on concepts of things, it ends in metaphysical symbolism. But 
in either case the arrangement comes from it. It would willingly believe itself 
independent. Rather than recognizing at once what it owes to the deep 
intuition of reality, it is exposed to what is only seen in all its work, to an 
artificial arrangement of symbols. With the result that if one keeps to the 
letter of what metaphysicians and scholars say, as well as to the coment of 
what they do, one might believe that the first have dug a deep tunnel under 
reality, while the others have thrown over it an elegant bridge, but that the 
moving river of things passes berween these rwo works of art without 
touching them. 
One of the principal tricks of Kantian criticism consisted in taking the 
metaphysician and the scholar at their word, in pushing metaphysics and 
science ro the utmost possible limit of symbolism, where, in any case, they 
lead of their own accord the moment the understanding lays claim to an 
independence full of dangers. Once the relation of science and metaphysics 
with 'intellectual intuition' is misunderstood, Kant has no difficulty in 
showing that our science is entirely relative and our metaphysics wholly 
artificial. Because he strained the independence of the understanding in both 

Introduction to Metaphysics 
279 
cases, because he relieved metaphysics and science of the 'intellectual 
intuition' which gave them their inner weight, science with its relations 
presents to him only an outer wrapping of form, and metaphysics with its 
things, an outer wrapping of matter. Is it surprising, then, that the first 
shows him only frameworks within frameworks, and the second phantoms 
pursuing phantoms? 
He struck our science and metaphysics such rude blows that they have not 
yet entirely recovered from their shock. Our mind would willingly resign 
itself to see in science a wholly relative knowledge and in metaphysics an 
empty speculation. It seems to us even today that Kantian criticism applies to 
all metaphysics and to all science. In reality it applies especially to the philos­
ophy of the ancients, as well as to the form - still ancient - that the moderns 
have given most often to their thought. It is valid against a metaphysics which 
claims to give us a unique and ready-made system of things, against a science 
which would be a unique system of relations, finally against a science and a 
metaphysics which present themselves with the architectural simplicity of the 
Platonic theory of Ideas, or of a Greek temple. If metaphysics claims to be 
made up of concepts we possessed prior to it, if it consists in an ingenious 
arrangement of pre-existing ideas which we utilize like the materials of 
construction for a building, in short, if it is something other than the constant 
dilation of our mind, the constantly renewed effort to go beyond our actual 
ideas and perhaps our simple logic as well, it is too evident that it becomes 
artificial like all works of pure understanding. And if science is wholly the 
work of analysis or of conceptual representation, if experience is only to serve 
as the verification of 'clear ideas,' if instead of starting from multiple and 
varied intuitions inserted into the movement proper to each reality but nm 
always fitting into one another, it claims to be an immense mathematics, 
a single system of relations which imprisons the totality of the real in a 
mesh prepared for it, it becomes a knowledge purely relative to the human 
understanding. 
A close reading of the Critique of Pure Reason will show that for Kant this 
kind of universal mathematics is science, and this barely modified Platonism, 
metaphysics. To tell the truth, the dream of a universal mathematics is itself 
only a survival of Platonism. Universal mathematics is what the world of 
Ideas becomes when one assumes that the Idea consists in a relation or a law, 
and no longer in a thing. Kant took for a reality this dream of certain 
modern philosophers: 17 much more, he thought that all scientific knowledge 
was only a detached fragment, or rather a projecting stone of universal 
mathematics. The main task of the Critique, therefore, was to lay the foun­
dations of this mathematics, that is, to determine what the intelligence should 
be and what should be the object in order that an unbroken mathematics 
might bind them together. And it follows that if all possible experience is 
thus assured of admitrance into the rigid and already constituted frameworks 
of our understanding (unless we assume a pre-established harmony), our 

280 
The Creative Mind 
understanding itself organizes nature and finds itself reflected in it as in a 
mirror. Whence the possibility of science, which owes all its effectiveness to 
its relativity - and the impossibility of metaphysics, since the latter will find 
nothing more to do than to parody, on the phantoms of things, the work 
of conceptual arrangement which science pursues seriously on relations. 
In short, the whole Critique of Pure Reason leads to establishing the fact that 
Platonism, illegitimate if Ideas are things, becomes legitimate if ideas are rela­
tions, and that the ready-made idea, once thus brought down from heaven to 
earth, is indeed as Plato wished, the common basis of thought and nature. But 
the whole Critique of Pure Reason rests also upon the postulate that our thought 
is incapable of anything but Platonising, that is, of pouring the whole of 
possible experience into pre-existing moulds. 
That is the whole question. If scientific knowledge is indeed what Kant 
in೎isted it was, there is a simple science pre-formed and even pre-formulated 
in nature, as Aristotle believed: from this logic immanent in things the great 
discoveries only illuminate point by point the line traced in advance, as, on a 
festival night, a string of bulbs flick on, one by one, to give the outline of 
a monument. And if metaphysical knowledge is indeed what Kant intended, 
it is reduced to the equal possibility of two opposed attitudes of mind toward 
all the great problems; its manifestations are so many arbitrary choices, always 
ephemeral, between two solutions virtually formulated from all eternity: it 
lives and dies from antinomies. But the truth is that neither does the science 
of modern times present this unilinear simplicity, nor the metaphysics of the 
moderns these irreducible oppositions. 
Modern science is neither one nor simple. It rests, I readily agree, upon 
ideas one ultimately finds clear; but these ideas, when they are profound, 
become progressively clear by the use made of them; they owe then the best 
part of their luminosity to the light cast back upon them, through reflection, 
by the facts and applications to which they have led, the clarity of a concept 
being little else, accordingly, than the assurance, once it is acquired, of 
manipulating it to advantage. At the start, more than one of them must have 
appeared obscure, difficult to reconcile with the ideas already accepted by 
science, and bordering on the absurd. That is to say that science does not 
proceed by the regular nesting of concepts predestined to fit neatly inside 
one another. Profound and fruitful ideas are so many points of contact 
with currents of reality which do nor necessarily converge on a same point. 
It is true that the concepts in which they lodge always manage somehow 
or other, in rounding off their corners by reciprocal friction, to make shift 
among themselves. 
On the other hand, the metaphysics of the moderns is not made of 
solutions so radical that they can lead to irreducible oppositions. This would 
no doubt be so if there were no means of accepting at the same time and in 
the same field the thesis and antithesis of the antinomies. But to philosophise 
consists precisely in placing oneself, by an effort of intuition, inside this 

Introduction to Metaphysics 
28 1 
concrete reality on which from the outside the Critique takes the two 
opposing views, thesis and antithesis. I shall never imagine how black and 
white intermingle if I have not seen grey, but I have no difficulty in under­
standing, once I have seen grey, how one can envisage it from the double 
viewpoints of black and white. Doctrines which have a basis of intuition 
escape Kantian criticism to the exact extent that they are intuitive; and these 
doctrines are che whole of metaphysics, provided one does nor cake the 
metaphysics congealed and dead in theses, but living in philosophers. To be 
sure, these divergences are striking between the schools, chat is to say, in 
short, between the groups of disciples formed around certain of the great 
masters. But would one find chem as clear-cut between the masters 
themselves? Something here dominates che diversity of systems, something, 
I repeat, simple and definite like a sounding of which one feels chat it has 
more or less reached che bottom of a same ocean, even though ic brings each 
rime co che surface very different materials. Ic is on these materials chat 
disciples normally work: in that is the role of analysis. And the master, in so 
far as he formulates, develops, translates into abstract ideas what he brings, is 
already, as it were, his own disciple. Bur the simple ace which has set analysis 
in motion and which hides behind analysis, emanates from a faculty quite 
different from chat of analysing. This is by very definicion intuition. 
Let it be said, in conclusion, chat there is nothing mysterious about chis 
faculty. Whoever has worked successfully at literary composition well knows 
that when the subject has been studied at great length, all the documents 
gathered together, all notes taken, something more is necessary to get down 
to the work of composition itself: an effort, often painful, immediately co 
place oneself in the very heart of the subject and to seek as deeply as possible 
an impulsion which, as soon as found, carries one forward of itself. This 
impulsion, once received, sees the mind off on a road where it finds both the 
information it had gathered and ocher details as well; it develops, analyses 
itself in terms whose enumeration follows on without limit; the farther one 
goes the more is disclosed about it; never will one manage to say everything: 
and yet, if one turns around suddenly to seize the impulsion felt, it slips away; 
for it was not a thing but an urge to movement, and although indefinitely 
extensible, it is simplicity itself Metaphysical intuition seems to be some­
thing of the same kind. What in this case matches the notes and documents of 
the literary composition, is the collection of observations and experiences 
gathered by positive science and above all by a reflection of the mind on the 
mind. For one does not obtain from reality an intuition, that is to say, 
a spiritual harmony with its innermost quality if one has not gained its 
confidence by a long comradeship with its superficial manifestations. And it 
is not a question simply of assimilating the outstanding facts; it is necessary 
to accumulate and fuse such an enormous mass of chem that one may be 
assured, in this fusion, of neutralizing by one another all the preconceived 
and premature ideas observers may have deposited unknowingly in their 

282 
The Creative Mind 
observations. Only thus does the raw material of the known facts emerge. 
Even in the simple and privileged case which served us as an example, even 
for the direct contact of the self with the self, the definitive effort of distinct 
intuition would be impossible for anyone who had not gathered and collated 
a very great number of psychological analyses. The masters of modern phil­
osophy have been men who had assimilated all the material of the science of 
their time. And the partial eclipse of metaphysics since the last half century 
has been caused more than anything else by the extraordinary difficulty the 
philosopher experiences today in making contact with a science already 
much too scattered. But metaphysical intuition, although one can achieve 
it only by means of material knowledge, is an entirely different thing from 
the summary or synthesis of this knowledge. It is as distinct from it as the 
motor impulsion is distinct from the path traced by the moving object, as 
the tension of the spring is distinct from the visible movements in the clock. 
In this sense, metaphysics has nothing in common with a generalization of 
experience, and yet it could be defined as the whole of experience 
(I 'experience integra/e). 

Bergson and Kant 


Beyond the Noumenafl 
What the Transcendental Aesthetic of Kant appears to have established once 
for all is that extension is not a material attribute of the same kind as others. 
We cannot reason indefinitely on the notions of heat, colour, or weight: in 
order to know the modalities of weight or of heat, we must have recourse to 
experience. Not so of the notion of space. Supposing even that it is given 
empirically by sight and touch (and Kant has not questioned the fact) there 
is chis about it that is remarkable: that our mind, speculating on it with its 
own powers alone, cuts out in it, a priori, figures whose properties we 
determine a priori: experience, with which we have not kept in touch, yet 
follows us through the infinite complications of our reasonings and 
invariably justifies them. That is the fact. Kant has set it in clear light. But 
the explanation of the fact, we believe, must be sought in a different 
direction to that which Kant followed. 
Intelligence, as Kant represents it to us, is barbed in an atmosphere of 
spatiality to which it is as inseparably united as che living body to the air it 
breathes. Our perceptions reach us only after having passed through this 
atmosphere. They have been impregnated in advance by our geometry, so 
that our faculty of thinking only finds again in matter the mathematical 
properties which our faculty of perceiving has already deposed there. We are 
assured, therefore, of seeing matter yield itself with docility to our reasonings; 
but this matter, in all that it has that is intelligible, is our own work; of the 
reality 'in itself' we know nothing and never shall know anything, since we 
only get its refraction through the forms of our faculty of perceiving. So that 
if we claim to affirm something of it, at once there rises the contrary affirma­
tion, equally demonstrable, equally plausible. The ideality of space is proved 
directly by the analysis of knowledge, indirectly by the antinomies co which 
the opposite theory leads. Such is the governing idea of the Kantian criticism. 
It has inspired Kant with a peremptory refutation of 'empiricist' theories of 
knowledge. It is, in our opinion, definitive in what it denies. But, in what it 
affirms, does it give us the solution of the problem? 
With Kant, space is given as a ready-made form of our perceptive 
faculty - a veritable deus ex machina, of which we see neither how it arises, 
nor why it is what it is rather chan anything else. 'Things-in-themselves' are 
also given, of which he claims chat we can know nothing: by what right, 
then, can he affirm their existence, even as 'problematic'? If the unknowable 

286 
Bergson and Kant 
realiry projects into our perceptive faculry a 'sensuous manifold' capable of 
fitting into it exactly, is it not, by that very fact, in part known? And when 
we examine this exact fitting, shall we not be led, in one point at least, to 
suppose a pre-established harmony between things and our mind - an idle 
hypothesis, which Kant was right in wishing to avoid? At bottom, it is for 
not having distinguished degrees in spatiality that he has had to take space 
ready-made as given - whence the question how the 'sensuous manifold' is 
adapted to ir. It is for the same reason that he has supposed matter wholly 
developed 
into 
parts 
absolutely external 
to 
one 
another; - whence 
antinomies, of which we may plainly see that the thesis and antithesis 
suppose the perfect coincidence of matter with geometrical space, but which 
vanish the moment we cease to extend to matter what is true only of pure 
space. Whence, finally, the conclusion that there are three alternatives, and 
three only, among which to choose a theory of knowledge: either the mind is 
determined by things, or things are determined by the mind, or between 
mind and things we must suppose a mysterious agreement. 
But the truth is that there is a fourth, which does not seem to have 
occurred to Kant - in the first place because he did not think that the mind 
overflowed the intellect, and in the second place (and this is at bottom the 
same thing) because he did not attribute to duration an absolute existence, 
having put time, a priori, on the same plane as space. This alternative 
consists, first of all, in regarding the intellect as a special function of the 
mind, essentially turned toward inert matter; then in saying that neither 
does matter determine the form of the intellect, nor does the intellect 
impose its form on matter, nor have matter and intellect been regulated in 
regard to one another by we know not what pre-established harmony, but 
that intellect and matter have progressively adapted themselves one to the 
other in order to attain at last a common form. This adaptation has, 
moreover, been brought about quite naturally, because it is the same inversion of 
the same movement which creates at once the intellectuality of mind and the 
materiality of things. 
From this point of view the knowledge of matter that our perception on 
the one hand and science on the other give ro us appears, no doubt, as 
approximative, but not as relative. Our perception, whose role it is to hold 
up a light to our actions, works a dividing up of matter that is always too 
sharply defined, always subordinated to practical needs, consequently always 
requiring revision. Our science, which aspires to the mathematical form, 
over-accentuates the spatiality of matter; its formulae are, in general, too 
precise, and ever need remaking. For a scientific theory to be final, the mind 
would have to embrace the totality of things in block and place each thing in 
its exact relation to every other thing; but in reality we are obliged to 
consider problems one by one, in terms which are, for that very reason, 
provisional, so that the solution of each problem will have to be corrected 
indefinitely by the solution that will be given to the problems that will 

Beyond the Noumenal 
287 
follow: thus, science as a whole is relative to the particular order in which the 
problems happen to have been pur. It is in this meaning, and to this degree, 
that science must be regarded as conventional. But it is a conventionality of 
fact so to speak, and not of right. In principle, positive science bears on 
reality itself, provided it does not overstep the limits of its own domain, 
which is inert matter. 
[ . . .  ] 
Certainly, the philosophy of Kant is also imbued with the belief in a 
science single and complete, embracing the whole of the real. Indeed, looked 
at from one aspect, it is only a continuation of the metaphysics of the 
moderns and a transposition of the ancient metaphysics. Spinoza and Leibniz 
had, following Aristotle, hypostatised in God the unity of knowledge. The 
Kanrian criticism, on one side at least, consists in asking whether the whole 
of this hypothesis is necessary to modern science as it was to ancient science, 
or if part of the hypothesis is not sufficient. For the ancients, science applied 
to concepts, that is to say, to kinds of things. In compressing all concepts into 
one, they therefore necessarily arrived at a being, which we may call 
Thought, but which was rather thought-object than thought-subject. When 
Aristotle defined God the vorwc:wr:; vorymr:;, it is probably on voryac:wr:;, and 
not on voryau:; that he put the emphasis. God was the synthesis of all 
concepts, the idea of ideas. But modern science turns on laws, that is, on 
relations. Now, a relation is a bond established by a mind between two or 
more terms. A relation is nothing outside of the intellect that relates. The 
universe, therefore, can only be a system of laws if phenomena have passed 
beforehand through the filter of an intellect. Of course, this intellect might 
be that of a being infinitely superior to man, who would found the 
materiality of things at the same time that he bound them together: such was 
the hypothesis of Leibniz and of Spinoza. But it is not necessary to go so far, 
and, for the effect we have here to obtain, the human intellect is enough: 
such is precisely the Kantian solution. Between the dogmatism of a Spinoza 
or a Leibniz and the criticism of Kant there is just the same distance as 
between 'it may be maintained that - '  and 'it suffices that - '. Kant stops 
this dogmatism on the incline that was making it slip too far toward the 
Greek metaphysics; he reduces to the strict minimum rhe hypothesis which 
is necessary in order to suppose the physics of Galileo indefinitely extensible. 
True, when he speaks of rhe human intellect, he means neither yours nor 
mine: the unity of nature comes indeed from the human understanding that 
unifies, but the unifying function that operates here is impersonal. It imparts 
itself to our individual consciousnesses, but it transcends them. It is much 
less than a substantial God; it is, however, a little more than the isolated 
work of a man or even than the collective work of humanity. It does not 
exactly lie within man; rather, man lies within it, as in an atmosphere of 
intellectuality which his consciousness breathes. It is, if we will, a formal 
God, something that in Kant is not yet divine, but which tends to become 

288 
Bergson and Kant 
so. It became so, indeed, with Fichte. With Kant, however, its principal role 
was to give to the whole of our science a relative and human character, 
although of a humanity already somewhat deified. From this point of view, 
the criticism of Kant consisted chiefly in limiting the dogmatism of his 
predecessors, accepting their conception of science and reducing to a 
minimum the metaphysic it implied. 
But it is otherwise with the Kantian distinction between the matter of 
knowledge and its form. By regarding intelligence as pre-eminently a faculty 
of establishing relations, Kant attributed an extra-intellectual origin to the 
terms between which the relations are established. He affirmed, against his 
immediate predecessors, that knowledge is not entirely resolvable into terms 
of intelligence. He brought back into philosophy - while modifying it and 
carrying it on to another plane - that essential element of the philosophy of 
Descartes which had been abandoned by the Cartesians. 
Thereby he prepared the way for a new philosophy, which might have 
established itself in the extra-intellectual matter of knowledge by a higher 
effort of intuition. Coinciding with this matter, adopting the same rhythm 
and the same movement, might not consciousness, by two efforts of 
opposite direction, raising itself and lowering itself by turns, become able to 
grasp from within, and no longer perceive only from without, the two forms 
of reality, body and mind? Would not this twofold effort make us, as far as 
that is possible, re-live the absolute? Moreover, as, in the course of this 
operation, we should see intellect spring up of itself, cut itself out in the 
whole of mind, intellectual knowledge would then appear as it is, limited, 
but not relative. 
Such was the direction that Kamianism might have pointed out to a 
revivified Cartesianism. But in this direction Kant himself did not go. 
He would not, because, while assigning to knowledge an extra-intellectual 
matter, he believed this matter to be either co-extensive with intellect or less 
extensive than intellect. Therefore he could not dream of cutting out intel­
lect in it, nor, consequently, of tracing the genesis of the understanding and 
its categories. The moulds of the understanding and the understanding itself 
had to be accepted as they are, already made. Between the matter presented to 
our intellect and this intellect itself there was no relationship. The agreement 
between the two was due ro the fact that intellect imposed its form on matter. 
So that not only was it necessary to posit the intellectual form of knowledge as 
a kind of absolute and give up the quest of its genesis, but the very matter 
of this knowledge seemed too ground down by the intellect for us to be able 
to hope co get it back in its original purity. It was not the 'thing-in-itself,' it 
was only the refraction of it through our atmosphere. 
If now we inquire why Kant did not believe that the matter of our 
knowledge extends beyond its form, this is what we find. The criticism of 
our knowledge of nature that was instituted by Kant consisted in ascer­
taining what our mind must be and what Nature must be if the claims of 

Beyond the Noumenal 
289 
our science are justified; but of these claims themselves Kant has not made 
the criticism. I mean chat he took for granted the idea of a science that is 
one, capable of binding with the same force all the parts of what is given, 
and of co-ordinating them into a system presenting on all sides an equal 
solidity. He did not consider, in his Critique of Pure Reason, that science 
became less and less objective, more and more symbolical, to the extent that 
it went from the physical to the vital, from the vital to the psychical. 
Experience does not move, to his view, in two different and perhaps 
opposite ways, the one conformable to the direction of the intellect, the 
other contrary to it. There is, for him, only one experience, and the intellect 
covers its whole ground. This is what Kant expresses by saying that all our 
intuitions are sensuous, or, in other words, infra-intellectual. And this would 
have to be admitted, indeed, if our science presented in all its parts an equal 
objectivity. But suppose, on the contrary, that science is less and less 
objective, more and more symbolical, as it goes from the physical to the 
psychical, passing through the viral: then, as it is indeed necessary to perceive 
a thing somehow in order to symbolize it, there would be an intuition of the 
psychical, and more generally of the vital, which the intellect would 
transpose and translate, no doubt, but which would none the less transcend 
the intellect. There would be, in other words, a supra-intellectual intuition. 
If this intuition exist, a raking possession of the spirit by itself is possible, 
and no longer only a knowledge that is external and phenomenal. What is 
more, if we have an intuition of this kind (I mean an ultra-intellectual 
intuition) then sensuous intuition is likely to be in continuity with it 
through certain intermediaries, as the infra-red is continuous with the ultra­
violet. Sensuous intuition itself, therefore, is promoted. It will no longer 
attain only the phantom of an unattainable thing-in-itself. It is (provided we 
bring to it certain indispensable corrections) into the absolute itself that it 
will introduce us. So long as it was regarded as the only material of our 
science, it reflected back on all science something of the relativity which 
strikes a scientific knowledge of spirit; and thus the perception of bodies, 
which is the beginning of the science of bodies, seemed itself to be relative. 
Relative, therefore, seemed to be sensuous intuition. But this is not the case 
if distinctions are made between the different sciences, and if the scientific 
knowledge of the spiritual (and also, consequently, of the vital) be regarded 
as the more or less artificial extension of a certain manner of knowing which, 
applied to bodies, is not at all symbolical. Let us go further: if there are rhus 
two intuitions of different order (the second being obtained by a reversal of 
the direction of the first), and if it is toward the second that the intellect 
naturally inclines, there is no essential difference between the intellect and 
this intuition itself. The barriers between the matter of sensible knowledge 
and its form are lowered, as also between the 'pure forms' of sensibility and 
the categories of the understanding. The matter and form of intellectual 
knowledge (restricted to its own object) are seen to be engendering each 

290 
Bergson and Kant 
other by a reciprocal adaptation, intellect modelling itself on corporeity, and 
corporeity on intellect. 
But this duality of intuition Kam neither would nor could admit. It would 
have been necessary, in order to admit it, to regard duration as the very stuff 
of reality, and consequently to distinguish between the substantial dura­
tion of things and time spread out in space. It would have been necessary to 
regard space itself, and the geometry which is immanent in space, as an ideal 
limit in the direction of which material things develop, but which they do not 
actually attain. Nothing could be more contrary to the letter, and perhaps 
also to the spirit, of the Critique of Pure Reason. No doubt, knowledge is 
presented to us in it as an ever-open roll, experience as a push of facts that 
is for ever going on. But, according to Kant, these facts are spread out on one 
plane as fast as they arise; they are external to each other and external to the 
mind. Of a knowledge from within, that could grasp them in their springing 
forth instead of taking them already sprung, that would dig beneath space 
and spatialised time, there is never any question. Yet it is indeed beneath this 
plane that our consciousness places us; there flows true duration. 
In this respect, also, Kant is very near his predecessors. Between the non­
temporal, and the time that is spread out in distinct moments, he admits 
no mean. And as there is indeed no intuition that carries us into the non­
temporal, all intuition is thus found to be sensuous, by definition. Bur 
between physical existence, which is spread our in space, and non-temporal 
existence, which can only be a conceptual and logical existence like that of 
which metaphysical dogmatism speaks, is there not room for consciousness 
and for life? There is, unquestionably. We perceive it when we place ourselves 
in duration in order to go from that duration to moments, instead of starting 
from moments in order to bind them again and to construct duration. 
Yet it was to a non-temporal intuition that the immediate successors of 
Kant turned, in order to escape from the Kantian relativism. Certainly, the 
ideas of becoming, of progress, of evolution, seem to occupy a large place in 
their philosophy. But does duration really play a part in it? Real duration is 
that in which each form flows out of previous forms, while adding ro them 
something new, and is explained by them as much as it explains them; but to 
deduce this form directly from one complete Being which it is supposed to 
manifest, is to return to Spinozism. It is, like Leibniz and Spinoza, to deny 
to duration all efficient action. The post-Kantian philosophy, severe as it 
may have been on the mechanistic theories, accepts from mechanism the 
idea of a science that is one and the same for all kinds of reality. And it is 
nearer to mechanism than it imagines; for though, in the consideration of 
matter, of life and of thought, it replaces the successive degrees of com­
plexity that mechanism supposed, by degrees of the realization of an Idea 
or by degrees of the objectification of a Will, it still speaks of degrees, and 
these degrees are those of a scale which Being traverses in a single direction. 
In short, it makes out the same articulations in nature that mechanism does. 

Beyond the Noumenal 
291 
Of mechanism it retains the whole design; it merely gives it a different 
colouring. But it is the design itself, or at least one half of the design, that 
needs to be re-made. 
If we are to do that, we must give up the method of construction, which was 
that of Kant's successors. We must appeal to experience - an experience 
purified, or, in other words, released, where necessary, from the moulds that 
our intellect has formed in the degree and proportion of the progress of our 
action on things. An experience of this kind is not a non-temporal experience. 
It only seeks, beyond the spatialised time in which we believe we see continual 
rearrangements between the parts, that concrete duration in which a radical 
recasting of the whole is always going on. It follows the real in all its 
sinuosities. It does not lead us, like the method of construction, to higher and 
higher generalities - piled-up stories of a magnificent building. But then it 
leaves no play between the explanations it suggests and the objects it has to 
explain. It is the detail of the real, and no longer only the whole in a lump, 
that it claims to illumine. 


The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 


Morality, Obligation and the Open Soufl 
The remembrance of forbidden fruit is the earliest thing in the memory of 
each of us, as it is in that of mankind. We should notice this, were not this 
recollection overlaid by others which we are more inclined to dwell upon. 
What a childhood we should have had if only we had been left to do as we 
pleased! We should have flitted from pleasure to pleasure. But all of a 
sudden an obstacle arose, neither visible nor tangible: a prohibition. Why 
did we obey? The question hardly occurred to us. We had formed the habit 
of deferring to our parents and teachers. All the same we knew very well that 
it was because they were our parents, because they were our teachers. 
Therefore, in our eyes, their authority came less from themselves than from 
their status in relation to us. They occupied a certain station; that was the 
source of the command which, had it issued from some other quarter, would 
not have possessed the same weight. In other words, parents and teachers 
seemed to act by proxy. We did not fully realize this, but behind our parents 
and our teachers we had an inkling of some enormous, or rather some 
shadowy, thing that exerted pressure on us through them. Later we would 
say it was society. And speculating upon it, we should compare it to an 
organism whose cells, united by imperceptible links, fall into their respective 
places in a highly developed hierarchy, and for the greatest good of the 
whole naturally submit to a discipline that may demand the sacrifice of the 
part. This, however, can only be a comparison, for an organism subject to 
inexorable laws is one thing, and a society composed of free wills another. 
But, once these wills are organized, they assume the guise of an organism; 
and in this more or less artificial organism habit plays the same role as 
necessity in the works of narure. From this first standpoint, social life 
appears to us a system of more or less deeply rooted habits, corresponding to 
the needs of the community. Some of them are habits of command, most of 
them are habits of obedience, whether we obey a person commanding by 
virtue of a mandate from society, or whether from society itself, vaguely 
perceived or felt, there emanates an impersonal imperative. Each of these 
habits of obedience exerts a pressure on our will. We can evade it, but then 
we are attracted towards it, drawn back to it, like a pendulum which has 
swung away from the vertical. A certain order of things has been upset, it 
must be restored. In a word, as with all habits, we feel a sense of obligation. 
But in this case the obligation is immeasurably stronger. When a certain 
magnitude is so much greater than another that the latter is negligible in 

296 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
comparison, mathematicians say that it belongs to another order. So it is 
with social obligation. The pressure of it, compared to that of other habits, 
is such that the difference in degree amounts to a difference in kind. It should 
be noted that all habits of this nature lend one another mutual support. 
Although we may not speculate on their essence and on their origin, we feel 
that they are interrelated, being demanded of us by our immediate surround­
ings, or by the surroundings of those surroundings, and so on to the 
uttermost limit, which would be society. Each one corresponds, directly or 
indirectly, to a social necessity; and so they all hang together, they form a 
solid block. Many of them would be trivial obligations if they appeared 
singly. But they are an integral part of obligation in general, and this whole, 
which is what it is owing to the contributions of its parts, in its turn confers 
upon each one the undivided authority of the totality. Thus the sum-total 
comes to the aid of each of its parts, and the general sentence 'do what duty 
bids' triumphs over the hesitations we might feel in the presence of a single 
duty. As a matter of fact, we do not explicitly think of a mass of partial duties 
added together and constituting a single total obligation. Perhaps there is 
really not an aggregation of parts. The strength which one obligation derives 
from all the others is rather to be compared to the breath of life drawn, 
complete and invisible, by each of the cells from the depths of the organism of 
which it is an element. Society, present within each of its members, has claims 
which, whether great or small, each express the sum-total of its vitality. But 
let us again repeat that this is only a comparison. A human community is a 
collectivity of free beings. The obligations which it lays down, and which 
enable it to subsist, introduce into it a regularity which has merely some 
analogy to the inflexible order of the phenomena of life. 
And yet everything conspires to make us believe that this regularity is 
comparable with that of nature. I do not allude merely to the unanimity of 
mankind in praising certain acts and blaming others. I mean that, even in 
those cases where moral precepts implied in judgments of values are not 
observed, we contrive that they should appear so. Just as we do not notice 
disease when walking along the street, so we do not gauge the degree of 
possible immorality behind the exterior which humanity presents to the 
world. It would take a good deal of time to become a misanthrope if we 
confined ourselves to the observation of others. It is when we detect our own 
weaknesses that we come to pity or despise mankind. The human nature 
from which we then turn away is the human nature we have discovered in 
the depths of our own being. The evil is so well screened, the secret so 
universally kept, that in this case each individual is the dupe of all: however 
severely we may profess to judge other men, at bottom we think them better 
than ourselves. On this happy illusion much of our social life is grounded. 
It is natural that society should do everything to encourage this idea. The 
laws which it promulgates and which maintain the social order resemble, 
moreover, in certain aspects, the laws of nature. I admit that the difference is a 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
297 
radical one in the eyes of the philosopher. To him the law which enunciates 
facts is one thing, the law which commands, another. It is possible to evade 
the latter; here we have obligation, not necessity. The former is, on the 
contrary, inescapable, for if any fact diverged from it we should be wrong in 
having assumed it to be a law; there would exist another one, the true one, 
formulated in such a way as to express everything we observe and to which the 
recalcitrant fact would then conform like the rest. True enough; but to 
the majority of people the distinction is far from being so clear. A law, be it 
physical, social or moral - every law - is in their eyes a command. There is a 
certain order of nature which finds expression in laws: the facts are presumed 
to 'obey' these laws so as to conform with that order. The scientist himself can 
hardly help believing that the law 'governs' facts and consequently is prior to 
them, like the Platonic Idea on which all things had to model themselves. The 
higher he rises in the scale of generalizations the more he tends, willy-nilly, to 
endow the law with this imperative character; it requires a very real struggle 
against our own prepossessions to imagine the principles of mechanics 
otherwise than as inscribed from all eternity on the transcendent tables that 
modern science has apparently fetched down from another Sinai. But if 
physical law tends to assume in our imagination the form of a command 
when it attains to a certain degree of generality, in its turn an imperative 
which applies to everybody appears to us somewhat like a law of nature. The 
two ideas, coming against each other in our minds, effect an exchange. 
The law borrows from the command its prerogative of compulsion; the 
command receives from the law its inevitability. Thus a breach of the social 
order assumes an anti-natural character; even when frequently repeated, it 
strikes us as an exception, being to society what a freak creation is to nature. 
And suppose we discern behind the social imperative a religious 
command? No matter the relation between the two terms: whether religion 
be interpreted in one way or another, whether it be social in essence or by 
accident, one thing is certain, that it has always played a social role. This 
part, indeed, is a complex one: it varies with time and place; but in societies 
such as our own the first effect of religion is to sustain and reinforce the 
claims of society. It may go much further. It goes at least thus far. Society 
institutes punishments which may strike the innocent and spare the guilty; 
its rewards are few and far between; it takes broad views and is easily 
satisfied; what human scales could weigh, as they should be weighed, 
rewards and punishments? But, just as the Platonic Ideas reveal to us, in its 
perfection and fullness, that reality which we see only in crude imitations, so 
religion admits us to a city whose most prominent features are here and 
there roughly typified by our institutions, our laws and our customs. Here 
below, order is merely approximate, being more or less artificially obtained 
by man; above, it is perfect and self-creative. Religion therefore, in our eyes, 
succeeds in filling in the gap, already narrowed by our habitual way of 
looking at things, between a command of society and a law of nature. 

298 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
We are thus being perpetually brought back to the same comparison, 
defective though it be in many ways, yet appropriate enough to the point 
with which we are dealing. The members of a civic community hold together 
like the cells of an organism. Habit, served by intelligence and imagination, 
introduces among them a discipline resembling, in the interdependence it 
establishes between separate individuals, the unity of an organism of ana­
stomotic cells. 
Everything, yet again, conspires to make social order an imitation of the 
order observed in nature. It is evident that each of us, thinking of himself 
alone, feels at liberty to follow his bent, his desire or his fancy, and not 
consider his fellow-men. But this inclination has no sooner taken shape than 
it comes up against a force composed of the accumulation of all social forces: 
unlike individual motives, each pulling its own way, this force would result 
in an order not without analogy to that of natural phenomena. The 
component cell of an organism, on becoming momentarily conscious, 
would barely have outlived the wish to emancipate itself when it would be 
recaptured by necessity. An individual forming part of a community may 
bend or even break a necessity of the same kind, which to some extent he has 
helped to create, but to which, still more, he has to yield; the sense of this 
necessity, together with the consciousness of being able to evade it, is none 
the less what he calls an obligation. From this point of view, and taken in its 
most usual meaning, obligation is to necessity what habit is to nature. 
It does not come then exactly from without. Each of us belongs as much 
to society as to himself. While his consciousness, delving downwards, reveals 
to him, the deeper he goes, an ever more original personality, incommen­
surable with the others and indeed undefinable in words, on the surface of 
life we are in continuous contact with other men whom we resemble, and 
united to them by a discipline which creates between them and us a relation 
of interdependence. Has the self no other means of clinging to something 
solid than by taking up its position in that part of us which is socialized? 
That would be so if there were no other way of escape from a life of impulse, 
caprice and regret. But in our innermost selves, if we know how to look for 
it, we may perhaps discover another sort of equilibrium, still more desirable 
than the one on the surface. Certain aquatic plants as they rise to the surface 
are ceaselessly jostled by the current: their leaves, meeting above the water, 
interlace, thus imparting to them stability above. But still more stable are the 
roots, which, firmly planted in the earth, support them from below. 
However, we shall not dwell for the present on the effort to delve down to 
the depths of our being. If possible at all, it is exceptional: and it is on the 
surface, at the point where it inserts itself into the close-woven tissue of other 
exteriorised personalities, that our ego generally finds its point of attach­
ment; its solidity lies in this solidarity. But, at the point where it is attached, 
it is itself socialized. Obligation, which we look upon as a bond between 
men, first binds us to ourselves. 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
299 
It would therefore be a mistake to reproach a purely social morality with 
neglecting individual duties. Even if we were only in theory under a state of 
obligation towards other men, we should be so in fact towards ourselves, 
since social solidarity exists only in so far as a social ego is superadded, in 
each of us, to the individual self. To cultivate this social ego is the essence of 
our obligation to society. Were there not some part of society in us, it would 
have no hold on us; and we scarcely need seek it out, we are self-sufficient, if 
we find it present within us. Irs presence is more or less marked in different 
men; but no one could cut himself off from it completely. Nor would he 
wish to do so, for he is perfectly aware that the greater part of his strength 
comes from this source, and that he owes to the ever-recurring demands of 
social life that unbroken tension of energy, that steadiness of aim in effort, 
which ensures the greatest return for his activity. But he could not do so, 
even if he wished to, because his memory and his imagination live on what 
society has implamed in them, because the soul of society is inherent in the 
language he speaks, and because even if there is no one present, even if he is 
merely thinking, he is still talking to himself. Vainly do we try to imagine an 
individual cut off from all social life. Even materially, Robinson Crusoe on 
his island remains in contact with other men, for the manufactured objects 
he saved from the wreck, and without which he could not get along, keep 
him within the bounds of civilization, and consequently within those of 
society. But a moral contact is still more necessary to him, for he would be 
soon discouraged if he had nothing else to cope with his incessant difficulties 
except an individual strength of which he knows the limitations. He draws 
energy from the society to which he remains attached in spirit; he may not 
perceive it, still it is there, watching him: if the individual ego maintains 
alive and present the social ego, he will effect, even in isolation, what he 
would with the encouragement and even the support of the whole of society. 
Those whom circumstances condemn for a time to solitude, and who cannot 
find within themselves the resources of a deep inner life, know the penalty 
of 'giving way,' chat is to say of not stabilising the individual ego at the 
level prescribed by the social ego. They will therefore be careful to maintain 
the latter, so that it shall not relax for one moment its strictness towards the 
former. If necessary, they will seek for some material or artificial support for 
it. You remember Kipling's Forest Officer, alone in his bungalow in the heart 
of the Indian rukh? He dresses every evening for dinner, so as to preserve his 
self-respect in his isolation. 2 
We shall not go so far as to say that this social ego is Adam Smith's 
'impartial spectator,' or that it must necessarily be identified with moral 
conscience, or that we feel pleased or displeased with ourselves according as 
it is favourably or unfavourably affected. We shall discover deeper sources 
for our moral feelings. Language here groups under one name very different 
things: what is there in common between the remorse of a murderer and 
that racking, haunting pain, also a remorse, which we may feel at having 

300 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
wounded someone's pride or been unjust to a child? To betray the con­
fidence of an innocent soul opening out to life is one of the most heinous 
offences for a certain type of conscience, which is apparently lacking in a 
sense of proportion, precisely because it does not borrow from society its 
standards, its gauges, its system of measurement. This type of conscience is 
not the one that is most often at work. At any rate it is more or less sensitive 
in different people. Generally the verdict of conscience is the verdict which 
would be given by the social self. 
And also, generally speaking, moral distress is a throwing out of gear of 
the relations between the social and the individual self. Analyse the feeling 
of remorse in the soul of a desperate criminal. You might mistake it at first 
for the dread of punishment, and indeed you find most minute precautions, 
perpetually supplemented and renewed, to conceal the crime and avoid 
being found our; at every moment comes the awful thought that some derail 
has been overlooked and that the authorities will get hold of the tell-tale 
clue. But look closer: what the fellow wants is not so much to evade 
punishment as to wipe out the past, to arrange things just as though the 
crime had never been committed at all. When nobody knows that a thing 
exists, it is almost as if it were nonexistent. Thus it is the crime itself that the 
criminal wants to erase, by suppressing any knowledge of it that might come 
to the human ken. But his own knowledge persists, and note how it drives 
him more and more out of that society within which he hoped to remain by 
obliterating the traces of his crime. For the same esteem for the man he was 
is still shown to the man he is no longer; therefore society is not addressing 
him; it is speaking to someone else. He, knowing what he is, feels more 
isolated among his fellow-men than he would on a desert island; for in his 
solitude he would carry with him, enveloping him and supporting him, the 
image of society; but now he is cut off from the image as well as the thing. 
He could reinstate himself in society by confessing his crime: he would then 
be treated according to his deserts, but society would then be speaking to his 
real self. He would resume his collaboration with other men. He would be 
punished by them, but, having made himself one of them, he would be in a 
small degree the author of his own condemnation; and a part of himself, the 
best part, would thus escape the penalty. Such is the force which will drive a 
criminal to give himself up. Sometimes, without going so far, he will confess 
to a friend, or to any decent fellow. By thus purring himself right, if not in 
the eyes of all, at least in somebody's eyes, he re-attaches himself to society 
at a single point, by a thread: even if he does not reinstate himself in it, at 
least he is near it, dose to it; he no longer remains alienated from it; in any 
case he is no longer in complete rupture with it, nor with that element of it 
which is part of himself. 
It takes this violent break to reveal clearly the nexus of the individual to 
society. In the ordinary way we conform to our obligations rather than think 
of them. If we had every time to evoke the idea, enunciate the formula, it 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
301 
would be much more tiring to do our duty. But habit is enough, and in 
most cases we have only to leave well alone in order to accord to society what 
it expects from us. Moreover, society has made matters very much easier for 
us by interpolating intermediaries between itself and us: we have a family; 
we follow a trade or a profession; we belong to our parish, to our district, to 
our country; and, in cases where the insertion of the group into society is 
complete, we may content ourselves, if need be, with fulfilling our 
obligations towards the group and so paying our debts to society. Society 
occupies the circumference; the individual is at the centre: from the centre to 
the circumference are arranged, like so many ever-widening concentric 
circles, the various groups to which the individual belongs. From the cir­
cumference to the centre, as the circles grow smaller, obligations are added 
to obligations, and the individual ends by finding himself confronted with 
all of them together. Thus obligation increases as it advances; but, if it is 
more complicated, it is less abstract, and the more easily accepted. When it 
has become fully concrete, it coincides with a tendency, so habitual that we 
find it natural, to play in society the part which our station assigns to us. 
So long as we yield to this tendency, we scarcely feel it. It assumes a peremp­
tory aspect, like all deep-seated habits, only if we depart from it. 
It is society that draws up for the individual the programme of his daily 
routine. It is impossible to live a family life, follow a profession, attend to 
the thousand and one cares of the day, do one's shopping, go for a suoll, or 
even stay at home, without obeying rules and submitting to obligations. 
Every instant we have to choose, and we naturally decide on what is in 
keeping with the rule. We are hardly conscious of this; there is no effort. 
A road has been marked out by society; it lies open before us, and we follow 
it; it would take more initiative to cut across country. Duty, in this sense, is 
almost always done automatically; and obedience to duty, if we restrict 
ourselves to the most usual case, might be defined as a form of non-exertion, 
passive acquiescence. How comes it, then, that on the contrary this obedience 
appears as a state of strain, and duty itself as something harsh and unbending? 
Obviously because there occur cases where obedience implies an over­
coming of self. These cases are exceptions; bur we notice them because they 
are accompanied by acute consciousness, as happens with all forms of 
hesitation - in fact consciousness is this hesitation itself; for an action which 
is started automatically passes almost unperceived. Thus, owing to the inter­
dependence of our duties, and because the obligation as a whole is immanent 
in each of its parts, all duties are tinged with the hue taken on exceptionally 
by one or the other of them. From the practical point of view this presents no 
inconvenience, there are even certain advantages in looking at things in this 
way. For, however naturally we do our duty, we may meet with resistance 
within ourselves; it is wise to expect it, and not take for granted that it is easy 
to remain a good husband, a decem citizen, a conscientious worker, in a word 
an honest fellow. Besides, there is a considerable amount of truth in this 

302 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
opinion; for if it is relatively easy to keep within the social order, yet we have 
had to enrol in it, and this enrolment demands an effort. The natural 
disobedience of the child, the necessity of education, are proof of this. It is 
but just to credit the individual with the consent virtually given to the totality 
of his obligations, even if he no longer needs to take counsel with himself on 
each one of them. The rider need only allow himself to be borne along; still 
he has had to get into the saddle. So it is with the individual in relation to 
society. In one sense it would be untrue, and in every sense it would be 
dangerous, to say that duty can be done automatically. Let us then set up as a 
practical maxim that obedience to duty means resistance to self. 
But a maxim is one thing, an explanation another. When, in order to 
define obligation, its essence and its origin, we lay down that obedience is 
primarily a struggle with self, a state of tension or contraction, we make a 
psychological error which has vitiated many theories of ethics. Thus artificial 
difficulties have arisen, problems which set philosophers at variance and 
which will be found to vanish when we analyse the terms in which they are 
expressed. Obligation is in no sense a unique fact, incommensurate with 
others, looming above them like a mysterious apparition. If a considerable 
number of philosophers, especially those who follow Kant, have taken this 
view, it is because they have confused the sense of obligation, a tranquil state 
akin to inclination, with the violent effort we now and again exert on 
ourselves to break down a possible obstacle to obligation. 
After an attack of rheumatism, we may feel some discomfort and even 
pain in moving our muscles and joints. It is the general sensation of a 
resistance set up by all our organs together. Little by little it decreases and 
ends by being lost in the consciousness we have of our movements when we 
are well. Now, we are at liberty to fancy that it is still there, in an incipient, 
or rather a subsiding, condition, that it is only on the look-out for a chance 
to become more acute; we must indeed expect attacks of rheumatism if we 
are rheumatic. Yet what should we say of a philosopher who saw in our 
habitual sensations, when moving our arms and legs, a mere diminution of 
pain, and who then defined our motory faculty as an effort to resist 
rheumatic discomfort? To begin with, he would thus be giving up the 
attempt to account for motory habits, since each of these implies a particular 
combination of movements, and can be explained only by that combination. 
The general faculty of walking, running, moving the body, is but an aggrega­
tion of these elementary habits, each of them finding its own explanation in 
the special movements it involves. But having only considered the faculty as 
a whole, and having then defined it as a force opposed to a resistance, it 
is natural enough to set up rheumatism beside it as an independent entity. 
It would seem as though some such error had been made by many of those 
who have speculated on obligation. We have any number of particular 
obligations, each calling for a separate explanation. It is natural, or, more 
strictly speaking, it is a matter of habit to obey them all. Suppose that 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
303 
exceptionally we deviate from one of them, there would be resistance; if we 
resist this resistance, a state of tension or contraction is likely to result. It is 
this rigidity which we objectifY when we attribute so stern an aspect to duty. 
It is also what the philosophers have in mind, when they see fit to resolve 
obligation into rational elements. In order to resist resistance, to keep to the 
right paths, when desire, passion or interest tempt us aside, we must 
necessarily give ourselves reasons. Even if we have opposed the unlawful 
desire by another, the latter, conjured up by the will, could arise only at the 
call of an idea. In a word, an intelligent being generally exerts his influence 
on himself through the medium of intelligence. But from the fact that we 
get back to obligation by rational ways it does not follow that obligation was 
of a rational order. We shall dwell on this point later; we do not intend to 
discuss ethical theories for the present. Let us merely say that a tendency, 
natural or acquired, is one thing, another thing the necessarily rational 
method which a reasonable being will use to restore to it its force and to 
combat what is opposing it. In the latter case the tendency which has been 
obscured may reappear; and then everything doubtless happens as though 
we had succeeded by this method in re-establishing the tendency anew. 
In reality we have merely swept aside something that hampered or checked 
it. It comes to the same thing, I grant you, in practice: explain the fact in one 
way or another, the fact is there, we have achieved success. And in order to 
succeed it is perhaps better to imagine that things did happen in the former 
way. But to state that this is actually the case would be to vitiate the whole 
theory of obligation. Has not this been the case with most philosophers? 
Let there be no misunderstanding. Even if we confine ourselves to a 
certain aspect of morality, as we have done up to now, we shall find many 
different attitudes towards duty. They line the intervening space between the 
extremes of two attitudes, or rather two habits: that of moving so naturally 
along the ways laid down by society as barely to notice them; or on the 
contrary hesitating and deliberating on which way to take, how far to go, 
the distances out and back we shall have to cover if we try several paths one 
after another. In the second case new problems arise with more or less 
frequency; and even in those instances where our duty is fully mapped out, 
we make all sorts of distinctions in fulfilling it. But, in the first place, the 
former attitude is that of the immense majority of men; it is probably 
general in backward communities. And, after all, however much we may 
reason in each particular case, formulate the maxim, enunciate the principle, 
deduce the consequences: if desire and passion join in the discussion, if 
temptation is strong, if we are on the point of falling, if suddenly we recover 
ourselves, what was it that pulled us up? A force asserts itself which we have 
called the 'totality of obligation': the concentrated extract, the quintessence 
of innumerable specific habits of obedience to the countless particular 
requirements of social life. This force is no one particular thing and, if it 
could speak (whereas it prefers to act), it would say: 'You must because you 

304 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
must.' Hence the work done by intelligence in weighing reasons, comparing 
maxims, going back to first principles, was to introduce more logical 
consistency into a line of conduct subordinated by its very nature to the 
claims of society; but this social claim was the real root of obligation. Never, 
in our hours of temptation, should we sacrifice to the mere need for logical 
consistency our interest, our passion, our vanity. Because in a reasonable 
being reason does indeed intervene as a regulator to assure this consistency 
between obligatory rules or maxims, philosophy has been led to look upon it 
as a principle of obligation. We might as well believe that the fly-wheel 
drives the machinery. 
Besides, the demands of a society dovetail into one another. Even the 
individual whose decent behaviour is the least based on reasoning and, if 
I may put it so, the most conventional, introduces a rational order into his 
conduct by the mere fact of obeying rules which are logically connected 
together. I freely admit that such logic has been late in taking possession of 
society. Logical co-ordination is essentially economy. From a whole it first 
roughly extracts certain principles and then excludes everything which is not 
in accordance with them. Nature, by contrast, is lavish. The closer a 
community is to nature, the greater the proportion of unaccountable and 
inconsistent rules it lays down. We find in primitive races many prohibitions 
and prescriptions explicable at most by vague associations of ideas, by 
superstition, by automatism. Nor are they without their use, since the 
obedience of everyone to laws, even absurd ones, assures greater cohesion to 
the community. But in that case the usefulness of the rule accrues, by a kind 
of reverse action, solely from the fact of our submission to it. Prescriptions 
or prohibitions which are intrinsically useful are those that are explicitly 
designed for the preservation or well-being of society. No doubt they have 
gradually detached themselves from the others and survived them. Social 
demands have therefore been co-ordinated with each other and subordinated 
to principles. But no matter. Logic permeates indeed present-day com­
munities, and even the man who does not reason out his conduct will live 
reasonably if he conforms to these principles. 
But the essence of obligation is a different thing from a requirement of 
reason. This is all we have tried to suggest so far. Our description would, 
we think, correspond more and more to reality as one came to deal with 
less developed communities and more rudimentary stages of consciousness. 
It remains a bare outline so long as we confine ourselves to the normal 
conscience, such as is found to-day in the ordinary decent person. But 
precisely because we are in this case dealing with a strange complex of 
feelings, of ideas and tendencies all interpenetrating each other, we shall 
avoid artificial analyses and arbitrary syntheses only if we have at hand an 
outline which gives the essential. Such is the outline we have attempted to 
trace. Conceive obligation as weighing on the will like a habit, each obliga­
tion dragging behind it the accumulated mass of the others, and utilising 

Morality. Obligation and the Open Soul 
305 
thus for the pressure it is exerting the weight of the whole: here you have the 
totality of obligation for a simple, elementary, moral conscience. That is 
the essential: that is what obligation could, if necessary, be reduced to, even 
in those cases where it attains its highest complexity. 
This shows when and in what sense (how slightly Kantian!) obligation in 
its elementary state takes the form of a 'categorical imperative.' We should 
find it very difficult to discover examples of such an imperative in everyday 
life. A military order, which is a command that admits neither reason nor 
reply, does say in fact: 'You must because you must.' But, though you may 
give the soldier no reason, he will imagine one. If we want a pure case of the 
categorical imperative, we must construct one a priori or at least make an 
arbitrary abstraction of experience. So let us imagine an ant who is stirred by 
a gleam of reflection and thereupon judges she has been wrong to work 
unremittingly for others. Her inclination to laziness would indeed endure 
but a few moments, just as long as the ray of intelligence. In the last of these 
moments, when instinct regaining the mastery would drag her back by sheer 
force to her task, intelligence at the point of relapsing into instinct would 
say, as its parting word: 'You must because you must.' This 'must because 
you must' would only be the momentary feeling of awareness of a tug which 
the ant experiences - the tug which the string, momentarily relaxed, exerts 
as it drags her back. The same command would ring in the ear of a sleep­
walker on the point of waking, or even actually beginning to wake, from the 
dream he is enacting: if he lapsed back at once into a hypnotic state, a 
categorical imperative would express in words, on behalf of the reflexion 
which had just been on the point of emerging and had instantly disappeared, 
the inevitableness of the relapse. In a word, an absolutely categorical impera­
tive is instinctive or somnambulistic, enacted as such in a normal state, 
represented as such if reflexion is roused long enough to take form, not long 
enough to seek for reasons. But, then, is it not evident that, in a reasonable 
being, an imperative will tend to become categorical in proportion as the 
activity brought into play, although inrelligent, will tend to become 
instinctive? But an activity which, starting as intelligent, progresses towards 
an imitation of instinct is exactly what we call, in man, a habit. And the most 
powerful habit, the habit whose strength is made up of the accumulated force 
of all the elementary social habits, is necessarily the one which best imitates 
instinct. Is it then surprising that, in the short momenr which separates 
obligation merely experienced as a living force from obligation fully realized 
and justified by all sortS of reasons, obligation should indeed take the form of 
the categorical imperative: 'you must because you must'? 
Let us consider rwo divergent lines of evolution with societies at the 
extremities of each. The type of society which will appear the more natural 
will obviously be the instinctive type; the link that unites the bees of a hive 
resembles far more the link which holds together the cells of an organism, 
co-ordinate and subordinate to one another. Let us suppose for an instant 

306 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
that nature has intended to produce at the extremity of the second line 
societies where a certain latitude was left to individual choice: she would 
have arranged that intelligence should achieve here results comparable, as 
regards their regularity, to those of instinct in the other; she would have had 
recourse to habit. Each of these habits, which may be called 'moral,' would 
be incidental. But the aggregate of them, I mean the habit of contracting 
these habits, being at the very basis of societies and a necessary condition of 
their existence, would have a force comparable to that of instinct in respect 
of both intensity and regularity. This is exactly what we have called the 
'totality of obligation.' This, be it said, will apply only to human societies at 
the moment of emerging from the hands of nature. It will apply to primitive 
and to elementary societies. But, however much human society may 
progress, grow complicated and spiritualised, the original design, expressing 
the purpose of nature, will remain. 
Now this is exactly what has happened. Without going deeply into a 
matter we have dealt with elsewhere, let us simply say that intelligence and 
instinct are forms of consciousness which must have interpenetrated each 
other in their rudimentary state and become dissociated as they grew. This 
development occurred on the two main lines of evolution of animal life, 
with the Arthropods and the Vertebrates. At the end of the former we have 
the instinct of insects, more especially the Hymenoptera; at the end of the 
second, human intelligence. Instinct and intelligence have each as their 
essential object the utilisation of implements: in the first case, organs 
supplied by nature and hence immutable; in the second, invented tools, and 
therefore varied and unforeseen. The implement is, moreover, designed for a 
certain type of work, and this work is all the more efficient the more it is 
specialized, the more it is divided up between diversely qualified workers 
who mutually supplement one another. Social life is thus immanent, like 
a vague ideal, in instinct as well as in intelligence: this ideal finds its most 
complete expression in the hive or the ant-hill on the one hand, in human 
societies on the other. Whether human or animal, a society is an organization; 
it implies a co-ordination and generally also a subordination of elements; 
it therefore exhibits, whether merely embodied in life or, in addition, 
specifically formulated, a collection of rules and laws. But in a hive or an ant­
hill the individual is riveted to his task by his structure, and the organization 
is relatively invariable, whereas the human community is variable in form, 
open to every kind of progress. The result is that in the former each rule is laid 
down by nature, and is necessary: whereas in the latter only one thing is 
natural, the necessity of a rule. Thus the more, in human society, we delve 
down to the root of the various obligations to reach obligation in general, the 
more obligation will tend to become necessity, the nearer it will draw, in its 
peremptory aspect, to instinct. And yet we should make a great mistake if we 
tried to ascribe any particular obligation, whatever it might be, to instinct. 
What we must perpetually recall is that, no one obligation being instinctive, 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
307 
obligation as a whole would have been instinct if human societies were not, so 
to speak, ballasted with variability and intelligence. Ir is a virtual instinct, like 
that which lies behind the habit of speech. The morality of a human society 
may indeed be compared to its language. If ants exchange signs, which seems 
probable, those signs are provided by the very instinct that makes the ants 
communicate with one another. On the contrary, our languages are the 
product of custom. Nothing in rhe vocabulary, or even in the syntax, comes 
from nature. But speech is natural, and unvarying signs, natural in origin, 
which are presumably used in a community of insects, exhibit what our 
language would have been, if nature in bestowing on us the faculty of speech 
had not added that function which, since it makes and uses tools, is inventive 
and called intelligence. We must perpetually recur to what obligation would 
have been if human society had been instinctive instead of intelligent: this will 
not explain any particular obligation, we shall even give of obligation in 
general an idea which would be false, if we went no further; and yet we must 
think of this instinctive society as the counterpart of intelligent society, if we 
are not to start without any clue in quest of the foundations of morality. 
From this point of view obligation loses its specific character. It ranks 
among the most general phenomena of life. When the elements which go to 
make up an organism submit to a rigid discipline, can we say that they feel 
themselves liable to obligation and that they are obeying a social instinct? 
Obviously not; but whereas such an organism is barely a community, the hive 
and the ant-hill are actual organisms, the elements of which are united by 
invisible ties, and the social instinct of an ant - I mean the force by virtue of 
which the worker, for example, performs the task to which she is predestined 
by her structure - cannot differ radically from the cause, whatever it be, by 
virtue of which every tissue, every cell of a living body, toils for the greatest 
good of the whole. Indeed it is, strictly speaking, no more a matter of 
obligation in the one case than in the other, but rather of necessity. It is just 
this necessity that we perceive, not actual but virtual, at the foundations of 
moral obligation, as through a more or less transparent veil. A human being 
feels an obligation only if he is free, and each obligation, considered 
separately, implies liberty. Bur it is necessary that there should be obligations; 
and the deeper we go, away from those particular obligations which are at the 
top, towards obligation in general, or, as we have said, towards obligation as a 
whole, which is at the bottom, the more obligation appears as the very form 
assumed by necessity in the realm of life, when it demands, for the 
accomplishment of certain ends, intelligence, choice, and therefore liberty. 
Here again it may be alleged that this applies to very simple human 
societies, that is to say primitive or rudimentary societies. Certainly, but, as 
we shall have occasion to point out later, civilized man differs from primitive 
man above all by the enormous mass of knowledge and habits which he has 
absorbed, since the first awakening of his consciousness, from the social 
surroundings in which they were stored up. What is natural is in great 

308 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
measure overlaid by what is acquired; but it endures, almost unchangeable, 
throughout the centuries; habits and knowledge by no means impregnate the 
organism to the extent of being transmitted by heredity, as used to be 
supposed. It is true that we could consider what is natural as negligible in our 
analysis of obligation, if it had been crushed out by the acquired habits which 
have accumulated over it in the course of centuries of civilization. But it 
remains in excellent condition, very much alive, in the most civilized society. 
To it we must revert, not to account for this or that social obligation, but to 
explain what we have called obligation as a whole. Our civilized commun­
ities, however different they may be from the society to which we were 
primarily destined by nature, exhibit indeed, with respect to that society, a 
fundamental resemblance. 
For they too are closed societies. They may be very extensive compared to 
the small agglomerations to which we were drawn by instinct and which the 
same instinct would probably tend to revive to-day if all the material and 
spiritual acquisitions of civilization were to disappear from the social environ­
ment in which we find them stored; their essential characteristic is none the 
less to include at any moment a certain number of individuals, and exclude 
others. We have said above, that underlying moral obligation there was a 
social demand. Of what society were we speaking? Was it of that open society 
represented by all mankind? We did not settle the matter, any more than one 
usually does when speaking of a man's duty to his fellows; one remains 
prudently vague; one refrains from making any assertion, but one would like 
to have it believed that 'human society' is already an accomplished fact. And 
it is well that we should like to have it believed, for if incontestably we have 
duties towards man as man (although these duties have an entirely different 
origin, as we shall see a little later) we should risk undermining them, were we 
to make a radical distinction between them and our duties to our fellow­
citizens. This is right enough so far as action is concerned. But a moral 
philosophy which does not emphasize this distinction misses the truth; its 
analyses will thereby be inevitably distorted. In fact when we lay down that 
the duty of respecting the life and property of others is a fundamental 
demand of social life, what society do we mean? To find an answer we need 
only think what happens in time of war. Murder and pillage and perfidy, 
cheating and lying become not only lawful, they are actually praiseworthy. 
The warring nations can say, with Macbeth's witches: 'Fair is foul, and foul is 
fair.' Would this be possible, would the transformation take place so easily, 
generally and instantaneously, if it were really a certain attitude of man 
towards man that society had been enjoining on us up till then? Oh, I know 
what society says (it has, I repeat, its reasons for saying so); but to know what 
it thinks and what it wants, we must not listen too much to what it says, we 
must look at what it does. It says that the duties it defines are indeed, in 
principle, duties towards humanity, but that under exceptional circum­
stances, regrettably unavoidable, they are for the time being inapplicable. 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
309 
If society did not express itself rhus, it would bar the road to progress for 
another morality, not derived from it, which it has every inducement to 
humour. On the other hand, it is consistent with our habits of mind to con­
sider as abnormal anything relatively rare or exceptional, disease for instance. 
But disease is as normal as health, which, viewed from a certain standpoint, 
appears as a constant effort to prevent disease or to avoid it. In the same way, 
peace has always hitherto been a preparation for defence or even attack, at 
any rate for war. Our social duties aim at social cohesion; whether we will 
or no they compose for us an attitude which is that of discipline in the face 
of the enemy. This means that, however much society may endow man, 
whom it has trained to discipline, with all it has acquired during centuries of 
civilization, society still has need of that primitive instinct which it coats 
with so thick a varnish. In a word, the social instinct which we have detected 
at the basis of social obligation always has in view - instinct being relatively 
unchangeable - a closed society, however large. It is doubtless overlaid by 
another morality which for char very reason it supports and to which it lends 
something of its force, I mean of its imperative character. But it is not itself 
concerned with humanity. For between the nation, however big, and 
humanity there lies the whole distance from rhe finite to the indefinite, from 
the closed to rhe open. We are fond of saying that the apprenticeship to civic 
virtue is served in the family, and that in the same way, from holding our 
country dear, we learn to love mankind. Our sympathies are supposed to 
broaden out in an unbroken progression, to expand while remaining iden­
tical, and to end by embracing all humanity. This is a priori reasoning, the 
result of a purely intellectualist conception of rhe soul. We observe that 
the three groups to which we can attach ourselves comprise an increasing 
number of people, and we conclude that a progressive expansion of feeling 
keeps pace with the increasing size of the object we love. And what 
encourages the illusion is chat, by a fortunate coincidence, the first part of rhe 
argument chances to fit in with the facts; domestic virtues are indeed bound 
up with civic virtues, for the very simple reason that family and society, 
originally undifferentiated, have remained closely connected. But between 
the society in which we live and humanity in general there is, we repeat, the 
same contrast as between the closed and the open; the difference between 
the two objects is one of kind and not simply one of degree. How much 
greater it would be if, passing to the realm of feeling, we compared with each 
other the two sentiments, love of country and love of mankind! Who can help 
seeing that social cohesion is largely due to the necessity for a community to 
protect itself against others, and that it is primarily as against all other men 
that we love the men with whom we live? Such is the primitive instinct. It is 
still there, though fortunately hidden under the accretions of civilization; bur 
even to-day we still love naturally and directly our parents and our fellow­
countrymen, whereas love of mankind is indirect and acquired. We go 
straight to the former, to the latter we come only by roundabout ways; for it is 

3 1 0  
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
only through God, in God, that religion bids man love mankind; and 
likewise it is through reason alone, that Reason in whose communion we are 
all partakers, that philosophers make us look at humanity in order to show us 
the pre-eminent dignity of the human being, the right of all to command 
respect. Neither in the one case nor the other do we come to humanity by 
degrees, through the stages of the family and the nation. We must, in a single 
bound, be carried far beyond it, and, without having made it our goal, reach 
it by outstripping it. Besides, whether we speak the language of religion or the 
language of philosophy, whether it be a question oflove or respect, a different 
morality, another kind of obligation supervenes, above and beyond the social 
pressure. So far we have only dealt with the latter. The time has come to pass 
to the other. 
We have been searching for pure obligation. To find it we have had to 
reduce morality to its simplest expression. The advantage of this has been 
to indicate in what obligation consisted; the disadvantage, to narrow down 
morality enormously. Not indeed because that part of it which we have left 
on one side is not obligatory: is there such a thing as a duty which is not 
compulsory? But it is conceivable that, starring from a primitive basis of 
obligation pure and simple, such as we have just defined, this obligation 
should radiate, expand, and even come to be absorbed into something that 
transfigures it. Let us now see what complete morality would be like. We shall 
use the same method and once more proceed, not downwards as up to now 
but upwards, to the extreme limit. 
In all times there have arisen exceptional men, incarnating this morality. 
Before the saints of Christianity, mankind had known the sages of Greece, 
the prophets of Israel, the Arahants of Buddhism, and others besides. It is to 
them that men have always turned for that complete morality which we had 
best call absolute morality. And this very fact is at once characteristic and 
instructive; this very fact suggests to us the existence of a difference of kind 
and not merely one of degree between the morality with which we have been 
dealing up to now and that we are about to study, between the minimum 
and the maximum, between the two extremes. Whereas the former is all the 
more unalloyed and perfect precisely in proportion as it is the more readily 
reduced to impersonal formulae, the second, in order to be fully itself, must 
be incarnate in a privileged person who becomes an example. The generality 
of the one consists in rhe universal acceptance of a law, that of the other in a 
common imitation of a model. 
Why is it, then, that saints have their imitators, and why do the great 
moral leaders draw the masses after them? They ask nothing, and yet they 
receive. They have no need to exhort; their mere existence suffices. For such 
is precisely the nature of this other morality. Whereas natural obligation is a 
pressure or a propulsive force, complete and perfect morality has the effect of 
an appeal. 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
3 1 1  
Only those who have come into touch with a great moral personality have 
fully realized the nature of this appeal. But we all, at those momentous hours 
when our usual maxims of conduct strike us as inadequate, have wondered 
what such or such a one would have expected of us under the circumstances. 
It might have been a relation or a friend whom we thus evoked in thought. 
But it might quite as well have been a man we had never met, whose life­
story had merely been told us, and to whose judgmenr we in imagination 
submitted our conduct, fearful of his censure, proud of his approval. 
It might even be a personality brought up from the depths of the soul inro 
the light of consciousness, stirring into life within us, which we felt might 
completely pervade us later, and to which we wished to attach ourselves for 
the time being, as the disciple to his teacher. As a matter of fact this person­
ality takes shape as soon as we adopt a model; the longing to resemble, 
which ideally generates the form, is an incipient resemblance; the word 
which we shall make our own is the word whose echo we have heard within 
ourselves. Bur the person matters little. Let us merely make the point that, 
whereas the first morality was the more potent the more distinctly it broke 
up inro impersonal obligation, on the contrary the latter morality, at first 
dispersed among general precepts to which our intelligence gave its 
allegiance, but which did not go so far as to set our will in motion, becomes 
more and more cogent in proportion as the multiplicity and generality of its 
maxims merge more completely into a man's unity and individuality. 
Whence does it derive its strength? What is the principle of action which 
here takes the place of the natural obligation, or rather which ends by 
absorbing it? To discover this, let us first see what is tacitly demanded of us. 
The duties dealt with so far are those imposed on us by social life; they are 
binding in respect of the city more than in respect of humanity. You might 
say that the second morality - if we do distinguish two - differs from the 
first in that it is human instead of being merely social. And you would not 
be enrirely wrong. For we have seen that it is not by widening the bounds of 
the city that you reach humanity; between a social morality and a human 
morality the difference is not one of degree but of kind. The former is the 
one of which we are generally thinking when we feel a natural obligation. 
Superimposed upon these clearly defined duries we like to imagine others, 
the lines of which are perhaps a little blurred. Loyalty, sacrifice of self, the 
spirit of renunciation, charity, such are the words we use when we think of 
these things. But have we, generally speaking, in mind at such times 
anything more than words? Probably not, and we fully realize this. It is 
sufficient, we say, that the formula is there; it will take on its full meaning, 
the idea which is ro fill it out will become operative, when the occasion 
arises. It is true that for many people the occasion will never arise or the 
action will be put off till later. With certain people the will does make a 
feeble start, bur so feeble that the slight shock they feel can in fact be 

312 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
attributed to no more than the expansion of social duty broadened and 
weakened into human duty. Bur only let these formulae be invested with 
substance, and that substance become animate, lo and behold! a new life 
is proclaimed; we understand, we feel the advent of a new morality. 
Consequently, in speaking here of love of humanity we should doubtless be 
denoting this morality. And yet we should not be expressing the essence of 
it, for the love of humanity is not a self-sufficient force or one which has a 
direct efficacy. The teachers of the young know full well that you cannot 
prevail over egoism by recommending 'altruism.' It even happens that a 
generous nature, eager to sacrifice itself, experiences a sudden chill at the 
idea that it is working 'for mankind.' The object is too vast, the effect too 
diffuse. We may therefore conjecture that if a love of humanity constitutes 
this morality, it constitutes it in much the same way as the intention of 
reaching a certain point implies the necessity of crossing an intervening 
space. In one sense it is the same thing; in another sense it is something 
entirely different. If we think only of the interval and the various points, 
infinite in number, which we still have to pass one by one, we shall be 
discouraged from starting, like Zeno's arrow, and besides there would be no 
object, no inducement. But if we step across the intervening space, thinking 
only of the goal or looking even beyond it, we shall easily accomplish a 
simple act, and at the same time overcome the infinite multiplicity of which 
this simplicity is the equivalent. What then, in this case, is the goal, what the 
direction of the effort? What exactly, in a word, is required of us? 
Let us first define the moral attitude of the man we have been considering 
up to now. He is part and parcel of society; he and it are absorbed together 
in the same task of individual and social preservation. Both are self-centred. 
True, it is doubtful whether private interest invariably agrees with public 
interest: we know against what insurmountable difficulties utilitarian ethics 
has always come up when it laid down the principle that the individual 
could seek only his own good, while maintaining that this would lead him to 
desire the good of others. An intelligent being, pursuing his personal 
advantage, will often do something quite different from what the general 
interest demands. Yet, if utilitarian ethics persists in recurring in one form or 
another, this means that it is not untenable, and if it is tenable the reason is 
precisely because, beneath the intelligent activity, forced in fact to choose 
between its own interests and those of others, there lies a substratum of 
instinctive activity, originally implanted there by nature, where the indi­
vidual and the social are well-nigh indistinguishable. The cell lives for itself 
and also for the organism, imparting to it vitality and borrowing vitality 
from it; it will sacrifice itself to the whole, if need be; and it would doubtless 
then say, if it were conscious, that it made this sacrifice in its own interest. 
Such would probably be the state of mind of an ant reflecting on her 
conduct. She would feel that her activity hinges on something intermediate 
between the good of the ant and the good of the ant-hill. Now it is just with 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
3 1 3  
this fundamental instinct that we have associated obligation as such: it 
implies at the beginning a state of things in which the individual and society 
are not distinguishable. This is what enables us to say that the attitude to 
which it corresponds is that of an individual and a community concentrated 
on themselves. At once individual and social, the soul here moves round in a 
circle. It is closed. 
The other attitude is that of the open soul. What, in that case, is allowed 
in? Suppose we say that it embraces all humanity: we should not be going 
roo far, we should hardly be going far enough, since its love may extend to 
animals, ro plants, to all nature. And yet no one of these things which would 
thus fill it would suffice to define the attitude taken by the soul, for it could, 
strictly speaking, do without all of them. Its form is not dependent on its 
content. We have just filled it; we could as easily empty it again. 'Charity' 
would persist in him who possesses 'charity,' though there be no other living 
creature on earth. 
Once again, it is not by a process of expansion of the self that we can pass 
from the first state to the second. A psychology which is roo purely intellec­
tualist, following the indications of speech, will doubtless define feelings by 
the things with which they are associated; love for one's family, love for one's 
country, love of mankind, it will see in these three inclinations one single 
feeling, growing ever larger, to embrace an increasing number of persons. The 
fact that these feelings are outwardly expressed by the same attitude or 
the same sort of motion, that all three incline us to something, enables us to 
group them under the concept 'love,' and to express them by one and the 
same word; we then distinguish them by naming three objects, each larger 
than the other, to which they are supposed to apply. This does in fact suffice 
to distinguish them. But does it describe them? Or analyse them? At a glance, 
consciousness perceives between the two first feelings and the third a differ­
ence of kind. The first imply a choice, therefore an exclusion; they may act as 
incentives to strife, they do not exclude hatred. The latter is all love. The 
former alight directly on an object which attracts them. The latter does not 
yield to the attraction of its object; it has not aimed at this object; it has shot 
beyond and reached humanity only by passing through humanity. Has it, 
strictly speaking, an object? We shall ask this question. But for the present we 
shall confine ourselves to noting that this psychic attitude, or rather psychic 
motion, is self-sufficient. 
Nevertheless there arises in regard to it a problem which stands ready 
solved in the case of the other. For that other was ordained by nature; we 
have just seen how and why we feel bound to adopt it. But the second 
attitude is acquired; it calls for, has always called for, an effort. How comes it 
that the men who have set the example have found other men to follow 
them? And what is the power that is in this case the counterpart of social 
pressure? We have no choice. Beyond instinct and habit there is no direct 
action on the will except feeling. The impulse given by feeling can indeed 

31-i 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
closely resemble obligation. Analyse the passion of love, particularly in its 
early stages; is pleasure its aim? Could we not as well say it is pain? Perhaps a 
tragedy lies ahead, a whole life wrecked, wasted, ruined, we know it, we feel 
it, no matter, we musr because we must. Indeed the worst perfidy of a 
nascent passion is that it counterfeits duty. But we need nor go as far as 
passion. Into the most peaceful emotion there may enter a certain demand 
for action, which differs from obligation as described above in that it will 
meet with no resistance, in that it imposes only what has already been 
acquiesced in, but which none the less resembles obligation in that it does 
impose something. Nowhere do we see this more clearly than in those cases 
where the demand ceases to have any practical consequence, rhus leaving us 
the leisure to reflect upon it and analyse what we feel. This is what occurs in 
musical emotion, for example. We feel, while we listen, as though we could 
not desire anything else but what the music is suggesting to us, and that that 
is just as we should naturally and necessarily act did we not refrain from 
action to listen. Let the music express joy or grief, pity or love, every 
moment we are what it expresses. Not only ourselves, but many others, nay, 
all the others, too. When music weeps, all humanity, all nature, weeps with 
it. In point of fact it does not introduce these feelings into us; it introduces 
us into them, as passers-by are forced imo a street dance. Thus do pioneers 
in morality proceed. Life holds for them unsuspected tones of feeling like 
those of some new symphony, and they draw us after them into this music 
that we may express it in action. 
It is through excess of intellectualism that feeling is made to hinge on an 
object and that all emotion is held to be the reaction of our sensory faculties 
to an intellectual representation. Taking again the example of music, we all 
know that it arouses in us well-defined emotions, joy, sorrow, pity, love, that 
these emotions may be intense and that to us they are complete, though not 
attached to anything in particular. Are you going to say that we are here in 
the realm of art and nor among real things, that therefore we are playing at 
emotion, that our feeling is purely imaginative, and that, anyway, the 
musician could not produce this emotion in us, suggest it without causing it, 
if we had not already experienced it in real life, where ir was caused by an 
object from which art had merely to detach it? That would be to forget rhat 
joy and sorrow, pity and love, are words expressing generalities, words which 
we must call upon to express what music makes us feel, whereas each new 
musical work brings with it new feelings, which are created by that music 
and within that music, are defined and delimited by the lines, unique of 
their kind, of the melody or symphony. They have therefore not been 
extracted from life by art; it is we who, in order to express them in words, are 
driven to compare the feeling created by the artist with the feeling most 
resembling it in life. But let us then take states of emotion caused in effect by 
certain things and, as it were, prefigured in them. Those ordained by nature 
are finite, that is to say limited in number. They are recognizable because 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
3 1 5  
they are destined to spur us on to acts answering to needs. The others, on 
the contrary, are real inventions, comparable to those of the musician, at the 
origin of which there has always been a man. Thus mountains may, since 
the beginning of time, have had the faculty of rousing in those who looked 
upon them certain feelings comparable with sensations, and indeed insep­
arable from mountains. But Rousseau created in connection with them a new 
and original emotion. This emotion has become current coin, Rousseau 
having put it into circulation. And even to-day it is Rousseau who makes us 
feel it, as much and more than the mountains. True, there are reasons why 
this emotion, sprung from the heart of Jean-Jacques, should fasten on 
to mountains rather than any other object; the elementary feelings, akin to 
sensations, which were directly aroused by mountains must have been able to 
harmonize with the new emotion. But Rousseau gathered them together, 
gave them their places, henceforth as mere harmonics in a sound for which he 
provided, by a true creation, the principal tone. It is the same with love of 
nature in general. Nature has ever aroused feelings which are almost 
sensations; people have always enjoyed the pleasant shade, the cool waters, 
etc., in fine all those things suggested in the word 'amoenus' by which the 
Romans described the charm of the country. But a fresh emotion, surely 
the creation of some person or persons, has arisen and used these pre-existing 
notes as harmonics, and produced in this way something to be compared 
with the fresh tones of a new instrument, what we call in our respective 
countries the sentiment of nature. The fundamental tone thus introduced 
might have been different, as is the case in the East, in Japan especially: the 
timbre would then have been different. Feelings akin to sensation, closely 
bound up with the objects which give rise to them, are indeed just as likely to 
attract a previously created emotion as they are to connect with an entirely 
new one. This is what happened with love. From time immemo rial woman 
must have inspired man with an inclination distinct from desire, but in 
immediate contact, as though welded to it, and pertaining both to feeling and 
to sensation. But romantic love has a definite date: it sprang up during the 
Middle Ages on the day when some person or persons conceived the idea of 
absorbing love into a kind of supernatural feeling, into religious emotion as 
created by Christianity and launched by the new religion into the world. 
When critics reproach mysticism with expressing itself in the same terms as 
passionate love, they forget that it was love which began by plagiarizing 
mysticism, borrowing from it its fervour, its raptures, its ecstasies: in using 
the language of a passion it had transfigured, mysticism has only resumed 
possession of its own. We may add that the nearer love is to adoration, the 
greater the disproportion between the emotion and the object, the deeper 
therefore the disappointment to which the lover is exposed unless he decides 
that he will ever look at the object through the mist of the emotion and never 
touch it, that he will, in a word, treat it religiously. Note that the ancients had 
already spoken of the illusions of love, but these were errors akin to those of 

316 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
the senses, and they concerned the face of the beloved, her figure, her bearing, 
her character. Think of Lucretius' description: the illusion here applies only 
to the qualities of the loved one, and not, as with the modern illusion, to what 
we can expect of love. Between the old illusion and the illusion we have 
superadded to it there is the same difference as between the primitive feeling, 
emanating from the object itself, and the religious emotion summoned from 
without by which it has been pervaded and eventually submerged. The 
margin left for disappointment is now enormous, for it is the gap between the 
divine and the human. 
That a new emotion is the source of the great creations of art, of science 
and of civilization in general there seems to be no doubt. Not only because 
emotion is a stimulus, because it incites the intelligence to undertake 
ventures and the will to persevere with them. We must go much further. 
There are emotions which beget thought; and invention, though it belongs 
to the category of the intellect, may partake of sensibility in its substance. 
For we must agree upon the meaning of the words 'emotion,' 'feeling' and 
'sensibility.' An emotion is an affective stirring of the soul, but a surface 
agitation is one thing, an upheaval of the depths another. The effect is in the 
first case diffused, in the second it remains undivided. In the one it is an 
oscillation of the parts without any displacement of the whole; in the other 
the whole is driven forward. Let us, however, get away from metaphors. 
We must distinguish between two kinds of emotion, two varieties of feeling, 
two manifestations of sensibility which have this one feature in common, 
that they are emotional states distinct from sensation, and cannot be 
reduced, like the latter, to the psychical transposition of a physical stimulus. 
In the first case the emotion is the consequence of an idea, or of a mental 
picture; the 'feeling' is indeed the result of an intellectual state which owes 
nothing to it, which is self-sufficient, and which, if it does experience a 
certain reaction from the feeling, loses more than it gains. It is the stirring of 
sensibility by a representation, as it were, dropped into it. But the other kind 
of emotion is not produced by a representation which it follows and from 
which it remains distinct. Rather is it, in relation to the intellectual states 
which are to supervene, a cause and not an effect; it is pregnant with repre­
sentations, not one of which is actually formed, but which it draws or might 
draw from its own substance by an organic development. The first is infra­
intellectual; that is the one with which the psychologist is generally 
concerned, and it is this we have in mind when we contrast sensibility with 
intelligence, and when we make of emotions a vague reflection of the 
representation. But of the other we should be inclined to say that it is supra­
intellectual, if the word did not immediately and exclusively evoke the idea 
of superiority of value: it is just as much a question of priority in time, and 
of the relation between that which generates and that which is generated. 
Indeed, the second kind of emotion can alone be productive of ideas. 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
3 1 7 
This is just what the critic overlooks when he qualifies as 'feminine,' with 
a touch of contempt, a psychology which accords so extensive and so 
handsome a place to sensibility. First of all he should be blamed for abiding 
by the current commonplaces about women, when it is so easy to use one's 
eyes. I do not intend, for the mere sake of correcting an inappropriate word, 
to enter upon a comparative study of the two sexes. Suffice it to say that 
woman is as intelligent as man, bur that she is less capable of emotion, and 
that if there is any faculty or power of the soul which seems to attain less 
development in woman than in man, it is not intelligence, bur sensibility. 
I mean of course sensibility in the depths, not agitation at the surface.3 But 
no matter. When the critic fancies that he would do injustice to man if he 
related to sensibility the highest faculties of the mind, he is still more to 
be blamed for not seeing precisely where the difference lies between that 
intelligence which understands, discusses, accepts or rejects - which in a 
word limits itself to criticism - and the intelligence which invents. 
Creation signifies, above all, emotion, and that not in literature or art 
alone. We all know the concentration and effort implied in scientific 
discovery. Genius has been defined as 'an infinite capacity for taking pains.' 
True, we think of intelligence as something apart, and, too, as something 
equally apart a general faculty of attention which, when more or less devel­
oped, is supposed to produce a greater or lesser concentration of intelligence. 
But how could this indeterminate attention, extraneous to intelligence, bring 
out of intelligence something which is not there? We cannot help feeling that 
psychology is once more the dupe of language when, having used the same 
word to denote all efforts of attention made in all possible cases, and having 
thus been deceived into assuming them to be all of the same quality, it 
perceives between them only differences of degree. The truth is that in each 
case attention takes on a distinctive colouring, as though individualized by 
the object to which it applies: this is why psychology has already a tendency to 
use the term 'interest' as much as 'attention,' thus implicitly introducing 
sensibility, as being capable of more extensive variation according to par­
ticular cases. But then this diversity is not sufficiently insisted upon; a general 
faculty of being interested is posited, which, while always the same faculty, 
once again affords variety only through a greater or lesser application to its 
object. So do not let us speak of interest in general. Let us rather say that the 
problem which has aroused interest is a representation duplicated by an 
emotion, and that the emotion, being at one and the same time curiosity, 
desire and the anticipated joy of solving a stated problem, is, like the repre­
sentation, unique. It is the emotion which drives the intelligence forward in 
spite of obstacles. It is the emotion above all which vivifies, or rather vitalizes, 
the intellectual elements with which it is destined to unite, constantly 
collecting everything that can be worked in with them and finally compelling 
the enunciation of the problem to expand into its solution. And what about 

318 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
literature and art? A work of genius is in most cases the outcome of an 
emotion, unique of its kind, which seemed to baffle expression, and yet which 
had to express itself. Bur is not this so of all work, however imperfect, into 
which there enters some degree of creativeness? Anyone engaged in writing 
has been in a position to feel the difference between an intelligence left to 
itself and that which burns with the fire of an original and unique emotion, 
born of the identification of the author with his subject, that is to say of 
intuition. In the first case the mind cold-hammers the materials, combining 
together ideas long since cast into words and which society supplies in a solid 
form. In the second, it would seem that the solid materials supplied by 
intelligence first melt and mix, then solidifY again into fresh ideas now shaped 
by the creative mind itself. If these ideas find words already existing which can 
express them, for each of them this seems a piece of unexpected good luck; 
and, in truth, it has often been necessary to assist fortune, and strain the 
meaning of a word, to mould it to the thought. In that event the effort is 
painful and the result problematical. Bur it is in such a case only that the 
mind feels itself, or believes itself, to be creative. It no longer starts from a 
multiplicity of ready-made elements to arrive at a composite unity made up 
of a new arrangement of the old. It has been transported at a bound to 
something which seems both one and unique, and which will contrive later 
to express itself, more or less satisfactorily, in concepts both multiple and 
common, previously provided by language. 
To sum up, alongside of the emotion which is a result of the represen­
tation and which is added to it, there is the emotion which precedes the 
image, which virtually contains it, and is to a certain extent irs cause. A play 
may be scarcely a work of literature and yet it may rack our nerves and cause 
an emotion of the first kind, intense, no doubt, bur commonplace, culled 
from those we experience in the course of daily life, ·and in any case devoid 
of mental content. But the emotion excited within us by a great dramatic 
work is of quite a distinct character. Unique of its kind, it has sprung up in 
the soul of the poet and there alone, before stirring our own; from this 
emotion the work has sprung, to this emotion the author was continually 
harking back throughout the composition of the work. It was no more than 
a creative exigency, bur it was a specific one, now satisfied once the work is 
finished, which would not have been satisfied by some other work unless 
that other had possessed an inward and profound resemblance with the 
former, such as that which exists between two equally satisfactory render­
ings, in terms of ideas or images, of one and the same melody. 
Which amounts to saying that, in attributing to emotion a large share in 
the genesis of the moral disposition, we are not by any means enunciating a 
'moral philosophy of sentiment.' For we are dealing with an emotion capable 
of crystallising into representations and even into an ethical doctrine. From 
this particular doctrine we could never have elicited the moral disposition any 
more than from any other; no amount of speculation will create an obligation 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
319 
or anything like it: the theory may be all very fine, I shall always be able ro say 
that I will not accept it; and even if I do accept it, I shall claim to be free and 
do as I please. Bur if rhe atmosphere of the emotion is there, ifl have breathed 
it in, if it has entered my being, I shall act in accordance with it, uplifted by it; 
not from constraint or necessity, but by virtue of an inclination which I 
should not want to resist. And instead of explaining my act by emotion itself, 
I might in this case just as well deduce it from the theory built up by the 
transposition of that emotion into ideas. We here get a glimpse of the possible 
reply to a weighty question which we have just touched on incidentally and 
with which we shall be confronted later. People are fond of saying that if a 
religion brings us a new morality, it imposes that morality by means of the 
metaphysics which it disposes us to accept, by its ideas on God, the universe, 
the relation of the one co the other. To which the answer has been made that 
it is, on the contrary, by the superiority of its morality that a religion wins 
over souls and reveals to them a certain concepcion of things. But would 
intelligence recognize the superiority of the proposed morality, since it can 
appreciate differences of value only by comparing them with a rule or an 
ideal, and this ideal and this rule are perforce supplied by the morality which 
is already in occupation? On the other hand, how could a new conception of 
the universal order of things be anything but yet another philosophy to set 
alongside of those we know? Even if our intelligence is won over, we shall 
never see in it anything but an explanation, theoretically preferable to the 
others. Even if it seems to enjoin on us, as more in harmony with itself, 
certain rules of conduct, there will be a wide gap between this assent of the 
intellect and a conversion of the will. But the truth is that the doctrine 
cannot, as a purely intellectual representation, ensure the adoption and, 
above all, the practice of the corresponding morality, any more than the 
particular morality, considered by intelligence as a system of rules of conduct, 
can render the doctrine intellectually preferable. Antecedent to the new 
morality, and also the new metaphysics, there is the emotion, which develops 
as an impetus in the realm of the will, and as an explicative representation 
in that of intelligence. Take, for example, the emotion introduced by 
Christianity under the name of charity: if it wins over souls, a certain 
behaviour ensues and a certain doctrine is disseminated. But neither has its 
metaphysics enforced the moral practice, nor the moral practice induced a 
disposition to its metaphysics. Metaphysics and morality express here the self­
same thing, one in terms of intelligence, the other in terms of will; and the 
two expressions of the thing are accepted together, as soon as the thing is 
there to be expressed. 
That a substantial half of our morality includes duties whose obligatory 
character is to be explained fundamentally by the pressure of society on the 
individual will be readily granted, because these duties are a matter of current 
practice, because they have a clear precise formula, and it is therefore easy for 
us, by grasping them where they are entirely visible, and then going down to 

320 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
the roots, to discover the social requirements from which they sprang. But 
that the rest of morality expresses a certain emotional stare, that actually we 
yield not to a pressure but to an attraction, many people will hesitate to 
acknowledge. The reason is that here we cannot, generally speaking, get back 
to the original emotion in the depths of our hearts. There exist formulae 
which are the residue of this emotion, and which have settled in what we may 
call the social conscience according as, within that emotion, a new conception 
of life took form - or rather a certain attitude towards life. Precisely because 
we find ourselves in the presence of the ashes of an extinct emotion, and 
because the driving power of that emotion came from the fire within it, rhe 
formulae which have remained would generally be incapable of rousing our 
will, if older formulae, expressing the fundamental requirements of social life, 
did not by contagious influence communicate to them something of their 
own obligatory character. These two moralities, placed side by side, appear 
now to be only one, the first having lent to the second something of its 
imperative character and having, on the other hand, received from it in 
exchange a connotation less strictly social, more broadly human. But let 
us stir the ashes, we shall find some of them still warm, and at length the 
sparks will kindle into flame; the fire may blaze up again; and, if ir does, it 
will gradually spread. I mean that the maxims of the second morality do nor 
work singly, like those of the first: as soon as one of them, ceasing to be 
abstract, becomes filled with significance and acquires the capacity to act, the 
others tend to do the same: at last they will fuse in the warm emotion which 
left them behind long ago, and in the men, now come to life again, who 
experienced it. Founders and reformers of religions, mystics and saints, 
obscure heroes of moral life whom we have met on our way and who are in 
our eyes the equals of the greatest, they are all there: inspired by their 
example, we follow them, as if we were joining an army of conquerors. They 
are indeed conquerors: they have broken down natural resistance and raised 
humanity to a new destiny. Thus, when we dispel appearances to get at 
reality, when we set aside the common form assumed, thanks to mutual 
exchanges, by the two moralities in conceptual thought and in speech, then, 
at the two extremes of the single morality we find pressure and aspiration: 
the former the more perfect as it becomes more impersonal, closer m those 
natural forces which we call habit or even instinct, the latter the more 
powerful according as it is more obviously aroused in us by definite persons, 
and the more it apparently triumphs over nature. True, if we went down to 
the roots of nature itself we should perhaps find that the same force which 
manifests itself directly, rotating on its own axis, in the human species once 
constituted, also acts later and indirectly, through the medium of privileged 
persons, in order to drive humanity forward. 
[ . . .  ] 
But antecedent to this metaphysical theory, and far nearer to what we have 
directly experienced, are the simpler representations which in this case spring 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
321 
from the emotion in proportion as we dwell on it. We were speaking of 
the founders and reformers of religion, the mystics and the saints. Let us 
hearken to their language; it merely expresses in representations the emotions 
peculiar to a soul opening out, breaking with nature, which enclosed it both 
within itself and within the city. 
They begin by saying that what they experience is a feeling of liberation. 
Well-being, pleasures, riches, all those things that mean so much to the 
common run of men, leave them indifferent. In breaking away from them 
they feel relief, and then exhilaration. Not that nature was wrong in 
attaching us by strong ties to the life she had ordained for us. But we must 
go further, and the amenities which are real comforts at home would 
become hindrances, burdensome impedimenta, if we had to take them on 
our travels. That a soul thus equipped for action would be more drawn to 
sympathize with other souls, and even with the whole of nature, might 
surprise us, if the relative immobility of the soul, revolving in a circle in an 
enclosed society, was not due precisely to the fact that nature has split 
humanity into a variety of individuals by the very act which constituted the 
human species. Like all acts creative of a species, this was a halt on the road. 
By a resumption of the forward movement, the decision to halt is broken. 
True, to obtain a complete effect, the privileged soul would have to carry the 
rest of humanity with it. But if a few follow, and if the others imagine they 
would do likewise on occasion, this already means a great deal; henceforth, 
with the beginning of accomplishment, there will be the hope that the circle 
may be broken in rhe end. In any case, we cannot repeat too often that it is 
not by preaching the love of our neighbour that we can obtain it. It is not by 
expanding our narrower feelings that we can embrace humanity. However 
much our intelligence may convince itself that this is the line of advance, 
things behave differently. What is simple for our understanding is not 
necessarily so for our will. In cases where logic affirms that a certain road 
should be the shortest, experience intervenes, and finds that in that direction 
there is no road. The truth is that heroism may be the only way to love. 
Now, heroism cannot be preached, it has only to show itself, and irs mere 
presence may stir others to action. For heroism itself is a return to 
movement, and emanates from an emotion - infectious like all emotions -
akin to the creative act. Religion expresses this truth in its own way by saying 
that it is in God that we love all other men. And all great mystics declare that 
they have the impression of a current passing from their soul to God, and 
flowing back again from God to mankind. 
Let no one speak of material obstacles to a soul thus freed! It will not 
answer that we can get round the obstacle, or rhat we can break it; it will 
declare that there is no obstacle. We cannot even say of this moral conviction 
that it moves mountains, for it sees no mountains to move. So long as you 
argue about the obstacle, it will stay where it is; and so long as you look at it, 
you will divide it into parts which will have to be overcome one by one; there 

322 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
may be no limit to their number; perhaps you will never exhaust them. But 
you can do away with the whole, at a stroke, if you deny its existence. That is 
what the philosopher did who proved movement by walking: his act was the 
negation pure and simple of the effort, perpetually to be renewed, and 
therefore fruitless, which Zeno judged indispensable to cover, one by one, the 
stages of the intervening space. By going deeply into this new aspect of 
morality, we should find an impression of coincidence, real or imaginary, 
with the generative effort of life. If seen from outside, rhe activity of life lends 
itself, in each of its works, to an analysis which might be carried on 
indefinitely; there is no end to a description of the structure of an eye such as 
ours. But what we call a series of means employed is, in reality, bur a number 
of obstacles overcome; the action of nature is simple, and the infinite 
complexity of the mechanism which it seems to have built up piece by piece 
to achieve the power of vision is but the endless network of opposing forces 
which have cancelled one another out to secure an uninterrupted channel 
for rhe functioning of the faculty. So, if we took into account only what we 
saw, the simple act of an invisible hand plunged into iron filings would seem 
like an inexhaustible interplay of actions and reactions among the filings 
themselves in order that they might effect an equilibrium. If such is the con­
trast between the real working of life and the aspect it presents to the senses 
and the intelligence which analyse it, is it surprising that a soul which no 
more recognizes any material obstacle should feel itself, rightly or wrongly, 
at one with the principle of life? 
Whatever heterogeneity we may at first find between the effect and the 
cause, and though the distance is great from a rule of conduct to a power of 
nature, it has always been from the contact with the generative principle 
of the human species that a man has felt he drew the strength to love 
mankind. By this I mean, of course, a love which absorbs and kindles the 
whole soul. But a more lukewarm love, faint and fleeting, can only be a 
radiation of the former, if not a still paler and colder image of it, left behind 
in the mind or deposited in speech. Thus, morality comprises two different 
pans, one of which follows from the original structure of human society, 
while the other finds its explanation in rhe principle which explains this 
structure. In the former, obligation stands for the pressure exerted by 
the elements of society on one another in order to maintain the shape of the 
whole; a pressure whose effect is prefigured in each of us by a system of 
habits which, so to speak, go to meet it: this mechanism, of which each 
separate part is a habit, but whose whole is comparable to an instinct, has 
been prepared by nature. In the second, there is still obligation, if you will, 
but that obligation is the force of an aspiration or an impetus, of the very 
impetus which culminated in the human species, in social life, in a system of 
habits which bears a resemblance more or less to instinct: the primitive 
impetus here comes into play directly, and no longer through the medium 
of the mechanisms it had set up, and at which it had provisionally halted. 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
323 
In short, to sum up what has gone before, we should say that nature, setting 
down the human species along the line of evolution, intended it to be 
sociable, in the same way as it did the communities of ants and bees; but since 
intelligence was there, the maintenance of social life had to be entrusted to 
an all but intelligent mechanism: intelligent in that each piece could be 
remodelled by human intelligence, yet instinctive in that man could not, 
without ceasing to be a man, reject all the pieces together and cease to accept 
a mechanism of preservation. Instinct gave place temporarily to a system of 
habits, each one of which became contingent, their convergence towards the 
preservation of society being alone necessary, and this necessity bringing 
back instinct with it. The necessity of the whole, felt behind the contingency 
of the parts, is what we call moral obligation in general - it being 
understood that the parts are contingent in the eyes of society only; to the 
individual, into whom society inculcates its habits, the part is as necessary as 
the whole. Now the mechanism designed by nature was simple, like the 
societies originally constituted by her. Did she foresee the immense develop­
ment and the endless complexities of societies such as ours? Let us first agree 
as to the meaning of this question. We do nor assert that nature has, strictly 
speaking, designed or foreseen anything whatever. But we have the right to 
proceed like a biologist, who speaks of nature's intentions every time he 
assigns a function to an organ: he merely expresses thus the adequateness 
of the organ to the function. In spite of humanity's having become civilized, 
in spite of the transformation of society, we maintain that the tendencies 
which are, as it were, organic in social life have remained what they were in 
the beginning. We can trace them back and study them. The result of this 
investigation is clear; it is for closed, simple societies that the moral structure, 
original and fundamental in man, is made. I grant that the organic tendencies 
do not stand out clearly to our consciousness. They constitute, nevertheless, 
the strongest element of obligation. However complex our morality has 
grown and though it has become coupled with tendencies which are not mere 
modifications of natural tendencies, and whose trend is not in the direction of 
nature, it is to these natural tendencies that we come in the end, when we 
want to obtain a precipitate of the pure obligation contained in this fluid 
mass. Such then is the first half of morality. The other had no place in 
nature's plan. We mean that nature foresaw a certain expansion of social life 
through intelligence, but it was to be a limited expansion. She could not have 
intended that this should go on so far as to endanger the original structure. 
Numerous indeed are the instances where man has thus outwitted nature, so 
knowing and wise, yet so simple-minded. Nature surely intended that men 
should beget men endlessly, according to the rule followed by all other living 
creatures; she rook the most minute precautions to ensure the preservation of 
the species by the multiplication of individuals; hence she had not foreseen, 
when bestowing on us intelligence, that intelligence would at once find a way 
of divorcing the sexual act from its consequences, and that man might refrain 

324 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
from reaping without forgoing the pleasure of sowing. It is in quite another 
sense that man outwits nature when he extends social solidarity into the 
brotherhood of man; but he is deceiving her nevertheless, for those societies 
whose design was prefigured in the original structure of the human soul, and 
of which we can still perceive the plan in the innate and fundamental 
tendencies of modern man, required that the group be closely united, bur that 
between group and group there should be virtual hostility; we were always to 
be prepared for attack or defence. Not, of course, that nature designed war 
for war's sake. Those leaders of humanity drawing men after them, who have 
broken down the gates of the city, seem indeed thereby to have placed 
themselves again in the current of the viral impetus. But this impetus 
inherent in life is, like life, finite. Its path is strewn with obstacles, and the 
species which have appeared, one after the other, are so many combinations 
of this force with opposing forces: the former urging us forward, the others 
making us rum in a circle. Man, fresh from the hands of nature, was a being 
both intelligent and social, his sociability being devised to find its scope in 
small communities, his intelligence being designed to further individual and 
group life. But intelligence, expanding through its own efforts, has devel­
oped unexpectedly. It has freed men from restrictions to which they were 
condemned by the limitations of their nature. This being so, it was not 
impossible that some of them, specially gifted, should reopen that which was 
closed and do, at least for themselves, what nature could not possibly have 
done for mankind. Their example has ended in leading others forward, in 
imagination at least. There is a genius of the will as there is a genius of the 
mind, and genius defies all anticipation. Through those geniuses of the will, 
the impetus of life, traversing matter, wrests from it, for the future of the 
species, promises such as were out of the question when the species was being 
constituted. Hence in passing from social solidarity to the brotherhood of 
man, we break with one particular nature, but not with all nature. It might be 
said, by slightly distorting the terms ofSpinoza, that it is to get back to natura 
naturans that we break away from natura naturata. 
Hence, between the first morality and the second, lies the whole distance 
between repose and movement. The first is supposed to be immutable. If it 
changes, it immediately forgets that it has changed, or it acknowledges no 
change. The shape it assumes at any given time claims to be the final shape. 
Bur the second is a forward thrust, a demand for movement; it is the very 
essence of mobility. Thus would it prove, thus alone, indeed, would it be 
able at first to define, its superiority. Postulate the first, you cannot bring the 
second our of it, any more than you can from one or several positions of a 
moveable body derive motion. But, on the contrary, movement includes 
immobility, each position traversed by the moving object being conceived 
and even perceived as a virtual stop. But a detailed demonstration is 
unnecessary: the superiority is experienced before ever it is represented, and 
furthermore could not be demonstrated afterwards if it had not first been 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
325 
felt. There is a difference of vital tone. Those who regularly put into practice 
the morality of the city know this feeling of well-being, common to the 
individual and to society, which is the outward sign of the interplay of 
material resistances neutralizing each other. Bur the soul that is opening, and 
before whose eyes material objects vanish, is lost in sheer joy. Pleasure and 
well-being are something, joy is more. For it is nor contained in these, 
whereas they are virtually contained in joy. They mean, indeed, a halt or a 
marking rime, while joy is a step forward. 
That is why the first morality is comparatively easy to formulate, but not 
the second. For our intelligence and our language deal in fact with things; 
they are less at home in representing transitions or progress. The morality 
of the Gospels is essentially that of the open soul: are we nor justified in 
pointing out that it borders upon paradox, and even upon contradiction, 
in its more definite admonirions1 If riches are an evil, should we not be 
injuring the poor in giving them what we possess? If he who has been smitten 
on the one cheek is to offer the other also, what becomes of justice, without 
which, after all, there can be no 'charity'? But the paradox disappears, the 
contradiction vanishes, if we consider the intent of these maxims, which is to 
create a certain disposition of the soul. It is not for the sake of the poor, but 
for his own sake, that the rich man should give up his riches: blessed are the 
poor 'in spirit'! The beauty lies, not in being deprived, not even in depriving 
oneself, but in not feeling the deprivation. The act by which the soul opens 
out broadens and raises to pure spirituality a morality enclosed and 
materialized in ready-made rules: the latter then becomes, in comparison 
with the other, something like a snapshot view of movement. Such is rhe 
inner meaning of the antitheses that occur one after the other in the Sermon 
on the Mount: 'Ye have heard that it was said . . .  I say unto you . .  .' On the 
one hand the closed, on the other the open. Current morality is not 
abolished; but it appears like a virtual stop in the course of actual progression. 
The old method is not given up; bur it is fitted into a more general method, as 
is the case when the dynamic reabsorbs the static, the laner then becoming a 
mere particular instance of the former. We should need then, strictly speak­
ing, a means of expressing directly the movement and the tendency; but if 
we still want - and we cannot avoid it - to translate them into the language 
of the static and the motionless, we shall be confronted with formulae that 
border on contradiction. So we might compare what is impracticable in 
certain precepts of the Gospels to what was illogical in the first explanations 
of the differential calculus. Indeed, between the morality of the ancients and 
Christianity we should find much the same relation as that berween the 
mathematics of antiquity and our own. 
The geometry of the ancients may have provided particular solutions 
which were, so to say, an anticipated application of our general methods; bur 
it never brought out these methods; the impetus was not there which would 
have made them spring from the static to the dynamic. But at any rate it 

326 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
carried as far as possible the imitation of the dynamic by the static. Now, we 
have just the same impression when we compare, for example, the doctrine 
of the Stoics with Christian morality. The Sroics proclaimed themselves 
citizens of the world, and added that all men were brothers, having come 
from the same God. The words were almost the same; but they did not find 
the same echo, because they were not spoken with the same accent. The 
Stoics provided some very fine examples. If they did not succeed in drawing 
humanity after them, it is because Stoicism is essentially a philosophy. The 
philosopher who is so enamoured of this noble doctrine as to become 
wrapped up in it doubtless vitalizes it by translating it into practice; just so 
did Pygmalion's love breathe life into the statue once it was carven. But it is 
a far cry from that to the enthusiasm which spreads from soul to soul, 
unceasingly, like a conflagration. Such an emotion may indeed develop into 
ideas which make up a doctrine, or even several different doctrines having 
no other resemblance between them than a kinship of the spirit; but it 
precedes the idea instead of following it. To find something of the kind in 
classical antiquity, we must go not to the Sroics, but rather to the man who 
inspired all the great philosophers of Greece without contributing any 
system, without having written anything, Socrates. Socrates indeed exalts the 
exercise of reason, and particularly the logical function of the mind, above 
everything else. The irony he parades is meant to dispose of opinions which 
have not undergone the test of reflection, to put them to shame, so to speak, 
by setting them in contradiction with themselves. 
Dialogue, 
as he 
understands it, has given birth to the Platonic dialectics and consequently 
to the philosophical method, essentially rational, which we still practise. The 
object of such a dialogue is ro arrive at concepts that may be circumscribed 
by definitions; these concepts will become the Platonic Ideas; and the theory 
of Ideas, in its turn, will serve as a model for the systems, also essentially 
rational, of traditional metaphysics. Socrates goes further still; virtue itself he 
holds to be a science, he identifies the practice of good with our knowledge 
of it; he rhus paves the way for the doctrine which will absorb all moral life 
in the rational function of thought. Reason has never been set so high. 
At least that is what strikes us at first. But let us look closer. Socrates teaches 
because the oracle of Delphi has spoken. He has received a mission. He is 
poor, and poor he must remain. He must mix with the common folk, he 
must become one of them, his speech must get back to their speech. He will 
write nothing, so that his thought shall be communicated, a living thing, to 
minds who shall convey it to other minds. He is indifferent to cold and 
hunger, though in no way an ascetic; he is merely delivered from material 
needs, and emancipated from his body. A 'daemon' accompanies him, 
which makes its voice heard when a warning is necessary. He so thoroughly 
believes in this 'daemonic voice' that he dies rather than not follow it; if he 
refuses to defend himself before the popular tribunal, if he goes to meet his 
condemnation, it is because the 'daemon' has said nothing to dissuade him. 

Morality, Obligation and the Open Soul 
327 
In a word, his mission is of a religious and mystic order, in the present-day 
meaning of the words; his teaching, so perfectly rational, hinges on some­
thing that seems to transcend pure reason. But do we not detect this in his 
teaching itself? If the inspired, or at all events lyrical sayings, which occur 
throughout the dialogues of Plato, were not those of Socrates, but those of 
Plato himself, if the master's language had always been such as Xenophon 
attributes to him, could we understand the enthusiasm which fired his 
disciples, and which has come down the ages? Stoics, Epicureans, Cynics, all 
the Greek moralists spring from Socrates - not only, as has always been said, 
because they develop the reaching of the Master in its various directions, bur 
also, and, above all, because they borrow from him the attitude which is so 
little in keeping with rhe Greek spirit and which he created, the attitude of 
the Sage. Whenever the philosopher, closeted with his wisdom, stands apart 
from the common rule of mankind - be it to teach them, to serve as a 
model, or simply to go about his work of perfecting his inner self - Socrates 
is there, Socrates alive, working through the incomparable prestige of his 
person. Let us go further. It has been said that he brought philosophy down 
from heaven to earth. But could we understand his life, and above all his 
death, if the conception of the soul which Plato attributes to him in the 
Phaedo had not been his? More generally speaking, do the myths we find in 
the dialogues of Plato, touching the soul, irs origin, its entrance into the 
body, do anything more than set down in Platonic terms a creative emotion, 
the emotion present in the moral teaching of Socrates? The myths, and the 
Socratic conception of the soul to which they stand in the same relationship 
as the explanatory programme to a symphony, have been preserved along 
with the Platonic dialectics. They pursue their subterranean way through 
Greek metaphysics, and rise to the open air again with the Alexandrine 
philosophers, with Arnmonius perhaps, in any case with Plorinus, who 
claims to be the successor of Socrates. They have provided the Socratic soul 
with a body of doctrine similar to that into which was to be breathed the 
spirit of the Gospels. The two metaphysics, in spite, perhaps because, of 
their resemblance, gave battle to each other, before the one absorbed the best 
that was in the other; for a while the world may well have wondered whether 
it was to become Christian or Neo-Plaronic. It was Socrates against Jesus. 
To confine ourselves to Socrates, the question is: what would this very 
practical genius have done in another society and in other circumstances; if 
he had not been struck, above all, by the danger of the moral empiricism of 
his time, and the mental anarchy of Athenian democracy; if he had not had 
to deal with the most crying need first, by establishing the rights of reason; if 
he had not therefore thrust intuition and inspiration into the background, 
and if the Greek he was had not mastered in him the Oriental who sought to 
come into being? We have made the distinction between the closed and the 
open: would anyone place Socrates among the closed souls? There was irony 
running through Socratic teaching, and outbursts of lyricism were probably 

328 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
rare; bur in the measure in which these ourbursts cleared the road for a new 
spirit, they have been decisive for the furure of humanity. 
Between the closed soul and the open soul there is the soul in process of 
opening. Between the immobility of a man seated and the motion of the same 
man running there is the act of getting up, the attitude he assumes when he 
rises. In a word, between the static and the dynamic there is to be observed, in 
morality too, a transition stage. This intermediate state would pass unnoticed 
if, when at rest, we could develop the necessary impetus to spring straight into 
action. But it attracts our attention when we stop short - the usual sign of 
insufficient impetus. Let us put the same thing in a different way. We have 
seen that the purely static morality might be called infra-intellectual, and 
the purely dynamic, supra-intellectual. Nature intended the one, and the 
other is a contribution of man's genius. The former is characteristic of a 
whole group of habits which are, in man, the counterpart of certain instincts 
in animals; it is something less than intelligence. The latter is inspiration, 
intuition, emotion, susceptible of analysis into ideas which furnish intellec­
tual notations of it and branch our into infinite detail; thus, like a unity 
which encompasses and transcends a plurality incapable of ever equalling it, 
it contains any amount of intellectuality; it is more than intelligence. 
Between the two lies intelligence itself. It is at this point that the human soul 
would have settled down, had it sprung forward from the one without 
reaching the other. It would have dominated the morality of the closed soul; 
it would not have attained to, or rather it would have not have created, that 
of the open soul. Its attitude, the result of getting up, would have lifted it to 
the plane of intellectuality. Compared with the position it had just left -
described negatively - such a soul would be manifesting indifference or 
insensibility, it would be in rhe 'ataraxy' or the 'apathy' of the Epicureans and 
the Stoics. Considered in what it positively is, if its detachment from the old 
sought to be an attachment to something new, its life would be contem­
plation; it would conform to the Platonic and the Aristotelian ideal. From 
whatever angle we look at it, its attitude would be upright, noble, truly 
worthy of admiration and reserved for the chosen few. Philosophies which 
start from very different principles may find in it a common goal. The 
reason is that there is only one road leading from action confined in a circle 
to action developing in the freedom of space, from repetition to creation, 
from the infra-intellectual to the supra-intellectual. Anyone halting between 
the two is inevitably in the zone of pure contemplation, and in any case, no 
longer holding to the one but without having yet reached the other, 
naturally practises that half-virtue, detachment. 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism4 
The alterations of ebb and flow in hisroty have often been discussed. All 
prolonged action, it would seem, brings about a reaction in the opposite 
direction. Then it starts anew, and the pendulum swings on indefinitely. 
True, in this case the pendulum is endowed with memoty, and is not the 
same when it swings back as on the outward swing, since it is then richer 
by all the intermediate experience. This is why the image of a spiral move­
ment, which has sometimes been used, is perhaps more correct than that of 
the oscillations of a pendulum. As a matter of fact, there are psychological 
and social causes which we might a priori predict will be productive of such 
effects. The uninterrupted enjoyment of an eagerly-sought advantage engen­
ders weariness or indifference; it seldom fulfils completely its promise; it 
brings with it unforeseen drawbacks; it ends by making conspicuous the 
good side of what has been given up and arousing a desire to get it back. 
The desire will be found principally in the rising generations, who have not 
experienced the ills of the past, and have not had to extricate themselves from 
them. Whereas the parents congratulate themselves on the present state of 
things as an acquisition for which they remember paying dearly, the children 
give it no more thought than the air they breathe; on the other hand, they are 
alive to disadvantages which are nothing but the reverse side of the advantages 
so painfully won for them. Thus may arise a wish ro put the clock back. Such 
actions and reactions are characteristic of the modern State, not by reason of 
any historical fatality, but because parliamentaty government was conceived 
in part with the vety object of providing a channel for discontent. The powers 
that be receive but moderate praise for the good they do; they are there to do 
it: but their slightest mistake is scored; and all mistakes are stored up until 
their accumulated weight causes the government to fall. If there are two 
opposing parties and two only, the game will go on with perfect regularity. 
Each team will come back into power, bringing with it the prestige of 
principles which have apparently remained intact during the period in which 
it had no responsibility to bear: principles sit with the Opposition. In reality 
the Opposition will have profited, if it is intelligent, by the experience it has 
left the party in power to work our; it will have more or less modified the 
content of its ideas and hence the significance of its principles. Thus progress 
becomes possible, in spite of the swing of the pendulum, or rather because of 
it, if only men care about it. But, in such cases, the oscillation between the 
two opposite extremes is the result of certain vety simple contrivances set up 

330 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
by society, or certain very obvious tendencies of the individual. Ir is not the 
effect of a paramount necessity towering above the particular causes of alter­
nation and dominating human events in general. Does such a necessiry exist? 
We do not believe in the fatality of history. There is no obstacle which 
cannot be broken down by wills sufficiently keyed up, if they deal with it in 
time. There is thus no inescapable historical law. But there are biological 
laws; and the human societies, in so far as they are partly willed by nature, 
pertain to biology on this particular point. If the evolution of the organized 
world takes place according to certain laws, I mean by virtue of certain forces, 
it is impossible that the psychological evolution of individual and social man 
should entirely renounce these habits of life. Now we have shown elsewhere 
that the essence of a viral tendency is to develop fan-wise, creating, by the 
mere fact of its growth, divergent directions, each of which will receive a 
certain portion of the impetus. We added that there was nothing mysterious 
about chis law. It simply expresses the fact that a tendency is the forward 
thrust of an indistinct multiplicity, which is, moreover, indistinct, and multi­
plicity, only if we consider it in retrospect, when the multitudinous views 
taken of its past undivided character allow us to see it composed of elements 
which were actually created by its development. Let us imagine that orange is 
the only colour that has as yet made its appearance in the world. Would it be 
already a composite of yellow and red? Obviously not. But it will have been 
composed of yellow and red when these two colours are born in their turn; 
from that hour the original orange colour can be looked at from the twofold 
point of view of red and yellow; and if we supposed, by a trick of fancy, that 
yellow and red appeared through an intensification of orange, we should 
have a very simple example of what we call fan-wise growth. But there is no 
real necessity for fancy and comparisons. All we need is to look at life without 
letting any idea of artificial synthesis supervene. Some psychologists hold the 
act of volition to be a composite reflex, others are inclined to see in the reflex 
activity a curtailment of volition. The truth is that the reflex and the 
voluntary actions embody two views, now rendered possible, of a primordial, 
indivisible activity, which was neither the one nor the other, but which 
becomes retroactively, through them, both at once. We could say the same 
of instinct and intelligence, of animal life and vegetable life, of many other 
pairs of divergent and complementary tendencies. Only, in the general evolu­
tion of life, the tendencies thus created by a process of dichotomy are to be 
found in species different from one another; they have set forth, each 
independently, to seek their fortunes in the world; and the material form they 
have assumed prevents them from reuniting to bring back again, stronger 
than it was, more complex, more fully evolved, the original tendency. Not so 
in the evolution of the psychical and social life. Here the tendencies, born of 
the process of splitting, develop in the same individual, or in the same society. 
As a rule, they can be developed only in succession. If there are two of them, 
as is generally the case, one of them will be clung to first; with this one we 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
331 
shall move more or less forward, generally as far as possible; then, with what 
we have acquired in the course of this evolution, we shall come back to take 
up the one we left behind. That one will chen be developed in its turn, the 
former being neglected, and our new effort will be continued until, 
reinforced by new acquisitions, we can take up the first one again and push it 
further forward still. Since, during the operation, we are entirely given up co 
one of the two tendencies, since it alone counts, we are apt to say that it alone 
is positive and that the other was only its negation; if we like to put things in 
this way, the ocher is, as a matter of fact, its opposite. It will then be said -
and this will be more or less true according to circumstances - chat the 
progress was due to an oscillation between the two opposites, the situation 
moreover not being the same and a gain having been realized by the rime the 
pendulum has swung back to its original position. But it does sometimes 
happen that the expression is entirely accurate, and that there is really 
oscillation berween two opposites. This is when a tendency, advantageous in 
itself, cannot be moderated otherwise than by the action of a counter­
tendency, which hence becomes advantageous also. It would seem as though 
the wise course, chen, would be a co-operation of the two tendencies, the first 
intervening when circumstances require, the ocher restraining it when it 
threatens to go coo far. Unfortunately, it is difficult to say where exaggeration 
and danger begin. Sometimes the mere fact of going further than appeared 
reasonable leads co new surroundings, creates a new situation which removes 
the danger, at the same time emphasizing the advantage. This is especially the 
case with the very general tendencies which determine the trend of a society, 
and whose development necessarily extends over a more or less considerable 
number of generations. An intelligence, even a superhuman one, cannot say 
where this will lead to, since action on the move creates its own route, cr.eates 
to a very great extent the conditions under which it is to be fulfilled, and thus 
baffles all calculation. In such a case, one pushes further and further afield, 
often stopping only on the very brink of disaster. The counter-tendency chen 
steps into the place chat has been vacated; alone, in its turn, it will go as far 
as it can go. If the other was called action, then this will be reaction. As the 
two tendencies, if they had journeyed together, would have moderated each 
other, as their interpenetration in an undivided primitive tendency is the very 
definition of moderation, the mere fact of raking up all the room imparts co 
each of them such an impetus that it bolts ahead as the barriers collapse one 
by one; there is something frenzied about it. Now we must not make 
exaggerated use of the word 'law' in a field which is that of liberty, but we 
may use chis convenient term when we are confronted with important facts 
which show sufficient regularity. So we will call law of dichotomy chat 
law which apparently brings about a materialization, by a mere splitting up, 
of tendencies which began by being two photographic views, so to speak, of 
one and the same tendency. And we propose to designate law of twofold frenzy 
the imperative demand, forthcoming from each of the two tendencies as soon 

332 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
as ir is materialized by the splitting, to be pursued to the very end - as if there 
was an end! Once more, it is difficult not to wonder whether the simple 
tendency would not have done better to grow without dividing in two, thus 
being kept within bounds by the very coincidence of its propulsive force with 
the power of stopping, which would then have been virtually, but not 
actually, a distinct and contrary force of impulsion. There would have been, 
then, no risk of stumbling into absurdity; there would have been an insurance 
against disaster. Yes, but this would not have given the maximum of creation, 
in quantity and in quality. It is necessary to keep on to the bitter end in one 
direction, to find out what it will yield: when we can go no further, we turn 
back, with all we have acquired, to set off in the direction from which we had 
turned aside. Doubtless, looking from the outside at these comings and 
goings we see only the antagonism of the two tendencies, the futile attempt of 
the one to thwart the other, the ultimate defeat of the second and the revenge 
of the first: man loves the dramatic; he is strongly inclined to pick out from a 
whole more or less extended period of history those characteristics which 
make of it a struggle between two parties, two societies or two principles, each 
of them in turn coming off victorious. But the struggle is here only the 
superficial aspect of an advance. The truth is that a tendency on which two 
different views are possible can put forth its maximum, in quantity or quality, 
only if it materializes these two possibilities into moving realities, each one of 
which leaps forward and monopolizes the available space, while the other is 
on the watch unceasingly for its own turn to come. Only thus will the content 
of the original tendency develop, if indeed we can speak of a content when 
no one, not even the tendency itself if it achieved consciousness, could tell 
what will issue from it. It supplies the effort, and the result is a surprise. Such 
are the workings of nature; the struggles which she stages for us do not 
indicate pugnacity so much as curiosity. And it is precisely when it imitates 
nature, when it yields to the original impulsion, that the progress of humanity 
assumes a certain regularity and conforms - though very imperfectly, be it 
said - to such laws as those we have stated. But the time has come to close 
this all too long parenthesis. Let us merely show how our two laws would 
apply in the case which led us to open it. 
We were dealing with the concern for comfort and luxury which has 
apparently become the main preoccupation of humanity. In considering 
how it has developed the spirit of invention, how so many inventions are the 
application of science, and how science is destined to extend its scope 
indefinitely, we should be tempted to believe in indefinite progress in the 
same direction. Never, indeed, do the satisfactions with which new inven­
tions meet old needs induce humanity to leave things at that; new needs 
arise, just as imperious and increasingly numerous. We have seen the race for 
comfort proceeding faster and faster, on a track along which are surging ever 
demer crowds. To-day it is a stampede. But should not this very frenzy open 
our eyes? Was there not some other frenzy to which it has succeeded, and 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
333 
which developed in the opposite direction an activity of which the present 
frenzy is the complement? In point of fact, it is from the fifteenth or 
sixteenth century onward that men seemed to aspire to easier material 
conditions. Throughout the Middle Ages, an ascetic ideal had predomi­
nated. There is no need to recall the exaggerations to which it led; here 
already you had frenzy. It may be alleged that asceticism was confined to a 
very small minority, and this is true. But just as mysticism, the privilege of 
a few, was popularised by religion, so concentrated asceticism, which was 
doubtless exceptional, became diluted for the rank and file of mankind into 
a general indifference to the conditions of daily existence. There was for one 
and all an absence of comfort which to us is astonishing. Rich and poor did 
without superfluities which we consider as necessities. It has been pointed 
out that if the lord lived better than the peasant, we must understand by this 
that he had more abundant food. 5 Otherwise, the difference was slight. Here 
we are, then, in the presence of two divergent tendencies which have 
succeeded each other and have behaved, both of them, frantically. So, we 
may presume that they correspond to two opposing manifestations of one 
primordial tendency, which in this way contrived to evolve from itself, in 
quantity and quality, everything that it was capable of, even more than it 
had to give, proceeding along each of the two roads, one after the other, 
getting back into one direction with everything that had been picked up 
by the way in the ocher. That signifies oscillation and progress, progress by 
oscillation. And we should expect, after the ever-increasing complexity of 
life, a return to simplicity. This return is obviously not a certainty; the future 
of humanity remains indeterminate, precisely because it is on humanity that 
it depends. But if, ahead of us, lie only possibilities or probabilities, which 
we shall examine presently, we cannot say the same for the past: the two 
opposite developments which we have just indicated are indeed those of a 
single original tendency. 
And indeed the history of ideas bears witness to it. Out of Socratic 
thought, pursued in two different directions which in Socrates were comple­
mentary, came the Cyrenaic and the Cynic doctrines: the one insisted chat we 
should demand from life the greatest possible number of satisfactions, the 
other chat we should learn to do without them. They developed into 
Epicureanism and Stoicism with their two opposing tendencies, laxity and 
tension. If there were the least doubt about the common essence of the two 
mental attitudes to which these principles correspond, it would suffice to note 
that, in the Epicurean school itself, along with popular Epicureanism which 
was at times the unbridled pursuit of pleasure, there was the Epicureanism of 
Epicurus, according to which the supreme pleasure was to need no pleasures. 
The truth is that the two principles are at the heart of the traditional con­
ception of happiness. Here is a word which is commonly used to designate 
something intricate and ambiguous, one of those ideas which humanity has 
intentionally left vague, so that each individual might interpret it after his 

334 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
own fashion. But in whatever sense it is understood, there is no happiness 
without security - I mean without the prospect of being able to rely on the 
permanence of a state into which one has settled oneself. This assurance is to 
be found either in the mastering of things, or in the mastering of self which 
makes one independent of things. In both cases there is delight in one's 
strength, whether inwardly perceived or outwardly manifested: the one may 
lead to pride, the other to vanity. But the simplification and complication of 
life do indeed follow from a 'dichotomy,' are indeed apt to develop into 
'double frenzy,' in fact have all that is required to alternate periodically. 
This being so, as we have said above, there is nothing improbable in the 
return to a simpler life. Science itself might show us the way. Whereas 
physics and chemistry help us to satisfy and encourage us to multiply our 
needs, it is conceivable that physiology and medical science may reveal more 
and more clearly to us all the dangers of this multiplication, all the 
disappointments which accompany the majority of our satisfactions. I enjoy 
a well-prepared dish of meat; to a vegetarian, who used to like it as much as I 
do, the mere sight of meat is sickening. It may be alleged that we are both 
right, and that there is no more arguing about taste than about colour. 
Perhaps: but I cannot help noting that my vegetarian is thoroughly 
convinced he will never revert to his old inclinations, whereas I am not 
nearly so sure that I shall always stick to mine. He has been through both 
experiments; I have only tried one. His repulsion grows stronger as he fixes 
his attention on it, whereas my satisfaction is largely a matter of inattention 
and tends to pale in a strong light. I do believe it would fade away 
altogether, if decisive experiments came to prove, as it is not impossible they 
will, that I am directly and slowly poisoning myself by eating meat.6 I was 
taught in my school days that the composition of foodstuffs was known, the 
requirements of our organs also, that it was possible to deduce from this the 
necessary and sufficient ration to maintain life. The master would have been 
very much surprised to hear that chemical analysis did not take into account 
'vitamins' whose presence in food is indispensable to health. It will probably 
be found that more than one malady, for which medical science has no cure, 
takes its remote origin from 'deficiencies' of which we have no inkling. The 
only sure means of absorbing all we need would be to have our food 
subjected to no preparation, perhaps even (who knows) not cooked at all. 
Here again the belief in the heredity of acquired habits has done great harm. 
It is commonly said that the human stomach has lost the habit, that we 
could not feed ourselves nowadays like primitive man. This is true, if taken 
as meaning that we have left certain natural tendencies lie dormant from our 
infancy, and that it would be difficult to reawaken them in middle age. But 
that we are born modified is hardly probable: even if our stomach is different 
from that of our prehistoric ancestors, the difference is not due to mere habit 
contracted down the ages. It will not be long before science enlightens us on 
all these points. Let us suppose that it does so in the sense we foresee: the 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
335 
mere reform of our food supply would have immeasurable reactions on our 
industry, our trade, our agriculture, all of which it would considerably 
simplify. What about our other needs? The demands of the procreative 
senses are imperious, bur rhey would be quickly settled if we hearkened to 
nature alone. The trouble is that around a violent but paltry sensation, taken 
as the fundamental, humanity has made rise an endlessly increasing number 
of overtones: so rich a variety of timbres that almost any object struck on 
some particular point now gives out the sound that has become an 
obsession. Thus the senses are constantly being roused by the imagination. 
Sex-appeal is the keynote of our whole civilization. Here again science has 
something to say, and it will say it one day so clearly that all must listen: 
there will no longer be pleasure in so much love of pleasure. Woman will 
hasten the coming of this time according as she really and sincerely strives to 
become man's equal, instead of remaining the instrument she still is, waiting 
to vibrate under the musician's bow. Let the transformation take place: our 
life will be both more purposeful and more simple. What woman demands 
in the way of luxuries in order to please man, and, at the rebound, to please 
herself, will become to a great extent unnecessary. There will be less waste, 
and less enviousness. Luxury, pleasure and comfort are indeed closely akin, 
though the connexion between them is not what it is generally supposed to 
be. It is our way to arrange them in a certain gradation, we are supposed 
to move up the scale from comfort to luxury: when we have made sure of 
our comfort we want to cap it with pleasures, then comes love of luxury on 
top of all. But this is a purely intellectualist psychology, which imagines that 
our feelings can be measured exactly by their objects. Because luxuries cost 
more than mere conveniences, and pleasure more than comfort, they are 
supposed to be keeping pace with goodness knows what corresponding 
desire. The truth is that it is generally for the sake of our luxuries that we 
want our comforts, because the comforts we lack look to us like luxuries, and 
because we want to imitate and equal those people who can afford them. 
In the beginning was vanity. How many delicacies are sought after solely 
because they are expensive! For years civilized people spent a great part of 
their efforts abroad in procuring spices. It is amazing to think that this 
was the supreme object of navigation, so perilous in those days; that for this 
thousands of men risked their lives; that the courage, the energy and the spirit 
of adventure, of which the discovery of America was a mere incident, were 
mainly employed in the search for ginger, cloves, pepper and cinnamon. 
Who troubles about these flavourings which so long tasted delicious, now 
that they can be had for a few pence from the grocer round the corner? Such 
facts as these are sad reading for the moralist. But reflect a moment, they 
contain cause for hope as well. The continual craving for creature comforts, 
the pursuit of pleasure, the unbridled love ofluxury, all these things which fill 
us with so much anxiety for the future of humanity, because it seems to find 
in them solid satisfactions, all this will appear as a balloon which man has 

336 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
madly inflated, and which will deflate just as suddenly. We know that one 
frenzy brings on the counter-frenzy. More particularly, the comparison of 
present-day facts with those of the past is a warning to us to regard as 
transient tastes which appear to be permanent. Since to-day the supreme 
ambition for so many men is to have a car, let us recognize the incomparable 
services rendered by motor-cars, admire the mechanical marvel they are, hope 
that they will multiply and spread wherever they are needed, but let us say to 
ourselves that a short time hence they may not be so greatly in demand just as 
an amenity or 'for swank,' though the chances are that they may not be quite 
so neglected, and we hope not, as cloves and cinnamon are to-day. 
Here we come to the essential point of our discussion. We have just cited 
an example of the craving for luxuries arising from a mechanical invention. 
Many are of the opinion that it is mechanical invention in general which has 
developed the taste for luxuries, and indeed for mere comfort. Nay, if it is 
generally admitted that our material needs will go on indefinitely growing 
more numerous and more imperious, this is because there seems to be no 
reason why humanity should abandon the path of mechanical invention, 
once it has started on it. Let us add that, the more science advances, the 
more inventions are suggested by its discoveries; in many cases from theory 
to application is but a step; and since science cannot stop, it really does look 
indeed as though there could be no end to the satisfying of our old needs 
and the creation of new ones. But we must first ascertain whether the spirit 
of invention necessarily creates artificial needs, or whether in this case it is 
not the artificial need which has guided the spirit of invention. 
The second hypothesis is by far the more probable. It is confirmed by 
recent research on the origin of mechanization? The fact has been recalled 
that man has always invented machines, that antiquity has remarkable ones 
to show, that many a clever mechanical device was thought of long before 
the development of modern science, and, at a later stage, independently of 
it: even to-day a mere workman, without scientific culture, will hit on 
improvements which have never occurred to skilled engineers. Mechanical 
invention is a natural gift. Doubtless its effects were limited so long as it was 
confined to utilizing actual, and as it were visible, forces: muscular effort, 
wind or water power. The machine developed its full efficiency only from 
the day when it became possible to place at its service, by a simple process 
of releasing, the potential energies stored up for millions of years, bor­
rowed from the sun, deposited in coal, oil, etc. Bur that was the day when 
the steam-engine was invented, and we know that this invention was not the 
outcome of theoretical considerations. Let us hasten to add that the progress 
made, slow enough at first, assumed giant proportions as soon as science 
took a hand. It is none the less true that the spirit of mechanical invention, 
which runs between narrow banks so long as it is left to itself, but expands 
indefinitely after its conjunction with science, remains distinct from it, and 
could, if need be, do without it. Similarly we have the Rhone entering the 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
337 
Lake of Geneva, apparently mingling with irs waters, but showing, when it 
leaves it again, that it has preserved its independence. 
There has not been then, as some people are inclined to believe, a demand 
on the part of science, imposing on men, by the mere fact of its 
development, increasingly artificial needs. If that were so, humanity would 
be doomed to a growing materiality, for the progress of science will never 
cease. But the truth is that science has given what was asked of it, and has 
not in this case taken the initiative; it is the spirit of invention which has not 
always operated in the best interests of humanity. It has created a mass of 
new needs; it has not taken the trouble to ensure for the majority of men, for 
all if that were possible, the satisfaction of old needs. To put it more clearly: 
though not neglecting the necessary, it has thought too much about the 
superfluous. It may be said that these rwo terms are hard to define, and that 
what are luxuries to some people are necessities to others. True, and it would 
be easy enough here to lose one's way amid subtle and fine distinctions. But 
there are cases where subtlety should be cast aside and a broad view taken. 
Millions of men never get enough to eat. There are some who starve to 
death. If the land produced much more, there would be far fewer chances of 
not getting enough to eat,8 or of starving to death. Over-production here is 
but a deceptio visus. If mechanization is in any way to blame, it is for not 
having sufficiently devoted itself to helping man in his agricultural labour. 
It will be said that agricultural implements exist and are now widely used. 
I grant it, but all that mechanization has done here to lighten man's burden, 
all that science has done on its side to increase the yield of the soil, amounts 
to comparatively little. We feel strongly that agriculture, which nourishes 
man, should dominate all else, in any case be the first concern of industry 
itself. Generally speaking, industry has not troubled enough about the 
greater or lesser importance of needs to be satisfied. It simply complied with 
public taste, and manufactured with no other thought than that of selling. 
Here as elsewhere, we should like to see a central, organizing intelligence, 
which would co-ordinate industry and agriculture and allot to the machine 
its proper place, I mean the place where it can best serve humanity. Thus, 
when the case against mechanization is stated, the main grievance is often 
left out. The charge is first that it converts the workman into a mere 
machine, and then that it leads to a uniformity of production which shocks 
the aesthetic sense. But if the machine procures for the workman more free 
rime, and if the workman uses this increase of leisure for something else than 
the so-called pleasures which an ill-directed industry has put within the 
reach of all, he will develop his intelligence as he chooses, instead of remain­
ing content with the development which would have been imposed upon 
him, and necessarily maintained within very narrow limits, by a return 
(impossible in fact) to tools, were machines abolished. As regards uniformity 
of products, the disadvantage would be negligible, if the economy of time 
and labour thus realized by the mass of the nation permitted the furtherance 

338 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
of intellectual culture and the development of true originality. An author, 
writing about the Americans, criticizes them for all wearing the same hat. 
But the head should come before the hat. Allow me to furnish the interior of 
my head as I please, and I shall put up with a hat like everybody else's. Such 
is not our grievance against mechanization. Without disputing the services it 
has rendered to man by greatly developing the means of satisfying real needs, 
we reproach it with having too strongly encouraged artificial ones, with 
having fostered luxury, with having favoured the towns co the detriment of 
the countryside, lastly with having widened the gap and revolutionized the 
relations between employer and employed, between capital and labour. 
These effects, indeed, can all be corrected, and then the machine would be 
nothing but a great benefactor. But then, humanity must set about 
simplifying its existence with as much frenzy as it devoted to complicating it. 
The initiative can come from humanity alone, for it is humanity and not the 
alleged force of circumstances, still less a fatality inherent to the machine, 
which has started the spirit of invention along a certain track. 
But did humanity wholly intend this? Was the impulsion it gave at the 
beginning exactly in the same direction that industrialism has actually taken? 
What is at the outset only an imperceptible deviation becomes in the end a 
considerable divergence, if the road has been straight and the journey long. 
Now, there is no doubt that the earliest features of what was destined later to 
become mechanization were sketched out at the same time as the first 
yearnings after democracy. The connexion between the two tendencies 
becomes plainly visible in the eighteenth century. It is a striking feature of 
the 'Encyclopaedists.' Should we not, then, suppose that it was a breath 
of democracy which urged the spirit of invention onward, that spirit as old as 
humanity, but insufficiently active so long as it was not given the necessary 
scope? There was surely no thought then of luxuries for all, or even of 
comforts for all. But there might have been the desire of an assured material 
existence, of dignity in security for all. Was this a conscious wish? We do not 
believe in the unconscious in history: the great undercurrents of thought of 
which so much has been written are due to the fact that masses of men have 
been carried along by one or several individuals. These individuals knew what 
they were doing, but did not foresee all the consequences. We, who know 
what followed, cannot help transferring back the image of it to the beginning: 
the present, reflected back into che past and perceived inside it as though in a 
mirror, is then what we call the unconscious of the past. The retroactivity of 
the present is at the origin of many philosophical delusions. We shall be 
careful, then, not to attribute to the fifteenth, sixteenth and eighteenth 
centuries (and still less the seventeenth, which is so different and has been 
considered as a sublime parenthesis) a concern for democratic ideas com­
parable to our own. Neither shall we attribute to them the vision of the 
power which lay hidden in the spirit of invention. It is none the less true that 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
339 
the Reformation, the Renaissance and the first symptoms or precursory signs 
of the great inventive impetus date from the same period. It is not 
impossible that there were here three reactions, interrelated, against the form 
taken until then by the Christian ideal. This ideal subsisted just the same, 
but it appeared like a heavenly body that had up to then always turned the 
same face towards man: people now began to catch a glimpse of the other 
side, though they did not always realize that it was the same body. That 
mysticism evokes asceticism there is no doubt. Both the one and the other 
will ever be peculiar tO the few. But that true, complete, active mysticism 
aspires to radiate, by virtue of the charity which is its essence, is none the less 
certain. How could it spread, even diluted and enfeebled as it must 
necessarily be, in a humanity obsessed by rhe fear of hunger? Man will rise 
above earthly things only if a powerful equipment supplies him with the 
requisite fulcrum. He must use matter as a support if he wants to get away 
from matter. In other words, the mystical summons up the mechanical. This 
has not been sufficiently realized, because machinery, through a mistake at 
the points, has been switched off on to a track at the end of which lies 
exaggerated comfort and luxury for the few, rather than liberation for all. 
We are struck by the accidental result, we do not see mechanization as it 
should be, as what it is in essence. Let us go further still. If our organs are 
natural instruments, our instruments must then be artificial organs. The 
workman's tool is the continuation of his arm, the tool-equipment of 
humanity is therefore a continuation of irs body. Nature, in endowing us 
with an essentially tool-making intelligence, prepared for us in this way a 
certain expansion. But machines which run on oil or coal or 'white coal,' and 
which convert into motion a potential energy stored up for millions of years, 
have actually imparted to our organism an extension so vast, have endowed it 
with a power so mighty, so out of proportion to the size and strength of that 
organism, that surely none of all this was foreseen in this structural plan of 
our species: here was a unique stroke of luck, the greatest material success of 
man on the planet. A spiritual impulsion had been given, perhaps, at the 
beginning: the extension took place automatically, helped as it were by a 
chance blow of the pick-axe which struck against a miraculous treasure 
underground.9 Now, in this body, distended out of all proportion, the soul 
remains what it was, too small to fill it, too weak to guide it. Hence the gap 
between the two. Hence the tremendous social, political and international 
problems which are just so many definitions of this gap, and which provoke 
so many chaotic and ineffectual efforts to fill it. What we need are new reserves 
of potential energy - moral energy this rime. So let us not merely say, as we 
did above, that the mystical summons up the mechanical. We must add 
that the body, now larger, calls for a bigger soul, and that mechanism should 
mean mysticism. The origins of the process of mechanization are indeed 
more mystical than we might imagine. Machinery will find irs true vocation 

340 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
again, it will render services in proportion to its power, only if mankind, 
which it has bowed still lower to the earth, can succeed, through it, in 
standing erect and looking heavenwards. 
In a long series of writings, which for depth and forcefulness are beyond 
praise, M. Ernest Seilliere shows how national ambitions claim for them­
selves divine missions: 'imperialism' naturally becomes 'mysticism.' If we give 
to this latter word the sense M. Ernest Seilliere10 attributes to it, and which 
his many books have made abundantly clear, the fact is undeniable; by noting 
it, by linking it up with its causes and following it in its effects, the author 
makes an invaluable contribution to the philosophy of history. But he himself 
would probably be of the opinion that mysticism taken in this sense, and 
indeed understood in this way by 'imperialism' such as he exhibits it, is but 
a counterfeit of true mysticism, the mysticism of 'dynamic religion' which we 
studied in the last chapter. We believe the counterfeiting to have taken place 
in the following way. It was a borrowing from the 'static religion' of the 
ancients, stripped of its old tags and left in its static form with the new label 
supplied by dynamic religion. There was indeed nothing fraudulent in this 
imitation; it was almost unintentional. For we must remember that 'static 
religion' is natural to man, and that nature does not alter. The innate beliefs 
of our ancestors subsist in the depths of our inner selves; they reappear as soon 
as they are no longer inhibited by opposing forces. Now, one of the essential 
characteristics of ancient religions was the idea of a link between the human 
groups and the deities attached to them. The gods of the city fought with and 
for the city. This belief is incompatible with true mysticism, I mean with the 
feeling which certain souls have that they are the instruments of God who 
loves all men with an equal love, and who bids them to love each other. But, 
rising from the darkest depths of the soul to the surface of consciousness, and 
meeting there with the image of true mysticism as the modern mystics have 
revealed it to the world, it instinctively decks itself out in this garb; it endows 
the God of the modern mystic with the nationalism of the ancient gods. It is 
in this sense that imperialism becomes mysticism. So that if we keep to true 
mysticism, we shall judge it incompatible with imperialism. At the most it 
will be admitted, as we have just put it, that mysticism cannot be dis­
seminated without encouraging a very special 'will to power.' This will be a 
sovereignty, not over men, but over things, precisely in order that man shall 
no longer have so much sovereignty over man. 
Let a mystic genius but appear, he will draw after him a humanity already 
vastly grown in body, and whose soul he has transfigured. He will yearn to 
make of it a new species, or rather deliver it from the necessity of being a 
species; for every species means a collective halt, and complete existence is 
mobility in individuality. The great breath of life which swept our planet 
had carried organization as far along as nature, alike docile and recalcitrant, 
permitted. Nature - let us repeat it - is the name we give to the totality of 
compliances and resistances which life encounters in raw matter - a totality 

Frenzy, Mechanism, Mysticism 
341 
which we treat, just as the biologist does, as though intentions could be 
attributed to it. A body compact of creative intelligence, and, round about 
that intelligence, a fringe of intuition, was the most complete thing nature 
had found it possible to produce. Such was the human body. There the 
evolution of life stopped. But now intelligence, raising the construction of 
instruments to a degree of complexity and perfection which nature (so 
incapable of mechanical construction) had not even foreseen, pouring into 
these machines reserves of energy which nature (so heedless of economy) had 
never even thought of, has endowed us with powers beside which those of 
our body barely count: they will be altogether limitless when science is able 
to liberate the force which is enclosed, or rather condensed, in the slightest 
particle of ponderable matter. The material barrier then has well nigh 
vanished. Tomorrow the way will be clear, in the very direction of the breath 
which had carried life to the point where it had to stop. Let once the 
summons of the hero come, we shall not all follow it, but we shall all feel 
that we ought to, and we shall see the path before us, which will become a 
highway if we pass along it. At the same time, for each and every philosophy 
the mystery of the supreme obligation will be a mystery no longer: a journey 
had been begun, it had had to be interrupted; by setting out once more we 
are merely willing again what we had willed at the start. It is always the stop 
which requires explanation, and not the movement. 
[ . .
. ] 
Joy indeed would be that simplicity of life diffused throughout the world 
by an ever-spreading mystic intuition; joy, too, that which would auto­
matically follow a vision of the life beyond attained through the furtherance 
of scientific experiment. Failing so thoroughgoing a spiritual reform, we must 
be content with shifts and submit to more and more numerous and vexatious 
regulations, intended to provide a means of circumventing each successive 
obstacle that our nature sets up against our civilization. But, whether we go 
bail for small measures or great, a decision is imperative. Mankind lies groan­
ing, half crushed beneath the weight of its own progress. Men do not 
sufficiently realize that their future is in their own hands. Theirs is the task of 
determining first of all whether they want to go on living or nor. Theirs the 
responsibility, then, for deciding if they want merely to live, or intend to 
make just the extra effort required for fulfilling, even on their refractory 
planet, the essential function of the universe, which is a machine for the 
making of gods. 


Melanges 
Translations by Melissa McMahon 


Good Sense and Classical Studies 1 
Speech given at the award ceremony for the concours general, 2 held in the 
Great Ampitheatre of the Sorbo nne, july 30, 1895. 
It has always been a great honour and a difficult task to speak in this imposing 
atmosphere of academic solemnity; but it seems to me that the responsibility 
becomes heavier each year, because the problem of education, which we 
would rather not go over for ever, takes on an ever more grave appearance and 
poses itself in ever more urgent terms. Everyone accepts that classical studies 
should do more than embellish the mind, that it is incumbent upon us 
to produce citizens who are aware of their duty and capable of carrying it 
out: what society gives by way of education, it expects to get back in wisdom. 
We question, however, with growing concern, whether disinterested study 
has this practical efficacy, and in particular whether good sense, which is a 
civic virtue in the free nations, varies according to intellectual cultivation. 
Whichever way the question is decided, moreover, whether in the affirmative 
or the negative, nobody can consider themselves satisfied; for if good sense 
does not depend on education, society would have to declare itself powerless 
with regard to what it needs most; and if it above all depends on education, 
if wisdom increases in proportion with this higher cultivation of the mind, 
which will always remain a privilege, we would have to be saddened at 
the sight of the irresistible trend which places power into the hands of the 
majority. Very fortunately, it is in no way necessary to settle on either of these 
extremes. I would like to show chat good sense partly consists in an active 
disposition of the intellect, but also partly in a certain and quite particular 
distrust on the part of the intellect with regard to itself; that education 
provides it with a support, but that its roots reach depths hardly penetrated by 
education; that classical studies are very useful to it, but through exercises 
common to all types of studies and which can be practised without a teacher; 
chat rhus the task of the educator consists above all, in such a matter, in 
leading some through the use of artifice where others are directly placed by 
nature. But what exacrly is good sense, and with what forces, what general 
dispositions of the soul is this intellectual attitude connected? 
The role of our senses, in general, is not so much to give us knowledge of 
material objects as to signal their utility to us. We taste flavours, we breathe 

346 
Melanges 
odours, we distinguish hot and cold, darkness and light. But science tells us 
that none of these qualities belong to objects in the form that we apprehend 
them; they only tell us in their picturesque language the inconvenience or 
advantage that things have for us, the services they could render us, the 
dangers they could lead us into. Our senses thus serve us, above all, to orient 
us in space; they are not turned towards science, but towards life. But we do 
not only live in a material milieu, but also in a social milieu. If all of our 
movements are transmitted in space and thus disturb part of the physical 
universe, by contrast most of our actions have their immediate or far­
reaching consequences, good or bad, first of all for us, then for the society 
that surrounds us. Foreseeing [prevoir] these consequences, or rather having 
a presentiment of them [pressentir]; distinguishing the essential from the 
inessential or indifferent in matters of behaviour; choosing from the various 
possible courses of action the one which will produce the greatest amount of 
attainable rather than imaginable good: this is, it seems to me, the role of 
good sense. It is thus indeed a sense in its own way; but while the other 
senses place us in relation to things, good sense presides over our relations 
with persons. 
There is a subtle presentiment of true and false, which is able to discover 
secret incompatibilities or unsuspected affinities between things well before 
any rigorous proof or decisive experiment. We call this higher-order intui­
tion genius, an intuition which is necessarily rare, since strictly speaking 
humanity could do without it. But everyday life demands of each one of us 
just such clear-cut solutions and rapid decisions. Every serious action closes a 
long series of reasons and conditions, and then spreads out in consequences 
which mean that, if the action depended on us, we in turn depend on it. 
And yet usually it makes no allowance for either experiment or delay: a 
course of action must be chosen, and we must comprehend the whole 
without anticipating all the details. The authority that we call upon in these 
cases, the one which dispels our hesitations and resolves the difficulty, is 
good sense. It thus seems that good sense is in practical life what genius is in 
the arts and sciences. 
But let us take a closer look: good sense is no more a passive attitude of 
the mind than genius is - waiting, in the middle of the night, for the ray 
of brilliance and the dawning of the light. If genius divines nature, it is 
because it has lived in close camaraderie with it. And good sense also requires 
a constant wakefulness, an ever-renewed adjustment to ever-new situations. 
It dreads nothing more than the ready-made idea, a ripe fruit perhaps of the 
mind, but detached from the tree, soon withered, and representing nothing 
more, in its rigidity, than the inert residue of intellectual work. Good sense 
is this work itself. It wants us to take each problem as new and do it the 
honour of a new effort. It requires us to make the sometimes painful sacrifice 
of the opinions we had made for ourselves and the solutions we had at the 
ready. And in the end it seems to have less in common with a superficially 

Good Sense and Classical Studies 
347 
encyclopaedic knowledge than with a self-aware ignorance, accompanied by 
the courage to learn.3 
If it can be likened to instinct in the speed of its decisions and the 
spontaneity of its nature, it is deeply opposed to it in the variety of its 
means, the suppleness of its form, and the jealous guard it sets up around us 
to preserve us from intellectual automatism. If it resembles science in its 
concern for the real and its obstinate determination to stay in touch with the 
facts, it is distinguished by the kind of truth it seeks, for it does not aim, like 
science, for universal truth, but that truth of the present hour, and is not so 
much concerned with being right once and for all, but with always renewing 
the task of being right [toujours recommencer d'avoir raison]. Science more­
over neglects no empirical fact, no consequence of its reasoning: it calculates 
the role of all the influences and takes the deduction of its principles to their 
end. Good sense chooses. It holds certain consequences to be practically 
negligible, and stops the development of a principle at the precise point that 
an excessively brutal logic would ruffle the delicacy of the real. A selection 
must be made between the facts and reasons which struggle, push and jostle 
with each other. In the end, good sense is more than instinct and less than 
science; it should be seen rather as a certain bent [pli] of the mind, a certain 
inclination of attention. We could almost say that good sense is attention 
itself, oriented in the direction of life. 
It thus has no greater enemies in the city than the spirit of routine and 
the spirit of fantasy [chimere]. To cling stubbornly to habits that are raised 
to the status oflaws, to repudiate change, is to let ones eyes be distracted from 
the movement that is the condition oflife. But is it not also through weakness 
of will or mental distraction that we abandon ourselves to the hope for 
miraculous transformations? There is less distance between these two types of 
mind than one would first think: equally removed from effective action, their 
difference is above all that one claims simply to sleep, while the other wants in 
addition to dream. But good sense neither sleeps nor dreams. Like the 
principle of life, it is constantly watchful and at work, weighed down no 
doubt by the matter that it animates, bur made aware of the reality of its 
action by the very materiality of irs effort. Its moderation is not like that of 
timid people who consider action to be dangerous and seek to insure 
themselves against it; on the contrary, it loves action - it advances by degrees 
only in order to achieve a transformation ar a more natural pace, and is again 
in this way like life, in respect of which it is hard to know what is more 
admirable: the harmoniously blended nuances of its transitions or the 
explosive contrast of its metamorphoses. The closer one comes to good sense, 
the more it seems to merge with the spirit of progress, provided that by this 
expression we understand both an energetic aspiration for improvement and 
a precise appreciation of the degree of elasticity of human things. 
What is rhus the principle of good sense? How can its essence be grasped? 
Where is its soul to be found? Does it derive, as has been said, from 

348 
Melanges 
experience?4 Does it represent the combined and condensed results of past 
observations? But as time advances, it unfolds ever-new situations, which 
demand of us an ever-original effort. Is it, on the other hand, only a greater 
sureness of reasoning, deployed in a logical process to deduce ever more far­
reaching consequences from a general principle? But our deduction is quite 
rigid, and life is very supple. However strong a grip we have on our 
reasonings, they will have trouble following the delicate and elusive contours 
of moving reality. I freely admit that good sense reasons, and sometimes 
using general principles; but it begins by orienting them towards the present 
reality; and is not this work of adaptation, which is no longer a matter of 
pure reasoning, precisely the specific function of good sense? No, good sense 
lies neither in a greater experience, nor in better-organized memories, nor in 
a more accurate deduction, nor even, more generally, in a more rigorous 
logic. Above all an instrument of social progress, it can only draw its strength 
from the very principle of social life, the spirit of justice. 
Oh, I don't mean the theoretical and abstract justice which, without 
regard for the real, traces a geometrical map in empty space and posits the 
form without giving itself the matter. Most often, it remains incapable of 
finding a point of contact with facts, or, if it succeeds, it is led by their 
resistance, which it had not taken into account in its calculations, into 
doubting its own virtue and despairing of itself. I am talking about justice 
embodied in the just man, living and acting justice, attentive to its insertion 
into events, but weighing up the act and the consequence on its scales, and 
fearing nothing so much as achieving the good at the price of a greater evil. 
Justice, when it is realized in this way in a man of good, becomes a delicate 
sense, a vision or rather a tact of practical truth. It gives him the exact 
measure of what he must ask of himself and what he can expect of others. 
It guides him straight ahead, like the surest instinct, to what is desirable and 
attainable. It shows him the injustices to correct, and consequently the good 
to be done, the arrangements to keep, which is to say the injustice not to 
commit. It protects him against error and awkwardness, through the 
rectitude of judgement that comes from the uprightness of the soul. Simple 
and clear, it is to chains of reasoning and multiplied experiments what pure 
gold is to money. If it carries the intelligence of life with it in this way, it is 
no doubt because it has touched its principle; and, although it shines in all 
its splendour only in the best of us, it no less shows what is most essential 
and intimate in humanity. Thus it is that in order to discover the deepest 
layers of the earth's crust, those that great upheavals have drawn from the 
very soul of the earth, one must climb to the summits. 
I thus see in good sense the inner energy of an intelligence which is 
constantly winning itself back, eliminating ready-made ideas in order to free 
up space for the ideas in the process of being made, and modelling itself on 
the real through the continuous effort of a persistent attention. And I also 
see in it the intellectual radiance of an intense moral centre, the justness of 

Good Sense and Classical Studies 
349 
ideas following the feeling of justice, ultimately the mind tempered by 
character. Our philosophy, infatuated with absolute distinctions, traces a 
very clear line of demarcation between intelligence and will, between moral­
ity and knowledge, between thought and action. And these are in effect two 
different directions which the development of human nature follows. But 
action and thought seem to me to have a common source, which is neither 
pure will nor pure intelligence, and this source is good sense. Is not good 
sense in effect what gives action its reasonable character, and thought its 
practical character? 
Examine, in the great philosophical problems, rhe solution of good sense: 
you will find, I think, that it is the socially useful solution, the one that 
facilitates language and favours action. Study, on the other hand, the 
behaviours and acts advised by good sense: you will see that it has spoken, 
without any deep reflection, as would perfect reason. It thus seems that good 
sense proceeds in speculative matters via an appeal to the will, and in 
practical matters by recourse to reason. In such a way that one could be 
tempted to see in it the effect of a blend, an intimate accord between the 
requirements of thought and those of action. And we must indeed speak in 
this way for clarity's sake, but I would be inclined, to get to the heart of the 
matter, to envisage things in a quite different way, to see in good sense 
the original disposition and to see in the habits of thought and the laws 
of the will, by contrast two emanations, two divergent orientations of this 
basic faculty of orientation. For I can imagine neither the play of associated 
wills without an ultimately reasonable goal, nor the natural functioning of 
thought without a practical destination. We must thus be able to derive 
these two forms of activity from one and the same force, which corresponds 
to the fundamental necessities of social life; and this sort of social sense is 
precisely what is called good sense. If it is thus the ground, the very essence 
of the mind, should we not find it, as Descartes said, 'complete in each 
individual' ,5 innate and universal, independent of education? This would be 
the case, I believe, if there was nothing but what was living in the soul and in 
society, if we were not condemned to drag along with us the dead weight 
of vices and prejudices, if also we did not sometimes, distracted momentarily 
or at length, live and think outside of ourselves, finally, if we did not let our 
intelligence make decisions that are, so to speak, abstract, instead of keeping 
it firmly in contact with the keen energy of the will. But it is rare that nature 
spontaneously produces an emancipated soul that is master of itself, a soul 
tuned in accord with life. Most often education must intervene, not so much 
to communicate an elan as to remove obstacles, rather, then, to lift a veil 
than to shed light. 
How far does this influence of education go, and of classical studies in 
particular? What can they do, and what should we ask of them? They are far 
from having the same sway over the diverse forces that I have just listed 
which would all tend to lead good sense astray. One of the greatest obstacles, 

350 
Melanges 
we were saying, to the freedom of the mind, are the ideas that language gives 
to us ready-made, and that we breathe, so to speak, in the environment 
which surrounds us. They are never assimilated with our substance: 
incapable of participating in the life of the mind, they persevere, as truly 
dead ideas, in their stiffness and immobility. Why then do we so often prefer 
them to those which are living and vibrant? Why does our thought, instead 
of working to become master of itself, prefer to exile itself from itself? It is 
firstly through distraction, and by dint of amusing ourselves along the road, 
we no longer know where we wanted to go. 
Perhaps you have noticed, in front of our monuments and in our 
museums, foreigners who hold an open book in their hand, a book where 
they no doubt find described the marvels surrounding them. Absorbed in 
this reading, do they not sometimes seem to forget for its sake the beautiful 
things they came to see? It is in this way that many of us travel through 
existence, our eyes fixed on formulas which are read in a sort of internal 
guide book, neglecting to look at life in order simply to refer oneself to what 
is said about it, and tending to think of words rather than things. But 
perhaps there is something more and better here than an accidental distrac­
tion of the mind. Perhaps there is a natural and necessary law which intends 
for our mind to begin by accepting ready-made ideas and live in a sort of 
tutelage, while waiting for the act of will, for some forever postponed, by 
which the mind will take hold of itself again. The child only sees in the 
external world the crude and conventional forms which he sketches on paper 
as soon as he has a pencil in hand: for him they come between the eye and 
the object; they provide for him a convenient simplification, and for many 
of us they continue to interpose themselves in this way, until the day that art 
comes to open our eyes to nature. 
I would readily compare the ideas that we find enclosed within words to 
these children's drawings. Each word indeed represents a portion of reality, 
bur a portion crudely cut out, as if humanity had carved reality according to 
its convenience and needs, instead of following the articulations of the real. 
We are indeed obliged to adopt provisionally this ready-made philosophy 
and science; but they are only footholds in order to go higher. Beyond the 
ideas which are chilled and congealed in language, we must seek the warmth 
and mobility of life. 
I precisely see, above aJI, in a classical education, an effort to break the ice 
of words and to find beneath it the free flow of thought. When you make the 
effort, young pupils, to translate ideas from one language to another, you 
become accustomed to crystallizing them, so to speak, in several different 
systems; in this way they are released from any definitively set verbal form, 
and you are invited to think the ideas themselves, independently of words. 
In the preference that a classical education gave to antiquity, there was not 
only a very great admiration for pure models; it was also no doubt considered 
that the ancient languages, carving the continuity of things along lines that 

Good Sense and Classical Studies 
35 1 
are very differenr to ours, would lead to the liberation of the idea through a 
more violent and more quickly effective exercise. And then, was any effort 
ever attempted comparable to that of the ancient Greeks to give speech the 
fluidity of thought? Bur whatever the language they express themselves in, 
rhe great writers can render the same service to our intelligence; for they 
have all had and have all sought to give us a direct vision of the real, in cases 
where we perceived things only through our conventions, habits and symbols. 
In this sense, a classical education, even when it seems to attach the most 
importance to words, teaches us above all not to be taken in by them. "While 
its particular object may change, it will always keep the same general aim, 
which is to remove our thought from automatism, release it from forms and 
formulas, and ultimately to re-establish the free circulation of life within it. 
Philosophy continues this work already begun along the same lines. It sub­
mits the ultimate principles of thought and action to criticism. It ascribes no 
value to passively received truth: it wants each of us to reconquer the truth 
through reflection, to become deserving of it through effort, and by making 
it deeply penetrate each one of us, animating truth with its life, it gives it 
enough force to enrich thought and direct the will. No doubt good sense 
can do without philosophy, bur if good sense resides in effort and tends in 
the first place to freedom, I do not see where it would have a better 
apprenticeship. 
But it is not enough to pur aside symbols and get used to seeing. We must 
also, we were saying, rid ourselves of the habit of a certain over-abstract way 
of judging, and cultivate a quite particular mode of attention. Certain 
disciplines have the advantage of bringing us close up against life. It is thus 
that the thorough study of the past will help us to understand the present, 
on the condition however that we remain on guard against misleading 
analogies, and that we seek in history, according to the profound words of a 
contemporary historian, causes rather than laws. 6 The physical and mathe­
matical sciences have a less concrete object; but they are excellent for making 
us understand the specific virtue and the special aim of methods that we 
employ somewhat thoughtlessly every day. As these sciences only generalize 
where there are stable laws, and only deduce when we can create our 
definitions, they clearly reveal to us, by a veritable 'passage to the limit', the 
ideal conditions of rigorous deduction and legitimate generalization. As a 
consequence, the further one goes into them, the less one is tempted to 
transpose their methods; wholesale, to the things of practical life. It is not 
only because the excessive precision of these methods would translate, at the 
moment of action, into excessively lengthy vacillations - a little as if one 
wanted to use a laboratory scale in the kitchen - it is rather and above all 
because good sense would, I think, run some very great risks in this trans­
portation. There exists a serious error, which consists in reasoning about 
society in the same way as about nature, in discovering there some bizarre 
mechanism of ineluctable laws, finally in misjudging the efficacy of the will 

352 
Melanges 
and the creative force of liberty. There is another error, made by minds given 
to fantasy, which posits the formula of a simple ideal, and geometrically 
deduces the consequences for the organization of society, as if definitions 
depended on us in this domain, as if our liberty did not encounter a limit, 
in the very conditions of human nature and social life. Good sense holds 
the middle ground between these two clumsy imitations of physics and 
geometry. Perhaps it has no method, strictly speaking, but rather a certain 
manner of doing things. At the risk of disturbing a widely held opinion, 
I will say that the manner of philosophers is that which seems closest to me 
to that of good sense; for every great philosophical doctrine is linked to 
principles and rests on facts, without either being able to be rigorously 
inferred from these facts, because it exceeds them, or being able to be 
entirely deduced from these principles, because it has known how to bend 
them. You will sometimes find, in the best disciple of a great master, a more 
systematic exposition of the doctrine as well as an apparently superior clarity. 
It is precisely because he has followed the dominant ideas of the system, with 
his simpler and more abstract logic, to their end. Bur one must go back to 
the work of the master to enter into communication with its personal and 
profound logic, one modelled on the real, supple like life, and capable, like 
nature, of presenting ever-new elements to our thought which in vain would 
seek to exhaust its analysis. This faculty seems indeed co me to be, in 
speculative matters, what good sense is in practical life. 
The education of good sense will thus not only consist in rescuing 
intelligence from ready-made ideas, but also in turning it away from 
excessively simple ideas, stopping it on the slippery slope of deductions and 
generalizations, and finally, preserving it from excessive self-confidence. Let 
us go further: the greatest risk that education could represent to good sense 
would be to encourage our tendency to judge men and things from a purely 
intellectual point of view, to measure our value and that of others according 
to mental merit alone, to extend this principle co societies themselves, to only 
approve institutions, laws and customs which bear the outward and 
superficial mark of logical clarity and simple organization. This standard 
would perhaps be appropriate for a society of pure minds, devoted to an 
entirely speculative existence; bur real life is turned towards action. I certainly 
grant that intelligence is one of its forces, and even the most obvious one, 
since its role is to shed light; bur it is not the only one. Why are intellectual 
gifts less useful to us in life than qualities of character? Why is it that so many 
brilliant and insightful minds remain incapable, despite the greatest efforrs, of 
producing a work or carrying our an action? And why do the most beautiful 
words remain without an echo if they are said without intonation? Is it 
not because intelligence acts by a strange hidden power whose effort it 
symbolizes, and char where this force is lacking, the mind has neither enough 
momentum [elan] to go far by itself, nor enough weight co leave any deep 
mark on what it touches? Here we have seen the function create che organ, 

Good Sense and Classical Studies 
353 
and unexpected intellectual faculties burst forth under the pressure of an 
intense moral force. And history also tells us that the greatness of a nation 
lies less in its apparent intellectual development than in certain invisible 
reserves of energy which nourish the intelligence, by which I mean the force 
of the will and the passion for great things. Well now, this is the idea that 
education can deeply impress upon us - not by a special demonstration, 
but by a thousand lessons drawn from history and from life. In this way it 
will not only save us from many disappointments and many surprises; it will 
send out, through the intermediary of this intelligence which it necessarily 
addresses, a forceful appeal to the power of feeling and willing. And in this it 
will set the soul back on its natural course, which is precisely good sense. 
These, it seems to me, are the different points on which good sense offers 
a grasp to education in general, and to classical studies in particular. In fixing 
your attention, Messieurs, on the last and most important of these, what have 
I done but commentate the words that you will not have forgotten, those 
pronounced in this very place, two years ago, by the head of the University? 
'I would like', he said, 'for us to undertake to seek the just and to propagate 
it, a little flame and imagination. Keep in mind that, even in a century of 
science and thought, the future will above all smile upon and favour those 
who have been careful to keep intact their ability to feel.'8 
It is chis strength of feeling that I believe can be seen in good sense. 
Without this strict lineage, without this harmony between the sense of the 
real and the faculty to be profoundly moved for the good, we could not 
understand how France, this classical land of good sense, has felt itself 
uplifted throughout the whole course of its history, by the internal thrust of 
great enthusiasms and generous passions. It is to a young and ardent faith that 
it owes the revelation of the tolerance that it has inscribed in its laws and 
taught to other nations; it is in a moment of enthusiasm that the wisest, most 
balanced and most reasonable expressions of law and equality have risen from 
its heart to its lips. In those of irs writers who are most enamoured of good 
sense, even in those who have sharpened their good sense on the intellect 
[en esprit], one can see, behind the qualities of order, method and clarity, an 
intense warmth that has become light. And does not the very transparency of 
its language, the winged lightness of its phrases, made to carry general ideas 
far, correspond to the elan of a soul which seeks free air and large spaces for 
the powerful feelings which run through it? Be in no doubt, young pupils: 
clarity of ideas, strength of attention, freedom and moderation in judge­
ment, all this forms the material envelope of good sense; but it is the passion 
for justice that is its soul. 

Letter to G. Lechalas 9 
END OF 1897 
Let us look for the reasons which lead philosophers (in contrast, as it 
happens, with common opinion) to suppose that the image of P is formed in 
a consciousness exterior to point P, then projected in P. In other words, 
what are the reasons that lead me to believe that I am situated elsewhere than 
in P? I doubt that you could first of all find any reason apart from this: 
'In order to touch P, I would have to move my body.' I am outside P in the 
sense that I would have to move in order to touch it. In ocher words, my 
possible action on P is not immediate, and my body could not touch, 
modifY or move P, except on the condition of traversing intermediary 
bodies. My belief in a real interval, and hence in a distinction between P and 
myself, is thus first of all only at bottom a distinction between this body and 
my body, a distinction uniquely related to tactile perception. Let us suppose 
for a moment that tactile sensibility is abolished (along with the motor 
functions attached to it), suppose a being which had only ever known visual 
perceptions (and who moreover would be condemned ro immobility); 
would he not perceive himself as being in P as much and in the same way as 
at the point occupied by his body? In my opinion, we are in a real sense in 
each point that our perception covers. This, at least, would be the most 
natural way of expressing ourselves: it is the needs of action that have led us 
to adopt another mode of expression, giving tactile perception a privileged 
rank, and restricting our real presence to this very limited part of space 
where our tactile influence is exercised. This is the sense in which I have 
been able to say that our perception (putting aside affect, and above all 
memory, whose role is considerable) is above all in the 'collection [ensemble] 
of images', or, if you prefer, in things in general, whereas our sensory-motor, 
or rather tactile, experience, restricts our presence to chat organized portion 
of matter by which we act upon all the others. 
I believe that if we study all the realist and idealist doctrines since 
Descartes, we will find that they always begin - consciously or uncon­
sciously - with this radical distinction between our body and the rest of 
matter. My body, being separate from the other bodies that I perceive, we 
imagine to be sufficient unto itself with its own concept, attached to the soul 
and detached from everything else: it thus becomes necessary to assume the 
existence somewhere, inside chis body, or intimately connected with ic, of 

Letter to G. Lechalas 
355 
more or less faithful reproductions or duplications of the rest of matter. 
We seek the materials for these representations in the peripheral sensations 
of the body; and, as these sensations are evidently insufficient for what we 
need from them, we have them converge toward the cerebral centres, which 
themselves become more and more contracted, until finally we cast the 
whole representation outside of space in an unextended consciousness, from 
which point it would be projected into space in order to cover the external 
bodies from which it emanated. I tried to show, in my first chapter, 10 that 
this conception raises insurmountable difficulties at every point. The truth is 
that my body is made of an analogous matter to other bodies, that my 
consciousness is no more attached to my body than to other bodies, and that 
it initially coincides (at least in part) with the totality of what it perceives and 
is able to perceive. 
I believe I have established a radical distinction between sensation, 
properly speaking, or affect, which is internal to my body, and the image, 
which is external to it. The sensations of hot and cold, and more generally 
all sensations that I localize in my body, depend above all on the state of the 
part in which they are produced; they take on quite different aspects 
according to whether my body is disposed to welcome or reject them, etc. 
I am thus quite willing to grant that the sensations of hot, cold, and many 
others, are for the most part relative to the state of my body, and express 
above all the particular and variable requirements of that state. But it is a 
quite different matter when we come to perceptions, properly speaking, 
which is to say, images which are situated outside of my body. 
I intentionally left this question in suspense. 1 1  In effect, in the case of 
memory [souvenir], I have positive reasons for affirming that recalled mem­
ories are chosen in the totality of past states, which are conserved in an 
unconscious form. By contrast, in the case of perception, I can see and I try to 
show how the perceived image is taken from a wider field than that of actual 
perception, but I have no means of determining how far this virtual 
perception extends. The very fact that you cite in your letter (i.e. that sound is 
abolished below a certain number of vibrations per second) and all other facts 
of this kind, is sufficient proof that our actual perception is a selection, just as 
the impossibility for us to conceive that the universe stops at the horizon of 
our actual perception further proves that we perceive virtually many more 
things than we perceive materially and actually: indeed, conscious perception 
seems unintelligible to me under any ocher hypothesis. But, I repeat, how far 
does the virtual extend? Does our mind virtually perceive the whole of matter, 
as Leibniz would have it? Or else does the universal perception from which 
our senses make a selection only include the things and elements which form 
an undivided system in relation to what we actually perceive (the material 
universe perhaps not forming a single and unique system)? Above all, would 
this virtual perception (which is to say independent of bodies) be comparable 
to our actual perception, which distinguishes objects; or else would it, while 

356 
Melanges 
still remaining concrete, be closer to scientific knowledge, which deals with 
properties, qualities and forms? So many questions to which l could only 
respond with unproven hypotheses. I wanted, however, to follow as closely as 
possible the contours of facts, to refrain from all metaphysical construction, 
in short come back to intuition. Where intuition no longer spoke, I had 
to stop. 

Bergson-james Correspondence 12 
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 6TH JANUARY 1903.13 
Mon cher Confrere, 
I have just finished reading the book which you so kindly sent to me - The 
Varieties of Religious Experience - and I must tell you the profound 
impression that this reading has had on me. I began it at least ten days 
ago, and since that moment I cannot chink of anything else, so captivating is 
the book and, if I may say, enthralling from one end to the other. It seems to 
me that you have managed to extract the very quintessence of religious 
emotion. We were already aware, no doubt, that chis emotion is both a 
spontaneous [sui generis] joy and the awareness of a union with a superior 
power; but the nature of this joy and this union is what seemed neither 
analysable nor expressible, and yet this is what you have been able to analyse 
and express, thanks to a very novel procedure which consists in giving the 
reader an alternating series of overall impressions which play against each 
other and at the same rime fuse together in his mind. In that respect you 
have opened up a path on which you will certainly be followed by many 
others, but on which you have so quickly gone so far that it will be a real 
struggle to overtake you and even catch up. 
If you have had the chance, over the last ten or twelve years, to chat with 
French students passing through Cambridge, they must have told you that I 
was one of your earliest admirers, and that I have never passed up an oppor­
tunity to express the great sympathy I have for your ideas to my listeners. 
When I wrote my essay on Les Donnees de La conscience [ Time and Free Will] ,  
I still only knew your essay on Effort, 14 bur I was led, through an analysis of 
the idea of time and reflecting on its role in mechanics, to a certain concep­
tion of psychological life which is entirely compatible with the one in your 
psychology (except perhaps that I see places of flight in the resting-places1 5 
themselves, rendered apparently immobile by the fixed gaze of conscious­
ness). This is another way of telling you chat no approval could be more 
precious to me than that which you have so kindly given to the conclusions 
of my book Matter and Memory. 16 
In this book I sought to show - without sacrificing any of the results of 
cerebral physiology - how the relationship of consciousness to cerebral 
activity is something else entirely than what is supposed by physiologists and 
philosophers: and I see that, on this point as well, we are following rwo very 

358 
Melanges 
do!>e and probably converging paths. This at least is what I take from reading 
the very interesting paper on Human Immortality that you were so kind as to 
send to me. 17 The more I reflect on this question, the more I am convinced 
that life is, through and through, a phenomenon of attention. The brain is 
the very direction of this attention: it marks, delimits and measures the 
psychological contraction that is necessary for action; in the end it is neither 
the duplicate nor the instrument of conscious life, it is its extreme point, the 
part which inserts itself into events - something like the prow where the ship 
becomes narrow in order to cleave the ocean. But, as you so rightly say, this 
conception of the relationship of the brain to the mind requires us to 
maintain the distinction between the soul and the body, and hence to shatter 
many of the frameworks in which we are accustomed to rhink. 
I very much hope that the occasion will present itself where I can talk 
about all of this with you. Might I ask you, in case of your coming to 
France, to be so good as to drop a small line letting me know in advance, so 
that we might arrange a meeting? 
H. Bergson 
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 25TH MARCH 1903.18 
Mon cher Confrere, 
I was greatly disappointed to hear that you will probably not be coming to 
Europe, and my regret would have been still more keen had I not known 
that it is the improvement of your health that has led you to abandon this 
trip. I hope that you recover promptly and completely from the tiredness 
that you mention, and which is easily explained when one thinks of the 
amount of effort and thought rhat this last book, The Varieties of Religious 
Experience, must have cost you. 
The difficulties that you point out in certain passages of Matter and 
Memory are only too real to me, and I am far from having managed to 
completely overcome them. 19 I believe nevertheless that some of these 
difficulties are simply a result of the obstinate habits of our mind, habits 
which have an entirely practical origin and from which we must liberate 
ourselves for speculation. Such is, for example, the difficulty of admitting 
memories which are present and unconscious. If we assimilate memories to 
things, there is clearly no middle ground for them between presence and 
absence: they are either entirely present to our mind and, in this sense, 
conscious, or else, if they are unconscious, they are absent from our mind 
and must no longer count as actual psychological realities. 
But in the world of psychological realities, I do not think there is any need 
to posit the alternative of to be or not to bi0 with such strictness. The more I 
try to grasp myself through consciousness, the more I apprehend myself as 
the totalization or the !nbegriff21 of my past, this past being contracted with 
a view to action. 'The unity of the self' which philosophers speak of seems to 

Bergson-fames Correspondence 
359 
me ro be the unity of an extremity [pointe] or a summit in which I contract 
myself through an effort of attention, an effort which lasts over a whole 
lifetime and which, it seems to me, is the essence of life. But I certainly feel 
that in order to pass from this extremity of consciousness or summit to the 
base, which is to say to a state where every memory of every moment would 
be scattered and distinct, one would have ro go from the normal state of 
concentration to a state of dispersion like that of certain dreams; there would 
thus be nothing positive to do, bur simply something to undo; nothing to 
gain, or add, rather something to lose; it is in this sense that all my memories 
are there when I don't perceive them, and that nothing truly new is 
produced when they reappear in my consciousness. 
I was deeply interested by the summary you kindly sent me of the course 
that you are giving at the moment. It contains so many new and original 
ideas that I have not yet managed to sufficiently grasp the whole, but one 
key idea strikes me at this point: that of the necessity ro transcend concepts, 
simplistic logic, in short, the methods of an over-systematic philosophy 
which postulates the unity of the whole. This is a direction analogous to the 
one I am engaged on, and I am quite convinced that if a truly positive 
philosophy is possible, it can only be found there. 
1 5TH FEBRUARY 1 905.22 
Mon cher Confrere, 
I beg you to forgive my delay in thanking you for sending me your last 
articles:23 I don't need to tell you that I read them - and reread them - as 
soon as I received them; but I have been very overworked these past weeks 
and it has been impossible for me to write ro you earlier. In these five articles 
there is the outline of a whole philosophy, and I await with some impatience 
the work which will present its complete development. But even now you 
indicate a certain number of applications, all extremely interesting. I think 
that on many essential points I would agree with you, but perhaps I would 
not go quite as far as you down the path of 'radical empiricism'. The main 
difference probably (I am still not quite sure about it) concerns the role of 
the unconscious. 24 I cannot help but provide a large place for the uncon­
scious, not only in psychological life, but also in the universe in general, as 
the existence of unperceived matter seems to me to be something of the same 
kind as that of a non-conscious psychological state. This existence of some 
reality outside of all actual consciousness is no doubt not the existence in 
itself spoken of by the old substantialism; and yet it is not part of what is 
actually presented to a consciousness, it is something between the two, always 
on the point of becoming or re-becoming conscious, something intimately 
mingled with conscious life, interwoven with it, and not underlying it, 25 as 
substantialism would have it. But it is possible that even on this point I am 
closer to you than I think. 

360 
Melanges 
I am very grateful for the friendly allusions you make to my work in several 
of your articles. They will call attention to the shared direction between the 
considerable movement of ideas that you have created in America and the one 
which makes more and more headway here. I hope that these converging 
efforts will lead to the constitution of a positive metaphysics, which is to say, 
one that is susceptible of progressing indefinitely, instead of being entirely 
taken or left, like the old systems. 
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 20TH JULY 1905.26 
Mon cher Confrere, 
To my great regret, I had co write to Abauzit that I couldn't take on the task 
of doing the preface that he kindly requested for his translation. For two or 
three weeks I have been suffering from a general nervous fatigue, caused by a 
very persistent case of insomnia: I have no doubt aggravated this state by 
insisting nevertheless on staying on in Paris to work. So now I am obliged to 
interrupt all work and go away, if I want to be able to resume my lectures at 
the return of classes. I am very sorry not to be able to make this sympathetic 
gesture to Abauzic, and, if I may say, this testimony of my great admiration 
for your book. But there was never a foreign work which less needed to be 
'introduced' to the French public than yours. 
I read the articles that you kindly sent me as soon as I received them, and I 
must tell you how much they interested me.27 They clarify your doctrine 
and reply, it seems to me, to the objections that have been raised against it. 
The essential point seems to me to be the one you address in the second 
article: How two minds can know one thing. 28 The more I think about it, the 
more I think that philosophy must come to a solution close to the one you 
suggest: there is pure experience, which is neither subjective nor objective 
(I use the word image to designate a reality of this kind), and there is what 
you call the appropriation of this experience by one consciousness or another, 
an appropriation which seems to me to consist in a diminution of the image 
sui generis, but which you see rather, if I have understood you correctly, as 
consisting in the affective states which proceed after [font cortege a] the pure 
image. In any case, I do not think that these last two points of view are 
irreconcilable, for the diminution that I describe is always carried out to a 
practical end; it involves our body and must, as a consequence, be translated 
in an attitude of the body which embraces or repudiates the exterior 
image.29 But this attitude of the body is perceived at the points where it is 
produced, which is to say inside the body-image. And a perception internal 
to our body is precisely, it seems to me, what is called an affective state. 
I don't know if you have read an article in the last issue of the Revue 
Philosophique about the Congress of Rome.30 In this article it is said that the 
conception of 'real duration' that I presented in my first work (Time and 
Free Will) was inspired by the ideas of Ward,31 and also a little by yours, 

Bergson-james Correspondence 
361 
and that, reciprocally, the philosophy that you now espouse is inspired by 
my work. I wrote a letter straightaway to the Revue Philosophique in response 
to this article which will appear in the next issue,32 in which I state: 1 .  That 
my Essai was written in all ignorance of both your and Ward's ideas, and 
that it is in any case evident that the theories developed in this Essai have a 
very different origin and significance; 2. That on the other hand you have 
not been able to be any more inspired by 'Bergsonism', for the very simple 
reason that you had set out on the path that you follow today well before 
Matter and Memory. 
I felt I had to nip this emergent myth in the bud, because, in my opinion, 
one of the most striking arguments that one can invoke (from the outside) in 
favour of American 'pragmatism' and the French 'new philosophy' is pre­
cisely that these two doctrines were established independently of each other, 
with different points of departure and different methods. When, in such 
conditions, two doctrines tend to agree, there is every chance that they are 
both in the vicinity of the truth. 
I very much hope that you follow up your project to spend a few months in 
France. And have no doubt that I am not the only one with these hopes. 
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 27TH JUNE 1907.33 
Cher Professor james, 
Your letter gives me very great joy, and I must thank you for it straightaway. 
You are right to say that the philosopher loves praise and that in this he 
resembles the common run of mortals; but permit me to tell you that the 
approval I particularly cared about was that of the thinker who has so greatly 
contributed to remodelling the soul of new generations and whose work has 
always inspired such a deep admiration in me. Thus the letter where you 
declare your readiness to enter into the essential ideas of my work, and 
where you defend them in advance against the attacks they will surely 
provoke, touches me at the highest level. I am keeping it as sufficient reward 
for the ten years of work that this book [Creative Evolution] has cost me. 
I began to read your Pragmatism the moment I received it by post and I 
have not been able to put it down before finishing it. It is the admirably 
drawn programme of the philosophy of the future. Through a very diverse 
series of considerations, which you always manage to make converge towards 
the same centre, through suggestions as much as explicit reasons, you give 
us the idea, and above all the feeling, of the supple and flexible philosophy 
which is destined to take the place of intellectualism. I have never been so 
conscious of the analogy between our two points of view as when reading 
your chapter 'Pragmatism and humanism' .34 When you say that 'for rational­
ism reality is ready-made and complete from all eternity, while for pragmatism 
it is still in the making', 35 you give the very formula of the metaphysics which 

362 
Melanges 
I am convinced we will come to, which we would have come to long ago if we 
had not remained under the charm of Platonic idealism. Would I go so far as 
to affirm with you that 'truth is mutable'?36 I believe in the mutability of 
reality rather than that of truth. If we can make our intuition accord with the 
mobility of the real, would not this accord be something stable, and would 
not truth - which can only be this accord itself - participate in this stability? 
But much trial and error would be necessary before reaching this point. 
Thank you once again, dear Professor James; all my compliments on this new 
work, destined to be of considerable influence. 
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 9TH MAY 1 908.37 
Cher Professor james, 
I cannot tell you what pleasure I had, yesterday, in recognizing your writing 
on an envelope bearing an English stamp. Here finally, I hope, is an 
opportunity to speak with you. 
You do me a very great honour in dedicating one of your lectures to me at 
Oxford.38 How happy I would have been to hear you, both in this lecture 
and in the others! I hope at least that you will not delay bringing them 
together in a book. 
Here is the information rhat you were kind enough to ask of me. First my 
curriculum vitae. Born in Paris in 1 859. Pupil at rhe Lycee Cordorcer, from 
1 868 to 1 878. Student at the Ecole Normale Superieure (an establishment 
where we train those who will become university teachers) from 1 878 to 
1 88 1 .  Agregated in philosophy in 1881, doctor of philosophy in 1 889. 
Philosophy reacher in various provincial and Parisian schools, from 1 88 1  to 
1 898. Lecturer at the Ecole Normale Superieure from 1 898 to 1 900. Lecturer 
at the College de F ranee since 1 900. Member of the Institute since 1 901. 
Now, as for notable events, there haven't been any in the course of my 
career, at least nothing objectively notable. But, subjectively, I cannot avoid 
attributing a great importance to the change that came abour in my way of 
thinking during the two years after leaving the Ecole N ormale, from 1 88 1  to 
1 883. Until that point I had remained completely steeped in the mechanistic 
theories to which I had been introduced very early on by reading Herbert 
Spencer, the philosopher to whom I adhered more or less unreservedly. 
My intention was to devote myself to what was then called 'rhe philosophy 
of sciences' and it was to this end that I had undertaken, upon leaving the 
Ecole Normale, the examination of several basic scientific notions. It was 
the analysis of the notion of time, such as it appears in mechanics or physics, 
which revolutionized all of my ideas. I realized, to my great amazement, that 
scientific time has no duration, that nothing would have to be changed in 
our scientific ideas of things if the totality of the real was deployed all at once 
and instantaneously, and that positive science essentially consists in the 
elimination of duration. This was the starting point of a series of reflections 

Bergson-james Correspondence 
363 
which led me, step by step, to reject almost all that I had previously 
accepted, and to completely change my point of view. In Time and Free Will 
(pages 1 16-20, 1 94-97, etc.), I have summarized these considerations on 
scientific time, which were to determine my philosophical orientation and 
which form the basis of all the reflections I have been able to make since . . .  
CHALET FERDINAND DE REYNIER, CHAUMONT-SUR­
NEUCHATEL (SWITZERLAND), 23RD JULY 1908.39 
Dear Professor James, 
I must tell you straightaway the great joy I experienced reading you.40 Never 
have I been examined, understood, penetrated in such a manner. Never, more­
over, have I been so conscious of the sympathy and the sort of'pre-established 
harmony' which attunes your thought and mine. Let me tell you, moreover, 
that you have not limited yourself to analysing my ideas; you have 
transfigured them, without ever disfiguring them in any way. In reading your 
exposition of my theses, I thought of those superb reproductions that the 
great engraving masters made of sometimes quite ordinary paintings. 
From your fifth lesson and the beginning of the seventh, as also in the last 
pages of the chapter that you devote to me, I think I can see the essential idea 
of your book - the idea that is important above all others, which will 
dissipate the difficulties chat have been accumulated by philosophers around 
the whole question. I hope I will soon be able to read this book,41 
which will 
form the link between the Principles of Psychology and the Varieties of Religious 
Experience, at the same time as defining the philosophy which pragmatism 
leads us to - a philosophy without any doubt destined to replace the old 
metaphysical dogmatism . . .  
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 21ST JANUARY 1909.42 
Cher William james, 
I have been so busy since the beginning of the academic year that I have not 
yet been able to read Fechner's Zend-Avesta that you spoke to me about in 
London;43 I will set about studying it as soon as I have a bit more free time. 
But I had a foretaste of it recently reading your lovely article in the Hibbert 
journa/.44 This hypothesis of an earth-sou/,45 which will perhaps seem 
arbitrary to many people, is in reality the one which most closely fits the 
facts, because it puts no more in the cause than precisely what is required to 
produce the effects that we observe. What is truly arbitrary is the immediate 
passage from these effects to an infinite cause which has neither a common 
measure nor point of contact with them. You have pointed this out so well 
in your article and enveloped all of it in such a beautiful poetry, that I now 
fear I will be disappointed when I read Fechner himself. - Your conception 

364 
Melanges 
of intermediary beings between man and God seems to me to be one which 
will become increasingly necessary to philosophy. 
9TH APRIL 1909.46 
Cher William james, 
I am writing you a couple of hasty words (as the post for America is leaving 
in a moment), simply to tell you the great pleasure I just had in reading your 
article in the Hibbert journal, which arrived this very moment.47 I was 
already familiar with it from the proofs which you kindly passed on to me; 
but I experienced a keen joy in rereading this truly masterly exposition of the 
leading ideas of my works. My thought is certainly there - but how I would 
have liked to have said it that way! and how much the idea gains from 
drawing on the original reflections that you surround it with! 
Once again, thank you. 
30TH APRIL 1909.48 
Cher William fames, 
I waited impatiently for your new work and I thank you for sending it to 
me.49 It is an admirable book, which I will only reproach for being too 
modest and for highlighting the names of Fechner and Bergson, when from 
one end to the other it is William James - his words, his thought, his very 
soul - that we are dealing with. The book says many things, and yet it 
suggests even more than it says. It defines and justifies pluralism, it places 
our finger on the concrete relation between beings, it definitively lays the 
foundations of 'radical empiricism': that is what it says. Bur it suggests 
something which goes beyond all of that - a certain consoling emotion drawn 
from the very heart of reality. You talk, in your conclusion, of those saving 
experiences50 which have been the privilege of certain souls: either I am very 
much mistaken, or your book, combined with the Varieties of Religious 
Experience, will make widespread experiences of this kind, by inspiring them 
in those who had no idea of them, or developing them where they only 
existed in a nascent state . . .  
There are many other points in your book which gave me cause for 
reflection. I will speak to you of them another time. I will limit myself 
for the moment to telling you the impression that this work has had on me. 
I look forward to having several days free in order to reread your last three 
books all in one session, one after the other. I would then no doubt be more 
able to put my impression into words. Bur it could not be more profound. 
Rest assured, cher William james, of my feelings of great admiration as well 
as affectionate devotion. 

Bergson-james Correspondence 
365 
VILLA MONTMORENCY, 3 1 ST MARCH 1910.51 
Man cher james, 
I hope that you have accepted the invitation that Boutroux52 has issued to 
you on behalf of the Universite de Paris, and that we will soon see you 
in France. If, as I hope, it is for this Spring or Summer, would you oblige 
me by letting me know the - at least approximate - date of your arrival? 
I absolutely count on being in Paris at that moment. 
I have not yet told you the pleasure I had in reading your two articles 'The 
moral equivalent of war' and 'A suggestion about mysticism'.53 The first is 
certainly the most beautiful and persuasive thing that has been written on 
the subject of the non-necessity of war, and the conditions under which we 
could eliminate it without thereby diminishing human energy. As for your 
article on mysticism, it will be, I am sure, the point of departure for many 
new observations and studies. I am not sure I have ever myself experienced 
an uncovering,54 but perhaps there was something of the sort in the 
following fact which has sometimes (rarely, as it happens) occurred in me 
while dreaming. I believed myself to be present before a superb spectacle -
generally the sight of a landscape of intense colours, through which I was 
travelling at high speed and which gave me such a profound impression of 
reality that I could not believe, during the first moments of waking up, that 
it was a simple dream. But during the quite short time that the dream 
seemed to last (two or three seconds at most), I have each time had the very 
clear feeling that I was in the process of having a dangerous experience, that it 
was up to me to prolong it and experience the outcome, but that something 
was stretching or swelling more and more within me and would end up 
bursting if I did not fix matters by waking up. And upon waking, I had at 
the same time the regret at having interrupted such a dream and the quite 
dear impression that it was me who had wanted to interrupt it. I give you 
this experience for what it is worth: perhaps it has some relationship with 
yours, in that it suggests the idea of a momentary extension of the field of 
consciousness, but due to an intense effort. 
How I would like you to pursue this study of 'the noetic value of abnormal 
mental states'!55 Your article, combined with what you have said in the 
Varieties of Religious Experience, opens up great perspectives for us in this 
direction. 

Letter to Harald Hojfding56 
15 MARCH 1915 
. . .  First I must tell you how graceful I am co you for having discussed my 
works in such an attentive and insightful manner. No greater honour could 
be given me. Even where you criticize my views, one feels chat your primary 
aim is to present them with absolute impartiality. Your method of discus­
sion has nothing in common with the kind that is so often applied to me, 
which consists in ascribing me some strange and false idea, which is then 
easily refuted. 
Even so, it is impossible for an original thinker to inhabit entirely the 
perspective of another. You will thus not be surprised if I cell you chat, in 
your overall exposition of my ideas, there is no chapter that I can completely 
subscribe to, - consequently, no criticism which seems to me to pertain 
exactly co what I have said, or at the very lease to what I have thought (for we 
are never sure that what we think has truly been communicated in what 
we have said). I cannot go into details; I leave aside certain criticisms chat 
I consider to be of lesser importance - for example concerning the relation­
ship of consciousness to the body (I also chink chat each state of consciousness 
has a motor accompaniment, and that one whole aspect of memory, that of 
moror habits, is embedded in the body); also as an example, concerning the 
problem of God (I have not really addressed this problem in my writings; 
I consider it inseparable from the moral problems whose study I have been 
absorbed in for several years; and the few lines in Creative Evolution that you 
allude to were only put there as placeholders in anticipation of this work 
[comme une pierre d'attente]); - still another example is the identification of 
art with philosophy that you ascribe to me, an identification which I cannot 
subscribe to, because: 1 .  Art is only concerned with the living and appeals to 
intuition alone, whereas philosophy is necessarily concerned with matter at 
the same time as it explores the mind, and consequently appeals to the 
intellect as well as intuition (even though intuition is its specific instrument); 
2. Philosophical intuition, having taken the same direction as artistic intu­
ition, then goes much further: it captures the vital before its dispersal into 
images, whereas art is concerned with the images. But I will leave all of that 
aside and come to the important point. 
In my opinion, any summary of my views will produce an overall 
distortion and, in virtue of this very fact, expose them to a mass of objections, 

Letter to Harald Hijfding 
367 
if it is not first situated at and does not ceaselessly return to what I consider 
the very centre of the doctrine: the intuition of duration. The representation 
of a multiplicity of 'reciprocal penetration', quite different from numer­
ical multiplicity - the representation of a heterogeneous, qualitative, creative 
duration - was my point of departure and the point to which I have con­
stantly returned. It requires a very great mental effort, the rupture of many 
frameworks, something like a new method of thought (for the immediate is 
far from being the easiest thing to apprehend); but, once one has reached this 
representation and possesses it in its simple form (which must not be confused 
with a conceptual reconstruction), one feels obliged to displace one's point of 
view on reality; one sees that the greatest difficulties come from the fact that 
philosophers have always put time and space on the same level: most of these 
difficulties are diminished or fade away. The theory of intuition, to which 
you give much greater weight than that of duration, only emerged for me 
quite a long time after the latter: it is derived from it and can only be 
understood through it. This is why this intuition would not fit any of the four 
definitions that you enumerate. No doubt it allows of a series of successive 
planes; but on the last plane, which is the principal one, it is the intuition 
of duration. 
There would in any case be a great deal to say, in relation to your book, on 
this intuition and this duration. I think that if you take my understanding of 
duration into account, you will see something more precise and also more 
persuasive in the 'vitalism' of Creative Evolution, than your account suggests. 
The essential argument that I oppose to mechanism in biology is that it does 
not explain how life unfolds a story, which is to say a succession where there 
is no repetition, where every moment is unique and carries within it the 
representation of the whole of the past. This idea is beginning to find some 
favour among certain biologists, as poorly inclined towards vitalism as 
biologists are in general: they thus see in it something other than 'the expres­
sion of admiration and wonder'. In a general sense, whoever has reclaimed 
their grasp on the intuition of duration can never again believe in universal 
mechanism; for, in the mechanistic hypothesis, real time becomes useless and 
even impossible. But duration is the most indisputable of facts for someone 
who has situated themselves within it. This is why I have said that it provides 
us with a definitive, empirical refutation of mechanistic philosophy. 
Moreover, your remark on intuition, instinct and intelligence misses the 
fact that, for me, practical knowledge is truly a knowledge of reality in itself, 
absolute reality, when it remains in its proper domain. Intelligence, whose 
role is to master unorganized matter, is thus capable of knowing this matter 
absolutely (although incompletely). In the same way, instinct, which is made 
to use life, knows life absolutely and from the inside, although incompletely 
and in a barely conscious way. Thus human intuition, which prolongs, 
develops and makes reAective what remains of instinct in man, is capable of 
embracing life more and more completely. Knowledge, whether intellectual 

368 
Melanges 
or intuitive, only becomes relative when the faculty of knowledge is applied 
to what it was not made for. Such is the knowledge of life which claims to 
give us conceptual intelligence (mechanism); and such also was, in former 
times, the representation of matter given using images drawn from the life 
world (hylozoism). 
My letter is already long; and yet I would have to further lengthen it 
enormously if I wanted to write to you everything that your book suggests to 
me. I think that if I could speak with you and remove all the misunder­
standings, I would also by the same stroke remove most of the criticisms and 
objections. I hope that you will give me the opportunity to do so. I cannot 
tell you what a good and vivid memory I have of the conversation we once 
had together. We must find a way to continue it one day. You must return 
to France, when we have recovered the necessary calm for philosophical 
speculation. At the moment France is fighting for justice, for the respect of 
the rights of individuals and peoples, large or small. She thus serves again, 
in this war, in which she has no selfish, ambitious or material interest, the 
cause of Ideas, to which she has always been devoted and which constitutes 
her greatness. 
I thank you once again, and I beg you accept, Monsieur and very honoured 
Colleague, the expression of my most distinguished and devoted feelings. 
H. Bergson 

Letter to Floris Delattre57 
24TH DECEMBER 1935. 
. . . It is easy to see that Butler only uses images, comparisons, etc. to 
supplement or even simply to decorate the expression of his thought: he 
could, strictly speaking, do without it. By contrast, in a book like Creative 
Evolution or The Two Sources, images are most often introduced because 
they are indispensable, as none of the existing concepts are able to express the 
thought of rhe author, and the author is thus obliged to suggest it. This 
suggestion can only be made by an image, but by an image which has not 
been chosen by the philosopher, which presents itself independently as the 
sole means of communication, and imposes itself with absolute necessity. 
To take only one example: when I relate the phenomena of life and 
evolution to an elan vital, it is not for the stylistic flourish, nor moreover is it 
in order to mask our ignorance of the deep cause with an image, as when the 
vitalist generally invokes a 'viral principal' or when Butler speaks to us of a 
'life-force'. The truth is that in this area philosophy only provides philos­
ophers with two explanatory principles: mechanism and finality (the latter 
characterizing the 'vital principle' of the vitalists and consequently the 'life­
force' of Butler). Now, for reasons whose detail it is not useful to go into here, 
I accept neither the one nor the other of these two points of view, which 
correspond to concepts formed by the human mind for a completely different 
purpose than the explanation of life. It is somewhere between these two 
concepts that we have to place ourselves. How do we determine this place? 
I can only indicate it by hand since there is no intermediary concept between 
'mechanism' and 'finality'. The image of an elan is nothing other than this 
indication. By itself it has no value. But it will acquire value if the reader is 
willing to place himself with me at this point, so that we can observe from 
this position what can be perceived of life and also what is not perceived. 
I have enumerated, in pages 1 1 1-116 of my book The Two Sources, the 
knowledges and the ignorances which make up a certain quite special vision 
of evolution and life, when one places oneself, between mechanism and 
finality, at the point that I mark by writing the word elan. I even amused 
myself, in this passage in my book, by counting them. I found precisely 
nine. My so-called metaphor is thus, in reality, the precise and at the same 
time global notation of possible observations. And this is why it is radically 
distinct from sterile images such as Schopenhauer's 'will-to-live' or the 'life­
force' of vitalists such as Buder. This is also why we could have predicted 

370 
Melanges 
that sooner or Iacer biology would have to adopt something like it. It is 
starting to do this - not, I admit, without hesitation and repugnance. But 
I am digressing from what was asked of me. It was a matter of knowing 
whether there is something in common between the two doctrines.58 I once 
again reply: 'No, I see nothing in common.' But I would like, this time, co 
go a bit further, and indicate why, a priori, it was very unlikely that they 
would have something in common. 
It is not, co be sure, that I lay claim to some sort of deep originality. Quite 
the contrary, I have always preached modesty in philosophy, and I have done 
what I could to give the example. But precisely for this reason, precisely 
because it seems to me that the time of great original hypotheses serving a 
philosopher's vanity has passed, I recommend and have practised for some 
fifty years a method which essentially consists in envisaging special problems 
in philosophy, as it is done in the positive sciences. Each one of these 
problems could require lengthy investigations of the philosopher; often his 
whole life will not be too long to carry them out; and yet this will only be a 
beginning: the principal difficulty is not there. The true difficulty is co pose 
the problem, to abstract oneself to this end from language (which was made 
for conversation, not for philosophy), to carve reality along its natural lines, 
whereas language and common sense have tailored and distributed it with a 
view to the convenience of our actions. In this way the problem will be 
limited, but the effort to resolve it, and above all to pose it, will become 
unlimited. At bottom, resolving and posing amount to the same thing. The 
problem, such as I conceive it, is only posed once it is resolved. 
Understanding philosophy in chis way, what chances are there that a 
philosopher would find in advance or have a premonition of what another 
philosopher will find? This is not at all impossible, if this philosopher has a 
similar understanding of philosophical method and possesses the same 
determination to obtain a result. It is impossible if the first philosopher 
intends to remain an amateur. I can now moreover give a precise definition 
of the word that I have just uttered. I call an amateur, in philosophy, 
someone who accepts wholesale the terms of a common problem, considers 
it definitively posed, and limits himself to choosing from the apparent 
solutions to this problem, which necessarily pre-exist his choice. Such is 
Butler rejecting Darwin's solution and allying himself with Lamarck's. But 
in this matter really to do philosophy consists in creating the position of the 
problem and in creating the solution. How could it be otherwise? Is it not 
evident that if a problem has been posed for a long time and not yet been 
resolved, it is because it comprises, in the form it is posed, two or several 
equally possible solutions, which are mutually exclusive? The philosopher 
properly called cannot, must not, stop at chis point. I thus call an amateur 
someone who chooses between ready-made solutions, like choosing which 
political parry to join. And I call a philosopher someone who creates the 
solution, which is then necessarily unique, of the problem that he has newly 

Letter to Floris Delattre 
371 
posed, through the very fact of having made the effort to resolve it. Between 
these two there is a radical difference, but one which might escape readers of 
the one or the other if they themselves assume the attitude of the amateur, if 
they do not, through a study which necessarily requires an effort analogous 
to that of the philosopher, horne in on the new sense which words assume in 
the new conception of the problem. 

Message to the Descartes Congress, 1937 
'One Must Act like a Man of Thought and 
Think like a Man of Action '59 
(Henri Bergson, honorary President of the International Congress of 
Philosophy, prevented from joining the members of this congress, but with 
them in spirit, has conveyed to M. Emile Brehier, President of the Organizing 
Committee, this text, which places the Congress under the spiritual patronage 
of Descartes.) 
I am old enough to have been able, when already no longer young, to be at 
the side of our dear and admirable Xavier Leon when he founded the 
Congress of Philosophy. It was also during an International Universal 
Exhibition, in 1 900. Some were surprised at the idea of introducing among 
the tools, machines and other material products of civilization an exhibition 
of world thought in its highest and most abstract forms. In reality, Xavier 
Leon must have foreseen what subsequent events have shown only too well: 
that our most marvellous discoveries and inventions will turn against us if 
we are not careful to dominate them, that the increasing size of the body of 
humanity will simply render it incapable of walking unless it is accom­
panied, for its direction and even support, by a surplus of moral energy. The 
political, economic, social and international problems that face us today only 
translate, each in their own way, this now monstrous disproportion between 
the body and soul of the human species, the soul tossing about inside a body 
that is too big for it, having been unable to expand in turn. Certainly our 
philosophy will not be sufficient to restore the balance: for this we will need a 
will stretched to the limit of its powers; we will also need the individual and 
collective experimentation which alone reveals the unforeseeable conse­
quences of a decision, and thus separates the possible from the impossible. 
But a good and strong will fortunately exists in a great number of people; and 
as for experimentation, we see it practised in the form of political regimes ar.d 
social organizations, whose antagonisms alone are visible to us now, but 
which we will find later to have collaborated in one and the same great 
experiment. If philosophy can then come forward to give all a full awareness 
of their movement, to help analyses and suggest syntheses, a new era could 

Message to the Descartes Congress, 1937 
373 
open up in the hisrory of humaniry. For my own part, I see the machine 
firstly worsening the inequaliry between men, but then settling for such a 
reduced level of human work in relation to such an abundant material 
production, that all would have the leisure to take up the most noble spiritual 
occupations: letters and science, arts, philosophy. The process of selection 
which produces elites will then bear as a matter of course on everyone, equally 
equipped from the start, and no longer only those chosen by circumstance. 
The elite will be reinforced, in number, and above all in value. It could 
change the face of humanity. The famous elegy ofThomas Gray, lamenting 
in a country cemetery the great man who is perhaps buried there,60 will no 
longer correspond to anything. These are some of the thoughts - utopian or 
paradoxical today, perhaps banal tomorrow - that the insertion of a philo­
sophical Congress into a Universal Exhibition will incite in philosophers. 
They will only be reinforced if we consider that our Congress is placed 
under the spiritual patronage of Descartes. It is true that Descartes was the 
very model of a speculative genius. A mind of universal scope, he remodelled 
human thought. He created from scratch, or almost, a mathematics to which 
a mathematician could apply, without too much exaggeration, the expression 
of the Latin poet: 'a child born without a mother', proles sine matre creata. 
The Discourse on Method is the analysis and commentary of this marvellous 
mathematics, or rather of a science of the same kind, made so as to be all­
embracing. He created the ideal of physics, by tracing the broad outline of a 
universal mechanism. He created a spiritualism which was later to serve as a 
model, because he did not shrink from clear separations, because he boldly 
affirmed the coexistence of the soul with the body, of thought with extension, 
of freedom with necessity and of the world with God. He created modern 
metaphysics, by setting minds on the path of idealism, a path on which he 
himself decided to stop half-way, but where others have continued to the end. 
He created an ideal of education that we must never lose sight of, consisting 
in the complete substitution of reason for memory, with the implicit idea that 
true knowledge has less in common with a superficially encyclopaedic 
knowledge than with a self-aware ignorance accompanied by the resolution to 
know. He created, specially for the Discourse on Method, the form that French 
philosophy was subsequently to adopt, abandoning Latin speech in order to 
communicate generously to all: the virrue par excellence, in Descartes's eyes, 
was in effect generosity. By also avoiding, as much as possible, expressions 
which store ready-made ideas, and thus obliging ordinary words to assume 
enough flexibility, and to combine with one another in such a skilful way so 
as to present new thoughts, he encouraged invention, at the same time as 
suggesting that the philosopher become, by means of effort, a little of what he 
was himselfby the grace of his genius: a writer. Above all, he created a mental 
attitude which was to set a standard in both philosophy and science: a proud, 
perhaps arrogant, posture of thought, standing against nature as well as 
tradition, an inflexible will to independence, an unlimited trust in the power 

374 
Melanges 
of intelligence. Finally, he created the need to create in the speculative 
domain, in particular the need for thought to engender the object to be 
studied, instead of accepting it as already made (his analytic geometry is just 
this), and it is this which gives his doctrine, systematized in different ways by 
different historians, a unity which it would be difficult to specify further; for 
this doctrine, sometimes cited as the paradigm of deductive philosophy, is 
essentially intuitive. Intuitive in the Cartesian sense, which is close to the 
ordinary sense, but also intuitive in the sense in which it is sometimes used 
today, since Descartes spoke, without giving it a name, of a knowledge that is 
acquired 'by refraining from thinking about it', 'by drawing only on life'. 
Such would be, according to one of his letters to Princess Elizabeth, our 
knowledge of the union of the soul with the body.61 Let us sum up then in a 
couple of words: all philosophy, directly or indirectly, can be traced back to 
Descartes. Those who have not read him closely might decide that this pure 
spirit (as Gassendi ironically called him) would only be moderately interested 
in, for example, an Exhibition like ours. I myself consider chat he would have 
wandered through it with real delight. For the goal he set for both philosophy 
and science, which he merged together in a sort of universal knowledge, was 
to 'render us the masters and owners of nature', no doubt alluding to the 
study of life and in particular medicine, but imagining this study in such a 
way that it presupposed our physics and mechanics. Recent commentators 
have thus taken chis very far and maintained that, for Descartes, theory was 
subordinate to its application. One of them has said: 'Aristotle's physics is the 
physics of an artist; Descartes's is the physics of an engineer.' Is this quite 
right? My answer would be yes, and yet no. Certainly not if the ultimate aim 
would be the comfort, well-being or even prolongation oflife that philosophy 
would bring us, according to Descartes, via the intermediary of a physical 
and mechanical biology. Yes, on the other hand, if we consider that aside 
from their material utility, scientific applications are so many successes 
through which we demonstrate our force to ourselves, and affirm our inde­
pendence, even our sovereignty. He made a clean sweep of Aristotelianism, 
and consequently of the method which proceeds by manipulating pre­
existing concepts: the new elements he will operate with must be 'clear and 
distinct ideas'. But by what criteria do we recognize a clarity that is not 
artificial or accidental, or a distinction that is not the result of an arbitrary 
division of experience? It can only be by its effectiveness, or rather, taking 
the French word in its English sense, by its 'efficiency' [ejicience]. Such that 
philosophy, which includes science, will make us little by little masters of 
nature, and this mastery, as it progresses, will provide an ever more complete 
material for philosophical speculation. Theory and application would rhus 
condition each other in what we could call, from a certain point of view and 
to a certain extent, a metaphysical pragmatism. 
Let us then reflect on the modernity of Cartesianism, which was already 
striking well before the theory of relativity once again inflected our physics 

Message to the Descartes Congress, 1937 
375 
in a Cartesian direction, and which could become so again if some new kind 
of determinism comes along, as is probable, to translate the indetermination 
that a recent physics has discovered in the heart of things. Let us also reflect 
on the modernity of the author, who was so ahead of his time in his 
conception both of the philosopher and of philosophy. He put aside what 
was said about things in order to be concerned solely with things themselves. 
He practised tourism in the grand style, travelling, first as a soldier, then out 
of pleasure, through Germany, Hungary, Switzerland, Holland and other 
countries still. He had something of a premonition of the international 
intellectual cooperation which the League of Nations and the French 
government has installed in Geneva and Paris, when he made contact with 
scholars from various countries, corresponded with a Princess, instructed a 
Queen. He organized his life in such a way as to draw the maximum return, 
settling overseas, or travelling, for greater tranquillity and independence: it 
was, in his case, the best way of serving his country. He disdained the science 
of books. Although obliged to accept controversy, he never liked it. In the 
closed room and heavy atmosphere in which professional thinkers have their 
discussions, he was the genius amateur who comes uninvited, throws wide 
open all the doors and windows, calls for air and light, and invites and 
obliges others to breathe freely. The Lord Chancellor Francis Bacon had 
already done something of this kind. Descartes provides the great example. 
When I try to imagine him in person, I see him first in his heated room in 
Germany, 'conversing with his thoughts'; but I also see him in the boat 
where the boatmen were plotting to rob him and throw him overboard, 
guessing their plan, drawing his sword and keeping the robbers at bay. 
I know there is much to be said on the relations between thought and action. 
But the motto that I would suggest for the philosopher, and even for the 
ordinary man, is the simplest one of all and, in my opinion, the most 
Cartesian. I would say that one must act like a man of thought and think 
like a man of action. 

Notes 
CHRONOLOGY OF LIFE AND WORKS 
See p. 362 above. 
INTRODUCTION 
This introduction draws on material first presented in John Mullarkey's Bergson and 
Philosophy ( 1 999) and Keith Ansell Pearson's Philosophy and the Adventure of the Virtual 
(200 1). 
2 
The one work by Bergson we have excluded from both the readings and our 
introductory discussion is Laughter, because, being a popularist piece of work, its place 
must be peripheral in an analysis of his academic philosophy. Additionally, while the 
essays from Mind-Energy and The Creative Mind which are included here do not receive 
any sustained individual treatment in this introduction, they are referred to when the 
themes being treated make it appropriate. 
3 
See Durie 1 999, p. xix. 
4 
It is a similar conception of continuiry that leads Richard Sorabji to the view that we can 
put to rest a bogey that has troubled commentators more than any other concerning 
Aristotle's definition of time as number in the Physics. This relates to the criticism made 
by Plotinus: how can the continuous nature of time be generated from number, which is 
discrete? In other words, how can time, qua continuiry, be number? Sorabji argues that 
while the stages which we choose to count are discrete this does not make time 
something discontinuous: 'On the contrary, it is infinitely divisible, in the sense that we 
can divide it at stages as close together as we please, and its infinite divisibiliry is precisely 
a mark of its continuiry' (Sorabji 1 983, p. 89). But this laying to rest of a bogey is only 
possible by construing time solely and simply in terms of an actual or discrete 
multipliciry. No other conception of multipliciry is allowed for. 
5 
Given the tags of mysticism and spiritualism that Bergsonism has acquired over the 
years, we perhaps need to be reminded of the fact that in his own day Bergson was read 
primarily as an empiricist whose thinking amounted, in the words of his former pupil 
and later harsh critic, Jacques Maritain, to a 'wild experimentalism' (Maritain 1 955, 
p. 66). Indeed, Maritain accused Bergson of realizing in metaphysics 'the very soul of 
empiricism' and of producing an ontology of becoming not 'after the fashion of Hegel's 
panlogism' but rather 'after the fashion of an integral empiricism' ( 1 943, p. 65). As a 
rationalist Julien Benda vigorously protested against Bergson's demand for new ways of 
thinking and new methods in philosophy and called for a return to Spinoza (see Benda 
1 954 and the study by Niess, 1 956, pp. l l 2- 1 3). See also James on Bergson, 1 909, 
pp. 237ff. and, more recently, the remarks in Mullarkey 1999a, pp. 1 58-9. 
6 
See Clark 1 997. 
7 
Dorothea Olkowski identifies the work of Antonio Damasio as falling into the internal­
ist trap Bergson identified. See Olkowski 1 999, note 28, pp. 257-8; and see Damasio 
1 994 and especially the treatment of images in his recent study The Feeling of What 

Notes 
377 
Happens, 1999, including the appendix, pp. 3 17ff. The work of Daniel C. Dennen is 
well known for its critique of Cartesian materialism, the view arrived at in the 
philosophy of mind when Descartes's mind-body dualism is discarded but the imagery 
of a central (and material) 'theatre' representing the locus of consciousness is retained 
(see Dennett 199 1 ,  p. 107). 
Dennett replaces the idea of a Cartesian theatre with 
what he calls a 'Multiple Drafts model' (chapter 5, and p. 321). Dennen's position is 
materialist in the sense that it adheres to the view that 'the mind is the brain' (p. 33). 
In spire of the innovations it endeavours to make, however, it is not clear, for the 
Bergsonian at least, that Dennett completely escapes the predicaments of the Cartesian 
materialist. See also the remarks made in Dennett 1996, pp. 72-3, 1 55-6. 
8 
See the helpful discussion in Moore 1996, pp. 30-l. 
9 
As Moore notes, representation 'is a bad picture of perception', because a living body 
does not make a picture of an object but rather selects some of its properties in accordance 
with its needs and projects (irs virtual actions) (Moore 1996, p. 27). If we suppose that it 
is necessary to ask after the conditions of image-perception (of picturabiliry and per­
ceptibility), we should not simply equate Bergson's position with that of either Kant or 
Wittgenstein, Moore argues. This is because on Bergson's model the conditions are 
'shallower', arising neither from logical requirements of sense or meaning, nor from 
a priori ones for rhe existence of a perceptible world, but rather 'from the (realized) 
possibility that the world contains objects which are capable of action like our own 
bodies' (p. 26). 
I 0 
See Moore 1996, p. 52. 
1 1  
It should be noted, however, that Russell had great problems trying to make sense of the 
notion of a pure past. His difficulties with the idea stem, we believe, from his failure to 
grasp the notion of the virtual at work in Bergson's thinking on memory. He mistakenly 
insists rhar whenever Bergson speaks of the past he can only mean a present memory of 
the past. See the discussion in Russell 1912, pp. 341 ff. Deleuze' s reading of the pure 
past, by contrast, makes the strong claim that the past exists in and for itself on irs own 
plane and nor simply relative to a present. 
12 
See MM, p .  168: There is nor, i n  man at least, a purely sensori-motor state, any more 
than there is in him an imaginative life without some slight activity beneath it. Our 
psychical life . . .  oscillates normally between these two extremes.' 
1 3  
Durie 1 999, p. xxiii note 1 2. 
14 
For a critique of Bergson that takes up this point see Deleuze and Guattari 1994, p. 1 32: 
'It is not enough to assimilate the scientific observer (for example, the cannonball 
traveller of relativity) to a simple symbol that would mark states of variables, as Bergson 
does, while the philosophical persona would have the privilege of the lived (a being that 
endures) because he will undergo the variations themselves. The philosophical persona is 
no more lived experience than the scientific observer is symbolic.' 
1 5  
Bergson lectured on all three of Kant's Critiques. His lessons on the Critique of Pure 
Reason provide a straightforward explication and can be found in Bergson Cours Ill, 1995, 
pp. 1 31-20 1. For further insight see de Gruson 1959, pp. 171-90, and Barthelmy­
Madaule' s study of 1966. 
16 
I n  CE intuition is, indeed, conceived in terms o f  instinct but one that has become 
disinterested and self-conscious, 'capable of reflecting upon its object and of enlarging it 
indefinitely' ( CE, p. 176). 
1 7  
Compare MM, p .  1 85: 'the task o f  the philosopher . . .  closely resembles that of the 
mathematician who determines a function by starting from the differential. The final 
effort of philosophical research is a true work of integration.' 
1 8  
Bergson's contention is that Kant's first Critique continues the old dream o f  approach­
ing the real in terms of a universal mathematics: 'In short, the whole Critique of Pure 
Reason leads to establishing the fact that Platonism, illegitimate if Ideas are things, becomes 
legitimate if ideas are relations, and that the ready-made idea, once thus brought down ftom 

378 
Notes 
heaven to earth, is indeed as Plato wished, the common basis of thought and nature. The 
whole Critique of Pure Reason rests also upon the postulate that our thought is incapable of 
anything but Platonising, that is, of pouring the whole of possible experience into pre­
existing moulds' (CM, p. 197; see below, p. 280). 
1 9  See Scharfstein 1943, pp. 104-5 note 1 0, 1 25-6; TSMR, pp. I 04-S (OE, pp. I 063-4). 
20 
Scharfstein 1943, pp. 125-6. 
2 1  
Hartshorne 1987, p .  379. 
22 See TSMR, p. 100 (OE, p. 1060). 
23 
See TSMR, p. 1 17 ( OE, p. 1 074), which says that individuals may already be societies or 
'aggregates of aggregates'. 
24 
TSMR, pp. 177, 1 16 (OE, pp. 1 125, 1073). 
25 
TSMR, pp. 1 0 1 ,  9 1-2 (OE, pp. 1 06 1 ,  1 052-3). 
26 
TSMR, pp. 1 6 1 ,  8 1 , 24 (OE, pp. 1 1 1 2, 1 043, 994). 
27 
See Jacques Chevalier, Entretiens avec Bergson, pp. 75, 1 54-5, 1 59, cited in Gallagher 
1970, p. 98. 
28 
TSMR, pp. 269, 68, 85, 89 (OE, pp. 1204, 1033, 1047, 1 050-l) .  
29 
TSMR, p. 90 (OE, p. 105 1 ). 
30 
TSMR, p. 47 (OE, pp. l 014- l 5); see below, p. 3 18. 
3 1  
TSMR, p. 96 (OE, p. IOS7). 
32 
See TSMR, pp. 9, 1 3-14, 26-7 (OE, pp. 981 ,  984-6, 996-7). We ought to note here 
that such collectivist thinking as this has often been accused of a romantic organicism 
along with the dangerous political implications purportedly attendant on this. Yet the 
charge of a more literal organicism need be neither so unpalatable nor so unwelcome 
as most collectivists assume it is. The impasse between a cultural view of morality, 
a rationalist one and a sociobiological one is undone by Bergson's plea that biology be 
understood 'broadly'. In Bergson's sociobiology, organicism leads to political views 
exactly opposite to those often repudiated. He does nor argue for a closed image of the 
social on the basis of a rigid biological essentialism: rather, because his so-called vitalism 
is embedded in a process metaphysics, the organic and the social are both left ideally 
open. Bergson does not believe that organic systems are wholes, rather, they are dynamic 
dissociating phenomena which are only relative unities. Political organicism need only 
be feared if one's picture of the organic, the biological or the vital is of a particular 
variety. 
33 
TSMR, pp. 27, 2 1  (OE, pp. 997, 992). 
34 
TSMR, pp. 32, 1 8-19, 30, 3 1  (OE, pp. 100 1 ,  989-90, 1 000, 100 1 ,  1002). 
35 
TSMR, pp. 39, 205-7 (OE, pp. 1 007, 1 1 50-l). 
36 
TSMR, pp. 17, 33-4 (OE, pp. 988, 1 003). 
37 
TSMR, p. 38 (OE, pp. 1 006-7); see below, p. 3 1 3. 
38 
See TSMR, pp. 52, 39, 254-5 (0£, pp. 1019, 1 007, 1 191-2). 
39 
TSMR, pp. 5 1 ,  84 (OE, pp. 1 0 1 8, 1 046). 
40 
TSMR, p. 96 (OE, p. 1057) our italics. 
4 1  
See TSMR, pp. 84, 2 13 (0£, pp. 1046, 1 1  56). 
42 
TSMR, pp. 34, 49, 68, 84, 278 (OE, pp. 1 003, 1 016, 1 032, 1046, 1 2 1 2). 
43 
Nonetheless, religious dynamism needs static religion for its expression and diffusion 
(TSMR, p. 1 79 (0£, p. 1 127)), and the two are not at all opposed in their common origin, 
which Bergson alludes to mysteriously as 'some intermediate thing' ( TSMR, p. 178 ( OE, 
p. 1 126)). The object of dynamic religion is also its source: the generative action of life, 
which Bergson periodically describes as 'God', though this is clearly an immanent and 
suprapersonal divinity; see TSMR, pp. 53, 252-62 (OE, pp. 1 1 19-20, 1 189-98). 
44 ME, p. 32 (OE, p. 834). 
45 
See TSMR, pp. 220, 228ff. ( OE, pp. 1 162, l l69ff.). 
46 
See ME, pp. l 53-5 (OE, pp. 910-l l). 

47 
See TSMR, p. 228 (OE, p. 1 169). 
Notes 
48 
TSMR, p. 225 (0£, pp. 1 166-7); Bergson is here quoting N. Soderblom. 
379 
49 
TSMR, p. 309 ( OE, p. 1 138); see below, p. 339. Hude 1989-1990, val. i, p. 149, cites a 
lecture course on ethics where Bergson advises that in the resolution of moral conflicts 
we should opt for that action which involves 'the greatest sacrifice, give that which costs 
you the most'. 
50 
TSMR, p. 53 (0£, p. 1 1 19). In Bergson's Laughter, p. l41 (0£, p. 454), an emotion is 
said to be dramatic and conragious when all the harmonics in it are heard along with the 
fundamental note. 
5 1  See TSMR, pp. 61-2 (OE, pp. 1026-7). Bergson sees Socratic rationalism as a reaction 
against the moral empiricism of his day. 
52 M, pp. 361 ,  363, 364, 371, 362. 
53 
Gunter 1995, p. 393. It should be no surprise that later in TSMR Bergson will attribute 
'un bon sens superieur' to the mystics (OE, p. 1 183 - though it is translated as 'common 
sense' in the English at TSMR, p. 245). 
54 See M, p. 362. 
55 
See letter of 3 1  March 1910 at M, p. 8 17; see below, p. 365. 
56 M, pp. 726-7; see below, p. 362. 
57 M, pp. 331 ,  477. 
58 M, p. 1 092. 
59 
CM, p. 22 (OE, p. 1 263). 
TIME AND FREE WILL 
[Editors' note: We have included all of chapter 2 in this extract from TFW, pp. 75-139 
(OE, pp. 51-92).] 
2 
I had already completed the presenr work when I read in the Critique philosophique 
(for 1883 and 1 884) F. Pillon's very remarkable refutation of an inreresting article by 
G. Noel on the interconnexion of the notions of number and space. But I have not 
found it necessary to make any alterations in the following pages, seeing that Pillon does 
not distinguish between rime as quality and rime as quanriry, between the mulriplicicy of 
juxtaposition and that of interpenetration. Without this vital diS[inction, which it is the 
chief aim of the present chapter to establish, it would be possible to maintain, with 
Pillon, that number may be built up from the relation of co-existence. But what is here 
meant by co-existence? If the co-existing terms form an organic whole, they will never 
lead us to the notion of number; if they remain distinct, they are in juxtaposition and we 
are dealing with space. It is no use to quote the example of simultaneous impressions 
received by several senses. We either leave these sensations their specific differences, 
which amounrs to saying that we do not count them; or else we eliminate their differ­
ences, and then how are we to distinguish them if not by their position or that of their 
symbols? We shall see that the verb 'to distinguish' has two meanings, the one qualitative, 
the other quantitative: these two meanings have been confused, in my opinion, by the 
philosophers who have dealt with the relations between number and space. 
3 
[Editors' note: Coming at this early stage in Bergson's work, this reference to inruition 
owes more to Kant than the peculiar and truly Bergsonian meaning that would not be 
introduced unril 1903.] 
4 
[Editors' note: What is given in the French (0£, p. 59) as 'dissocie' and later 
'dissociation' in the description of counting is misleadingly translated into English (p. 87) 
as 'separate' and then 'separation'.] 
5 
Evellin, Infini et quantite, Paris, 1 88 1 .  

380 
Notes 
MATIER AND MEMORY 
[Editors' note: This is the Introduction from the English translation of MM, pp. 9-16 
(OE, pp. 1 61-82).] 
2 
We have laid stress on this particular point in an essay on 'Le paralogisme psycho­
physiologique,' Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale (Nov., 1904). 
3 
F. Moutier, L'Aphasie de Broca, Paris, 1908; especially Chapter VII. See the work of 
Professor Pierre Marie. 
4 
P. Janet, Les Obsessions et Ia psychasthenie, Paris, 1903; in particular, pp. 474-502. 
5 
[Editors' note: This section is from the whole of chapter 1 of MM, pp. 17-76 (OE, 
pp. 169-223).] 
6 
The word representation is used throughout this book in the French sense, as meaning a 
mental picture, which mental picture is very often perception. [Translators' note.] 
7 
Lotze, Metaphysic, Oxford, 1887, vol. ii, p. 206. 
8 
Schwarz, Das Wahrnehmungsproblem, Leipzig, 1 892, pp. 3 13ff. 
9 
[Editors' note: Once again, this is not the full-blown intuition for which Bergson is 
famed, but rather a Kamian use of the term.] 
10 The word 'spiritualism' is used throughout this work to signify any philosophy that 
claims for spirit an existence of its own. [Translators' note.] 
1 1  [Editors' note: This section is from Matter and Memory, chapter 3, pp. 132-41 ,  
148-55, 161-3 (OE, pp. 276-83, 289-96, 3 0  1-2).] 
12 
Kay, Memory and How to Improve It, New York, 1 888, p. 1 8. 
1 3  Mathias Duval, 'Theorie histologique du sommeil', C.R. de Ia Soc. De Biologie (1895), 
p. 74. Cf. Lepine, p. 85; and Revue de Medicine (Aug., 1 894); and, especially Pupin, Le 
Neurone et les hypotheses histowgiques, Paris, 1 896. 
14 Forbes Winslow, Obscure Diseases of the Brain, pp. 25ff.; Ribot, Maladies de Ia memoire, 
pp. 139ff.; Mauro, Le Sommeil et les reves, Paris, 1878, p. 439; Egger, 'Le Moi des 
mourants,' Revue philosophique (Jan. and Oct., 1 896). Cf. Ball's dictum: 'Memory is a 
faculty which loses nothing and records everything.' (Quoted by Rouillard, Les Amnesies 
[medical thesis], Paris, 1 885, p. 25.) 
1 5  
[Editors' note: This section is from the Summary and Conclusion o f  Matter and 
Memory, pp. 24 1-3 (OE, pp. 370-3).] 
MIND-ENERGY 
[Editors' note: We have chosen to reproduce only the sections of this essay where 
Bergson explains his own theory (ME, pp. 1 51-85 (OE, pp. 908-30)) and have omitted 
the opening literature review.] 
2 
Cf. especially the cases collected by Bernard-Leroy, L 'Illusion de fausse reconnaissance, 
1 898, pp. 176, 182, 1 85, 232. 
3 
Bernard-Leroy, op. cit., p. 1 86. 
4 
Lalande, Rev. Philos. (1893), p. 487. 
5 
Jensen, Allgemeine Zeitschrift for Psychiatrie, Suppl. (1 868), p. 57. 
6 
F. Gregh, quoted by Bernard-Leroy, p. 1 83. 
7 
Bernard-Leroy, op. cit., p. 169. 
8 
Cf. especially the analysis of Krapelin, Arch. for Psychiatrie (1 876), also that of Dromard 
and Albes, Journal de Psychologie ( 1905), pp. 2 1 6-28. 
9 
[Editors' note: This essay is from ME, pp. 231-57 (OE, pp. 959-74).] 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
[Editors' note: This section comes from pp. 1-23, 26-31 of chapter 1 of CE (OE, 
pp. 495-513, 5 1 6-21).] 

Notes 
2 Matiere et memoire, Paris, 1896, chaps ii and iii. 
38 1 
3 
Calkins, Studies on the Life History of Protozoa (Archiv f Entwicklungsmechanik, val. xv. , 
1903, pp. 139-86). 
4 
Sedgwick Minor, On Certain Phenomena of Growing Old (Proc. Amer. Assoc. for the 
Adz,ancement of Science, 39th Meeting, Salem, 189 1 ,  pp. 271-88). 
5 
Le Dantec, L 'individualite et l'erreur individualiste, Paris, 1905, pp. 84ff. 
6 
Metchnikoff, La Degenerescence senile (Annee biologique, iii, 1897, pp. 249ff.). Cf. by the 
same author, La Nature humaine, Paris, 1 903, pp. 3 12ff. 
7 
[Editors' note: August Weismann (1834-19 14), founding figure in the rise of neo­
Darwinism, who sought a scienrifically accurate accounr of heredity and whose theory of 
the germ-plasm (the hereditary substance) established Darwinism's break with the 
doctrine of inheritance of acquired characteristics derived from Lamarck.] 
8 
Roule, L 'Embryologie generate, Paris, 1893. p. 3 19. 
9 
The irreversibility of the series of living beings has been well set forth by Baldwin 
(Development and Evolution, New York, 1902; in particular p. 327). 
1 0  We have dwelt on this point and tried ro make it clear in Time and Free Will, 
pp. 184-99. 
1 1  In his fine work on Genius in Art (Le Genie dans l'art), M. Seailles develops this twofold 
thesis, chat art is a continuation of namre and that life is creation. We should willingly 
accept the second formula; but by creation must we understand, as the author does, a 
synthesis of elements? Where the elements pre-exist, the synthesis that will be made is 
virtually given, being only one of the possible arrangements. This arrangemenr a super­
human intellect could have perceived in advance among all the possible ones that 
surround it. We hold, on the contrary, that in the domain of life the elements have no 
real and separate existence. They are manifold mental views of an indivisible process. 
And for that reason there is radical contingency in progress, incommensurability between 
what goes before and what follows - in short, duration. 
1 2  [Editors' note: This section is from pp. 37-43 of CE (QE, pp. 526-31).] 
13 
Laplace, Introduction a Ia theorie analytique des probabilites (Oeuvres completes, vol. vii., 
Paris, 1886, p. vi.). 
14 Du Bois-Reymond, Uber die Grmzen des Naturerkennens, Leipzig, 1 892. 
1 5  [Editors' note: Thomas Henry Huxley ( 1825-95), British biologist and popularizer of 
science, best known as an ardent defender and promoter of Darwin's ideas, which he 
publicly championed in the 1860 debate at Oxford University with Bishop Wilberforce; 
also founder of craniology and did important work reclassifying George Cuvier's system 
of classification.] 
16 There are really two lines to follow in contemporary neo-viralism: on the one hand, the 
assertion that pure mechanism is insufficient, which assumes great authority when made 
by such scienrists as Driesch or Reinke, for example; and, on the other hand, the 
hypotheses which this vitalism superposes on mechanism (the 'entelechies' of Driesch, 
and the 'dominanrs' of Reinke, etc.). Of these two parts, the former is perhaps the more 
inreresting. Cf. the admirable studies of Driesch - Die Lokalisation morphogenetischer 
Vorgange, Leipzig, 1899; Die organischen Regufationen, Leipzig, 190 1 ;  Naturbegrifi und 
Natururteile, Leipzig, 1904; Der Vitalismus als Geschichte und als Lehre, Leipzig, 1905; 
and of Reinke - Die Welt als Tat, Berlin, 1899; Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie, 
Berlin, 190 I ;  Philosophie der Botanik, Leipzig, 1 905. 
17 
[Editors' note: This section of CE is from pp. 50-9, 87-96 (0£, pp. 537-45, 569-78).] 
1 8  [Editors' note: Gustav Heinrich Theodor Eimer ( 1843-98): Swiss-German zoologist 
and neo-Lamarckian, an orthogeneticist along with Carl von Nageli and opponenr of 
Weismann. As an advocate of orthogenesis, Eimer was committed to there being an 
immanent source of evolutionary change and trend towards diversification.] 
1 9  Cf., o n  this subject, Matiere et memoire, chap. i. 

382 
Notes 
DURATION AND SIMULTANEITY 
[Editors' note: This selection is from rhe whole of chapter 3, 'Concerning the nature 
of time'.] 
2 
For the development of the views presented here, see Time and Free Will, mainly Chaps 
II and III; Matter and Memory, Chaps I and IV; Creative Evolution, passim. Cf. 
'Introduction ro metaphysics' and The perception of change' in The Creative Mind. 
3 
Cf. those of our works we have just cited. 
4 
See Matter and Memory, Chap. I. 
5 
See Time and Free Will, especially pp. 109ff. 
6 
[Editors' note: This is a clear step backwards from Bergson's position in C£ which 
allowed matter a low level of duration.] 
7 
That the concept of the mathematical point is natural is well known to those who have 
taught geometry to children. Minds most refracrory to the first elements imagine 
immediately and without difficulty lines without thickness and points without size. 
8 
It is obvious that our hypothesis would lose its meaning if we thought of consciousness 
as an 'epiphenomenon' added to cerebral phenomena of which it would be merely the 
result or expression. We cannot dwell here upon this theory of consciousness-as­
epiphenomenon, which we tend more and more ro consider arbitrary. We have 
discussed it in detail in several of our works, notably in the first three chapters of Matter 
and Memory and in different essays in Mind-Energy. Let us confine ourselves ro recalling: 
(I) that this theory in no way stems from facrs, (2) rhat its metaphysical origins are easily 
made out, (3) that, taken literally, it would be self-contradictory. (Concerning this last 
point and the oscillation which the theory implies between two contrary assertions, see 
Mind-Energy, pp. 243-55.) In the present work, we take consciousness as experience 
gives it to us, without theorizing about its nature and origins. 
9 
Time and Free Will, p. 109. 
10 
Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1 920). This work (which takes the theory of relativity into account) is certainly 
one of the most profound ever written on the philosophy of nature. [The relevant 
passage occurs on page 54 of Whitehead's work and reads as follows: 'It is an exhibition 
of the process of nature that each duration happens and passes. The process of nature 
can also be termed the "passage of nature." I definitely refrain at this stage from using 
the word "rime," since the measurable time of science and of civilized life generally 
merely exhibits some aspects of the more fundamental fact of the passage of nature. 
I believe that in this doctrine I am in full accord with Bergson, though he uses "time" 
for the fundamental fact which I call the "passage of nature." '] 
THE CREATIVE MIND 
[Edirors' note: From CM we have selected all of the essays The possible and the real', 
'Philosophical intuition', The perception of change' and 'On the pragmatism ofWilliam 
James: truth and reality', as well as the last section of 'Introduction ro metaphysics' 
(CM, pp. 91-106, 107-29, 130-58, 1 88-200, 209-19; OE, pp. 1 331-45, 1 345-65, 
1 365-92, 141 9-32, 1440-50).] 
2 
This article was the development of certain views presented at the opening of the 'philo­
sophical meeting' at Oxford, September 24, 1 920. In writing it for the Swedish review 
Nordisk Tidskrift, I wished to express my regret at being unable ro go to Stockholm ro 
give a lecture, as was the cusrom, on the occasion of the bestowal of the Nobel prize. 
Until it appeared in The Creative Mind the article existed only in the Swedish language. 
3 
In my Time and Free Will, p. 1 10, I did in fact show that measurable Time could 
be considered as 'a fourth dimension of Space'. It was, naturally, a question of pure 

Notes 
383 
Space, and nm of the mixture Space-Time of rhe theory of Relativity, which is quire 
another thing. 
4 
Even then one must ask in certain cases, if rhe obstacles have nor become surmountable 
thanks to the creative action which surmounted them: the action, unforeseeable in itself, 
would then have created the 'surmountability.' Before ir, the obstacles were insurmount­
able, and without it, they would have remained so. 
5 
I reproduce these views in rhe form I gave them in my lecture, aware that they will 
probably cause the same misunderstanding as before, in spite of the applications and 
explanations I presented in subsequent works. From the fact that a being is action can 
one conclude that irs existence is evanescent? What more does anyone say than I have 
said, in making ir reside in a 'substratum,' which has nothing determined abour it, since, 
by hypothesis, irs determination, and consequently its essence, is this very action? Does 
an existence rhus conceived ever cease to be present to itself, real duration implying the 
persistence of rhe past into rhe presem and rhe indivisible continuity of an unfolding? 
All the misunderstandings derive from the fact that the applications of my conception of 
real duration have been approached through the usual notion of spatialized time. 
6 
This essay was wrirren as the preface ro William James's work on Pragmatism, translated 
by E. Le Brun (Paris, Flammarion, 1 9 1 1). 
7 
A Pluralistic Universe, London, 1 909. Translated inro French in the 'Bibliotheque de 
philosophic scientifique,' under the ride Philosophie de !'Experience. 
8 
M. Andre Chaumeix has very ingeniously pointed our resemblances between rhe person­
ality of James and rhar of Socrates (Revue des Deux Mondes, October 1 5, 1910). The 
effort of bringing man to a consideration of things human is in itself something Socratic. 
9 
In his study of William James (Revue de metaphysique et de morale, November 1 9 1 0), 
M. Emile Bourroux has brought our the quite unique meaning of the English verb to 
experience, 'which means, not coldly to observe a thing happening outside us, bur to 
undergo, to feel within oneself, to live oneself this or rhar manner of being . . . . ' 
1 0  I am nm sure that James used the word 'invention' nor rhar he explicitly compared 
theoretical truth with a mechanical apparatus; bur I believe that this comparison is in 
keeping with the spirit of the doctrine, and rhat ir can help us to understand 
Pragmatism. 
1 1  This essay appeared in the Revue de mhaphysique et de morale in 1903. Since rhar period I 
have been led more accurately to define rhe meaning of the rerms metaphysics and science. 
One is free to give words the meaning one wishes, when one is careful to define that 
meaning: nothing would hinder one from calling any kind of knowledge 'science' or 
'philosophy,' as has long been done. As I have mentioned previously, one could even 
include everything in metaphysics. Nevertheless it is incontestable that knowledge bears 
in a well-defined direction when it arranges irs object with measurement in view, and that 
it proceeds in a different, even opposite, direction when it frees itself of any thought of 
relation and comparison in order to be in sympathy with reality. I have shown that the first 
method was suited to the study of marrer and the second to the study of mind, that there 
is, furthermore, reciprocal overlapping of the two objects and that the two methods 
should be muwally helpful. In the first case one is dealing with spatialized time and with 
space; in the second, with real duration. Ir has seemed ro me more and more useful, for 
the clariry of ideas, to call the first form of knowledge 'scientific' and rhe second 'meta­
physical.' It is then ro the account of metaphysics rhar we shall pur this 'philosophy of 
science' or 'metaphysics of science,' which inhabits the minds of great scholars, which is 
immanent in their science and which is often its invisible inspiration. In the present 
article I left it still to the account of science, because ir was, in fact, practised by those 
searchers called, by general agreement, 'savants' rather than 'metaphysicians.' 
It must nor be forgotten, on the other hand, rhat rhe present essay was wrirten at a rime 
when rhe criticism of Kant and rhe dogmatism of his successors were fairly generally 
accepted, if nor as a conclusion, at least as point of departure for philosophical speculation. 

384 
Notes 
1 2  Let m e  insist I am thereby in no way setting aside substance. O n  the contrary, I affirm 
the persistence of existences. And I believe I have facilitated their representation. How 
was it ever possible to compare this doctrine with rhe doctrine of Heraclitus? 
1 3  Especially in Newton, i n  his consideration o f  fluxions. 
1 4  On this point, as on several other questions dealt with i n  the present essay, consult the 
excellent works of Le Roy, Vincent and Wilbois, found in the Revue de mhaphysique et 
de morale. 
1 5  As I explain at the beginning o f  my second essay (Introduction II, p. 30 [ 0£, p. 1 271]) 
I hesitated a long time before using the term 'intuition'; and when I finally decided to do 
so I designated by this word the metaphysical function of thought: principally the inti­
mare knowledge of the mind by the mind, secondarily the knowledge by rhe mind of 
what there is essential in matter, intelligence being, no doubt, made above all to manipu­
late matter and consequently to know it, but not having as its especial destiny to touch 
the bottom of it. It is this meaning that I give to the word in rhe present essay (written in 
1 902), more especially in irs last few pages. By all increasing care for precision I was later 
led co distinguish more clearly between intelligence and intuition, as well as between 
science and metaphysics. Bur in a general way the change of terminology has no serious 
disadvantage when one rakes the trouble each rime to define the term in its particular 
meaning, or even simply when the conrext makes the meaning sufficiently obvious. 
16 In order to complete what I was saying in rhe previous note let me add that I have been 
led, since the time of writing these lines, to restrict the meaning of the word 'science,' 
and to call more particularly scientific the knowledge of inert matter by pure inrelligence. 
That does not prevent me from saying that the knowledge of life and of the mind is 
scientific to a large extent, - to the extent that it calls on the same methods of investi­
gation as the knowledge of inert matrer. Conversely, the knowledge of inert matter can 
be called philosophical to the extent that it utilizes, at a certain decisive moment in irs 
history, the intuition of pure duration. 
17 See a very interesting article on this subject, by Radulescu-Motru: Zur Entwickelung von 
Kant's Theorie der Naturcausalitlit, in the Philosophische Studien ofWundt (vol. IX, 1894). 
BERGSON AND KANT: BEYOND THE NOUMENAL 
[Editors' nore: These extracts come from C£, pp. 203-7, 356-63 (0£, pp. 668-7 1 ,  
795-80 1).] 
THE TWO SOURCES OF MORALITY AND RELIGION 
[Editors' note: This extract is taken from TSMR, pp. 3-5 1 ,  52-65 (0£, pp. 98 1-1017, 
1018-29).] 
2 
Kipling, 'In the Rukh,' from Many Inventions. 
3 
We need hardly say that there are many exceptions. Religious fervour, for example, can 
attain, in women, to undreamt-of depths. Bur nature has probably ordained, as a general 
rule, that woman should concentrate on her child and confine within somewhat narrow 
bounds the best of her sensibility. In this department she is indeed incomparable; here 
the emotion is supra-intellectual in that it becomes divination. How many things rise up 
in the vision of a mother as she gazes in wonder upon her little one? Illusion perhaps! 
This is not certain. Let us rather say that reality is big with possibilities, and that the 
mother sees in the child not only what he will become, bur also what he would become, 
if he were not obliged, at every step in his life, to choose and therefore to exclude. 

Notes 
385 
4 
[Editors' note: This section comes from TSMR, pp. 292-3 12, 3 17 ( 0£, pp. 1 223-41 ,  
1245).] 
5 
See Gina Lombroso's interesting work, La Ranron du machinisme (Paris, 1930). 
6 
We hasten ro state that we have no particular knowledge of this subject. We have chosen 
the example of meat as we might have that of any other usual food. 
. 
7 
We again refer the reader to Gina Lombroso's fine work. See also Mantoux, La Revolution 
industrielle au dix-huitieme siecle. 
8 
There are doubtless periods of 'over-production' which extend to agricultural products 
and may even start from these. But they are obviously not due to the fact that there is 
too much food for the consumption of mankind. The fact is simply that, production in 
general not being properly organized, there is no way of exchange. 
9 
We are speaking figuratively, of course. Coal was known long before the steam-engine 
turned it into a treasure. 
10 A meaning only part of which we deal with here, as also in the case of the word 
'imperialism.' 
MELANGES 
Except for the entries which are identified as translator's notes, all entries within square 
brackets are editors' notes. 
[M, pp. 358-72. Text of lecture published in the Concours general: Annee 1895, Paris, 
Delalain, and by Editions de l'Epervier, Clermont-Ferrand, 1947, also appearing in the 
journal La Nef 32 (July 1947), pp. 62-72, and in Ecrits et Paroles, vol. i, Paris, Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1957, pp. 84-94.] 
2 
[Translator's note: This was a competitive examination for French secondary school 
pupils.] 
3 
[See Descartes Address, p. 373 above] 
4 
[Translator's note: M suggests that Bergson is thinking here of Auguste Comte; see 
Discours sur !'esprit positif, Paris, Schleicher, 1909, pp. 53-6.] 
5 
[Translator's note: Descartes, Discourse on Method, Part I, II. 26-9: 'for as to the reason 
or sense, inasmuch as ir is that alone which constitutes us men, and distinguishes us 
from the brutes, I am disposed to believe that it is to be found complete in each 
individual' (trans. J. Veitch, Chicago, Open Court, 1907).] 
6 
[Translator's note: M gives two references: Hippolyte Taine, To know an object is to 
know its cause and follow it through the whole order of its effects', 'De Ia methode', in 
Essais de critique et d'histoire, 1858, p. iii, and Antoine Cournot, Considerations, ch. 1 ,  
'L'etiologie historique' (no quote given).] 
7 
[Translator's note: Raymond Poincare, subsequently president of the French republic 
(1913-20) and first cousin of the mathematician Henri Poincare. He presided at this 
ceremony in his capacity at the time as Minister of Public Education.] 
8 
[Translator's note: Raymond Poincare, Concours general: Annee 1893, Paris, Delalain, 
p. 16.] 
9 [M, pp. 410- 13. Georges Lechalas, neo-Kanrian author of Etude sur l'espace et !e temps, 
Paris, Editions Alcan, 1896. This text from his 'Compte rendu de Matiere et memoire', 
Annales de philosophie chrhienne, 36 ( 1897), pp. 1 54, 328, 333; also reproduced in Ecrits 
et Paroles, vol. i, pp. 95-7.] 
10 
[Of Matter and Memory.] 
I I  [The question of the extent of virtual perception.] 
1 2  [The Bergson-James correspondence was reproduced i n  the Revue des Deux Mondes 
(RDM), 15 October 1933. Bergson's letters were also published in Ecrits et Paroles (EP).] 
13 
[M, pp. 579-81; RDM, pp. 793-4; EP, vol. i, pp. 192-3.] 

386 
Notes 
14 [Translator's note: The feeling of effort', Anniversary Memoirs of the Boston Sociery of 
Natural History, Boston, 1880, also in Mind, 5 (1 880). French translation 'Le 
Sentiment de !'effort', Critique Philosophique, 9: 2 ( 1880), pp. 123-291 .] 
1 5  [Translator's note: Both expressions in English in the original.] 
16 
[Translator's note: The passage Bergson is referring to in James's letter of 14 December 
1902 reads in the original: 'Ir is a work of exquisite genius. It makes a sort of Copernican 
revolution as much as Berkeley's 'Principles' or Kant's 'Critique' did, and will probably, 
as it gets better known, open a new era of philosophical discussions', The Letters of 
William james, edited by his son Henry James, vol. ii, London, Longmans, Green & Co., 
1920, p. 179.] 
17 
[Translator's note: Human Immortality: Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine, Inger­
soll Lecture, Boston, 1 898, published in Ingersoll Lecture Series, Westminster, 1899.] 
1 8  [M, pp. 587-9; RDM, pp. 797-8; EP, vol. ii, pp. 197-8.] 
19 
[Translator's note: Regarding these 'difficulties', the passage from James's letter of 
25 February 1 903 reads: 'your unconscious or subconscious permanence of memories is 
. . .  a notion that offers difficulties, seeming in fact to be the equivalent of the "soul" in 
another shape, and the manner in which these memories "insert" themselves into the 
brain action, and in fact the whole conception of the difference berween the inner and 
outer worlds in your philosophy, still need to me a great deal of elucidation', The Letters 
of William james, edited by his son Henry James, vol. ii, London, Longmans, Green & 
Co., 1920, p. 1 84.] 
20 
[Translator's note: In English in the original.) 
2 1  
[Translator's note: German lnbegriff - (quint)essence, embodimenr, paragon.] 
22 
[M, pp. 65 1-2; RDM, pp. 798-9; EP, vol. ii, pp. 235-6.] 
23 
[Translator's note: According to MelAnges, these would certainly include 'Is radical 
empiricism solipsistic?', journal of PhiloJOphy, 2 (1905), pp. 235-8, and most probably, 
'Does consciousness exist?', ibid., I (1904), pp. 477-91 ;  'A world of pure experience', 
ibid., pp. 533-43; 'The pragmatic method', ibid., pp. 673-87; and 'Humanism and 
truth', Mind, 13 (1904), pp. 457-75.) 
24 
[Translator's note: See James's 'difficulties', n. 1 9  above. James does not treat the 
'unconscious' as a special topic in, e.g., the Essays in &dical Experience, which reproduce 
much of the material Bergson is speaking of here. His non-position can be both explained 
by and extrapolated from the thesis he maintains in the essay 'Does consciousness exist?' 
(chapter 1 in the Essays), where he already contests the notion of consciousness as a separate 
entity or special property of the subject, arguing that it is rather a particular functional 
inflection of 'pure experience', which is neutral in itself and belongs to nobody in par­
ticular. In this sense the 'unconscious' for James would either also be a particular mode 
of pure experience, or be largely coextensive with the realm of 'pure experience' itself, if 
we understand Bergson to mean by the unconscious here what exists or subsists virtually 
beyond its particular 'actualization' (for James an appropriation) in, or as, a particular 
consciousness. Bergson later affirms James's norion of personal experience as simply an 
'appropriation' of a generalized experience - see below, the letter of20 July 1905, para­
graph 2 - and specifies the differences in the derails of their position.] 
25 
[Translator's nore: Both italicized expressions in English in the original.] 
26 
[M, pp. 659-6 1; RDM, pp. 802-4; EP, vol. ii, pp. 24 1-2.) 
27 
[Translator's note: According to Melanges, these would be the 1905 series of essays pub­
lished in the journal of Philosophy and gathered together in Essays in &dical Empiricism, 
New York/London, 1912.) 
28 
[Translator's note: Essays in Radical Empiricism, ch. 4.) 
29 
[Translator's note: See Letter to G. Lechalas, 'all sensations that I localize in my body, 
depend above all on the state of the part in which they are produced; they take on quire 
different aspects according to whether my body is disposed to welcome or reject them'; 
see above, p. 355.] 

Notes 
387 
30 
[Translawr's note: G. Rageot, '5th International Congress of Psychology', Revue Philoso­
phique de Ia France et de l'Etranger, 60: I Ouly 1 905), pp. 84-5). Rageot is commentating 
on a paper given by James, 'La notion de conscience' (reproduced in the Essays on Radical 
Empiricism), and writes (p. 84): 'Nobody is unaware of - and he himself constantly 
proclaims - what our eminent philosopher, our master analyst, M. Bergson, owed, at the 
beginning of his career, to American works. It is firstly and above all from the inspiration 
of Ward, then a little under the influence of William James, that the author of the Essay 
on the immediate data of consciousness was led to his famous conception of an interior !low, 
the real duration of the deep and ineffable self. . .  .'] 
3 1  
[Translator's note: James Ward, 1 843-1925.] 
32 
[Translator's note: Revue Philosophique de Ia France et de l'Etranger, 60: 2 (August 1905), 
pp. 229-30.] 
33 
[M, pp. 726-7; RDM, pp. 808-9; EP, vol. ii, pp. 260-1 .] 
34 
[Translator's note: In James, Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, 
London and New York, Longmans, Green, 1907.] 
35 
[Translator's note: Pragmatism, p. 257.] 
36 
[Translator's note: In English in the original.] 
37 
[M, pp. 765-6; RDM, pp. 8 1 0-1 1; EP, vol. ii, pp. 294-5.] 
38 
[Translator's note: James, The philosophy of Bergson', Hibbert Journal, 7 ( 1 909), 
pp. 562-77.] 
39 
[M, pp. 775-7; RDM, pp. 8 13-14; EP, vol. ii, pp. 304-5.] 
40 
[Translator's note: Oxford lesson on Bergson sent as a proof to Bergson by 
James, 19 July 1908, published as The philosophy of Bergson', Hibbert Journal, 
7 (I 909).] 
41 
[Translator's note: A Pluralistic Universe: Hibbert Lectures at Manchester College on the 
Present Situation in Philosophy, London, Longmans, Green, 1909.] 
42 [M, pp. 785-6; RDM, pp. 816-17: EP, vol. ii, p. 31 0.] 
43 
[Translator's note: Gustav Theodor Fechner, 1 801-87, German physicist and philoso­
pher, advocate of pan-psychism and founder of psychophysics, a science concerned with 
quantitative relations between sensations and the stimuli producing them.] 
44 
[Translator's note: 'The doctrine of the earth-soul and of being intermediate between 
man and God: an account of the philosophy of G. T. Fechner', Hibbert journal, 
7 (1909), pp. 278-94.] 
45 
[Translator's note: In English in the original.] 
46 
[M, p. 790; RDM, p. 8 17; EP, vol. ii, p. 31 5.] 
47 
[Translator's note: 'The philosophy of Bergson', Hibbert Journal, 7 (1909), see n. 40 
above.] 
48 
[M, p. 79 1; RDM, pp. 817-18; EP, vol. ii, pp. 31 5-16.] 
49 
[Translator's note: A Pluralistic Universe, see n. 41 above.] 
50 
[Translator's note: In English in the original.] 
5 1  [M, pp. 8 1 6-17; RDM, pp. 8 19-20; EP, vol. ii, pp. 335-6.] 
52 
[Translator's note: Emile Bourroux (1845-1 921), French professor ar the Sorbonne.] 
53 
[Translator's note: The moral equivalent of war' was based on a speech given at Stanford 
University in 1906, reproduced in Memories and Studies, London, 191 1 .  'A suggestion 
abour mysticism', journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods, 7: 4 (1910), 
pp. 85-93, reproduced in James, Collected Essays and Reviews, London, Longmans, 1920.] 
54 
[Translator's note: In English in the original.] 
55 
[Translator's note: 'A suggestion about mysticism', p. 93, Bergson's italics.] 
56 
[M, pp. 1 146-50, reproduced in EP, vol. iii, pp. 455-8.] [Translator's note: Origin­
ally a handwritten letter, the text was republished in Hoffding's second revised edition 
of La Philosophic de Bergson, Paris, Editions Alcan, 1917, pp. 1 57-65, with some slight 
corrections suggesting Bergson had access ro the proof prior to its publication, this 
modified version being the text reproduced in M. The beginning of the letter reads: 

38H 
Notes 
1 5  March, 1 9 1 5, Villa Montmorency 
Monsieur et rres honore collegue, 
I have been so occupied - and above all so preoccupied - recently that I have not yet 
been able to thank you for kindly sending me your work: Modern Philosophers and 
Lectum on Bergson. I don't need ro tell you that I was quire familiar, already, with the 
first parr of rhe book; I think I have already had rhe opportunity ro tell you with what 
interest and benefit I had read these 1902 lectures which complete so well your 'History 
of Modern Philosophy'. It is thus more particularly on the second part of the work that I 
would like to speak today. First I must . . .  ] 
57 
[M, pp. 1 526-28 (extract).] [Translator's note: Floris Delarrre was Bergson's nephew 
by marriage, professor of English literature at the Sorbonne, and the founder and first 
president of the Societe des Amis de Bergson. He also edited the three-volume collection 
of Bergson's Ecrits et Paroles, published between 1957 and 1959. This extract comes 
from a piece appearing in the Revue Anglo-Americaine, 13: 5 (June 1936), pp. 395-401 ,  
reproduced i n  EP, vol. iii, pp. 600-5, i n  response to the suggestion that similarities 
existed berween Bergson's doctrine and the neo-Lamarckian views of the English essayist 
and novelist Samuel Butler, expressed in non-fictional works of his such as Life and 
Habit and Evolution Old and New. Bergson begins his lener by claiming his complete 
ignorance of Butler prior to 1914, then gives his own account of Butler's position and 
finally underlines what he sees as their crucial differences, which form the substance of 
this extract.] 
58 
[Bergson's and Butler's.] 
59 [M, pp. 1 574-9.] 
60 
[Thomas Gray, 'Elegy written in a country churchyard'.] 
61 
[Translator's note: Descartes to Princess Elizabeth, 28 June 1643: 'et enfin, c'est en 
usant seulement de Ia vie er des conversations ordinaires, et en s'abstenant de mediter et 
d'erudier aux chases qui exercent !'imagination, qu'on apprend a concevoir ]'union de 
!'arne et du corps.' English translation, Anthony Kenny, Descartes: Philosophical Letters, 
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1970, p. 141: 'Bur it is the ordinary course of life and conver­
sation, and abstention from meditation and from the study of things which exercise the 
imagination, that teaches us how to conceive the union of the soul and the body.'] 

Guide to Further Reading 
Where rwo dates are given the one given in square brackets refers to the original date of 
publication. An asterisk indicates a text which is used in this book. 
Texts by Henri Bergson 
(19 1 1) [1900], Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning ofthe Comic, rrans. Cloudesley Brereton 
and Fred Rothwell, London, Macmillan. 
*(1920), Mind-Energy, trans. H. Wildon Carr, New York, Henry Holt. 
(1920) [ 1901 ) ,  'Dreams', in Mind-Energy, pp. 104-34. 
*(1920) [1904] ,  'Brain and thought: a philosophical illusion', in Mind-Energy, pp. 231-57. 
*( 1920) [ 1908), 'Memory of the present and false recognition', in Mind-Energy, pp. 134-86. 
(1920) [ 1 9 1 1], 'Life and consciousness', in Mind-Energy, pp. 3-37. 
(1959a) [ 1 884), The Philosophy of Poetry: The Genius of Lucretius, trans. W. Baskin, New 
York, Philosophical Library. 
( 1959b), Oeuvres, Paris, PUF. 
*(1960) [1889], Time and Free Will, rrans. F. L. Pogson, New York, Harper & Row. 
*(1965), The Creative Mind, rrans. M. L. Andison, Totowa, Litrlefield, Adams & Co. 
*(1965) [1903], 'Introduction to metaphysic,s', in The Creative Mind, pp. 1 59-20 1. 
(1965) [1 904], The life and work of Ravaisson', in The Creative Mind, pp. 220-52. 
*( 1965) [191 1 ] ,  'Philosophical inruirion', in The Creative Mind, pp. 107-30. 
*(1965) [191 1 ] ,  The perception of change', in The Creative Mind, pp. 130-59. 
*(1965) [ 1 9 1 1 ]  'On the pragmatism of William James: truth and moraliry', in The Creative 
Mind, pp. 1 88-200. 
(1965) [19 13) ,  The philosophy of Claude Bernard', in The Creative Mind, pp. 20 1-9. 
( 1 965) [ 1 922] . 'Introduction I and II', in The Creative Mind, pp. 1 1-30, 30-9 1 .  
*(1965) [1930), The possible and the real', in The Creative Mind, pp. 9 1-107. 
( 1970) [ 1889) , AristotLe s Concept of Place, trans. J. K. Ryan, in Studies in Philosophy and the 
History of Philosophy, vol. v. pp. 13-72. 
*(1972), Melanges, Paris, PUF. 
*(1977) [ 1 932], The Two Sources of Morality and Religion, rrans. R. Ashley Audra and 
C. Brereron, Notre Dame IN, UniversitY of Notre Dame Press. 
*(1983) [ 1907], Creative Evolution, trans . . A. Mitchell, Lanham MD, University Press of 
America. 
(1990), Cours 1: Lefom de Psychologie et de Metaphysique (Ciermont-Ferrand 1887-8), Paris, 
PUF. 
*(1991) [1 896], Matter and Memory, trans. N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer, New York, Zone 
Books. 
( 1 992), Cours 11: LefOI'IS d'esthetique: lefOI'IS de morale, psychologie et meraphysique, Paris, PUF. 
( 1 995), Cours III: Lefons d'histoire d'e Ia philosophie moderne & Theories de l'ame, Paris, PUF. 
*(2000) [ 1 922], Duration and Simultaneity, trans. L. Jacobson and M. Lewis, Manchester, 
Clinamen Press. 
For useful general introductions (moJtly sympathetic but sometimes critical) to Bergson s work, 
consult the following: 
Alexander, Ian W. (1957), Bergson: Philosopher of Reflection, London, Bowes & Bowes. 

390 
Guide to Further Reading 
Seguin, Alben, and Thevanez, Pierre (eds) (1943), Henri Bergson: Essais et temoignages, 
Neucharel, Editions de Ia Baconniere. 
Benda, J. ( 1954), Sur le succes du Bergsonisme, Paris, Mercure de France. 
Chevalier, J. (1928), Henri Bergson, rrans. L. A. Clare, London, Rider & Co. 
Dale Adamson, G. ( 1 999), 'Henri Bergson: rime, evolution, and philosophy', World Futures, 
54: 1 ,  pp. 135-62. 
Deleuze, G. (1991) [1966], Bergsonism, rrans. H. Tomlinson and B. Habberjam, New York, 
Zone Books 
Deleuze, G. (1994) ( 1968], Diforence and Repetition, trans. P. Pmon, London, Arhlone Press. 
Delhomme, Jeanne (1960), Vie et conscience de Ia Vie: Essais sur Bergson, Paris, PUF. 
Gunn. A. (1920), Bergson and His Philosophy, London, Merhuen & Co. 
Gunter, P. A. Y. (ed.) (1986), Henri Bergson: A Bibliography, Bowling Green OH, Philosophy 
Documenrarion Cenrer, Bowling Green Srare Universiry. 
Hanna, Thoma5 (ed.) (1962), The Bergsonian Heritage, New York and London, Columbia 
Universiry Press. 
Hi:iffding, H. ( 1 9 1 5), Modern Philosophers and Lectures on Bergson, rrans. A. C. Ma5on, 
London, Macmillan. 
Hude. Henri (1989-90), Bergson I et II, Paris, Editions Universiraires. 
Jankelevirch, V. (1959), Henri Bergson, Paris, PUF. 
Kolakowski, Leszek (1985), Bergson, Oxford, Oxford Universiry Press. 
Lacey. A. R. (1989), Bergson, London, Routledge. 
de Lame, Alain (1990), Bergson: Une ontologie de La perplexite, Paris, PUF. 
Le Roy, E. (1913), A New Philosophy: Henri Bergson, London, Williams & Norgare; New 
York, Henry Hair. 
Linds,Jy, A. D. ( 1 9 1 1), The Philosophy of Bergsonism, London, J. M. Denr & Sons Lrd. 
Marirain, J. ( 1 943), Redeeming the Time, London, The Cenrenary Press. 
Marirain, J. (1955), Bergsonian Philosophy and Thomism, rrans. M. L. Andison, New York, 
Philosophical Library. 
Moore, F. C. T. ( 1 996), Bergson: Thinking Backwards, Cambridge, Cambridge Universiry Press. 
Moun·los, Georges (1964), Bergson et les niveaux de realite, Paris, PUF. 
Mullarkey, J. (1999a), Bergson and Philosophy, Edinburgh, Edinburgh Universiry Press. 
Mullarkey, J. (ed.) (1999b), The New Bn-gson, Manchester, Manchester Universiry Press. 
Papanicolaou, A. C., and Gunrer, P. A. Y. (eds) (1987), Bergson and Modern Thought: 
Tou•ards a Unified Science, Chur, Switzerland, Harwood Academic Press. 
Rabiner, Andre (1965), Bergson et les metamorphoses de Ia duree, Paris, Editions Seghers. 
Russell, B. ( 19 12), The philosophy of Bergson', The Monist, 22: 3, pp. 321-47 (rep rimed in 
The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, val. vi, London, Routledge, 1992, pp. 3 13-38). 
Sanrayana, G. (1940), Winds of Doctrine: Studies in Contemporary Opinion, London, Denr 
(first published 19 13, new edition 1940). 
Stephen, K. (1922), The Misuse of Mi12d: A Study of Bergson 's Attack on Intellectualism, 
London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. 
T rorignon, Pierre (1968), L 'Idee de vie chez Bergson et la critique de la metaphysique, Paris, 
PUF. 
Wahl, Jean (1965), Bergson, Cours de Sorbonne, Paris, Cenrre de Documenrarion 
U ni versi raire. 
Worms, F. (2000), Le Vocabulaire de Bergson, Paris, Ellipses. 
For studies relating Bergson ism to other philosophen or taking a historical approach to his thought, 
comulr: 
Alliez, E. (1998), 'On Deleuze's Bergson ism', Discourse, 20: 3, pp. 226-47. 
Ansell Pearson, K. (200 l), Thinking immanence: on rhe evenr of Deleuze's Bergsonism', 
in C. Genosko (ed.), Deleuze and Guattari: Critical Assessments, London and New York, 
Taylor and Francis, pp. 4 1 2-41 .  

Guide to Further Reading 
39 1 
Barthelmy-Madaule, M. ( 1966), Bergson, adversaire de Kant: Etude critique de Ia conception 
Bergsonienne du Kantisme, Paris, PUF. 
de Gruson, Francrois Fabre Luce ( 1 959), 'Bergson, lecteur de Kant', Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 
5, pp. 1 7 1 -90. 
Delattre, F. (1948), 'Bergson and Proust: accords et dissonances', Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 
1 ,  pp. 13-127. 
Gillies, Mary Ann (1996), Henri Bergson and British Modernism, Montreal, MeGill-Queen's 
University Press. 
Grogin, R. C. ( 1 988), The Bergsonian Controvmy in France, 1900-1914, Calgary, The 
University of Calgary Press. 
Gross, D. (1985), 'Bergson, Proust, and the revaluation of memory', International Philo­
sophical Quarterly, 25: 4, pp. 369-80. 
Pilkington, A. E. ( 1 976), Bergson and His Influence: A Reassessment, Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Quirk, Tom ( 1 990), Bergson and American Culture, Chapel Hill, University of North 
Carolina Press. 
Scharfstein, Ben-Ami (1943), Roots of Bergson 's  Philosophy, New York, Columbia University 
Press. 
Sokal, A., and Bricmont, J. (1997), Impostures Intellectuelles, Paris, Editions Odile Jacob. 
Soulez, Philippe ( 1 989) Bergson politique, Paris, PU F. 
Soulez, Philippe, and Worms, F. ( 1 997), Bergson: Biographie, Paris, Flammarion. 
Zac, S. ( 1 968), 'Les Themes Spinozistes dans Ia philosophie de Bergson', Les Etudes 
Bergsoniennes, 8, pp. 1 23-58. 
For examinations of Bergson ian methodology, read: 
Deleuze, G. ( 1 995) [ 1 990] , Negotiations, trans. M. Joughin, New York, Columbia University 
Press. 
Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F. ( 1 994) [1991], What Is Philosophy?, trans. G. Burchill and 
H. Tomlinson, London, Verso. 
Merleau-Ponty, M. ( 1 964), 'Einstein and the crisis of reason', in M. Merleau-Ponry, Signs, 
trans. Richard C. McCleary, Evanston, Northwestern University Press, pp. 1 92-7. 
Merleau-Ponry, M. ( 1 988) [ 1 953] , In Praise of Philosophy and Other Essays, trans. J. Wild and 
]. Edie, Evanston, Northwestern University Press. 
Mullarkey, ]. (I 995), 'Bergson's method of multiplicity', Metaphilosophy, 26: 3, pp. 230-59. 
For discussions of ontological issues in relation to Bergsonism, read: 
Ansell Pearson, K. (200 I), Philosophy and the Adventure of the Virtual, London, Rourledge. 
Badiou, A. (2000), Deleuze: The Clamor of Being, trans. L. Burchill, Minneapolis, University 
of Minneapolis Press. 
Deleuze, G. ( 1 996), 'L'actuel et le virtue!', in Dialogues, 2nd edn, Paris, Flammarion, 
pp. 1 79-85. 
Deleuze, G. ( 1 999) [ 1 956], 'Bergson's conception of difference', trans. M. McMahon, in 
J. Mullarkey (ed.), The New Bergson, Manchester, Manchester University Press, pp. 42-66. 
Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F. (1988) [ 1 980] , A Thousand Plateaus, London, Athlone Press. 
Gilson, Bernard ( 1 978), L 'lndividualite dans fa philosophie de Bergson, Paris, Librairie 
Philosophique J.Yrin. 
James, W. ( 1 909). A Pluralistic Universe, London, Longmans, Green & Co. 
de Lame, Alain ( 1 990), Bergson: Une ontologie de fa perplexite, Paris, Presses Universitaires de 
France. 
Merleau-Ponry, M. ( 1 964), 'Bergson in the making', in M. Merleau-Ponry, Signs, trans. by 
Richard C. McCleary, Evanston, Northwestern University Press, pp. 1 82-9 1 .  

392 
Guide to Further Reading 
Moore, A. W. (I 990), The Infinite, London, Routledge. 
Olkowski, D. (I 999), Gilles Deleuze and the Ruin of Representation, Berkeley, Universiry of 
California Press. 
Paradis, Bruno (1991), 'Indetermination et mouvements de birfurcation chez Bergson', 
Philosophie, 32, pp. 1 1-40. 
Rescher, Nicholas (I 996), Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Process Philosophy, Albany, 
SUNY Press. 
For forther information on duration and the philosophy of space and time (both Bergsonian and 
non-Bergsonian), consult: 
Bachelard, G. ( 1 999) [1 950] , The Dialectic of Duration, trans. M. MacAllister Jones, Man­
chester, Clinamen Press. 
Bachelard, G. (2000), 'The instant', in R. Durie (ed.), Time and the Instant, Manchester, 
Clinamen Press, pp. 64-95. 
Capek, M. ( 197 1), Bergson and Modern Physics, Dordrecht, Nijhoff. 
Dale Adamson, G. (2000), 'Science and philosophy: two sides of the absolute', Pli: The 
Warwick journal of Philosophy, 9, pp. 53-86. 
Durie, R. (2000), 'Splitting time: Bergson's philosophical legacy', Philosophy Today, 44, 
pp. 1 52-68. 
Game, A. (I 991), Undoing the Social: Towards a Deconstructive Sociology, Milton Keynes, 
Open Universiry Press. 
Giroux, Laurent ( 1 971 ), Duree pure et temporalite: Bergron et Heidegger, Montreal, Ballarmin. 
Gunter, P. A. Y. (ed.) (I 969), Bergson and the Evolution of Physics, Knoxville, Universiry of 
Tennessee Press. 
Gunter, P. A. Y. (1971), 'Bergson's theory of matter and modern cosmology', journal of the 
History of Ideas, 32: 4, pp. 525-43. 
Gunter, P. A. Y. (I 991), 'Bergson and non-linear non-equilibrium thermodynamics: an appli­
cation of method', Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 45: 2, pp. 1 08-22. 
Heidsieck, Frans;ois (1 957), Henri Bergson et Ia notion d'espace, Paris, Le Circle du Livre. 
Horkheimer, M. (1934), 'Zu Bergson Metaphysik der Zeit', Zeitschrift fur Sozialforschung, 
3: .3, pp. 321-43. 
Levinas, E. (I 987), Time and the Other, trans. R. A. Cohen, Pinsburgh, Duquesne Universiry 
Press. 
Lewis, W. ( 1927), Time and Western Man, London, Chatro & Windus. 
Murphy, T. S. (1999), 'Beneath relativiry: Bergson and Bohm on absolute time , tn 
]. Mullarkey (ed.), The New Bergson, Manchester, Manchester Universiry Press, pp. 66-84. 
Russell, B. ( 1 9 1 5), 'On the experience of time', The Monist, 25, pp. 2 1 2-33. 
Sorabji, R. (1983), Time, Creation, and the Continuum, London, Duckworth. 
T uretz.ky, P. (1998), Time, London, Routledge. 
Wiener, N. (1961) [1948], 'Newtonian and Bergsonian time', in Cybernetics, or Control and 
Communication in the Animal and the Machine, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
For reading in physics or the philosophy of physics that throws forther light on Bergson s work, 
consult: 
Capek, M. (1971), Bergson and Modern Physics, Dordrecht, Nijhoff. 
May, William E. ( 1 970), 'The realiry of matter in the metaphysics of Bergson', International 
Phdosophical Quarterly, 1 0: 4, pp. 61 1-42. 
Murphy, T. S. ( 1 999), 'Beneath relativiry: Bergson and Bohm on absolute time', in 
J. Mullarkey (ed.), The New Bergson, Manchester, Manchester Universiry Press, pp. 66-84. 
Serres, Michel (I 977), 'Boltzmann et Bergson' in Hermes IV Le Distribution, Paris, Les 
Editions de la Minuit. 

Guide to Further Reading 
393 
For analyses of Bergson s approach to memory and psychology in general as well as contrasting views 
in the philosophy of mind, consult: 
Benjamin, W. (1973), Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn, London, Collins. 
Cariou, Marie ( 1 990), Lectures Bergsoniennes, Paris, PUF. 
Clark, A. (1 997), Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again, Cam­
bridge MA, MIT Press. 
Crary, ]. (I 999), Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern Culture, Cam­
bridge MA, MIT Press. 
Damasio, A. (1994), Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain, London, 
Macmillan. 
Damasio, A. (I 999), The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion, and the Making of 
Consciousness, London, Heinemann. 
Deleuze, G. ( 1986) [1983], Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, trans. H. Tomlinson and 
B. Habberjam, London, Athlone Press. 
Deleuze, G. (1989) [1985], Cinema 2: The Time-Image, trans. H. Tomlinson and R. Galeta, 
London, Athlone Press. 
Deleuze, G. (2000) [1972], Proust and Signs: The Complete Text, trans. R. Howard, London, 
Athlone Press. 
Dewey, ]. (1912), 'Perception and organic action', The journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and 
Scientific Methods, 9: 24, pp. 645-68. 
Elsasser, W. (1953), 'A reformulation of Bergson's theory of memory', Philosophy of Science, 
20, pp. 7-2 1 .  
Gallais, P., and Forzy, G. (eds) (1997), Bergson et les Neurosciences, Le Plessis Robinson, 
lnstirut Synrhelabo. 
Game, A. (I 991), Undoing the Social: Towards a Deconstructive Sociology, Milton Keynes, 
Open University Press. 
Hyppolite, Jean (1991 ) , jean Hyppolite: Figures de Ia Pemee Philosophique, 2 vols, Paris, 
Presses Universitaires de France. 
Jay, M. (1993), Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French 
Thought, Berkeley, University of California Press. 
McNamara, P. (1999), Mind and Variability: Mental Darwinism, Memory, and Self, London, 
Praeger. 
Meissner, W. W. (I 967), 'The problem of psychophysics in Bergson's critique', Journal of 
General Psychology, 66, pp. 301-9. 
Merleau-Ponty, M. ( 1968), L 'Union de lame et du corps chez Malebranche, Biran et Bergson: 
notes prises au cours de Maurice Merleau-Ponty a L'Ecole Normale Superieure 1947-1948, 
recueillies er redigees par Jean Deprun, Paris, Librairie Philosophique J.Vrin. 
Minkowski, Eugene (1970) [1933], Lived Time: Phenomenological and Psychopathological 
Studies, trans. Nancy Merzel, Evanston IL, Northwestern University Press. 
Same, J.-P. (1962) [ 1 936), Imagination, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press. 
Same, J.-P. ( 1 995) [ 1 940), The Psychology of the Imagination, London, Routledge. 
Wolff, Edgar (1957), 'La Theorie de Ia memoire chez Bergson', Archives de Phil.osophie, 20, 
pp. 42-77. 
Worms, F. (1997), Introduction a 'Materie et memoire' de Bergson, Paris, PUF. 
For useful explorations of biology which either analyse or complement Bergson s theory of the elan 
vital, consult: 
Adolphe, L. ( 1952), 'Bergson et L'Eian Viral', Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 3, pp. 81-1 38. 
Ansell Pearson, K. ( 1999), Germinal Life: The Diference and Repetition of Deleuze, London, 
Routledge. 
Burwick, F., and Douglass, P. (eds) (1992), The Crisis in Modernism: Bergsonism and the 
Vitalist Controvmy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 

394 
Guide to Further Reading 
Canڙuilhem, G. (I 943), 'Commenraire au rroisieme chapirre de L' Evolution Creatrice', 
Bulletin de Ia Faculte Lettres de Strasbourg, 2 I, pp. 126-4 3. 
Gras"ie, P. (I 977), Evolution of Living Organisms: Evidence for a New Theory of Trans­
formation, New York, Academic Press. 
Kampis, G. (1993), 'Creative evolution', World Futures, 38, pp. 131 -7. 
Miquel, Paui-Anroine (I 997), Le Probleme de Ia nouveaute dam !evolution du vivant: 
Dialogue entre Bergson et Ia biologie contemporaine, Villeneuve d'Ascq, Presses U niversitaires 
du Seprenrrion. 
Monod, J. (I 971), Chance and Necessity, trans. A. Wainhouse, New York, Knopf. 
Wobky, M., and Wolsky, A. (1 992), 'Bergson's vitalism in the light of modern biology', in 
F. Burwick and P. Douglass (eds), The Crisis in Modernity: Bergsonism and the Vitalist 
Controversy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp. 1 53-70. 
For investigations of Bergsonian epistemolog;y, especially the concept of intuition, consult: 
Husson, Leon (I 947), L 'fntellectualisme de Bergson, Paris, PUF. 
Miler, Jean (I 974), Bergson et le calcul infinitesimal, Paris, PUF. 
Olkowski, D. (1999), Gilles Deleuze and the Ruin of Representation, Berkeley, University of 
California Press. 
Pariente, J. C. (I 973), Le Langage et l'individuel, Armand Colin. 
For works investigating Bergson s ideas in ethics and the philosophy of religion, consult: 
Fouhert, J. (1973), 'Mystique plorinienne. Mystique bergsonienne', Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 
10, pp. 7-73. 
Galbgher, ldealla J. (1970), Morality in Evolution: The Moral Philosophy of Henri Bergson, 
The Hague, Marrinus Nijhoff. 
Gouhier, Henri (1961), Bergson et le Christ des evangiles, Paris, Vrin. 
Hude, Henri (1989-90), Bergson I et II, Paris, Editions Universiraires. 
Kennedy, Ellen ( 1987), Freedom and the Open Society: Henri Bergson s Contribution to Political 
Pf.ilosophy, New York and London, Garland. 
Leviuas, E. (I 987), Time and the Other, uans. R. A. Cohen, Pittsburgh, Duquesne University 
Press. 
Levinas, E. ( I  998), Entre Nous, trans. M. B. Smith and B. Harshav, London, Athlone Press. 
Levinas, E. (1999), Alterity and Transcendence, trans. M. B. Smith, London, Athlone Press. 
Other texts referred to in the Introduction 
Davies, Paul (1995), About Time, Harmondsworth, Penguin. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Guarrari, Felix (1994) [1991], What Is Philosophy?, trans. Graham 
Burchill and Hugh Tomlinson, London, Verso. 
Dennett, D. C. (1991), Consciousness Explained, London, Allen Lane. 
Dennett, D. C. (1996), Kinds of Minds: Towards an Understanding of Consciousness, London, 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Durie, Robin (1999), 'lnrroduction' in Bergson (2000), pp. vii-xxiii. 
Einstein, Albert ( 1999), Relativity: The Special Theory and General Theory, London, Routledge. 
Gunter, P. A. Y. (1995), 'Bergson's philosophy of education', Educational Theory, 45, 
pp. 379-94. 
Han>horne, Charles (1987), 'Bergson's aesthetic creationism compared to Whitehead's', in 
A. C. Papanicolaou and P. A. Y. Gunter (eds), Bergson and Modern Thought: Towards a 
Unified Science, Chur, Switzerland, Harwood Academic Press, pp. 369-82. 
Kant, Immanuel (1952), Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith, London, 
Macmillan. 
Niess, N. ]. (1956), julien Benda, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press. 
Russell, B. (1922) [1914] ,  Our Knowledge of the External World, London, Allen & Unwin. 

Index 
About Time (Davies) 
26 
action 
354 
adaptation 
191, 195-6 
affection 
I 1 2-13 
aging 
1 8 1 ,  224 
and time 
182 
agriculture 
337 
Alexandrine philosophers 
327 
algebra 
68 
altruism 
312 
America 
225 
Ammonius 
327 
amoebae 
1 10 
ancient philosophy 
232, 248, 249, 253-4, 
see also philosophy 
animals 
93, 135 
levels of consciousness 
206 
perceptions of space 
58 
anttctpation 
152-3 
aphasia 
84, 264 
Aristotelianism 
374 
Aristotle 280 
on God 
287 
arithmetic, see mathematics 
art 
265, 3 16, 3 18, 366 
aims 
251 
comparison with philosophy 
366 
and perception 
252, 253 
satisfaction from 265 
stimulated by emotion 3 1 6, 3 1 7-18 
see also painting; literature 
artists 
225, 253 
asceticism 
333 
astronomy 28 
Bacon, Francis 
375 
Bain, Alexander 
56 
being, see existence 
Bergson, Henri 
biographical details 
360, 362 
philosophical legacy 
44-5 
Bergsonism 
Bergson on 
44-5 
Bergsonism (Deleuze) 
10 
Berkeley, George 
12-13, 237-42 
on God 
239-41 
idealism 
159, 238-44 
on the soul 
24 1 
The Bible 
325 
biology 
367 
birth 
181 
blindness 
147 
body 
34 1 
and consciousness 
86-9 
and mind 
81, 84, 354-S, 366, 372 
and perception 
14, 86-7, 101-4, lOS, 
106-7, 1 10-12 
relation to the material universe 
14, 
89-9 1 ,  100 
see also physiology 
brain 
and matter 
14-16, 89 
and perception 
14, 87-90, 101-3, 1 13, 
122, 163-4 
physiology 
83, 89-90, 93-4, 163-4 
relationship to thought 
84, 1 57-67, 358 
Buder, Samuel 
369-70 
calculus 
275 
cars 
336 
Cartesianism 
288, see also Descartes, Rene 
categorical imperative 
305 
causes 
166, 194, 226 
cerebral states, see brain 
change 
I 71, 17 5-6 
of colour 
258 
and determinism 
265 
indivisibility 
256-7, 258-60, 264-5 
Kant on 254-5 
and mobility 258-9, 264 
and perception 
249-5 1 ,  259-60 
and psychology 
260 
scientific view 260 
Zeno of Elea on 
255, 257-8 
charity 
31 9, 325 
childhood 
295 

396 
children 
and spontaneous memory 
133 
Chrisrianicy 
3 1 5, 319, 325-7, 339 
and emotion 
3 1 5, 319 
and moralicy 
325-7 
and mysticism 
339 
civiliwion 
316, 341 
classical studies 
345 
and good sense 
349-51 
colour 
8 1  
changes o f  258 
comfort 
332, 335-6 
communicy, see sociery 
conception 
199 
and perception 
249-50 
conscience 
40, 299-300 
consciousness 
223-6, 244, 255, 357-8 
and change 
174 
different planes 
136-7 
diminution of 141-2 
and duration 
71-2, 206-7 
epiphenomenal 
92 
and existence 
17 4 
impersonal 
205 
materialist explanation 
97 
and memory 
1 27-8, I 31, 358-9 
multiple 
207 
and number 
69 
and perception 
206 
relationship to the body 
86-9, 162 
and space 
75-6 
in a state of flux I 72-3 
and thought 
82-3 
continuicy 
Russell on 
6-8 
creation 
182, 224, 227, 23 1 ,  232 
Creative Evolution (Bergson) 
21 
creativicy 
192, 3 I 7-8, 23 I 
crime 
300 
Critique of Pure Reason (Kant) 
254, 
279-81 ,  289 
inAuence on Bergson 
1 2, 33-5 
Cynic philosophers 
333 
Cyrenaic philosophers 
333 
Darwin, Charles 
370 
Darwinism 
1 1 ,  1 7, 1 94 
Davies, Paul 
26 
deafness 
14 7 
death 
180 
Delame, Floris 
Bergson's letter to 
44, 369-71 
Dekuze, Gilles 
3, 9-10, 17, 20, 30 
Index 
deliberation 
223 
Democritus 
121 
Descartes, Rene 
14, 239, 288, 354 
achievements 
373-4 
Bergson on 
44, 375 
biographical details 
375 
on dreams 
237-8 
on metaphysics and mathematics 
82, 
1 57-8 
on mind 
349 
modernicy 
375 
determinism 
and change 265 
and human experience 
223-4 
Discourse on Method (Descartes) 
373 
disease 
142 
disorder 
228 
dreams 
7 1 ,  1 34, 142-3, 237-8, 365 
Du Bois-Reymond, Emil 
1 87 
dualism 
82, 90, 354-5, 372 
and consciousness 
8 1 ,  366 
Kant on 
92 
and marter 
81 
Duns Scows, John 
237 
duration 
49-78, 205-21 9, 
226, 262 
concrete 
226, 278 
definition 
205, 262 
Deleuze on 
3, 9-10 
divisibiliry 208-9 
homogeneiry 
70-1 
and intuition 
367 
Kant on 
290 
and mathematics 
49-56, 260-1 
and memory 
127, 205, 207-8 
and mulriplicicy 76-7 
and ontology 
9-10 
pure 
208 
'real' 
33-4, 216-7, 360-1 
of self 173-5 
and space 
4, 69 
and rime 
1-6, 224, 362 
Duration and Simultaneity (Deleuze) 
3 
Durie, Robin 
3 
duty 
301-2, 3 19-20, see also obligation 
earth-soul 
363-4 
Ecole Normale Superieure 
362 
education 
373 
classical 
345, 349-5 1 
and good sense 
345, 349-51 ,  352 
purposes 
345 
ego 
172 
social 
299 

Index 
397 
Eimer, Gustav Heinrich Theodor 
193 
Einstein, Albert 
29, 207, 210, 2 1 3, 
2 1 7-18 
meeting with Bergson 
26 
elan vital 
I 
Eleadcs 
65, 249, see also Zeno of Elea 
emotion 
38-9, 74-5, 3 14-20 
religious 
3 1 5, 321, 333, 357 
empiricism 
285 
radical 
268-9, 359, 364 
emptiness, see nothingness 
Epicureanism 
328, 333 
Epicurus 
333 
equality 
335, 373 
ethics 
37-42 
and justice 
348-9 
see also morality 
Ethics (Spinoza) 
236-7 
evolution 9, 2 1-6, 193, 196, 231 ,  330-2 
existence 
171, 17 4, 226, 261 
preceded by nothingness 
226-7 
preceded by possibility 228-9 
see also life 
experience 
270-1 
extension 
285 
eyes 
1 14, 196-8 
family life 
30 I 
Faraday, Michael 
99 
Fechner, Gustav Theodor 
269, 363, 364 
The Feeling of Effort (James) 
357 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 
288 
foresight 
152-4, 223, 229 
forgetting 
263-4 
France 353 
free will 
and change 
265 
and morality 
298 
freedom 
231 
frenzy 
336 
Galileo Galilei 
182, 277, 287 
Garve, Chrisdan 
32 
gender 
317 
genius 
317-18, 346-7 
God 
366 
Aristotle on 
287 
Berkeley on 
239-41 
existence 
227, 239-40 
and matter 
240-1 
and morality 
319, 321 
and mysticism 
340 
and religion 
3 10, 3 19, 321 
good 
achievement of 348 
Gospels 325 
government 
329-30 
Gray, Thomas 
373 
Hamlet (Shakespeare) 
230 
happiness 
334 
harmony 
1 9 1  
Hartshorne, Charles 
37 
health 
334 
hearing 
260-1 
and change 
259 
see also perception; senses 
heroism 
42 
Hibbert Journal 363-4 
history 
importance of studying 
351 
Hobbes, Thomas 
237 
Hoffding, Harald 
Bergson's letter to 
44, 366-8 
Human Immortality (James) 
358 
human nature 
296 
Huxley, Thomas Henry 
188 
hypnosis 
145-6 
idealism 
Berkeleian 
238-44 
criticisms of 12, 92-3, 1 19, 1 59 
Kantian 
13 
and matter 
8 1-2, 109, 1 19, 354 
on the reladonship between brain and 
thought 
1 59-65 
ideas 
1 58, 274, 278 
Berkeley on 
239 
Ideas (Platonic) 
232, 326 
and morality 297 
impetus 
I 
individuality 
177-9, 224-6 
industrialization 
337-41 
inert matter, see matter, inert 
instinct 
306 
intellect 
192, 225-6 
Kant on 
285-9 
intelligence 
224-6, 306, 3 17, 341, 368 
Kant on 
285 
process of 274 
see also sense, 'good' 
intuition 
234-5, 241 ,  246, 255, 289, 346, 
366-7 
and genius 346 
and history of philosophy 
237 
inventions 
336-7, 338-9, 372 

398 
Index 
James, William 
1 2, 267-73 
Bergson's admiration for 
357, 361 ,  364 
correspondence with Bergson 
43-5, 
357-65 
influence on Bergson 
357-8, 359, 
360-1, 364 
Janet, Pierre 
84-5 
justice 348-9 
and education 
353 
Kant, Immanuel 
1 2-13, 82 
Bergson on 
32-7, 285-91 
and intuition 
246 
on metaphysics 
254-5, 278-81 
on obligation 
302, 305 
on space 
56-7 
on truth 
270, 272 
Kipling, Rudyard 
299 
knowledge 
1, 1 18, 277, 367-8 
and the brain 
252-3 
Kant on 
285-6, 288-9 
scientific 
9 3 
unification of 243 
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste 
370 
language 
1 58, 226-8, 239, 299-300 
influence on sensations 
73-4 
and morality 307 
and reality 
350 
and space 
69-70 
Laplace, Pierre Simon 
187 
Lechalas, Georges 
Bergson's letter to 
44, 354-6 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 
99, 287, 290, 
355 
on finalism 
188-9 
Leon, Xavier 
372 
life 
177-86 
beginnings 
183-4 
continuity 
1 84-5 
duration 
1 9 1 ,  196 
evolution 
193 
finalist theory 
1 87-90, 19 1-2, 198, 
200-1 
meamng 
192 
mechanist theory 
187-8, 193, 194-5, 
198-201 
ser also existence 
literature 
74-5, 229, 230, 318 
see also art 
Locke, John 
238 
logic 
352 
Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon 
2 1 8  
Lotze, Rudolf 56, I 07 
love 74, 3 13, 322 
of humanity 
3 1 2  
romantic 
3 1 5-6 
Lucretius 
316 
luxury 
332, 335-6 
MeN a mara, Patrick 
17 
Malebranche, Nicolas 
237 
materialism 
89-90, 92, I 00, 1 20-1 
and consciousness 
97 
mathematics 
7-8, 51-3, 275-6, 351 
and duration 
68 
Kant on 
279-80 
and sensory perception 
see also number 
matter 
1 2-16 
166 
Berkeley on 
changes in 
existence of 
81-2, 238-41 
175-6 
81-2 
inert 
and consciousness 
223-4 
Matter and Memory (Bergson) 
6, 9, 143, 
1 47, 358 
meat 
334 
mechanics 
and measuremem of velocity 
66-8 
mechanism 
24 
mechanization 
337-8, 339-41 
medicine 
334 
memory 
bodily explanation 
16, 131-3, 134-5, 
253, 364 
and consciousness 
136-7, 173, 358 
creation of 
144 
and duration 
205, 207-8 
and false recognition 
1 53-6 
and image 
1 25-6, 1 29, 1 3 1  
loss of 
141 
and perception 
19-21. 96-7, 102-3, 
1 17. 120, 1 25-7. 145 
of the present 
148-50, 152-4 
process of 1 24-5 
psychical state 
129-30 
psychological 
16-21, 83, 263-4, 
358-9 
pure 
1 24, 1 27, 1 29 
and sensation 
125, 128-9 
spontaneous 
133 
visual 
147 

Index 
399 
metaphysics 
difficulties 
27 4-5 
Kant on 
278-81 
origins 
255 
problems 'boldly stated' 
226 
pseudo-problems 
226 
relation to science 
276-80 
mind 
and body 
8 1 ,  84, 354-5, 366, 372 
freedom of 350 
and number 
53 
Minkowski, Herman, 217 
mobility 
274, 277 
and change 
258-9, 26 1 
The moral equivalent of war' (James) 
365 
morality 
37-42, 43, 295-328, 348-9, 
353 
leaders in 
3 1 0-1 1 
as an obligation 
296-7, 300-1 
social aspect 
295, 299, 300-1 
see also ethics 
motion 
S-6 
and duration 
70-1 
and space 
64-6, 257-8 
and velociry 
67-8 
movement 
indivisibiliry 
256-8 
scientific view 
260 
in Zeno's paradox of Achilles 
257-8 
Muller, Johann 
56 
multipliciry 
1-2, 21-2, 27, 70-3, 367 
continuous (virtual) 
1 
discrete (actual) 
1 
and duration 
76-7 
and material objects 
53 
and psychic states 
53-4 
and space 
69-70 
see also number 
music 
259, 260-1 
mysticism 
3 I S, 333, 339-4I ,  365 
natural selection 
I 94 
Nature 
1 98, 340-I 
nervous system 
93-5 
neuroses 
84-5 
Newton, Isaac 
33 
Nietzsche, Friedrich 
I6 
nominalism 
and idealism 
239-40 
nothingness 
as a linguistic problem 
226-7 
and suppression 
227-8 
novels 
74-5 
novelry 
223, 225 
number 7, 49-56, 69-70 
abstract 
55 
discontinuiry 
5 2  
divisibiliry 
5 1-4 
and objectivity 
52-3 
perception of 49-51 
and psychic states 
52-4 
and space 
54-5 
as visual image 49-SI 
see also mathematics, multipliciry 
objectivity 
52-3 
obligation 
40, 295-8, 300-7, 3 IO, 322, 
see also duty 
omology 
226-8 
Our Knowledge of the External World 
(Russell) 
6 
Oxford, University of 248, 362 
pain 
I 09-10 
painting 
59, 25I-2, see also art 
paradoxes 
6-7, 3I2 
of Achilles 
4-5, 65-6, 257-8 
perception 
and art 
251-2 
as a bodily function 
93-4, 1 01-4, 
1 09-I4 
and the brain 
101-3, 1 13, 122 
of change 
259-60 
and conception 
249-50 
and consciousness 
95-9, I 19 
functions of 253 
and generalization 
268 
and human character 
225 
idealism on 
239 
of images 
86-90 
Kant on 
254-5, 285 
mathematical explanations 
166 
and memory 
1 9-21 , 96-7, 1 02-3, 1 I7, 
I 20, I 24, 125-7, 1 45 
of the physical world 
205 
'pure' 
1 9, 1 I6 
as pure knowledge 
93 
of self 
1 04-5 
see also senses; sight 
personaliry 
17 4 
philosophers 
253 
philosophy 
Bergson's explanation 
369-71 
and everyday knowledge 
253-5 

400 
Index 
philosophy - continued 
history 
236-7, 242, 249 
practice 
233-6, 242-7. 250-1 , 253 
purposes 
266, 351-2, 372-3 
see also ancient philosophy 
physics 
inAuence of Descartes 
374-5 
physiology 
87 
relationship to thought 
1 57-67 
see also body 
Plato 
327 
and change 
255 
and practice of philosophy 
254 
Platonic Forms, see Ideas 
Platonism 
232, 278 
pleasure 
pursuit of 332-3, 335 
Plotinus 
253-4, 327 
pluralism 268, 364 
A Pluralistic Universe (James) 
364 
poetry 251 
political systems 
329-30 
possibility 237 
preceding existence 
228-30 
and reality 
232 
set• also virtuality 
poveny 
333, 337 
pragmatism 
267-73, 361-2 
Pragmatism ( James) 
361-2 
present 
ddinition of 261-2 
Principles of Human Knowledge (James) 
12 
Principles of Psychology (James) 
363 
psychical states 
change of 
172 
duration of 172 
and number 
55 
psychology 
1-2, 85, 252 
and duration 
77 
James on 
357 
and perception 
108-9 
relation to metaphysics 
1 17-1 8  
role of the unconscious 
359 
punishment 
297, 300 
quantity 
70 
radical empiricism 
268-9, 359, 364 
realism 
13, 81-2, 91-2, 1 19, 354 
and Kant 
1 3  
and matter 
1 09 
on perception 
92-3 
on the relationship between brain and 
thought 
1 58-65 
reality 218, 267-8, 269-73 
external 
274 
mobile 
275 
and perception 226 
reason 
and good sense 
349 
recognition 
false 
1 53-6 
recollection, see memory 
relativism 
Kantian 
290 
Relativity 
3, 26-32, 207, 210, 217-18 
religion 
and emotion 
315, 321 ,  333, 357 
experience of 269 
and God 
3 10, 319 
and morality 40-1, 3 10, 3 1 9, 320-1 
and mysticism 
339-41 
social role 
40-1, 297 
reproduction 
1 83-4 
Revue Philosophique de Ia France et de 
l'Etranger 360-1 
Riemann, G. B. 
2, 3, 30 
Robinson Crusoe (Defoe) 
299 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 
3 1 5  
Russell, Bertrand 
6-9, 1 7  
Schopenhauer, Arthur 
1 5, 369 
science 
28, 270, 351 
Kant on 286-9 
medical 
334 
and metaphysics 
276-80 
and philosophy 
242-5, 250, 260 
progress in 
336-7 
relativity of 276 
self 
duration of 
173-5 
perceptions of 104-5 
and society 
299-300, 302 
Selliere, M. Ernest 
340 
sensations 274 
and duration 
171 
and language 
73-4 
loss of 141 
and memory 
125, 128-9 
sense 
'good' 
345-56 
see also intelligence 
senses 
259-60 
and emotional states 
74 
and knowledge 
345-6 

and social relations 
345-6 
see also hearing; perception; sight 
sensibility 3 1 7  
sensory perception, see perception 
sex 
323-4 
sexes 
differences between 
31 7 
equality between 
335 
Shakespeare, William 
230-1 
sight 
201 ,  239, 259-60 
and memory 
1 7 1  
psychological explanations 
1 14 
and physiology 
1 07-8, 160, 196-8, 
201, 259-60 
and the brain 
103, 160, 162 
see also perception; senses 
simultaneity 
60-4, 66-7, 205-6, 
2 10-1 3  
sin 295 
sleep 
71 
Smith, Adam 
299 
social obligation, see obligation 
society 
322 
evolution of 305-6 
as an organism 
295-6, 298, 305-6, 
323 
sociobiology 
37-40 
Socrates 42, 234, 326-7, 333 
Sorbonne 
345 
soul 269 
Berkeley on 
241 
'cerebral' 
166 
disproportionate to body 
372 
James on 
363-4 
uprightness of 348 
see also World Soul 
sound 
53-4 
space 
266 
absolute reality 
56 
as abstract 
56 
as differentiation 
57-8 
divisibility 
65-6 
and duration 
69 
empirical explanation 
57 
as homogeneous 
58-9, 68-9, 76 
Kant on 
285-6 
and number 
54-5 
and succession 
60-3 
and rime 
56, 59-64 
Spencer, Herbert 224, 362 
spices 
335-6 
Spinoza, Benedict de 
236-7, 287, 290, 
324 
Index 
401 
spirimalism 
1 2 1  
Stoia 
32ژ 328, 333 
substance 
and change 
264-5 
successton 
59-64 
'A suggestion about mysticism' (James) 
365 
suppression 
227-8 
symbols 
278 
taste 
73-4 
theism 
239-40 
time 20-1, 362 
and duration 
1-6, 50, 55-6, 176, 
224-5, 260-1 , 362 
English school on 
59 
and existence 
261-2 
homogenous 
59-64, 69, 70-1 
identical with continuity 
205 
impersonal 
208-9 
measurability 
1 75-6, 208-16 
Michelson-Morley experiment 
2 1 8  
and number 
55-6 
:scientific explanations 
28-9 
and space 
I ,  4, 56, 59-64, 2 1 1 , 214-1 5 
splitting of 20-1 
as succession 
2 1 8  
viewed by different schools of philosophy 
232 
see also duration 
Time and Free Will (Bergson) 
2 
tourism 
350 
Transcendental Aesthetic (Kant) 
56, 285 
truth 
269-73 
ancient Greek view of 253-4 
mutability of 362 
unconscious 
359 
unity 
and number 49, 5 1-2 
utilitarianism 
312 
utopianism 
373 
Varieties of Religious Experience (James) 
269, 357, 358, 363, 364, 365 
vegetarianism 
334 
velocity 
66-8 
virtuality 
preceding existence 
230 
see also possibility 
vision, see sight 
war 
324 
James on 
365 

402 
Ward, James 
360-1 
wealth 
325, 333 
wisdom 
345 
women 
3 17, 335 
words, see language 
World Soul 
224, see also soul 
Wundt, Wilhelm 
56-7 
Index 
Xenophon 
327 
Zend-Avesta (Fechner) 
363 
Zeno of Elea 
4-5, 65-6, 255, 322 
paradoxes 
6-7, 312 
of Achilles 
4-5, 65-6, 257-8 
see also Elearics 

