LAUGHTER 
AN 
ESSAY OX 
THE 
l\1EAXING 
OF THE 
COiVIIC 
BY 
HEXRI 
BERGSOO 
JrtE3otBER OF THE I'STITt.JTE 
PROFESSOR AT THE COLLEGE DE FRA.'OCE 
AUTHORISED 
TRANSLATION 
BY 
CLOGDESLEY 
BRERETOP 
L. ts L. (PARIS), LA. (CA3-rAB.): A,;o 
FRED ROTHWELL 
B.A. (Lo,;oo,;) 
:\rbl nom 
THE 1'-'IAC:\1ILLAN COMPANY 
1913 

CoPYRIGHT, 1911, 
Bv THE MACMILLA:S COMPANY. 
Set up and electrotyped. 
Published November, 1911. 
Reprinted 
March, 1912; January, 1913. 
Normoo¯ ljlrrss 
J. S. Cushing Co. -Berwick & Smith Co • 
.Norwood, Mass., U.S.A. 

TRANSLATORS' PREFACE 
THis work, by Professor Bergson, has been 
revised in detail by the author himself, and the 
present translation is the only authorised one. 
For this ungrudging labour of revision, for the 
thoroughness with which it has been carried 
out, and for personal sympathy in many a 
difficulty of word and phrase, we desire to offer 
our grateful acknowledgment to Professor 
Bergson. 
It may be pointed out that the essay on 
Laughter originally appeared in a series of 
three articles in one of the leading magazines 
in France, the Revue de Paris. 
This will 
account for the relatively simple form of the 
work and the comparative absence of technical 
terms. 
It will also explain why the author has 
confined himself to exposing and illustrating 
his novel theory of the comic without entering 
into a detailed discussion of other explanations 
v 

Vl 
LAUGHTER 
already in the field. 
He none the less indicates, 
when discussing sundry examples, why the 
principal theories, to which they have given 
rise, appear to him inadequate. To quote only 
a few, one may mention those based on con­
trast, exaggeration, and degradation. 
The book has been highly successful in 
France, where it is in its seventh edition. 
It 
has been translated into Russian, Polish, and 
Swedish. 
German and H ungarian translations 
are under preparation. 
Its success is due 
partly to the novelty of the explanation offered 
of the comic, and partly also to the fact that the 
author incidentally discusses questions of still 
greater interest and importance. 
Thus, one of 
the best known and most frequently quoted 
passages of the book is that portion of the last 
chapter (pages IS0-162), in which the author 
outlines a general theory of art. 
C. B. 
F. R. 

CONTENTS 
CHAPTER I 
THE COMIC 
Dl 
GDIERAL- THE COMIC ELEME0-IT I/ 
FOR1!S A:\'D J'viOVDIENTS- EXPANSIVE 
FORCE 
OF 
THE CO:IIIC 
CHAPTER II 
THE COMIC ELEMENT I2 SITUATIO2S AND THE COMIC 
ELE:IIE::ST I/ WORDS • 
CHAPTER III 
PAGB 
THE COMIC I/ CHARACTER 
• 
IJ:Z 
vii 


CHAPTER I 
THE COMIC IN GENERAL- THE COMIC ELEMENT 
IN 
FORMS 
AND 
MOVEMENTS
- EXPANSIVE 
FORCE OF THE COMIC 
WHAT does laughter mean ? What is the basal 
element in the laughable ? 
What common 
ground can we find between the grimace of a 
merry-andrew, a play upon ,,.ords, an equivocal 
situation in a burlesque and a scene of high 
comedy ? \i\That method of distillation will yield 
us invariably the same essence from which so 
many different products borrow either their 
obtrusive odour or their delicate perfume ? The 
greatest of thinkers, from Aristotle downwards, 
have tackled this little problem, which has a 
knack of baffling every effort, of slipping away 
and escaping only to bob up again, a pert 
challenge flung at philosophic speculation. 
B 

2 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
Our excuse for attacking the problem in our 
turn must lie in the fact that we shall not aim 
at imprisoning the comic spirit within a defini­
tion. We regard it, above all, as a living thing. 
However trivial it may be, we shall treat it with 
the respect due to life. We shall confine our­
selves to watching it grow and expand. Passing 
by imperceptible gradations from one form to 
another, it will be seen to achieve the strangest 
metamorphoses. 
We shall disdain nothing we 
have seen. 
Maybe we may gain from this 
prolonged contact, for the matter of that, some­
thing more flexible than an abstract definition,­
a practical, intimate acquaintance, such as springs 
from a long companionship. And maybe we 
may also find that, unintentionally, we have 
made an acquaintance that is useful. 
For the 
comic spirit has a logic of its own, even in its 
wildest eccentricities. 
It has a method in its 
madness. It dreams, I admit, but it conjures up 
in its dreams visions that are at once accepted 
and understood by the whole of a social group. 
Can it then fail to throw light for us on the 
way that human imagination works, and more 
particularly social, collective, 
and popular 
imagination ? 
Begotten of real life and akin 

THE COMIC IN GENERAL 
3 
to art, should it not also have something of its 
own to tell us about art and life ? 
At the outset we shall put forward three 
observations which we look upon as funda­
mental. They have less bearing on the actually 
comic than on the field within which it must 
be sought. 
I 
The first point to which attention should be 
called is that the comic does not exist outside 
the pale of what is strictly human. 
A landscape 
may be beautiful, charming and sublime, or 
insignificant and ugly ; it will never be laugh­
able. 
You may laugh at an animal, but only 
because you have detected in it some human 
attitude or expression. 
You may laugh at a 
hat, but what you are making fun of, in this case, 
is not the piece of felt or straw, but the shape 
that men have given it, - the human caprice 
whose mould it has assumed. 
It is strange 
that so important a fact, and such a simple one 
too, has not attracted to a greater degree the at­
tention of philosophers. Several have defined 
man as " an animal which laughs." They might 
equally well have defined him as an animal 

4 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP, 
which is laughed at ; for if any other animal, or 
some lifeless object, produces the same effect, it 
is always because of some resemblance to man, 
of the stamp he gives it or the use he puts it to. 
Here I would point out, as a symptom 
equally worthy of notice, the absence of feefi1zg 
which usually accompanies laughter. 
It seems 
as though the comic could not produce its 
disturbing effect unless it fell, so to say, on the 
surface of a soul that is thoroughly calm and 
unruffled. 
Indifference is its natural environ­
ment, for laughter has no greater foe than 
emotion. 
I do not mean that we could not 
laugh at a person who inspires us with pity, for 
instance, or even with affection, but in such a 
case we must, for the moment, put our affection 
out of court and impose silence upon our pity. 
In a society composed of pure intelligences 
there would probably be no more tears, though 
perhaps there would still be laughter; whereas 
highly emotional souls, in tune and unison with 
life, in whom every event would be sentiment­
ally prolonged and re-echoed, would neither 
know nor understand laughter. Try, for a 
moment, to become interested in everything 
that is being said and done ; act, in imagina-

T H E  COMIC IN GENERAL 
5 
tion, with those who act, and feel with those 
who feel ; in a word, give your sympathy its 
widest expansion : as though at the touch of 
a fairy wand you will see the flimsiest of 
objects assume importance, and a gloomy hue 
spread over everything. 
Now step aside, look 
upon life as a disinterested spectator : many a 
drama will turn into a comedy. 
It is enough 
for us to stop our ears to the sound of music in 
a room, where dancing is going on, for the 
dancers at once to appear ridiculous. 
How 
many human actions would stand a similar test? 
Should we not see many of them suddenly pass 
from grave to gay, on isolating them from the ac­
companying music of sentiment ? 
To produce 
the whole of its effect, then, the comic demands 
something like a momentary anesthesia of the 
heart. 
Its appeal is to intelligence, pure and 
simple. 
This intelligence, however, must always 
remain in touch with other intelligences. And 
here is the third fact to which attention should 
be drawn. You would hardly appreciate the 
comic if you felt yourseif isolated from others. 
Laughter appears to stand in need of an echo. 
Listen to it carefully : it is not an articulate, 

6 
LAUGH TER 
CHAP. 
clear, well-defined sound ; it is something which 
would fain be prolonged by reverberating from 
one to another, something beginning with a 
crash, to continue in successive rumblings, like 
thunder in a mountain. Still, this reverbera­
tion cannot go on for ever. 
It can travel 
within as wide a circle as you please : the circle 
remains, none the less, a closed one. Our 
laughter is always the laughter of a group. 
It 
rna y, perchance, have happened to you, when 
seated in a railway carriage or at table d'hote, to 
hear travellers relating to one another stories 
which must have been comic to them, for they 
laughed heartily. 
Had you been one of their 
company, you would have laughed like them, 
but, as you were not, you had no desire what­
ever to do so. 
A man who was once asked 
why he did not weep at a sermon when every­
body else was shedding tears replied : " I  don't 
belong to the parish !" What that man thought 
of tears would be still more true of laughter. 
However spontaneous it seems, laughter always 
implies a kind of secret freemasonry, or 
even complicity, with other laughers, real or im­
aginary. 
How often has it been said that the 
fuller the theatre, the more uncontrolled the 

T H E  CO!\IIC I N  GENERAL 
7 
laughter of the audience ! 
On the other hand, 
how often has the remark been made that 
many comic effects are incapable of translation 
from one language to another, because they 
refer to the customs and ideas of a particular 
social group ! 
It is through not understanding 
the importance of this double fact that the 
comic has been looked upon as a mere curiosity 
in which the mind finds amusement, and 
laughter itself as a strange, isolated pheno­
menon, without any bearing on the rest of 
human activity. 
Hence those definitions which 
tend to make the comic into an abstract rela­
tion between ideas : " an intellectual contrast," 
" a  patent absurdity," etc., definitions which, 
even were they really suitable to every form of 
the comic, would not in the least explain why 
the comic makes us laugh. 
How, indeed, 
should it come about that this particular logical 
relation, as soon as it is perceived, contracts, 
expands and shakes our limbs, whilst all other 
relations leave the body unaffected ? 
It is not 
from this point of view that we shall approach 
the problem. 
To understand laughter, we must 
put it back into its natural environment, which 
is society, and above all must we determine 

8 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
the utility of its function, which is a social one. 
Such, let us say at once, will be the leading 
idea of all our investigations. 
Laughter must 
answer to certain requirements of life in 
common. It must have a social signification. 
Let us clearly mark the point towards which 
our three preliminary observations are con­
verging. The comic will come into being, it 
appears, whenever a group of men concentrate 
their attention on one of their number, im­
posing silence on their emotions and calling 
into play nothing but their intelligence. What, 
now, is the particular point on which their 
attention will have to be concentrated, and 
what will here be the function of intelligence ? 
To reply to these questions will be at once to 
come to closer grips with the problem. But here 
a few examples have become indispensable. 
I I  
A man, runnmg along the street, stumbles 
and falls ; the passers-by burst out laughing. 
They would not laugh at him, I imagine, could 
they suppose that the whim had suddenly 
seized him to sit down on the ground. They 
laugh because his sitting down is involuntary. 

THE COMIC IN GENERAL 
9 
Consequently, it is not his sudden change of 
attitude that raises a laugh, but rather the in­
voluntary element in this change, - his clum­
siness, in fact. 
Perhaps there was a stone on 
the road. 
He should have altered his pace or 
avoided the obstacle. 
Instead of that, through 
lack of elasticity, through absentmindedness 
and a kind of physical obstinacy, as a result, z'n 
fact, of rigidity or of mommtzmz, the muscles 
continued to perform the same movement when 
the circumstances of the case called for some­
thing else. That is the reason of the man's 
fall, and also of the people's laughter. 
Now, take the case of a person who attends 
to the petty occupations of his everyday life 
with mathematical precision. 
The objects 
around him, however, have all been tampered 
with by a mischievous wag, the result being 
that when he dips his pen into the inkstand 
he draws it out all covered with mud, when he 
fancies he is sitting down on a solid chair he 
finds himself sprawling on the floor, in a word 
his actions are all topsy-turvy or mere beating 
the air, while in every case the effect is invari­
ably one of momentum. 
Habit has given the 
impulse : what was wanted was to check the 

10 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
movement or deflect it. 
He did nothing of 
the sort, but continued like a machine in the 
same straight line. 
The victim, then, of a 
practical joke is in a position similar to that of 
a runner who falls, - he is comic for the same 
reason. The laughable element in both cases 
consists of a certain mechanical imlastic£ty, just 
where one would expect to find the wideawake 
adaptability and the living pliableness of a human 
being. 
The only difference in the two cases is 
that the former happened of itself, whilst the 
latter was obtained artificially. 
In the first 
instance, the passer-by does nothing but look 
on, but in the second the mischievous wag 
intervenes. 
All the same, in both cases the result has 
been brought about by an external circumstance. 
The comic is therefore accidental : it remains, so 
to speak, in superficial contact with the person. 
How is it to penetrate within ? 
The necessary 
conditions will be fulfilled when mechanical 
rigidity no longer requires for its manifestation 
a stumbling-block which either the hazard of 
circumstance or human knavery has set in its 
way, but extracts by natural processes, from its 
own store, an inexhaustible series of oppor-

THE CO:\IIC IN GENERAL 
1 1  
tunities for externally revealing its presence. 
Suppose, then, we imagine a mind ah\·ays 
thinking of what it has just done and never of 
what it is doing, like a song which lags behind 
its accompaniment. 
Let us try to picture to 
ourselves a certain inborn lack of elasticity of 
both senses and intelligence, which brings it to 
pass that we continue to see what is no longer 
visible, to hear what is no longer audible, to 
say what is no longer to the point : in short, to 
adapt ourselves to a past and therefore imagi­
nary situation, when we ought to be shaping our 
conduct in accordance with the reality which is 
present. This time the comic will take up its 
abode in the person himself ; it is the person 
who will supply it with everything - matter and 
form, cause and opportunity. 
Is it then sur­
prising that the absent-minded individual - for 
this is the character we have just been describ­
ing - has usually fired the imagination of comic 
authors ? 
\Vhen La Bruyere came across this 
particular type, he realised, on analysing it, that 
he had got hold of a recipe for the wholesale 
manufacture of comic effects. 
As a matter of 
fact he overdid it, and gave us far too lengthy 
and detailed a description of Menalque, coming 

12 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
back to his subject, dwelling and expatiating on 
it beyond all bounds. 
The very facility of the 
subject fascinated him. 
Absentmindedness, in­
deed, is not perhaps the actual fountain-head 
of the comic, but surely it is contiguous to a 
certain stream of facts and fancies which flows 
straight from the fountain-head. 
It is situated, 
so to say, on one of the great natural water­
sheds of laughter. 
Now, the effect of absentmindedness may 
gather strength in its turn. There is a general 
law, the first example of which we have just 
encountered, and which we will formulate in 
the following terms : when a certain comic ef­
fect has its origin in a certain cause, the more 
natural we regard the cause to be, the more 
comic shall we find the effect. 
Even now we 
laugh at absentmindedness when presented to 
us as a simple fact. 
Still more laughable will 
be the absentmindedness we have seen spring­
ing up and growing before our very eyes, with 
whose origin we are acquainted and whose 
life-history we can reconstruct. To choose a 
definite example: suppose a man has taken to 
reading nothing but romances of love and 
chivalry. 
Attracted and fascinated by his 

THE CO:\IIC IN GEN ERAL 
13 
heroes, his thoughts and intentions gradually 
turn more and more towards them, till one fine 
day we find him walking among us like a 
somnambulist. 
His actions are distractions. 
But then his distractions can be traced back to 
a definite, positive cause. 
They are no longer 
cases of absence of mind, pure and simple ; they 
find their explanation in the presence of the 
individual in quite definite, though imaginary, 
surroundings. 
Doubtless a fall is always a fall, 
but it is one thing to tumble into a well because 
you were looking anywhere but in front of you, 
it is quite another thing to fall into it because 
you were intent upon a star. 
It was certainly 
a star at which Don Quixote was gazing. 
How 
profound is the comic element in the over­
romantic, Utopian bent of mind ! 
And yet, if 
you reintroduce the idea of absentmindedness, 
which acts as a go-between, you will see this 
profound comic element uniting with the most 
superficial type. 
Yes, indeed, these whimsical 
wild enthusiasts, these madmen who are yet so 
strangely reasonable, excite us to laughter by 
playing on the same chords within ourselves, 
by setting in motion the same inner mechanism, 
as does the victim of a practical joke or the 

LAUG HTER 
CHAP, 
passer-by who slips down in the street. 
They, 
too, are runners who fall and simple souls who 
are being hoaxed - runners after the ideal who 
stumble over realities, child-like dreamers for 
whom life delights to lie in wait. 
But, above 
all, they are past-masters in absentmindedness, 
with this superiority over their fellows that 
their absentmindedness is systematic and or­
ganised around one central idea, and that their 
mishaps are also quite coherent, thanks to the 
inexorable logic which reality applies to the 
correction of dreams, so that they kindle in 
those around them, by a series of cumulative 
effects, a hilarity capable of unlimited ex­
pansion. 
Now, let us go a little further. 
Might not 
certain vices have the same relation to char­
acter that the rigidity of a fixed idea has to 
intellect ? 
Whether as a moral kink or a 
crooked twist given to the will, vice has often 
the appearance of a curvature of the soul. 
Doubtless there are vices into which the soul 
plunges deeply with all its pregnant potency, 
which it rejuvenates and drags along with it 
into a moving circle of reincarnations. 
Those 
are tragic vices. 
But the vice capable of 

THE COMIC I N  GENERAL 
I 5 
making us comic is, on the contrary, that which 
is brought from without, like a ready-made 
frame into which we are to step. 
It lends us 
its own rigidity instead of borrowing from us 
our flexibility. 
We do not render it more 
complicated ; on the contrary, it simplifies us. 
Here, as we shall see later on in the conclud­
ing section of this study, lies the essential 
difference between comedy and drama. A 
drama, even when portraying passions or vices 
that bear a name, so completely incorporates 
them in the person that their names are for­
gotten, their general characteristics effaced, and 
we no longer think of them at all, but rather of 
the person in whom they are assimilated ; 
hence, the title of a drama can seldom be any­
thing else than a proper noun. On the other 
hand, many comedies have a common noun as 
their ti tie : l' A vare, le joueur, etc. 
Were you 
asked to think of a play capable of being called 
le Jaloux, for instance, you would find that 
Sga1zarelle or George DaÃzdiÃt would occur to 
your mind, but not Othello: le Jaloux could 
only be the title of a comedy. The reason is 
that, however intimately vice, when comic, is 
associated with persons, it none the less retains 

16 
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
its simple, independent existence, it remams 
the central character, present though invisible, 
to which the characters in flesh and blood on 
the stage are attached. 
At times it delights in 
dragging them down with its own weight and 
making them share in its tumbles. 
More fre­
quently, however, it plays on them as on an 
instrument or pulls the strings as though they 
were puppets. 
Look closely: you will find 
that the art of the comic poet consists in 
making us so well acquainted with the par­
ticular vice, in introducing us, the spectators, 
to such a degree of intimacy with it, that in 
the end we get hold of some of the strings of 
the marionette with which he is playing, and 
actually work them ourselves ; this it is that ex­
plains part of the pleasure we feel. 
Here, too, 
it is really a kind of automatism that makes us 
laugh - an automatism, as we have already re­
marked, closely akin to mere absentminded­
ness. 
To realise this more fully, it need only 
be noted that a comic character is generally 
comic in proportion to his ignorance of himself. 
The comic person is unconscious. 
As though 
wearing the ring of Gyges with reverse effect, 
he becomes invisible to himself while remain-

THE COMIC I N  GENERAL 
1 7  
ing visible to all the world. 
A character in a 
tragedy will make no change in his conduct 
because he will know how it is judged by us ; 
he may continue therein even though fully con­
scious of what he is and feeling keenly the 
horror he inspires in us. 
But a defect that is 
ridiculous, as soon as it feels itself to be so, 
endeavours to modify itself or at least to appear 
as though it did. \Vere Harpagon to see us 
laugh at his miserliness, I do not say that he 
would get rid of it, but he would either show 
it less or show it differently. 
Indeed, it is in 
this sense only that laughter " corrects men's 
manners." It makes us at once endeavour to 
appear what we ought to be, what some day 
we shall perhaps end in being. 
It is unnecessary to carry this analysis any 
further. 
From the runner who falls to the 
simpleton who is hoaxed, from a state of be­
ing hoaxed to one of absentmindedness, from 
absentmindedness to wild enthusiasm, from 
wild enthusiasm to various distortions of char­
acter and will, we have followed the line of 
progress along which the comic becomes more 
and more deeply imbedded in the person, yet 
without ceasing, in its subtler manifestations, 

1 8  
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
to recall to us some trace of what we noticed 
in its grosser forms, an effect of automatism 
and of inelasticity. 
Now we can obtin a first 
glimpse - a distant one, it is true, and still 
hazy and confused - of the laughable side of 
human nature and of the ordinary function of 
laughter. 
What life and society require of each of us 
is a constantly alert attention that discerns the 
outlines of the present situation, together with 
a certain elasticity of mind and body to enable 
us to adapt ourselves in consequence. 
Tnz­
si01z and elastic£ty are two forces, mutually com­
plementary, which life brings into play. 
If 
these two forces are lacking in the body to 
any considerable extent, we have sickness and 
infirmity and accidents of every kind. 
If they 
are lacking in the mind, we find every degree 
of mental deficiency, every variety of insanity. 
Finally, if they are lacking in the character, we 
have cases of the gravest inadaptability to 
social life, which are the sources of misery and 
at times the causes of crime. Once these 
elements of inferiority that affect the serious 
side of existence are removed - and they tend 
to eliminate themselves in what has been called 

THE COMIC IN GENERAL 
19 
the struggle for life - the person can live, and 
that in common with other persons. 
But 
society asks for something more ; it is not 
satisfied with simply living, it insists on living 
well. 
What it now has to dread is that each 
one of us, content with paying attention to 
what affects the essentials of life, will, so far as 
the rest is concerned, give way to the easy 
automatism of acquired habits. Another thing 
it must fear is that the members of whom it is 
made up, instead of aiming after an increasingly 
delicate adjustment of wills which will fit more 
and more perfectly into one another, will con­
fine themselves to respecting simply the funda­
mental conditions of this adjustment : a cut­
and-dried agreement among the persons will 
not satisfy it, it insists on a constant striv­
ing after reciprocal adaptation. 
Society will 
therefore be suspicious of all inelasticity of 
character, of mind and even of body, because 
it is the possible sign of a slumbering activity 
as well as of an activity with separatist tend­
encies, that inclines to swerve from the common 
centre round which society gravitates : in 
short, because it is the sign of an eccentricity. 
And yet, society cannot intervene at this stage 

20 
LAU GHTER 
CHAP. 
by material repression, since it IS not affected 
in a material fashion. 
It is confronted with 
something that makes it uneasy, but only as a 
symptom - scarcely a threat, at the very most 
a gesture. A gesture, therefore, will be its 
reply. 
Laughter must be something of this 
kind, a sort of social gesture. 
By the fear 
which it inspires, it restrains eccentricity, keeps 
constantly awake and in mutual contact certain 
activities of a secondary order which might 
retire into their shell and go to sleep, and in 
short, softens down whatever the surface of the 
social body may retain of mechanical inelasticity. 
Laughter, then, does not belong to the province 
of esthetics alone, since unconsciously (and even 
immorally in many particular instances) it pur­
sues a utilitarian aim of general improvement. 
And yet there is something esthetic about it, 
since the comic comes into being just when 
society and the individual, freed from the worry 
of self-preservation, begin to regard themselves 
as works of art. 
In a word, if a circle be 
drawn round those actions and dispositions­
implied in individual or social life - to which 
their natural consequences bring their own 
penalties, there remains outside this sphere of 

T H E  C01\IIC IN GENERAL 
2 1  
emotion and struggle - and within a neutral 
zone in which man simply exposes himself to 
man's curiosity-a certain rigidity of body, mind 
and character that society would still like to 
get rid of in order to obtain from its members 
the greatest possible degree of elasticity and 
sociability. 
This rigidity is the comic, and 
laughter is its corrective. 
Still, we must not accept this formula as a 
definition of the comic. 
It is suitable only 
for cases that are elementary, theoretical and 
perfect, in which the comic is free from all 
adulteration. 
Nor do we offer it, either, as an 
explanation. We prefer to make it, if you 
will, the leitmotiv which is to accompany all 
our explanations. We must ever keep it in 
mind, though without dwelling on it too much, 
somewhat as a skilful fencer must think of the 
discontinuous movements of the lesson whilst 
his body is given up to the continuity of the 
fencing-match. 
\Ve will now endeavour to 
reconstruct the sequence of comic forms, taking 
up again the thread that leads from the horse­
play of a clown up to the most refined effects 
of comedy, following this thread in its often 
unforeseen windings, halting at intervals to look 

2 2  
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
around, and finally getting back, if possible, to 
the point at which the thread is dangling and 
where we shall perhaps find - since the comic 
oscillates between life and art-the general re­
lation that art bears to life. 
III 
Let us begin at the simplest point. What 
is a comic physiognomy ? 
\Vhere does a 
ridiculous expression of the face come from ? 
And what is, in this case, the distinction be­
tween the comic and the ugly ? 
Thus stated, 
the question could scarcely be answered in 
any other than an arbitrary fashion. 
Simple 
though it may appear, it is, even now, too 
subtle to allow of a direct attack. 
\Ve should 
have to begin with a definition of ugliness, and 
then discoYer what addition the comic makes 
to it; now, ugliness is not much easier to 
analyse than is beauty. 
However, we will 
employ an artifice which will often stand us in 
good stead. \Ve will exaggerate the problem, 
so to speak, by magnifying the effect to the 
point of making the cause visible. 
Suppose, 
then, we intensify ugliness to the point of 

I 
FORMS 
23 
deformity, and study the transition from the 
deformed to the ridiculous. 
Now, certain deformities undoubtedly pos­
sess over others the sorry privilege of causing 
some persons to laugh ; some hunchbacks, for 
instance, will excite laughter. 
Without at this 
point entering into useless details, we will 
simply ask the reader to think of a number of 
deformities, and then to divide them into two 
groups : on the one hand, those which nature 
has directed towards the ridiculous ; and on 
the other, those which absolutely diverge from 
it. 
No doubt he will hit upon the following 
law: A deformity that may become comic £s a 
deformity that a. 1tormally built person could 
successfit!ly imitate. 
Is it not, then, the case that the hunchback 
suggests the appearance of a person who holds 
himself badly ? 
Hiݱ back seems to have con­
tracted an ugly stoop. 
By a kind of physical 
obstinacy, by rigidity, in a word, it persists 
in the habit it has contracted. 
Try to see 
with your eyes alone. A void reflection, and 
above all, do not reason. Abandon all your 
prepossessions ; seek to recapture 
a fresh, 
direct and primitive impression. The vision 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
you will reacquire will be one of this kind. 
You will have before you a man bent on culti­
vating a certain rigid attitude whose body, if 
one may use the expression, is one vast grin. 
Now, let us go back to the point we wished 
to clear up. 
By toning down a deformity that 
is laughable, we ought to obtain an ugliness 
that is comic. 
A laughable expression of the 
face, then, is one that will make us think of 
something rigid and, so to speak, coagulated, 
in the wonted mobility of the face. \Vhat we 
shall see will be an ingrained twitching or a 
fixed grimace. 
It may be objected that every 
habitual expression of the face, even when 
graceful and beautiful, gives us this same im­
pression of something stereotyped ? 
Here an 
important distinction must be drawn. \Vhen 
we speak of expressive beauty or even ex­
pressive ugliness, when we say that a face 
possesses expression, we mean expression that 
may be stable, but which we conjecture to be 
mobile. It maintains, in the midst of its fixity, 
a certain indecision in which are obscurely 
portrayed all possible shades of the state of 
mind it expresses, just as the sunny promise 
of a warm day manifests itself in the haze of 

FORMS 
a spring morning. 
But a comic expression 
of the face is one 
that promises nothing 
more than it gives. 
It is a unique and per­
manent grimace. 
One would say that the 
person's whole moral life has crystallised into 
this particular cast of features. This is the 
reason why a face is all the more comic, the 
more nearly it suggests to us the idea of some 
simple mechanical action in which its person­
ality would for ever be absorbed. Some faces 
seem to be always engaged in weeping, others 
in laughing or whistling, others, again, in eter­
nally blowing an imaginary trumpet, and these 
are the most comic faces of all. 
Here again is 
exemplified the law according to which the 
more natural the explanation of the cause, the 
more comic is the effect. 
Automatism, in­
elasticity, habit that has been contracted and 
maintained, are clearly the causes why a face 
makes us laugh. 
But this effect gains in in­
tensity when we are able to connect these 
characteristics with some deep-seated cause, 
a certain ftmdamental absentmin-dedness, as 
though the soul had allowed itself to be fasci­
nated and hypnotised by the materiality of a 
simple action. 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
We shall now understand the comic element 
in caricature. 
However regular we may imagine 
a face to be, however harmonious its lines and 
supple its movements, their adjustment is never 
altogether perfect : there will always be dis­
coverable the signs of some impending bias, 
the vague suggestion of a possible grimace, in 
short, some favourite distortion towards which 
nature seems to be particularly inclined. 
The 
art of the caricaturist consists in detecting 
this, at times, imperceptible tendency, and in 
rendering it visible to all eyes by magnifying it. 
He makes his models grimace, as they would 
do themselves if they went to the end of their 
tether. 
Beneath the skin-deep harmony of 
form, he divines the deep-seated recalcitrance 
of matter. 
He realises disproportions and de­
formations which must have existed in nature 
as mere inclinations, but which have not suc­
ceeded in coming to a head, being held in check 
by a higher force. 
His art, which has a touch 
of the diabolical, raises up the demon who had 
been overthrown by the angel. Certainly, it is 
an art that exaggerates, and yet the definition 
would be very far from complete were exaggera­
tion alone alleged to be its aim and object, for 

I 
FORMS 
there exist caricatures that are more lifelike 
than portraits, caricatures in which the exag­
geration is scarcely noticeable, whilst, inversely, 
it is quite possible to exaggerate to excess 
without obtaining a real caricature. 
For 
exaggeration to be comic, it must not appear as 
an aim, but rather as a means that the artist is 
using in order to make manifest to our eyes the 
distortions which he sees in embryo. 
It is 
this process of distortion that is of moment and 
interest. And that is precisely why we shall 
look for it even in those elements of the face 
that are incapable of movement, in the curve of 
a nose or the shape of an ear. 
For, in our eyes, 
form is always the outline of a movement. 
The 
caricaturist who alters the size of a nose, but 
respects its ground plan, lengthening it, for 
instance, in the very direction in which it was 
being lengthened by nature, is really making 
the nose indulge in a grin. 
Henceforth we 
shall always look upon the original as having 
determined to lengthen itself and start grinning. 
In this sense, one might say that Nature herself 
often meets with the successes of a caricaturist. 
In the movement through which she has slit that 
mouth, curtailed that chin and bulged out that 

LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
cheek, she would appear to have succeeded 
in completing the intended grimace, thus out­
witting the restraining supervision of a more 
reasonable force. 
In that case, the face we 
laugh at is, so to speak, its own caricature. 
To sum up, whatever be the doctrine to 
which our reason assents, our imagination has 
a very clear-cut philosophy of its own : in every 
human form it sees the effort of a soul which is 
shaping matter, a soul which is infinitely supple 
and perpetually in motion, subject to no law of 
gravitation, for it is not the earth that attracts 
it. This soul imparts a portion of its winged 
lightness to the body it animates : the im­
materiality which thus passes into matter is 
what is called gracefulness. 
Matter, however, 
is obstinate and resists. 
It draws to itself the 
ever-alert activity of this higher principle, 
would fain convert it to its own inertia and 
cause it to revert to mere automatism. 
It 
would fain immobilise the intelligently varied 
movements of the body in stupidly contracted 
grooves, stereotype in permanent grimaces the 
fleeting expressions of the face, in short 
imprint on the whole person such an attitude as 
to make it appear immersed and absorbed in 

MOVEMENTS 
29 
the materiality of some mechanical occupation 
instead of ceaselessly renewing its vitality by 
keeping in touch with a living ideal. Where 
matter thus succeeds in dulling the outward life 
of the soul, in petrifying its movements and 
thwarting its gracefulness, it achieves, at the 
expense of the body, an effect that is comic. 
If, then, at this point we wish to define the 
comic by comparing it with its contrary, we 
should have to contrast it with gracefulness 
even more than with beauty. 
It partakes 
rather of the unsprightly than of the unsightly, 
of r£g£dness rather than of ugliness. 
IV 
We will now pass from the comic element 
in forms to that in gestures and movemmts. 
Let us at once state the law which seems to 
govern all the phenomena of this kind. 
It may 
indeed be deduced without any difficulty from 
the considerations stated above. 
The att£tudes, gestures aJtd movements of the 
human body are laughable £n exact proportion 
as that body reminds us of a mere machine. 
There is no need to follow this law through 

30 
LAUG HTER 
CHAP. 
the details of its immediate applications, which 
are innumerable. 
To verify it directly, it 
would be sufficient to study closely the work 
of comic artists, eliminating entirely the element 
of caricature, and omitting that portion of the 
comic which is not inherent in the drawing 
itself. 
For, obviously, the comic element in a 
drawing is often a borrowed one, for which the 
text supplies all the stock-in-trade. 
I mean 
that the artist may be his own understudy in 
the shape of a satirist, or even a playwright, 
and that then we laugh far less at the drawings 
themselves than at the satire or comic incident 
they represent. 
But if we devote our whole 
attention to the drawing with the firm resolve 
to think of nothing else, we shall probably find 
that it is generally comic in proportion to the 
clearness, as well as the subtleness, with which 
it enables us to see a man as a jointed puppet. 
The suggestion must be a clear one, for inside 
the person we must distinctly perceive, as 
though through a glass, a set-up mechanism. 
But the suggestion must also be a subtle one, 
for the general appearance of the person, whose 
every limb has been made rigid as a machine, 
must continue to give us the impression of a 

I 
MOVE:\IENTS 
3 1  
living being. 
The more exactly these two 
images, that of a person and that of a machine, 
fit into each other, the more striking is the 
comic effect, and the more consummate the art 
of the draughtsman. 
The originality of a comic 
artist is thus expressed in the special kind of 
life he imparts to a mere puppet. 
We will, however, leave on one side the 
immediate application of the principle, and at 
this point insist only on the more remote con­
sequences. The illusion of a machine working 
in the inside of the person is a thing that only 
crops up amid a host of amusing effects; but for 
the most part it is a fleeting glimpse, that is 
immediately lost in the laughter it provokes. 
To render it permanent, analysis and reflection 
must be called into play. 
In a public speaker, for instance, we find 
that gesture vies with speech. Jealous of the 
latter, gesture closely dogs the speaker's 
thought, demanding also to act as interpreter. 
Well and good ; but then it must pledge itself 
to follow thought through all the phases of its 
development. 
An idea is something that 
grows, buds, blossoms and ripens from the 
beginning to the end of a speech. 
It never 

32 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP, 
halts, never repeats itself. 
It must be changing 
every moment, for to cease to change \Vould be 
to cease to live. 
Then let gesture display 
a like animation ! 
Let it accept the funda­
mental law of life, which is the complete 
negation of repetition ! 
But I find that a 
certain movement of head or arm, a movement 
always the same, seems to return at regular 
inten·als. 
If I notice it and it succeeds in 
diverting my attention, if I wait for it to occur 
and it occurs when I expect it, then involun­
tarily I laugh. 
\Vhy ? 
Because I now have 
before me a machine that works automatically. 
This is no longer life, it is automatism 
established in life and imitating it. 
It be­
longs to the comic. 
This is also the reason why gestures, at which 
we never dreamt of laughing, become laughable 
when imitated by another individual. 
The 
most elaborate explanations have been offered 
for this extremely simple fact. 
A little reflec­
tion, however, will show that our mental state 
is ever changing, and that if our gestures faith­
fully followed these inner movements, if they 
were as fully ali,·e as we, they would never 
repeat themselves, and so would keep imitation 

I 
MOVEMENTS 
33 
at bay. 
\Ve begin, then, to become imitable 
only when we cease to be ourselves. 
I mean 
our gestures can only be imitated in their 
mechanical uniformity, and therefore exactly 
in what is alien to our living personality. 
To 
imitate any one is to bring out the element of 
automatism he has allowed to creep into his 
person. 
And as this is the very essence of the 
ludicrous, it is no wonder that imitation gives 
rise to laughter. 
Still, if the imitation of gestures is intrin­
sically laughable, it will become even more so 
when it busies itself in deflecting them, though 
without altering their form, towards some 
mechanical occupation, such as sawing wood, 
striking on an anvil, or tugging away at an 
imaginary bell-rope. 
Not that vulgarity is the 
essence of the comic, - although certainly it is 
to some extent an ingredient, - but rather that 
the incriminated gesture seems more frankly 
mechanical when it can be connected with a 
simple operation, as though it were intentionally 
mechanical. To suggest this mechanical inter­
pretation ought to be one of the favourite 
devices of parody. 
\Ve have reached this 
result through deduction, but I 
tmagme 

34 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
clowns have long had an intuition of the 
fact. 
This seems to me the solution of the little 
riddle propounded by Pascal in one passage 
of his Thoughts: 
" Two faces that are alike, 
although neither of them excites laughter by 
itself, make us laugh when together, on account 
of their likeness." 
It might just as well be 
said : " The gestures of a public speaker, no 
one of which is laughable by itself, excite 
laughter by their repetition." 
The truth is 
that a really living life should never repeat 
itself. 
Wherever there is repetition or complete 
similarity, we always suspect some mechanism 
at work behind the living. Analyse the im­
pression you get from two faces that are too 
much alike, and you will find that you are 
thinking of two copies cast in the same mould, 
or two impressions of the same seal, or two 
reproductions of the same negative, - in a 
word, of some manufacturing process or other. 
This deflection of life towards the mechanical 
is here the real cause of laughter. 
And laughter will be more pronounced still, 
if we find on the stage not merely two charac­
ters, as in the example from Pascal, but several, 

I 
MOVEMENTS 
35 
nay, as great a number as possible, the image 
of one another, who come and go, dance and 
gesticulate together, simultaneously striking 
the same attitudes and tossing their arms 
about in the same manner. 
This time, we dis­
tinctly think of marionettes. 
Invisible threads 
seem to us to be joining arms to arms, legs to 
legs, each muscle in one face to its fellow-muscle 
in the other : by reason of the absolute uniform­
ity which prevails, the very litheness of the 
bodies seems to stiffen as we gaze, and the 
actors themselves seem transformed into lifeless 
automata. 
Such, at least, appears to be the 
artifice underlying this somewhat obvious form 
of amusement. 
I daresay the performers have 
never read Pascal, but what they do is merely 
to realise to the full the suggestions contained 
in Pascal's words. 
If, as is undoubtedly the 
case, laughter is caused in the second instance 
by the hallucination of a mechanical effect, it 
must already have been so, though in more 
subtle fashion, in the first. 
Continuing along this path, we dimly per­
ceive the increasingly important and far-reaching 
consequences of the law we have just stated. 
We faintly catch still more fugitive glimpses 

LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
of mechanical effects, glimpses suggested by 
man's complex actions, no longer merely by 
his gestures. 
We instinctively feel that the 
usual devices of comedy, the periodical repeti­
tion of a word or a scene, the systematic in­
version of the parts, the geometrical develop­
ment of a farcical misunderstanding and many 
other stage contrivances must derive their 
comic force from the same source, - the art of 
the playwright probably consisting in setting 
before us an obvious clockwork arrangement 
of human events, while carefully preserving an 
outward aspect of probability and thereby 
retaining something of the suppleness of life. 
But we must not forestall results which will be 
duly disclosed in the course of our analysis. 
v 
Before going further, let us halt a moment 
and glance around. As we hinted at the outset 
of this study, it would be idle to attempt to 
derive every comic effect from one simple 
formula. The formula exists well enough in a 
certain sense, but its development does not 
follow a straightforward course. What I mean 

EXPA NS IVE FORCE OF COMIC 37 
is that the process of deduction ought from time 
to time to stop and study certain culminating 
effects, and that these effects each appear as 
models round which new effects resembling 
them take their places in a circle. 
These latter 
are not deductions from the formula, but are 
comic through their relationship with those 
that are. 
To quote Pascal again, I see no 
objection, at this stage, to defining the process 
by the curve which that geometrician studied 
under the name of roulette or cycloid-the curve 
traced by a point in the circumference of a 
wheel when the carriage is advancing in a 
straight line : this point turns like the wheel, 
though it advances like the carriage. 
Or else 
we might think of an immense avenue such as 
are to be seen in the forest of Fontainebleau, 
with crosses at intervals to indicate the cross­
ways : at each of these we shall walk round the 
cross, explore for a while the paths that open 
out before us, and then return to our original 
course. 
Now, we have just reached one of 
these mental crossways. 
Somethingmecha1tical 
encrusted o1z the living will represent a cross 
at which we must halt, a central image from 
which the imagination branches off in different 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
directions. \Vhat are these directions? There 
appear to be three main ones. 
We will follow 
them one after the other, and then continue 
our onward course. 
1. In the first place, this view of the 
mechanical and the living dovetailed into each 
other makes us incline towards the vaguer 
image of some ri'gi'di'ty or other applied to the 
mobility of life, in an awkward attempt to 
follow its lines and counterfeit its suppleness. 
Here we perceive how easy it is for a garment 
to become ridiculous. 
It might almost be said 
that every fashion is laughable in some respect. 
Only, when we are dealing with the fashion of 
the day, we are so accustomed to it that the 
garment seems, in our mind, to form one with 
the individual wearing it. 
\Ve do not separate 
them in imagination. 
The idea no longer 
occurs to us to contrast the inert rigidity of the 
covering with the living suppleness of the object 
covered: consequently, the comic here remains 
in a latent condition. It will only succeed in 
emerging when the natural incompatibility is 
so deep-seated between the covering and the 
covered that even an immemorial association 

EXPANSIVE FORCE O F  COMIC 39 
fails to cement this union : a case in point is 
our head and top hat. 
Suppose, however, 
some eccentric individual dresses himself in the 
fashion of former times our attention is imme­
diately drawn to the clothes themselves ; we 
absolutely distinguish them from the individual, 
we say that the latter £s d£sgu£s£1tg himself,- as 
though every article of clothing were not a 
disguise ! - and the laughable aspect of fashion 
comes out of the shadow into the light. 
Here we are beginning to catch a faint 
glimpse of the highly intricate difficulties raised 
by this problem of the comic. 
One of the 
reasons that must have given rise to many 
erroneous or unsatisfactory theories of laughter 
is that many things are comic de jure without 
being comic de facto, the continuity of custom 
having deadened within them the comic quality. 
A sudden dissolution of continuity is needed, a 
break with fashion, for this quality to revive. 
Hence the impression that this dissolution of 
continuity is the parent of the comic, whereas 
all it does is to bring it to our notice. 
Hence, 
again, the explanation of laughter by surprise, 
coJZtrast, etc., definitions which would equally 
apply to a host of cases in which we have no 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
inclination whatever to laugh. The truth of 
the matter is far from being so simple. 
But to return to our idea of disguise, which, 
as we have just shown, has been entrusted with 
the special mandate of arousing laughter. 
It 
will not be out of place to investigate the uses 
it makes of this power. 
Why do we laugh at a head of hair which 
has changed from dark to blond ? 
\Vhat is 
there comic about a rubicund nose ? 
And why 
does one laugh at a negro ? 
The question 
would appear to be an embarrassing one, for it 
has been asked by successive psychologists such 
as Hecker, Kraepelin and Lipps, and all have 
given different replies. And yet I rather fancy 
the correct answer was suggested to me one day 
in the street by an ordinary cabby, who applied 
the expression " unwashed " to the negro fare he 
was driving. 
Unwashed ! Does not this mean 
that a black face, in our imagination, is one 
daubed over with ink or soot ? 
If so, then a 
red nose can only be one which has received a 
coating of vermilion. And so we see that the 
notion of disguise has passed on something of 
its comic quality to instances in which there is 
actually no disguise, though there might be. 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 41 
In the former set of examples, although his 
usual dress was distinct from the individual, 
it appeared in our mind to form one with him, 
because we had become accustomed to the sight. 
In the latter, although the black or red colour 
is indeed inherent in the skin, we look upon 
it as artificially laid on, because it surprises us. 
But here we meet with a fresh crop of diffi­
culties in the theory of the comic. 
Such a 
proposition as the following : " My usual dress 
forms part of my body " is absurd in the eyes 
of reason. 
Yet imagination looks upon it as 
true. " A  red nose is a painted nose," " A  
negro is a white man in disguise," are also 
absurd to the reason which rationalises ; but 
they are gospel truths to pure imagination. So 
there is a logic of the imagination which is not 
the logic of reason, one which at times is even 
opposed to the latter, with which, however, 
philosophy must reckon, not only in the study 
of the comic, but in every other investigation of 
the same kind. 
It is something like the logic 
of dreams, though of dreams that have not been 
left to the whim of individual fancy, being the 
dreams dreamt by the whole of society. 
In 
order to reconstruct this hidden logic, a special 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
kind of effort is needed, by \Yhich the outer 
crust of carefully stratified judgments and firmly 
established ideas will be lifted, and we shall 
behold in the depths of our mind, like a 
sheet of subterranean water, the flow of an un­
broken stream of images which pass from one 
into another. 
This interpenetration of images 
does not come about by chance. 
It obeys laws, 
or rather habits, which hold the same relation 
to imagination that logic does to thought. 
Let us then follow this logic of the imagina­
tion in the special case in hand. 
A man in 
disguise is comic. A man we regard as dis­
guised is also comic. So, by analogy, any 
disguise is seen to become comic, not only that 
of a man, but that of society also, and even the 
disguise of nature. 
Let us start with nature. You laugh at a 
dog that is half-clipped, at a bed of artificially 
coloured flowers, at a wood in which the trees 
are plastered over with election addresses, etc. 
Look for the reason, and you will see that you 
are once more thinking of a masquerade. Here, 
however, the comic element is very faint ; it is 
too farfrom its source. If you wish to strengthen 
it, you must go back to the source itself and 

EXPANSIVE FO RCE OF CO MIC 43 
contrast the derived image, that of a masquer­
ade, with the original one, which, be it remem­
bered, was that of a mechanical tampering with 
life. In " a  nature that is mechanically tampered 
with " we possess a thoroughly comic theme, on 
which fancy will be able to play ever so many 
variations with the certainty of successfully pro­
voking the heartiest hilarity. You may call to 
mind that amusing passage in Tartarin sur les 
Alpes, in which Bompard makes Tartarin ­
and therefore also the reader to some slight ex­
tent-accept the idea of a Switzerland choke-full 
of machinery like the basement of the Opera, and 
run by a company which maintains a series of 
waterfalls, glaciers and artificial crevasses. The 
same theme reappears, though transposed in 
quite another key, in the Novel Notes of the 
English humorist, Jerome K. Jerome. 
An 
elderly Lady Bountiful, who does not want her 
deeds of charity to take up too much of her 
time, provides homes within easy hail of her 
mansion for the conversion of atheists who have 
been specially manufactured for her, so to speak, 
and for a number of honest folk who have been 
made into drunkards so that she may cure them 
of their failing, etc. There are comic phrases 

44 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
in which this theme is audible, like a distant 
echo, coupled with an ingenuousness, whether 
sincere or affected, which acts as accompaniment. 
Take, as an instance, the remark made by a 
lady whom Cassini, the astronomer, had invited 
to see an eclipse of the moon. 
Arriving too 
late, she said, 
" M. de Cassini, I know, will 
have the goodness to begin it all over again, to 
please me." Or, take again the exclamation of 
one of Gondinet's characters on arriving in a 
town and learning that there is an extinct 
volcano in the neighbourhood, " They had a 
volcano, and they have let it go out ! "  
Let us go on to society. As we are both in 
and of it, we cannot help treating it as a living 
being. 
Any image, then, suggestive of the 
notion of a society disguising itself, or of a social 
masquerade, so to speak, will be laughable. 
Now, such a notion is formed when we perceive 
anything inert or stereotyped, or simply ready­
made, on the surface of living society. 
There 
we have rigidity over again, clashing with the 
inner suppleness of life. The ceremonial side 
of social life must, therefore, always include a 
latent comic element, which is only waiting for 
an opportunity to burst into full view. 
It 

EXPANSIVE FO RCE OF COMIC 45 
might be said that ceremonies are to the social 
body what clothing is to the individual body : 
they owe their seriousness to the fact that they 
are identified, in our minds, with the serious 
object with which custom associates them, and 
when we isolate them in imagination, they 
forthwith lose their seriousness. 
For any 
ceremony, then, to become comic, it is enough 
that our attention be fixed on the ceremonial 
element in it, and that we neglect its matter, as 
philosophers say, and think only of its form. 
Every one knows how easily the comic spirit 
exercises its ingenuity on social actions of a 
stereotyped nature, from an ordinary prize­
distribution to the solemn sitting of a court of 
justice. 
Any form or formula is a ready-made 
frame into which the comic element may be 
fitted. 
Here, again, the comic will be emphasised 
by bringing it nearer to its source. 
From the 
idea of travesty, a derived one, we must go 
back to the original idea, that of a mechanism 
superposed upon life. 
Already, the stiff and 
starched formality of any ceremonial suggests 
to us an image of this kind. For, as soon as 
we forget the serious object of a solemnity or a 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
ceremony, those taking part in it give us the 
impression of puppets in motion. 
Their 
mobility seems to adopt as a model the im­
mobility of a formula. 
It becomes automatism. 
But complete automatism is only reached in 
the official, for instance, who performs his duty 
like a mere machine, or again in the un­
consciousness that marks an administrative 
regulation working with inexorable fatality, 
and setting itself up for a law of nature. 
Quite by chance, when reading the newspaper, 
I came across a specimen of the comic of this 
type. Twenty years ago, a large steamer was 
wrecked off the coast at Dieppe. With con­
siderable difficulty some of the passengers were 
rescued in a boat. 
A few custom-house offi­
cers, who had courageously rushed to their 
assistance, began by asking them " if they had 
anything to declare." 
We find something 
similar, though the idea is a more subtle one, 
in the remark of an M.P. when questioning the 
Home Secretary on the morrow of a terrible 
murder which took place in a railway carriage : 
" The assassin, after despatching his victim, 
must have got out the wrong side of the train, 
thereby infringing the Company's rules." 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COI\1IC 47 
A mechanical element introduced into nature 
and an automatic regulation of society, such, 
then, are the two types of laughable effects at 
which we have arrived. 
It remains for us, in 
conclusion, to combine them and see what the 
result will be. 
The result of the combination will evidently 
be a human regulation of affairs usurping the 
place of the laws of nature. \Ve may call to mind 
the answer Sganarelle gave Geronte when the 
latter remarked that the heart was on the left 
side and the liver on the right : 
" Yes, it was 
so formerly, but we have altered all that ; now, 
we practise medicine in quite a new way." 
We may also recall the consultation between 
M. de Pourceaugnac's two doctors : 
" The 
arguments you have used are so erudite and 
elegant that it is impossible for the patient not 
to be hypochondriacally melancholic ; or, even 
if he were not, he must surely become so 
because of the elegance of the things you have 
said and the accuracy of your reasoning." We 
might multiply examples, for all we need do 
would be to call up Moliere's doctors, one after 
the other. 
However far, moreover, comic 
fancy may seem to go, reality at times under-

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
takes to improve upon it. 
It was suggested to 
a contemporary philosopher, an out-and-out 
arguer, that his arguments, though irreproach­
able in their deductions, had experience against 
them. 
He put an end to the discussion by 
merely remarking, " Experience is in the 
wrong." The truth is, this idea of regulating 
life as a matter of business routine is more 
widespread than might be imagined ; it is 
natural in its way, although we have just 
obtained it by an artificial process of re­
construction. One might say that it gives us 
the very quintessence of pedantry, which, at 
bottom, is nothing else than art pretending to 
outdo nature. 
To sum up, then, we have one and the same 
effect, which assumes ever subtler forms as it 
passes from the idea of an artificial mechan£sa­
t£01t of the human body, if such an expression 
is permissible, to that of any substitution what­
soever of the artificial for the natural. A less 
and less rigorous logic, that more and more 
resembles the logic of dreamland, transfers the 
same relationship into higher and higher 
spheres, between increasingly immaterial terms, 
till in the end we find a mere administrative 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 49 
enactment occupying the same relation to a 
natural or moral law that a ready-made garment, 
for instance, does to the I iving body. We 
have now gone right to the end of the first of 
the three directions we had to follow. 
Let us 
turn to the second and see where it will lead 
us. 
2. Our starting-point is again " something 
mechanical encrusted upon the living." \Vhere 
did the comic come from in this case ? 
It came 
from the fact that the living body became rigid, 
like a machine. 
Accordingly, it seemed to us 
that the living body ought to be the perfection 
of suppleness, the ever-alert activity of a 
principle always at work. 
But this activity 
would really belong to the soul rather than to 
the body. 
It would be the very flame of life, 
kindled within us by a higher principle and 
perceived through the body, as though through 
a glass. When we see only gracefulness and 
suppleness in the living body, it is because 
we disregard in it the elements of weight, of 
resistance, and, in a word, of matter ; we forget 
its materiality and think only of its vitality, 
a vitality which we regard as derived from 

so 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
the very principle of intellectual and moral life. 
Let us suppose, however, that our attention is 
drawn to this material side of the body ; that, 
so far from sharing in the lightness and 
subtlety of the principle with which it is 
animated, the body is no more in our eyes than 
a heavy and cumbersome vesture, a kind of 
irksome ballast which holds down to earth a 
soul eager to rise aloft. 
Then the body will 
become to the soul what, as we have just seen, 
the garment was to the body itself - inert 
matter dumped down upon living energy. 
The 
impression of the comic will be produced as 
soon as we have a clear apprehension of this 
putting the one on the other. And we shall 
experience it most strongly when we are shown 
the soul tantalised by the needs of the body : 
on the one hand, the moral personality with its 
intelligently varied energy, and, on the other, 
the stupidly monotonous body, perpetually 
obstructing everything with its machine-like 
obstinacy. 
The more paltry and uniformly 
repeated these claims of the body, the more 
striking will be the result. 
But that is only a 
matter of degree, and the general law of these 
phenomena may be formulated as follows : A1zy 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 5 1  
incidmt is comic that calls our attention to the 
physical in a person, when -it -is the moral side 
that is concerned. 
\Vhy do we laugh at a public speaker who 
sneezes just at the most pathetic moment of his 
speech ? 
Where lies the comic element in this 
sentence, taken from a funeral speech and 
quoted by a German philosopher : " He was 
virtuous and plump " ?  It lies in the fact that 
our attention is suddenly recalled from the soul 
to the body. 
Similar instances abound in daily 
life, but if you do not care to take the trouble 
to look for them, you have only to open at 
random a volume of Labiche, you will be 
almost certain to light upon an effect of this 
kind. 
Now, we have a speaker whose most 
eloquent sentences are cut short by the twinges 
of a bad tooth ; now, one of the characters who 
never begins to speak without stopping in the 
middle to complain of his shoes being too 
small, or his belt too tight, etc. 
A person 
embarrassed by his body is the image suggested 
to us in all these examples. 
The reason that 
excessive stoutness is laughable is probably 
because it calls up an image of the same kind. 
I almost think that this too is what sometimes 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
makes bashfulness somewhat ridiculous. 
The 
bashful man rather gives the impression of a 
person embarrassed by his body, looking round 
for some convenient cloak-room in which to 
deposit it. 
This is just why the tragic poet is so care­
ful to avoid anything calculated to attract 
attention to the material side of his heroes. 
No sooner does anxiety about the body mani­
fest itself than the intrusion of a comic element 
is to be feared. 
On this account, the hero in 
a tragedy does not eat or drink or warm him­
self. 
He does not even sit down any more 
than can be helped. 
To sit down in the 
middle of a fine speech would imply that you 
remembered you had a body. 
Napoleon, who 
was a psychologist when he wished to be so, 
had noticed that the transition from tragedy 
to comedy is effected simply by sitting down. 
In the journal i11edit of Baron Gourgaud ­
when speaking of an interview with the Queen 
of Prussia after the battle of lena - he ex­
presses himself in the following terms : " She 
received me in tragic fashion like Chimene : 
Justice ! Sire, Justice ! Magdeburg ! Thus she 
continued in a way most embarrassing to me. 

EXPANSIVE FO RCE OF COM IC 53 
Finally, to make her change her style, I re­
quested her to take a seat. 
This is the best 
method for cutting short a tragic scene, for as 
soon as you are seated it all becomes comedy." 
Let us now give a wider scope to this 
image of the body taking precedence of the 
soul. 
We 
shall 
obtain 
something more 
general - the manner seekz"ng to outdo the 
matter, the letter aiming at ousting the spirit. 
Is it not perchance this idea that comedy is 
trying to suggest to us when holding up a 
profession to ridicule ? 
It makes the lawyer, 
the 
magistrate and the doctor speak as 
though health and justice were of little 
moment, the main point being that we should 
have lawyers, magistrates and doctors, and 
that all outward formalities pertaining to these 
professions should be scrupulously respected. 
And so we find the means substituted for the 
end, the manner for the matter ; no longer is 
it the profession that is made for the public, 
but rather the public for the profession. 
Con­
stant attention to form and the mechanical 
application of rules here bring about a kind 
of professional automatism analogous to that 
imposed upon the soul by the habits of the 

54 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
body, and equally laughable. 
Numerous are 
the examples of this on the stage. Without 
entering into details of the variations executed 
on this theme, let us quote two or three 
passages in w·hich the theme itself is set 
forth in all its simplicity. 
" You are only 
bound to treat people according to form," says 
Doctor Diafoirus in the Malade Imaginaire. 
Again, says 
Doctor Bahis, in L'Amour 
medecin : " It is better to die through follow­
ing the rules than to recover through violating 
them." 
In the same play, Desfonandres had 
previously said : " 'vVe must always observe 
the formalities of professional etiquette, what­
ever may happen." And the reason is given 
by Tomes, his colleague : " A  dead man is 
but a dead man, but the non-observance of a 
formality causes a notable prejudice to the 
whole faculty." 
Brid'oison's words, though 
embodying a rather different idea, are none 
the less significant : 
" F-form, mind you, 
£-form. 
A man laughs at a judge in a 
morning coat, and yet he would quake with 
dread at the mere sight of an attorney 
m 
his gown. 
F-form, all a matter 
of 
£-form." 

EXPANS IVE FO RCE OF COMIC 55 
Here we have the first illustration of a law 
which will appear with increasing distinctness 
as we proceed with our task. \Vhen a musician 
strikes a note on an instrument, other notes 
start up of themselves, not so loud as the first, 
yet connected with it by certain definite rela­
tions, which coalesce with it and determine its 
quality. 
These are what are called in physics 
the overtones of the fundamental note. 
It 
would seem that comic fancy, even in its most 
far-fetched inventions, obeys a similar law. 
For instance, consider this comic note : appear­
ance seeking to triumph over reality. 
If our 
analysis is correct, this note must have as its 
overtones the body tantalizing the mind, the 
body taking precedence of the mind. No 
sooner, then, does the comic poet strike 
the first note than he will add the second on to 
it, involuntarily and instinctively. 
In other 
words, he will duplicate what is ridiculous 
professionally with something that is ridiculous 
physically. 
\Vhen Brid'oison the judge comes stammer­
ing on to the stage, is he not actually preparing 
us, by this very stammering, to understand the 
phenomenon of intellectual ossification we are 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
about to witness? \Vhat bond of secret 
relationship can there be between the physical 
defect and the moral infirmity? 
It is difficult 
to say ; yet we feel that the relationship is 
there, though we cannot express it in words. 
Perhaps the situation required that this judging 
machine should also appear before us as a 
talking machine. 
However it may be, no 
other overtone could more perfectly have 
completed the fundamental note. 
\Vhen Moliere introduces to us the two 
ridiculous doctors, Bahis and Macroton, in 
L'Amour medecin, he makes one of them speak 
very slowly, as though scanning his words 
syllable by syllable, whilst the other stutters. 
We find the same contrast between the two 
lawyers in Mons£eur de Pourceaugnac. 
In the 
rhythm of speech is generally to be found the 
physical peculiarity that is destined to complete 
the element of professional ridicule. 
When the 
author has failed to suggest a defect of this 
kind, it is seldom the case that the actor does 
not instinctively invent one. 
Consequently, there is a natural relationship, 
which we equally naturally recognise, between 
the two images we have been comparing with 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 5 7 
each other, the mind crystallising in certain 
grooves, and the body losing its elasticity 
through the influence of certain defects. 
Whether or not our attention be diverted from 
the matter to the manner, or from the moral to 
the physical, in both cases the same sort of 
impression is conveyed to our imagination ; in 
both, then, the comic is of the same kind. 
Here, once more, it has been our aim to follow 
the natural trend of the movement of the 
imagination. 
This trend or direction, it may 
be remembered, was the second of those offered 
to us, starting from a central image. 
A third 
and final path remains unexplored, along which 
we will now proceed. 
3· 
Let us then return, for the last time, to 
our central image - something mechanical en­
crusted on something living. 
Here, the living 
being under discussion was a human being, a 
person. 
A mechanical arrangement, on the 
other hand, is a thing. 
What, therefore, 
incited laughter, was the momentary transfor­
mation of a person into a thing, if one considers 
the image from this standpoint. 
Let us then 
pass from the exact idea of a machine to the 

ss 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
vaguer one of a thing in general. 
We shall 
have a fresh series of laughable images which 
will be obtained by taking a blurred impression, 
so to speak, of the outlines of the former and will 
bring us to this new law : We laugh every time 
a person gives us the impression of being a thing. 
We laugh at Sancho Panza tumbled into a 
bed-quilt and tossed into the air like a football. 
\Ve laugh at Baron Munchausen turned into 
a cannon-ball and travelling through space. 
But certain tricks of circus clowns might afford 
a still more precise exemplification of the same 
law. 
True, we should have to eliminate the 
jokes, mere interpolations by the clown in his 
main theme, and keep in mind only the theme 
itself, that is to say, the divers attitudes, capers 
and 
movements 
which 
form the strictly 
" clownish " element in the clown's art. On 
two occasions only have I been able to observe 
this style of the comic in its unadulterated 
state, and in both I received the same im­
pression. 
The first time, the clowns came and 
went, collided, fell and jumped up again in a 
uniformly accelerated rhythm, visibly intent 
upon effecting a crescmdo. And it was more 
and more to the jumping up again, the rebou1zd, 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 59 
that the attention of the public was attracted. 
Gradually, one lost sight of the fact that they 
were men of flesh and blood like ourselves ; 
one began to think of bundles of all sorts, 
falling and knocking against each other. Then 
the vision assumed a more definite aspect. 
The forms grew rounder, the bodies rolled 
together and seemed to pick themselves up 
like balls. 
Then at last appeared the image 
towards which the whole of this scene had 
doubtless been unconsciously evolving,- large 
rubber balls hurled against one another in every 
direction. 
The second scene, though even 
coarser than the first, was no less instructive. 
There came on the stage two men, each with 
an enormous head, bald as a billiard ball. 
I n  
their hands they carried large sticks which 
each, in turn, brought down on to the other's 
cranium. 
Here, again, a certain gradation was 
observable. 
After each blow, 
the 
bodies 
seemed to grow heavier and more unyielding, 
overpowered by 
an 
increasing degree of 
rigidity. 
Then came the return blow, in each 
case heavier and more resounding than the last, 
coming, too, after a longer interval. 
The 
skulls gave forth a formidable ring throughout 

6o 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
the silent house. 
At last the two bodies, each 
quite rigid and as straight as an arrow, slowly 
bent over towards each other, the sticks came 
crashing down for the last time on to the two 
heads with a thud as of enormous mallets falling 
upon oaken beams, and the pair lay prone upon 
the ground. At that instant appeared in all its 
vividness the suggestion that the two artists 
had gradually driven into the imagination of 
the spectators : 
" We are about to become 
. . . we have now become solid wooden 
dummies. " 
A kind of dim, vague instinct may enable 
even an uncultured mind to get an inkling here 
of the subtler results of psychological science. 
\Ve know that it is possible to call up hallucina­
tory visions in a hypnotised subject by simple 
suggestion. 
If he be told that a bird is perched 
on his hand, he will see the bird and watch it 
fly away. 
The idea suggested, however, is far 
from being always accepted with like docility. 
Not infrequently, the mesmeriser only succeeds 
in getting an idea into his subject's head by 
slow degrees through a carefully graduated 
series of hints. 
He will then start with objects 
really perceived by the subject, and will en-

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 6 1  
deavour to make the perception of these objects 
more and more indefinite ; then, step by step, 
he will bring out of this state of mental chaos 
the precise form of the object of which he 
wishes to create an hallucination. Something 
of the kind happens to many people when 
dropping off to sleep ; they see those coloured, 
fluid, shapeless masses, which occupy the field 
of vision, insensibly solidifying into distinct 
objects. 
Consequently, the gradual passing 
from the dim and vague to the clear and dis­
tinct is the method of suggestion par excellmce. 
I fancy it might be found to be at the root of a 
good many comic suggestions, especially in the 
coarser forms of the comic, in which the trans­
formation of a person into a thing seems to be 
taking place before our eyes. 
But there are 
other and more subtle methods in use, among 
poets, for instance, which perhaps unconsciously 
lead to the same end. 
By a certain arrange­
ment of rhythm, rhyme and assonance, it is 
possible to lull the imagination, to rock it to 
and fro between like and like with a regular 
see-saw motion, and thus prepare it submissively 
to accept the vision suggested. 
Listen to 
these few lines of Regnard, and see whether 

62 
LA UGH TER 
CHAP. 
something like the fleeting image of a doll does 
not cross the field of your imagination : 
•
•
.
 Plus, il doit a maints particuliers 
La somme de dix mil une livre une obole, 
Pour l'avoir sans rel.iche un an sur sa parole 
Habille, voiture, chauffe, chausse, gante, 
Alimente, rase, desaltere, porte.1 
Is not something of the same kind found in 
the following sally of Figaro's (though here an 
attempt is perhaps made to suggest the image 
of an animal rather than that of a thing) : " Quel 
homme est-ce ? - C'est un beau, gros, court, 
jeune vieillard, gris pommele, ruse, rase, blase, 
qui guette et furette, et grande et geint tout a 
la fois." 2 
Now, between these coarse scenes and these 
subtle suggestions there is room for a countless 
1 Further, he owes to many an honest wight 
Item - the sum two thousand pounds, one farthing, 
For having on his simple word of honour 
Sans intermission for an entire year 
Clothed him, conveyed him, warmed him, shod him, 
gloved him, 
Fed him and shaved him, quenched his thirst and borne 
him. 
2 '' \Vhat sort of man is here ? - He is a handsome, stout, short, 
youthful old gentleman, iron-grey, an artful knave, clean shaved, 
clean ' used up,' who spies and pries and growls and groans al 
in the same breath." 

EXPANS IVE FORCE OF COMIC 63 
number of amusing effects, for all those that 
can be obtained by talking about persons as 
one would do about mere things. 
We will 
only select one or two instances from the plays 
of Labiche, in which they are legion. 
Just as M. Perrichon is getting into the 
railway carriage, he makes certain of not 
forgetting any of his parcels : " Four, five, 
six, my wife seven, my daughter eight, and 
myself nine." 
In another play, a fond father 
is boasting of his daughter's learning in the 
following terms : " She will tell you, without 
faltering, all the kings of France that have 
occurred." This phrase, " that have occurred," 
though not exactly transforming the kings intp 
mere things, likens them, all the same, to events 
of an impersonal nature. 
As regards this latter example, note that it is 
unnecessary to complete the identification of 
the person with the thing to ensure a comic 
effect. 
It is sufficient for us to start in this 
direction by feigning, for instance, to confuse 
the person with the function he exercises. 
I 
will only quote a sentence spoken by a village 
mayor in one of About's novels : " The prefect, 
who has always shown us the same kindness, 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
though he has been changed several times since 
1847 . . .  
, 
All these witticisms are constructed on the 
same model. 
\Ve might make up any number 
of them, when once we are in possession of the 
recipe. 
But the art of the story-teller or the 
playwright does not merely consist in concoct­
ing jokes. 
The difficulty lies in giving to a 
joke its power of suggestion, £.e. in making it 
acceptable. And we only do accept it either 
because it seems to be the natural product of a 
particular state of mind or because it is in keep­
ing with the circumstances of the case. 
For 
instance, we are aware that M. Perrichon is 
greatly excited on the occasion of his first rail­
way journey. The expression " to occur " is one 
that must have cropped up a good many times 
in the lessons repeated by the girl before her 
father ; it makes us think of such a repetition. 
Lastly, admiration of the governmental machine 
might, at a pinch, be extended to the point of 
making us believe that no change takes place in 
the prefect when he changes his name, and that 
the function gets carried on independently of 
the functionary. 
Vve have now reached a point very far from 

EXPANSIVE FORCE OF COMIC 65 
the original cause of laughter. 
Many a comic 
form, that cannot be explained by itself, can 
indeed only be understood from its resemblance 
to another, which only makes us laugh by 
reason of its relationship with a third, and so 
on indefinitely, so that psychological analysis, 
however luminous and searching, will go 
astray unless it holds the thread along which 
the comic impression has travelled from one 
end of the series to the other. \Vhere does 
this progressive continuity come from ? 
\Vhat 
can be the driving force, the strange impulse 
which causes the comic to glide thus from 
image to image, farther and farther away from 
the starting-point, until it is broken up and 
lost in infinitely remote analogies ? 
But what 
is that force which divides and subdivides the 
branches of a tree into smaller boughs and its 
roots into radicles ? 
An inexorable law dooms 
every living energy, during the brief interval 
allotted to it in time, to cover the widest pos­
sible extent in space. 
Now, comic fancy is 
indeed a living energy, a strange plant that has 
flourished on the stony portions of the social 
soil, until such time as culture should allow it 
to vie with the most refined products of art. 

66 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. I 
True, we are far from great art in the examples 
of the comic we have just been reviewing. 
But we shall draw nearer to it, though without 
attaining to it completely, in the following 
chapter. Below art, we find artifice, and it is 
this zone of artifice, midway between nature 
and art, that we are now about to enter. 
We 
are going to deal with the comic playwright 
and the wit. 

CHAPTER II 
THE COMIC ELEMENT I N  SITUATIONS AND THE 
COMIC ELEMENT IN WORDS 
I 
WE have studied the com1c element in 
forms, in attitudes, and in movements gener­
ally ; now let us look for it in actions and in 
situations. 
We encounter, indeed, this kind of 
comic readily enough in everyday life. 
It is 
not here, however, that it best lends itself to 
analysis. 
Assuming that the stage is both 
a magnified and a simplified view of life, we 
shall find that comedy is capable of furnishing 
us with more information than real life on this 
particular part of our subject. Perhaps we 
ought even to carry simplification still far­
ther, and, going back to our earliest recollec­
tions, try to discover, in the games that amused 
us as children, the first faint traces of the 
67 

68 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
combinations that make us laugh as grown-up 
persons. \Ve are too -apt to speak of our 
feelings of pleasure and of pain as though full 
grown at birth, as though each one of them had 
not a history of its own. 
Above all, we are too 
apt to ignore the childish element, so to speak, 
latent in most of our joyful emotions. And 
yet, how many of our present pleasures, were 
we to examine them closely, would shrink into 
nothing more than memories of past ones ! 
\Vhat would there be left of many of our 
emotions, were we to reduce them to the exact 
quantum of pure feeling they contain by 
subtracting from them all that is merely 
reminiscence ? 
Indeed, it seems possible that, 
after a certain age, we become impervious to 
all fresh or novel forms of joy, and the sweetest 
pleasures of the middle-aged man are perhaps 
nothing more than a revival of the sensations 
of childhood, a balmy zephyr wafted in fainter 
and fainter breaths by a past that is ever 
receding. 
In any case, whatever reply we give 
to this broad question, one thing is certain : 
there can be no break in continuity between 
the child's delight in games and that of the 
grown-up person. 
Now, comedy is a game, a 

u 
THE COMIC I N  SITUATIONS 
69 
game that imitates life. 
And since, in the 
games of the child when working its dolls and 
puppets, many of the movements are produced by 
strings, ought we not to find those same strings, 
some\vhat frayed by wear, reappearing as the 
threads that knot together the situations in a 
comedy ? 
Let us, then, start with the games 
of a child, and follow the imperceptible process 
by which, as he grows himself, he makes his 
puppets grow, inspires them with life, and 
finally brings them to an ambiguous state in 
which, without ceasing to be puppets, they 
have yet become human beings. 
We thus 
obtain characters of a comedy type. And upon 
them we can test the truth of the law of which 
all our preceding analyses gave an inkling, a 
law in accordance with which we will define all 
broadly comic situations in general. A1zy ar­
rang-ement of acts and events is comic which 
gives us, £n a single combination, the illusion of 
life and the distinct impression of a mecha1zica! 
arran-gement. 
1. The Jack-£n-the-bo:c. - As children we 
have all played with the little man who springs 
out of his box. 
You squeeze him flat, he 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
JUmps up again. 
Push him lower, and he 
shoots up still higher. 
Crush him down 
beneath the lid, and often he will send every­
thing flying. 
It is hard to tell whether or not 
the toy itself is very ancient, but the kind of 
amusement it affords belongs to all time. It is a 
struggle between two stubborn elements, one of 
which, being simply mechanical, generally ends 
by giving in to the other, which treats it as a 
plaything. 
A cat playing with a mouse, which 
from time to time she releases like a spring, 
only to pull it up short with a stroke of her 
paw, indulges in the same kind of amusement. 
We will now pass on to the theatre, begin­
ning with a Punch and Judy show. 
No sooner 
does the policeman put in an appearance on the 
stage than, naturally enough, he receives a 
blow which fells him. 
He springs to his feet, 
a second blow lays him flat. 
A repetition of 
the offence is followed by a repetition of the 
punishment. 
Up and down the constable flops 
and hops with the uniform rhythm of the bend­
ing and release of a spring, whilst the spectators 
laugh louder and louder. 
Now, let us think of a spring that is rather 
of a moral type, an idea that is first expressed, 

n 
THE COMIC IN SITUAT IONS 7 1  
then repressed, and then expressed again ; a 
stream of words that bursts forth, is checked, 
and keeps on starting afresh. 
Once more we 
have the vision of one stubborn force, counter­
acted by another, equally pertinacious. 
This 
vision, however, will have discarded a portion 
of its materiality. 
No longer is it Punch and 
1 udy that we are watching, but rather a real 
comedy. 
Many a comic scene may indeed be referred 
to this simple type. 
For instance, in the scene 
of the Mar£age force between Sganarelle and 
Pancrace, the entire v£s com£ca lies in the con­
flict set up between the idea of Sganarelle, who 
wishes to make the philosopher listen to him, 
and the obstinacy of the philosopher, a regular 
talking-machine, working automatically. 
As 
the scene progresses, the image of the 1 ack-in­
the-box becomes more apparent, so that at last 
the characters themselves adopt its movements, 
- Sganarelle pushing Pancrace, each time he 
shows himself, back into the wings, Pancrace 
returning to the stage after each repulse, to 
continue his patter. 
And when Sganarelle 
finally drives Pancrace back and shuts him up 
inside the house-inside the box, one is tempted 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP, 
to say - a window suddenly flies open, and the 
head of the philosopher again appears, as 
though it had burst open the lid of a box. 
The same by-play occurs in the Malade 
Imaginaire. 
Through the mouth of 1\'Ionsieur 
Purgon the outraged medical profession pours 
out its vials of wrath upon Argan, threatening 
him with every disease that flesh is heir to. 
And every time Argan rises from his seat, as 
though to silence Purgon, the latter disappears 
for a moment, being, as it were, thrust back 
into the wings ; then, as though impelled by a 
spring, he rebounds on to the stage with a 
fresh curse on his lips. The self-same exclama­
tion : " 1\Ionsieur Purgon ! "  recurs at regular 
beats, and, as it were, marks the tempo of this 
little scene. 
Let us scrutinise more closely the image of 
the spring which is bent, released, and bent 
again.. Let us disentangle its central element, 
and we shall hit upon one of the usual processes 
of classic comedy, - repetition. 
\Vhy is it there is something comic in the 
repetition of a word on the stage ? 
No theory 
of the ludicrous seems to offer a satisfactory 
answer to this very simple question. Nor can 

u 
T H E  COMIC I N  SIT UATIONS 73 
an answer be found, so long as we look for the 
explanation of an amusing word or phrase in 
the phrase or word itself, apart from all it sug­
gests to us. 
Nowhere will the usual method 
prove to be so inadequate as here. 
With the 
exception, however, of a few special instances 
to which we shall recur later, the repetition of 
a word is never laughable in itself. 
It makes 
us laugh only because it symbolises a special 
play of moral elements, this play itself being 
the symbol of an altogether material diversion. 
It is the diversion of the cat with the mouse, 
the diversion of the child pushing back the 
Jack-in-the-box, time after time, to the bottom 
of his box - but in a refined and spiritualised 
form, transferred to the realm of feelings and 
ideas. Let us then state the law which we 
think defines the main comic varieties of word­
repetition on the stage : In a com£c repet£t£01t of 
words we generally find two terms : a repressed 
feel£1Zg wh£ch goes ojf l£ke a spr£ng, a1td an z"dea 
that delz"ghts z"n repress£ng the feelz'ng anew. 
When Dorine is telling Organ of his wife's 
illness, and the latter continually interrupts him 
with inquiries as to the health of Tartuffe, 
the question :  " Et Tartuffe ? "  repeated every 

74 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
few moments, affords us the distinct sensation 
of a spring being released. This spring Dorine 
delights in pushing back, each time she resumes 
her account of Elmire's illness. 
And \vhen 
Scapin informs old Geronte that his son has 
been taken prisoner on the famous galley, and 
that a ransom must be paid without delay, he 
is playing with the avarice of Geronte exactly 
as Dorine does with the infatuation of Orgon. 
The old man's avarice is no sooner repressed 
than up it springs again automatically, and it is 
this automatism that Moliere tries to indicate by 
the mechanical repetition of a sentence express­
ing regret at the money that would have to 
be forthcoming : " \Vhat the deuce did he want 
in that galley ? "  The same criticism is appli­
cable to the scene in which Valere points out to 
Harpagon the wrong he would be doing in 
marrying his daughter to a man she did not 
love. 
" No dowry wanted ! "  interrupts the 
miserly Harpagon every few moments. 
Be­
hind this exclamation, which recurs automati­
cally we faintly discern a complete repeating­
machine set going by a fixed idea. 
At times this mechanism is less easy to 
detect, and here we encounter a fresh difficulty 

n 
THE CO MIC IN SIT UATIONS 75 
in the theory of the comic. 
Sometimes the 
whole interest of a scene lies in one character 
playing a double part, the intervening speaker 
acting as a mere prism, so to speak, through 
which the dual personality is developed. 
\Ve 
run the risk, then, of going astray, if we look 
for the secret of the effect in what we see and 
hear, - in the external scene played by the 
characters, - and not in the altogether inner 
comedy of which this scene is no more than the 
outer refrݰction. 
For instance, when Alceste 
stubbornly repeats the words, " I  don't say 
that ! " on Oronte asking him if he thinks his 
poetry bad, the repetition is laughable, though 
evidently Oronte is not now playing \vith 
Alceste at the game we have just described. 
We must be careful, however, for, in reality, 
we have two men in Alceste: on the one hand, 
the " misanthropist " who has vowed hence­
forth to call a spade a spade, and on the other 
the gentleman who cannot unlearn, in a trice, 
the usual forms of politeness, or even, it may 
be, just the honest fellow who, when called 
upon to put his words into practice, shrinks 
from wounding another's self-esteem or hurting 
his feelings. 
Accordingly, the real scene is not 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
between Alceste and Oronte, it is between 
Alceste and himself. 
The one Alceste would 
fain blurt out the truth, and the other stops his 
mouth just as he is on the point of telling 
everything. Each " I  don't say that ! ,  reveals 
a growing effort to repress something that 
strives and struggles to get out. 
And so the 
tone in which the phrase is uttered gets more 
and more violent, Alceste becoming more and 
more angry - not with Oronte, as he thinks ­
but with himself. The tension of the spring is 
continually being renewed and reinforced, until 
it at last goes off with a bang. 
Here, as else­
where, we have the same identical mechanism 
of repetition. 
For a man to make a resolution never hence­
forth to say what he does not think, even 
though he " openly defy the whole human 
race," is not necessarily laughable ; it is a 
phase of life at its highest and best. For 
another man, through amiability, selfishness or 
disdain, to prefer to flatter people, is only another 
phase of life ; there is nothing in it to make us 
laugh. 
You may even corn bine these two men 
into one, and arrange that the individual waver 
between offensive frankness and delusive polite-

n 
T H E  COMIC I N  SITUAT IONS 77 
ness, this duel between two opposing feelings 
will not even then be comic, rather it will 
appear the essence of seriousness if these two 
feelings through their very distinctness complete 
each other, develop side by side, and make up 
between them a composite mental condition, 
adopting, in short, a modus vivendi which merely 
gives us the complex impression of life. 
But im­
agine these two feelings as inelastic and unvary­
ing elements in a really living man, make him 
oscillate from one to the other ; above all, arrange 
that this oscillation becomes entirely mechani­
cal by adopting the well-known form of some 
habitual, simple, childish contrivance : then 
you will get the image we have so far found in 
all laughable objects, something mechami:al in 
somethiJtg living; in fact, something comic. 
We have dwelt on this first image, the 
Jack-in-the-box, sufficiently to show how comic 
fancy gradually converts a material mechanism 
into a moral one. 
Now we will consider one 
or two other games, confining ourselves to their 
most striking aspects. 
2. The Dancing/ack. - There are mnumer­
able comedies in which one of the characters 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
thinks he is speaking and acting freely, and 
consequently, retains all the essentials of life, 
whereas, viewed from a certain standpoint, he 
appears as a mere toy in the hands of another, 
who is playing with him. 
The transition is 
easily made, from the dancing-jack which a 
child works with a string, to Geronte and 
Argante manipulated by Scapin. 
Listen to 
Scapin himself : " The machine is all there," 
and again : " Providence has brought them into 
my net," etc. 
Instinctively, and because one 
would rather be a cheat than be cheated, in 
imagination at all events, the spectator sides 
with the knaves ; and for the rest of the time, 
like a child who has persuaded his playmate to 
lend him his doll, he takes hold of the strings 
himself and makes the marionette come and 
go on the stage as he pleases. 
But this latter 
condition is not indispensable ; we can remain 
outside the pale of what is taking place if only 
we retain the distinct impression of a mechan­
ical arrangement. 
This is what happens when­
ever one of the characters vacillates between 
two contrary opinions, each in turn appealing 
to him, as when Panurge asks Tom, Dick and 
Harry whether or not he ought to get married. 

u 
T H E  COMIC I N  SIT UATIONS 79 
Note that, in such a case, a comic author is 
always careful to perso1Zify the two opposing 
decisions. 
For, if there is no spectator, there 
must at all events be actors to hold the 
strings. 
All that is serious m life comes from our 
freedom. 
The feelings we have matured, the 
passiOns we have brooded over, the actions 
we have weighed, decided upon and carried 
through, in short, all that comes from us and 
is our very own, these are the things that give 
life its ofttimes dramatic and generally grave 
aspect. 
\Vhat, then, is requisite to transform 
all this into a comedy ? 
Merely to fancy that 
our seeming freedom conceals the strings of a 
dancing-jack, and that we are, as the poet says, 
• . . humble marionettes 
The wires of which are pulled by Fate.1 
So there is not a real, a serious, or even a 
dramatic scene that fancy cannot render comic 
by simply calling forth this image. 
Nor is 
there a game for which a wider field lies open . 
. . . d'humbles marionnettes 
Dont le fil est aux mains de Ia Necessite. 
SULLY-PRUDHOMME. 

8o 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
3· The Su,ow-ball. - The farther we proceed 
in this investigation into the methods of comedy, 
the more clearly we see the part played by 
childhood's memories. 
These memories refer, 
perhaps, less to any special game than to the 
mechanical device of which that game is a 
particular instance. 
The same general device, 
moreover, may be met with in widely different 
games, just as the same operatic air is found 
in many different arrangements and variations. 
What is here of importance and is retained in 
the mind, what passes by imperceptible stages 
from the games of a child to those of a man, is 
the mental diagram, the skeleton outline of 
the combination, or, if you like, the abstract 
formula of which these games are particular 
illustrations. 
Take, for instance, the rolling 
snow-ball, which increases in size as it moves 
along. 
We might just as well think of toy 
soldiers standing behind one another. 
Push 
the first and it tumbles down on the second, 
this latter knocks down the third, and the state 
of things goes from bad to worse until they all 
lie prone on the floor. 
Or again, take a house 
of cards that has been built up with infinite 
care : the first you touch seems uncertain 

n 
T H E  COMIC I N  SITUATIONS 8 1  
whether to move or not, its tottering neighbour 
comes to a quicker decision, and the work of 
destruction, gathering momentum as it goes on, 
rushes headlong to the final collapse. These 
instances are all different, but they suggest the 
same abstract vision, that of an effect which 
grows by arithmetical progression, so that the 
cause, insignificant at the outset, culminates by 
a necessary evolution in a result as important as 
it is unexpected. 
Now let us open a children's 
picture-book ; we shall find this arrangement 
already on the high road to becoming comic. 
Here, for instance,-in one of the comic chap­
books picked up by chance,-we have a caller 
rushing violently into a drawing-room ; he 
knocks against a lady, who upsets her cup of 
tea over an old gentleman, who slips against a 
glass window which falls in the street on to the 
head of a constable, who sets the whole police 
force agog, etc. The same arrangement re­
appears in many a picture intended for grown­
up persons. 
In the " stories without words " 
sketched by humorous artists we are often 
shown an object which moves from place to 
place, and persons who are closely connected 
with it, so that through a series of scenes a 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
change in the position of the object mechani­
cally brings about increasingly serious changes 
in the situation of the persons. 
Let us now 
turn to comedy. Many a droll scene, many 
a comedy even, may be referred to this 
simple type. 
Read the speech of Chicanneau 
in the Plaz'deurs; here we find lawsuits within 
lawsuits, and the mechanism works faster and 
faster - Racine produces in us this feeling of 
increasing acceleration by crowding his law 
terms ever closer together - until the lawsuit 
over a truss of hay costs the plaintiff the best 
part of his fortune. 
And again the same 
arrangement occurs in certain scenes of Don 
Quixote ; for instance, in the inn scene, where, 
by an extraordinary concatenation of circum­
stances, the mule-driver strikes Sancho, who 
belabours 1\Iaritornes, upon whom the inn­
keeper falls, etc. Finally, let us pass to the 
light comedy of to-day. 
Need we call to mind 
all the forms in which this same combination 
appears ? 
There is one that is employed 
rather frequently. 
For instance a certain 
thing, say a letter, happens to be of supreme 
importance to a certain person and must be 
recovered at all costs. 
This thing, which 

n 
T H E  COMIC IN SITUATIONS 83 
always vanishes just when you think you have 
caught it, pervades the entire play, " rolling up " 
increasingly serious and unexpected incidents 
as it proceeds. 
All this is far more like a 
child's game than appears at first blush. 
Once 
more the effect produced is that of the snow­
ball. 
It is the characteristic of a mechanical com­
bination to be generally reversible. 
A child is 
delighted when he sees the ball in a game of 
ninepins knocking down everything in its way 
and spreading havoc in all directions ; he laughs 
louder than ever when the ball returns to its 
starting-point 
after twists 
and turns and 
waverings of every kind. 
In other words, 
the mechanism just described is laughable even 
when rectilinear, it is much more so on be­
coming circular and when every effort the 
player makes, by a fatal interaction of cause 
and effect, merely results in bringing it back 
to the same spot. 
Now, a considerable number 
of light comedies revolve round this idea. An 
Italian straw hat has been eaten up by a horse.1 
There is only one other hat like it in the whole 
of Paris ; it must be secured regardless of cost. 
1 U?Z chapeau de paille d'ltalie (Labiche). 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
This hat, \\'hich always slips a\vay at the 
moment its capture seems inevitable, keeps 
the principal character on the run, and through 
him all the others who hang, so to say, on to 
his coat tails, like a magnet which, by a suc­
cessiYe series of attractions, draws along in its 
train the grains of iron filings that hang on to 
each other. And when at last, after all sorts of 
difficulties, the goal seems in sight, it is found 
that the hat so ardently sought is precisely the 
one that has been eaten. The same voyage of 
discovery is depicted in another equally well­
kno,vn comedy of Labiche.1 The curtain rises 
on an old bachelor and an old maid, acquaint­
ances of long standing, at the moment of 
enjoying their daily rubber. 
Each of them, 
unknown to the other, has applied to the same 
matrimonial agency. 
Through innumerable 
difficulties, one mishap following on the heels 
of another, they hurry along, side by side, right 
through the play, to the interview which brings 
them back, purely and simply, into each other's 
presence. \Ve have the same circular effect, 
the same return to the starting-point, in a more 
recent play.2 A henpecked husband imagines 
1 La Cagnotte. 
2 Les surjJrz"ses du divorce. 

n 
THE CO MIC I N  SITUATIONS Ss 
he has escaped by divorce from the clutches of 
his wife and his mother-in-law. 
He marries 
again, when, lo and behold, the double com­
bination of marriage and divorce brings back 
to him his former wife in the aggravated form 
of a second mother-in-law ! 
When we think how intense and how 
common is this type of the comic, we under­
stand why it has fascinated the imagination of 
certain philosophers. To cover a good deal 
of ground only to come back unwittingly to 
the starting-point, is to make a great effort for a 
result that is nil. So we might be tempted to 
define the comic in this latter fashion. And 
such, indeed, seems to be the idea of Herbert 
Spencer : according to him, laughter is the 
indication of an effort which suddenly en­
counters a void. 
Kant had already said 
something of the kind : " Laughter is the 
result of an expectation which, of a sudden, 
ends in nothing." 
No doubt these definitions 
would apply to the last few examples given, 
although, even then, the formula needs the 
addition of sundry limitations, for we often 
make an ineffectual effort which is in no way 
provocative of laughter. vVhile, however, the 

86 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
last few examples are illustrations of a great 
cause resulting in a small effect, we quoted 
others, immediately before, which might be 
defined inversely as a great effect springing 
from a small cause. 
The truth is, this second 
definition has scarcely more validity than the 
first. 
Lack of proportion between cause and 
effect, whether appearing in one or in the other, 
is never the direct source of laughter. \Vhat 
we do laugh at is something that this lack of 
proportion may in certain cases disclose, namely, 
a particular mechanical arrangement which it 
reveals to us, as through a glass, at the back of 
the series of effects and causes. 
Disregard 
this arrangement, and you let go the only clue 
capable of guiding you through the labyrinth of 
the comic. Any hypothesis you otherwise \vould 
select, while possibly applicable to a few care­
fully chosen cases, is liable at any moment to 
be met and overthrown by the first unsuitable 
instance that comes along. 
But why is it we laugh at this mechanical 
arrangement ?  It is doubtless strange that the 
history of a person or of a group should some­
times appear like a game worked by strings, or 
gearings, or springs ; but from what source does 

u 
THE COMIC IN SIT U AT IONS 87 
the special character of this strangeness arise ? 
'What is it that makes it laughable ? 
To this 
question, which we have already propounded 
in various forms, our answer must ahvays be 
the same. 
The rigid mechanism which we 
occasionally detect, as a foreign body, in the 
living continuity of human affairs is of peculiar 
interest to us as being a kind of abseutmz"nded­
ness on the part of life. 
Were events un­
ceasingly mindful of their own course, there 
would be no coincidences, no conjunctures and 
no circular series ; everything would evolve 
and progress continuously. 
And were all men 
always attentive to life, were we constantly 
keeping in touch with others as well as with 
ourselves, nothing within us would ever appear 
as due to the working of strings or springs. 
The comic is that side of a person which 
reveals his likeness to a thing, that aspect of 
human events which, through its peculiar 
inelasticity, conveys the impression of pure 
mechanism, of automatism, of 
movement 
without life. 
Consequently it expresses an 
individual or collective imperfection which 
calls for an immediate corrective. 
This cor­
rective is laughter, a social gesture that singles 

88 
LAUGHTE R  
CHAP. 
out and represses a special kind of absent­
mindedness in men and in events. 
But this in turn tempts us to make further 
investigations. 
So far, we have spent our time 
in rediscovering, in the diversions of the grown­
up man, those mechanical combinations which 
amused him as a child. 
Our methods, in fact, 
have been entirely empirical. 
Let us now 
attempt to frame a full and methodical theory, 
by seeking, as it were, at the fountain-head, 
the changeless and simple archetypes of the 
manifold and transient practices of the comic 
stage. 
Comedy, we said, combines events so 
as to introduce mechanism into the outer forms 
of life. 
Let us now ascertain in what essential 
characteristics life, when viewed from without, 
seems to contrast with mere mechanism. \Ve 
shall only have, then, to turn to the opposite 
characteristics, in order to discover the abstract 
formula, this time a general and complete one, 
for every real and possible method of comedy. 
Life presents itself to us as evolution in 
time and complexity in space. 
Regarded in 
time, it is the continuous evolution of a being 
ever growing older; it never goes backwards 
and never repeats itself. Considered in space, it 

n 
T H E  CO MIC IN SITUAT IONS 89 
exhibits certain coexisting elements so closely 
interdependent, so exclusively made for one 
another, that not one of them could, at the 
same time, belong to two different organisms : 
each living being is a closed system of phe­
nomena, incapable of interfering with other 
systems. 
A continual change of aspect, the 
irreversibility of the order of phenomena, the 
perfect individuality of a perfectly self-contained 
series : such, then, are the outward charac­
teristics - whether real or apparent is of little 
moment -which distinguish the living from the 
merely mechanical. 
Let us take the counter­
part of each of these : we shall obtain three 
processes which might be called repet£tio1z, 
i11version, and reciprocal i1tterfermce of series. 
Now, it is easy to see that these are also the 
methods of light comedy, and that no others 
are possible. 
As a matter of fact, we could discover them, 
as ingredients of varying importance, in the 
composition of all the scenes we have just been 
considering, and, a fortiori, in the children's 
games, the mechanism of which they reproduce. 
The requisite analysis would, however, delay 
us too long, and it is more profitable to study 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
them in their purity by taking fresh examples. 
Nothing could be easier, for it is in their pure 
state that they are found, both in classic comedy 
and in contemporary plays. 
1 .  Repetitio1l,. - Our present problem no 
longer deals, like the preceding one, with a 
word or a sentence repeated by an individual, 
but rather with a situation, that is, a combina­
tion of circumstances, which recurs several 
times in its original form and thus contrasts 
with the changing stream of life. Everyday 
experience supplies us with this type of the 
comic, though only in a rudimentary state. 
Thus, you meet a friend in the street whom 
you have not seen for an age ; there is nothing 
comic in the situation. 
If, however, you meet 
him again the same day, and then a third and 
a fourth time, you may laugh at the " coinci­
dence." 
Now, picture to yourself a series of 
imaginary events which affords a tolerably fair 
illusion of life, and within this ever-moving 
series imagine one and the same scene repro­
duced either by the same characters or by 
different ones : again you will have a coinci­
dence, though a far more extraordinary one. 

u 
THE COMIC I N  SIT UATIONS 9 1  
Such are the repetitions produced on the stage. 
They are the more laughable in proportion as 
the scene repeated is more complex and more 
naturally introduced - two conditions which 
seem mutually exclusive, and which the play­
writer must be clever enough to reconcile. 
Contemporary light comedy employs this 
method in every shape and form. 
One of the 
best-known examples consists in bringing a 
group of characters, act after act, into the most 
varied surroundings, so as to reproduce, under 
ever fresh circumstances, one and the same 
series of incidents or accidents more or less 
symmetrically identical. 
I n  several of Moliere's plays we find one 
and the same arrangement of events repeated 
right through the comedy from beginning to 
end. Thus, the Ecole des Femmes does nothing 
more than reproduce and repeat a single in­
cident in three temp£: first tempo, Horace tells 
Arnolphe of the plan he has devised to deceive 
Agnes's guardian, who turns out to be Arnolphe 
himself ; second tempo, Arnolphe thinks he has 
checkmated the move ; third tempo, Agnes con­
trives that Horace gets all the benefit of 
Arnolphe's precautionary measures. 
There is 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
the same symmetrical repetition in the Ecole 
des Maris, in L'Etourd£, and above all in 
George Daudin, where the same effect in three 
tempi is again met with : first tempo, George 
Dandin discovers that his wife is unfaithful ; 
second tempo, he summons his father- and 
mother-in-law to his assistance ; third tempo, it 
is George Dandin himself, after all, who has to 
apologise. 
At times the same scene is reproduced with 
groups of different characters. Then it not 
infrequently happens that the first group con­
sists of masters and the second of servants. 
The latter repeat in another key a scene 
already played by the former, though the 
rendering is naturally less refined. A part of 
the Depit amoureux is constructed on this 
plan, as is also Amp!titryon. 
In an amusing 
little comedy of Benedix, Der Eigmsimz, the 
order is inverted : we have the masters repro­
ducing a scene of stubbornness in which their 
servants have set the example. 
But, quite irrespective of the characters 
who serve as pegs for the arrangement of 
symmetrical situations, there seems to be a 
wide gulf between classic comedy and the 

n 
T H E  COMIC IN SITU ATIONS 93 
theatre of to-day. 
Both aim at introducing a 
certain mathematical order into events, while 
none the less maintaining their aspect of likeli­
hood, that is to say, of life. 
But the means 
they employ are different. The majority of 
light comedies of our day seek to mesmerise 
directly the mind of the spectator. 
For, how­
ever extraordinary the coincidence, it becomes 
acceptable from the very fact that it is accepted ; 
and we do accept it, if we have been gradually 
prepared for its reception. Such is often the 
procedure adopted by contemporary authors. 
In Moliere's plays, on the contrary, it is the 
moods of the persons on the stage, not of the 
audience, that make repetition seem natural. 
Each of the characters represents a certain 
force applied in a certain direction, and it is 
because these forces, constant in direction, 
necessarily combine together in the same way, 
that the same situation is reproduced. Thus 
interpreted, the comedy of situation is akin to 
the comedy of character. 
It deserves to be 
called classic, if classic art is indeed that which 
does not claim to derive from the effect more 
than it has put into the cause. 

94 
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
2. Inversion. - This second method has so 
much analogy with the first that we will merely 
define it without insisting on illustrations. 
Picture to yourself certain characters in a 
certain situation : if you reverse the situation 
and invert the rOles, you obtain a comic scene. 
The double rescue scene in Le Voyage de M 
Perrichon belongs to this class.1 There is no 
necessity, however, for both the identical scenes 
to be played before us. We may be shown 
only one, provided the other is really in our 
minds. 
Thus, we laugh at the prisoner at the 
bar lecturing the magistrate ; at a child pre­
suming to teach its parents ; in a word, at 
everything that comes under the heading of 
"topsyturvydom." 
Not infrequently comedy sets before us a 
character who lays a trap in which he is the 
first to be caught. 
The plot of the villain who 
is the victim of his own villany, or the cheat 
cheated, forms the stock-in-trade of a good 
many plays. 
\Ve find this even in primitive 
farce. 
Lawyer Pathelin tells his client of a 
trick to outwit the magistrate ; the client 
employs the self-same trick to avoid paymg 
1 Labiche, Le Voyage de ,lf. Perrichon. 

n 
THE C0ݮ1IC IN S ITUATIONS 95 
the lawyer. A termagant of a wife insists 
upon her husband doing all the housework ; 
she has put down each separate item on a 
' rota.' 
Now let her fall into a copper, her 
husband will refuse to drag her out, for " that 
is not down on his ' rota.' " 
In modern litera­
ture we meet with hundreds of variations on 
the theme of the robber robbed. 
In every 
case the root idea involves an inversion of 
rOles, and a situation which recoils on the head 
of its author. 
Here we apparently find the confirmation of 
a law, some illustrations of which we have 
already pointed out. 
When a comic scene 
has been reproduced a number of times, it 
reaches the stage of being a classical type or 
model. 
It becomes amusing in itself, quite 
apart from the causes which render it amusing. 
Henceforth, new scenes, which are not comic 
de jure, may become amusing de facto, on 
account of their partial resemblance to this 
model. They call up in our mind a more or 
less confused image which we know to be 
comical. 
They range themselves in a category 
representing an officially recognised type of 
the comic. 
The scene of the " robber robbed " 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
belongs to this class. 
It casts over a host of 
other scenes a reflection of the comic element 
it contains. 
In the end it renders comic any 
mishap that befalls one through one's own fault, 
no matter what the fault or mishap may be, ­
nay, an allusion to this mishap, a single word 
that recalls it, is sufficient. 
There would be 
nothing amusing in the saying, " It serves you 
right, George Dandin," were it not for the 
comic overtones that take up and re-echo it. 
3· We have dwelt at considerable length on 
repetition and inversion ; we now come to the 
reciprocal interference 1 of series. 
This is a 
comic effect, the precise formula of which is 
very difficult to disentangle, by reason of the 
extraordinary variety of forms in which it 
appears on the stage. 
Perhaps it might be 
defined as follows : A situation is invariably 
comic when it belongs simulta1teously to two 
altogether independent series of events and is 
capable of being interpreted i1t two entz'rely 
diferent memtings at the same time. 
1 The word " interference " has here the meaning given to it 
in Optics, where it indicates the partial superposition and neu­
tralisation, by each other, of two series of light-waves. 

n 
T H E  COMIC IN SITUATIONS 97 
You will at once think of an equivocal 
situation. 
And the equivocal situation is 
indeed one which permits of two different 
meanings at the same time, the one merely 
plausible, which is put forward by the actors ; 
the other a real one, which is given by the 
public. 
We see the real meaning of the 
situation, because care has been taken to 
show us every aspect of it, but each of the 
actors knows only one of these aspects ; hence 
the mistakes they make and the erroneous 
judgments they pass both on what is going 
on around them and on what they are doing 
themselves. 
We proceed from this erroneous 
judgment to the correct one, we waver between 
the possible meaning and the real, and it is 
this mental see-saw between two contrary in­
terpretations which is at first apparent in the 
enjoyment we derive from an equivocal situa­
tion. 
It is natural that certain philosophers 
should have been specially struck by this men­
tal instability, and that some of them should 
regard the very essence of the ludicrous as 
consisting in the collision or coincidence of 
two judgments that contradict each other. 
Their definition, however, is far from meeting 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
every case, and even when it does, it defines ­
not the principle of the ludicrous, but only one 
of its more or less distant consequences. 
In­
deed, -it is easy to see that the stage-made 
misunderstanding is nothing but a particular 
instance of a far more general phenomenon, ­
the reciprocal interference of independent series, 
and that, moreover, it is not laughable in itself, 
but only as a sign of such an interference. 
As a matter of fact, each of the characters 
in every stage-made misunderstanding has his 
setting in an appropriate series of events which 
he correctly interprets as far as he is concerned, 
and which give the key-note to his words and 
actions. 
Each of the series peculiar to the 
several characters develop independently, but 
at a certain moment they meet under such 
conditions that the actions and words that 
belong to one might just as well belong to 
another. 
Hence arise the misunderstandings 
and the equivocal nature of the situation. 
But 
this latter is not laughable in itself, it is so 
only because it reveals the coincidence of the 
two independent series. 
The proof of this 
lies in the fact that the author must be con­
tinually taxing his ingenuity to recall our 

n 
THE COMIC IN SITUATIONS 99 
attention to the double fact of independence 
and coincidence. 
This he generally succeeds 
in doing by constantly renewing the vain 
threat of dissolving partnership between the 
two coinciding series. 
Every moment the 
whole thing threatens to break down, but 
manages to get patched up again ; it is this 
diversion that excites laughter, far more than 
the oscillation of the mind between two con­
tradictory ideas. 
It makes us laugh because 
it reveals to us the reciprocal interference of 
two independent series, the real source of the 
comic effect. 
And so the stage-made misunderstanding is 
nothing more than one particular instance, 
one means - perhaps the most artificial - of 
illustrating the reciprocal interference of series, 
but it is not the only one. 
Instead of two 
contemporary series, you might take one series 
of events belonging to the past and another 
belonging to the present : if the two series 
happen to coincide in our imagination, there 
will be no resulting cross-purposes, and yet 
the same comic effect will continue to take 
place. 
Think of Bonivard, captive in the 
Castle of Chill on : one series of facts. 
Now 

100 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP . 
picture to yourself Tartarin, travelling in 
Switzerland, arrested and imprisoned : second 
series, independent of the former. 
Now let 
Tartarin be manacled to Bonivard's chain, 
thus making the two stories seem for a moment 
to coincide, and you will get a very amusing 
scene, one of the most amusing that Daudet's 
imagination has pictured.1 Numerous incidents 
of the mock-heroic style, if analysed, would 
reveal the same elements. The transposition 
from the ancient to the modern - always a 
laughable one - draws its inspiration from the 
same idea. 
Labiche has made use of this method in 
every shape and form. Sometimes he begins 
by building up the series separately, and then 
delights in making them interfere with one 
another : he takes an independent group - a 
wedding-party, for instance - and throws them 
into altogether unconnected surroundings, into 
which certain coincidences allow of their be­
ing foisted for the time being. 
Sometimes he 
keeps one and the same set of characters right 
through the play, but contrives that certain of 
these characters have something to conceal -
1 Tartarin sur les Alpes, by Daudet. 

n 
T H E  COMIC I N  S I T U ATIONS 101 
have in fact, a secret understanding on the 
point - in short, play a smaller comedy within 
the principal one : at one moment, one of the 
two comedies is on the point of upsetting the 
other ; the next, everything comes right and 
the coincidence between the two series is 
restored. Sometimes, even, he introduces into 
the actual series a purely immaterial series of 
events, an inconvenient past, for instance, that 
some one has an interest in concealing, but 
which is continually cropping up in the present, 
and on each occasion is successfully brought 
into line with situations with which it seemed 
destined to play havoc. 
But in every case we 
find the two independent series, and also their 
partial coincidence. 
We will not carry any further this analysis 
of the methods of light comedy. 
Whether we 
find reciprocal interference of series, inversion, 
or repetition, we see that the objective is 
always the same - to obtain what we have 
called a mechanisatimt o£ life. 
You take a set 
of actions and relations and repeat it as it is, or 
turn it upside down, or transfer it bodily to 
another set with which it partially coincides 
- all these being processes that consist in 

102 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
looking upon life as a repeating mechanism, 
with reversible action and interchangeable 
parts. Actual life is comedy just so far as it 
produces, in a natural fashion, actions of the 
same kind ; consequently, just so far as it 
forgets itself, for were it always on the alert, 
it would be ever-changing continuity, irre­
versible progress, undivided unity. 
And so 
the ludicrous in events may be defined as 
absent-mindedness in things, just as the ludi­
crous in an individual character always results 
from some fundamental absent-mindedness in 
the person, as we have already intimated and 
shall prove later on. 
This absent-mindedness 
in events, however, is exceptional. 
Its results 
are slight. At any rate it is incurable, so that 
it is useless to laugh at it. 
Therefore the idea 
would never have occurred to any one of 
exaggerating absent-mindedness, of converting 
it into a system, and creating an art for it, if 
laughter were not always a pleasure, and man­
kind did not pounce upon the slightest excuse 
for indulging in it. 
This is the real explanation 
of light comedy, which holds the same relation 
to actual life as does a jointed dancing-doll to 
a man walking, - being, as it is, an artificial 

II 
T H E  COMIC IN \tVORDS 
103 
exaggeration of a natural rigidity in things. 
The thread that binds it to actual life is a very 
fragile one. 
It is scarcely more than a game 
which, like all games, depends on a previously 
accepted convention. Comedy in character 
strikes far deeper roots into life. 
With that 
kind of comedy we shall deal more particularly 
in the final portion of our investigation. 
But 
we must first analyse a certain type of the 
comic, in many respects similar to that of light 
comedy : the comic in w'ords. 
II 
There may be something artificial in making 
a special category for the comic in words, since 
most of the varieties of the comic that we have 
examined so far were produced through the 
medium of language. 
We must make a dis­
tinction, however, between the comic expressed 
and the comic created by language. 
The 
former could, if necessary, be translated from 
one language into another, though at the cost 
of losing the greater portion of its significance 
when introduced into a fresh society different in 
manners, in literature, and above all in associa-

1 04 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
tion of ideas. 
But it is generally impossible to 
translate the latter. 
It owes its entire being to 
the structure of the sentence or to the choice of 
the words. 
It does not set forth, by means of 
language, special cases of absent-mindedness 
in man or in events. 
It lays stress on lapses 
of attention in language itself. 
In this case, 
it is language itself that becomes comic. 
Comic sayings, however, are not a matter of 
spontaneous generation ;  if we laugh at them, 
we are equally entitled to laugh at their author. 
This latter condition, however, is not indis­
pensable, since the saying or expression has a 
comic virtue of its own. This is proved by the 
fact that we find it very difficult, in the majority 
of these cases, to say whom we are laughing at, 
although at times we have a dim, vague feeling 
that there is some one in the background. 
Moreover, the person implicated is not 
always the speaker. 
Here it seems as though 
we should draw an important distinction 
between the witty (spirituel) and the comic. 
A word is said to be comic when it makes us 
laugh at the person who utters it, and witty 
when it makes us laugh either at a third party 
or at ourselves. But in most cases we can 

II 
T H E  COMIC I N  \VORDS 
105 
hardly make up our minds whether the word is 
comic or witty. All that we can say is that it 
is laughable. 
Before proceeding, it might be well to 
examine more closely what is meant by wit 
(esprit). 
A witty saying makes us at least 
smile; 
consequently, no investigation into 
laughter would be complete did it not get to 
the bottom of the nature of wit and throw 
light on the underlying idea. 
It is to be feared, 
however, that this extremely subtle essence is 
one that evaporates when exposed to the light. 
Let us first make a distinction between 
the two meanings of the word " wit " (esprit), the 
broader one and the more restricted. 
In the 
broader meaning of the word, it would seem 
that what is called wit is a certain dramatic 
way of thinking. 
Instead of treating his ideas 
as mere symbols, the wit sees them, he hears 
them and, above all, makes them converse 
with one another like persons. 
He puts them 
on the stage, and himself, to some extent, into 
the bargain. A witty nation is, of necessity, a 
nation enamoured of the theatre. 
In every 
wit there is something of a poet - just as in 
every good reader there is the making of an 

106 
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
actor. 
This comparison is made purposely, 
because a proportion might easily be established 
between the four terms. 
In order to read well 
we need only the intellectual side of the actor's 
art ; but in order to act well one must be an 
actor in all one's soul and body. 
In just the 
same way, poetic creation calls for some degree 
of self-forgetfulness, whilst the wit does not 
usually err in this respect. \Ve always get a 
glimpse of the latter behind what he says and 
does. 
He is not wholly engrossed in the 
business, because he only brings his intelligence 
into play. 
So any poet may reveal himself as a wit 
when he pleases. 
To do this there will be no 
need for him to acquire anything ; it seems 
rather as though he would have to give up 
something. 
He would simply have to let his 
ideas hold converse with one another " for 
nothing, for the mere joy of the thing ! "  1 
He 
would only have to unfasten the double bond 
which keeps his ideas in touch with his feelings 
and his soul in touch with life. 
In short, he 
would turn into a wit by simply resolving to 
1 " Pour rien, pour le plaisir," is a quotation from Victor 
Hugo's Jfarion Delorme. 

II 
THE COMIC IN WORDS 
107 
be no longer a poet in feeling, but only m 
intelligence. 
But if wit consists, for the most part, in 
seeing things sub specie theatri, it is evidently 
capable of being specially directed to one 
variety of dramatic art, namely, comedy. 
Here we have a more restricted meaning of 
the term, and, moreover, the only one that 
interests us from the point of view of the theory 
of laughter. 
What is here called wit is a gift 
for dashing off comic scenes in a few strokes ­
dashing them off, however, so subtly, delicately 
and rapidly, that all is over as soon as we begin 
to notice them. 
\Vho are the actors in these scenes ? 
With 
whom has the wit to deal ? 
First of all, with 
his interlocutors themselves, when his witticism 
is a direct retort to one of them. Often with 
an absent person whom he supposes to have 
spoken and to whom he is replying. Still 
oftener, with the whole world, - in the ordinary 
meaning of the term, - which he takes to task, 
twisting a current idea into a paradox, or mak­
ing use of a hackneyed phrase, or parodying 
some quotation or proverb. 
If we compare 
these scenes in miniature with one another, we 

108 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
find they are almost always variations of a 
comic theme with which we are well ac­
quainted, that of the " robber robbed." You 
take up a metaphor, a phrase, an argument, 
and turn it against the man who is, or might 
be, its author, so that he is made to say what 
he did not mean to say and lets himself be 
caught, to some extent, in the toils of lan­
guage. 
But the theme of the " robber robbed " 
is not the only possible one. \Ve have gone 
over many varieties of the comic, and there is 
not one of them that is incapable of being 
volatilised into a witticism. 
Every witty remark, then, lends itself to an 
analysis, whose chemical formula, so to say, we 
are now in a position to state. It runs as follows: 
Take the remark, first enlarge it into a regular 
scene, then find out the category of the comic to 
which the scene evidently belongs: by this means 
you reduce the witty remark to its simplest 
elements and obtain a full explanation of it. 
Let us apply this method to a classic ex­
ample. " Your chest hurts me " (j'ai mal a 
votre poitrine), wrote Mme. de Sevigne to her 
ailing daughter - clearly a witty saying. 
If 
our theory is correct, we need only lay stress 

II 
THE COMIC I N  \VORDS 
upon the saying, enlarge and magnify it, and 
we shall see it expand into a comic scene. 
Now, we find this very scene, ready made, in 
the Amour medicin of Moliere. The sham 
doctor, Clitandre, who has been summoned to 
attend Sganarelle's daughter, contents himself 
with feeling Sganarelle's own pulse, where­
upon, relying on the sympathy there must be 
between father and daughter, he unhesitatingly 
concludes: " Your daughter is very ill ! "  Here 
we have the transition from the witty to the 
comical. 
To complete our analysis, then, all 
\\'e have to do is to discover what there is 
comical in the idea of giving a diagnosis of the 
child after sounding the father or the mother. 
Well, we know that one essential form of comic 
fancy lies in picturing to ourselves a living 
person as a kind of jointed dancing-doll, and 
that frequently, with the object of inducing us 
to form this mental picture, we are shown two 
or more persons speaking and acting as though 
attached to one another by invisible strings. 
Is not this the idea here suggested when we 
are led to materialise, so to speak, the sym­
pathy we postulate as existing between father 
and daughter ? 

I 10 
LAU GHTER 
CHAP. 
We now see how it is that writers on wit 
have perforce confined themselves to comment­
ing on the extraordinary complexity of the 
things denoted by the term without ever suc­
ceeding in defining it. There are many ways 
of being witty, almost as many as there are of 
being the reverse. 
How can we detect what 
they have in common with one another, unless 
we first determine the general relationship be­
tween the witty and the comic ? 
Once, however, 
this relationship is cleared up, everything is plain 
sailing. 
\Ve then find the same connection be­
tween the comic and the witty as exists between 
a regular scene and the fugitive suggestion of a 
possible one. 
Hence, however numerous the 
forms assumed by the comic, wit will possess an 
equal number of corresponding varieties. So 
that the comic, in all its forms, is what should 
be defined first, by discovering (a task which is 
already quite difficult enough) the clue that 
leads from one form to the other. 
By that 
very operation wit will have been analysed, 
and will then appear as nothing more than the 
comic in a highly volatile state. 
To follow the 
opposite plan, however, and attempt directly to 
evolve a formula for wit, would be courting 

II 
THE COMIC IN \VO RDS 
I I I 
certain failure. 'iVhat should we think of a 
chemist who, having ever so many jars of a 
certain substance in his laboratory, would pre­
fer getting that substance from the atmosphere, 
in which merely infinitesimal traces of its vapour 
are to be found ? 
But this comparison between the witty and 
the comic is also indicative of the line we must 
take in studying the comic in words. 
On the 
one hand, indeed, we find there is no essential 
difference between a word that is comic and 
one that is witty ; on the other hand, the latter, 
although connected with a figure of speech, in­
variably calls up the image, dim or distinct, of 
a comic scene. 
This amounts to saying that 
the comic in speech should correspond, point 
by point, with the comic in actions and in 
situations, and is nothing more, if one may so 
express oneself, than their projection on to the 
plane of words. 
So let us return to the comic 
in actions and in situations, consider the chief 
methods by which it is obtained, and apply 
them to the choice of words and the building 
up of sentences. 
We shall thus have every 
possible form of the comic in words as well as 
every variety of wit. 

1 1 2  
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
1 .  Inadvertently to say or do what we have 
no intention of saying or doing, as a result of 
inelasticity or momentum, is, as we are aware, 
one of the main sources of the comic. Thus, 
absent-mindedness is essentially laughable, and 
so we laugh at anything rigid, ready-made, 
mechanical in gesture, attitude and even facial 
expression. Do we find this kind of rigidity in 
language also ? 
No doubt we do, since lan­
guage contains ready-made formulas and stereo­
typed phrases. 
The man who always expressed 
himself in such terms would invariably be comic. 
But if an isolated phrase is to be comic in itself, 
when once separated from the person who utters 
it, it must be something more than ready-made, 
it must bear within itself some sign which tells 
us, beyond the possibility of doubt, that it was 
uttered automatically. This can only happen 
when the phrase embodies some evident ab­
surdity, either a palpable error or a contradic­
tion in terms. 
Hence the following general 
rule : A comic meaniug is i1zvariably obtai1zed 
whm an absurd idea is .fitted into a well-estab­
lished phrase-form. 
" Ce sabre est le plus 
said M. Prudhomme. 
beau jour de rna vie," 
Translate the phrase 

II 
T H E  COMIC I N  WORDS 
I I 3 
into English or German and it becomes purely 
absurd, though it is comic enough in French. 
The reason is that " le plus beau jour de rna 
vie " is one of those ready-made phrase-endings 
to which a Frenchman's ear is accustomed. To 
make it comic, then, we need only clearly indi­
cate the automatism of the person who utters it. 
This is what we get when we introduce an 
absurdity into the phrase. 
Here the absurdity 
is by no means the source of the comic, it is 
only a very simple and effective means of mak­
ing it obvious. 
We have quoted only one saying of M. 
Prudhomme, but the majority of those attri­
buted to him belong to the same class. 
M. 
Prudhomme is a man of ready-made phrases. 
And as there are ready-made phrases in all 
languages, M. Prudhomme is always capable 
of being transposed, though seldom of being 
translated. 
At times the commonplace phrase, under 
cover of which the absurdity slips in, is not 
so readily noticeable. " I don't like working 
between meals," said a lazy lout. There would 
be nothing amusing in the saying did there 
not exist that salutary precept in the realm 

I 1 4  
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
of hygiene : " One should not eat between 
meals." 
Sometimes too the effect is a complicated 
one. Instead of one commonplace phrase-form, 
there are two or three which are dovetailed 
into each other. Take, for instance, the remark 
of one of the characters in a play by Labiche : 
" Only God has the right to kill His fellow­
creature." It would seem that advantage is here 
taken of two separate familiar sayings : " It is 
God who disposes of the lives of men," and, " It 
is criminal for a man to kill his fello\Y-crea'ture." 
But the two sayings are combined so as to de­
ceive the ear and leave the impression of being 
one of those hackneyed sentences that are ac­
cepted as a matter of course. Hence our atten­
tion nods, until we are suddenly aroused by the 
absurdity of the meaning. 
These examples suffice to show how one of 
the most important types of the comic can be 
projected - in a simplified form - on the plane 
of speech. \Ve will now proceed to a form 
which is not so general. 
2. " We laugh if our attention is diverted to 
the physical in a person when it is the moral 

II 
THE CO MIC I N  WORDS 
1 1 5 
that is in question," is a law we laid down in 
the first part of this work. 
Let us apply it to 
language. 
l\lost words might be said to have 
a physical and a moral meaning, according as 
they are interpreted literally or figuratively. 
Every word, indeed, begins by denoting a con­
crete object or a material action ; but by degrees 
the meaning of the word is refined into an 
abstract relation or a pure idea. 
If then the 
above law holds good here, it should be stated 
as follows : " A  comic efect is obtained whm­
ever we preteud to take literally an expression 
which was used jiguratz'vely " ;  or, " Once our 
attmtion is fixed o1z the material aspect of a 
metaphor the idea expressed becomes comic." 
In the phrase, " Tous les arts sont freres " 
(all the arts are brothers), the word " frere " 
(brother) is used metaphorically to indicate a 
more or less striking resemblance. The word 
is so often used in this way, that when we hear 
it we do not think of the concrete, the material 
connection implied in every relationship. We 
should notice it more if we were told that " Tous 
les arts sont cousins," for the word " cousin " is 
not so often employed in a figurative sense ; 
that is why the word here already assumes a 

I I 6 
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
slight tinge of the comic. But let us go further 
still, and suppose that our attention is attracted 
to the material side of the metaphor by the 
choice of a relationship which is incompatible 
with the gender of the two words composing 
the metaphorical expression, we get a laugh­
able result. Such is the well-known saying, 
also attributed to M. Prudhomme, " Tous les 
arts (masculine) sont sݯurs (feminine)." 
" He is always running after a joke," was 
said in Boufflers' presence regarding a very 
conceited fellow. 
Had Boufflers replied, " He 
won't catch it," that would have been the 
beginning of a witty saying, though nothing 
more than the beginning, for the word " catch " 
is interpreted figuratively almost as often as 
the word " run " ;  nor does it compel us more 
strongly than the latter to materialise the image 
of two runners, the one at the heels of the 
other. 
In order that the rejoinder may appear 
to be a thoroughly witty one, we must borrow 
from the language of sport an expression so 
vivid and concrete that we cannot refrain from 
witnessing the race in good earnest. 
This is 
what Boufflers does when he retorts, " I'll back 
the joke ! "  

II 
THE COMIC I N  \VOROS 
I I 7 
We said that wit often consists in extending 
the idea of one's interlocutor to the point of 
making him express the opposite of what he 
thinks and getting him, so to say, entrapt by 
his own words. 'vVe must now add that this 
trap is almost always some metaphor or com­
parison the concrete aspect of which is turned 
against him. You may remember the dialogue 
between a mother and her son in the Faux Boƺts­
hommes : 
" My dear boy, gambling on 'Change 
is very risky. 
You win one day and lose the 
next. "-" Well, then, I will gamble only every 
other day." 
In the same play too we find the 
following edifying conversation between two 
company-promoters : 
" Is this a very honour­
able thing we are doing ? 
These unfortunate 
shareholders, you see, we are taking the money 
out of their very pockets . . . .  "-" Well, out of 
what do you expect us to take it ? "  
An amusing result is likewise obtainable 
whenever a symbol or an emblem is expanded 
on its concrete side, and a pretence is made of 
retaining the same symbolical value for this 
expansion as for the emblem itself. 
In a very 
lively comedy we are introduced to a Monte 
Carlo official whose uniform is covered with 

I I8 
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
medals, although he has only received a single 
decoration. " You see, I staked my medal on 
a number at roulette," he said, " and as the 
number turned up, I was entitled to thirty-six 
times my stake." 
This reasoning is very 
similar to that offered by Giboyer in the 
Effrontes. 
Criticism is made of a bride of 
forty summers who is wearing orange-blossoms 
with her wedding costume : 
" \Vhy, she was 
entitled to oranges, let alone orange-blossoms ! "  
remarked Giboyer. 
But we should never cease were we to take 
one by one ail the laws we have stated, and try 
to prove them on what we have cailed the 
plane of language. 
\Ve had better confine 
ourselves to the three general propositions of 
the preceding section. 
\Ve have shown that 
" series of events " may become comic either 
by repetition, by z'1zversion or by reciprocal 
z'nterfermce. 
Now we shaii see that this is 
also the case with series of words. 
To take series of events and repeat them 
in another key or another environment, or to 
invert them whilst stiii leaving them a certain 
meaning, or mix them up so that their respective 
meanings jostle one another, is invariably 

II 
THE COMIC I N  vVORDS 
I I 9 
comic, as we have already said, for it is getting 
life to submit to be treated as a machine. 
But 
thought too is a living thing. 
And language, 
the translation of thought, should be just as 
living. 
We may thus surmise that a phrase is 
likely to become comic, if, though reversed, it 
still makes sense, or if it expresses equally well 
two quite independent sets of ideas, or, finally, 
if it has been obtained by transposing an idea 
into some key other than its own. Such, 
indeed, are the three fundamental laws of what 
might be called the comic transformation of 
smtences, as we shall show by a few examples. 
Let it first be said that these three laws are 
far from being of equal importance as regards 
the theory of the ludicrous. Inversion is the 
least interesting of the three. 
It must be easy 
of application, however, for it is noticeable that, 
no sooner do professional wits hear a sentence 
spoken than they experiment to see if a mean­
ing cannot be obtained by reversing it, by 
putting, for instance, the subject in place of the 
object, and the object in place of the subject. 
It is not unusual for this device to be employed 
for refuting an idea in more or less humorous 
terms. 
One of the characters in a comedy of 

1 20 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
Labiche shouts out to his neighbour on the 
floor above, who is in the habit of dirtying his 
balcony, " \Vhat do you mean by emptying 
your pipe on to my terrace? "  The neighbour 
retorts, " \Vhat do you mean by putting your 
terrace under my pipe ? " 
There is no necessity 
to dwell upon this kind of wit, instances of 
which could easily be multiplied. 
The reci'procal interference of two sets of 
ideas in the same sentence is an inexhaustible 
source of amusing varieties. 
There are many 
ways of bringing about this interference, I 
mean of bracketing in the same expression two 
independent meanings that apparently tally. 
The least reputable of these ways is the pun. 
In the pun, the same sentence appears to offer 
two independent meanings, but it is only an 
appearance ; in reality there are two different 
sentences made up of different words, but 
claiming to be one and the same because both 
have the same sound. \Ve pass from the pun, 
by imperceptible stages, to the true play upon 
words. 
Here there is really one and the same 
sentence through which two different sets of 
ideas are expressed, and we are confronted with 
only one series of words ; but advantage is 

II 
THE COMIC IN \VORDS 
1 2 1  
taken of the different meanings a word may 
have, especially when used figuratively instead 
of literally. 
So that in fact there is often only 
a slight difference between the play upon words 
on the one hand, and a poetic metaphor or an 
illuminating comparison on the other. Whereas 
an illuminating comparison and a striking 
image always seem to reveal the close harmony 
that exists between language and nature, re­
garded as two parallel forms of life, the play 
upon words makes us think somehow of a 
negligence on the part of language, which, for 
the time being, seems to have forgotten its real 
function and now claims to accommodate things 
to itself instead of accommodating itself to 
things. 
And so the play upon words always 
betrays a momentary lapse o.f attmtio11, in 
language, and it is precisely on that account 
that it is amusing. 
Inversion and reciprocal £nteiference, after 
all, are only a certain playfulness of the mind 
which ends at playing upon words.. 
The comic 
in trmzsposition is much more far-reaching. 
Indeed, transposition is to ordinary language 
what repetition is to comedy. 
We said that repetition is the favourite 

1 2 2  
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
method of classic comedy. 
It consists m so 
arranging events that a scene is reproduced 
either between the same characters under fresh 
circumstances or between fresh characters un­
der the same circumstances. Thus we have, re­
peated by lackeys in less dignified language, a 
scene already played by their masters. 
Now, 
imagine ideas expressed in suitable style and 
thus placed in the setting of their natural en­
vironment. 
If you think of some arrangement 
whereby they are transferred to fresh surround­
ings, while maintaining their mutual relations, 
or, in other words, if you can induce them to 
express themselves in an altogether different 
style and to transpose themselves into another 
key, - you will have language itself playing a 
comedy - language itself made comic. 
There 
will be no need, moreover, actually to set before 
us both expressions of the same ideas, the 
transposed expression and the natural one. 
For we are acquainted with the natural one ­
the one which we should have chosen instinc­
tively. 
So it will be enough if the effort of 
comic invention bears on the other, and on the 
other alone. 
No sooner is the second set 
before us than we spontaneously supply the 

II 
T H E  COMIC IN \VOROS 
1 2 3 
first. 
Hence the following general rule : A 
comic efect is always obtainable by transposing 
tlte natural expressioJt of an idea into another 
key. 
The means of transposition are so many 
and varied, language affords so rich a con­
tinuity of themes and the comic is here 
capable of passing through so great a number 
of stages, from the most insipid buffoonery 
up to the loftiest forms of humour and irony, 
that we shall forego the attempt to make out 
a complete list. 
Having stated the rule, we 
will simply, here and there, verity its main 
applications. 
In the first place, we may distinguish two 
keys at the extreme ends of the scale, the 
solemn and the familiar. 
The most obvious 
effects are obtained by merely transposing the 
one into the other, which thus provides us with 
two opposite currents of comic fancy. 
Transpose the solemn into the familiar and 
the result is parody. 
The effect of parody, 
thus defined, extends to instances in which the 
idea expressed in familiar terms is one that, if 
only in deference to custom, ought to be pitched 
in another key. 
Take as an example the 

1 24 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
following description of the dawn, quoted by 
Jean Paul Richter : " The sky was beginning 
to change from black to red, like a lobster 
being boiled." 
Note that the expression of 
old-world matters in terms of modern life 
produces the same effect, by reason of the 
halo of poetry which surrounds classical 
antiquity. 
It is doubtless the comic in parody that has 
suggested to some philosophers, and in particu­
lar to Alexander Bain, the idea of defining the 
comic, in general, as a species of degradation. 
They describe the laughable as causing some­
thing to appear mean that was formerly dignified. 
But if our analysis is correct, degradation is 
only one form of transposition, and trans­
position itself only one of the means of obtaia­
ing laughter. There is a host of others, and 
the source of laughter must be sought for 
much further back. 
l\Ioreover, without going 
so far, we see that while the transposition 
from solemn to trivial, from better to worse, 
is comic, the inverse transposition may be 
even more so. 
It is met with as often as the other, and, 
apparently, we may distinguish two main forms 

II 
THE COMIC IN WORDS 
1 2 5  
of it, according as it refers to the physical 
dimensions of an object or to its moral 
value. 
To speak of small things as though they 
were large is, in a general way, to exaggerate. 
Exaggeration is always comic when prolonged, 
and especially when systematic ; then, indeed, 
it appears as one method of transposition. 
It 
excites so much laughter that some writers 
have been 
led 
to define the comic as 
exaggeration, just as others have defined it 
as degradation. As a matter of fact, exaggera­
tion, like degradation, is only one form of one 
kind of the comic. Still, it is a very striking 
form. 
It has given birth to the mock-heroic 
poem, a rather old-fashioned device, I admit, 
though traces of it are still to be found in 
persons inclined to exaggerate methodically. 
It might often be said of braggadocio that it 
is its mock-heroic aspect which makes us 
laugh. 
Far more artificial, but also far more re­
fined, is the transposition upwards from below 
when applied to the moral value of things, not 
to their physical dimensions. To express m 
reputable language some disreputable idea, to 

1 26 
LAU GHTER 
CHAP. 
take some scandalous situation, some low-class 
calling or disgraceful behaviour, and describe 
them in terms of the utmost " respectabilz"ty," is 
generally comic. The English word is here 
purposely employed, as the practice itself is 
characteristically English.' Many instances of 
it may be found in Dickens and Thackeray, 
and in English literature generally. 
Let 
us remark, in passing, that the intensity of 
the effect does not here depend on its length. 
A word is sometimes sufficient, provided it 
gives us a glimpse of an entire system of 
transposition accepted in certain social circles 
and reveals, as it were, a moral organisation 
of immorality. 
Take the following remark 
made by an official to one of his subordinates 
in a novel of Gogol's, " Your peculations 
are too extensive for an official of your 
rank." 
Summing up the foregoing, then, there are 
two extreme terms of comparison, the very 
large and the very small, the best and the 
worst, between which transposition may be 
effected in one direction or the other. 
Now, 
if the interval be gradually narrowed, the 
contrast between the terms obtained will be 

II 
THE CO MIC IN \VOROS 
less and less violent, and the varieties of comic 
transposition more and more subtle. 
The most common of these contrasts is 
perhaps that between the real and the ideal, 
between what is and what oug1t to be. 
Here 
again transposition may take place in either 
direction. 
Sometimes we state what ought 
to be done, and pretend to believe that this 
is just what is actually being done ; then we 
have £rouy. 
Sometimes, on the contrary, we 
describe with scrupulous minuteness what is 
being done, and pretend to believe that this 
is just what ought to be done ; such is often 
the method of humour. 
Humour, thus defined, 
is the counterpart of irony. 
Both are forms of 
satire, but irony is oratorical in its nature, whilst 
humour partakes of the scientific. 
Irony is 
emphasised the higher we allow ourselves to 
be uplifted by the idea of the good that ought 
to be : thus irony may grow so hot within us 
that it becomes a kind of high-pressure 
eloquence. 
On the other hand, humour is 
the more emphasised the deeper we go down 
into an evil that actually is, in order to set 
down its details in the most cold-blooded in­
difference. Several authors, Jean Paul amongst 

1 28 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
them, have noticed that humour delights in 
concrete terms, technical details, definite facts. 
If our analysis is correct, this is not an 
accidental trait of humour, it is its very 
essence. A humourist is a moralist disguised 
as a scientist, something like an anatomist 
who practises dissection with the sole object 
of filling us with disgust ; so that humour, in 
the restricted sense in which we are here 
regarding the word, is really a transposition 
from the moral to the scientific. 
By still further curtailing the interval be­
tween the terms transposed, we may now 
obtain more and more specialised types of 
comic transpositions. 
Thus, certain profes­
sions have a technical vocabulary : what a 
wealth of laughable results have been obtained 
by transposing the ideas of everyday life into 
this professional jargon ! 
Equally comic is the 
extension of business phraseology to the social 
relations of life, - for instance, the phrase of 
one of Labiche's characters in allusion to an 
invitation he has received, " Your · kindness 
of the third ult.," thus transposing the com­
mercial formula, " Your favour of the third 
instant." 
This class of the comic, more-

II 
THE COMIC IN WORDS 
1 29 
over, may attain a special profundity of its 
own when it discloses not merely a profes­
sional practice, but a fault in character. 
Recall 
to mind the scenes in the Faux Bonshommes 
and the Famille Benoiton, where marriage is 
dealt with as a business affair, and matters of 
sentiment are set down in strictly commercial 
language. 
Here, however, we reach the point at 
which peculiarities of language really express 
peculiarities of character, a closer investigation 
of which we must hold over to the next chapter. 
Thus, as might have been expected and may 
be seen from the foregoing, the comic in words 
follows closely on the comic in situation and is 
finally merged, along with the latter, in the 
comic in character. 
Language only attains 
laughable results because it is a human product, 
modelled as exactly as possible on the forms 
of the human mind. We feel it contains some 
living element of our own life ; and if this life 
of language were complete and perfect, if there 
were nothing stereotype in it, if, in short, 
language were an absolutely unified organism 
incapable of being split up into independent 
organisms, it would evade the comic as would 

1 30 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
a soul whose life was one harmonious whole, 
unruffled as the calm surface of a peaceful lake. 
There is no pool, however, which has not some 
dead leaves floating on its surface, no human 
soul upon which there do not settle habits that 
make it rigid against itself by making it rigid 
against others, no language, in short, so subtle 
and instinct with life, so fully alert in each of 
its parts as to eliminate the ready-made and 
oppose the mechanical operations of inversion, 
transposition, etc., which one would fain per­
form upon it as on some lifeless thing. 
The 
rigid, the ready-made, the mechanical, in con­
trast with the supple, the ever-changing and 
the living, absentmindedness in contrast with 
attention, in a word, automatism in contrast 
with free activity, such are the defects that 
laughter singles out and would fain correct. 
We appealed to this idea to give us light at 
the outset, when starting upon the analysis of 
the ludicrous. We have seen it shining at every 
decisive turning in our road. With its help, 
we shall now enter upon a more important 
investigation, one that will, we hope, be more 
instructive. 
We purpose, in short, studying 
comic characters, or rather determining the 

n 
T H E  COMIC I N  \VORDS 
I J I  
essential conditions of comedy in character, 
while endeavouring to bring it about that this 
study may contribute to a better understand­
ing of the real nature of art and the general 
relation between art and life. 

CHAPTER III 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 
I 
WE have followed the comic along many of its 
winding channels in an endeavour to discover 
how it percolates into a form, an attitude, or a 
gesture ; a situation, an action, or an expression. 
The analysis of comic characters has now 
brought us to the most important part of our 
task. 
It would also be the most difficult, had 
we yielded to the temptation of defining the 
laughable by a few striking - and consequently 
obvious - examples ; for then, in proportion as 
we advanced towards the loftiest manifestations 
of the comic, we should have found the facts 
slipping between the over-wide meshes of the 
definition intended to retain them. 
But, as a 
matter of fact, we have followed the opposite 
plan, by throwing light on the subject from 
IJ2 

CH. Ill T H E  COMIC I N  CHARACTER 1 33 
above. Convinced that laughter has a social 
meaning and import, that the comic expresses, 
above all else, a special lack of adaptability 
to 
society, and that, in 
short, 
there is 
nothing comic apart from man, we have 
made man and character generally our main 
objective. 
Our chief difficulty, therefore, has 
lain in explaining how we come to laugh at 
anything else than character, and by what 
subtle processes of fertilisation, combination, or 
amalgamation the comic can worm its way into 
a mere movement, an impersonal situation, or 
an independent phrase. This is what we have 
done so far. \Ve started with the pure metal, 
and all our endeavours have been directed 
solely towards reconstructing the ore. 
It is the 
metal itself we are now about to study. Nothing 
could be easier, for this time we have a simple 
element to deal with. 
Let us examine it 
closely and see how it reacts upon everything 
else. 
There are moods, we said, which move us 
as soon as we perceive them, joys and sorrows 
with which we sympathise, passions and vices 
which call forth painful astonishment, terror, or 
pity, in the beholder ; in short, sentiments that 

1 34 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
are prolonged in sentimental overtones from 
mind to mind. All this concerns the essentials 
of life. 
All this is serious, at times even 
tragic. 
Comedy can only begin at the point 
where our neighbour's personality ceases to 
affect us. 
It begins, in fact, with what might 
be called a growz"ng callousness to social life. 
Any individual is comic who automatically goes 
his own way without troubling himself about 
getting in to touch with the rest of his fellow­
beings. 
It is the part of laughter to reprove 
his absentmindedness and wake him out of his 
dream. 
If it is permissible to compare impor­
tant things with trivial ones, we would call to 
mind what happens when a youth enters one of 
our military academies. 
After getting through 
the dreaded ordeal of the examination, he finds 
he has other ordeals to face, which his seniors 
have arranged with the object of fitting him for 
the new life he is entering upon, or, as they 
say, of " breaking him into harness." 
Every 
small society that forms within the larger is 
thus impelled, by a vague kind of instinct, to 
devise some method of discipline or " breaking 
in," so as to deal with the rigidity of habits that 
have been formed elsewhere and have now 

m THE COMIC IN CHARACTE R 
1 35 
to undergo a partial modification. 
Society, 
properly so called, proceeds in exactly the same 
way. 
Each member must be ever attentive to 
his social surroundings ; he must model himself 
on his environment ; in short, he must avoid 
shutting himself up in his own peculiar character 
as a philosopher in his ivory tower. Therefore 
society holds suspended over each individual 
member, if not the threat of correction, at all 
events the prospect of a snubbing, which, 
although it is slight, is none the less dreaded. 
Such must be the function of laughter. Always 
rather humiliating for the one against whom it 
is directed, laughter is really and truly a kind 
of social " ragging." 
Hence the equivocal nature of the comic. 
It belongs neither altogether to art nor alto­
gether to life. 
On the one hand, characters in 
real life would never make us laugh were we 
not capable of watching their vagaries in the 
same way as we look down at a play from our 
seat in a box ; they are only comic in our eyes 
because they perform a kind of comedy before 
us. 
But, on the other hand, the pleasure 
caused by laughter, even on the stage, is not an 
unadulterated enjoyment ;  it is not a pleasure 

1 36 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
that is exclusively esthetic or altogether dis­
interested. 
It always implies a secret or 
unconscious intent, if not of each one of us, at 
all events of society as a whole. 
In laughter 
we always find an unavowed intention to 
humiliate, and consequently to correct our 
neighbour, if not in his will, at least in his 
deed. This is the reason a comedy is far more 
like real life than a drama is. 
The more 
sublime the drama, the more profound the 
analysis to which the poet has had to subject 
the raw materials of daily life in order to 
obtain the tragic element in its unadulterated 
form. 
On the contrary, it is only in its lower 
aspects, in light comedy and farce, that comedy 
is in striking contrast to reality : the higher it 
rises, the more it approximates to life ; in fact, 
there are scenes in real life so closely bordering 
on high-class comedy that the stage might 
adopt them without changing a single word. 
Hence it follows that the elements of comic 
character on the stage and in actual life will be 
the same. 
\Vhat are these elements ? 
We 
shall find no difficulty in deducing them. 
It has often been said that it is the trijliJZg 
faults of our fellow-men that make us laugh. 

m THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 37 
Evidently there is a considerable amount of 
truth in this opinion ; still, it cannot be regarded 
as altogether correct. 
First, as regards faults, 
it is no easy matter to draw the line between 
the trifling and the serious ; maybe it is not 
because a fault is trifling, that it makes us laugh, 
but rather because it makes us laugh that we 
regard it as trifling; for there is nothing dis­
arms us like laughter. 
But we may go even far­
ther, and maintain that there are faults at which 
we laugh, even though fully aware that they 
are serious, - Harpagon's avarice, for instance. 
And then, we may as well confess - though 
somewhat reluctantly - that we laugh not 
only at the faults of our fellow-men, but also, 
at times, at their good qualities. \Ve laugh at 
Alceste. 
The objection may be urged that it 
is not the earnestness of Alceste that is ludi­
crous, but rather the special aspect which 
earnestness assumes in his case ; and, in short, 
a certain eccentricity that mars it in our eyes. 
Agreed ; but it is none the less true that this 
eccentricity in Alceste, at which we laugh, 
makes his earnestness laughable, and that is the 
main point. 
So we may conclude that the 
comic is not always an indication of a fault, 

1 38 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
in the moral meaning of the word, and if 
critics insist on seeing a fault, even though a 
trifling one, in the ludicrous, they must point 
out what it is here that exactly distinguishes 
the trifling from the serious. 
The truth is, the comic character may, 
strictly speaking, be quite in accord with stern 
morality. 
All it has to do is to bring itself 
into accord with society. 
The character of 
Alceste is that of a thoroughly honest man. 
But then he is unsociable, and, on that very 
account, ludicrous. A flexible vice may not 
be so easy to ridicule as a rigid virtue. 
It is 
rigidity that society eyes with suspicion. Con­
sequently, it is the rigidity of Alceste that 
makes us laugh, though here rigidity stands for 
honesty. 
The man who 'vithdraws into him­
self is liable to ridicule, because the comic is 
largely made up of this very withdra"·al. This 
accounts for the comic being so frequently 
dependent on the manners or ideas, or, to put 
it bluntly, on the prejudices, of a society. 
It must be acknowledged, however, to the 
credit of mankind, that there is no essential 
difference between the social ideal and the 
moral. 
\Ve may therefore admit, as a general 

m 
THE COMIC I N  CHARACTER 1 39 
rule, that it is the faults of others that make us 
laugh, provided we add that they make us 
laugh by reason of their tmsocz"ability rather 
than of their immoralz'ty. 
\Vhat, then, are the 
faults capable of becoming ludicrous, and 
in what circumstances do we regard them as 
being too serious to be laughed at ? 
\Ve have already given an implicit answer 
to this question. 
The comic, we said, appeals 
to the intelligence pure and simple; laughter is 
incompatible with emotion. 
Depict some fault, 
however trifling, in such a way as to arouse 
sympathy, fear, or pity ; the mischief is done,, it 
is impossible for us to laugh. 
On the other 
hand, take a downright vice, - even one that 
is, generally speaking, of an odious nature, 
- you may make it ludicrous if, by some 
suitable contrivance, you arrange so that it 
leaves our emotions unaffected. 
Not that the 
vice must then be ludicrous, but it may, from 
that time forth, become so. It must not arouse 
our feelings ; that is the sole condition really 
necessary, though assuredly it is not sufficient. 
But, then, how will the comic poet set to 
\vork to prevent our feelings being moved ? 
The question is an embarrassing one. 
To 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
clear it up thoroughly, we should have to enter 
upon a rather novel line of investigation, to 
analyse the artificial sympathy which we bring 
with us to the theatre, and determine upon the 
circumstances in which we accept and those in 
which we refuse to share imaginary joys and 
sorrows. 
There is an art of lulling sensibility 
to sleep and providing it with dreams, as 
happens in the case of a mesmerised person. 
And there is also an art of throwing a wet 
blanket upon sympathy at the very moment it 
might arise, the result being that the situation, 
though a serious one, is not taken seriously. 
This latter art would appear to be governed by 
two methods, which are applied more or less 
unconsciously by the comic poet. 
The first 
consists in isolatiJZg, within the soul of the 
character, the feeling attributed to him, and 
making it a parasitic organism, so to speak, 
endowed with an independent existence. 
As a 
general rule, an intense feeling successively 
encroaches upon all other mental states, and 
colours them with its own peculiar hue ; if, 
then, we are made to witness this gradual im­
pregnation, we finally become impregnated 
ourselves with a corresponding emotion. To 

m THE COMIC IN CHA RACTER 1 4 1  
employ a different image, an emotion may be 
said to be dramatic and contagious when all 
the harmonics in it are heard along with the 
fundamental note. 
It is because the actor 
thus thrills throughout his whole being that the 
spectators themselves feel the thrill. 
On the 
contrary, in the case of emotion that leaves us 
indifferent, and that is about to become comic, 
there is always present a certain rigidity which 
prevents it from establishing a connection with 
the rest of the soul in which it has taken up its 
abode. 
This rigidity may be manifested, when 
the time comes, by puppet-like movements, and 
then it will provoke laughter ; but, before that, 
it had already alienated our sympathy : how can 
we put ourselves in tune with a soul which is 
not in tune with itself ? 
In Moliere's L'Avare 
we have a scene bordering upon drama. It is the 
one in which the borrower and the usurer, who 
have never seen each other, meet face to face 
and find that they are son and father. 
Here 
we should be in the thick of a drama, if only 
greed and fatherly affection, conflicting with 
each other in the soul of H arpagon, had 
effected a more or less original combination. 
But such is not the case. 
No sooner has the 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
interview come to an end than the father for­
gets everything. 
On meeting his son again he 
barely alludes to the scene, serious though it 
has been : " You, my son, whom I am good 
enough to forgive your recent escapade, etc." 
Greed has thus passed close to all other feelings 
absentmindedly, without either touching them or 
being touched. 
Although it has taken up its 
abode in the soul and become master of the 
house, none the less it remains a stranger. Far 
different would be avarice of a tragic sort. We 
should find it attracting and absorbing, trans­
forming and assimilating the divers energies of 
the man : feelings and affections, likes and dis­
likes, vices and virtues, would all become some­
thing into which avarice would breathe a new 
kind of life. 
Such seems to be the first essen­
tial difference between high-class comedy and 
drama. 
There is a second, which is far more obvious 
and arises out of the first. \Vhen a mental 
state is depicted to us with the object of mak­
ing it dramatic, or even merely of inducing 
us to take it seriously, it gradually crystallises 
into actions which provide the real measure of 
its greatness. 
Thus, the miser orders his 

m 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 43 
whole life with a view to acquiring wealth, 
and the pious hypocrite, though pretending to 
have his eyes fixed upon heaven, steers most 
skilfully his course here below. 
Most cer­
tainly, comedy does not shut out calculations of 
this kind ; we need only take as an example 
the very machinations of Tartuffe. 
But that 
is what comedy has in common with drama ; 
and in order to keep distinct from it, to prevent 
our taking a serious action seriously, in short, 
in order to prepare us for laughter, comedy 
utilises a method, the formula of which may be 
given as follows : instead of concentrating our 
attenti01z on act£ons, comedy directs it rather to 
gestures. 
By gestures we here mean the at­
titudes, the movements and even the language 
by which a mental state expresses itself out­
wardly without any aim or profit, from no other 
cause than a kind of inner itching. 
Gesture, 
thus defined, is profoundly different from action. 
Action is intentional or, at any rate, con­
scious ; gesture slips out unawares, it is auto­
matic. 
In action, the entire person is engaged ; 
in gesture, an isolated part of the person is 
expressed, unknown to, or at least apart from, 
the whole of the personality. 
Lastly - and 

144 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
here is the essential point - action is m exact 
proportion to the feeling that inspires it : the 
one gradually passes into the other, so that we 
may allow our sympathy or our aversion to 
glide along the line running from feeling 
to action and become increasingly interested. 
About gesture, however, there is something 
explosive, which awakes our sensibility when 
on the point of being lulled to sleep and, by 
thus rousing us up, prevents our taking matters 
seriously. Thus, as soon as our attention is 
fixed on gesture and not on action, we are in 
the realm of comedy. 
Did we merely take his 
actions into account, Tartuffe would belong to 
drama : it is only when we take his gestures 
into consideration that we find him comic. You 
may remember how he comes on to the stage 
with the words : " Laurent, lock up my hair­
shirt and my scourge." 
He knows Dorine is 
listening to him, but doubtless he would say 
the same if she were not there. 
He enters so 
thoroughly into the role of a hypocrite that he 
plays it almost sincerely. 
I n  this way, and 
this way only, can he become comic. Were it 
not for this material sincerity, were it not for 
the language and attitudes that his long-standing 

m THE CO MIC I N  CHARACTER 1 45 
experience as a hypocrite has transformed into 
natural gestures, Tartuffe would be simply odious, 
because we should only think of what is meant 
and willed in his conduct. 
And so we see why 
action is essential in drama, but only accessory 
in comedy. 
In a comedy, we feel any other 
situation might equally well have been chosen 
for the purpose of introducing the character ; 
he would still have been the same man though 
the situation were different. 
Now, we do 
not get this impression in a drama. 
Here 
characters and situations are welded together ; 
or rather, events form part and parcel with the 
persons, so that were the drama to tell us a 
different story, even though the actors kept 
the same names, \Ve should in reality be dealing 
with other persons. 
To sum up, whether a character is good or 
bad is of little moment ; granted he is un­
sociable, he is capable of becoming comic. 
We now see that the seriousness of the case is 
of no importance either : whether serious or 
trifling, it is still capable of making us laugh, 
provided that care be taken not to arouse our 
emotions. 
Unsociability in the performer and 
insensibility in the spectator- such, in a word, 

LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
are the two essential conditions. 
There is a 
third, implicit in the other two, which so far it 
has been the aim of our analysis to bring out. 
This third condition is automatism. \Ve 
have pointed it out from the outset of this 
work, continually drawing attention to the 
following point : what is essentially laughable 
is what is done automatically. 
In a vice, even 
in a virtue, the comic is that element by which 
the person unwittingly betrays himself - the 
involuntary gesture or the unconscious remark. 
Absentmindedness is always comical. Indeed, 
the deeper the absentmindedness the higher 
the comedy. 
Systematic absentmindedness, 
like that of Don Quixote, is the most comical 
thing imaginable : it is the comic itself, drawn 
as nearly as possible from its very source. 
Take any other comic character : however 
unconscious he may be of what he says or 
does, he cannot be comical unless there be 
some aspect of his person of which he is un­
aware, one side of his nature which he over­
looks ; on that account alone does he make us 
laugh.1 
Profoundly comic sayings are those 
1 When the humourist laughs at himself, he is really acting a 
double part ; the self who laughs is indeed conscious, but not the 
self who is laughed at. 

m THE COl\1I C  I N  CHARACTER 1 4 7  
artless ones in which some vice reveals itself 
in all its nakedness : how could it thus expose 
itself were it capable of seeing itself as it is ? 
It is not uncommon for a comic character to 
condemn in general terms a certain line of 
conduct and immediately afterwards afford an 
example of it himself : for instance, M. Jour­
dain's teacher of philosophy flying into a pas­
sion after inveighing against anger ; Vadius 
taking a poem from his pocket after heaping 
ridicule on readers of poetry, etc. 
\Vhat is the 
object of such contradictions except to help us 
to put our finger on the obliviousness of the 
characters to their own actions ? 
Inattention 
to self, and consequently to others, is what we 
invariably find. And if we look at the matter 
closely, we see that inattention is here equiva­
lent to what we have called unsociability. 
The 
chief cause of rigidity is the neglect to look 
around - and more especially within oneself : 
how can a man fashion his personality after that 
of another if he does not first study others as 
well as himself? Rigidity, automatism, absent­
mindedness and unsociability are all inextricably 
entwined ; and all serve as ingredients to the 
making up of the comic in character. 

LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
In a word, if we leave on one side, when 
dealing with human personality, that portion 
which interests our sensibility or appeals to 
our feeling, all the rest is capable of becoming 
comic, and the comic will be proportioned to 
the rigidity. 
We formulated this idea at the 
outset of this work. 
We have verified it in its 
main results, and have just applied it to the 
definition of comedy. 
Now we must get to 
closer quarters, and show how it enables us to 
delimitate the exact position comedy occupies 
among all the other arts. 
In one sense it might be said that all char­
acter is comic, provided we mean by character 
the ready-made element in our personality, that 
mechanical element which resembles a piece of 
clockwork wound up once for all and capable 
of working automatically. 
It is, if you will, 
that which causes us to imitate ourselves. 
And it is also, for that very reason, that which 
enables others to imitate us. 
Every comic 
character is a type. 
Inversely, every resem­
blance to a type has something comic in it. 
Though we may long have associated with an 
individual without discovering anything about 
him to laugh at, still, if advantage is taken of 

m T H E  COMIC I N  CHA RACTER 1 49 
some accidental analogy to dub him with the 
name of a famous hero of romance or drama, 
he will in our eyes border upon the ridiculous, 
if only for a moment. And yet this hero of 
romance may not be a comic character at all. 
But then ݭt is comic to be like him. 
It is 
comic to wander out of one's own self. 
It is 
comic to fall into a ready-made category. And 
what is most comic of all is to become a cate­
gory oneself into which others will fall, as into 
a ready-made frame ; it is to crystallise into a 
stock character. 
Thus, to depict characters, that is to say, 
general types, is the object of high-class comedy. 
This has often been said. 
But it is as well to 
repeat it, since there could be no better 
definition of comedy. Not only are we entitled 
to say that comedy gives us general types, but 
we might add that it is the only one of all the 
arts that aims at the general ; so that once this 
objective has been attributed to it, we have said 
all that it is and all that the rest cannot be. 
To prove that such is really the essence of 
comedy, and that it is in this respect opposed 
to tragedy, drama and the other forms of art, 
we should begin by defining art in its higher 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
forms : then, gradually coming down to comic 
poetry, we should find that this latter is situated 
on the border-line between art and life, and 
that, by the generality of its subject-matter it 
contrasts with the rest of the arts. 
\Ve cannot 
here plunge into so vast a subject of investiga­
tion ; but we needs must sketch its main out­
lines, lest we overlook what, to our mind, is 
essential on the comic stage. 
\Vhat is the object of art ? 
Could reality 
come into direct contact with sense and 
consciousness, could "'e enter into immediate 
communion with things and with ourselves, 
probably art would be useless, or rather we 
should all be artists, for then our soul would 
continually vibrate in perfect accord with 
nature. 
Our eyes, aided by memory, would 
carve out in space and fix in time the most 
inimitable of pictures. 
Hewn in the living 
marble of the human form, fragments of statues, 
beautiful as the relics of antique statuary, would 
strike the passing glance. Deep in our souls 
we should hear the strains of our inner life's 
unbroken melody, - a music that is ofttimes 
gay, but more frequently plaintive and always 

m 
T H E  CO MIC I N  C H A RACTER 1 5 1  
original. 
All this is around and within us, and 
yet no whit of it do we distinctly perceive. 
Between nature and ourselves, nay, between 
ourselves and our own consciousness a veil is 
interposed : a veil that is dense and opaque for 
the common herd,-thin, almost transparent, for 
the artist and the poet. 
\Vhat fairy wove that 
veil ? 
Was it done in malice or in friendliness ? 
vVe had to live, and life demands that we 
grasp things in their relations to our own needs. 
Life is action. 
Life implies the acceptance 
only of the utilitarian side of things in order 
to respond to them by appropriate reactions : 
all other impressions must be dimmed or else 
reach us vague and blurred. 
I look and I 
think I see, I listen and I think I hear, I 
examine myself and I think I am reading the 
very depths of my heart. 
But what I see and 
hear of the outer world is purely and simply a 
selection made by my senses to serve as a light 
to my conduct ; what I know of myself is what 
comes to the surface, what participates in my 
actions. 
My senses and my consciousness, 
therefore, give me no more than a practical 
simplification of reality. 
In the vision they 
furnish me of myself and of things, the differ-

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
ences that are useless to man are obliterated, 
the resemblances that are useful to him are 
emphasised ; ways are traced out for me in 
advance along which my activity is to travel. 
These ways are the ways which all mankind 
has trod before me. Things have been classi­
fied with a view to the use I can derive from 
them. And it is this classification I perceive, 
far more clearly than the colour and the shape 
of things. 
Doubtless man is vastly superior 
to the lower animals in this respect. 
It is not 
vei}' likely that the eye of a wolf makes any 
distinction between a kid and a lamb ; both 
appear to the wolf as the same identical quarry, 
alike easy to pounce upon, alike good to devour. 
\Ve, for our part, make a distinction between 
a goat and a sheep ; but can we tell one goat 
from another, one sheep from another ? 
The 
z"ndivzduality of things or of beings escapes us, 
unless it is materially to our advantage to per· 
ceive it. 
Even when we do take note of it ­
as when we distinguish one man from another 
- it is not the individuality itself that the eye 
grasps, i.e. an entirely original harmony of 
forms and colours, but only one or two features 
that will make practical recognition easier. 

m 
T H E  COMIC IN CHA RACTER 1 53 
In short, we do not see the actual things 
themselves ; in most cases we confine ourselves 
to reading the labels affixed to them. This 
tendency, the result of need, has become even 
more pronounced under the influence of speech ; 
for words - with the exception of proper nouns 
- all denote genera. The word, which only 
takes note of the most ordinary function and 
commonplace aspect of the thing, intervenes 
between it and ourselves, and would conceal its 
form from our eyes, were that form not already 
masked beneath the necessities that brought 
the word into existence. 
Not only external 
objects, but even our own mental states, are 
screened from us in their inmost, their personal 
aspect, in the original life they possess. \Vhen 
we feel love or hatred, when we are gay or 
sad, is it really the feeling itself that reaches 
our consciousness with those innumerable fleet­
ing shades of meaning and deep resounding 
echoes that make it something altogether our 
own ? 
We should all, were it so, be novelists 
or poets or mus1c1ans. 
Mostly, however, we 
perceive nothing but the outward display of 
our mental state. 
Vve catch only the imper­
sonal aspect of our feelings, that aspect which 

1 54 
LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
speech has set down once for all because it is 
almost the same, in the same conditions, for all 
men. Thus, even in our own individual, in­
divid1.1ality escapes our ken. \Ve move amidst 
generalities and symbols, as within a tilt-yard 
in which our force is effectively pitted against 
other forces ; and fascinated by action, tempted 
by it, for our own good, on to the field it has 
selected, we live in a zone midway between 
things and ourselves, externally to things, 
externally also to ourselves. 
From time to 
time, however, in a fit of absentmindedness, 
nature raises up souls that are more detached 
from life. 
Not with that intentional, logical, 
systematical detachment -· the result of reflec­
tion and philosophy - but rather with a natural 
detachment, one innate in the structure of sense 
or consciousness, which at once reveals itself by 
a virginal manner, so to speak, of seeing, hear­
ing, or thinking. 
\Vere this detachment com­
plete, did the soul no longer cleave to action 
by any of its perceptions, it would be the 
soul of an artist such as the world has never 
yet seen. 
It would excel alike in every art at 
the same time ; or rather, it would fuse them 
all into one. 
It would perceive all things 

m 
T H E  CO MIC I N  CHARACTER 1 5 5 
in their native purity : the forms, colours, 
sounds of the physical world as well as the 
subtlest movements of the inner life. 
But this 
is asking too much of nature. 
Even for such 
of us as she has made artists, it is by accident, 
and on one side only, that she has lifted the 
veil. 
In one direction only has she forgotten 
to rivet the perception to the need. And since 
each direction corresponds to what we call a 
seJtse
- through one of his senses, and through 
that sense alone, is the artist usually wedded to 
art. 
Hence, originally, the diversity of arts. 
Hence also the speciality of predispositions. 
This one applies himself to colours and forms, 
and since he loves colour for colour and form 
for form, since he perceives them for their sake 
and not for his own, it is the inner life of things 
that he sees appearing through their forms and 
colours. 
Little by little he insinuates it into 
our own perception, baffled though we may be 
at the outset. For a few moments at least, he 
diverts us from the prejudices of form and 
colour that come between ourselves and reality. 
And thus he realises the loftiest ambition of art, 
which here consists in revealing to us nature. 
Others, again, retire within themselves. Be-

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
neath the thousand rudimentary actions which 
are the outward and visible signs of an emo­
tion, behind the commonplace, conventional 
expression that both reveals and conceals 
an individual mental state, it is the emotion, 
the original mood, to which they attain in its 
undefiled essence. And then, to induce us to 
make the same effort ourselves, they contrive 
to make us see something of what they have 
seen : by rhythmical arrangement of words, 
which thus become organised and animated 
with a life of their own, they tell us - or rather 
suggest - things that speech was not calculated 
to express. 
Others delve yet deeper still. 
Beneath these joys and sorrows which can, at 
a pinch, be translated into language, they grasp 
something that has nothing in common with 
language, certain rhythms of life and breath 
that are closer to man than his inmost feelings, 
being the living law - varying with each indi­
vidual - of his enthusiasm and despair, his 
hopes and regrets. 
By setting free and em­
phasising this music, they force it upon our 
attention ; they compel us, willy-nilly, to fall in 
with it, like passers-by who join in a dance. 
And thus they impel us to set in motion, in the 

m 
THE COl\liC I N  CHARACTE R 1 5 7  
depths of our being, some secret chord which 
was only waiting to thrill. 
So art, whether it 
be painting or sculpture, poetry or music, has 
no other object than to brush aside the utilitarian 
symbols, the conventional and socially accepted 
generalities, in short, everything that veils 
reality from us, in order to bring us face to face 
with reality itself. It is from a misunderstanding 
on this point that the dispute between realism 
and idealism in art has risen. 
Art is cer­
tainly only a more direct vision of reality. 
But 
this purity of perception implies a break with 
utilitarian convention, an innate and specially 
localised disinterestedness of sense or conscious­
ness, in short, a certain immateriality of life, 
which is what has always been called idealism. 
So that we might say, without in any way 
playing upon the meaning of the words, that 
realism is in the work when idealism is in the 
soul, and that it is only through ideality that 
we can resume contact with reality. 
Dramatic art forms no exception to this law. 
\\'hat drama goes forth to discover and brings 
to light, is a deep-seated reality that is veiled 
from us, often in our own interests, by the 
necessities of life. 
vVhat is this reality ? 
What 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
are these necessities ? Poetry always expresses 
inward states. 
But amongst these states some 
arise mainly from contact with our fellow-men. 
They are the most intense as well as the most 
violent. As contrary electricities attract each 
other and accumulate between the two plates 
of the condenser from which the spark will 
presently flash, so, by simply bringing people 
together, strong attractions and repulsions take 
place followed by an utter loss of balance, in a 
word, by that electrification of the soul known 
as passion. \Vere man to give way to the 
imFulse of his natural feelings, were there 
neither social nor moral law, these outbursts of 
violent feeling would be the ordinary rule in 
life. 
But utility demands that these outbursts 
should be foreseen and averted. 
1\Ian must 
live in society, and consequently submit to 
rules. 
And what interest advises, reason 
commands : duty calls, and we have to obey 
the summons. Under this dual · influence has 
perforce been formed an outward layer of feel­
ings and ideas which make for permanence, aim 
at becoming common to all men, and cover, 
when they are not strong enough to extinguish 
it, the inner fire of individual passions. The 

m THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 59 
slow progress of mankind in the direction of 
an increasingly peaceful social life has gradually 
consolidated this layer, just as the life of our 
planet itself has been one long effort to cover 
over with a cool and solid crust the fiery mass 
of seething metals. 
But volcanic eruptions 
occur. And if the earth were a living being, 
as mythology has feigned, most likely when in 
repose it would take delight in dreaming of 
these sudden explosions whereby it suddenly 
resumes possession oݬ its innermost nature. 
Such is just the kind of pleasure that is 
provided for us by drama. 
Beneath the quiet 
humdrum life that reason and society have 
fashioned for us, it stirs something within us 
which luckily does not explode, but which it 
makes us feel in its inner tension. 
It offers 
nature her revenge upon society. 
Sometimes 
it makes straight for the goal, summoning up 
to the surface, from the depths below, passions 
that produce a general upheaval. 
Sometimes 
it follows a flank movement, as is often the case 
in contemporary drama ; with a skill that is 
frequently sophistical it shows up the incon­
sistencies of society ; it exaggerates the shams 
and shibboleths of the social law, and so 

1 60 
LAUGHTE R  
CHAP. 
indirectly, by merely dissolving or corroding 
the outer crust, it again brings us back to the 
mner core. 
But, in both cases, whether it 
weakens society or strengthens nature, it has 
the same end in view : that of laying bare a 
secret portion of ourselves, what might be 
called the tragic element in our character. 
This is indeed the impression we get after 
seeing a stirring drama. 
\Vhat has just in­
terested us is not so much what we have been 
told about others as the glimpse we have 
caught of ourselves - a whole host of ghostly 
feelings, emotions and events that would fain 
have come into real existence, but, fortunately 
for us, did not. 
It also seems as if an appeal 
had been made within us to certain ancestral 
memories belonging to a far-away past ­
memories so deep-seated and so foreign to our 
present life that this latter, for a moment, 
seems something unreal and conventional, for 
which we shall have to serve a fresh appren­
ticeship. So it is indeed a deeper reality 
that drama draws up from beneath our 
superficial and utilitarian attainments ; and 
this art has the same end in view as all 
the others. 

m T H E  COMIC I N  CHARACTER 161 
Hence it follows that art always aims at 
what is £ndividual. 
What the artist fixes on 
his canvas is something he has seen at a 
certain spot, on a certain day, at a certain 
hour, with a colouring that will never be seen 
again. \Vhat the poet sings of is a certain 
mood which was his, and his alone, and which 
will never return. \Vhat the dramatist unfolds 
before us is the life-history of a soul, a living 
tissue of feelings and events - something, in 
short, which has once happened and can never 
be repeated. 
\Ve may, indeed, give general 
names to these feelings, but they cannot be 
the same thing in another soul. They are 
£ndividualz'sed. 
Thereby, and thereby only, do 
they belong to art ; for generalities, symbols, 
or even types form the current coin of our 
daily perception. 
How, then, does a mis­
understanding on this point arise ? 
The reason lies in the fact that two very 
different things have been mistaken for each 
other : the generality of things and that of 
the opinions we come to regarding them. 
Because a feeling is generally recognised as 
true, it does not follow that it is a general 
feeling. 
Nothing could be more unique than 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
the character of Hamlet. 
Though he may 
resemble other men in some respects, it is 
clearly not on that account that he interests us 
most. 
But he is universally accepted and 
regarded as a living character. 
In this sense 
only is he universally true. The same holds 
good of all the other products of art. 
Each of 
them is unique, and yet, if it bear the stamp of 
genius, it will come to be accepted by every­
body. Why will it be accepted ? 
And if it is 
unique of its kind, by what sign do we know it 
to be genuine ? 
Evidently, by the very effort 
it forces us to make against our predispositions 
in order to see sincerely. 
Sincerity is con­
tagious. 
What the artist has seen we shall 
probably never see again, or at least never see 
in exactly the same way ; but if he has actually 
seen it, the attempt he has made to lift the 
veil compels our imitation. His work is an 
example which we take as a lesson. 
And 
the efficacy of the lesson is the exact standard 
of the genuineness of the work. Consequently, 
truth bears within itself a power of conviction, 
nay, of conversion, which is the sign that 
enables us to recognise it. 
The greater the 
work and the more profound the dimly appre-

m 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 163 
hended truth, the longer may the effect be in 
coming ; but, on the other hand, the more 
universal will that effect tend to become. 
So 
the universality here lies in the effect produced, 
and not in the cause. 
Altogether different is the object of comedy. 
Here it is in the work itself that the generality 
lies. 
Comedy depicts characters we have 
already come across and shall meet with again. 
It takes note of similarities. 
It aims at placing 
types before our eyes. 
It even creates new 
types, if necessary. 
In this respect it forms 
a contrast to all the other arts. 
The very titles of certain classical comedies 
are significant in themselves. 
Le Misanthrope, 
l'Avare, le J oueur, le Distrait, etc., are names 
of whole classes of people ; and even when a 
character comedy has a proper noun as its 
title, this proper noun is speedily swept away, 
by the very weight of its contents, into the 
stream of common nouns. \Ve say " a  Tar­
tuffe," but we should never say " a  Phedre " 
or " a  Polyeucte." 
Above all, a tragic poet will never think 
of grouping around the chief character in his 
play secondary characters to serve as simplified 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
copies, so to speak, of the former. 
The hero 
of a tragedy represents an individuality unique 
of its kind. 
It may be possible to imitate him, 
but then we shall be passing, whether con­
sciously or not, from the tragic to the comic. 
No one is like him, because he is like no one. 
But a remarkable instinct, on the contrary, 
impels the comic poet, once he has elaborated 
his central character, to cause other characters, 
displaying the same general traits, to revolve 
as satellites round him. Many comedies have 
either a plural noun or some collective term 
as their title. " Les Femmes savantes," " Les 
Precieuses ridicules," " Le Monde ou l'on 
s'ennuie," etc., represent so many rallying points 
on the stage adopted by different groups of 
characters, all belonging to one identical type. 
It would be interesting to analyse this tendency 
in comedy. Maybe dramatists have caught a 
glimpse of a fact recently brought forward by 
mental pathology, viz. that cranks of the 
same kind are drawn by a secret attraction to 
seek each other's company. 
Without precisely 
coming within the province of medicine, the 
comic individual, as we have shown, is in 
some way absentminded, and the transition 

m 
T H E  COl\liC IN CHARACTER 165 
from absentmindedness to crankiness is con­
tinuous. 
But there is also another reason. 
If the comic poet's object is to offer us 
types, that is to say, characters capable of 
self-repetition, how can he set about it better 
than by showing us, in each instance, several 
different copies of the same model ? 
That is 
just what the naturalist does in order to define 
a spec1es. 
He enumerates and describes its 
main varieties. 
This essential difference between tragedy 
and comedy, the former being concerned with 
individuals and the latter with classes, is re­
vealed in yet another way. 
It appears in the 
first draft of the work. From the outset it is 
manifested by two radically different methods 
of observation. 
Though the assertion may seem paradoxical, 
a study of other men is probably not necessary 
to the tragic poet. 
\Ve find that some of the 
great poets have lived a retiring, homely sort of 
life, without having a chance of witnessing 
around them an outburst of the passions they 
have so faithfully depicted. 
But, supposing 
even they had witnessed such a spectacle, it is 
doubtful whether they would have found it of 

r 66 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
much use. 
For what interests us in the work 
of the poet is the glimpse we get of certain 
profound moods or inner struggles. Now, this 
glimpse cannot be obtained from without. 
Our 
souls are impenetrable to one another. 
Certain 
signs of passion are all that we ever apperceive 
externally. These we interpret-though always, 
by the way, defectively - only by analogy with 
what we have ourselves experienced. 
So 
what we experience is the main point, and 
we cannot become thoroughly acquainted with 
anything but our own heart - supposing we 
ever get so far. 
Does this mean that the 
poet has experienced what he depicts, that 
he has gone through the various situations 
he makes his characters traverse, and lived the 
whole of their inner life ? 
Here, too, the 
biographies of poets would contradict such a 
supposition. 
How, indeed, could the same 
man have been Macbeth, Hamlet, Othello, 
King Lear, and many others ? 
But then a 
distinction should perhaps here be made be­
tween the personality we have and all those 
we might have had. 
Our character is the 
result of a choice that is continually being 
renewed. 
There are points - at all events 

m 
T H E  COMIC IN CHARACTER 167 
there seem to be - all along the way, where 
we may branch off, and \Ve perceive many 
possible directions though we are unable to 
take more than one. 
To retrace one's steps, 
and follow to the end the faintly distingui.sh­
able directions, appears to be the essential 
element in poetic imagination. Of course, 
Shakespeare was neither Macbeth, nor Ham­
let, nor Othello ; still, he nzi'ght have bem 
these several characters, if the circumstances 
of the case on one hand, and the consent 
of his will on the other, had cause to break 
out into explosive action what was nothing 
more than an inner prompting. 
We are 
strangely mistaken as to the part played by 
poetic imagination if we think it pieces to­
gether its heroes out of fragments filched from 
right and left, as though it were patching to­
gether a harlequin's motley. 
Nothing living 
would result from that. 
Life cannot be re­
composed ; it can only be looked at and repro­
duced. 
Poetic imagination is but a fuller view 
of reality. 
If the characters created by a poet 
give us the impression of life, it is only because 
they are the poet himself, - a multiplication or 
division of the poet, - the poet plumbing the 

1 68 
LAU GHTE R  
CHAP. 
depths of his own nature in so powerful an 
effort of inner observation, that he lays hold 
of the potential in the real, and takes up what 
nature has left as a mere outline or sketch 
in his soul in order to make of it a finished 
work of art. 
Altogether different is the kind of observa­
tion from which comedy springs. 
It is directed 
outwards. 
However interested a dramatist 
may be in the comic features of human nature, 
he will hardly go, I imagine, to the extent of 
trying to discover his own. 
Besides, he would 
not find them, for we are never ridiculous 
except in some point that remains hidden from 
our own consciousness. 
It is on others, then, 
that such observation must perforce be prac­
tised. 
But it will, for this very reason, assume 
a character of generality that it cannot have 
when we apply it to ourselves. Settling on 
the surface, it will not be more than skin-deep, 
dealing with persons at the point at which they 
come into contact and become capable of re­
sembling one another. 
It will go no farther. 
Even if it could, it would not desire to do so, 
for it would have nothing to gain in the process. 
To penetrate too far into the personality, to 

m T H E  COMIC IN CHARACTER 169 
couple the outer effect with causes that are too 
deep-seated, would mean to endanger, and in 
the end to sacrifice all that was laughable in 
the effect. 
In order th2t we may be tempted 
to laugh at it, we must localise its cause in 
some intermediate region of the soul. Conse­
quently, the effect must appear to us as an 
average effect, as expressing an average of 
mankind. And, like all averages, this one is 
obtained by bringing together scattered data, 
by comparing analogous cases and extracting 
their essence ; in short by a process of abstrac­
tion and generalisation similar to that which 
the physicist brings to bear upon facts with the 
object of grouping them under laws. 
In a 
word, method and object are here of the same 
nature as in the inductive sciences, in that 
observation is always external and the result 
always general. 
And so we come back, by a roundabout 
way, to the double conclusion we reached in the 
course of our investigations. 
On the one hand, 
a person is never ridiculous except through 
some mental attribute resembling absent­
mindedness, through something that lives upon 
him without forming part of his organism, 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
after the fashion of a parasite ; that is the 
reason this state of mind is observable from 
without and capable of being corrected. 
But, 
on the other hand, just because laughter aims 
at correcting, it is expedient that the correction 
should reach as great a number of persons as 
possible. This is the reason comic observation 
instinctively proceeds to what is general. 
It 
chooses such peculiarities as admit of being 
reproduced, and consequently are not indis­
solubly bound up with the individuality of a 
single person,-.a possibly common sort of un­
commonness, so to say,- peculiarities that are 
held in common. 
By transferring-them to the 
stage, it creates works which doubtless belong 
to art in that their only visible aim is to please, 
but which will be found to contrast with other 
works of art by reason of their generality, and 
also of their scarcely confessed or scݫrcely 
conscious intention to correct and instruct. 
So 
we were probably right in saying that comedy 
lies midway between art and life. 
It is not 
disinterested as genuine art is. 
By organising 
laughter, comedy accepts social life as a natural 
environment ; it even obeys an impulse of social 
life. And in this respect it turns its back upon 

III 
THE COM IC IN CHARACTER I 7 I 
art, which is a breaking away from society and 
a return to pure nature. 
I I  
Now let us see, i n  the light of what has gone 
before, the line to take for creating an ideally 
comic type of character, comic in itself, in its 
origin, and in all its manifestations. It must 
be deep-rooted, so as to supply comedy with 
inexhaustible matter, and yet superficial, in 
order that it may remain within the scope of 
comedy ; invisible to its actual owner, for the 
comic ever partakes of the unconscious, but 
visible to everybody else, so that it may call 
forth general laughter ; extremely considerate to 
its own self, so that it may be displayed without 
scruple, but troublesome to others, so that they 
may repress it without pity, but immediately 
repressible, so that our laughter may not have 
been wasted ; sure of reappearing under fresh 
aspects, so that laughter may always find some­
thing to do ; inseparable from social life, 
although insufferable to society ; capable - in 
order that it may assume the greatest imagin­
able variety of forms - of being tacked on to all 

I 72 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
the vices and even to a good many virtues. 
Truly a goodly number of elements to fuse 
together ! 
But a chemist of the soul, entrusted 
with this elaborate preparation, would be some­
what disappointed when pouring out the con­
tents of his retort. 
He would find he had 
taken a vast deal of trouble to compound a 
mixture which may be found ready-made and 
free of expense, for it is as widespread through­
out mankind as air throughout nature. 
This mixture is vanity. 
Probably there is 
not a single failing that is more superficial or 
more deep-rooted. The wounds it receives are 
never very serious, and yet they are seldom 
healed. 
The services rendered to it are the 
most unreal of all services, and yet they are the 
very ones that meet with lasting gratitude. 
It 
is scarcely a vice, and yet all the vices are 
drawn into its orbit and, in proportion as they 
become more refined and artificial, tend to be 
nothing more than a means of satisfying it. 
The outcome of social life, since it is an admira­
tion of ourselves based on the admiration we 
think we are inspiring in others, it is even more 
natural, more universally innate than egoism ; 
for egoism may be conquered by nature, 

m 
THE COl\IIC IN CHARACTER 1 73 
whereas only by reflection do we get the 
better of vanity. 
It does not seem, indeed, as 
if men were ever born modest, unless we dub 
with the name of modesty a sort of purely 
physical bashfulness, which is nearer to pride 
than is generally supposed. 
True modesty 
can be nothing but a meditation on vanity. 
It springs from the sight of others' mistakes, 
and the dread of being similarly deceived. 
It is a sort of scientific cautiousness with 
respect to what we shall say and think of 
ourselves. 
It is made up of improvements 
and aftertouches. 
In short, it is an acquired 
virtue. 
It is no easy matter to define the point at 
which the anxiety to become modest rna y 
be distinguished from the dread of becoming 
ridiculous. 
But surely, at the outset, this 
dread and this anxiety are one and the same 
thing. 
A complete investigation into the 
illusions of vanity, and into the ridicule that 
clings to them, would cast a strange light upon 
the whole theory of laughter. \Ve should find 
laughter performing, with mathematical regu­
larity, one of its main functions - that of 
bringing back to complete self-consciousness 

1 74 
LAU GHTER 
CHAP. 
a certain self-admiration which is almost auto­
matic, and thus obtaining the greatest possible 
sociability of characters. \Ve should see that 
vanity, though it is a natural product of social 
life, is an inconvenience to society, just as 
certain slight poisons, continually secreted by 
the human organism, would destroy it in the 
long run, if they were not neutralised by other 
secretions. 
Laughter is unceasingly doing 
work of this kind. 
In this respect, it might be 
said that the specific remedy for vanity is 
laughter, and that the one failing that is essen­
tially laughable is vanity. 
\Vhile dealing with the comic in form and 
movement, we showed how any simple image, 
laughable in itself, is capable of worming its 
way into other images of a more complex 
nature, and instilling into them something of 
its comic essence ; thus, the highest forms of 
the comic can sometimes be explained by the 
lowest. 
The inverse process, however, is per­
haps even more common, and many coarse 
comic effects are the direct result of a drop 
from some very subtle comic element. 
For in­
stance, vanity, that higher form of the comic, is 
an element we are prone to look for, minutely 

m 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 75 
though unconsciously, in every manifestation 
of human activity. \Ve look for it if only to 
laugh at it. 
Indeed, our imagination often 
locates it where it has no business to be. 
Perhaps we must attribute to this source the 
altogether coarse comic element in certain 
effects which psychologists have very in­
adequately explained by contrast : a short 
man bowing his head to pass beneath a large 
door ; two individuals, one very tall, the other 
a mere dwarf, gravely walking along arm-in­
arm, etc. 
By scanning narrowly this latter 
image, we shall probably find that the shorter 
of the two persons seems as though he were 
trying to raise himself to the height of the 
taller, like the frog that wanted to make itself 
as large as the ox. 
III 
It would be quite impossible to go through 
all the peculiarities of character that either 
coalesce or compete with vanity in order to 
force themselves upon the attention of the 
comic poet. \Ve have shown that all failings 
may become laughable, and even, occasionally, 

LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
many a good quality. 
Even though a list 
of all the peculiarities that have ever been 
found ridiculous were drawn up, comedy would 
manage to add to them, not indeed by creating 
artificial ones, but by discovering lines of comic 
development that had hitherto gone unnoticed; 
thus does imagination isolate ever fresh figures 
in the intricate design of one and the same 
piece of tapestry. 
The essential condition, as 
we know, is that the peculiarity observed should 
straightway appear as a kind of category into 
which a number of individuals can step. 
Now, there are ready-made categories estab­
lished by society itself, and necessary to it 
because it is based on the division of labour. 
We mean the various trades, public services, 
and professions. 
Each particular profession 
impresses on its corporate members certain 
habits of mind and peculiarities of character 
in which they resemble each other and also 
distinguish themselves from the rest. 
Small 
societies are thus formed within the bosom of 
Society at large. 
Doubtless they arise from the 
very organisation of Society as a whole. 
And 
yet, if they held too much aloof, there would be 
a risk of their proving harmful to sociability. 

m 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 77 
Now, it is the business of laughter to repress 
any separatist tendency. 
Its function is to 
convert rigidity into plasticity, to readapt the 
individual to the whole, in short, to round off 
the corners wherever they are met with. 
Accordingly, we here find a species of the 
comic whose varieties might be calculated be­
forehand. 
This we shall call the professional 
comzc. 
Instead of taking up these varieties in detail, 
we prefer to lay stress upon what they have in 
common. 
In the forefront we find professional 
vanity. 
Each one of M. Jourdain's teachers 
exalts his own art above all the rest. 
In a play 
of Labiche there is a character who cannot 
understand how it is possible to be anything 
else than a timber merchant. 
Naturally he is 
a timber merchant himself. 
Note that vanity 
here tends to merge into solemnity, in propor­
tion to the degree of quackery there is in the 
profession under consideration. 
For it is a 
remarkable fact that the more questionable an 
art, science, or occupation is, the more those 
who practise it are inclined to regard them­
selves as invested with a kind of priesthood 
and to claim that all should bow before its 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
mysteries. 
Useful 
professions are clearly 
meant for the public, but those whose utility 
is more dubious can only justify their existence 
by assuming that the public is meant for them : 
now, this is just the illusion that lies at the root 
of solemnity. 
Almost everything comic in 
Moliere's doctors comes from this source. 
They treat the patient as though he had been 
made for the doctors, and nature herself as an 
appendage to medicine. 
Another form of this comic rigidity is what 
may be called proj'essio11al callousness. 
The 
comic character is so tightly jammed into the 
rigid frame of his functions that he has no 
room to move or to be moved like other men. 
Only call to mind the answer Isabelle receives 
from Perrin Dandin, the judge, when she asks 
him how he can bear to look on when the poor 
wretches are being tortured : 
Bah ! cela fait toujours passer une heure ou deux.1 
Does not Tartuffe also manifest a sort of 
professional callousness when he says - it is 
true, by the mouth of Orgon : 
1 Bah ! it always helps to while away an hour or two. 

m T H E  COMIC I N  C H A RACTER 1 79 
Et je verrais mourir frere, enfants, mere et femme 
Que je m'en soucierais autant que de cela ! 1 
The device most in use, however, for making 
a profession ludicrous .is to confine it, so to 
say, within the four corners of its own par­
ticular jargon. Judge, doctor and soldier are 
made to apply the language of law, medicine 
and strategy to the everyday affairs of life, as 
though they had become incapable of talking 
like ordinary people. 
As a rule, this kind of 
the ludicrous is rather coarse. 
It becomes 
more refined, however, as we have already 
said, if it reveals some peculiarity of charac­
ter in addition to a professional habit. 
We 
will instance only Regnard's joueur, who 
expresses himself with the utmost origin­
ality in terms borrowed from gambling, giving 
his valet the name of Hector, and calling his 
betrothed 
Pallas, du nom connu de Ia Dame de Pique ; 2 
or 
Moliere's Femmes savaJZ!es, where the 
comic element evidently consists largely in the 
translation of ideas of a scientific nature into 
1 Let brother, children, mother and wife all die, what should 
I care ! 
2 Pallas, from the well-known name of the Queen of Spades. 

ISO 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
terms of feminine sensibility : " Epicure me 
plazt .
.
.
 " (Epicurus is charming), "j'aime les 
tourbillons " (I dote on vortices), etc. You 
have only to read the third act to find that 
Armande, Philaminte and Belise almost invari­
ably express themselves in this style. 
Proceeding further in the same direction, we 
discover that there is also such a thing as a 
professional logic, i.e. certain ways of reasoning 
that are customary in certain circles, which are 
valid for these circles, but untrue for the rest of 
the public. 
Now, the contrast between these 
two kinds of logic - one particular, the other 
universal - produces comic effects of a special 
nature, on which we may advantageously dwell 
at greater length. 
Here we touch upon a 
point of some consequence in the theory of 
laughter. We propose, therefore, to give the 
question a wider scope and consider it in its 
most general aspect. 
IV 
Eager as we have been to discover the 
deep-seated cause of the comic, we have so 
far had to neglect one of its most striking 

m T H E  COMIC I N  CHARACTER 181 
phenomena. 
\Ve refer to the logic peculiar to 
the comic character and the comic group, a 
strange kind of logic, which, in some cases, 
may include a good deal of absurdity. 
Theophile Gautier said that the comic in its 
extreme form was the logic of the absurd. 
More than one philosophy of laughter revolves 
round a like idea. Every comic effect, it is 
said, implies contradiction in some of its 
aspects. 
What makes us laugh is alleged to 
be the absurd realised in concrete shape, a 
" palpable absurdity " ; - or, again, an apparent 
absurdity, which we swallow for the moment 
only to rectify it immediately afterwards ; - or, 
better still, something absurd from one point 
of view though capable of a natural explanation 
from another, etc. All these theories may 
contain some portion of the truth ; but, in the 
first place, they apply only to certain rather 
obvious comic effects, and then, even where 
they do apply, they evidently take no account 
of the characteristic element of the laughable, 
that is, the particular kind of absurdity the 
comic contains when it does contain something 
absurd. Is an immediate proof of this desired ? 
You have only to choose one of these definitions 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
and make up effects in accordance with the 
formula : twice out of every three times there 
will be nothing laughable in the effect obtained. 
So we see that absurdity, when met with in 
the comic, is not absurdity £n general. 
It is an 
absurdity of a definite kind. 
It does not create 
the comic ; rather, we might say that the comic 
infuses into it its own particular essence. 
It is 
not a cause but an effect - an effect of a very 
special kind, which reflects the special nature 
of its cause. 
Now, this cause is known to us ; 
consequently we shall have no trouble in under­
standing the nature of the effect. 
Assume, when out for a country walk, that 
you notice on the top of a hill something that 
bears a faint resemblance to a large motionless 
body with revolving arms. So far you do not 
know what it is, but you begin to search 
amongst your £deas- that is to say, in the 
present instance, amongst the recollections at 
your disposal -for that recollection which will 
best fit in with what you see. Almost immedi­
ately the image of a windmill comes into your 
mind : the object before you is a windmill. 
No matter if, before leaving the house, you 
have just been reading fairy-tales telling of 

III THE COMIC I N  CHA RACTER I 8J 
giants with enormous arms ; for although com­
mon sense consists mainly in being able to 
remember, it consists even more in being able 
to forget. 
Common sense represents the en­
deavour of a mind continually adapting itself 
anew and changing ideas when it changes 
objects. 
It is the mobility of the intelligence 
conforming exactly to the mobility of things. 
It is the moving continuity of our attention 
to life. 
But now, let us take Don Quixote setting 
out for the wars. 
The romances he has been 
reading all tell of knights encountering, on the 
way, giant adversaries. 
He therefore must 
needs encounter a giant. 
This idea of a giant 
is a privileged recollection, which has taken 
its abode in his mind and lies there in wait, 
motionless, watching for an opportunity to sally 
forth and become embodied in a thing. 
It £s 
be1tt on entering the material world, and so the 
very first object he sees bearing the faintest 
resemblance to a giant is invested with the form 
of one. Thus, Don Quixote sees giants where 
we see windmills. 
This is comical ; it is also 
absurd. 
But is it a mere absurdity, - an 
absurdity of an indefinite kind ? 

LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
It IS a very special inversion of common 
sense. 
It consists in seeking to mould things 
on an idea of one's own, instead of moulding 
one's ideas on things, - in seeing before us what 
we are thinking of, instead of thinking of what 
we see. 
Good sense would have us leave all 
our memories in their proper rank and file ; 
then the appropriate memory will every time 
answer the summons of the situation of the 
moment and serve only to interpret it. 
But in 
Don Quixote, on the contrary, there is one 
group of memories in command of all the rest 
and dominating the character itself : thus it is 
reality that now has to bow to imagination, its 
only function being to supply fancy with a body. 
Once the illusion has been created, Don Quixote 
develops it logically enough in all its con­
sequences ; he proceeds with the certainty and 
precision of a somnambulist who is acting his 
dream. 
Such, then, is the origin of his delu­
sions and such the peculiar logic which con­
trols this particular absurdity. 
Now, is this 
logic peculiar to Don Quixote ? 
We have shown that the comic character 
always errs through obstinacy of mind or of dis­
position, through absentmindedness, in short, 

m T H E  C0 1\l i C  I N  CHARACTER 185 
through automatism. 
At the root of the comic 
there is a sort of rigidity which compels its 
victims to keep strictly to one path, to follow it 
straight along, to shut their ears and refuse to 
listen. 
In Moliere's plays how many comic 
scenes can be reduced to this simple type : a 
character followiJZg up his oJZe zdea, and con­
tinually recurring to it in spite of incessant 
interruptions ! 
The transition seems to take 
place imperceptibly from the man who will 
listen to nothing to the one who will see 
nothing, and from this latter to the one who 
sees only what he wants to see. A stubborn 
spirit ends by adjusting things to its own 
way of thinking, instead of accommodating 
its thoughts to the things. 
So every comic 
character is on the highroad to the above-men­
tioned illusion, and Don Quixote furnishes us 
with the general type of comic absurdity. 
Is there a name for this inversion of common 
sense ? 
Doubtless it may be found, in either 
an acute or a chronic form, in certain types of 
insanity. 
In many of its aspects it resembles a 
fixed idea. 
But neither insanity in general, nor 
fixed ideas in particular, are provocative of 
laughter : they are diseases, and arouse our pity. 

! 86 
LAU GHTER 
CHAP. 
Laughter, as we have seen, is incompatible with 
emotion. 
If there exists a madness that is 
laughable, it can only be one compatible with 
the general health of the mind, - a  sane type of 
madness, one might say. Now, there is a sane 
state of the mind that resembles madness in 
every respect, in which we find the same asso­
ciations of ideas as we do in lunacy, the same 
peculiar logic as in a fixed idea. This state is 
that of dreams. 
So either our analysis is in­
correct, or it must be capable of being stated in 
the following theorem : Comic absurdity is of 
the same nature as that of dreams. 
The behaviour of the intellect in a dream is 
exactly what we have just been describing. 
The mind, enamoured of itself, now seeks in 
the outer world nothing more than a pretext 
for realizing its imaginations. 
A confused 
murmur of sounds still reaches the ear, 
colours enter the field of vision, the senses are 
not completely shut in. But the dreamer, 
instead of appealing to the whole of his recol­
lections for the interpretation of what his senses 
perceive, makes use of what he perceives to 
give substance to the particular recollection he 
favours : thus, according to the mood of the 

m 
THE COMIC I N  CHARACTER 187 
dreamer and the idea that fills his imagination 
at the time, a gust of wind blowing down the 
chimney becomes the howl of a wild beast 
or a tuneful melody. Such is the ordinary 
mechanism of illusion in dreams. 
Now, if comic illusion is similar to dream 
illusion, if the logic of the comic is the logic of 
dreams, we may expect to discover in the logic 
of the laughable all the peculiarities of dream 
logic. 
Here, again, we shall find an illustra­
tion of the law with which we are well 
acquainted : given one form of the laughable, 
other forms that are lacking in the same comic 
essence become laughable from their outward 
resemblance to the first. 
Indeed, it is not diffi­
cult to see that any play of ideas may afford 
us amusement if only it bring back to mind, 
more or less distinctly, the play of dreamland. 
\Ve shall first call attention to a certain 
general relaxation of the rules of reasoning. 
The reasonings at which we laugh are those 
we know to be false, but which we might 
accept as true were we to hear them in a 
dream. They counterfeit true reasoning just 
sufficiently to deceive a mind dropping off to 
sleep. There is still an element of logic in 

1 88 
LA U GHTER 
CHAP. 
them, if you will, but it is a logic lacking 
in tension and, for that very reason, affording 
us relief from intellectual effort. 
Many " witti­
cisms " are reasonings of this kind, considerably 
abridged reasonings, of which we are given 
only the beginning and the end. Such play 
upon ideas evolves in the direction of 
a 
play upon words in proportion as the rela­
tions set up between the ideas become more 
superficial : gradually we come to take no 
account of the meaning of the words we hear, 
but only of their sound. 
It might be instruc­
tive to compare with dreams certain comic 
scenes in which one of the characters system­
atically repeats in a nonsensical fashion what 
another character whispers in his ear. If you 
fall asleep with people talking round you, you 
sometimes find that what they say gradually 
becomes devoid of meaning, that the sounds 
get distorted, as it were, and recombine in a 
haphazard fashion to form in your mind the 
strangest of meanings, and that you are re­
producing between yourself and the different 
speakers the scene between Petit-Jean and 
The Prompter.1 
1 Les Plaideurs (Racine). 

m 
T H E  COMIC I N  CHARACTER 189 
There are also comic obsessions that seem to 
bear a great resemblance to dream obsessions. 
\Vho has not had the experience of seeing the 
same image appear in several successive dreams, 
assuming a plausible meaning in each of them, 
whereas these dreams had no other point in 
common. 
Effects of 
repetition sometimes 
present this special form on the stage or in 
fiction : some of them, in fact, sound as though 
they belonged to a dream. 
It may be the 
same with the burden of many a song : it 
persistently recurs, always unchanged, at the 
end of every verse, each time with a different 
meamng. 
Not infrequently do we notice in dreams a 
particular crescendo, a weird effect that grows 
more pronounced as we proceed. 
The first 
concession extorted from reason introduces a 
second ; and this one, another of a more 
serious nature ; and so on till the crowning 
absurdity is reached. 
Now, this progress to­
wards the absurd produces on the dreamer a 
very peculiar sensation. 
Such is probably 
the experience of the tippler when he feels 
himself pleasantly drifting into a state of 
blankness in which neither reason nor pro-

I go 
LAUGH TER 
CHAP. 
priety has any meaning for him. 
Now, 
consider whether some of Moliere's plays 
would not produce the same sensation : for 
instance, llf01tsieur de Pourceaugnac, which, 
after beginning almost reasonably, develops 
into a sequence of all sorts of absurdities. 
Consider also the 
Bourgeois gmtzlhomme, 
where the different characters seem to allow 
themselves to be caught up in a very whirl­
wind of madness as the play proceeds. 
" If 
it is possible to find a man more completely 
mad, I will go and publish it in Rome." 
This 
sentence, which warns us that the play is over, 
rouses us from the increasingly extravagant 
dream into which, along with _M. Jourdain, we 
have been sinking. 
But, above all, there is a special madness 
that is peculiar to dreams. There are certain 
special contradictions so natural to the imagina­
tion of a dreamer, and so absurd to the reason 
of a man wide-awake, that it would be im­
possible to give a full and correct idea of 
their nature to anyone who had not ex­
perienced them. 
Vve allude to the strange 
fusion that a dream often effects between two 
persons who henceforth form only one and 

m T H E  COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 9 1  
yet remain distinct. 
Generally one of these 
is the dreamer himself. 
He feels he has not 
ceased to be what he is ; yet he has be­
come someone else. 
He is himself, and not 
himself. 
He hears himself speak and sees 
himself act, but he feels that some other 
" he "  has borrowed his body and stolen his 
voice. Or perhaps he is conscious of speak­
ing and acting as usual, but he speaks of 
himself as a stranger with whom he has 
nothing in common ; he has stepped out of 
his own self. Does it not seem as though 
we found this same extraordinary confusion 
in many a comic scene? 
I am not speaking 
of Amph£trymz, in which play the confusion 
is perhaps suggested to the mind of the 
spectator, though the bulk of the comic effect 
proceeds rather from what we have already 
called a "  reciprocal interference of two series." 
I am speaking of the extravagant and comic 
reasonings in which we really meet with this 
confusion in its pure form, though it requires 
some looking into to pick it out. 
For instance, 
listen to Mark Twain's replies to the reporter 
who called to interview him : 
Questz'oJt. Isn't that a brother of yours ? 

LA UGHTER 
CHAP. 
Answer. Oh ! yes, yes, yes ! 
Now you 
remind me of it, that was a brother of mme. 
That's \Villiam - Bill we called him. 
Poor 
old Bill ! 
Q. \Vhy ? 
Is he dead, then ? 
A. Ah ! well, I suppose so. \Ve never could 
tell. There was a great mystery about it. 
Q. That is sad, very sad. 
He disappeared, 
then ? 
A. \Veil, yes, in a sort of general way. 
We 
buried him. 
Q. Buried him ! Buried him, without know­
ing whether he was dead or not ? 
A. 0 h no ! Not that. 
He was dead enough. 
Q. \Veil, I confess that I can't understand 
this. 
If you buried him, and you knew he was 
dead -
A. No ! no ! 
\Ve only thought he was. 
Q. Oh, I see ! 
He came to life again ? 
A. I bet he didn't. 
Q. \Veil, I never heard anything like this. 
Somebody was dead. 
Somebody was buried. 
Now, where was the mystery ? 
A. Ah ! that's just it ! 
That's it exactly. 
You see, we were twins, - defunct and I,- and 
we got mixed in the bath-tub when we were 

m THE COMIC I N  CHARACTER 1 93 
only two weeks old, and one of us was drowned. 
But we didn't know which. Some think it was 
Bill. Some think it was me. 
Q. Well, that z's remarkable. 
What do you 
think ? 
A. Goodness knows ! 
I would give whole 
worlds to know. 
This solemn, this awful 
tragedy has cast a gloom over my whole life. 
But I will tell you a secret now, which I have 
never revealed to any creature before. 
One 
of us had a peculiar mark, - a large mole on 
the back of his left hand : that was me. 
That 
chz'ld was the one that was drow1zed I . 
etc., etc. 
A close examination will show us that the 
absurdity of this dialogue is by no means an 
absurdity of. an ordinary type. 
It would dis­
appear were not the speaker himself one of the 
twins in the story. 
It results entirely from the 
fact that Mark Twain asserts he is one of these 
twins, whilst all the time he talks as though he 
were a third person who tells the tale. 
In 
many of our dreams we adopt exactly the same 
method. 

1 94 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
v 
Regarded from this latter point of view, the 
comic seems to show itself in a form some­
what different from the one we lately attributed 
to it. 
Up to this point, we have regarded 
laughter as first and foremost a means of 
correction. 
If you take the series of comic 
varieties and isolate the predominant types at 
long intervals, you will find that all the inter­
vening varieties borrow their comic quality 
from their resemblance to these types, and that 
the types themselves are so many models of 
impertinence with regard to society. 
To these 
impertinences society retorts by laughter, an 
even greater impertinence. 
So evidently there 
is nothing very benevolent in laughter. 
It 
seems rather inclined to return evil for evil. 
But this is not what we are immediately 
struck by in our first impression of the laughable. 
The comic character is often one with whom, 
to begin with, our mind, or rather our body, 
sympathises. 
By this is meant that we put 
ourselves for a very short time in his place, 
adopt his gestures, words and actions, and, 
if amused by anything laughable in him, 

m 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 195 
we invite him, in imagination, to share his 
amusement with us ; in fact, we treat him first 
as a playmate. 
So, in the laugher, we find a 
" hail-fellow-well-met " spirit - as far, at least, 
as appearances go - which it would be wrong 
of us not to take into consideration. In partic­
ular, there is in laughter a movement of rela:ca­
tiolt which has often been noticed, and the 
reason of which we must try to discover. 
No­
where is this impression more noticeable than 
in the last few examples. 
In them, indeed, we 
shall find its explanation. 
When the comic character automatically 
follows up his idea, he ultimately thinks, speaks 
and acts as though he were dreaming. 
Now, 
a dream is a relaxation. To remain in touch 
with things and men, to see nothing but what 
is existent and think nothing but what is con­
sistent, demands a continuous effort of intel­
lectual tension. 
This effort is common sense. 
And to remain sensible is, indeed, to remain at 
work. 
But to detach oneself from things and 
yet continue to perceive images, to break away 
from logic and yet continue to string together 
ideas, is to indulge in play or, if you prefer, in 
dolce far nieute. 
So, comic absurdity gives us 

196 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. 
from the outset the impression of playing with 
ideas. Our first impulse is to join in the game. 
That relieves us from the strain of thinking. 
Now, the same might be said of the other 
forms of the laughable. Deep-rooted in the 
comic, there is always a tendency, we said, 
to take the line of least resistance, generally 
that of habit. The comic character no longer 
tries to be ceaselessly adapting and readapting 
himself to the society of which he is a member. 
He slackens in the attention that is due to life. 
He more or less resembles the absentminded. 
Maybe his will is here even more concerned 
than his intellect, and there is not so much a 
want of attention as a lack of tension : still, in 
some way or another, he is abse1tt, away from 
his work, taking it easy. 
He abandons social 
convention, as indeed - in the case we have just 
been considering - he abandoned logic. Here, 
too, our first impulse is to accept the invitation 
to take it easy. 
For a short time, at all events, 
we join in the game. 
And that relieves us 
from the strain of living. 
But we rest only for a short time. The 
sympathy that is capable of entering into the 
impression of the comic is a very fleeting one. 

m T H E  COMIC I N  CHARACT E R  1 97 
It also comes from a lapse in attention. Thus, 
a stern father may at times forget himself and 
join in some prank his child is playing, only to 
check himself at once in order to correct it. 
Laughter is, above all, a corrective. 
Being 
intended to humiliate, it must make a painful 
impression on the person against whom it is 
directed. 
By laughter, society avenges itself 
for the liberties taken with it. 
It would fail in 
its object i£ it bore the stamp of sympathy or 
kindness. 
Shall we be told that the motive, at all 
events, may be a good one, that we often 
punish because we love, and that laughter, by 
checking the outer manifestations o£ certain 
failings, thus causes the person laughed at to 
correct these failings and thereby improve him­
self inwardly ? 
Much might be said on this point. 
As a 
general rule, and speaking roughly, laughter 
doubtless exercises a useful function. 
Indeed, 
the whole of our analysis points to this fact. 
But it does not therefore follow that laughter 
always hits the mark or is invariably inspired 
by sentiments of kindness or even of justice. 
To be certain of always hitting the mark, it 

1 98 
LAUGHTE R  
CHAP. 
would have to proceed from an act of reflec­
tion. Now laughter is simply the result of a 
mechanism set up in us by nature or, what is 
almost the same thing, by our long acquaint­
ance with social life. It goes off spontaneously 
and returns tit for tat. 
It has no time to look 
where it hits. 
Laughter punishes certain fail­
ings somewhat as disease punishes certain 
forms of excess, striking down some who are 
innocent and sparing some who are guilty, 
aiming at a general result and incapable of 
dealing separately with each individual case. 
And so it is with everything that comes to 
pass by natural means instead of happening by 
conscious reflection. 
An average of justice 
may show itself in the total result, though the 
details, taken separately, often point to any­
thing but justice. 
In this sense, laughter cannot be absolutely 
just. 
Nor should it be kind-hearted either. 
Its function is to intimidate by humiliating. 
NO\v, it would not succeed in doing this, had 
not nature implanted for that very purpose, 
even in the best of men, a spark of spiteful­
ness or, at all events, of mischief. 
Perhaps 
we had better not investigate this point too 

m 
THE COMIC IN CHARACTER 1 99 
closely, for we should not find anything very 
flattering to ourselves. We should see that 
this movement of relaxation or expansion 
is nothing but a prelude to laughter, that the 
Iaugher immediately retires within himself, 
more self-assertive and conceited than ever, and 
is evidently disposed to look upon another's 
personality as a marionette of which he pulls the 
strings. 
In this presumptuousness we speedily 
discern a degree of egoism and, behind this 
latter, something less spontaneous and more 
bitter, the beginnings of a curious pessimism 
which becomes the more pronounced as the 
Iaugher more closely analyses his laughter. 
Here, as elsewhere, nature has utilised evil 
with a view to good. 
It is more especially the 
good that has engaged our attention through­
out this work. We have seen that the more 
society improves, the more plastic is the adapt­
ability it obtains from its members ; while the 
greater the tendency towards increasing stability 
below, the more does it force to the surface the 
disturbing elements inseparable from so vast 
a bulk ; and thus laughter performs a useful 
function by emphasising the form of these 
significant undulations. 

200 
LAUGHTER 
CHAP. III 
Such IS also the truceless warfare of the 
waves on the surface of the sea, whilst pro­
found peace reigns in the depths below. 
The 
billows clash and collide with each other, as 
they strive to find their level. 
A fringe of 
snow-white foam, feathery and frolicsome, 
follows their changing outlines. 
From time 
to time, the receding wave leaves behind a 
remnant of foam on the sandy beach. 
The 
child, who pia ys hard by, picks up a handful, 
and, the next moment, is astonished to find 
that nothing remains in his grasp but a few 
drops of water, water that is far more brackish, 
far more bitter, than that of the wave which 
brought it. Laughter comes into being in the 
self-same fashion. 
It indicates a slight revolt 
on the surface of social life. 
It instantly adopts 
the changing forms of the disturbance. 
It, 
also, is a froth with a saline base. 
Like froth, 
it sparkles. 
It is gaiety itself. 
But the philos­
opher who gathers a handful to taste may 
find that the substance is scanty, and the after­
taste bitter. 


