
The World of Dreams 


By HENRI BERGSON 
PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY 
New York 

Copyright 1958 by PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY, INc. 
15 East 4oth Street, New York 16, N.Y. 
Al rights reserved 
Translated from the French by 
WADE BASKIN 
Printed in the United States of America 

The World of Dreams 


INTRODUCTION 
In the modern world there is an increasing 
tendency to see the essence of reality and the 
secret of the universe, not in the inertia of 
matter, but in the movement of life. For the 
particular orientation of contemporary thought 
we are to a certain extent indebted to one man 
who, unwilling to submit to a materialistic doc­
trine, took up the concept of vitalism forged 
earlier by Schopenhauer and by virtue of the 
eloquence of his expression, the clarity of his 
thought, and the force of his sincerity, made a 
lasting impression on a sceptical age. 
The major works of Henri Bergson (1859-
194 1) are probably more familiar to the general 
7 

8 
The TVorld of Dreams 
public than are those of any other philosopher 
of our century. The same holds true for some of 
his minor works, one exception being the present 
work on dreams, first given as a lecture before 
the lnstitut Psychologique on March 26, 1901 
and later published in the Revue Scientifique 
of June 8, 1901. And one is tempted to attribute 
the neglect in this instance to the nature of the 
subject rather than to a lack of merit in the 
work. Too many investigators seem unfortu­
nately to look with disdain or bias on the study 
of the interpretation of dreams. Each culture 
has or has had its interpreters, yet the scientific 
literature on the subject suggests that, apart from 
the contributions of groups associated with 
Sigmund Freud, Alfred Adler, and C. G. Jung, 
there has been little progress since Bergson at 
the end of his enlightening study left us "at the 
threshold of the mystery." 
That repressed 
wishes seek expression in 
dreams was a common belief among the ancients. 
Xerxes was urged repeatedly in his dreams to 
undertake the invasion of Greece. He renounced 
the idea only after he was told by Artabanus 
that his dreams were nothing more than the 
expression of thoughts that had been on his mind 

The World of Dreams 
9 
during the day. Lucretius subsequently observed 
that whatever our hearts are set upon will be 
the subject of our dreams; he was supported by 
Cicero, who added that dreams arc influenced 
by the overflow from our waking life, and by 
Plotinus, who noted that in dreams phantasy 
presents us with the object of our desire. 
Another common belief among the ancients 
was that some dreams warn the sleeper that sick­
ness or disease is imminent. Aristotle explained 
this; he pointed out that the sleeper has the ability 
to convert slight sensations into intense ones; he 
observed, for example, that a sleeper may dream 
of walking through fire when he perceives a 
slight sensation of heat on some part of his body. 
But the ancients insisted that while such dreams 
may be caused by immediate circumstances, 
others are unquestionably of divine origin. 
They supposed that in sleep we sometimes 
have direct visions of the future or receive 
symbolic visions that can be interpreted by the 
expert. People possessed of the ability to in­
terpret dreams have generally been held in high 
esteem by their associates. The Bible tells us that 
Joseph was made ruler over Egypt as a result 
of his proven skill in interpreting dreams. The 

1 o 
T be TV orld of Dreams 
Greeks relied heavily on their interpreters. It was 
the practice of the Greeks to go to the temple 
of Aesculapius or to the temple of Apollo, per­
form or be subjected to certain rites and cere­
monies, work themselves up into a state of 
exaltation, and fall asleep on the skin of a lamb 
that had been sacrificed. Afterwards they con­
sulted the experts who explained to them the 
actual or symbolic meaning of their dreams. 
Aristotle 
even 
anticipated 
modern 
psycho­
analytical thought by pointing out the element 
of distortion in dreams. 
Bergson, who was acquainted with a vast body 
of Greek and Latin literature, succeeded in in­
corporating the best of contemporary thinking 
in all of his works. In his study of dreams, as in 
his other works, he gives ample evidence of his 
far-reaching scholarship, yet without ever ap­
pearing to flaunt it. Though his predilection for 
the well-chosen analogy may have carried him 
back to Plotinus, his tireless quest for truth made 
him range widely through books and periodicals 
written in English, French, and German. 
In discussing different techniques for studying 
dreams, Bergson referred to the writings of 
D'Hervey and Ladd. In his analysis of the proc-

The World of Dreams 
11 
ess of perception he cited the contributions of 
Goldscheidcr, Muller, and Mtinsterberg. His 
own ideas on the interpretation of dreams were 
drawn largely from the writings of A. Krauss. 
Finally, in dealing with the influence of inci­
dental or repressed experiences on dreams, he 
alluded to Delage, Freud, and W. Robert. 
Schopenhaucr, (in Parerga und Paralipomena, 
Berlin, 1 8 57) saw life as a ceaseless struggle 
against sleep and observed that when the intellect 
tires and demands sleep, the sleep that comes har­
bors for even the wisest man strange, senseless 
dreams. Like Schopenhauer, Tissie (in Les reves, 
physiologie et pathologie, Paris, 1898.) held that 
the excitation of dreams may proceed from the 
sympathetic nervous system-that is, that de­
rangements of the internal organs may provoke 
dreams or that dreams may reflect incipient 
changes in the condition of the body. Tissie also 
cited the case of a sleeper who when exposed to 
a bright light had a dream in which fire played 
an important part. Though psychoanalysts might 
stress a different aspect of the dream-the sym­
bolic significance of such images as fire, water, 
chains, posts, and buildings-Bergson emphasized 
the fact that it was built around a visual sen-

I 2 
Tbe World of Dreams 
sation. Schemer (in Das Leben des Traumes, 
Berlin, I 861) was the first modern scholar to 
stress the importance of symbolism in dreams; 
he also saw in dreams a decentralization of the 
movement of life. Schopenhauer had phrased the 
same thought differently; he held that even when 
the intellect tires and suspends its functioning, 
the will continues to function. 
Bergson in his discussion of the origin of 
dream-images (souvenirs, translated here as re­
membrances) relied heavily on an article written 
by Krauss (in Allgemeine Zeitscbrift fiir Psy­
cbologie, XV and XVI, I858-x8s9). In his 
article Krauss explained the origin of dream­
images in this way: any sensation that is per­
ceived during sleep awakens or evokes in the 
unconscious a related idea or image. 
Delage (in Revue Scientifique, II, July, 1891) 
posited repressed materials as the main source of 
dreams. His article was of course published be­
fore Freud had announced his views on the sub­
ject. Bergson's lecture was delivered one year 
after 
the 
publication 
of 
Freud's 
epochal 
Interpretation of Dreams but long before Freud's 
theories had become a controversial issue. In his 
lecture and in a later statement, Bergson, who 

The World of Dreams 
1 3 
held that no pan of our cumulative experience 
is ever lost, insisted that his views on the ex­
pression of repressed (not consciously formu­
lated) wishes or fears are compatible with those 
of Freud. 
Bergson's srudy of dreams, like all of his minor 
works, contributes an important share of his 
overall philosophy. He held that no universal 
system is valid; he nevertheless attacked a par­
ticular problem in each of his works and thereby 
elucidated a general philosophy of duration and 
movement. 
Before his time most philosophers had at­
tempted to define everything in terms of being, 
permanence, substance. Bergson starred from the 
opposite point of view. He started from the as­
sumption that the ultimate reality is time itself. 
In 1888 he finished the first of his major works, 
Time and Free Will. In 1896 he published the 
results of his srudy of memory, the means 
through which our existence is made continuous. 
Matter and Memory was followed in 1907 by 
the first philosophical masterpiece of our century, 
Creative Evolution. Midway between the last 
two works came his srudy of dreams, which has 
more than a chronological relation to both. 

14 
The TVorld of Dreams 
Bergson called dreams the direct link between 
sensation and memory. His studies of duration 
and movement had provided him with a broad 
base for his theory. vVith characteristic moder­
ation and insight, he surmised that while our 
dreams are constructed around what we have 
seen, said, desired or done, their elaboration de­
pends on memory-images collected and preserved 
since earliest childhood in "the innermost depths 
of the unconscious." 
Only psychoanalysts have made a concerted 
attempt to penetrate the mystery surrounding 
the interpretation of dreams. Bergson's discussion 
of the dream in which fire played an important 
part was referred to earlier. Other typical dreams 
discussed in his lecture merit some comment in 
the light of psychoanalytical theory. As early as 
1897, Moudy Void had suggested, at the Third 
International Congress of Psychologists (Mu­
nich), that wish fulfillment, not posture, is re­
sponsible for dreams of flying. Freud saw in such 
dreams (when the whole body is not a phallic 
symbol) a desire on the part of the sleeper to 
relive childhood experiences. Freud also pro­
vided a psychoanalytical interpretation of the 
common dream of nakedness accompanied by 

T be JV orld of Dreams 
1 5 
embarrassment on the pan of the dreamer but no 
sign of embarrassment on the pan of observers. 
Contending that only those dreams in which the 
subject feels embarrassment deserve serious con­
sideration, Freud attributed the vision of naked­
ness to a longing for a return to the days of 
pristine childhood when nakedness seldom oc­
casioned expressions of ridicule or censure. 
Experiments in progress at the University of 
Chicago since 1953 support Bergson's belief that 
dreaming is a normal process common to all and a 
vital link between perception and memory. 
Nathaniel Kleitman and William Dement in 
their investigations made use of a new discovery 
and an ingenious technique for determining with 
remarkable accuracy the exact moment when 
dreaming occurs. The information which they 
gathered from more than a thousand hours of 
sleep, though it uproots some popular beliefs on 
the subject of dreams, tends on the whole to re­
affirm Bergson's statements. 
Kleitman and Dement discovered that we tend 
to follow with our eyes the actions presented in 
our dreams. They were able by using electrodes 
and recording devices to chart the eye move-

16 
The TV orld of Dreams 
ments 
and physiological 
reactions 
of 
their 
subjects all during the night. On being awakened 
at various stages during their dreams, the subjects 
recorded their impressions while the dreams were 
still fresh in their memories (or reported that 
they had not been dreaming) and went back to 
sleep. 
Much was learned in these experiments about 
the length and frequency of dreams as well as 
about the subjects' reactions to them. We dream 
on the average slightly more than one-fifth of the 
time while we are asleep. Dreaming occurs sev­
eral times during the night but during only one 
stage of sleep. vVe see spots, flashing lights, 
blurred images as we drift to the brink of sleep. 
Suddenly we plunge into a deep, apparently 
dreamless sleep; dreaming that we can recall does 
not occur until an hour or so later, after we have 
gradually risen to the lightest stage of sleep; we 
dream only about ten minutes during the light 
stage in the first cycle; in succeeding cycles 
sleep becomes progressively lighter and the 
dreaming stage longer. As we approach the 
dreaming stage in each cycle we become rest­
less; we roll and toss on the bed, adjust our arms 
and legs, assume a new posture in anticipation of 

The World of Dreams 
17 
the drama that is about to begin. Once the 
curtain goes up, we remain motionless until the 
end of the performance. We may repress some 
dreams on awakening, not so much because they 
are immoral or unpleasant, but because they 
occur at a low level of our mental activity-or as 
Bergson might phrase it, because we are then 
completely relaxed. 
Two dreams recorded by Kleitman and 
Dement lend support to Bergson's conception of 
the constant interplay between perception and 
memory. The first illustrates our ability to 
incorporate in our dreams the data supplied by 
the senses while we are asleep, the second our 
ability to reproduce in our dreams images uncon­
sciously perceived while we are awake. One 
subject was sprayed with water while a dream 
was presumably in progress and allowed to re­
main asleep for approximately thirty seconds. 
He reported on being awakened that he had been 
participating in a play when suddenly the leading 
lady fell. On rushing over to assist her, he felt 
water dripping down on his head. When he 
looked up, he saw that there was a hole in the 
roof. He dragged the lady off stage and rang 
down the curtain. A second subject looked on as 

18 
The World of Dreams 
a picture was flashed repeatedly on a screen, yet 
was unable to describe what he had seen. That 
night he dreamed, among other things, of a dog 
with silvery eyes and of a soldier with bulging 
eyes and a hideous grin. On being shown three 
different pictures after he awoke, the subject was 
able to select the one that had previously been 
flashed on the screen in front of him-a big auto­
mobile with an impressive grill. 
Kleitman and Dement did not attempt to in­
terpret the dreams recorded by their subjects. 
Deep sleep, according to Bergson, carries us far 
back into the past and provides a most fruitful 
field for psychic research. The evidence as­
sembled by these two investigators, though it 
fails to yield any direct proof of the occurrence 
of dreams during deep sleep, does not actually 
contradict Bergson on this point. In some in­
stances subjects whose eye movements had not 
been charted reported that they had been dream­
ing; in a few other instances subjects whose eye 
movements had not been charted reported that 
they had been dreaming. The exceptional cases 
raise the possibility that some dreams are actually 
accompanied by eye movements but not subject 
to recall while others are so remote from our 

The World of Dreams 
19 
consciousness as to entail no eye movement and 
be forever beyond recall. 
In another lecture Bergson likened the func­
tioning of our sensory organs to the intellect. 
Just as our intellect admits into consciousness 
only those memory-images that have a direct 
bearing on the present, so the sensory organs 
channel into consciousness only perceptions that 
are of some pragmatic worth. And just as the 
memory-images evoked by perceptions received 
through the senses are fringed by other vague 
images, so our perceptions may in tum be fringed 
by other vague 
(extra-sensory) perceptions. 
Bergson observed in his lecture on dreams that 
telepathy, if it influences our dreams, would 
be most likely to manifest itself in deep sleep. 
Bergson ended his lecture on a hopeful note. 
He hoped that through the study of the un­
conscious, to which the best approach is dreams, 
we might one day resolve the enigmas that still 
perplex us. His quest led him to accept the 
presidency of the British Society for Psychical 
Research (19 13) and to study at first hand the 
case of Eusapia Palladino 
( 1854- 1918), the 
Italian medium who, though she showed but 
little understanding of the feats which she was 

20 
The JVorld of Dreams 
able to perform in both light and dark-levi­
tation of furniture and apparitions of the dead 
-baffled the scientific world for a period of 
twenty years. 
Much mystery still surrounds the subject of 
dreams. An understanding of their significance 
would be of great worth in psychoanalysis and 
in the treatment of mental patients; it would also 
contribute much toward the understanding of 
the thought-processes of normal people. Bergson 
even expressed the hope that mankind might one 
day cross over the threshold of the mystery 
adumbrated in his theory of dreams and win its 
greatest battle over matter, the enemy of the 
movement of life, by achieving immortality. 
WADE BASKIN 
Southern State College 

THE WORLD OF DREAMS 
What, then, is a dream? I perceive objects, yet 
there is nothing. I see men. I think that I speak 
to them and hear them answer me, yet there is 
no one and I say nothing. Everything happens 
as if there were real things and real persons, but 
upon awakening I find that everything has 
vanished. How does this come about? 
To begin with, is it really true that there is 
nothing in the dream? In other words, is there 
not some perceptible matter that we can see,. 
hear, feel, etc. when we are asleep as well as 
when we are awake? 
Close your eyes and consider carefully what 
occurs on the field of vision. Many people when 
21 

2 2 
The TV orld of Dreams 
questioned on this point will say that nothing 
happens and that they see nothing. That is be­
cause a certain amount of practice is required for 
proper self-observation. But let the same people 
take the first step toward making the necessary 
effort and gradually through attentiveness they 
will be able to single out many different things. 
At first generally, a dark background. Occa­
sionally against the dark background, bright dots 
which come and go, rise and fall, slowly and 
sedately. More often, spots of a thousand colors, 
sometimes dull but at other times and with 
certain people of an extraordinary brilliance 
which reality could never match. These spots 
expand and contract, change their shape and 
colors, constantly displace one another. Some­
times the change is slow and gradual but some­
times it is a whirlwind of bewildering swiftness. 
vVhat is responsible for this whole phantas­
magoria? Physiologists and psychologists have 
studied the changing medley of colors; to de­
scribe the phenomenon they have used such 
terms as ocular spectrum, color spots, and phos­
phenes; they have attributed it to slight modifi­
cations that occur at all times as a result of retinal 
circulation and to pressure exerted on the eyes 

Tbe World of Dreams 
2 3 
by the closed lids, resulting in the mechanical 
excitation of the optic nerve. But the explanation 
of the phenomenon and the terms used to 
identify it are not of primary imponance. Every­
one is familiar with the phenomenon. The point 
that I wish to make here is that it constitutes the 
raw material, the stuff that we use in shaping our 
dreams. 
Some thirty or fony years ago Alfred Maury, 
and at about the same time D'Hervey, noticed 
that when we are about to fall asleep, the color 
spots with their changing shapes consolidate, be­
come fixed, take on precise outlines-the very 
outlines of the objects and persons that will ap­
pear in our dreams. But that observation is 
slightly suspect, for it was made by psychologists 
who were half-asleep. Recently an American 
psychologist, Professor Ladd of Yale, devised a 
more exact method; his method is hard to apply, 
however, for it requires special training. It con­
sists in acquiring the habit of keeping the eyelids 
closed on awakening in the morning and of 
retaining for a shon while the dream which 
otherwise would soon vanish from the field of 
vision and also, doubtlessly, from memory. Then 
the figures and objects in the dream are seen to 

24 
The World of Dreams 
dissolve gradually into phosphenes, the color 
spots which the eyes actually perceive when 
the lids are closed. Suppose, for instance, that in 
your dream you were reading a newspaper. On 
awakening you might find that in reality the 
well-defined outlines were blurred and that there 
remained nothing more than a white spot with 
scattered black lines. Or again, suppose that in 
your dream you were out on the open sea. As 
far as you could see, there stretched an endless 
expanse of yellowish-gray waves with their 
crowns of white spume. You might find on 
awakening that everything had fused into a huge 
spot, half yellow and half gray, sprinkled with 
bright dots. The spot was there and the bright 
dots were there all along. This would mean that 
our perception really has at its disposal during 
sleep a sort of visual dust, and that this dust is 
the source of our dreams. 
But is it the only source? Restricting ourselves 
for the moment to the sense of sight, we must 
join to these visual sensations that might be called 
internal those that continue to come to us from 
an external source. Our eyes can still distinguish 
light from darkness and to a certain extent dif­
ferent kinds of light even after the lids arc closed. 

Tbe World of Dreams 
25 
The sensations of light that come from without 
are responsible for many of our dreams. The 
sudden lighting of a candle in his room will 
suggest to the sleeper, unless he is sleeping too 
soundly, a dream dominated by the image of 
fire. Allow me to quote two of Tissie's ob­
servations on this point: 
Leon B-- dreamed that the theater in 
Alexandria was on fire; the flames lighted 
up the whole district. Suddenly he found 
himself transported to a fountain in the 
middle of a great forum. Fire spanned the 
chains linking the thick posts set up around 
the fountain. Then he found himself back 
in Paris at the exposition, which was on 
fire . . . ; he witnessed some heart-rending 
scenes, etc. He awoke with a start. On his 
eyes fell the rays from a dark lantern which 
the night nurse had flashed toward his bed 
. 
. 
m passmg. 
Bertrand M-- dreamed that he had en­
listed in the marine infantry in which he had 
previously served. He went to Fort-de­
France, Toulon, Lorient, the Crimea, and 
Constantinople. He saw lightning and heard 

z6 
Tbe World of Dreams 
thunder. . . . Finally he took part in a 
battle in which he saw fire leap from the 
mouths of cannon. He awoke with a start. 
Like B- he had been awakened by a 
flash of light from the dark lantern turned 
on him by the night nurse. 
Such are the dreams often caused by sudden 
exposure to bright light. 
Quite different are the dreams suggested by 
soft, continuous light, like moonlight. A. Krauss 
relates that upon awakening one day he dis­
covered that he was still extending his arms 
toward something which he saw in his dreams 
as the image of a girl. Slowly the image fused 
with that of the full moon, which was bathing 
him in its rays. Oddly enough, there are other 
examples of dreams in which moonlight, caress­
ing a sleeper's eyes, gives rise to visions of 
maidens. This suggests a kindred origin for the 
classical 
fable 
of 
Endymion, 
the 
shepherd 
thrown into a deep sleep and caressed while 
sleeping by Selene, the goddess of the moon. 
I have been discussing only visual sensations. 
They arc the main ones. But auditive sensations 
also play an important part in our dreams. 

The vVorld of Dreams 
2 7 
First, our ears perceive internal sensations­
humming, buzzing, whistling-which are hard 
to isolate and identify in the waking state but 
which are distinct in sleep. Next, we continue 
after falling asleep to hear external noises. A 
creaking piece of furniture, a crackling fire, the 
rain lashing a window, the wind playing a chro­
matic scale in the chimney-all these sounds 
reach our ears and are convened by dreams, 
according to circumstances, into conversation, 
songs, shouts, music, etc. Scissors were grated 
on tweezers near Alfred Maury's ears while he 
was asleep. Soon he dreamed that he was hearing 
the tocsin and witnessing the events of June, 
1848. There are countless instances of similar 
observations and experiences. But I hasten to 
add that sounds do not play in our dreams so 
imponant a part as colors. Our dreams are by 
and large visual, and even more visual than we 
think. Most of us at one time or another-as 
Max Simon has observed-have dreamed about 
speaking to someone or being engaged in a 
lengthy conversation only to have forced upon 
us the singular realization that we were not 
speaking and had not spoken, and that our inter­
locutor had not uttered a single word. We had 

2 8 
The World of Dreams 
exchanged our thoughts and carried on an un­
equivocal 
conversation, 
yet 
we 
had 
heard 
nothing. This fact is easily explained. For us to 
hear sounds in our dreams it is generally neces­
sary for us to perceive real noises. vVe can not 
start from scratch. Unless we are provided with 
some phonic substance, it is hard for us to fabri­
cate sounds in our dreams. 
Much more might be said about tactile sen­
sations than about auditive sensations, but our 
time is limited. We could speak for hours about 
the singular phenomena that stem from the fact 
that our sense of touch continues to function, 
though indistinctly, during sleep. These sen­
sations assail and characteristically modify or 
reshape the images that occupy our field of 
vision. Often in the dead of night we suddenly 
sense the contact of our bodies with our light 
clothing; this reminds us that we are lightly clad. 
Then we expose ourselves, if we happen to be 
dreaming about walking in the street, in our 
modest garb to the eyes of passers-by-seem­
ingly without causing them to be astonished. 
\Ve are at times astonished in our dreams but 
no one ever seems to be astonished by our 
actions. I mention this dream because it is a 

The World of Dreams 
29 
common one. Another dream which many of 
you must have had is this one: You feel that you 
are flying through the air or floating in space. 
If you have ever had such a dream, you can be 
almost certain that it will be repeated. Each 
time that it recurs, you will reason in this way: 
"Previously in dreams I have had the illusion 
of flying through the air or of floating in space, 
but this is the real thing. This proves to me con­
clusively that we can defy the law of gravi­
tation." Now if you awaken suddenly from 
the dream, you will have no difficulty in ana­
lyzing it, provided that you lose no time in 
making the attempt. You will see that you were 
acutely aware of the fact that your feet were 
not on the ground. And still, since you did not 
believe that you were asleep, you had lost sight 
of the fact that you were lying down, with the 
result that in your dream you were not in bed 
and yet did not have your feet on the ground. 
You concluded quite naturally that you were 
floating in space. Notice that when levitation is 
accomplished by flight, only one side of your 
body makes an effort to fly. And if you awaken 
at that moment, you will find that the sensation 
of making an effort to fly coincides with the 

30 
The World of Dreams 
actual sensation produced by the pressure of 
your body against the bed. The sensation of 
pressure, dissociated from its cause, transformed 
into a sensation of effon pure and simple, and 
joined to the illusion of floating in space, may 
be sufficient to produce the dream. 
It is interesting to observe how sensations 
of pressure, by moving up toward the field of 
vision and taking advantage of the luminous dust 
found there, manage to change into shapes and 
colors. Max Simon relates that he once had a 
strange, distressing dream. He dreamed that he 
had before him two unequal stacks of gold coins 
which for some reason he had to make equal. 
He could not succeed and was distressed by his 
failure. His anxiety, increasing in intensity as 
the dream progressed, finally awoke him. He 
then noticed that one of his legs was caught in 
the folds of the blanket in such a way that his 
feet were on diferent levels, making it im­
possible for him to align them. Hence the feeling 
of inequality which, invading the field of vision 
and finding there one or more yellow spots (this 
is at any rate the hypothesis that I offer), was 
expressed visually through the inequality of the 
two stacks of gold coins. Immanent in the sen-

The TVorld of Dreams 
3 1 
sacions of touch experienced during sleep is the 
tendency to visualize ourselves and thereby to 
put ourselves into our dreams. 
Even more important than tactile sensations 
proper are the sensations related to what has 
sometimes been called the internal senses. These 
deep-seated sensations emanate from every organ 
and especially from the viscera. One would 
hardly suspect that these internal sensations could 
become so acute during sleep. They are doubt­
lessly present in the waking state but go un­
noticed as a result of our being engaged in 
different activities. vVe live outside ourselves. 
But sleep brings us back inside ourselves. It 
frequently happens that people subject to laryn­
gitis and tonsillitis dream that they are having a 
recurrence of their ailment and feel an un­
pleasant tingling in their throats. A wake, they 
no longer feel anything and believe that the 
tingling was an illusion. But a few hours later 
the illusion becomes a reality. 
Serious illnesses and accidents, epileptic at­
tacks, cardiac diseases, etc. have in some instances 
been anticipated almost prophetically in dreams. 
We should not be surprised, therefore, to find 
that philosophers like Schopenhauer have seen 

3 2 
Tbe TV orld of Dreams 
in dreams a repercussion upon our consciousness 
of disturbances which emanate from the sym­
pathetic nervous system, that psychologists like 
Schemer have attributed to each of our organs 
the power to provoke a definite class of dreams 
which in some way represent it symbolically, 
and finally, that doctors like Artigues have 
written treatises on the semiological value of 
dreams, i.e. the means of using dreams for 
diagnosing certain illnesses. More recently Tissie, 
mentioned 
earlier, 
has 
shown how specific 
dreams are related to affections of the digestive, 
respiratory, and circulatory systems. 
Let me summarize. \Vhen we fall into a natural 
sleep we must not think, as some people some­
times imagine, that our senses are shut off from 
external impressions. Our senses continue to 
function. It is true that they function with less 
precision, but in return they embrace a host of 
subjective impressions which pass unnoticed in 
the waking state-when we live in a world of 
perceptions common to all men-and which 
reappear in sleep when we live only for our­
selves. Our faculty of sensory perception, far 
from shrinking in every respect when we arc 
asleep, broadens its field of operations. It is true 

The JV orld of Dreams 
3 3 
that it often loses in energy and tension what 
it gains in extension,. for it rarely brings us any­
thing other than vague impressions. These im­
pressions are the materials with which we build 
our dreams. But they are only the materials; by 
themselves they could never yield dreams. 
They could never yield dreams by themselves 
because they are vague and indeterminate. I am 
speaking only of the impressions that play an 
important part in our dreams: the changing 
colors and shapes that evolve before our eyes as 
soon as the lids are closed. They never have well­
defined outlines. Take black lines against a white 
background. To the dreamer they may stand 
for a page in a book, the front of a new house 
with dark shutters, or any number of other 
things. \Vho will make the choice? What shape 
will his decision imprint on the indecisive sub­
stance? The shape will depend on his remem­
brances. 
Note that as a rule dreams create nothing. 
Artistic, literary or scientific productions have 
of course been attributed in some instances to 
dreams. I shall mention only the well-known 
anecdote told about T artini, a violinist and com­
poser of the past century. Finding the muse 

34 
Tbe TVorld of Dreams 
recalcitrant when he tried to compose a sonara, 
he fell asleep; in his dream he saw the devil, who 
wrested from him his violin and gave a masterful 
rendition of the elusive sonata. Tartini wrote it 
down from memory when he awoke. It has come 
down to us as "The Devil's Sonata." 
But it is difficult in dealing with older cases 
to separate history from legend. \Ve need first­
hand observations of unquestionable authen­
ticity. About the only one that I have been able 
to find is that of the contemporary English 
novelist Stevenson. In a striking essay entitled 
"A Chapter on Dreams" this author, who was 
endowed with rare analytical talent, explained 
how the most original of his novels were com­
posed or at least sketched out in his dreams. But 
you will find on reading the chapter carefully 
that at a certain period in his life Stevenson had 
reached a psychological state in which it was 
difficult for him to tell whether he was asleep or 
awake. At least that is my interpretation of the 
facts. 
vVhen the mind creates-1 mean when it is 
capable of exerting the organizing and synthe­
sizing effort required for overcoming an obstacle 
or solving a problem and to an even greater 

T be World of Dreams 
3 5 
degree for producing a viable work of the 
imagination-we are not actually asleep, or the 
part of us that is at work is not the same at any 
rate as the part that is asleep; we can not say, 
therefore, that the mind is dreaming. In true 
sleep-in sleep that involves our whole being­
remembrances are first and foremost in the warp 
and woof of our dreams. But we often fail to 
recognize them. They may be very old remem­
brances of which we are oblivious during the 
waking state-remembrances drawn from the 
darkest depths of our past. They may be (and 
often are) memory images of which we are but 
vaguely, almost unconsciously aware during the 
waking state. Or again, they may be fragments 
of shattered remembrances which we have col­
lected piecemeal and woven haphazardly into an 
unrecognizable and incoherent fabric. 
Confronted with these odd collections of 
images with no plausible meaning, our intelli­
gence (which, contrary to what some people 
have asserted, does not abdicate its power of 
reasoning during sleep) searches for an expla­
nation, tries to fill in the gaps. It fills them by 
calling up other remembrances which, because 
they have the same deformations and the same 

36 
Tbe World of Dreams 
inconsistencies as the former, evoke in their turn 
still other remembrances-and so on indefinitely. 
But I shall not dwell on this point at the moment. 
It is enough for me to say, in answer to the 
question asked earlier, that the force which puts 
to constructive usc the materials made available 
to dreams by the different senses-the force 
which converts into specific, well-defined ob­
jects the vague, indeterminate sensations which 
we receive through our eyes and ears as well as 
from the whole surface and interior of our bodies 
-Is memory. 
Memory! In the waking state many remem­
brances come and go, occupying our minds by 
turns. But they are always linked closely to our 
present activity. Here I recall D'Hervcy's book 
on dreams. That is because I am discussing the 
question of dreams here in the Institut Psy­
chologique, because my presence in this place 
and the activity that I am called upon to perform 
-the lecture that I am giving-direct the func­
tioning of my memory along a certain specific 
course. The remembrances that we evoke when 
we are awake, no matter how remote they may 
at first appear, are always linked in some way to 
our present activity. 

The World of Dreams 
37 
vVhat is the function of memory in an animal? 
It is to recall to the animal in a specific situation 
the helpful or harmful consequences that may 
have issued previously from similar situations 
and thereby to direct its course of action. Doubt­
lessly the memory of man, though not subser­
vient to it in the same degree, is also linked to 
his present activity. Our remembrances at a given 
moment form a coherent whole-a pyramid, as 
it were, whose peak is wedged into our present 
activity. 
Behind the remembrances associated with our 
employment and revealed through it, however, 
are others, thousands of others, stored away in 
the depths of the memory, down beneath the 
stage lighted by consciousness. Yes, I believe 
indeed that all our past life is there, preserved 
in its most intimate details, that we never forget 
anything, and that everything which we have 
felt, perceived, thought and willed since the first 
stirrings of our consciousness lives on inde­
structibly. But the remembrances preserved in 
the darkest depths are like invisible phantoms. 
Perhaps they are drawn toward the light but 
dissuaded from ever making the attempt to reach 
it by the knowledge that such an undenaking is 

38 
The TV orld of Dreams 
hopeless and that I, a living, acting being, have 
to do something other than concern myself with 
them. 
Now suppose that at a cenain moment I be­
come disimerested in the present situation or 
activity-in short, disinterested in everything 
that has been holding and directing my memory 
up to that moment. Suppose, in other words, 
that I fall asleep. Then, sensing that I have just 
removed the obstacle, lifted the trap door that 
has been keeping them in the substratum of my 
consciousness, the remembrances spring forth. 
They leap up, bestir themselves, perform a great 
dance of death in the night of the unconscious. 
And, all together, they rush toward the door that 
has just been opened slightly. They would all 
like to pass through it. They can not, however, 
for there are too many of them. From the multi­
tude called, which ones will be chosen? The out­
come is not hard to predict. Earlier, while I was 
awake, the remembrances that managed to break 
through were those related in some way to the 
present situation, to what I could see and hear 
around me. Now the images that crowd my 
field of vision are more vague, the sounds that 
strike my cars more turbid, the tactile sensations 

Tbe World of Dreams 
39 
that come to me from all over my body more 
indistinct, but the sensations that issue from the 
innermost parts of my system are more numer­
ous. Among the phantom remembrances that 
aspire to fill themselves with color and sound­
with substance, in short-the only ones to 
succeed will be those that can assimilate the 
colors that we glimpse, the external and internal 
noises that we hear, etc. and correspond in ad­
dition to the affective tone of our general sen­
sibility. When this union between memory and 
sensation is effected, we have a dream. 
In a poetic passage of his Enneads, the philoso­
pher Plotinus, Plato's interpreter and successor, 
explains how men come into being. Nature, he 
says, roughs out living bodies. But she provides 
nothing more than the skeletal form. \Vithout 
help from another source she could never com­
plete her task. But souls dwell in the world of 
ideas. Unable to act by themselves and not even 
thinking of independent action, they float around 
beyond time and space. Certain bodies, however, 
correspond more closely than others by virtue 
of their shape to the aspirations of certain souls. 
And certain souls identify themselves with cer­
tain bodies. A body, not wholly viable when it 

40 
Tbe World of Dreams 
leaves the hand of nature, rises toward the soul 
that will make its life complete. And the soul, 
looking upon this body and believing that it sees 
its image in the body as in a mirror, is attracted 
and enthralled; it drops down, and its fall is life. 
To these detached souls I would compare the 
remembrances immersed in the darkness of the 
unconscious. Our nocturnal sensations, on the 
other hand, resemble incomplete bodies. Sen­
sations are warm, colorful, lively and almost 
alive, but indecisive. Remembrances are com­
plete but airy and lifeless. Each sensation is 
trying to find a form on which to mold its vague 
outlines. Each remembrance is seeking to obtain 
some substance to fill it, to provide it with ballast 
-in short, to bring about its actualization. They 
exen a mutual attraction and the phantom re­
membrance, incarnated in the sensation that 
provides it with flesh and blood, becomes a being 
with a life of its own-a dream. 
There is nothing mysterious about the binh 
of a dream. It resembles the birth of a perception. 
The mechanism of dreams is the same in its broad 
outlines as that of normal perception. vVhat we 
actually see when we perceive a real object, in 
fact-the concrete matter of our perception-

The World of Dreams 
41 
is insignificant in contrast to what our memory 
introduces. \Vhen you read a book or look over 
a newspaper, do you believe that every printed 
letter actually reaches your consciousness? If 
that were true, more than a whole day might be 
required for going over the ne,vspaper. The 
truth is that in each word or even in each phrase 
you see but a few letters or characteristic marks 
-just enough to enable you to guess the rest. 
You think that you see the rest, but actually 
this is a hallucination. A number of conclusive 
experiments leaves no room for doubt on this 
point. I shall mention only the experiments of 
Goldscheider and Muller. These investigators 
copied or printed certain formulas in common 
use-"Positively No Admission," "Preface to 
the Fourth Edition," etc.-but were careful to 
write the words incorrectly by changing some 
letters and, above all, by omitting others. The 
expressions were exhibited in a darkened room. 
The person who was to serve as the subject in 
the experiment did not know, of course, what 
had been written on the placard in front of him. 
Each placard was lighted electrically for a very 
short time-not long enough for the observer 
to be able actually to perceive every letter. The 

42 
Tbe World of Dreams 
researchers began by determining experimentally 
the time necessary for viewing one letter of the 
alphabet; then it was easy for them to make it 
impossible for the subject to glimpse more than 
eight or ten letters, for example, out of a total 
of thirty or forty contained in each expression. 
The subject generally read the expression in its 
entirety without difficulty. But for our purposes 
that is not the most instructive point in the 
experiment. 
The subject was asked in each instance about 
the letters which he was sure of having seen. 
These letters might actually have been written 
on the placard, or they might have been missing, 
either because they had been replaced by others 
or because they had been omitted. Thus the sub­
ject might see clearly outlined in the bright light 
a letter which did not exist if that letter seemed 
by virtue of its context to belong in the expres­
sion. The characteristics that actually made an 
impression on the subject's eyes were therefore 
used only to guide his unconscious memory. 
vVhen the appropriate remembrance was dis­
covered-when the memory reconstructed the 
expression presented in a skeletal form by these 
characteristics-it was brought to the fore. This 

The World of Dreams 
43 
remembrance, and not the writing on the 
placard, was what the subject saw. Thus the 
experiments clearly show that ordinary reading 
is mainly guesswork, but not abstract guesswork. 
It is an externalization of remembrances which 
manage by taking advantage of piecemeal real­
izations to realize themselves completely. 
Thus it is that in the waking state and in the 
cognizance that we take of concrete objects 
around us, there is in operation a process identical 
in nature to the process of dreaming. We per­
ceive but the skeletal form of a thing; this rough 
outline summons the complete remembrance, 
which is either in the unconscious or simply in 
the state of thought; profiting by the occasion, 
the complete remembrance rushes out. It is this 
type of hallucination, packaged and framed in a 
concrete setting, that we perceive. This is much 
shorter and is accomplished more quickly than 
the thing itself. Interesting studies might also be 
made of the behavior and appearance of remem­
brances during the process. We must not assume 
that our remembrances are stored away as inert 
imprints. They are kept in our memory like 
steam in a boiler, more or less under pressure. 
When the skeletal form that the viewer has 

44 
The JVorld of Dreams 
glimpsed sends out its summons, remembrances 
seem to come together in family groups accord­
ing to their bonds of kinship and resemblance. 
Some of Miinsterbcrg's experiments (earlier than 
those 
of 
Goldscheider 
and 
Muller), 
even 
though conducted for a different purpose, seem 
to me to confirm this hypothesis. Miinsterberg 
wrote his words correctly. Nor did he use stereo­
typed expressions; he used isolated words chosen 
at random. In his experiments also, the words 
were exposed for such a short time that they 
could not be perceived in their entirety. While 
the subject was looking at one of the written 
words, another word with a completely different 
meaning was shouted in his ear. Examples: The 
word shown was tumult, the word shouted, 
train; the word given by the subject was 
tunnel. The word shown was Triest,. the word 
shouted, 
the 
German 
word 
V erzweiflzmg 
(despair); the word recalled by the subject was 
Trost ( comfon). Thus everything happened as 
if when pronounced close to the subject's ear, 
the word train had awakened, without his know­
ing it, hopes of conscious realization on the pan 
of a host of remembrances related to the idea of 
train (car, rail, trip, etc.); but these were only 

The World of Dreams 
45 
hopes, and the memory image that actually ap­
peared was the one that the sensation had already 
begun to realize. 
Such is the mechanism of true perception and 
also of dreams. In each instance there are on 
the one hand concrete impressions made on the 
sense organs and on the other, remembrances 
that have come to be incorporated in the im­
pressions and revived by their vitality. 
But precisely what is the essential difference 
between perceiving and dreaming? What does it 
mean to sleep? Needless to say, I am not asking 
for a physiological explanation of sleep. That is 
a special issue and one that is in addition far from 
being resolved. I am asking for a psychological 
explanation of sleep. For our mind continues to 
function while we sleep; it functions, as we have 
just seen, with elements similar to those used 
during the waking state-with sensations and 
remembrances; and in much the same way it 
puts them together. Yet on the one hand we have 
normal perception and on the other, dreams. 
What, then, I repeat, is the difference between 
them? And what is the psychological basis of 
sleep? 

46 
The JV orld of Dreams 
Theories are to be regarded with distrust. 
And there are many theories of sleep. One 
theory is that sleeping consists in isolating our­
selves from the external world, in closing our 
senses to things from the outside. But I have 
shown that our senses continue to function 
during sleep, that they provide us with the rough 
outlines or at least the staning point for most 
of our dreams. Failing asleep, according to some 
people, means stopping the functioning of the 
higher mental faculties. And they talk of some 
kind of temporary paralysis of the higher cere­
bral centers. I do not believe that this is much 
closer to the truth. In our dreams we of course 
become indifferent to logic, but we do not be­
come incapable of exercising it. In some dreams 
we reason soundly and even subtly. I would 
almost say-at the risk of seeming paradoxical­
that the dreamer's mistake is in reasoning too 
much. He would rule out folly if he acted merely 
as a spectator attending the parade staged by 
the images in his dreams. But he is cenain to 
resort to whimsical reasoning bordering on 
foolishness when he makes every effon to ex­
plain what he sees, for then he must tie together 
incoherent images. I am of course aware of the 

Tbe World of Dreams 
47 
fact that our higher intellectual faculties flag 
during sleep and that for the most part the 
dreamer's powers of reasoning are so weak as to 
seem at times like a parody of reasoning. But as 
much could be said of every other faculty during 
sleep. Dreams are therefore characterized neither 
by the abolition of reasoning nor by the closing 
of the senses. The answer must be sought else­
where. 
Something more than theories is required. We 
must come directly into contact with the facts. 
Researchers must use themselves as subjects in 
conclusive experiments. On coming out of a 
dream-for he can hardly analyze himself while 
the dream is in progress-the subject should 
watch for the transition between sleeping and 
waking, clinging as tightly as possible to the 
transition, and then force himself to express in 
words all that he has experienced during the 
transition. That is very difficult, but it can be ac­
complished through attentiveness. Allow me to 
borrow from my own experience and relate 
both a recent dream and what was accomplished 
on coming out of the dream. 
I dreamed that I was addressing an audience, 
making a political speech at a political rally. And 

48 
Tbe lVorld of Dreams 
from the back of the auditorium there came a 
murmur. The murmur grew louder, like a 
rumble. Then it became a roar, a frightful 
tumult. And finally there resounded throughout 
the auditorium the rhythmic shout: "Throw him 
out! Throw him out!" At that instant I awoke. 
A dog was barking in a near-by garden, and each 
wow-wow blended with a shout: "Throw him 
out!" So there was the infinitesimal moment that 
must be grasped. My waking self, which had just 
reappeared, had to turn around toward the self 
in my dreams, which was still there, and for a 
few instants at least hold on to it, keep it from 
getting away. 
"I have caught you in the act. You thought 
that you heard an audience shouting, but it was 
only a dog barking. You are going to tell me 
what you were doing!" 
To that the self in my dream replied: "I wasn't 
doing anytbing, and that is precisely how you 
and I differ from one another. You suppose that 
you don't have to do anything at all to hear a 
dog bark and know that it is a dog barking. That 
is a big mistake. \Vithout realizing it, you put 
forth a considerable effort. 
"This is what you do. You take your whole 

The vVorld of Dreams 
49 
memory, all your cumulative experience, and 
you cause this formidable mass of remembrances 
to converge on a single point in such a way as to 
inject into the sound that you actually hear the 
most appropriate sound that can be drawn from 
all your remembrances. And you achieve a 
perfect correspondence; there must not be the 
slightest discrepancy between the remembrance 
that you call up and the crude sensation that you 
receive (otherwise you would still be dreaming); 
you can achieve this perfect correspondence only 
through an effort of both your memory and 
your perception, just as the tailor when fitting 
you for a suit stretches the pieces of cloth and 
adjusts them to the shape of your body in order 
to pin them. So you see, at every moment during 
the day, you are putting forth an enormous 
effort. Your waking life is a life of toil even when 
you think that you are doing nothing, for at 
every instant you must choose and at every 
instant exclude. You choose-and with extreme 
precision and subtlety-between remembrancesʗ 
rejecting any remembrance which will not fit in 
exactly with your present state. The choice that 
you are forever exercising, the adaptation that 
you are forever in the process of making, is the 

so 
The World of Dreams 
first and most important attribute of what is 
called good sense. But all this keeps you in a 
state of uninterrupted tension. You don't feel it 
at this very moment any more than you feel 
aonospheric pressure, but in the long run you 
become tired. Good sense is tiresome. 
"Well, I repeat, I differ from you for the very 
reason that I do nothing. I simply refuse to make 
the effort that you are forever making. Instead 
of becoming attached to life, I become detached 
from it. I become indifferent to everything. 
Sleeping means becoming disinterested. You 
sleep in proportion to your disinterest. A mother 
sleeping beside her child may not stir at the sound 
of thunder, yet awaken at the whimper of the 
child. She is not really asleep with respect to the 
child. vVe do not sleep with respect to what 
continues to interest us. 
"You ask me what I do when I dream. I'll tell 
you what you do when you are awake. You take 
me, your dreaming self, me, the totality of your 
past, and you manage by making me smaller and 
smaller to fit me into the tiny circle which you 
draw around your present activity. That is what 
it means to be awake and to live a psycholog­
ically normal life. It means struggling. It means 

The World of Dreams 
5 1  
willing. As for dreams, do you really need an 
explanation? It is the state into which you 
naturally fall back as soon as you give yourself 
up, as soon as you no longer have the strength 
to concentrate on a single point, as soon as you 
stop willing. Something more likely to call for an 
explanation is the wonderful mechanism through 
which your will instantaneously and almost un­
consciously manages at a particular moment to 
concentrate everything that you are carrying 
around inside yourself on one and the same point, 
the point that interests you. But to explain that is 
the task of normal psychology, the psychology 
of the waking state, for waking and willing are 
one and the same." 
That is what my dreaming self might have 
said. And it might tell us many other things if we 
could let it speak freely. But I see that our time 
has already elapsed. Let us hastily extract from 
this lecture the basic difference between dream­
ing and the waking state. The same faculties 
function when we dream and when we are 
awake, but in one instance they are tense and in 
the other relaxed. The fullness of our mental 
life is in our dreams, but with a minimum of 
tension, effort, and bodily movement. We still 

5 2  
The World of Dreams 
perceive, still remember, still reason; all this may 
abound in dreams, for in the domain of the mind, 
abundance does not mean effort. What requires 
effort is precision of correspondence. No effort 
is required for the sound of a barking dog to 
evoke the remembrance of a murmuring, shout­
ing audience. But a positive effort is required for 
this sound to be perceived as the barking of a 
dog. The dreamer does not have the ability to 
make this effort. That is the one and only dif­
ference between him and a man who is awake. 
From this basic difference many others could 
be deduced. The main characteristics of dreams 
would be readily understood. But here I can only 
outline the form which an extensive study of 
dreams should take. It would be carried out along 
three main lines: the incoherence of dreams, 
the abolition of the sense of duration which often 
appears to characterize dreams, and the order in 
which remembrances present themselves to the 
dreamer to contend for the waiting sensations in 
which they will be incorporated. 
The incoherence of dreams seems to me to be 
easily explained. Since a dream characteristically 
exhibits, not a perfect correspondence but rather 
some variance between memory and sensation, 

The TV orld of Dreams 
53 
quite different remembrances may be suited to 
the same sensation. Suppose, for instance, that in 
the field of vision there is a green spot with 
white dots. It may be a lawn spotted with white 
flowers, a billiard-table and billiard-balls, or a 
host of other things. These different remem­
brances, all capable of profiting by the same 
sensation, rush toward it. Sometimes all the re­
membrances cluster around a sensation at the 
same time, and then the lawn actually is a 
billiard-table. This accounts for the absurd 
dreams in which an object retains its identity 
while becoming something else. As I said a 
moment ago, the mind when confronted with 
such preposterous sights seeks an explanation and 
often, in so doing, simply adds to the incoher­
ence. 
As for the abolition of the sense of time in 
many of our dreams, this is another effect stem­
ming from the same cause. A dream can offer 
us in a few seconds a series of events which 
during the waking state would occupy whole 
days. You are acquainted with the case men­
tioned by Maury; it has become a classic, and I 
accept it as probable in spite of recent adverse 
criticism because of the great number of similar 

54 
The World of Dreams 
observations that I have found scattered through­
out the literature of dreams. But there is no 
mystery about the precipitation of images. In 
the waking state we live our lives in common 
with our fellow beings; attentiveness to this 
external, social bond holds sway over the suc­
cession of our internal states. It is like the 
pendulum which lessens and cuts up into regular 
segments the undivided, almost instantaneous 
tension of the mainspring in a clock. It is the 
pendulum that is missing in dreams. P.recipitatin 
is not any more so than abundance a sign of effort 
in the domain of the mind. Precision of corre-
-
,_ . 
-
ʘpondenʙe, I repeat, is what requires effort. And 
that is precisely what the dreamer lacks. He is no 
longer capable of the attentiveness to life neces­
sary for regulating the inner according to the 
outer, for fitting inner duration perfectly into 
the general duration of things. 
Finally, there remains the question of how the 
peculiar relaxation of the mind during dreams 
explains the preference shown by the dreamer 
for one remembrance over another one equally 
capable of being incorporated in actual sen­
sations. According to one current theory, we 
dream mainly about events that have especially 

Tbe World of Dreams 
55 
preoccupied us during the day. That is some­
times true, but when the psychological life of 
the waking state is carried over in that way into 
our sleep, the result is that we hardly sleep. Sleep 
filled with such dreams would leave us exhausted. 
In normal sleep our dreams relate rather, all other 
conditions being equal, to the thoughts that have 
flashed by us like lightning or to objects that we 
have perceived almost without awareness. If we 
dream of events of the same day, the most in­
significant facts, not the most important ones, 
will have the best chance of reappearing. 
Here I am in complete agreement with W. 
Robert, Delage, and Freud. I was in the street, 
waiting for a streetcar. I was waiting beside the 
tracks and was not in the slightest danger. Never­
theless, if the idea of possible danger had crossed 
my mind just as the streetcar came by-how 
shall I put it?-if my body had instinctively re­
coiled even though I was not conscious of feeling 
any fear, that night I might have dreamed that 
the streetcar was running over me. I was watch­
ing over a patient whose condition was hopeless. 
If I had once chanced to hope against all hope 
without being aware of it, I might have dreamed 
that the patient had recovered. I would be more 

56 
Tbe lVorld of Dreams 
likely in any case to dream of recovery than 
of sickness. In short, the events that are most 
likely to reappear in dreams are those to which 
we are least attentive in our thinking. \Vhat is 
unusual about that? A dreaming self is a relaxed 
self. It welcomes most readily incidental, dis­
tracting remembrances not characterized by 
effort. 
It may be true that in very deep sleep the laws 
governing the reappearance of remembrances are 
quite different. \Ve know almost nothing about 
deep sleep. The dreams that fill it are as a general 
rule dreams that we forget. Sometimes, however, 
we recall some part of them. And then we ex­
perience a strange, untranslatable feeling. It 
seems that we are returning from afar-from 
far away in space and time. These are doubt­
lessly very old scenes from our youth or child­
hood which in our dreams we revive in all their 
details, changed somewhat by the emotional 
coloring that we have added but impregnated 
with a youthful, childlike freshness that we 
might seek in vain to re-create during the waking 
state. I believe that some recent unpublished 
experiments by Vaschide will throw some light 
on deep sleep and show that these dreams are 

The World of Dreams 
57 
more coherent than the ones which we ordi­
narily remember. 
It is toward deep sleep that psychologists 
should direct their efforts in order not only to 
study the mechanism of the unconscious memory 
but also to examine the more mysterious phe­
nomena relating to "psychical research." I dare 
not make any pronouncements on these phe­
nomena, but I can not refrain from attaching 
some imponance to the data collected system­
atically and with tireless zeal by the Society for 
Psychical Research which we were told about 
the other day. If telepathy influences our dreams, 
it probably has the best opportunity to manifest 
itself during very deep sleep. But, I repeat, I can 
make no pronouncement on this point. I have 
gone forward with you as far as possible. I stop 
at the threshold of the mystery. To explore the 
innermost depths of the unconscious, to work 
in what I have called earlier the substratum of 
consciousness, that will be the main task of psy­
chology in the century that is dawning. I do not 
doubt that wonderful discoveries await it there, 
as important perhaps as were in the preceding 
centuries the discoveries in the physical and 
natural sciences. That, at any rate, is the promise 

58 
The World of Dreams 
that I make, the wish that I express in closing. 
And to you, ladies and gentlemen, I am grateful 
for the constant attentiveness with which you 
have followed this address from the beginning to 
the end, even though it has exceeded by far the 
prescribed length. 


