
Ma t t e r  a n d  Memo r y  

Authorized Translation by Nancy Margaret Paul 
and W. Scott Palmer 

Matter and Memory 
Henri Bergson 
ZONE 
BOOKS
· 
NEW 
YORK 
1991 

Published exclusively in the United States 
© 1988 Urzone Inc. 
ZONE BOOKS 
1226 Prospect Avenue 
Brooklyn, NY 11218 
All rights reserved. 
First Paperback Edition 
Eighth Printing, 2005 
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, including electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
microfilming, recording, or otherwise (except for that 
copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. 
Copyright Law and except by reviewers for the public 
press) without written permission from the Publisher. 
Originally published in France as Matiere et Memoire by 
Presses Universitaires de France. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
Distributed by The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Bergson, Henri, 1859-1941. 
[Matiere et memoire. English] 
Matter and memory / Henri Bergson; authorized 
translation by N aney Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer. 
p. 
cm. 
Bibliography: p. 
ISBN 0-942299-05-1 (pbk.) 
1. Mind and body. 2. Matter. 1. Title. 
B243o.B4M313 
1988 
128'·3 -dC19 
87-37124 
CIP 

Tr a n s I a t  0 r s' N o t  e 
This translation of Monsieur Bergson's Matiere et memoire has been 
made from the fifth edition of1908, and has had the great advan­
tage of being revised in proof by the author. Monsieur Bergson has 
also written a new Introduction for it, which supersedes that which 
accompanied the original work. 
The translators offer their sincere thanks to the author for his 
invaluable help in these matters and for many suggestions made 
by him while the book was in manuscript. 
N.M.P. 
Ws.P. 


C o n t e n t s  
Introduction 
9 
Of the Selection of Images for Conscious Presentation. 
17 
What Our Body Means and Does 
I I 
Of the Recognition of Images. 
77 
Memory and Brain 
III 
Of the Survival of Images. 
133 
Memory and Mind 
IV 
The Delimiting and Fixing of Images. 
179 
Perception and Matter. Soul and Body 
Summary and Conclusion 
225 
Notes 
251 
Bibliography, compiled by Bruno Paradis 
261 
Index 
275 


I n t r o duc t i o n  
This book affirms the reality of spirit and the reality of matter, 
and tries to determine the relation of the one to the other by the 
study of a definite example, that of memory. It is, then, frankly 
dualistic. But, on the other hand, it deals with body and mind in 
such a way as, we hope, to lessen greatly, if not to overcome, the 
theoretical difficulties which have always beset dualism, and which 
cause it, though suggested by the immediate verdict of conscious­
ness and adopted by common sense, to be held in small honor 
among philosophers. 
These difficulties are due, for the most part, to the concep­
tion, now realistic, now idealistic, which philosophers have of 
matter. The aim of our first chapter is to show that realism and 
idealism both go too far, that it is a mistake to reduce matter to 
the perception which we have of it, a mistake also to make of it a 
thing able to produce in us perceptions, but in itself of another 
nature than they. Matter, in our view, is an aggregate of "images." 
And by "image" we mean a certain existence which is more than 
that which the idealist calls a representation, but less than that which 
the realist calls a thing - an existence placed halfway between 
the "thing" and the "representation." This conception of matter 
9 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
is simply that of common sense. It would greatly astonish a man 
unaware of the speculations of philosophy if we told him that the 
object before him, which he sees and touches, exists only in his 
mind and for his mind or even, more generally, exists only for mind, 
as Berkeley held. Such a man would always maintain that the object 
exists independently of the consciousness which perceives it. But, 
on the other hand, we should astonish him quite as much by tell­
ing him that the object is entirely different from that which is 
perceived in it, that it has neither the color ascribed to it by the 
eye nor the resistance found in it by the hand. The color, the resis­
tance, are, for him, in the object: they are not states of our mind; 
they are part and parcel of an existence really independent of our 
own. For common sense, then, the object exists in itself, and, on 
the other hand, the object is, in itself, pictorial, as we perceive it: 
image it is, but a self-existing image. 
This is just the sense in which we use the word image in our 
first chapter. We place ourselves at the point of view of a mind 
unaware of the disputes between philosophers. Such a mind would 
naturally believe that matter exists just as it is perceived; and, 
since it is perceived as an image, the mind would make of it, in 
itself, an image. In a word, we consider matter before the disso­
ciation which idealism and realism have brought about between 
its existence and its appearance. No doubt it has become difficult 
to avoid this dissociation now that philosophers have made it. To 
forget it, however, is what we ask of the reader. If, in the course of 
this first chapter, objections arise in his mind against any of the 
views that we put forward, let him ask himself whether these objec­
tions do not imply his return to one or the other of the two points 
of view above which we urge him to rise. 
Philosophy made a great step forward on the day when Berkeley 
proved, as against the "mechanical philosophers," that the sec­
ondary qualities of matter have at least as much reality as the pri-
10 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
mary qualities. His mistake lay in believing that, for this, it was 
necessary to place matter within the mind and make it into a pure 
idea. Descartes, no doubt, had put matter too far from us when he 
made it one with geometrical extensity. But, in order to bring it 
nearer to us, there was no need to go to the point of making it one 
with our own mind. Because he did go as far as this, Berkeley 
was unable to account for the success of physics, and, whereas 
Descartes had set up the mathematical relations between phe­
nomena as their very essence, he was obliged to regard the mathe­
matical order of the universe as a mere accident. So the Kantian 
criticism became necessary, to show the reason of this mathemati­
cal order and to give back to our physics a solid foundation - a 
task in which, however, it succeeded only by limiting the range 
and value of our senses and of our understanding. The criticism of 
Kant, on this point at least, would have been unnecessary; the 
human mind, in this direction at least, would not have been led to 
limit its own range; metaphysics would not have been sacrificed 
to physics, if philosophy had been content to leave matter half 
way between the place to which Descartes had driven it and that 
to which Berkeley drew it back - to leave it, in fact, where it is 
seen by common sense. 
There we shall try to see it ourselves. Our first chapter defines 
this way of looking at matter; the last sets forth the consequences 
of such a view. But, as we said before, we treat of matter only in so 
far as it concerns the problem dealt with in our second and third 
chapters, that which is the subject of this essay: the problem of 
the relation between soul and body. 
This relation, though it has been a favorite theme throughout 
the history of philosophy, has really been very little studied. If we 
leave on one side the theories which are content to state the "union 
of soul and body" as an irreducible and inexplicable fact, and those 
which speak vaguely of the body as an instrument of the soul, 
II 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
there remains hardly any other conception of the psychophys­
iological relation than the hypothesis of "epiphenomenalism" or 
that of "parallelism," which in practice - I mean in the interpre­
tation of particular facts - both end in the same conclusions. For 
whether, indeed, thought is regarded as a mere function of the 
brain and the state of consciousness as an epiphenomenon of the 
state of the brain, or whether mental states and brain states are 
held to be two versions, in two different languages, of one and the 
same original, in either case it is laid down that, could we pene­
trate into the inside of a brain at work and behold the dance of the 
atoms which make up the cortex, and if, on the other hand, we 
possessed the key to psychophysiology, we should know every 
detail of what is going on in the corresponding consciousness. 
This, indeed, is what is most commonly maintained by phi­
losophers as well as by men of science. Yet it would be well to ask 
whether the facts, when examined without any preconceived idea, 
really suggest an hypothesis of this kind. That there is a close 
connection between a state of consciousness and the brain we do 
not dispute. But there is also a close connection between a coat 
and the nail on which it hangs, for, if the nail is pulled out, the 
coat falls to the ground. Shall we say, then, that the shape of the 
nail gives us the shape of the coat, or in any way corresponds to it? 
No more are we entitled to conclude, because the physical fact is 
hung onto a cerebral state, that there is any parallelism between 
the two series psychical and physiological. When philosophy pleads 
that the theory of parallelism is borne out by the results of posi­
tive science, it enters upon an unmistakably vicious circle; for, if 
science interprets connection, which is a fact, as signifying paral­
lelism, which is an hypothesis (and an hypothesis to which it is 
difficult to attach an intelligible meaning!), it does so, consciously 
or unconsciously, for reasons of a philosophic order: it is because 
science has been accustomed by a certain type of philosophy to 
!2 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
believe that there is no hypothesis more probable, more in accor­
dance with the interests of scientific inquiry. 
Now, as soon as we do, indeed, apply to positive facts for such 
information as may help us to solve the problem, we find it is with 
memory that we have to deal. This was to be expected, because 
memory - we shall try to prove it in the course of this work - is 
just the intersection of mind and matter. But we may leave out 
the reason here: no one, at any rate, will deny that, among all the 
facts capable of throwing light on the psychophysiological rela­
tion, those which concern memory, whether in the normal or in 
the pathological state, hold a privileged position. Not only is the 
evidence here extremely abundant (consider the enormous mass 
of observations collected in regard to the various kinds of apha­
sia), but nowhere else have anatomy, physiology and psychology 
been able to lend each other such valuable aid. Anyone who 
approaches, without preconceived ideas and on the firm ground of 
facts, the classical problem of the relations of soul and body, will 
soon see this problem as centering upon the subject of memory, 
and, even more particularly, upon the memory of words: it is from 
this quarter, undoubtedly, that will come the light which will illu­
mine the obscurer parts of the problem. 
The reader will see how we try to solve it. Speaking generally, 
the physical state seems to us to be, in most cases, immensely 
wider than the cerebral state. I mean that the brain state indicates 
only a very small part of the mental state, that part which is capa­
ble of translating itself into movements of locomotion. Take a com­
plex thought which unrolls itself in a chain of abstract reasoning. 
This thought is accompanied by images, that are at least nascent. 
And these images themselves are not pictured in consciousness 
without some foreshadowing, in the form of a sketch or a ten­
dency, of the movements by which these images would be acted 
or played in space - would, that is to say, impress particular atti-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
tudes upon the body, and set free all that they implicitly contain 
of spatial movement. Now, of all the thought which is unrolling, 
this, in our view, is what the cerebral state indicates at every 
moment. He who could penetrate into the interior of a brain and 
see what happens there, would probably obtain full details of these 
sketched-out, or prepared, movements; there is no proof that he 
would learn anything else. Were he endowed with a superhuman 
intellect, did he possess the key to psychophysiology, he would 
know no more of what is going on in the corresponding conscious­
ness than we should know of a play from the comings and goings 
of the actors upon the stage. 
That is to say, the relation of the mental to the cerebral is not a 
constant, any more than it is a simple, relation. According to the 
nature of the play that is being acted, the movements of the players 
tell us more or less about it: nearly everything, if it is a pantomime; 
next to nothing, if it is a delicate comedy. Thus our cerebral state 
contains more or less of our mental state in the measure that we reel 
off our psychic life into action or wind it up into pure knowledge. 
There are then, in short, divers tones of mental life, or, in other 
wurds, our psychic life may be lived at different heights, now nearer 
to action, now further removed from it, according to the degree 
of our attention to life. Here we have one of the ruling ideas of this 
book - the idea, indeed, which served as the starting point of our 
inquiry. That which is usually held to be a greater complexity of 
the psychical state appears to us, from our point of view, to be a 
greater dilatation of the whole personality, which, normally nar­
rowed down by action, expands with the unscrewing of the vice 
in which it has allowed itself to be squeezed, and, always whole 
and undivided, spreads itself over a wider and wider surface. That 
which is commonly held to be a disturbance of the psychic life 
itself, an inward disorder, a disease of the personality, appears to 
us, from our point of view, to be an unloosing or a breaking of the 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
tie which binds this psychic life to its motor accompaniment, a 
weakening or an impairing of our attention to outward life. This 
opinion, as also that which denies the localization of the memory­
images of words and explains aphasia quite otherwise than by such 
localization, was considered paradoxical at the date of the first 
publication of the present work (1896). It will appear much less 
so now. The conception of aphasia then classical, universally admit­
ted, believed to be unshakable, has been considerably shaken in 
the last few years, chiefly by reasons of an anatomical order, but 
partly also by reasons of the same kind as those which we then 
advanced.2 And the profound and original study of neuroses made 
by Professor Pierre Janet has led him, of late years, to explain all 
psychasthenic forms of disease by these same considerations of psy­
chic "tension" and of attention to reality which were then pre­
sumed to be metaphysical. 3 
In truth, it was not altogether a mistake to call them by that 
name. Without denying to psychology, any more than to meta­
physics, the right to make itself into an independent science, we 
believe that each of these two sciences should set problems to the 
other and can, in a measure, help it to solve them. How should 
it be otherwise, if psychology has for its object the study of the 
human mind working for practical utility, and if metaphysics is 
but this same mind striving to transcend the conditions of useful 
action and to come back to itself as to a pure creative energy? 
Many problems, which appear foreign to each other as long as we 
are bound by the letter of the terms in which these two sciences 
state them, are seen to be very near akin, and to be able to solve 
each other when we thus penetrate into their inner meaning. We 
little thought, at the beginning of our inquiry, that there could 
be any connection between the analytical study of memory and 
the question, which is debated between realists and idealists or 
between mechanists and dynamists, with regard to the existence 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
or the essence of matter. Yet this connection is real, it is even 
intimate; and, if we take it into account, a cardinal metaphysical 
problem is carried into the open field of observation, where it 
may be solved progressively, instead of forever giving rise to fresh 
disputes of the schools within the closed lists of pure dialectic. 
The complexity of some parts of the present work is due to the 
inevitable dovetailing of problems which results from approach­
ing philosophy in such a way. But through this complexity, which 
is due to the complexity of reality itself, we believe that the reader 
will find his way if he keeps a fast hold on the two principles which 
we have used as a clue throughout our own researches. The first is 
that in psychological analysis we must never forget the utilitarian 
character of our mental functions, which are essentially turned 
toward action. The second is that the habits formed in action find 
their way up to the sphere of speculation, where they create ficti­
tious problems, and that metaphysics must begin by dispersing 
this artificial obscurity. 
PARIS, 
October 1 9 10 
16 
H. BERGSON 

C H A P T E R  I 
Of T h e  Se l e c t i o n  o f  I ma g e s  f o r 
C o n sc i o u s  P r e s e n t a t i o n . 
W h a t  Ou r B o d y  Me a n s  a n d  D o e s. 
We will assume for the moment that we know nothing of theories 
of matter and theories of spirit, nothing of the discussions as to 
the reality or ideality of the external world. Here I am in the pres­
ence of images, in the vaguest sense of the word, images perceived 
when my senses are opened to them, unperceived when they are 
closed. All these images act and react upon one another in all their 
elementary parts according to constant laws which I call laws of 
nature, and, as a perfect knowledge of these laws would probably 
allow us to calculate and to foresee what will happen in each of 
these images, the future of the images must be contained in their 
present and will add to them nothing new. 
Yet there is one of them which is distinct from all the others, in 
that I do not know it only from without by perceptions, but from 
within by affections: it is my body. I examine the conditions in 
which these affections are produced: I find that they always inter­
pose themselves between the excitations that I receive from with­
out and the movements which I am about to execute, as though 
they had some undefined influence on the final issue. I pass in 
review my different affections: it seems to me that each of them 
contains, after its kind, an invitation to act, with at the same time 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
leave to wait and even to do nothing. I look closer: I find move­
ments begun, but not executed, the indication of a more or less 
useful decision, but not that constraint which precludes choice. I 
call up, I compare my recollections: I remember that everywhere, 
in the organic world, I have thought I saw this same sensibility 
appear at the very moment when nature, having conferred upon 
the living being the power of mobility in space, gives warning to 
the species, by means of sensation, of the general dangers which 
threaten it, leaving to the individual the precautions necessary for 
escaping from them. Lastly, I interrogate my consciousness as to 
the part which it plays in affection: consciousness replies that it is 
present indeed, in the form of feeling or of sensation, at all the 
steps in which I believe that I take the initiative, and that it fades 
and disappears as soon as my activity, by becoming automatic, shows 
that consciousness is no longer needed. Therefore, either all these 
appearances are deceptive, or the act in which the affective state 
issues is not one of those which might be rigorously deduced from 
antecedent phenomena, as a movement from a movement; and, 
hence, it really adds something new to the universe and to its his­
tory. Let us hold to the appearances; I will formulate purely and 
simply what I feel and what I see: All seems to take place as if, in this 
aggregate of images which I call the universe, nothing really new could 
happen except through the medium of certain particular images, the type 
of which is furnished me by my body. 
I pass now to the study, in bodies similar to my own, of the 
structure of that particular image which I call my body. I perceive 
afferent nerves which transmit a disturbance to the nerve centers; 
then efferent nerves which start from the center, conduct the dis­
turbance to the periphery, and set in motion parts of the body or 
the body as a whole. I question the physiologist and the psycholo­
gist as to the purpose of both kinds. They answer that, as the cen­
trifugal movements of the nervous system can call forth a movement 
1 8  

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
of the body or of parts of the body, so the centripetal movements, 
or at least some of them, give birth to the representation I of the 
external world. What are we to think of this? 
The afferent nerves are images, the brain is an image, the dis­
turbance traveling through the sensory nerves and propagated in 
the brain is an image too. If the image which I term cerebral dis­
turbance really begot external images, it would contain them in 
one way or another, and the representation of the whole material 
universe would be implied in that of this molecular movement. 
Now to state this proposition is enough to show its absurdity. The 
brain is part of the material world; the material world is not part 
of the brain. Eliminate the image which bears the name material 
world, and you destroy at the same time the brain and the cere­
bral disturbance which are parts of it. Suppose, on the contrary, 
that these two images, the brain and the cerebral disturbance, van­
ish: ex hypothesi you efface only these, that is to say very little, an 
insignificant detail from an immense picture. The picture in its 
totality, that is to say the whole universe, remains. To make of the 
brain the condition on which the whole image depends is, in truth, 
a contradiction in terms, since the brain is by hypothesis a part of 
this image. Neither nerves nor nerve centers can, then, condition 
the image of the universe. 
Let us consider this last point. Here are external images, then 
my body, and, lastly, the changes brought about by my body in the 
surrounding images. I see plainly how external images influence 
the image that I call my body: they transmit movement to it. And 
I also see how this body influences external images: it gives back 
movement to them. My body is, then, in the aggregate ofthe mate­
rial world, an image which acts like other images, receiving and 
giving back movement, with, perhaps, this difference only, that 
my body appears to choose, within certain limits, the manner in 
which it shall restore what it receives. But how could my body in 
19 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
general, and my nervous system in particular, beget the whole or 
a part of my representation of the universe? You may say that my 
body is matter, or that it is an image: the word is of no impor­
tance. If it is matter, it is a part of the material world; and the 
material world, consequently, exists around it and without it. Ifit 
is an image, that image can give but what has been put into it, and 
since it is, by hypothesis, the image of my body only, it would be 
absurd to expect to get from it that of the whole universe. My 
body, an object destined to move other objects, is, then, a center of action; it 
cannot give birth to a representation. 
But if my body is an object capable of exercising a genuine and 
therefore a new action upon the surrounding objects, it must occupy 
a privileged position in regard to them. As a rule, any image influ­
ences other images in a manner which is determined, and even 
calculable, through what are called the laws of nature. As it has 
not to choose, so neither has it any need to explore the region 
round about it, nor to try its hand at several merely eventual actions. 
The necessary action will take place automatically, when its hour 
strikes. But I have supposed that the office of the image which I 
call my body was to exercise on other images a real influence, 
and, consequently, to decide which step to take among several 
which are all materially possible. And since these steps are proba­
bly suggested to it by the greater or lesser advantage which it can 
derive from the surrounding images, these images must display in 
some way, upon the aspect which they present to my body, the 
profit which my body can gain from them. In fact, I note that the 
size, shape, even the color, of external objects is modified as my 
body approaches or recedes from them; that the strength of an 
odor, the intensity of a sound, increases or diminishes with dis­
tance; finally, that this very distance represents, above all, the mea-
20 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
sure in which surrounding bodies are insured, in some way, against 
the immediate action of my body. To the degree that my horizon 
widens, the images which surround me seem to be painted upon 
a more uniform background and become to me more indifferent. 
The more I narrow this horizon, the more the objects which it 
circumscribes space themselves out distinctly accofding to the 
greater or lesser ease with which my body can touch and move 
them. They send back, then, to my body, as would a mirror, its 
eventual influence; they take rank in an order corresponding to 
the growing or decreasing powers of my body. The objects which 
surround my body reflect its possible action upon them. 
I will now, without touching the other images, modify slightly 
that image which I call my body. In this image I cut asunder, in 
thought, all the afferent nerves of the cerebro-spinal system. What 
will happen? A few cuts with the scalpel have severed a few bun­
dles of fibres: the rest of the universe, and even the rest of my 
body, remain what they were before. The change effected is there­
fore insignificant. As a matter of fact, my perception has entirely 
vanished. Let us consider more closely what has just occurred. 
Here are the images which compose the universe in general, then 
those which are near to my body, and finally my body itself. In 
this last image the habitual office of the centripetal nerves is to 
transmit movements to the brain and to the cord; the centrifugal 
nerves send back this movement to the periphery. Sectioning of 
the centripetal nerves can, therefore, produce only one intelligi­
ble effect: that is, to interrupt the current which goes from the 
periphery to the periphery by way of the center, and, consequently, 
to make it impossible for my body to extract, from among all the 
things which surround it, the quantity and quality of movement 
necessary in order to act upon them. Here is something which 
2 1  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
concerns action, and action alone. Yet i t  i s  my perception which 
has vanished. What does this mean, if not that my perception 
displays, in the midst of the image world, as would their outward 
reflection or shadow, the eventual or possible actions of my body? 
Now the system of images in which the scalpel has effected only 
an insignificant change is what is generally called the material 
world; and, on the other hand, that which has just vanished is 
"my perception" of matter. Whence, provisionally, these two 
definitions: 1 call matter the agaregate of images, and perception of 
matter these same images referred to the eventual action of one particular 
image, my body. 
Let us go more deeply into this reference. I consider my body, 
with its centripetal and centrifugal nerves, with its nerve centers. 
I know that external objects make in the afferent nerves a distur­
bance which passes onward to the centers, that the centers are 
the theater of very varied molecular movements, and that these 
movements depend on the nature and position of the objects. 
Change the objects, or modify their relation to my body, and every­
thing is changed in the interior movements of my perceptive cen­
ters. But everything is also changed in "my perception." My 
perception is, then, a function of these molecular movements; it 
depends upon them. But how does it depend upon them? It will 
perhaps be said that it translates them, and that, in the main, I 
represent to myself nothing but the molecular movements of cere­
bral substance. But how should this have any meaning, since the 
image of the nervous system and of its internal movements is only, 
by hypothesis, that of a certain material object, whereas I repre­
sent to myself the whole material universe? It is true that many 
philosophers attempt to evade the difficulty. They show us a brain, 
analogous in its essence to the rest of the material universe, an 
2 2  

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
image, consequently, i f  the universe i s  an image. Then, since they 
want the internal movements of this brain to create or determine 
the representation of the whole material world - an image infi­
nitely greater than that of the cerebral vibrations - they maintain 
that these molecular movements, and movement in general, are 
not images like others, but something which is either more or less 
than an image - in any case is of another nature than an image -
and from which representation will issue as by a miracle. Thus 
matter is made into something radically different from represen­
tation, something of which, consequently, we have no image; over 
against it they place a consciousness empty of images, of which 
we are unable to form any idea; lastly, to fill consciousness, they 
invent an incomprehensible action of this formless matter upon 
this matterless thought. But the truth is that the movements of 
matter are very clear, regarded as images, and that there is no need 
to look in movement for anything more than what we see in it. 
The sole difficulty would consist in bringing forth from these very 
particular images the infinite variety of representations; but why 
seek to do so, since we all agree that the cerebral vibrations are 
contained in the material world, and that these images, consequently, 
are only a part of the representation? What then are these move­
ments, and what part do these particular images play in the repre­
sentation of the whole? The answer is obvious: they are, within 
my body, the movements intended to prepare, while beginning 
it, the reaction of my body to the action of external objects. Images 
themselves cannot create images; but they indicate at each moment, 
like a compass that is being moved about, the position of a certain 
given image, my body, in relation to the surrounding images. In 
the totality of representation they are very little; but they are of 
capital importance for that part of representation which I call my 
body, since they foreshadow at each successive moment its virtual 
acts. There is, then, only a difference of degree - there can be no 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
difference i n  kind - between what i s  called the perceptive faculty 
of the brain and the reflex functions of the spinal .cord. The cord 
transforms into movements the stimulation received; the brain 
prolongs them into reactions which are merely nascent; but, in 
the one case as in the other, the function of the nerve substance is 
to conduct, to coordinate, or to inhibit movements. How then 
does it come about that "my perception of the universe" appears 
to depend upon the internal movements ofthe cerebral substance, 
to change when they vary, and to vanish when they cease? 
The difficulty of this problem is mainly due to the fact that the 
grey matter and its modifications are regarded as things which are 
sufficient to themselves and might be isolated from the rest of the 
universe. Materialists and dualists are fundamentally agreed on this 
point. They consider certain molecular movements of the cere­
bral matter apart: then, some see in our conscious perception a 
phosphorescence which follows these movements and illuminates 
their track; for others, our perceptions succeed each other like an 
unwinding scroll in a consciousness which expresses continuously, 
in its own way, the molecular vibrations of the cortical substance: 
in the one case, as in the other, our perception is supposed to 
translate or to picture the states of our nervous system. But is it 
possible to conceive the nervous system as living apart from the 
organism which nourishes it, from the atmosphere in which the 
organism breathes, from the earth which that atmosphere enve­
lopes, from the sun round which the earth revolves? More gener­
all y, does not the fiction of an isolated material object imply a 
kind of absurdity, since this object borrows its physical properties 
from the relations which it maintains with all others, and owes 
each of its determinations, and, consequently, its very existence, 
to the place which it occupies in the universe as a whole? Let us 
no longer say, then, that our perceptions depend simply upon the 
molecular movements of the cerebral mass. We must say rather 

O F  T H E  S E L E CT I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
that they vary with them, but that these movements themselves 
remain inseparably bound up with the rest of the material world. 
The question, then, is not only how our perceptions are connected 
with the modifications of the grey matter. The problem widens, 
and can also be put in much clearer terms. 
It might be stated as follows: Here is a system of images which 
I term my perception of the universe, and which may be entirely 
altered by a very slight change in a certain privileged image - my 
body. This image occupies the center; by it all the others are con­
ditioned; at each of its movements everything changes, as though 
by a turn of a kaleidoscope. Here, on the other hand, are the same 
images, but referred each one to itself, influencing each other no 
doubt, but in such a manner that the effect is always in proportion 
to the cause: this is what I term the universe. The question is: how 
can these two systems coexist, and why are the same images rela­
tively invariable in the universe and infinitely variable in percep­
tion? The problem at issue between realism and idealism, perhaps 
even between materialism and spiritualism, should be stated, then, 
it seems to us, in the following terms: How is it that the same images 
can belong at the same time to two different systems: one in which each 
image varies for itself and in the well-defined measure that it is patient of 
the real action of surrounding images; and another in which all images 
change for a Single image and in the varying measure that they reflect the 
eventual action of this priVileged image? 
E\'ery image is within certain images and without others; but 
of the aggregate of images we cannot say that it is within us or 
without us, since interiority and exteriority are only relations among 
images. To ask whether the universe exists only in our thought, or 
outside of our thought, is to put the problem in terms that are 
insoluble, even if we suppose them to be intelligible; it is to con­
demn ourselves to a barren discussion, in which the terms thought, 
being, universe, will always be taken on either hand in entirely dif-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
ferent senses. To settle the matter, we must first find a common 
ground where combatants may meet; and since on both sides it is 
agreed that we can only grasp things in the form of images, we 
must state the problem in terms of images, and of images alone. 
Now no philosophical doctrine denies that the same images can 
enter at the same time into two distinct systems, one belonging 
to science, wherein each image, related only to itself, possesses an 
absolute value; and the other, the world of consciousness, wherein 
all the images depend on a central image, our body, the variations 
of which they follow. The question raised between realism and 
idealism then becomes quite clear: what are the relations which 
these two systems of images maintain with each other? And it is 
easy to see that subjective idealism consists in deriving the first 
system from the second, materialistic realism in deriving the 
second from the first. 
The realist starts, in fact, from the universe, that is to say from 
an aggregate of images governed, as to their mutual relations, by 
fixed laws, in which effects are in strict proportion to their causes, 
and of which the character is an absence of center, all the images 
unfolding on one and the same plane indefinitely prolonged. But 
he is at once bound to recognize that, besides this system, there 
are perceptions, that is to say, systems in which these same images 
seem to depend on a single one among them, around which they 
range themselves on different planes, so as to be wholly transformed 
by the slightest modification of this central image. Now this per­
ception is just what the idealist starts from: in the system of images 
which he adopts there is a privileged image, his body, by which 
the other images are conditioned. But as soon as he attempts to 
connect the present with the past and to foretell the future, he is 
obliged to abandon this central position, to replace all the images 
on the same plane, to suppose that they no longer vary for him, 
but for themselves; and to treat them as though they made part of 
26 

O F  T H E 
S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
a system in which every change gives the exact measure of its cause. 
On this condition alone a science of the universe becomes possi­
ble; and, since this science exists, since it succeeds in foreseeing 
the future, its fundamental hypothesis cannot be arbitrary. The 
first system alone is given to present experience; but we believe in 
the second, if only because we affirm the continuity of the past, 
present and future. Thus in idealism, as in realism, we posit one 
of the two systems and seek to deduce the other from it. 
But in this deduction neither realism nor idealism can succeed, 
because neither of the two systems of images is implied in the 
other, and each of them is sufficient to itself. If you posit the sys­
tem of images which has no center, and in which each element 
possesses its absolute dimensions and value, I see no reason why 
to this system should accrue a second, in which each image has an 
undetermined value, subject to all the vicissitudes of a central 
image. You must, then, to engender perception, conjure up some 
deus ex machina, such as the materialistic hypothesis of the epi­
phenomenal consciousness, whereby you choose, among all the 
images that vary absolutely and that you posited to begin with, 
the one which we term our brain - conferring on the internal 
states of this image the singular and inexplicable privilege of add­
ing to itself a reproduction, this time relative and variable, of all 
the others. It is true that you afterwards pretend to attach no impor­
tance to this representation, to see in it a mere phosphorescence 
which the cerebral vibrations leave behind them: as if the cere­
bral matter and cerebral vibrations, set in the images which com­
pose this representation, could be of another nature than they are! 
All realism is thus bound to make perception an accident, and, 
consequently, a mystery. But, inversely, if you posit a system of 
unstable images disposed about a privileged center, and profoundly 
modified by trifling displacements of this center, you begin by 
excluding the order of nature, that order which is indifferent to 
27 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
the point at which we take our stand and to the particular end from 
which we begin. You will have to bring back this order by conjur­
ing up in your turn a deus ex machinaj I mean that you will have 
to assume, by an arbitrary hypothesis, some sort of pre-established 
harmony between things and mind, or, at least (to use Kant's terms), 
between sense and understanding. It is science now that will 
become an accident, and its success a mystery. You cannot, then, 
deduce the first system of images from the second, nor the sec­
ond from the firstj and these two antagonistic doctrines, realism 
and idealism, as soon as they decide to enter the same lists, hurl 
themselves from opposite directions against the same obstacle. 
If we now look closely at the two doctrines, we shall discover 
in them a common postulate, which we may formulate thus: per­
ception has a wholly speculative interest; it is pure knowledge. The whole 
discussion turns upon the importance to be attributed to this knowl­
edge as compared with scientific knowledge. The one doctrine starts 
from the order required by science, and sees in perception only a 
confused and provisional science. The other puts perception in 
the first place, erects it into an absolute, and then holds science 
to be a symbolic expression of the real. But, for both parties, to 
perceive means above all to know. 
Now it is just this postulate that we dispute. Even the most 
superficial examination of the structure of the nervous system in 
the animal series gives it the lie. And it is not possible to accept it 
without profoundly obscuring the threefold problem of matter, 
consciousness and their relation. 
For if we follow, step by step, the progress of external percep­
tion from the monera to the higher vertebrates, we find that liv­
ing matter, even as a simple mass of protoplasm, is already irritable 
and contractile, that it is open to the influence of external stimu­
lation, and answers to it by mechanical, physical and chemical 
reactions. As we rise in the organic series, we find a division of 
2 8  

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
physiological labor. Nerve cells appear, are diversified, tend to group 
themselves into a system; at the same time, the animal reacts by 
more varied movements to external stimulation. But even when 
the stimulation received is not at once prolonged into movement, 
it appears merely to await its occasion; and the same impression, 
which makes the organism aware of changes in the environment, 
determines it or prepares it to adapt itself to them. No doubt there 
is in the higher vertebrates a radical distinction between pure 
automatism, of which the seat is mainly in the spinal cord, and 
voluntary activity, which requires the intervention of the brain. It 
might be imagined that the impression received, instead of expand­
ing into more movements, spiritualizes itself into consciousness. 
But as soon as we compare the structure of the spinal cord with 
that of the brain, we are bound to infer that there is merely a dif­
ference of complication, and not a difference in kind, between 
the functions of the brain and the reflex activity of the medullary 
system. For what takes place in reflex action? The centripetal move­
ment communicated by the stimulus is reflected at once, by the 
intermediary of the nerve centers of the spinal cord, in a centrifu­
gal movement determining a muscular contraction. In what, on 
the other hand, does the function of the cerebral system consist? 
The peripheral excitation, instead of proceeding directly to the 
motorcells of the spinal cord and impressing on the muscle a nec­
essary contraction, mounts first to the brain, and then descends 
again to the very same motor cells of the spinal cord which inter­
vened in the reflex action. Now what has it gained by this round­
about course, and what did it seek in the so-called sensory cells of 
the cerebral cortex? I do not understand, I shall never understand, 
that it draws thence a miraculous power of changing itself into a 
representation of things; and, moreover, I hold this hypothesis to 
be useless, as will shortly appear. But what I do see clearly is that 
the cells of the various regions of the cortex which are termed 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
sensory - cells interposed between the terminal branches of the 
centripetal fibers and the motor cells of the Rolandic area - allow 
the stimulation received to reach at will this or that motor mecha­
nism of the spinal cord, and so to choose its effect. The more these 
intercalated cells are multiplied and the more they project amoe­
boid prolongations which are probably capable of approaching each 
other in various ways, the more numerous and more varied will 
be the paths capable of opening to one and the same disturbance 
from the periphery, and, consequently, the more systems of move­
ments will there be among which one and the same stimulation 
will allow of choice. In our opinion, then, the brain is no more 
than a kind of central telephonic exchange: its office is to allow 
communication or to delay it. It adds nothing to what it receives; 
but, as all the organs of perception send it to their ultimate pro­
longations, and, as all the motor mechanisms of the spinal cord 
and of the medulla oblongata have in it their accredited represen­
tatives, it really constitutes a center, where the peripheral excita­
tion gets into relation with this or that motor mechanism, chosen 
and no longer prescribed. Yet, as a great multitude of motor tracks 
can open simultaneously in this substance to one and the same 
excitation from the periphery, this disturbance may subdivide to 
any extent, and consequently dissipate itself in innumerable motor 
reactions which are merely nascent. Hence the office of the brain 
is sometimes to conduct the movement received to a chosen organ 
of reaction, and sometimes to open to this movement the totality 
of the motor tracts, so that it may manifest there all the potential 
reactions with which it is charged, and may divide and so disperse. 
In other words, the brain appears to us to be an instrument of 
analysis in regard to the movement received and an instrument of 
selection in regard to the movement executed. But, in the one 
case as in the other, its office is limited to the transmission and 
division of movement. And no more in the higher centers of the 
3 0 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
cortex than in the spinal cord do the nervous elements work with 
a view to knowledge: they do but indicate a number of possible 
actions at once, or organize one of them. 
That is to say that the nervous system is in no sense an appara­
tus which may serve to fabricate, or even to prepare, representa­
tions. Its function is to receive stimulation, to provide motor 
apparatus, and to present the largest possible number of these appa­
ratuses to a given stimulus. The more it develops, the more numer­
ous and the more distant are the points of space which it brings 
into relation with ever more complex motor mechanisms. In this 
way the scope which it allows to our action enlarges: its growing 
perfection consists in nothing else. But, if the nervous system is 
thus constructed, from one end of the animal series to the other, 
in view of an action which is less and less necessary, must we not 
think that perception, of which the progress is regulated by that of 
the nervous system, is also entirely directed toward action, and not 
toward pure knowledge? And, if this be so, is not the growing rich­
ness of this perception likely to symbolize the wider range of inde­
termination left to the choice of the l iving being in its conduct 
with regard to things? Let us start, then, from this indetermina­
tion as from the true principle, and try whether we cannot deduce 
from it the possibility, and even the necessity, of conscious percep­
tion. In other words, let us posit that system of closely-linked images 
which we call the material world, and imagine here and there, 
within the system, centers of real action, represented by living mat­
ter: what we mean to prove is that there must be, ranged round 
each one of these centers, images that are subordinated to its posi­
tion and variable with it; that conscious perception is bound to 
occur, and that, moreover, it is possible to understand how it arises. 
We note, in the first place, that a strict law connects the amount 
of conscious perception with the intensity of action at the dis­
posal of the living being. If our hypothesis is well founded, this 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
perception appears at the precise moment when a stimulation 
received by matter is not prolonged into a necessary action. In 
the case of a rudimentary organism, it is true that immediate con­
tact with the object which interests it is necessary to produce the 
stimulation and that reaction can then hardly be delayed. Thus, in 
the lower organisms, touch is active and passive at one and the 
same time, enabling them to recognize their prey and seize it, to 
feel a danger and make the effort to avoid it. The various prolon­
gations of the protozoa, the ambulacra of the echinodermata, are 
organs of movement as well as of tactile perception; the stinging 
apparatus of the coelenterata is an instrument of perception as 
well as a means of defence. In a word, the more immediate the 
reaction is compelled to be, the more must perception resemble 
a mere contact; and the complete process of perception and of 
reaction can then hardly be distinguishecl from a mechanical impul­
sion followed by a necessary movement. But in the measure that 
the reaction becomes more uncertain, and allows more room for 
suspense, does the distance increase at which the animal is sensi­
ble of the action of that which interests it. By sight, by hearing, it 
enters into relation with an ever greater number of things, and is 
subject to more and more distant influences; and, whether these 
objects promise an advantage or threaten a danger, both promises 
and threats defer the date of their fulfillment. The degree of inde­
pendence of which a living being is master, or, as we shall say, the 
zone of indetermination which surrounds its activity, allows, then, 
of an a priori estimate of the number and the distance of the things 
with which it is in relation. Whatever this relation may be, what­
ever be the inner nature of perception, we can affirm that its ampli­
tude gives the exact measure of the indetermination of the act 
which is to follow. So that we can formulate this law: perception is 
master of space in the exact measure in which action is master of time. 
But why does this relation of the organism to more or less dis-

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
tant objects take the particular form of conscious perception? We 
have examined what takes place in the organized body, we have 
seen movements transmitted or inhibited, metamorphosed into 
accomplished actions or broken up into nascent actions. These 
movements appear to us to concern action, and action alone; they 
remain absolutely foreign to the process of representation. We 
then considered action itself, and the indetermination which sur­
rounds it and is implied in the structure. of the nervous system -
an indetermination to which this system seems to point much 
more than to representation. From this indetermination, accepted 
as a fact, we have been able to infer the necessity of a perception, 
that is to say, a variable relation between the living being and the 
more-or-less distant influence ofthe objects which interest it. How 
is it that this perception is consciousness, and why does every­
thing happen as if this consciousness were born of the internal 
movements of the cerebral substance? 
To answer this question, we will first simplify considerably the 
conditions under which conscious perception takes place. In fact, 
there is no perception which is not full of memories. With the 
immediate and present data of our senses, we mingle a thousand 
details out of our past experience. In most cases these memories 
supplant our actual perceptions, of which we then retain only a 
few hints, thus using them merely as "signs" that recall to us for­
mer images. The convenience and the rapidity of perception are 
bought at this price; but hence also springs every kind of illUilion. 
Let us, for the purposes of study, substitute for this perception, 
impregnated with our past, a perception that a consciousness would 
have if it were supposed to be ripe and full-grown, yet confined to 
the present and absorbed, to the exclusion of all else, in the task 
of molding itself upon the external object. It may be urged that 
this is an arbitrary hypothesis, and that such an ideal perception, 
obtained by the elimination of individual accidents, has no corre-
3 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
spondence with reality. But we hope to show that the individual 
accidents are merely grafted on to this impersonal perception, 
which is at the very root of our knowledge of things; and that just 
because philosophers have overlooked it, because they have not 
distinguished it from that which memory adds to or subtracts from 
it, they have taken perception as a whole for a kind of interior and 
subjective vision, which would then differ from memory only by its 
greater intensity. This will be our first hypothesis. But it leads 
naturally to another. However brief we suppose any perception to 
be, it always occupies a certain duration, and involves, consequently, 
an effort of memory which prolongs, one into another, a plurality 
of moments. As we shall endeavor to show, even the "subjectiv­
ity" of sensible qualities consists above all else in a kind of con­
traction of the real, effected by our memory. In sho·rt, memory in 
these two forms, covering as it does with a cloak of recollections 
a core of immediate perception, and also contracting a number of 
external moments into a single internal moment, constitutes the 
principal share of individual consciousness in perception, the sub­
jective side of the knowledge of things; and, since we must neglect 
this share in order to make our idea clearer, we shall go too far 
along the path we have chosen. But we shall only have to retrace 
our steps and to correct, especially by bringing memory back again, 
whatever may be excessive in our conclusions. What follows, there­
fore, must be regarded as only a schematic rendering, and we ask 
that perception should be provisionally understood to mean not 
my concrete and complex perception - that which is enlarged by 
memories and offers always a certain breadth of duration - but a 
pure perception. By this I mean a perception which exists in the­
ory rather than in fact and would be possessed by a being placed 
where I am, living as I live, but absorbed in the present and capa­
ble, by giving up every form of memory, of obtaining a vision of 
matter both immediate and instantaneous. Adopting this hypoth-
3 4  

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
esis, let us consider how conscious perception may be explained. 
To deduce consciousness would be, indeed, a bold undertak­
ing; but it is really not necessary here, because by positing the 
material world we assume an aggregate of images, and, moreover, 
because it is impossible to assume anything else. No theory of 
matter escapes this necessity. Reduce matter to atoms in motion: 
these atoms, though denuded of physical qualities, are determined 
only in relation to an eventual vision and an eventual contact, the 
one without light and the other without materiality. Condense 
atoms into centers of force, dissolve them into vortices revolving 
in a continuous fluid: this fluid, these movements, these centers, 
can themselves be determined only in relation to an impotent 
touch, an ineffectual impulsion, a colorless light; they are still 
images. It is true that an image may be without being perceived - it 
may be present without being represented - and the distance 
between these two terms, presence and representation, seems just 
to measure the interval between matter itself and our conscious 
perception of matter. But let us examine the point more closely 
and see in what this difference consists. If there were more in the 
second term than in the first, if, in order to pass from presence to 
representation, it were necessary to add something, the barrier 
would indeed be insuperable, and the passage from matter to per­
ception would remain wrapped in impenetrable mystery. It would 
not be the same if it were possible to pass from the first term to 
the second by way of diminution, and if the representation of an 
image were less than its presence; for it would then suffice that the 
images present should be compelled to abandon something of them­
selves in order that their mere presence should convert them into 
representations. Now, here is the image which I call a material 
object; I have the representation of it. How then does it not appear 
to be in itself that which it is for me? It is because, being bound 
up with all other images, it is continued in those which follow it, 
35 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
just as i t  prolonged those which preceded it. To transform its exis­
tence into representation, it would be enough to suppress what 
follows it, what precedes it, and also all that fills it, and to retain 
only its external crust, its superficial skin. That which distinguishes 
it as a present image, as an objective reality, from a represented image 
is the necessity which obliges it to act through every one of its 
points upon all the points of all other images, to transmit the whole 
of what it receives, to oppose to every action an equal and con­
trary reaction, to be, in short, merely a road by which pass, in 
every direction, the modifications propagated throughout the 
immensity ofthe universe. I should convert it into representation 
ifI could isolate it, especially ifI could isolate its shell. Represen­
tation is there, but always virtual - being neutralized, at the very 
moment when it might become actual, by the obligation to con­
tinue itself and to lose itself in something else. To obtain this con­
version from the virtual to the actual, it would be necessary, not 
to throw more light on the object, but, on the contrary, to obscure 
some of its aspects, to diminish it by the greater part of itself, so 
that the remainder, instead of being encased in its surroundings as 
a thing, should detach itself from them as a picture. Now, if living 
beings are, within the universe, just "centers of indetermination," 
and if the degree of this indetermination is measured by the num­
ber and rank of their functions, we can conceive that their mere 
presence is equivalent to the suppression of all those parts of objects 
in which their functions find no interest. They allow to pass through 
them, so to speak, those external influences which are indifferent 
to them; the others isolated, become "perceptions" by their very 
isolation. Everything thus happens for us as though we reflected 
back to surfaces the light which emanates from them, the light 
which, had it passed on unopposed, would never have been revealed. 
The images which surround us will appear to turn toward our body 
the side, emphasized by the light upon it, which interests our body. 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
They will detach from themselves that which we have arrested on 
its way, that which we are capable of influencing. Indifferent to 
each other because of the radical mechanism which binds them 
together, they present each to the others all their sides at once: 
which means that they act and react mutually by all their elements, 
and that none of them perceives or is perceived consciously. Sup­
pose, on the contrary, that they encounter somewhere a certain 
spontaneity of reaction: their action is so far diminished, and this 
diminution of their action is just the representation which we 
have of them. Our representation of things would thus arise from 
the fact that they are thrown back and reflected by our freedom. 
When a ray of light passes from one medium into another, it 
usually traverses it with a change of direction. But the respective 
densities of the two media may be such that, for a given angle of 
incidence, refraction is no longer possible. Then we have total 
reflection. The luminous point gives rise to a virtual image which 
symbolizes, so to speak, the fact that the luminous rays cannot 
pursue their way. Perception is just a phenomenon of the same kind. 
That which is given is the totality of the images of the material 
world, with the totality of their internal elements. But, if we sup­
pose centers of real, that is to say of spontaneous, activity, the rays 
which reach it, and which interest that activity, instead of passing 
through those centers, will appear to be reflected and thus to indi­
cate the outlines of the object which emits them. There is nothing 
positive here, nothing added to the image, nothing new. The objects 
merely abandon something of their real action in order to mani­
fest their virtual influence of the living being upon them. Percep­
tion therefore resembles those phenomena of reflexion which result 
from an impeded ,refraction; it is like an effect of mirage. 
This is as much as to say that there is for images merely a differ­
ence of degree, and not of kind, between being and being consciously 
perceived. The reality of matter consists in the totality of its ele-
3 7  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
ments and of their actions of every kind. Our representation of 
matter is the measure of our possible action upon bodies: it results 
from the discarding of what has no interest for our needs, or more 
generally, for our functions. In one sense we might say that the 
perception of any unconscious material point whatever, in its instan­
taneousness, is infinitely greater and more complete than ours, 
since this point gathers and transmits the influences of all the points 
of the material universe, whereas our consciousness only attains 
to certain parts and to certain aspects of those parts. Conscious­
ness - in regard to external perception - lies in just this choice. 
But there is, in this necessary poverty of our conscious percep­
tion, something that is positive, that foretells spirit: it is, in the 
etymological sense of the word, discernment. 
The whole difficulty of the problem that occupies us comes 
from the fact that we imagine perception to be a kind of photo­
graphic view of things, taken from a fixed point by that special 
apparatus which is called an organ of perception - a photograph 
which would then be developed in the brain-matter by some 
unknown chemical and psychical process of elaboration. But is it 
not obvious that the photograph, if photograph there be, is already 
taken, already developed in the very heart of things and at all the 
points of space? No metaphysics, no physics even, can escape this 
conclusion. Build up the universe with atoms: each of them is 
subject to the action, variable in quantity and quality according 
to the distance, exerted on it by all material atoms. Bring in Fara­
day's centers of force: the lines of force emitted in every direction 
from every center bring to bear upon each the influences of the 
whole material world. Call up the Leibnizian monads: each'is the 
mirror of the universe. All philosophers, then, agree on this point. 
Only if, when we consider any other given place in the universe, 
we can regard the acton of all matter as passing through it without 
resistance and without loss, and the photograph of the whole as 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
translucent: here there is wanting behind the plate the black screen 
on which the image could be shown. Our "zones of indetermina­
tion" play in some sort the part of the screen. They add nothing to 
what is there; they effect merely this: that the real action passes 
through, the virtual action remains. 
This is no hypothesis. We content ourselves with formulating 
data with which no theory of perception can dispense. For no 
philosopher can begin the study of external perception without 
assuming the possibility at least of a material world, that is to say, 
in the main, the virtual perception of all things. From this merely 
possible material mass he will then isolate the particular object 
which I call my body, and, in this body, centers of perception: he 
will show me the disturbance coming from a certain point in space, 
propagating itself along the nerves, and reaching the centers. But 
here I am confronted by a transformation scene from fairyland. 
The material world, which surrounds the body; the body, which 
shelters the brain; the brain, in which we distinguish centers; he 
abruptly dismisses, and, as by a magician's wand, he conjures up, 
as a thing entirely new the representation of what he began by 
postulating. This representation he drives out of space, so that it 
may have nothing in common with the matter from which he 
started. As for matter itself, he would fain go without it, but can­
not, because its phenomena present relatively to each other an 
order so strict and so indifferent as to the point of origin chosen, 
that this regularity and this indifference really constitute an inde­
pendent existence. So he must resign himself to retaining at least 
the phantasm of matter. But then he manages to deprive it of all 
the qualities which give it life. In an amorphous space he carves 
out moving figures; or else (and it comes to nearly the same thing), 
he imagines relations of magnitude which adjust themselves one 
to another, mathematical functions which go on evolving and devel­
oping their own content: representation, laden with the spoils of 
3 9  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
matter, thenceforth displays itself freely in an un extended con­
sciousness. But it is not enough to cut out, it is necessary to sew 
the pieces together. You must now explain how those qualities 
which you have detached from their material support can be joined 
to it again. Each attribute which you take away from matter wid­
ens the interval between representation and its object. If you make 
matter unextended, how will it acquire extension? If you reduce 
it to homogeneous movements, whence arises quality? Above all, 
how are we to imagine a relation between a thing and its image, 
between matter and thought, since each of these terms possesses, 
by definition, only that which is lacking to the other? Thus diffi­
culties spring up beneath our feet; and every effort that you make 
to dispose of one of them does but resolve it into many more. 
What then do we ask of you? Merely to give up your magician's 
wand, and to continue along the path on which you first set out. 
You showed us external images reaching the organs of sense, modi­
fying the nerves, propagating their influence in the brain. Well, 
follow the process to the end. The movement will pass through 
the cerebral substance (although not without having tarried there), 
and will then expand into voluntary action. There you have the 
whole mechanism of perception. As for perception itself, in so far 
as it is an image, you are not called upon to retrace its genesis, 
since you posited it to begin with, and since, moreover, no other 
course was open to you. In assuming the brain, in assuming the 
smallest portion of matter, did you not assume the totality of 
images? What you have to explain, then, is not how perception arises, 
but how it is limited, since it should be the image of the whole, and is in 
fact reduced to the image of that which interests you. But if it differs 
from the mere image, precisely in that its parts range themselves 
with reference to a variable center, its limitation is easy to under­
stand: unlimited de jure, it confines itself de facto to indicating 
the degree of indetermination allowed to the acts of the special 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
image which you call your body. And, inversely, i t  follows that the 
indetermination of the movements of your body, such as it results 
from the structure of the grey matter of the brain, gives the exact 
measure of the extent of your perception. It is no wonder, then, 
that everything happens as though your perception were a result of 
the internal motions of the brain and issued in some sort from the 
cortical centers. It could not actually come from them, since the 
brain is an image like others, enveloped in the mass of other images, 
and it would be absurd that the container should issue from the 
content. But since the structure of the brain is like the detailed 
plan of the movements among which you have the choice, and 
since that part of the external images which appears to return upon 
itself in order to constitute perception includes precisely all the 
points of the universe which these movements could affect, con­
scious perception and cerebral movement are in strict correspon­
dence. The reciprocal dependence of these two terms is therefore 
simply due to the fact that both are functions of a third, which is 
the indetermination of the will. 
Take, for example, a luminous point P, of which the rays impinge 
on the different parts a, b, c, of the retina. At this point P, science 
localizes vibrations of a certain amplitude and duration. At the 
same point P, consciousness perceives light. We propose to show, 
in the course of this study, that both are right; and that there is no 
essential difference between the light and the movements, pro­
vided we restore to movement the unity, indivisibility, and quali­
tative heterogeneity denied to it by abstract mechanics; provided 
also that we see in sensible qualities contractions effected by our 
memory. Science and consciousness would then coincide in the 
instantaneous. For the moment all we need say, without examin­
ing too closely the meaning of the words, is that the point P sends 
to the retina vibrations oflight. What happens then? If the visual 
image of the point P were not already given, we should indeed 
41 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
have to seek the manner i n  which i t  had been engendered, and 
should soon be confronted by an insoluble problem. But, what­
ever we do, we cannot avoid assuming it to begin with: the sole 
question is, then, to know how and why this image is chosen to 
form part of my perception, while an infinite number of other 
images remain excluded from it. Now I see that the vibrations 
transmitted from the point P to the various parts of the retina are 
conducted to the subcortical and cortical optic centers, often to 
other centers as well, and that these centers sometimes transmit 
them to motor mechanisms, sometimes provisionally arrest them. 
The nervous elements concerned are, therefore, what give effi­
cacy to the disturbance received; they symbolize the indetermi­
nation of the will; on their soundness this indetermination depends; 
consequently, any injury to these elements, by diminishing our 
possible action, diminishes perception in the same degree. In other 
words, if there exist in the material world places where the vibra­
tions received are not mechanically transmitted, if there are, as 
we said, zones of indetermination, these zones must occur along 
the path of what is termed the sensori-motor process; and hence 
all must happen as though the rays Po, Pb, Pc were perceived along 
this path and afterwards projected into P. Further, while the inde­
termination is something which escapes experiment and calcula­
tion, this is not the case with the nervous elements by which the 
impression is received and transmitted. These elements are the 
special concern of the physiologist and the psychologist; on them 
all the details of external perception would seem to depend and 
by them they may be explained. So we may say, if we like, that the 
disturbance, after having travelled along these nervous elements, 
after having gained the center, there changes into a conscious image 
which is subsequently exteriorized at the point P. But, when we 
so express ourselves, we merely bow to the exigencies of the sci­
entific method; we in no way describe the real process. There is 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
not, in fact, an unextended image which forms itselfin conscious­
ness and then projects itself into P. The truth is that the point P, 
the rays which it emits, the retina and the nervous elements affected, 
form a single whole; that the luminous point P is a part of this 
whole; and that it is really in P, and not elsewhere, that the image 
of P is formed and perceived. 
When we represent things to ourselves in this manner, we do 
but return to the simple convictions of common sense. We all of 
us began by believing that we grasped the very object, that we 
perceived it in itself and not in us. When philosophers disdain an 
idea so simple and so close to reality, it is because the intracerebral 
process - that diminutive part of perception - appears to them 
the equivalent of the whole of perception. If we suppress the object 
perceived and keep the internal process, it seems to them that the 
image of the object remains. And their belief is easily explained: 
there are many conditions, such as hallucination and dreams, in 
which images arise that resemble external perception in all their 
details. Because as, in such cases, the object has disappeared while 
the brain persists, he holds that the cerebral phenomenon is suffi­
cient for the production of the image. But it must not be forgot­
ten that in all psychical states of this kind memory plays the chief 
part. We shall try to show later that, when perception, as we under­
stand it, is once admitted, memory must arise, and that this memory 
has not, any more than perception itself, a cerebral state as its true 
and complete condition. But, without as yet entering upon the 
examination of these two points, we will content ourselves with 
a very simple observation which has indeed no novelty. In many 
people who are blind from birth, the visual centers are intact; yet 
they live and die without having formed a single visual image. Such 
an image, therefore, cannot appear unless the external object has, 
at least, once played its part: it must, once at any rate, have been 
part and parcel with representation. Now this is what we claim 
4 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
and for the moment all that we require, for we are dealing here 
with pure perception, and not with perception complicated by 
memory. Reject then the share of memory, consider perception 
in its unmixed state, and you will be forced to recognize that there 
is no image without an object. But, from the moment that you 
thus posit the intracerebral processes in addition to the external 
object which causes them, we can clearly see how the image of 
that object is given with it and in it: how the image should arise 
from the cerʂbral movement we shall never understand. 
When a lesion of the nerves or of the centers interrupts the 
passage of the nerve vibration, perception is to that extent dimin­
ished. Need we be surprised? The office of the nervous system is 
to utilize that vibration, to convert it into practical deeds, really 
or virtually accomplished. If, for one reason or another, the dis­
turbance cannot pass along, it would be strange ifthe correspond­
ing perception still took place, since this perception would then 
connect our body with points of space which no longer directly 
invite it to make a choice. Sever the optic nerve of an animal: the 
vibrations issuing from the luminous point can no longer be trans­
mitted to the brain and thence to the motor nerves; the thread, of 
which the optic nerve is a part and which binds the external object 
to the motor mechanisms of the animal, is broken: visual percep­
tion has therefore become impotent, and this very impotence is 
unconsciousness. That matter should be perceived without the 
help of a nervous system and without organs of sense, is not theo­
retically inconceivable; but it is practically impossible because 
such perception would be of no use. It would suit a phantom, not 
a living, and, therefore, acting, being. We are too much inclined 
to regard the living body as a world within a world, the nervous 
system as a separate being, of which the function is, first, to elabo­
rate perceptions, and, then, to create movements. The truth is 
that my nervous system, interposed between the objects which 
44 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
affect my body and those which I can influence, i s  a mere conduc­
tor, transmitting, sending back or inhibiting movement. This con­
ductor is composed of an enormous number of threads which 
stretch from the periphery to the center, and from the center to 
the periphery. As many threads as pass from the periphery to the 
center, so many points of space are there able to make an appeal 
to my will and to put, so to speak, an elementary question to my 
motor activity. Every such question is what is termed a percep­
tion. Thus perception is diminished by one of its elements each 
time one of the threads termed sensory is cut because some part of 
the external object then becomes unable to appeal to activity; and it 
is also diminished whenever a stable habit has been formed, because 
this time the ready-made response renders the question unneces­
sary. What disappears in either case is the apparent reflection of 
the stimulus upon itself, the return of the light on the image whence 
it comes; or rather that dissociation, that discernment, whereby the 
perception is disengaged from the image. We may therefore say 
that while the detail of perception is molded exactly upon that 
of the nerves termed sensory, perception as a whole has its true 
and final explanation in the tendency of the body to movement. 
The cause of the general illusion on this point lies in the appar­
ent indifference of our movements to the stimulation which excites 
them. It seems that the movement of my body in order to reach 
and to modify an object is the same, whether I have been told of 
its existence by the ear or whether it has been revealed to me by 
sight or touch. My motor activity thus appears as a separate entity, 
a sort of reservoir whence movements issue at will, always the 
same for the same action, whatever the kind of image which has 
called it into being. But the truth is that the character of move­
ments which are externally identical is internally different, accord­
ing as they respond to a visual, an auditory or a tactile impression. 
Suppose I perceive a multitude of objects in space; each of them, 
45 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
inasmuch as it is a visual form, solicits my activity. Now I sud­
denly lose my sight. No doubt I still have at my disposal the same 
quantity and the same quality of movements in space; but these 
movements can no longer be coordinated to visual impressions; 
they must in future follow tactile impressions, for example, and a 
new arrangement will take place in the brain. The protoplasmic 
expansions of the motor nervous elements in the cortex will now 
be in relation with a much smaller number of the nervous ele­
ments termed sensory. My activity is then really diminished, in 
the sense that although I can produce the same movements, the 
occasion comes more rarely from the external objects. Conse­
quently, the sudden interruption of optical continuity has brought 
with it, as its essential and profound effect, the suppression of a 
large part of the queries or demands addressed to my activity. Now 
such as query or demand is, as we have seen, a perception. Here 
we put our finger on the mistake of those who maintain that per­
ception springs from what is properly called the sensory vibra­
tion, and not from a sort of question addressed to motor activity. 
They sever this motor activity from the perceptive process; and, 
as it appears to survive the loss of perception, they conclude that 
perception is localized in the nervous elements termed sensory. 
But the truth is that perception is no more in the sensory centers 
than in the motor centers; it measures the complexity of their 
relations, and is, in fact, where it appears to be. 
Psychologists who have studied infancy are well aware that our 
representation is at first impersonal. Only little by little, and as a 
result of experience, does it adopt our body as a center and become 
our representation. The mechanism of this process is, moreover, 
easy to understand. As my body moves in space, all the other images 
vary, while that image, my body, remains invariable. I must, there­
fore, make it a center, to which I refer all the other images. My 
belief in an external world does not come, cannot come, from the 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
fact that I project outside myself sensations that are unextended: 
how could these sensations ever acquire extension, and whence 
should I get the notion of exteriority? But, if we allow that, as 
experience testifies, the aggregate of images is given to begin with, 
I can see clearly how my body comes to occupy, within this aggre­
gate, a privileged position. And I understand also whence arises 
the notion of interiority and exteriority, which is, to begin with, 
merely the distinction between my body and other bodies. For, if 
you start from my body, as is usually done, you will never make 
me understand how impressions received on the surface of my 
body, impressions which concern that body alone, are able to 
become for me independent objects and form an external world. 
But if, on the contrary, all images are posited at the outset, my 
body will necessarily end by standing out in the midst of them as a 
distinct thing, since they change unceasingly, and it does not vary. 
The distinction between the inside and the outside will then be 
only a distinction between the part and the whole. There is, first 
of all, the aggregate of images; and, then, in this aggregate, there 
are "centers of action," from which the interesting images appear 
to be reflected: thus perceptions are born and actions made ready. 
My body is that which stands out as the center of these percep­
tions; my personality is the being to which these actions must be 
referred. The whole subject becomes clear if we travel thus from 
the periphery to the center, as the child does, and as we ourselves 
are invited to do by immediate experience and by common sense. 
On the contrary everything becomes obscure, and problems are 
multiplied on all sides, if we attempt, with the theorists, to travel 
from the center to the periphery. Whence arises, then, this idea 
of an external world constructed artificially, piece by piece, out 
of unextended sensations, though we can neither understand how 
they come to form an extended surface, nor how they are subse­
quently projected outside our body? Why insist, in spite of appear-
47 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
ances, that I should go from my conscious self to my body, then 
from my body to other bodies, whereas in fact I place myself at 
once in the material world in general, and then gradually cut out 
within it the center of action which I shall come to call my body 
and to distinguish from all others? There are so many illusions 
gathered round this belief in the originally unextended character 
of our external perception; there are, in the idea that we project 
outside ourselves states which are purely internal, so many mis­
conceptions, so many lame answers to badly stated questions, that 
we cannot hope to throw light on the whole subject at once. We 
believe that light will increase, as we show more clearly, behind 
these illusions, the metaphysical error which confounds "pure per­
ception" with memory. But these illusions are, nevertheless, con­
nected with real facts, which we may here indicate in order to 
correct their interpretation. 
The first of these facts is that our senses require education. 
Neither sight nor touch is able at the outset to localize impres­
sions. A series of comparisons and inductions is necessary, whereby 
we gradually coordinate one impression with another. Hence phi­
losophers may jump to the belief that sensations are in their essence 
inextensive and that they constitute extensity by their juxtaposi­
tion. But is it not clear that, upon the hypothesis just advanced, our 
senses are equally in need of education - not, of course, in order 
to accommodate themselves to each other? Here, in the midst of 
all the images, there is a certain image which I term my body and 
of which the virtual action reveals itself by an apparent reflection 
of the surrounding images upon themselves. Suppose there are so 
many kinds of possible action for my body: there must be an equal 
number of systems of reflection for other bodies; each of these 
systems will be just what is perceived by one of my senses. My 
body, then, acts like an image which reflects others, and which, 
in so doing, analyzes them along lines corresponding to the differ-

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
ent actions which i t  can exercise upon them. And, consequently, 
each of the qualities perceived in the same object by my different 
senses symbolizes a particular direction of my activity, a particu­
lar need. Now, will all these perceptions of a body by my different 
senses give me, when united, the complete image of that body? 
Certainly not, because they have been gathered from a larger whole. 
To perceive all the influences from all the points of all bodies would 
be to descend to the condition of a material object. Conscious 
perception signifies choice, and consciousness mainly consists in 
this practical discernment. The diverse perceptions of the same 
object, given by my different senses, will not, then, when put 
together, reconstruct the complete image of the object; they will 
remain separated from each other by intervals which measure, so 
to speak, the gaps in my needs. It is to fill these intervals that an 
education of the senses is necessary. The aim of this education is 
to harmonize my senses with each other, to restore between their 
data a continuity which has been broken by the discontinuity of 
the needs of my body, in short, to reconstruct, as nearly as may be, 
the whole of the material object. This, on our hypothesis, explains 
the need for an education of the senses. Now let us compare it 
with the preceding explanation. In the first, un extended sensa­
tions of sight combine with unextended sensations of touch and 
of the other senses to give, by their synthesis, the idea of a mate­
rial object. But, to begin with, it is not easy to see how these 
sensations can acquire extension, nor how, above all, when exten­
sion in general has been acquired, we can explain in particular the 
preference of a given one of these sensations for a given point of 
space. And then we may ask: by what happy agreement, in virtue 
of what preestablished harmony, do these sensations of different 
kinds coordinate themselves to form a stable object, henceforth 
solidified, common to my experience and to that of all men, sub­
ject, in its relation to other objects, to those inflexible rules which 
49 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
we call the laws of nature? In the second, "the data of our differ­
ent senses" are, on the contrary, the very qualities of things, per­
ceived first in the things rather than in us: is it surprising that they 
come together, since abstraction alone has separated them? On 
the first hypothesis, the material object is nothing of all that we 
perceive: you put, on one side, the conscious principle with the 
sensible qualities and, on the other, a matter of which you can 
predicate nothing, which you define by negations because you have 
begun by despoiling it of all that reveals it to us. On the second 
hypothesis, an ever-deepening knowledge of matter becomes pos­
sible. Far from depriving matter of anything perceived, we must 
on the contrary, bring together all sensible qualities, restore their 
relationship, and reestablish among them the continuity broken 
by our needs. Our perception of matter is, then, no longer either 
relative or subjective, at least in principle, and apart, as we shall 
see presently, from affection and especially from memory; it is 
merely dissevered by the multiplicity of our needs. On the first 
hypothesis, spirit is as unknowable as matter, for (we) attribute to 
it the undefinable power of evoking sensations we know not 
whence, and of projecting them, we know not why, into a space 
where they will form bodies. On the second, the part played by 
consciousness is clearly defined: consciousness means virtual action, 
and the forms acquired by mind, those which hide the essence of 
spirit from us, should, with the help of this second principle, be 
removed as so many concealing veils. Thus, on our hypothesis, we 
begin to see the possibility of a clearer distinction between spirit 
and matter, and of a reconciliation between them. But we will 
leave this first point and come to the second. 
The second fact brought forward consists of what was long 
termed the "specific energy of the nerves." We know that stimula­
tion of the optic nerve by an external shock or by an electric cur­
rent will produce a visual sensation and that this same electric 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
current applied to the acoustic or to the glosso-pharyngeal nerve 
will cause a sound to be heard or a taste to be perceived. From 
these very particular facts have been deduced two very general 
laws: that different causes acting on the same nerve excite the 
same sensation and that the same cause, acting on different nerves, 
provokes different sensations. And from these laws it has been 
inferred that our sensations are merely signals and that the office 
of each sense is to translate into its own language homogeneous 
and mechanical movements occurring in space. Hence, as a con­
clusion, the idea of cutting our perception into two distinct parts, 
thenceforth incapable of uniting: on the one hand, homogeneous 
movements in space and, on the other hand, unextended sensa­
tions in consciousness. Now it is not our part to enter into an 
examination of the physiological problems raised by the interpre­
tation of the two laws: in whatever way these laws are understood, 
whether the specific energy is attributed to the nerves or whether 
it is referred to the centers, insurmountable difficulties arise. But 
the very existence of the laws themselves appears more and more 
problematical. Lotze himself already suspected a fallacy in them. 
He awaited, before putting faith in them, "sound waves which 
should give to the eye the sensation of light, or luminous vibra­
tions which should give to the ear a sound."2 The truth is that all 
the facts alleged can be brought back to a single type: the one 
stimulus capable of producing different sensations, the multiple 
stimuli capable of inducing the same sensation, are either an elec­
tric current or a mechanical cause capable of determining in the 
organ a modification of electrical equilibrium. Now we may well 
ask whether the electrical stimulus does not include different com­
ponents, answering objectively to sensations of different kinds, and 
whether the office of each sense is not merely to extract from the 
whole the component that concerns it. We should then have, 
indeed, the same stimuli giving the same sensations and different 
1)1 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
stimuli provoking different sensations. To speak more precisely, 
it is difficult to admit, for instance, that applying an electrical 
stimulus to the tongue would not occasion chemical changes, and 
these changes are what, in all cases, we term tastes. Yet, while the 
physicist has been able to identify light with an electromagnetic 
disturbance, we may say, inversely, that what he calls here an elec­
tromagnetic disturbance is light, so that it is really light that the 
optic nerve perceives objectively when subject to electrical stim­
ulus. The doctrine of specific energy appears to be nowhere more 
firmly based than in the case of the ear: nowhere also has the real 
existence of the thing perceived become more probable. We will 
not insist on these facts because they will be found stated and 
exhaustively discussed in a recent work.3 We will only remark 
that the sensations here spoken of are not images perceived by us 
outside our body, but rather affections localized within the body. 
Now it results from the nature and use of our body, as we shall 
see, that each of its so-called sensory elements has its own real 
action, which must be of the same kind as its virtual action on the 
external objects which it usually perceives; and thus we can under­
stand how it is that each of the sensory nerves appears to vibrate 
according to a fixed manner of sensation. But to elucidate this 
point we must consider the nature of affection. Thus we are led to 
the third and last argument which we have to examine. 
This third argument is drawn from the fact that we pass by 
insensible degrees from the representative state, which occupies 
space, to the affective state which appears to be unextended. 
Hence it is inferred that all sensation is naturally and neces­
sarily unextended, so that extensity is superimposed upon sensa­
tion, and the process of perception consists in an exteriorization 
of internal states. The psychologist starts, in fact, from his body, 
and, as the impressions received at the periphery of this body seem 
to him sufficient for the reconstitution of the entire material uni-

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
verse, to his body he at first reduces the universe. But this first 
position is not tenable; his body has not, and cannot have, any 
more or any less reality than all other bodies. So he must go far­
ther, follow to the end the consequences of his principle, and, 
after having narrowed the universe to the surface of the living body, 
contract this body itself into a center which he will end by sup­
posing unextended. Then, from this center will start unextended 
sensations, which will swell, so to speak, will grow into extensity, 
and will end by giving extension first to his body and afterwards 
to all other material objects. But this strange supposition WQuid 
be impossible if there were not, in point of fact, between images 
and ideas - the former extended and the latter unextended -
a series of intermediate states, more or less vaguely localized, 
which are the affective states. Our understanding, yielding to its 
customary illusion, poses the dilemma that a thing either is or is not 
extended, and as the affective state participates vaguely in exten­
sion, is in fact imperfectly localized, we conclude that this state is 
absolutely unextended. But then the successive degrees of exten­
sion, and extensity itself, will have to be explained by I know not 
what acquired property of un extended states; the history of per­
ception will become that of internal unextended states which 
acquire extension and project themselves without. Shall we put 
the argument in another form? There is hardly any perception which 
may not, by the increase of the action of its object upon our body, 
become an affection, and, more particularly, pain. Thus we pass 
insensibly from the contact with a pin to its prick. Inversely the 
decreasing pain coincides with the lessening perception ofits cause, 
and exteriorizes itself, so to speak, into a representation. So it 
does seem, then, as if there were a difference of degree and not of 
nature between affection and perception. Now the first is inti­
mately bound up with my personal existence: what, indeed, would 
be a pain detached from the subject that feels it? It seems, there-
5 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
fore, that i t  must b e  so with the second and that external percep­
tion is formed by projecting into space an affection which has 
become harmless. Realists and idealists are agreed in this method 
of reasoning. The latter see in the material universe nothing but a 
synthesis of subjective and unextended states; the former add that, 
behind this synthesis, there is an independent reality correspond­
ing to it, but both conclude, from the gradual passage of affection 
to representation, that our representation of the material universe 
is relative and subjective and that it has, so to speak, emerged 
from us, rather than that we have emerged from it. 
Before criticizing this questionable interpretation of an unques­
tionable fact, we may show that it does not succeed in explaining, 
or even in throwing light upon, the nature either of pain or of 
perception. That affective states, essentially bound up with my 
personality, and vanishing ifI disappear, should acquire extensity 
by losing intensity, should adopt a definite position in space, and 
build up a firm, solid experience, always in accord with itself and 
with the experience of other men - is very difficult to realize. 
Whatever we do, we shall be forced to give back to sensations, in 
one form or another, first the extension and then the indepen­
dence which we have tried to do without. But, what is more, affec­
tion, on this hypothesis, is hardly clearer than representation. For 
if it is not easy to see how affections, by diminishing in intensity, 
become representations, neither can we understand how the same 
phenomenon, which was given at first as perception, becomes affec­
tion by an increase of intensity. There is in pain something posi­
tive and active, which is ill explained by saying, as do some 
philosophers, that it consists in a confused representation. But still 
this is not the principal difficulty. That the gradual augmentation 
of the stimulus ends by transforming perception into pain, no one 
will deny; it is none the less true that this change arises at a defi­
nite moment: why at this moment rather than at another? And 
5"4 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
what special reason causes a phenomenon of which I was at first 
only an indifferent spectator to suddenly acquire for me a vital 
interest? Therefore, on this hypothesis I fail to see either why, at a 
given moment, a diminution of intensity in the phenomenon con­
fers on it a right to extension and to an apparent independence, or 
why an increase of intensity should create, at one moment rather 
than at another, this new property, the source of positive action, 
which is called pain. 
Let us return now to our hypothesis and show that affection 
must, at a given moment, arise out of the image. We shall thus under­
stand how it is that we pass from a perception, which has extensity, 
to an affection which is believed to be unextended. But some pre­
liminary remarks on the real significance of pain are indispensable. 
When a foreign body touches one of the prolongations of the 
amoeba, that prolongation is retracted; every part of the proto­
plasmic mass is equally able to receive a stimulation and to react 
against it; perception and movement being here blended in a sin­
gle property - contractility. But, as the organism grows more com­
plex, there is a division oflabor; functions become differentiated, 
and the anatomical elements thus determined forego their inde­
pendence. In such an organism as our own, the nerve fibres termed 
sensory are exclusively empowered to transmit stimulation to a 
central region whence the vibration will be passed on to motor 
elements. It would seem then that they have abandoned individ­
ual action to take their share, as outposts, in the maneuvers of the 
whole body. But nonetheless they remain exposed, singly, to the 
same causes of destruction which threaten the organism as a whole, 
and while this organism is able to move - and thereby to escape a 
danger or to repair a loss - the sensitive element retains the rela­
tive immobility to which the division oflabor condemns it. Thence 
arises pain, which, in our view, is nothing but the effort of the 
damaged element to set things right - a kind of motor tendency 
55 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
i n  a sensory nerve. Every pain, then, must consist i n  an effort - an 
effort which is doomed to be unavailing. Every pain is a local effort, 
and in its very isolation lies the cause of its impotence, because 
the organism, by reason of the solidarity of its parts, is able to 
move only as a whole. I t is also because the effort is local that pain 
is entirely disproportioned to the danger incurred by the living 
being. The danger may be mortal and the pain slight; the pain may 
be unbearable (as in a toothache) and the danger insignificant. 
There is then, there must be, a precise moment when pain inter­
venes: it is when the interested part of the organism, instead of 
accepting the stimulation, repels it. And it is not merely a dif­
ference of degree that separates perception from affection but a 
difference in kind. 
Now we have considered the living body as a kind of center 
whence is reflected on the surrounding objects the action which 
these objects exercise upon it: in that reflection external percep­
tion consists. But this center is not a mathematical point; it is a 
body, exposed, like all natural bodies, to the action of external 
causes which threaten to disintegrate it. We have just seen that it 
resists the influence of these causes. It does not merely reflect 
action received from without; it struggles, and thus absorbs some 
part of this action. Here is the source of affection. We might there­
fore say, metaphorically, that while perception measures the reflect­
ing power of the body, affection measures its power to absorb. 
But this is only a metaphor. We must consider the matter more 
carefully in order to understand clearly that the necessity of affec­
tion follows from the very existence of perception. Perception, 
understood as we understand it, measures our possible action upon 
things, and thereby, inversely, the possible action of things upon 
us. The greater the body's power of action (symbolized by a higher 
degree of complexity in the nervous system), the wider is the field 
that perception embraces. The distance which separates our body 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F 
I M A G E S  
from an object perceived really measures, therefore, the greater 
or less imminence of a danger, the nearer or more remote fulfill­
ment of a promise. And, consequently, our perception of an object 
distinct from our body, separated from our body by an interval, 
never expresses anything but a virtual action. But the more dis­
tance decreases between this object and our body (the more, in 
other words, the danger becomes urgent or the promise immedi­
ate), the more does virtual action tend to pass into real action. 
Suppose the distance reduced to zero, that is to say that the object 
to be perceived coincides with our body, that is to say again, that 
our body is the object to be perceived. Then it is no longer virtual 
action, but real action, that this specialized perception will express, 
and this is exactly what affection is. Our sensations are, then, to our 
perceptions that which the real action of our body is to its pos­
sible, or virtual, action. Its virtual action concerns other objects 
and is manifested within those objects; its real action concerns 
itself, and is manifested within its own substance. Everything then 
will happen as if, by a true return of real and virtual actions to 
their points of application or of origin, the external images were 
reflected by our body into surrounding space and the real actions 
arrested by it within itself. And that is why its surface, the com­
mon limit of the exterʃal and the internal, is the only portion of 
space which is both perceived and felt. 
That is to say once more, that my perception is outside my 
body and my affection within it. Just as external objects are per­
ceived by me where they are, in themselves and not in me, so my 
affective states are experienced where they occur, that is, at a given 
point in my body. Consider the system of images which is called 
the material world. My body is one of them. Around this image is 
grouped the representation, i.e., its eventual influence on the 
others. Within it occurs affection, i.e., its actual effort upon itself. 
Such is indeed the fundamental difference which every one of us 
57 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
naturally makes between an image and a sensation. When we say 
that the image exists outside us, we signify by this that it is exter­
nal to our body. When we speak of sensation as an internal state, 
we mean that it arises within in our body. And this is why we 
affirm that the totality of perceived images subsists, even if our 
body disappears, whereas we know that we cannot annihilate our 
body without destroying our sensations. 
Hence we begin to see that we must correct, at least in this 
particular, our theory of pure perception. We have argued as though 
our perception were a part of the images, detached, as such, from 
their entirety, as though, expressing the virtual action of the object 
upon our body, or of our body upon the object, perception merely 
isolated from the total object that aspect of it which interests us. 
But we have to take into account the fact that our body is not a 
mathematical point in space, that its virtual actions are compli­
cated by, and impregnated with, real actions, or, in other words, 
that there is no perception without affection. Affection is, then, 
that part or aspect of the inside of our body which we mix with 
the image of external bodies; it is what we must first of all sub­
tract from perception to get the image in its purity. But the psy­
chologist who shuts his eyes to the difference of function and nature 
between perception and sensation - the latter involving a real 
action, and the former a merely possible action - can only find 
between them a difference of degree. Because sensation (on account 
of the confused effort which it involves) is only vaguely localized, 
he declares it unextended, and thence makes sensation in general 
the simple element from which we obtain by composition all exter­
nal images. The truth is that affection is not the primary matter of 
which perception is made; it is rather the impurity with which 
perception is alloyed. 
Here we grasp, at its origin, the error which leads the psy­
chologist to consider sensation as unextended and perception as 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
an aggregate of sensations. This error i s  reinforced, as we shall 
see, by illusions derived from a false conception of the role of 
space and of the nature of extensity. But it has also the support of 
misinterpreted facts, which we must now examine. 
It appears, in the first place, as if the localization of an affec­
tive sensation in one part of the body were a matter of gradual 
training. A certain time elapses before the child can touch with 
the finger the precise point where it has been pricked. The fact is 
indisputable, but all that can be concluded from it is that some 
tentative essays are required to coordinate the painful impressions 
on the skin, which has received the prick, with the impressions of 
the muscular sense, which guides the movement, of arm and hand. 
Our internal affections, like our external perceptions, are of dif­
ferent kinds. These kinds of affections, like those of perception, 
are discontinuous, separated by intervals which are filled up in 
the course of education. But it does not at all follow that there is 
not, for each affection, an immediate localization of a certain kind, 
a local color which is proper to it. We may go further: if the affec­
tion has not this local color at once, it will never have it. For all 
that education can do is to associate with the actual affective sen­
sation the idea of a certain potential perception of sight and touch, 
so that a definite affection may evoke the image of a visual or tac­
tile impression, equally definite. There must be, therefore, in this 
affection itself, something which distinguishes it from other affec­
tions of the same kind and permits of its reference to this or that 
potential datum of sight or touch rather than to any other. But is 
not this equivalent to saying that affection possesses, from the out­
set, a certain determination of extensity? 
Again, it is alleged that there are erroneous localizations, for 
example, the illusion of those who have lost a limb (an illusion 
which requires, however, further examination). But what can we 
conclude from this beyond the fact that education, once acquired, 
59 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
persists and that such data of memory as are more useful in practi­
cal life supplant those of immediate consciousness? It is indispen­
sable, in view of action, that we should translate our affective 
experience into eventual data of sight, touch and muscular sense. 
When this translation is made, the original pales, but it never could 
have been made if the original had not been there to begin with, 
and if sensation had not been, from the beginning, localized by its 
own power and in its own way. 
But the psychologist has much difficulty in accepting this idea 
from common sense. Just as perception, in his view, could be in 
the things perceived only if they had perception, so a sensation 
cannot be in the nerve unless the nerve feels. Now it is evident 
that the nerve does not feel. So he takes sensation away from the 
point where common sense localizes it, carries it toward the brain, 
on which, more than on the nerve, it appears to depend, and logi­
cally should end by placing it in the brain. But it soon becomes 
clear that if it is not at the point where it appears to arise, neither 
can it be anywhere else: if it is not in the nerve, neither is it in the 
brain; for to explain its projection from the center to the periph­
ery a certain force is necessary, which must be attributed to a con­
sciousness that is to some extent active. Therefore, he must go 
further, and, after having made sensations converge toward the 
cerebral center, must push them out of the brain and thereby out 
of space. So he has to imagine, on the one hand, sensations that 
are absolutely unextended, and, on the other hand, an empty space 
indifferent to the sensations which are projected into it: hence­
forth he will exhaust himself in efforts of every kind to make us 
understand how unextended sensations acquire extensity and why 
they choose for their abode this or that point of space rather than 
any other. But this doctrine is not only incapable of showing us 
clearly how the unextended takes on extension; it renders affec­
tion, extension and representation equally inexplicable. It must 
60 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
assume affective states as so many absolutes, of which i t  i s  impos­
sible to say why they appear in or disappear from consciousness at 
definite moments. The passage from affection to representation 
remains wrapped in an equally impenetrable mystery because, once 
again, you will never find in internal states, which are supposed 
to be simple and unextended, any reason why they should prefer 
this or that particular order in space. And, finally, representation 
itself must be posited as an absolute: we cannot guess either its 
origin or its goal. 
Everything becomes clearer, on the other hand, if we start from 
representation itself, that is to say, from the totality of perceived 
images. My perception, in its pure state, isolated from memory, 
does not go on from my body to other bodies; it is, to begin with, 
in the aggregate of bodies, then gradually limits itself and adopts 
my body as a center. And it is led to do so precisely by experience 
of the double faculty, which this body possesses, of performing 
actions and feeling affections; in a word, it is led to do so by expe­
rience of the sensori-motor power of a certain image, privileged 
among other images. For, on the one hand, this image always occu­
pies the center of representation, so that the other images range 
themselves round it in the very order in which they might be sub­
ject to its action; on the other hand, I know it from within, by 
sensations which I term affective, instead of knowing only, as in 
the case of the other images, its outer skin. There is, then, in the 
aggregate of images, a privileged image, perceived in its depths 
and no longer only on the surface - the seat of affection and, at 
the same time, the source of action: it is this particular image 
which I adopt as the center of my universe and as the physical 
basis of my personality. 
But before we go on to establish the precise relation between 
the personality and the images in which it dwells, let us briefly 
sum up, contrasting it with the analyses of current psychology, 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
the theory of pure perception which we have just sketched out. 
We will return, for the sake of simplici ty, to the sense of sight, 
which we chose as our example. Psychology has accustomed us 
to assume the elementary sensations corresponding to the impres­
sions received by the rods and cones of the retina. With these 
sensations it goes on to reconstitute visual perception. But, in the 
first place, there is not one retina, there are two; so that we have to 
explain how two sensations, held to be distinct, combine to form 
a single perception corresponding to what we call a point in space. 
Suppose this problem is solved. The sensations in question are 
unextended; how will they acquire extension? Whether we see in 
extensity a framework ready to receive sensations, or an effect of 
the mere simultaneity of sensations coexisting in consciousness 
without coalescing, in either case something new is introduced 
with extensity, something unaccounted for: the process by which 
sensation arrives at extension, and the choice by each elementary 
sensation of a definite point in space, remain alike unexplained. 
We will leave this difficulty, and suppose visual extension con­
stituted. How does it in its turn reunite with tactile extension? 
All that my vision perceives in space is verified by my touch. Shall 
we say that objects are constituted by just the cooperation of sight 
and touch and that the agreement of the two senses in perception 
may be explained by the fact that the object perceived is their 
common product? But how could there be anything common, in 
the matter of quality, between an elementary visual sensation and 
a tactile sensation, since they belong to two different genera? The 
correspondence between visual and tactile extension can only be 
explained, therefore, by the parallelism of the order of the visual 
sensations wi th the order of the tactile sensations. So we are now 
obliged to suppose, over and above visual sensations, over and above 
tactile sensations, a certain order which is common to both and 
which, consequently, must be independent of either. We may go 
6 2  

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
further: this order is independent of our individual perception, 
since it is the same for all men and constitutes a material world in 
which effects are linked with causes, in which phenomena obey 
laws. We are thus led at last to the hypothesis of an objective order, 
independent of ourselves, that is to say, of a material world dis­
tinct from sensation. 
We have had, as we advanced, to multiply our irreducible data 
and to complicate more and more the simple hypothesis from 
which we started. But have we gained anything by it? Though the 
matter which we have been led to posit is indispensable in order 
to account for the marvellous accord of sensations among them­
selves, we still know nothing of it, since we must refuse to it all 
the qualities perceived, all the sensations of which it has only 
to explain the correspondence. It is not, then, it cannot be, any­
thing of what we know, anything of what we imagine. It remains a 
mysterious entity. 
But our own nature, the office and the function of our person­
ality, remain enveloped in equal mystery. For these elementary 
unextended sensations which develop themselves in space, whence 
do they come, how are they born, what purpose do they serve? We 
must posit them as so many absolutes, of which we see neither 
the origin nor the end. And even supposing that we must distin­
guish, in each of us, between the spirit and the body, we can know 
nothing either of body or of spirit or of the relation between them. 
Now in what does this hypothesis of ours consist, and at what 
precise point does it part company with the other? Instead of start­
ing from affection, of which we can say nothing, since there is no 
reason why it should be what it is rather than anything else, we 
start from action, that is to say from our faculty of effecting changes 
in things, a faculty attested to by consciousness and toward which 
all the powers of the organized body are seen to converge. So we 
place ourselves at once in the midst of extended images, and in 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
this material universe we perceive centers of indetermination, char­
acteristic oflife. In order that actions may radiate [i'om these cen­
ters, the movements or influences of the other images must be, 
on the one hand, received and, on the other hand, utilized. Living 
matter, in its simplest form and in a homogeneous state, accom­
plishes this function simultaneously with those of nourishment 
and repair. The progress of such matter consists in sharing this 
double labor between two categories of organs, the purpose of 
the first, called organs of nutrition, being to maintain the second: 
the second, in their turn, are made for action; they have as their 
simple type a chain of nervous elements, connecting two extremi­
ties, of which the one receives external impressions and the other 
executes movements. Thus, to return to the example of visual 
perception, the office of the rods and cones is merely to receive 
excitations which will be subsequently elaborated into movements, 
either accomplished or nascent. No perception can result from 
this, and nowhere in the nervous system are there conscious cen­
ters, but perception arises from the same cause which has brought 
into being the chain of nervous elements, with the organs which 
sustain them and with life in general. I t expresses and measures 
the power of action in the living being, the indetermination of 
the movement or of the action which will follow the receipt of 
the stimulus. This indetermination, as we have shown, ""ill express 
itself in a reflection upon themselves or, better, in a division, of 
the images which surround our body, and, as the chain of nervous 
elements which receives, arrests and transmits movements is the 
seat of this indetermination and gives its measure, our perception 
will follow all the detail and will appear to express all the varia­
tions of the nervous elements themselves. Perception, in its pure 
state, is, then, in very truth, a part of things. And, as for affective 
sensation, it does not spring spontaneously from the depths of 
consciousness to extend itself, as it grows weaker, in space; it is 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
one with the necessary modifications to which, in the midst of 
the surrounding images that influence it, the particular image that 
each one of us terms his body is subject. 
Such is our simplified, schematic theory of external perception. 
It is the theory of pure perception. If we went no further, the part 
of consciousness in perception would thus be confined to thread­
ing on the continuous string of memory an uninterrupted series 
of instantaneous visions, which would be a part of things rather 
than of ourselves. That this is the chief office of consciousness in 
external perception is indeed what we may deduce a priori from 
the very definition of living bodies. For though the function of 
these bodies is to receive stimulations in order to elaborate them 
into unforeseen reactions, still the choice of the reaction cannot 
be the work of chance. This choice is likely to be inspired by past 
experience, and the reaction does not take place without an appeal 
to the memories which analogous situations may have left behind 
them. The indetermination of acts to be accomplished requires, 
then, if it is not to be confounded with pure caprice, the preser­
vation of the images perceived. It may be said that we have no 
grasp of the future without an equal and corresponding outlook 
over the past, that the onrush of our activity makes a void behind 
it into which memories flow, and that memory is thus the rever­
beration, in the sphere of consciousness, of the indetermination 
of our will. But the action of memory goes further and deeper 
than this superficial glance would suggest. The moment has come 
to reinstate memory in perception, to correct in this way the ele­
ment of exaggeration in our conclusions, and so to determine with 
more precision the point of contact between consciousness and 
things, between the body and the spirit. 
We assert, at the outset, that if there be memory, that is, the 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
survival of past images, these images must constantly mingle with 
our perception of the present and may even take its place. For if 
they have survived it is with a view to utility; at every moment 
they complete our present experience, enriching it with experi­
ence already acquired, and, as the latter is ever increasing, it must 
end by covering up and submerging the former. It is indisputable 
that the basis of real, and so to speak instantaneous, intuition, on 
which our perception of the external world is developed, is a small 
matter compared with all that memory adds to it. Just because 
the recollection of earlier analogous intuitions is more useful than 
the intuition itself, being bound up in memory with the whole 
series of subsequent events and capable thereby of throwing a bet­
ter light on our decision, it supplants the real intuition of which 
the office is then merely - we shall prove it later - to call up the 
recollection, to give it a body, to render it active and thereby actual. 
We had every right, then, to say that the coincidence of percep­
tion with the object perceived exists in theory rather than in fact. 
We must take into account that perception ends by being merely 
an occasion for remembering, that we measure in practice the 
degree of reality by the degree of utility, and, finally, that it is our 
interest to regard as mere signs of the real those immediate intu­
itions which are, in fact, part and parcel of reality. But here we 
discover the mistake of those who say that to perceive is to project 
externally unextended sensations, which have been drawn from 
our own depths, and then to develop them in space. They have no 
difficulty in showing that our complete perception is filled with 
images which belong to us personally, with exteriorized (that is 
to say, recollected) images, but they forget that an impersonal basis 
remains in which perception coincides with the object perceived 
and which is, in fact, externality itself. 
The capital error, the error which, passing over from psychology 
into metaphysic, shuts us out in the end from the knowledge both 
66 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
of body and spirit, is that which sees only a difference of intensity 
instead of a difference of nature, between pure perception and 
memory. Our perceptions are undoubtedly interlaced with memo­
ries, and, inversely, a memory, as we shall show later, only becomes 
actual by borrowing the body of some perception into which it 
slips. These two acts, perception and recollection, always inter­
penetrate each other, are always exchanging something of their 
substance as by a process of endosmosis. The proper office of psy­
chologists would be to dissociate them, to give back to each its 
natural purity; in this way many difficulties raised by psychology, 
and perhaps also by metaphysics, might be lessened. But they will 
have it that these mixed states, compounded, in unequal propor­
tions, of pure perception and pure memory, are simple. And so 
we are condemned to an ignorance both of pure memory and of 
pure perception; to knowing only a single kind of phenomenon 
which will be called now memory and now perception, accord­
ing to the predominance in it of one or other of the two aspects; 
and, consequently, to finding between perception and memory 
only a difference in degree, and not in kind. The first effect ofthis 
error, as we shall see in detail, is to vitiate profoundly the theory 
of memory; for, if we make recollection merely a weakened per­
ception, we misunderstand the essential difference between the 
past and the present, we abandon all hope of understanding the 
phenomena of recognition, and, more generally, the mechanism 
of the unconscious. But, inversely, if recollection is regarded as a 
weakened perception, perception must be regarded as a stronger 
recollection. We are driven to argue as though it was given to us 
after the manner of a memory, as an internal state, a mere modifi­
cation of our personality; and our eyes are closed to the primor­
dial and fundamental act of perception - the act, constituting pure 
perception, whereby we place ourselves in the very heart of things. 
And thus the same error, which manifests itselfin psychology by a 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
radical incapacity to explain the mechanism of memory, will in 
metaphysics profoundly influence the idealistic and realistic con­
ceptions of matter. 
For realism, in fact, the invariable order of the phenomena of 
nature lies in a cause distinct from our perceptions, whether this 
cause must remain unknowable, or whether we can reach it by an 
effort (always more or less arbitrary) of metaphysical construc­
tion. For the idealist, on the contrary, these perceptions are the 
whole of reality, and the invariable order of the phenomena of 
nature is but the symbol whereby we express, alongside of real 
perceptions, perceptions that are possible. But, for realism as for 
idealism, perceptions are "veridical hallucinations," states of the 
subject, projected outside himself, and the two doctrines differ 
merely in this: that, in the one, these states constitute reality; in 
the other, they are sent forth to unite with it. 
But behind this illusion lurks yet another that extends to the 
theory of knowledge in general. We have said that the material 
world is made up of objects, or, if you prefer it, of images, of which 
all the parts act and react upon each other by movements. And 
that which constitutes our pure perception, is our dawning action, 
in so far as it is prefigured in those images. The actuality of our 
perception thus lies in its activity, in the movements which pro­
long it, and not in its greater intensity: the past is only idea, the 
present is ideo-motor. But this is what our opponents are deter­
mined not to see because they regard perception as a kind of con­
templation, attribute to it always a purely speculative end, and 
maintain that it seeks some strange disinterested knowledge, as 
though, by isolating it from action, and thus severing its links with 
the real, they were not rendering it both inexplicable and useless. 
But thenceforward all difference between perception and recol­
lection is abolished, since the past is essentially that which acts no 
longer, and since, by misunderstanding this characteristic of the 
68 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
past, they become incapable of making a real distinction between 
it and the present, i.e., that which is acting. No difference but that 
of mere degree will remain between perception and memory and 
neither in the one nor in the other will the subject be acknowl­
edged to pass beyond himself. Restore, on the contrary, the true 
character of perception; recognize in pure perception a system of 
nascent acts which plunges roots deep into the real; and at once 
perception is seen to be radically distinct from recollection; the 
reality of things is no more constructed or reconstructed, but 
touched, penetrated, lived, and the problem at issue between real­
ism and idealism, instead of giving rise to interminable metaphysi­
cal discussions, is solved, or rather, dissolved, by intuition. 
In this way also we shall plainly see what position we ought to 
take up between idealism and realism, which are both condemned 
to see in a matter only a construction or a reconstruction exe­
cuted by the mind. For if we follow to the end the principle accord­
ing to which the subjectivity of our perception consists, above 
all, in the share taken by memory, we shall say that even the sensi­
ble qualities of matter would be known in themselves, from within 
and not from without, could we but disengage them from that 
particular rhythm of duration which characterizes our conscious­
ness. Pure perception, in fact, however rapid we suppose it to be, 
occupies a certain depth of duration, so that our successive per­
ceptions are never the real moments of things, as we have hitherto 
supposed, but are moments of our consciousness. Theoretically, 
we said, the part played by consciousness in external perception 
would be to join together, by the continuous thread of memory, 
instantaneous visions of the real. But, in fact, there is for us noth­
ing that is instantaneous. In all that goes by that name there is 
already some work of our memory, and consequently, of our con­
sciousness, which prolongs into each other, so as to grasp them in 
one relatively simple intuition, an endless number of moments of 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
an endlessly divisible time. Now what is, in truth, the difference 
between matter as the strictest realism might conceive it and the 
perception which we have of it? Our perception presents us with 
a series of pictorial, but discontinuous, views of the universe; from 
our present perceptions we could not deduce subsequent percep­
tions because there is nothing in an aggregate of sensible qualities 
which foretells the new qualities into which they will change. On 
the contrary, matter, as realism usually posits it, evolves in such a 
manner that we can pass from one moment to the next by a mathe­
matical deduction. It is true that, between this matter and this 
perception, scientific realism can find no point of contact because 
it develops matter into homogeneous changes in space, while it 
contracts perception into unextended sensations within conscious­
ness. But, if our hypothesis is correct, we can easily see how per­
ception and matter are distinguished and how they coincide. The 
qualitative heterogeneity of our successive perceptions of the uni­
verse results from the fact that each, in itself, extends over a cer­
tain depth of duration and that memory condenses in each an 
enormous multiplicity of vibrations which appear to us all at once, 
although they are successive. If we were only to divide, ideally, 
this undivided depth of time, to distinguish in it the necessary 
multiplicity of moments, in a word, to eliminate all memory, we 
should pass thereby from perception to matter, from the subject 
to the object. Then matter, becoming more and more homoge­
neous as our extended sensations spread themselves over a greater 
number of moments, would tend more and more toward that 
system of homogeneous vibrations of which realism tells us, 
although it would never coincide entirely with them. There would 
be no need to assume, on the one hand, space with unperceived 
movements, and, on the other, consciousness with unextended 
sensations. Subject and object would unite in an extended per­
ception, the subjective side of perception being the contraction 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
effected by memory, and the objective reality of matter fusing with 
the multitudinous and successive vibrations into which this per­
ception can be internally broken up. Such at least is the conclu­
sion which, we hope, will issue clearly from the last part of this 
essay. Q,Jestions relating to subject and object, to their distinction and their 
union, should be put in terms of time rather than of space. 
But our distinction between "pure perception" and "pure memory" 
has yet another aim. Just as pure perception, by giving us hints as 
to the nature of matter, allows us to take an intermediate position 
between realism and idealism, so pure memory, on the other hand, 
by opening to us a view of what is called spirit should enable us to 
decide between those other two doctrines, materialism and 
spiritualism.4 Indeed, it is this aspect of the subject which will 
first occupy our attention in the two following chapters because 
it is in this aspect that our hypothesis allows some degree of experi­
mental verification. 
For it is possible to sum up our conclusions as to pure percep­
tion by saying that there is in matter something more than, but not some­
thing diferent from, that which is actually given. Undoubtedly, conscious 
perception does not compass the whole of matter, since it con­
sists, in as far as it is conscious, in the separation, or the "discern­
ment," of that which, in matter, interests our various needs. But 
between this perception of matter and matter itself there is but a 
difference of degree and not of kind, pure perception standing 
toward matter in the relation of the part to the whole. This amounts 
to saying that matter cannot exercise powers of any kind other 
than those which we perceive. It has no mysterious virtue; it can 
conceal none. To take a definite example, one, moreover, which 
interests us most nearly, we may say that the nervous system, a 
material mass presenting certain qualities of color, resistance, cohe-
7 1 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
sion, etc., may well possess unperceived physical properties, but 
physical properties only. And hence it can have no other office 
than to receive, inhibit or transmit movement. 
Now the essence of every form of materialism is to maintain 
the contrary, since it holds that consciousness, with all its func­
tions, is born of the mere interplay of material elements. Hence it 
is led to consider even the perceived qualities of matter - sensi­
ble, and consequently felt, qualities -as so many phosphorescences 
which follow the track of the cerebral phenomena in the act of 
perception. Matter, thus supposed capable of creating elemen­
tary facts of consciousness, might therefore just as well engender 
intellectual facts of the highest order. It is, then, the essence of 
materialism to assert the perfect relativity of sensible qualities, 
and it is not without good reason that this thesis, which Democ­
ritus has formulated in precise terms, is as old as materialism. 
But spiritualism has always followed materialism along this 
path. As if everything lost to matter must be gained by spirit, spiri­
tualism has never hesitated to despoil matter of the qualities 
with which it is invested in our perception, and which, on this 
view, are subjective appearances. Matter has thus too often been 
reduced to a mysterious entity which, just because all we know of 
it is an empty show, might as well engender thought as well as any 
other phenomenon. 
The truth is that there is one, and only one, method of refut­
ing materialism: it is to show that matter is precisely that which it 
appears to be. Thereby we eliminate all virtuality, all hidden power, 
from matter and establish the phenomena of spirit as an indepen­
dent reality. But to do this we must leave to matter those qualities 
which materialists and spiritualists alike strip from it: the latter 
that they may make of them representations of the spiri t, the for­
mer that they may regard them only as the accidental garb of space. 
This, indeed, is the attitude of common sense with regard to 
7 2 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
matter, and for this reason common sense believes in spirit. It seems 
to us that philosophy should here adopt the attitude of common 
sense, although correcting it in one respect. Memory, inseparable 
in practice from perception, imports the past into the present, con­
tracts into a single intuition many moments of duration, and thus 
by a twofold operation compells us, de facto, to perceive matter 
in ourselves, whereas we, de jure, perceive matter within matter. 
Hence the capital importance of the problem of memory. If it 
is memory above all that lends to perception its subjective char­
acter, the philosophy of matter must aim, in the first instance, we 
said, at eliminating the contributions of memory. We must now 
add that, as pure perception gives us the whole or at least the essen­
tial part of matter (since the rest comes from memory and is super­
added to matter), it follows that memory must be, in principle, a 
power absolutely independent of matter. If, then, spirit is a real­
ity, it is here, in the phenomenon of memory, that we may come 
into touch with it experimentally. And hence any attempt to derive 
pure memory from an operation of the brain should reveal on analy­
sis a radical illusion. 
Let us put the same statement in clearer language. We maintain 
that matter has no occult or unknowable power and that it coin­
cides, in essentials, with pure perception. Therefore we con­
clude that the living body in general, and the nervous system in 
particular, are only channels for the transmission of movements, 
which, received in the form of stimulation, are transmitted in the 
form of action, reflex or voluntary. That is to say, it is vain to attri­
bute to the cerebral substance the property of engendering repre­
sentations. Now the phenomena of memory, in which we believe 
that we can grasp spirit in its most tangible form, are precisely 
those of which a superficial psychology is most ready to find the 
origin in cerebral activity alone; just because they are at the point 
of contact between consciousness and matter, and because even 
7 3 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
the adversaries of materialism have no objection to treating the 
brain as a storehouse of memories. But if it could be positively 
established that the cerebral process answers only to a very small 
part of memory, that it is rather the effect than the cause, that 
matter is here as elsewhere the vehicle of an action and not the 
substratum of a knowledge, then the thesis which we are maintain­
ing would be demonstrated by the very example which is com­
monly supposed to be most unfavorable to it, and the necessity 
might arise of erecting spirit into an independent reality. In this 
way also, perhaps some light would be thrown on the nature of 
what is called spirit and on the possibility of the interaction of 
spirit and matter. For a demonstration of this kind could not be 
purely negative. Having shown what memory is not, we should 
have to try to discover what it is. Having attributed to the body 
the sole function of preparing actions, we are bound to enquire 
why memory appears to be one with this body, how bodily lesions 
influence it, and in what sense it may be said to mold itself upon 
the state of the brain matter. It is, moreover, impossible that this 
enquiry should fail to give us some information as to the psycho­
logical mechanism of memory and the various mental operations 
connected therewith. And, inversely, if the problems of pure psy­
chology seem to acquire some light from our hypothesis, this 
hypothesis itself will thereby gain in certainty and weight. 
But we must present this same idea in yet a third form, so as to 
make it quite clear why the problem of memory is in our eyes a 
privileged problem. From our analysis of pure perception issue 
two conclusions, which are in some sort divergent, one of them 
going beyond psychology in the direction of psycho-physiology 
and the other in that of metaphysics, but neither allowing of imme­
diate verification. The first concerns the office of the brain in 
perception: we maintain that the brain is an instrument of action, 
and not of representation. We cannot demand from facts the direct 
74 

O F  T H E  S E L E C T I O N  O F  I M A G E S 
confirmation of this thesis because pure perception bears, by defi­
nition, upon present objects, acting on our organs and our nerve 
centers; and because everything always happens, in consequence, 
as though our perceptions emanated from our cerebral state and 
were subsequently projected upon an object which differs abso­
lutely from them. In other words, with regard to external percep­
tion, the thesis which we dispute and that which we substitute 
for it lead to precisely the same consequence, so that it is possible 
to invoke in favor of either the one or the other its greater intelli­
gibility, but not the authority of experience. On the contrary, the 
empirical study of memory may and must decide between them. 
For pure recollection is, by hypothesis, the representation of an 
absent object. If the necessary and sufficient cause of perception 
lies in a certain activity of the brain, this same cerebral activity, 
repeating itself more or less completely in the absence of the 
object, will suffice to reproduce perception: memory will be 
entirely explicable by the brain. But if we find that the cerebral 
mechanism does indeed in some sort condition memories, but is 
in no way sufficient to ensure their survival; ifit concerns, in remem­
bered perception, our action rather than our representation; we 
shall be able to infer that it plays an analogous part in perception 
itself and that its office is merely to ensure our effective action on 
the object present. Our first conclusion may thus find its verifica­
tion. There would still remain this second conclusion, which is 
of a more metaphysical order - viz.: that in pure perception we 
are actually placed outside ourselves; we touch the reality of the 
object in an immediate intuition. Here also an experimental veri­
fication is impossible, since the practical results are absolutely 
the same whether the reality of the object is intuitively perceived 
or whether it is rationally constructed. But here again a study of 
memory may decide between the two hypotheses. For, in the sec­
ond, there is only a difference of intensity, or more generally, of 
7 5  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
degree, between perception and recollection, since they are both 
self-sufficient phenomena of representation. But if, on the con­
trary, we find that the difference between perception and recol­
lection is not merely in degree, but is a radical difference in kind, 
the presumption will be in favor of the hypothesis which finds in 
perception something which is entirely absent from memory, a 
reality intuitively grasped. Thus the problem of memory is in very 
truth a privileged problem, in that it must lead to the psychologi­
cal verification of two theses which appear to be insusceptible to 
proof, and of which the second, being of a metaphysical order, 
appears to go far beyond the borders of psychology. 
The road which we have to follow, then, lies clear before us. 
We shall first review evidence of various kinds borrowed from nor­
mal and from pathological psychology, by which philosophers might 
hold themselves justified in maintaining a physical explanation of 
memory. This examination must needs be minute or it would be 
useless. Keeping as close as possible to facts, we must seek to dis­
cover where, in the operations of memory, the office of the body 
begins and where it ends. And should we, in the course of this 
inquiry, find confirmation of our own hypothesis, we shall not 
hesitate to go further and, considering in itself the elementary 
work of the mind, complete the theory thereby sketched out, of 
the relation of spirit with matter. 

C H A P T E R  I I  
Of T h e  R e c o g n i t i o n  of I ma g e s .  
Memo r y  a n d  T h e  B r a i n  
We pass now to the consideration of the consequences for the 
theory of memory, which might ensue from the acceptance of the 
principles we have laid down. We have said that the body, placed 
between the objects which act upon it and those which it influ­
ences, is only a conductor, the office of which is to receive move­
ments and to transmit them (when it does not arrest them) to 
certain motor mechanisms, determined if the action is reflex, cho­
sen if the action is voluntary. Everything, then, must happen as if 
an independent memory gathered images as they successively occur 
along the course of time; and as if our body, together with its sur­
roundings, was never more than one among these images, the last 
is that which we obtain at any moment by making an instanta­
neous section in the general stream of becoming. In this section 
our body occupies the center. The things which surround it act 
upon it, and it reacts upon them. Its reactions are more or less 
complex, more or less varied, according to the number and nature 
of the apparatus which experience has set up within it. There­
fore, in the form of motor contrivances, and of motor contriv­
ances only, it can store up the action of the past. Whence it results 
that past images, properly so called, must be otherwise preserved; 
and we may formulate this first hypothesis: 
77 

M A T T E R 
A N D  M E M O R Y  
I .  The past survives under two distinct forms: first, in motor mecha­
nisms; secondly. in independent recollections. 
But then the practical, and, consequently, the usual function 
of memory, the utilizing of past experience for present action -
recognition, in short - must take place in two different ways. 
Sometimes it lies in the action itself and in the automatic setting 
in motion of a mechanism adapted to the circumstances; at other 
times it implies an effort of the mind which seeks in the past, in 
order to apply them to the present, those representations which 
are best able to enter into the present situation. Whence our 
second proposition: 
II. The recognition of a present object is effected by movements when it 
proceeds from the object, by representations when it issues from the subject. 
It is true that there remains yet another question: how these 
representations are preserved, and what are their relations with 
the motor mechanisms. We shall go into this subject thoroughly 
in our next chapter, after we have considered the unconscious 
and shown where the fundamental distinction lies between the 
past and the present. But already we may speak of the body as an 
ever advancing boundary between the future and the past, as a 
pointed end, which our past is continually driving forward into 
our future. Whereas my body, taken at a single moment, is but a 
conductor interposed between the objects which influence it and 
those on which it acts, it is, nevertheless, when replaced in the 
flux of time, always situated at the very point where my past expires 
in a deed. And, consequently, those particular images, which I 
call cerebral mechanisms, terminate at each successive moment 
the series of my past representations, being the extreme prolon­
gation of those representations into the present, their link with 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
the real, that is, with action. Sever that link - and you do not 
necessarily destroy the past image, but you deprive it of all means 
of acting upon the real and, consequently, as we shall show, of 
being realized. It is in this sense, and in this sense only, that an 
injury to the brain can abolish any part of memory. Hence our 
third, and last, proposition: 
III. We pass, by imperceptible stages, from recollections strung out along 
the course of time to the movements which indicate their nascent or possible 
action in space. Lesions of the brain may affect these movements, but not 
these recollections. 
We have now to see whether experience verifies these three 
propositions. 
I. The two forms of memory. I study a lesson, and in order to learn it 
by heart I read it a first time, accentuating every line; I then repeat 
it a certain number of times. At each repetition there is progress; 
the words are more and more linked together and at last make a 
continuous whole. When that moment comes, it is said that I 
know my lesson by heart, that it is imprinted on my memory. 
I consider now how the lesson has been learned, and picture to 
myself the successive phases of the process. Each successive read­
ing then recurs to me with its own individuality; I can see it again 
with the circumstances which attended it then and still form its 
setting. It is distinguished from those which preceded or followed 
it by the place which it occupied in time; in short, each reading 
stands out in my mind as a definite event in my history. Again it 
will be said that these images are recollections, that they are 
imprinted on my memory. The same words, then, are used in both 
cases. Do they mean the same thing? 
The memory of the lesson, which is remembered in the sense 
79 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
oflearned by heart, has all the marks of a habit. Like a habit, it is 
acquired by the repetition of the same effort. Like a habit, it 
demands first a decomposition and then a recomposition of the 
whole action. Lastly, like every habitual bodily exercise, it is stored 
up in a mechanism which is set in motion as a whole by an initial 
impulse, in a closed system of automatic movements which suc­
ceed each other in the same order and, together, take the same 
length of time. 
The memory of each successive reading, on the contrary, the 
second or the third for instance, has none of the marks of a habit. 
Its image was necessarily imprinted at once on the memory, since 
the other readings form, by thtir very definition, other recollec­
tions. It is like an event in my life; its essence is to bear a date, 
and, consequently, to be unable to occur again. All that later read­
ings can add to it will only alter its original nature; though my 
effort to recall this image becomes more and more easy as I repeat 
it, the image, regarded in itself, was necessarily at the outset what 
it always will be. 
I t may be urged that these two recollections, that of the read­
ing and that of the lesson, differ only as the less from the more, 
and that the images successively developed by each repetition over­
lie each other, so that the lesson once learned is but the compos­
ite image in which all readings are blended. And I quite agree that 
each of the successive readings differs from the preceding mainly 
in the fact that the lesson is better known. But it is no less certain 
that each of them, considered as a new reading and not as a lesson 
better known, is entirely sufficient to itself, subsists exactly as it 
occurred, and constitutes with all its concomitant perceptions an 
original moment of my history. We may even go further and aver 
that consciousness reveals to us a profound difference, a differ­
ence in kind, between the two sorts of recollection. The memory 
of a given reading is a representation, and only a representation; it 
80 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
is embraced in an intuition of the mind which I may lengthen or 
shorten at will; I assign to it any duration I please; there is nothing 
to prevent my grasping the whole of it instantaneously, as in one 
picture. On the contrary, the memory of the lesson I have learned, 
even if I repeat this lesson only mentally, requires a definite time, 
the time necessary to develop one by one, were it only in imagina­
tion, all the articulatory movements that are necessary: it is no 
longer a representation; it is an action. And, in fact, the lesson 
once learned bears upon it no mark which betrays its origin and 
classes it in the past; it is part of my present, exactly like my habit 
of walking or of writing; it is lived and acted, rather than repre­
sented: I might believe it innate, if I did not choose to recall at 
the same time, as so many representations, the successive read­
ings by means of which I learned it. Therefore, these representa­
tions are independent of it, and, just as they preceded the lesson 
as I now possess and know it, so that lesson once learned can 
do without them. 
Following to the end this fundamental distinction, we are con­
fronted by two different memories theoretically independent. The 
first records, in the form of memory-images, all the events of our 
daily life as they occur in time; it neglects no detail; it leaves to 
each fact, to each gesture, its place and date. Regardless of utility 
or of practical application, it stores up the past by the mere neces­
sity of its own nature. By this memory is made possible the intel­
ligent, or rather intellectual, recognition of perception already 
experienced; in it we take refuge every time that, in the search for 
a particular image, we remount the slope of our past. But every 
perception is prolonged into a nascent action; and while the images 
are taking their place and order in this memory, the movements 
which continue them modify the organism and create in the body 
new dispositions toward action. Thus is gradually formed an expe­
rience of an entirely different order, which accumulates within 
8 1  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
the body, a series o f  mechanisms would up and ready, with reac­
tions to external stimuli ever more numerous and more varied 
and answers ready prepared to an ever growing number of possi­
ble solicitations. We become conscious of these mechanisms as 
they come into play; this consciousness of a whole past of efforts 
stored up in the present is indeed also a memory, but a memory 
profoundly different from the first, always bent upon action, seated 
in the present and looking only to the future. It has retained from 
the past only the intelligently coordinated movements which rep­
resent the accumulated efforts of the past; it recovers those past 
efforts, not in the memory-images which recall them, but in the 
definite order and systematic character with which the actual move­
ments take place. In truth it no longer represents our past to us, it 
acts it; and ifit still deserves the name of memory, it is not because 
it conserves bygone images, but because it prolongs their useful 
effect into the present moment. 
Of these two memories, of which the one imagines and the other 
repeats, the second may supply the place of the first and even some­
times be mistaken for it. When a dog welcomes his master, bark­
ing and wagging his tail, he certainly recognizes him; but does 
this recognition imply the evocation of a past image and the com­
parison of that image with the present perception? Does it not 
rather consist in the animal's consciousness of a certain special 
attitude adopted by his body, an attitude which has been gradually 
built up by his familiar relations with his master, and which the 
mere perception of his master now calls forth in him mechani­
cally? We must not go too far; even in the animal it is possible that 
vague images of the past overflow into the present perception; we 
can even conceive that its entire past is virtually indicated in its 
consciousness; but this past does not interest the animal enough 
to detach it from the fascinating present, and its recognition must 
be rather lived than thought. To call up the past in the form of an 
8 2  

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
image, we must be able to withdraw ourselves from the action of 
the moment, we must have the power to value the useless, we 
must have the will to dream. Man alone is capable of such an effort. 
But even in him the past to which he returns is fugitive, ever on 
the point of escaping him, as though his backward turning memory 
were thwarted by the other, more natural, memory, of which the 
forward movement bears him on to action and to life. 
When psychologists talk of recollection as of a fold in a mate­
rial, as of an impress graven deeper by repetition, they forget that 
the immense majority of our memories bear upon events and details 
of our life of which the essence is to have a date, and, consequently, 
to be incapable of being repeated. The memories which we acquire 
voluntarily by repetition are rare and exceptional. On the con­
trary, the recording, by memory, of facts and images unique in 
their kind takes place at every moment of duration. But inasmuch 
as learned memories are more useful, they are more remarked. 
And as the acquisition of these memories by a repetition of the 
same effort resembles the well-known process of habit, we prefer 
to set this kind of memory in the foreground, to erect it into the 
model memory, and to see in spontaneous recollection only the 
same phenomenon in a nascent state, the beginning of a lesson 
learned by heart. But how can we overlook the radical difference 
between that which must be built up by repetition and that which 
is essentially incapable of being repeated? Spontaneous recollec­
tion is perfect from the outset; time can add nothing to its image 
without disfiguring it; it retains in memory its place and date. On 
the contrary, a learned recollection passes out of time in the mea­
sure that the lesson is better known; it becomes more and more 
impersonal, more and more foreign to our past life. Repetition, 
therefore, in no sense effects the conversion of t!1.e first into the 
last; its office is merely to utilize more and more the movements 
by which the first was continued, in order to organize them together 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
and, by setting up a mechanism, to create a bodily habit. Indeed, 
this habit could not be called a remembrance were it not that I 
remember that I have acquired it, and I remember its acquisition 
only because I appeal to that memory which is spontaneous, which 
dates events and records them but once. Of the two memories, then, 
which we have just distinguished, the first appears to be memory 
par excellence. The second, that generally studied by psycholo­
gists, is habit interpreted by memory rather than memory itself. 
It is true that the example of a lesson learned by heart is to 
some extent artificial. Yet our whole life is passed among a lim­
ited number of objects, which pass more or less often before our 
eyes: each of them, as it is perceived, provokes on our part move­
ments, at least nascent, whereby we adapt ourselves to it. These 
movements, as they recur, contrive a mechanism for themselves, 
grow into a habit, and determine in us attitudes which automati­
cally follow our perception of things. This, as we have said, is the 
main office of our nervous system. The afferent nerves bring to 
the brain a disturbance, which, after having intelligently chosen 
its path, transmits itself to motor mechanisms created by repeti­
tion. Thus is ensured the appropriate reaction, the correspondence 
to environment - adaptation, in a word - which is the general 
aim of life. And a living being which did nothing but live would 
need no more than this. But, simultaneously with this process of 
perception and adaptation which ends in the record of the past in 
the form of motor habits, consciousness, as we have seen, retains 
the image of the situations through which it has successively trav­
eled, and lays them side by side in the order in which they took 
place. Of what use are these memory-images? Preserved in mem­
ory, reproduced in consciousness, do they not distort the practical 
character of life, mingling dream with reality? They would, no 
doubt, if our actual consciousness, a consciousness which reflects 
the exact adaptation of our nervous system to the present situation, 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
did not set aside all those among the past images which cannot be 
coordinated with the present perception and are unable to form 
with it a useful combination. At most, certain confused recollec­
tions, unrelated to the present circumstances, may overflow the 
usefully associated images, making around these a less illuminated 
fringe which fades away into an immense zone of obscurity. But sup­
pose an accident which upsets the equilibrium maintained by the 
brain between the external stimulation and the motor reaction, 
relax for a moment the tension of the threads which go from the 
periphery to the periphery by way of the center, and immediately 
these darkened images come forward into the full light: it is prob­
ably the latter condition which is realized in any sleep wherein we 
dream. Of these two memories that we have distinguished, the 
second, which is active, or motor, will, then, constantly inhibit 
the first, or at least only accept from it that which can throw light 
upon and complete in a useful way the present situation: thus, as 
we shall see later, could the laws of the association of ideas be 
explained. But, besides the services which they can render by asso­
ciating with the present perception, the images stored up in the 
spontaneous memory have yet another use. No doubt they are 
dream-images; no doubt they usually appear and disappear inde­
pendently of our will; this is why, when we really wish to know a 
thing, we are obliged to learn it by heart, that is to say, to substi­
tute for the spontaneous image a motor mechanism which can 
serve in its stead. But there is a certain effort sui Beneris which per­
mits us to retain the image itself, for a limited time, within the 
field of our consciousness; thanks to this faculty, we have no need 
to await at the hands of chance the accidental repetition of the 
same situations in order to organize into a habit concomitant move­
ments; we make use of the fugitive image to construct a stable 
mechanism which takes its place. Either, then, our distinction of 
the two independent memories is unsound, or, if it corresponds to 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
facts, we shall find an exaltation of spontaneous memory in most 
cases where the sensori-motor equilibrium of the nervous system 
is disturbed; an inhibition, on the contrary, in the normal state, of 
all spontaneous recollections which do not serve to consolidate the 
present equilibrium; and lastly, in the operation by means of which 
we acquire the habit-memory, a latent intervention of the image­
memory. Let us see whether the facts confirm this hypothesis. 
For the moment we will insist on neither point; we hope to 
throw ample light upon both when we study the disturbances of 
memory and the laws of the association of ideas. We shall be con­
tent for the present to show, in regard to things which are learned, 
how the two memories run side by side and lend to each other a 
mutual support. It is a matter of everyday experience that lessons 
committed to the motor memory can be automatically repeated, 
but observation of pathological cases proves that automatism 
extends much further in this direction than we think. In cases of 
dementia, we sometimes find that intelligent answers are given 
to a succession of questions which are not understood: language 
here works after the manner of a reflex.! Aphasics, incapable of 
uttering a word spontaneously, can recollect without a mistake 
the words of an air which they sing.2 Or again, they will fluently 
repeat a prayer, a series of numbers, the days of the week or the 
months of the year.3 Thus extremely complex mechanisms, sub­
tle enough to imitate intelligence, can work by themselves when 
once they have been built up, and, in consequence, usually obey a 
mere initial impulse of the will. But what takes place while they 
are being built up? When we strive to learn a lesson, for instance, 
is not the visual or auditory image which we endeavor to reconsti­
tute by movements already in our mind, invisible though present? 
Even in the very first recitation, we recognize, by a vague feeling 
of uneasiness, any error we have made, as though from the obscure 
depths of consciousness we received a sort of warning. 4 Concen-
86 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
trate your mind on that sensation, and you will feel that the com­
plete image is there, but evanescent, a phantasm that disappears 
just at the moment when motor activity tries to fix its outline. 
During some recent experiments (which, however, were under­
taken with quite a different purpose),5 the subjects averred that 
they felt just such an impression. A series of letters, which they 
were asked to remember, was held before their eyes for a few sec­
onds. But, to prevent any accentuating of the letters so perceived 
by appropriate movements of articulation, they were asked to repeat 
continuously a given syllable while their eyes were fixed on the 
image. From this resulted a special psychical state; the subjects 
felt themselves to be in complete possession of the visual image, 
although unable to produce any part of it on demand: to their 
great surprise the line disappeared. "According to one observer, 
the basis was a Gesammtvorstellung, a sort of all-embracing com­
plex idea in which the parts have an indefinitely felt unity."6 
This spontaneous recollection, which is masked by the acquired 
recollection, may flash out at intervals, but it disappears at the 
least movement of the voluntary memory. If the subject sees the 
series of letters, of which he thought he retained the image, van­
ish from before his eyes, this happens mainly when he begins to 
repeat it: the effort seems to drive the rest of the image out of his 
consciousness.7 Now, analyze many of the imaginative methods 
of mnenomics and you will find that the object of this science is 
to bring into the foreground the spontaneous memory which was 
hidden, and to place it, as an active memory, at our service; to this 
end every attempt at motor memory is, to begin with, suppressed. 
The faculty of mental photography, says one author,8 belongs rather 
to subconsciousness than to consciousness; it answers with diffi­
culty to the summons of the will. In order to exercise it, we should 
accustom ourselves to retaining, for instance, several arrangements 
of points at once, without even thinking of counting them9: we 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
must imitate in some sort the instantaneity of this memory in order 
to attain to its mastery. Even so it remains capricious in its mani­
festations; as the recollections which it brings us are akin to dreams, 
its more regular intrusion into the life of the mind may seriously 
disturb intellectual equilibrium. 
What this memory is, whence it is derived and how it works 
will be shown in the next chapter. For the moment, the sche­
matic conception will be enough. So we shall merely sum up the 
preceding paragraphs and say that the past appears indeed to be 
stored up, as we had surmised, under two extreme forms: on the 
one hand, motor mechanisms which make use of it; on the other, 
personal memory-images which picture all past events with their 
outline, their color and their place in time. Of these two memo­
ries the first follows the direction of nature; the second, left to 
itself, would rather go the contrary way. The first, conquered by 
effort, remains dependent upon our will; the second, entirely spon­
taneous, is as capricious in reproducing as it is faithful in preserv­
ing. The only regular and certain service which the second memory 
can render to the first is to bring before it images of what pre­
ceded or followed situations similar to the present situation, so as 
to guide its choice: in this consists the association of ideas. There 
is no other case in which the memory which recalls is sure to 
obey the memory which repeats. Everywhere else, we prefer to 
construct a mechanism which allows us to sketch the image again, 
at need, because we are well aware that we cannot count upon 
its reappearance. These are the two extreme forms of memory in 
their pure state. 
Now we may say at once that it is because philosophers have 
concerned themselves only with the intermediate and, so to speak, 
impure forms that they have misunderstood the true nature of 
memory. Instead of dissociating the two elements, memory-image 
and movement, in order to discover subsequently by what series 
88 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
of operations they come, having each abandoned some part of its 
. original purity to fuse one with the other, they are apt to consider 
only the mixed phenomenon which results from their coalescence. 
This phenomenon, being mixed, presents on the one side the aspect 
of a motor habit, and, on the other side, that of an image more or 
less consciously localized. But they will have it that the phenome­
non is a simple one. So they must assume that the cerebral mecha­
nism, whether of the brain or of the medulla oblongata or of the 
cord, which serves as the basis of the motor habit, is at the same 
time the substratum of the conscious image. Hence the strange 
hypothesis of recollections stored in the brain, which are supposed 
to become conscious as though by a miracle and bring us back to 
the past by a process that is left unexplained. True, some observ­
ers do not make so light of the conscious aspect of the operation 
and see in it something more than an epiphenomenon. But, as 
they have not begun by isolating the memory which retains and 
sets out the successive repetitions side by side in the form of 
memory images, since they confound it with the habit which is 
perfected by use, they are led to believe that the effect of repeti­
tion is brought to bear upon one and the same single and indivisi­
ble phenomenon which merely grows stronger by recurrence: and, 
as this phenomenon clearly ends by being merely a motor habit 
corresponding to a mechanism, cerebral or other, they are led, 
whether they will it or not, to suppose that some mechanism of 
this kind was from the beginning behind the image and that the 
brain is an organ of representation. We are now about to consider 
these intermediate states and distinguish in each of them the part 
which belongs to nascent action, that is to say of the brain, 
and the part of independent memory, that is to say of memory­
images. What are these states? Being partly motor they must, on 
our hypothesis, prolong a present perception; but, on the other 
hand, inasmuch as they are images, they reproduce past percep-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
tions. Now the concrete process by which we grasp the past in 
the present is recognition. Recognition, therefore, is what we have 
to study, to begin with. 
II. Of recognition in general: memory-images and movements. There are 
two ways in which it is customary to explain the feeling of "hav­
ing seen a thing before." On one theory, the recognition of a pre­
sent perception consists in inserting it mentally in its former 
surroundings. I encounter a man for the first time: I simply per­
ceive him. If I meet him again, I recognize him, in the sense that 
the concomitant circumstances of the original perception, return­
ing to my mind, surround the actual image with a setting which is 
not a setting actually perceived. To recognize, then, according to 
this theory, is to associate with a present perception the images 
which were formerly given in connection with iL IO But, as it has 
been justly observed, a renewed perception cannot suggest the 
conco'mitant circumstances of the original perception unless the 
latter is evoked, to begin with, by the present state which resem­
bles it. 1 1  Let A be the first perception; the accompanying circum­
stances B, C, 0, remain associated with it by contiguity. If I call 
the same perception renewed A', as it is not with A', but with A 
that the terms B, C, 0 are bound up, it is necessary, in order to 
evoke the terms B, C, 0, that A' should be first called up by some 
association of resemblance. And it is of no use to assert that A' is 
identical with A. For the two terms, though similar, are numeri­
cally distinct, and differ at least by this simple fact that A' is a 
perception, whereas A is but a memory. Of the two interpreta­
tions of which we have spoken, the first, then, melts into the sec­
ond, which we will now examine. 
It is alleged that the present perception dives into the depths 
of memory in search of the remembrance of the previous percep­
tion which resembles it: the sense of recognition would thus come 
90 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
from a bringing together, or a blending, or perception and memory. 
No doubt, as an acute thinker12 has already pointed out, resem­
blance is a relation established by the mind between terms which 
it compares and consequently already possesses; so the perception 
of a resemblance is rather an effect of association than its cause. 
But, along with this definite and perceived resemblance which 
consists in the common element seized and disengaged by the mind, 
there is a vague and in some way objective resemblance, spread 
over the surface of the images themselves, which might act per­
haps like a physical cause of reciprocal attraction. 13 And should 
we ask how it is, then, that when we often recognize an object 
without being able to identify it with a former image, refuge is 
sought in the convenient hypothesis of cerebral tracks which coin­
cide with each other, of cerebral movements made easier by 
practice, 14 or of perceptive cells communicating with cells where 
memories are stored. IS In truth, all such theories of recognition 
are bound to melt away, in the end, into physiological hypotheses 
of this kind. What they were aiming at, first, was to make all rec­
ognition issue from a bringing together of perception and memory; 
but experience stands over against them, testifying that in most 
cases recollection emerges only after the perception is recognized. 
So they are sooner or later forced to relegate to the brain, in the 
form of a combination between movements or of a connection 
between cells, that which they had first declared to be an associa­
tion of ideas; and to explain the fact of recognition - very clear on 
our view - by the hypothesis, which seems to us very obscure, of 
a brain which stores up ideas. 
But the fact is that the association of a perception with a mem­
ory is not enough to account for the process of recognition. For, if 
recognition took place in this way, it would always be obliterated 
when the memory images had disappeared and always happen when 
these images are retained. Psychic blindness, or the inability to 
91 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
recognize perceived objects, would, then, never occur without 
an inhibition of visual memory, and, above all, the inhibition of 
visual memory would invariably produce psychic blindness. But 
neither consequence is borne out by facts. In a case studied by 
Wilbrand, 16 the patient could describe with her eyes shut the town 
she lived in and, in imagination, walk through its streets; yet, once 
in the street, she felt like a complete stranger: she recognized noth­
ing and could not find her way. Facts of the same kind have been 
observed by Fr. Muller17 and Lissauer: 18 the patients can summon 
up the mental picture of an object named to them; they describe 
it very well; but they cannot recognize it when it is shown to them. 
The retention, even the conscious retention, of a visual memory 
is, therefore, not enough for the recognition of a similar percep­
tion. Inversely, in Charcot's case, which has become the classic 
example of a complete eclipse of visual images, 19 not all recogni­
tion of perceptions was obliterated. A careful study of the report 
of the case is conclusive on this point. No doubt the patient failed 
to recognize the streets and houses of his native town, to the extent 
of being unable to name them or to find his way about them; yet 
he knew that they were streets and houses. He no longer recog­
nized his wife and children; yet, when he saw them, he could say 
that this was a woman, that those were children. None of this 
would have been possible had there been psychic blindness in the 
absolute sense of the word. A certain kind of recognition, then, 
which we shall need to analyze, was obliterated, not the general 
faculty of recognition. So we must conclude that not every recog­
nition implies the intervention of a memory image, and, conversely, 
that we may still be able to call up such images when we have lost 
the power of identifying perceptions with them. What, then, is 
recognition, and how shall we define it? 
There is, in the first place, if we carry the process to the extreme, 
an instantaneous recognition, of which the body is capable by itself, 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
without the help o f  any explicit memory-image. I t  consists in 
action and not in representation. For instance, I take a walk in a 
town seen for the first time. At every street comer I hesitate, uncer­
tain where I am going. I am in doubt, I mean by this that alterna­
tives are offered to my body, that my movement as a whole is 
discontinuous, that there is nothing in one attitude which foretells 
and prepares future attitudes. Later, after prolonged sojourn in the 
town, I shall go about it mechanically, without having any dis­
tinct perception of the objects which I am passing. Now, between 
these two extremes, the one in which perception has not yet organ­
ized the definite movements which accompany it and the other in 
which these accompanying movements are organized to a degree 
which renders perception useless, there is an intermediate state 
in which the object is perceived, yet provokes movements which 
are connected, continuous and called up by one another. I began 
by a state in which I distinguished only by my perception; I 
shall end in a state in which I am hardly conscious of anything but 
automatism: in the interval there is a mixed state, a perception 
followed step by step by automatism just impending. Now, if the 
later perceptions differ from the first perception in the fact that 
they guide the body toward the appropriate mechanical reaction, 
and if, on the other hand, those renewed perceptions appear to 
the mind under that special aspect which characterizes familiar 
or recognized perceptions, must we not assume that the conscious­
ness of a well-regulated motor accompaniment, of an organized 
motor reaction, is here the foundation of the sense of familiarity? 
At the basis of recognition there would thus be a phenomenon of 
a motor order. 
To recognize a common object is mainly to know how to use 
it. This is so true that early observers gave the name apraxia to that 
failure of recognition which we call psychic blindness.2o But to 
know how to use a thing is to sketch out the movements which 
9 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
adapt themselves to it; i t  i s  to take a certain attitude or at least to 
have a tendency to do so through what the Germans call motor 
impulses (Bewegungsantriebe). The habit of using the object has, 
then, resulted in organizing together movements and perceptions; 
the consciousness of these nascent movements, which follow per­
ception after the manner of a reflex, must be here also at the bot­
tom of recognition. 
There is no perception which is not prolonged into movement. 
Ribot21 and Maudsley22 have long since drawn attention to this 
point. The training of the senses consists in just the sum of the 
connections established between the sensory impression and the 
movement which makes use of it. As the impression is repeated, 
the connection is consolidated. Nor is there anything mysterious 
in the mechanism of the operation. Our nervous system is evi­
dently arranged with a view to the building up of motor apparatus 
linked, through the intermediary of centers, with sense stimuli; 
the discontinuity of the nervous elements, the multiplicity of their 
terminal branches, which are probably capable of joining in vari­
ous ways, make possible an unlimited number of connections 
between impressions and the corresponding movements. But the 
mechanism in course of construction cannot appear to conscious­
ness in the same form as the mechanism already constructed. There 
is something which profoundly distinguishes and clearly mani­
fests those systems of movements which are consolidated in the 
organism; that is, we believe, the difficulty we have in modifying 
their order. I t is, again, the performance of the movements which 
follow in the movements which precede, a performance whereby 
the part virtually contains the whole, as when each note of a tune 
learned by heart seems to lean over the next to watch its execu­
tion.23 If, then, every perception has its organized motor accom­
paniment, the ordinary feeling of recognition has its root in the 
consciousness of this organization. 
94 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
In fact, we commonly act our recognition before we think it. 
Our daily life is spent among objects whose very presence invites 
us to play a part: in this the familiarity of their aspect consists. 
Motor tendencies would, then, be enough by themselves to give 
us the feeling of recognition. But we hasten to add that in most 
cases there is something else besides. 
For, while motor apparatus are built up under the influence of 
perceptions that are analyzed with increasing precision by the body, 
our past psychical life is there: it survives - as we shall try to prove -
with all the detail of its events localized in time. Always inhib­
ited by the practical and useful consciousness of the present 
moment, that is to say, by the sensori-motor equilibrium of a ner­
vous system connecting perception with action, this memory 
merely awaits the occurrence of a rift between the actual impres­
sion and its corresponding movement to slip in its images. As a 
rule, when we desire to go back along the course of the past and 
discover the known, localized, personal memory-image which is 
related to the present, an effort is necessary, whereby we draw 
back from the act to which perception inclines us: the latter would 
urge us toward the future; we have to go backwards into the past. 
In this sense, movement rather tends to drive away the image. 
Yet, in one way, it contributes to its approach. For, though the 
whole series of our past images remains present within us, still 
the representation which is analogous to the present perception 
has to be chosen from among all possible representations. Move­
ments, accomplished or merely nascent, prepare this choice or at 
the very least mark out the field in which we shall seek the image 
we need. By the very constitution of our nervous system, we are 
beings in whom present impressions find their way to appropriate 
movements: ifit so happens that former images can just as well be 
prolonged in these movements, they take advantage of the oppor­
tunity to slip into the actual perception and get themselves adopted 
95 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
by it. They then appear, i n  fact, to our consciousness, though it 
seems as if they ought, by right, to remain concealed by the pre­
sent state. So we may say that the movements which bring about 
mechanical recognition hinder in one way, and encourage in 
another, recognition by images. In principle, the present supplants 
the past. But, just because the disappearance of former images is 
due to their inhibition by our present attitude, those whose shape 
might fit into this attitude encounter less resistance than the others; 
if, then, any one of them is indeed able to overcome the obstacle, 
it is the image most similar to the present perception that will 
actually do so. 
If our analysis is correct, the diseases which affect recognition 
will be of two widely differing forms, and facts will show us two 
kinds of psychic blindness. For we may presume that, in some 
cases, it is the memory-image which can no longer reappear, and 
that, in other cases, it is merely the bond between perception and 
the accompanying habitual movements which is broken - per­
ception provoking diffused movements, as though it were wholly 
new. Do the facts confirm this hypothesis? 
There can be no dispute as to the first point. The apparent 
abolition of visual memory in psychic blindness is so common a 
fact that it served, for a time, as a definition of that disorder. We 
shall have to consider how far, and in what sense, memories can 
really disappear. What interests us for the moment is that cases 
occur in which there is no recognition, and yet visual memory is 
not altogether lost. Have we here then, as we maintain, merely a 
disturbance of motor habits or at most an interruption of the chain 
which unite them to sense perceptions? As no observer has con­
sidered a question of this nature, we should be hard put for an 
answer to it if we had not noticed here and there in their descrip­
tions certain facts which appear to us significant. 
The first of these facts is the loss of the sense of direction. All 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
those who have treated the subject of psychic blindness have been 
struck by this peculiarity. Lissauer's patient had completely lost 
the faculty of finding his way about his own house.24 Fr. Muller 
insists on the fact that, while blind men soon learn to find their 
way, the victim of psychic blindness fails, even after months of 
practice, to find his way about his own room.25 But is not this 
faculty of orientation the same thing as the faculty of coordinat­
ing the movements of the body with the visual impression, and of 
mechanically prolonging perceptions in useful reactions? 
There is a second, and even more characteristic fact, and that 
is the manner in which these patients draw. We can conceive two 
fashions of drawing. In the first, we manage, by tentative efforts, 
to set down here and there on the paper a certain number of points, 
and we then connect them together, verifying continually the 
resemblance between the drawing and the object. This is what is 
known as "point to point" drawing. But our habitual method is 
quite different. We draw with a continuous line, after having looked 
at, or thought of, our model. How shall we explain such a faculty, 
except by our habit of discovering at once the organization of the 
outlines of common objects, that is to say, by a motor tendency to 
draft their diagram in one continuous line? But if it is just such 
habits or correspondences which are lost in certain forms of psy­
chic blindness, the patient may still perhaps be able to draw bits 
of a line which he will connect together more or less well; but he 
will no longer be able to draw at a stroke because the tendency to 
adopt and reproduce the general movement of the outline is no longer 
present in his hand. Now this is just what experiment verifies. 
Lissauer's observations are instructive on this head.26 His patient 
had the greatest difficulty in drawing simple objects; ifhe tried to 
draw them from memory, he traced detached portions of them 
chosen at random and was unable to unite these into a whole. 
Cases of complete psychic blindness are, however, rare. Those of 
97 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
word-blindness are much more numerous - cases of a loss, that is, 
of visual recognition limited to the characters of the alphabet. 
Now it is a fact of common observation that the patient in such 
cases is unable to seize what may be called the movement of the 
letters when he tries to copy them. He begins to draw them at any 
point, passing back and forth between the copy and the original 
to make sure that they agree. And this is the more remarkable in 
that he often retains unimpaired the faculty of writing from dicta­
tion or spontaneously. What is lost is clearly the habit of distin­
guishing the articulations ofthe object perceived, that is to say, of 
completing the visual perception by a motor tendency to sketch 
its diagram. Whence we may conclude that such is indeed the 
primordial condition of recognition. 
But we must pass now from automatic recognition, which 
is mainly achieved through movements, to that which requires 
the regular intervention of memory-images. The first is rec­
ognition by inattention; the second, as we shall see, is atten­
tive recognition. 
This form also begins by movements. But, whereas, in auto­
matic recognition, our movements prolong our perception in order 
to draw from it useful effects and thus take us away from the object 
perceived, here, on the contrary, they bring us back to the object, 
to dwell upon its outlines. Thus is explained the preponderant, 
and no longer merely accessory, part taken here by memory-images. 
For, if we suppose that the movements forego their practical end, 
and that motor activity, instead of continuing perception by use­
ful reactions, turns back to mark out its more striking features, 
then the images which are analogous to the present perception -
images of which these movements have already sketched out, so 
to speak, the form - will come regularly, and no longer acciden­
tally, to flow into this mold, though they may have to give up much 
of their detail in order to get in more easily. 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
III. Gradual passaae of recollections into movements. Recoanition and 
attention. Here we come to the essential point of our discussion. 
In those cases where recognition is attentive, i.e., where memory­
images are reaularly united with the present perception, is it the 
perception which determines mechanically the appearance of the 
memories, or is it the memories which spontaneously go to meet 
the perception? 
On the answer to this question will depend the nature of the 
relation which philosophers will have to establish between the 
brain and memory. For in every perception there is a disturbance 
communicated by the nerves to the perceptive centers. If the pass­
ing on of this movement to other cortical centers had, as its real 
effect, the springing up of images in these, then we might in strict­
ness maintain that memory is but a function of the brain. But if 
we can establish that here, as elsewhere, movement produces noth­
ing but movement, that the office of the sense-stimulation is merely 
to impress on the body a certain attitude into which recollec­
tions will come to insert themselves, then, as it would be clear 
that the whole effect of the material vibrations is exhausted in 
this work of motor adaptation, we should have to look for memory 
elsewhere. On the first hypothesis, the disorders of memory occa­
sioned by a cerebral lesion would result from the fact that the 
recollections occupied the damaged region and were destroyed 
with it. On the second hypothesis, these lesions would affect our 
nascent or possible action, but our action alone. Sometimes they 
would hinder the body from taking, in regard to the object, the 
attitude that may call back its memory-image; sometimes they 
would sever the bonds between remembrance and the present real­
ity; that is, by suppressing the last phase of the realization of a 
memory - the phase of action - they would thereby hinder the 
memory from becoming actual. But in neither case would a lesion 
of the brain really destroy memories. 
99 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
The second hypothesis i s  ours; but, before we attempt to ver­
ify it, we must briefly state how we understand the general rela­
tions of perception, attention and memory. In order to show how 
a memory may, by gradual stages, come to graft itself on an atti­
tude or a movement, we shall have to anticipate in some degree 
the conclusions of our next chapter. 
What is attention? In one point of view, the essential effect of 
attention is to render perception more intense and to spread out 
its details; regarded in its content, it would resolve itself into a 
certain magnifying of the intellectual state.27 But, on the other 
hand, consciousness testifies to an irreducible difference of form 
between this increase of intensity and that which is owing to a 
higher power of the external stimulus: it seems indeed to come 
from within and to indicate a certain attitude adopted by the intel­
lect. But it is just here that the difficulty begins, for the idea of 
an intellectual attitude is not a clear idea. Psychologists will 
here speak of a "concentration of the mind,"28 or again of an 
"apperceptive"29 effort to bring perception into the field of dis­
tinct intelligence. Some of them, materializing this idea, will 
suppose a higher tension of cerebral energy,30 or even the setting 
free of a certain amount of central energy which reinforces the 
stimulation received.3! But either the fact observed psychologi­
cally is merely translated thereby into a physiological symbolism 
which seems to us even less clear, or else we always come back 
to a metaphor. 
Stage by stage we shall be led on to define attention as an adap­
tation of the body rather than of the mind and to see in this atti­
tude of consciousness mainly the consciousness of an attitude. 
Such is the position assumed by Ribot32 in the discussion, and, 
though it has been attacked,33 it appears to have retained all its 
strength, provided, however, that we are content to see, in the 
movements described by Ribot, only the negative condition of 
100 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
the phenomenon. For, even i f  we suppose that the accompanying 
movements of voluntary attention are mainly movements of arrest, 
we still have to explain the accompanying work of the mind, that 
is to say, the mysterious operation by which the same organ, per­
ceiving in the same surroundings the same object, discovers in it a 
growing number of things. But we may go farther and maintain 
that the phenomena of inhibition are merely a preparation for the 
actual movements of voluntary attention. Suppose for a moment 
that attention, as we have already suggested, implies a backward 
movement of the mind which thus gives up the pursuit of the use­
ful effect of a present perception: there will indeed be, first, an 
inhibition of movement, an arresting action. But, upon this general 
attitude, more subtle movements will soon graft themselves, some 
of which have been already remarked and described,34 and all of 
which combine to retrace the outlines of the object perceived. 
With these movements the positive, no longer merely negative, 
work of attention begins. It is continued by memories. 
For, while external perception provokes on our part movements 
which retrace its main lines, our memory directs upon the per­
ception received the memory-images which resemble it and which 
are already sketched out by the movements themselves. Memory 
thus creates anew the present perception, or rather it doubles this 
perception by reflecting upon it either its own image or some other 
memory-image of the same kind. If the retained or remembered 
image will not cover all the details of the image that is being per­
ceived, an appeal is made to the deeper and more distant regions 
of memory, until other details that are already known come to 
project themselves upon those details that remain unperceived. 
And the operation may go on indefinitely - memory strengthen­
ing and enriching perception, which, in its turn becoming wider, 
draws into itself a growing number of complementary recollec­
tions. So let us no longer think of a mind which disposes of some 
WI 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
fixed quantity of light, now diffusing i t  around, now concentrat­
ing it on a single point. Metaphor for metaphor, we would rather 
compare the elementary work of attention to that of the telegraph 
clerk who, on receipt of an important dispatch, sends it back again, 
word for word, in order to check its accuracy. 
But, to send a telegram, we must know how to use the machine. 
And, in the same way, in order to reflect upon a perception the 
image which we have received from it, we must be able to repro­
duce it, i.e., to reconstruct it by an effort of synthesis. It has been 
said that attention is a power of analysis, and it is true; but it has 
not been sufficiently shown how an analysis of this kind is possi­
ble, nor by what process we are able to discover in a perception 
that which could not be perceived in it at first. The truth is that 
this analysis is effected by a series of attempts at a synthesis, i.e., 
by so many hypotheses: our memory chooses, one after the other, 
various analogous images which it launches in the direction of the 
new perception. But the choice is not made at random. What 
suggests the hypotheses, what presides, even from afar, over the 
choice is the movement of imitation, which continues the per­
ception, and provides for the perception and for the images 
a comI1lon framework. 
But, if this be so, the mechanism of distinct perception must 
be different from what it is usually thought to be. Perception does 
not consist merely in impressions gathered, or even elaborated, 
by the mind. This is the case, at most, with the perceptions that 
are dissipated as soon as received, those which we disperse in use­
ful actions. But every attentive perception truly involves a reJ7ec­
tion, in the etymological sense of the word, that is to say the 
projection, outside ourselves, of an actively created image, iden­
tical with, or similar to, the object on which it comes to mold 
itself. If, after having gazed at any object, we turn our eyes abruptly 
away, we obtain an "afterimage" of it: must we not suppose that 
102 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
this image existed already while we were looking? The recent dis­
covery of centrifugal fibers of perception inclines us to think that 
this is the usual course of things and that, beside the afferent pro­
cess which carries the impression to the center, there is another 
process, of contrary direction, which brings back the image to 
the periphery. It is true that we are dealing here with images pho­
tographed upon the object itself, and with memories following 
immediately upon the perception of which they are but the echo. 
But, behind these images, which are identical with the object, 
there are others, stored in memory, which merely resemble it, 
and others, finally, which are only more or less distantly akin to 
it. All these go out to meet the perception, and, feeding on its 
substance, acquire sufficient vigor and life to abide with it in space. 
The experiments of Munsterberg35 and ofKulpe36 leave no doubt 
as to this latter point: any memory-image that is capable of inter­
preting our actual perception inserts itself so thoroughly into it 
that we are no longer able to discern what is perception and what 
is memory. The ingenious experiments of Gold scheider and Muller 
on the mechanism of reading are most interesting in this regard. 37 
Arguing against Grashey, who, in a well-known essay,38 maintained 
that we read words letter by letter, these observers proved by experi­
ments that rapid reading is a real work of divination. Our mind 
notes here and there a few characteristic lines and fills all the inter­
vals with memory-images which, projected on the paper, take the 
place of the real printed characters and may be mistaken for them. 
Thus we are constantly creating or reconstructing. Our distinct 
perception is really comparable to a closed circle, in which the 
perception-image, going toward the mind, and the memory-image, 
launched into space, careen the one behind the other. 
We must emphasize this latter point. Attentive perception is 
often represented as a series of processes which make their way in 
single file; the object exciting sensations, the sensations causing 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
ideas to start u p  before them, each idea setting i n  motion, one in 
front of the other, points more and more remote of the intellec­
tual mass. Thus there is supposed to be a rectilinear progress, by 
which the mind goes further and further from the object, never to 
return to it. We maintain, on the contrary, that reflective percep­
tion is a circuit, in which all the elements, including the perceived 
object itself, hold each other in a state of mutual tension as in an 
electric circuit, so that no disturbance starting from the object 
can stop on its way and remain in the depths of the mind: it must 
always find its way back to the object from where it proceeds. 
Now it must not be thought that this is a mere matter of words. 
We have here two radically different conceptions of the intellec­
tual process. According to the first, things happen mechanically 
and by a merely accidental series of successive additions. At each 
moment of an attentive perception, for example, new elements 
sent up from a deeper stratum of the mind might join the earlier 
elements, without thereby creating a general disturbance and with­
out bringing about a transformation of the whole system. In the 
second, on the contrary, an act of attention implies such a solidar­
ity between the mind and its object, it is a circuit so well closed 
that we cannot pass to states of higher concentration without cre­
ating, whole and entire, so many new circuits which envelop the 
first and have nothing in common between them but the perceived 
object. Of these different circles of memory, which later we shall 
study in detail, the smallest, A, is the nearest to immediate per­
ception. It contains only the object 0, with the afterimage which 
comes back and overlies it. Behind it, the larger and larger circles 
B, C, 0 correspond to growing efforts at intellectual expansion. 
It is the whole of memory, as we shall see, that passes over into 
each of these circuits, since memory is always present; but that 
memory, capable, by reason of its elasticity, of expanding more 
and more, reflects upon the object a growing number of suggested 
104 

Fig. ! 
O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
..... :::
.<.. 
\, . 
.... I?: ...... y .... 
: \ 
.
.
 
l .
..
... 
·· ..... 9: .... ·· .... ) 
............. 9.' ......... .... 
images - sometimes the details of the object itself, sometimes 
concomitant details which may throw light upon it. Thus, after 
having rebuilt the object perceived, as an independent whole, we 
reassemble, together with it, the more and more distant condi­
tions with which it forms one system. If we call B', C', 0 ' ,  these 
causes of growing depth, situated behind the object and virtually 
given with the object itself, it will be seen that the progress of 
attention results in creating anew not only the object perceived, 
but also the ever widening systems with which it may be bound 
up; so that in the measure in which the circles B, C, 0 represent a 
higher expansion of memory, their reflection attains in B', C ' ,  0 '  
deeper strata o f  reality. 
The same psychical life, therefore, must be supposed to be 
repeated an endless number of times on the different stories of 
memory, and the same act of the mind may be performed at vary­
ing heights. In the effort of attention, the mind is always con­
cerned in its entirety, but it simplifies or complicates itself according 
to the level on which it chooses to go to work. Usually it is the 
present perception which determines the direction of our mind; 
but, according to the degree of tension which our mind adopts 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
and the height at which i t  takes its stand, the perception develops 
a greater or smaller number of images. 
In other words, personal recollections, exactly localized, the 
series of which represents the course of our past existence, make 
up, all together, the last and largest enclosure of our memory. Essen­
tially fugitive, they become materialized only by chance, either 
when an accidentally precise determination of our bodily attitude 
attracts them or when the very indetermination of that attitude 
leaves a clear field to the caprices of their manifestation. But this 
outermost envelope contracts and repeats itself in inner and con­
centric circles, which in their narrower range enclose the same 
recollections grown smaller, more and more removed from their 
personal and original form, and more and more capable, from their 
lack of distinguishing features, of being applied to the present per­
ception and of determining it after the manner of a species which 
defines and absorbs the individual. There comes a moment when 
the recollection thus brought down is capable of blending so well 
with the present perception that we cannot say where perception 
ends or where memory begins. At that precise moment, memory, 
instead of capriciously sending in and calling back its images, fol­
lows regularly, in all their details, the movements of the body. 
But, in the degree that these recollections draw nearer to move­
ments, and so to external perception, the work of memory acquires 
a higher practical importance. Past images, reproduced exactly as 
they were, with all their details and even with their affective col­
oring, are the images of idle fancy or of dream: to act is just to 
induce this memory to shrink, or rather to become thinned and 
sharpened, so that it presents nothing thicker than the edge of a 
blade to actual experience, into which it will thus be able to pene­
trate. In truth, it is because psychology has failed to separate out 
the motor element in memory that we have sometimes overlooked 
and sometimes exaggerated what is automatic in the evocation of 
106 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
remembrances. According to our view, an appeal is made to activity 
at the precise moment when perception gives rise to imitative 
movements which scan it, as it were, automatically. A sketch is 
thereby furnished to us, into which we put the right details and 
the right coloring by projecting into it memories more or less 
remote. But such is not the usual way of describing the process. 
Sometimes the mind is supposed to be absolutely independent of 
circumstances, to work exactly as it likes on present or absent 
objects - and then we can no longer understand how it is that the 
normal process of attention may be seriously impaired by even a 
slight disturbance of the sensori-motor equilibrium. Sometimes, 
on the contrary, the evocation of images is supposed to be a mere 
mechanical effect of present perception: it is assumed that, by a 
necessary concatenation of processes supposed to be all alike, the 
object calls forth sensations and the sensations ideas which cling 
to them - but then, since there is no reason why the operation, 
which is mechanical to begin with, should change its character as 
it goes on, we are led to the hypothesis of a brain wherein mental 
states may dwell in order to slumber and to awaken. In both cases 
the true function of the body is misunderstood, and as neither 
theory teaches how and why the intervention of a mechanism is 
necessary, neither of them is able to show where such interven­
tion should stop if it is once brought in. 
But it is time to leave these general considerations. We must 
ascertain whether our hypothesis is confirmed or contradicted by 
the facts of cerebral localization known at the present day. The 
disorders ofimaginative memory, which correspond to local lesions 
of the cortex, are always diseases of the faculty of recognition, 
either of visual or auditory recognition in general (psychic blind­
ness and deafness) or of the recognition of words (word blindness, 
word deafness, etc.). These disorders we have now to examine. 
If our hypothesis is well founded, these failures of recognition 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
are i n  no sense due to the fact that the recollections occupied the 
injured region of the brain. They must be due to one of two causes: 
sometimes our body is no longer able automatically to adopt, under 
the influence of the external stimulus, the precise attitude by 
means of which a choice could be automatically made among our 
memories; sometimes the memories are no longer able to find a 
fulcrum in the body, a means of prolonging themselves in action. 
In the first case, the lesion affects the mechanisms which con­
tinue, in an automatically executed movement, the stimulation 
received: attention can no longer be fixed by the object. In the 
second case, the lesion involves those particular cortical centers 
which prepare voluntary movements by lending them the required 
sensory antecedent, centers which, rightly or wrongly, are termed 
image-centers: attention can no longer be fixed by the subject. 
But, in either case, it is actual movements, which are hindered, or 
future movements, which are no longer prepared: there has been 
no destruction of memories. 
Now pathology confirms this forecast. It rereveals to us two 
absolutely distinct kinds of psychic blindness and deafness and 
word blindness and deafness. In the first kind, visual and auditory 
memories are still evoked, but they cannot apply themselves to 
the corresponding perceptions. In the second, evocation of the 
memories themselves is hindered. Is it true that the lesion involves, 
as we said, the sensori-motor mechanisms of automatic attention 
in the first case, and the imaginative mechanisms of voluntary atten­
tion in the second? In order to verify our hypothesis, we must 
limit demonstration to a definite example. No doubt we could 
show that visual recognition of things in general, and of words in 
particular, implies a semiautomatic motor process to begin with, 
and then an active projection of memories which engraft them­
selves on the corresponding attitudes. But we prefer to confine 
ourselves to impressions of hearing, and more particularly to the 
108 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
hearing of articulate language, because this example i s  the most 
comprehensive. To hear speech is, in fact, first of all to recognize 
a sound, then to discover its sense, and finally to interpret it more 
or less thoroughly: in short, it is to pass through all the stages of 
attention and to exercise several higher or lower powers of memory. 
Moreover, no disorders are more common or better studied than 
those of the auditive memory of words. And, lastly, acoustic ver­
bal images are not destroyed without a serious lesion of certain 
determined convolutions of the cortex: so that we are provided 
here with an undisputed example oflocalization, in regard to which 
we can enquire whether the brain is really capable of storing up 
memories. We have, then, to show in the auditory recognition of 
words: first, an automatic sensori-motor process; secondly, an active 
and, so to speak, excentric projection of memory-images. 
I.  I listen to two people speaking in a language which is unknown 
to me. Do I therefore hear them talk? The vibrations which reach 
my ears are the same as those which strike theirs. Yet I perceive 
only a confused noise, in which all sounds are alike. I distinguish 
nothing and could not repeat anything. In this same sonorous mass, 
however, the two interlocutors distinguish consonants, vowels 
and syllables which are not at all alike, in short, separate words. 
Between them and me where is the difference? 
The question is, how can the knowledge of a language, which 
is only memory, modify the material content of a present percep­
tion and cause some listeners actually to hear what others, in the 
same physical conditions, do not hear. It is alleged, indeed, that 
the auditory recollections of words, accumulated in memory, are 
called up by the sound-impression and come to strengthen its effect. 
But if the conversation to which I listen is, for me, only a noise, 
we may suppose the sound increased as much as we like: the noise 
will be none the more intelligible for being louder. I grant that 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
the memory o f  a word will be called up by the sound o f  that word: 
yet it is necessary, for this, that the sound of the word should have 
been heard by the ear. How can the sounds perceived speak to 
memory, how can they choose, in the storehouse of auditory 
images, those which should come to rejoin them, unless they have 
been already separated, distinguished - in short, perceived - as 
syllables and as words? 
This difficulty does not appear to have been sufficiently noticed 
by the theorists of sensory aphasia. For in word-deafness the patient 
finds himself, in regard to his own language, in the same position 
as we all are when we hear an unknown tongue. He has generally 
preserved intact his sense of hearing, but he has no understanding 
of the words spoken to him and is frequently even unable to dis­
tinguish them. The explanation generally given of the disease is 
that the auditory recollection of words has been destroyed in the 
cortex or that a lesion, sometimes transcortical, sometimes sub­
cortical, hinders the auditive memory from evoking the idea, or 
the perception, from uniting with the memory. But in the latter 
case, at least, the psychological question has still to be answered: 
what is the conscious process which the lesion has abolished, and 
what is the intermediary process that we go through in our nor­
mal condition in order to discern words and syllables which are, 
at first, given to the ear as a continuity of sound? 
The difficulty would be insuperable if we really had only audi­
tory impressions on the one hand, and auditory memories, on the 
other hand. Not so however, if auditory impressions organize nascent 
movements, capable of scanning the phrase which is heard and of 
emphasizing its main articulations. These automatic movements 
of internal accompaniment, at first undecided or uncoordinated, 
might become more precise by repetition; they would end by 
sketching a simplified figure in which the listener would find, in 
their main lines and principal directions, the very movements of 
110 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
the speaker. Thus would unfold itself i n  consciousness, under the 
form of nascent muscular sensations, the motor diagram, as it were, 
of the speech we hear. To adapt our hearing to a new language 
would then consist, at the outset, neither in modifying the crude 
sound nor in supplementing the sounds with memories; it would 
be to coordinate the motor tendencies of the muscular apparatus 
of the voice to the impressions of the ear; it would be to perfect 
the motor accompaniment. 
In learning a physical exercise, we begin by imitating the move­
ment as a whole, as our eyes see it from without, as we think we 
have seen it done. Our perception of it is confused; confused, there­
fore, will be the movement whereby we try to repeat it. But whereas 
our visual perception was of a continuous whole, the movement by 
which we endeavor to reconstruct the image is compound and made 
up of a multitude of muscular contractions and tensions; our con­
sciousness of these itself includes a number of sensations resulting 
from the varied play of the articulations. The confused movement 
which copies the image is, then, already its virtual decomposi­
tion; it bears within itself, so to speak, its own analysis. The prog­
ress which is brought about by repetition and practice consists 
merely in unfolding what was previously wrapped up, in bestow­
ing one of the elementary movements that autonomy which ensures 
precision without, however, breaking up that solidarity with the 
others without which it would become useless. We are right when 
we say that habit is formed by the repetition of an effort; but what 
would be the use of repeating it, if the result were always to repro­
duce the same thing? The true effect of repetition is to decom­
pose and then to recompose, and thus appeal to the intelligence of 
the body. At each new attempt it separates movements which were 
interpenetrating; each time it calls the attention of the body to a 
new detail which had passed unperceived; it bids the body dis­
criminate and classify; it teaches what is the essential; it points 
I I I  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
out, one after another, within the total movement, the lines that 
mark off its internal structure. In this sense, a movement is learned 
when the body has been made to understand it. 
So a motor accompaniment of speech may well break the con­
tinuity of the mass of sound. But we have now to point out in 
what this accompaniment consists. Is it speech itself, repeated 
internally? If this were so, the child would be able to repeat all 
the words that its ear can distinguish and we ourselves should only 
need to understand a foreign language to be able to pronounce it 
with a correct accent. The matter is far from being so simple. I 
may be able to catch a tune, to follow its phrasing, even to fix it in 
memory, without being able to sing it. I can easily distinguish the 
peculiarities of inflection and tone in an Englishman speaking 
German - I correct him therefore, mentally - but it by no means 
follows that I could give the right inflection and tone to the Ger­
man phrase if I were to utter it. Here, moreover, the observation 
of everyday life is confirmed by clinical facts. It is still possible to 
follow and understand speech when one has become incapable of 
speaking. Motor aphasia does not involve word deafness. 
This is because the diagram, by means of which we divide up 
the speech we hear, indicates only its salient outlines. It is to speech 
itself what the rough sketch is to the finished picture. For it is one 
thing to understand a difficult movement, another to be able to 
carry it out. To understand it, we need only to realize in it what is 
essential, just enough to distinguish it from all other possible move­
ments. But to be able to carry it out, we must have also brought 
our body to understand it. Now the logic of the body admits of no 
tacit implications. It demands that all the constituent parts of the 
required movement shall be set forth one by one, and then put 
together again. Here a complete analysis is necessary, in which no 
detail is neglected, and an actual synthesis, in which nothing is 
curtailed. The imagined diagram, composed of a few nascent mus-
1 1 2  

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
cular sensations, is but a sketch. The muscular sensations, really 
and completely experienced, give it color and life. 
I t remains to be considered how an accompaniment of this 
kind can be produced and whether it really is always produced. 
We know that in order effectively to pronounce a word the tongue 
and lips must articulate, the larynx must be brought into play for 
phonation, and the muscles of the chest must produce an expir­
atory movement of air. Thus, for every syllable uttered there cor­
responds the play of a number of mechanisms already prepared in 
the cerebral and bulbar centers. These mechanisms are joined to 
the higher centers of the cortex by the axis-cylinder processes of 
the pyramidal cells in the psycho-motor zone. Along this path the 
impulse of the will travels. So, when we desire to articulate this 
or that sound, we transmit the order to act to this or that group of 
motor mechanisms selected from among them all. But, while the 
ready-made mechanisms which correspond to the various possi­
ble movements of articulation and phonation are connected with 
the causes (whatever these may be) which set them to work in 
voluntary speech, there are facts which put beyond all doubt the 
linkage of these same mechanisms with the auditory perception 
of words. First of all, among the numerous varieties of aphasia 
described in clinical reports, we know of two (Lichtheim's fourth 
and sixth forms) which appear to imply a relation of this kind. 
Thus, in a case observed by Lichtheim himself, the subject had 
lost, as the result of a fall, the memory ofthe articulation of words 
and, consequently, the faculty of spontaneous speech; yet he 
repeated quite correctly what was said to him.39 On the other 
hand, in cases where spontaneous speech is unaffected, but where 
word deafness is absolute and the patient no longer understands 
what is said to him, the faculty of repeating another person's words 
may still be completely retained.4o It may be said, with Bastian, 
that these phenomena merely point to a fatigue of the articula-
1 1 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
tory or auditive memory of words, the acoustic impressions only 
serving to awaken that memory from its torpor. 4 1 We may have to 
allow for this hypothesis, but it does not appear to us to account 
for the curious phenomena of echolalia, long since pointed out by 
Romberg,42 Voisin43 and Forbes Winslow,44 which are termed by 
Kussmaul45 (probably with some exaggeration) acoustic reflexes. 
Here the subject repeats mechanically, and perhaps unconsciously, 
the words he hears, as though the auditory sensations converted 
themselves automatically into movements of articulation. From 
these facts some have inferred that there is a special mechanism 
which unites a so-called acoustic center of words with an articu­
latory center of speech. 46 The truth appears to lie between these 
two hypotheses. There is more in these various phenomena than 
absolutely mechanical actions but less than an appeal to voluntary 
memory. They testify to a tendency of verbal auditory impressions 
to prolong themselves in movements of articulation; a tendency 
which assuredly does not escape, as a rule, the control ofthe will, 
and perhaps even implies a rudimentary discrimination, and 
expresses itself, in the normal state, by an internal repetition of 
the striking features of the words that are heard. Now our motor 
diagram is nothing else. 
Considering this hypothesis more closely, we shall perhaps find 
in it the psychological explanation, which we were just now seek­
ing, of certain forms of word deafness. A few cases of word deaf­
ness are known where there was a complete survival of acoustic 
memory. The patient had retained, unimpaired, both the auditive 
memory of words and the sense of hearing; yet he recognized no 
word that was said to him.47 A subcortical lesion is here supposed, 
which prevents the acoustic impressions from going to join the 
verbal auditory images in the cortical centers where they are sup­
posed to be deposited. But, in the first place, the question is 
whether the brain can store up images. And, secondly, even if it 
1 14 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
were proved that there is some lesion i n  the paths that the acoustic 
impressions have to follow, we should still be compelled to seek 
a psychological interpretation of the final result. For, by hypoth­
esis, the auditory memories can still be recalled to consciousness; 
by hypothesis also, the auditory impressions still reach conscious­
ness; there must therefore be in consciousness itself a gap, a solu­
tion of continuity, something, whatever it is, which hinders the 
perception from joining the memories. Now we may throw some 
light on the case if we remember that crude auditory perception 
is really that of a continuity of sound, and that the sensori-motor 
connections established by habit must have as their office, in the 
normal state, to decompose this continuity. A lesion of these con­
scious mechanisms, by hindering the decomposition, might com­
pletely check the upsurge of memories which tend to alight upon 
the corresponding perceptions. Therefore, the "motor diagram" 
might be what is injured by the lesion. If we pass in review the 
cases (which are, indeed, not very numerous) of word-deafness, 
where acoustic memories were retained, we notice certain details 
that are interesting in this respect. Adler notes, as a remarkable 
fact in word-deafness, that the patients no longer react even to 
the loudest sounds, though their hearing has preserved all its 
acuteness.48 In other words, sound no longer finds in them its 
motor echo. A patient of Charcot's, attacked by a passing word­
deafness, relates that he heard his clock strike but that he could 
not count the strokes.49 Probably he was unable to separate and 
distinguish them. Another patient declares that he perceives the 
words of a conversations, but as a confused noise. 50 Lastly, the 
patient who has lost the understanding of the spoken word recov­
ers it if the word is repeated to him several times, and especially if 
it is pronounced with marked divisions, syllable by syllable.51 This 
last fact, observed in several cases of word-deafness, where acous­
tic memories were unimpaired, is particularly significant. 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
Stricker's52 mistake was to believe in a complete internal rep­
etition of the words that are heard. His assertion is already 
contradicted by the simple fact that we do not know of a single 
case of motor aphasia which brought out word-deafness. But all 
the facts combine to prove the existence of a motor tendency to 
separate the sounds and to establish their diagram. This automatic 
tendency is not without (as we said above) a certain elementary 
mental effort: how otherwise could we identify with each other, 
and, consequently, follow with the same diagram, similar words 
pronounced on different notes and by different qualities of voice? 
These inner movements of repeating and recognizing are like a 
prelude to voluntary attention. They mark the limit between the 
voluntary and the automatic. By them, as we hinted before, the 
characteristic phenomena of intellectual recognition are first pre­
pared and then determined . .  But what is this complete and fully 
conscious recognition? 
2. We come to the second part of our subject: from movements 
we pass to memories. We have said that attentive recognition is a 
kind of circuit in which the external object yields to us deeper and 
deeper parts of itself, as our memory adopts a correspondingly 
higher degree of tension in order to project recollections toward 
it. I n  the particular case we are now considering, the object is an 
interlocutor whose ideas develop within his consciousness into 
auditory representations which are then materialized into uttered 
words. So, if we are right, the hearer places himself at once in the midst 
of the corresponding ideas, and then develops them into acoustic 
memories which go out to overlie the crude sounds perceived, 
while fitting themselves into the motor diagram. To follow an arith­
metical addition is to do it over again for ourselves. To understand 
another's words is, in like manner, to reconstruct intelligently, 
starting from the ideas, the continuity of sound which the ear per-
1\6 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
ceives. And, more generally, to attend, to recognize intellectu­
ally, to interpret, may be summed up in a single operation whereby 
the mind, having chosen its level, having selected within itself, 
with reference to the crude perceptions, the point that is exactly 
symmetrical with their more or less immediate cause, allows to 
flow toward them the memories that will go out to overlie them. 
Such, however, is certainly not the usual way oflooking at the 
matter. The associationist habit is there; in accordance with it, 
we find men maintaining that, by the mere effect of contiguity, 
the perception of a sound brings back the memory of the sound, 
and memories bring back the corresponding ideas. And then, we 
have the cerebral lesions which seem to bring about a destruction 
of memories; more particularly, in the case we are studying, there 
are the lesions of the brain found in word deafness. Thus psycho­
logical observations and clinical facts seem to conspire. Together 
they seem to point to the existence, within the cortex, of audi­
tory memories slumbering whether as a physico-chemical modi­
fication of certain cells or under some other form. A sensory 
stimulation is then supposed to awaken them; finally, by an 
intracerebral process, perhaps by transcortical movements that 
go to find the complementary representations, they are supposed 
to evoke ideas. 
Now consider for a moment the amazing consequences of an 
hypothesis of this kind. The auditory image of a word is not an 
object with well-defined outlines, for the same word pronounced 
by different voices, or by the same voice on different notes, gives a 
different sound. So, if you adopt the hypothesis of which we have 
been speaking, you must assume that there are as many auditory 
images of the same word as there are pitches of sound and quali­
ties of voice. Do you mean that all these images are treasured up 
in the brain? Or is it that the brain chooses? If the brain chooses 
one of them, where does its preference come from? Suppose, even, 
117 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
that you can explain why the brain chooses one or the other; how 
is it that this same word, uttered by a new person, gives a sound 
which, although different, is still able to rejoin the same memory? 
For you must bear in mind that this memory is supposed to be 
an inert and passive thing and consequently, incapable of discover­
ing, beneath external differences, an internal similitude. You speak 
of the auditory image of a word as if it were an entity or a genus: 
such a genus can, indeed, be constructed by an active memory 
which extracts the resemblance of several complex sounds and 
only retains, as it were, their common diagram. But for a brain 
that is supposed - nay, is bound - to record only the materiality 
of the sounds perceived, there must be, of one and the same word, 
thousands of distinct images. Uttered by a new voice, it will con­
stitute a new image which will simply be added to the others. 
But there is something still more perplexing: a word has an 
individuality for us only from the moment that we have been taught 
to abstract it. What we first hear are short phrases, not words. A 
word is always continuous with the other words which accom­
pany it and takes different aspects according to the cadence and 
movement of the sentences in which it is set: just as each note of a 
melody vaguely reflects the whole musical phrase. Suppose, then, 
that there are indeed model auditory memories, consisting in cer­
tain intracerebral arrangements, and lying in what for analogous 
impressions of sound: these impressions may come, but they will 
pass unrecognized. How could there be a common measure; how 
could there be a point of contact, between the dry, inert, isolated 
image and the living reality ofthe word organized with the rest of 
the phrase? I understand clearly enough that beginning of auto­
matic recognition which would consist, as I have said above, in 
emphasizing inwardly the principal division of the sentence that 
is heard, and so in adopting its movement. But, unless we are to 
suppose in all men identical voices pronouncing in the same tone 
1 18 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
the same stereotyped phrases, I fail to see how the words we hear 
are able to rejoin their images in the brain. 
Now, if memories are really deposited in the cortical cells, we 
should find in sensory aphasia, for instance, the irreparable loss of 
certain determined words, the integral conservation of others. But, 
as a matter of fact, things happen quite differently. Sometimes it 
is the whole set of memories that disappears, the faculty of men­
tal hearing being purely and simply abolished; sometimes there is 
a general weakening of the function, but it is usually the function 
which is diminished and not the number of recollections. It seems 
as if the patient had no longer strength to grasp his acoustic memo­
ries, as ifhe turned round about the verbal image without being 
able to hit upon it. To enable him to recover a word, it is often 
enough to put him on the track of it by giving him its first syllable, 53 
or even by merely encouraging him.54 An emotion may produce 
the same effect.55 There are, however, cases in which it does indeed 
seem that definite groups of representations have disappeared from 
memory. I have passed in review a large number of these facts, and 
it has seemed that they could be referred to two absolutely dis­
tinct categories. In the first, the loss of memories is usually abrupt; 
in the second, it is progressive. In the first, the recollections 
detached from memory are arbitrarily and even capriciously cho­
sen: they may be certain words, certain figures, or often all the 
words of an acquired language. In the second, the disappearance 
of the words is governed by a methodical and grammatical order, 
that which is indicated by Ribot's law: proper names go first, then 
common nouns, and lastly verbs.56 Such are the external differ­
ences. Now this, I believe, is the internal difference. In the amne­
sias of the first type, which are nearly always the result of a violent 
shock, I incline to think that the memories which are apparently 
destroyed are really present, and not only present but acting. To 
take an example frequently borrowed from Forbes Winslow, 57 that 
1 19 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
of a patient who had forgotten the letter F, and the letter F only, I 
wonder how it is possible to subtract a given letter wherever met 
with - to detach it, that is, from the spoken or written words in 
which it occurs - if it were not first implicitly recognized. In 
another case cited by the same author, 58 the patient had forgotten 
languages he had learnt and poems he had written. Having begun 
to write again, he reproduced nearly the same lines. Moreover, in 
such cases the patient may often recover the lost memories. With­
out wishing to be too dogmatic on a question of this kind, we 
cannot avoid noticing the analogy between these phenomena and 
that dividing of the self of which instances have been described 
by Pierre Janet:S9 some of them bear a remarkable resemblance to 
the "negative hallucinations," and suggestions with point de repere, 
induced by hypnotizers.6o Entirely different are the aphasias of the 
second kind, which are indeed the true aphasias. These are due, 
as we shall try to show presently, to the progressive diminution of 
a well-localized function, the faculty of actualizing the recollec­
tion of words. How are we to explain the fact that amnesia here 
follows a methodical course, beginning with proper nouns and 
ending with verbs? We could hardl y explain it if the verbal images 
were really deposited in the cells of the cortex: it would be won­
derful indeed that disease should always attack these cells in the 
same order.61 But the fact can be explained, if we admit that memo­
ries need, for their actualization, a motor ally, and that they require 
for their recall a kind of mental attitude which must itself be 
engrafted upon an attitude of the body. If such be the case, verbs 
in general, which essentially express imitable actions, are precisely 
the words that a bodily effort might enable us to recapture when 
the function oflanguage has all but escaped us: proper names, on 
the other hand, being of all words the most remote from those 
impersonal actions which our body can sketch out, are those which 
a weakening of the function will earliest affect. It is a noteworthy 
1 20 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
fact that the aphasic patient, who has become as a rule incapable 
of finding the noun he seeks, may replace it by an appropriate 
periphrasis into which other nouns,62 and perhaps even the eva­
sive noun itself, enter. Unable to think of the precise word, he has 
thought of the corresponding action, and this attitude has deter­
mined the general direction of a movement from which the phrase 
then springs. So likewise it may happen to any of us that, having 
retained the initial of a forgotten name, we recover the name by 
repeating the initial.63 Therefore, in facts ofthe second kind, it is 
the function that is attacked as a whole, and in those of the first 
kind the forgetting, though in appearance more complete, is never 
really final. Neither in the one case nor in the other do we find 
memories localized in certain cells of the cerebral substance and 
abolished by their destruction. 
But let us question our own consciousness, and ask of it what 
happens when we listen to the words of another person with the 
desire to understand them. Do we passively wait for the impres­
sions to go in search of their images? Do we not rather feel that we 
are adopting a certain disposition, which varies with our interloc­
utor, with the language he speaks, with the nature of the ideas 
which he expresses - and varies, above all, with the general move­
ment of his phrase, as though we were choosing the key in which 
our own intellect is called upon to play? The motor diagram, empha­
sizing his utterance, following through all its windings the curve 
of his thought, shows our thought the road. It is the empty vessel, 
which determines, by its form, the form which the fluid mass, 
rushing into it, already tends to take. 
But psychologists may be unwilling to explain in this way the 
mechanism of interpretation because of the invincible tendency 
which impels us to think on all occasions of things rather than of 
movements. We have said that we start from the idea, and that we 
develop it into auditory memory-images capable of inserting them-
1 2 1  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
selves in the motor diagram, so as to overlie the sounds we hear. 
We have here a continuous movement, by which the nebulosity 
of the idea is condensed into distinct auditory images, which, still 
fluid, will be finally solidified as they coalesce with the sounds 
materially perceived. At no moment is it possible to say with pre­
cision that the idea or the memory-image or the sensation begins. 
And, in fact, where is the dividing line between the confusion of 
sounds perceived in the lump and the clearness which the remem­
bered auditory images add to them, between the discontinuity of 
these remembered images themselves and the continuity of the 
original idea which they dissociate and refract into distinct words? 
But scientific thought, analyzing this unbroken series of changes, 
and yielding to an irresistible need of symbolic presentment, arrests 
and solidifies into finished things the principal phases of this devel­
opment. It erects the crude sounds heard into separate and com­
plete words, then the remembered auditory images into entities 
independent of the idea they develop: these three terms, crude 
perception, auditory image and idea, are thus made into distinct 
wholes of which each is supposed to be self-sufficing. And while, 
if we really confined ourselves to pure experience, the idea is what 
we should start from - since it is to the idea that the auditory 
memories owe their connection and since it is by the memories 
that the crude sounds become completed. On the contrary, when 
once we have arbitrarily supposed the crude sound to be by itself 
complete and arbitrarily also assumed the memories to be con­
nected together, we see no harm in reversing the real order of the 
processes, and in asserting that we go from the perception to the 
memories and from the memories to the idea. Nevertheless, we 
cannot help feeling that we must bring back again, under one form 
or another, at one moment or another, the continuity which we 
have thus broken between the perception, the memory and the 
idea. So we make out that these three things, each lodged in a 
1 2 2  

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
certain portion of the cortex or of the medulla, intercommuni­
cate, the perceptions going to awaken the auditory memories, and 
the memories going to rouse up the ideas. As we have begun by 
solidifying into distinct and independent things what were only 
phases - the main phases - of a continuous development, we go on 
materializing the development itself into lines of communication, 
contacts and impulsions. But not with impunity can we thus invert 
the true order, and as a necessary consequence, introduce into each 
term of the series elements which are only realized by those that 
follow. Not with impunity, either, can we congeal into distinct 
and independent things the fluidity of a continuous undivided pro­
cess. This symbolism may indeed suffice as long as it is strictly 
limited to the facts which have served to invent it: but each new 
fact will force us to complicate our diagram, to insert new sta­
tions along the line of the movement; yet all those stations laid 
side by side will never be able to reconstitute the movement itself. 
Nothing is more instructive in this regard than the history of 
the diagrams of sensory aphasia. In the early period, marked by the 
work of Charcot,64 Broadbent,65 Kussmaul66 and Lichtheim,67 
the theorists confined themselves to the hypothesis of an "ide­
ational center" linked by transcortical paths to the various speech 
centers. But, as the analysis of cases was pushed further, this cen­
ter for ideas receded and finally disappeared. For, while the physi­
ology of the brain was more and more successful in localizing 
sensations and movements, but never ideas, the diversity of sen­
sory aphasias obliged clinicians to break up the intellectual cen­
ter into a growing multiplicity of image centers - a center for 
visual representations, for tactile representations, for auditory rep­
resentations, etc. - nay, to divide sometimes into two different 
tracks, the one ascending and the other descending, the line of 
communication between any two of them. 68 This was the charac­
teristic feature of the diagrams of the later period, those of 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
Wysman,69 of Moeli,70 of Freud,7! etc. Thus the theory grew 
more and more complicated, yet without ever being able to grasp 
the full complexity of reality. And, as the diagrams became more 
complicated, they figured and suggested the possibility oflesions 
which, just because they were more diverse, were more special 
and more simple, the complication of the diagram being due pre­
cisely to that dissociation of centers which had at first been con­
founded. Experience, however, was far from justifying the theory 
at this point, since it nearly always showed, in partial and diverse 
combinations, several of those simple psychical lesions which 
the theory isolated. The complication of the theories of aphasia 
being thus self-destructive, it is no wonder that modern pathology, 
becoming more and more sceptical with regard to diagrams, is 
returning purely and simply to the description offacts.72 
But how could it be otherwise? To hear some theorists dis­
course on sensory aphasia, we might imagine that they had never 
considered with any care the structure of a sentence. They argue 
as if a sentence were composed of nouns which call up the images 
of things. What becomes of those parts of speech, of which the 
precise function is to establish, between images, relations and shades 
of meaning of every kind? Is it said that each of such words still 
expresses and evokes a material image, more confused, no doubt, 
but yet determined? Consider then the host of different relations 
which can be expressed by the same word, according to the place 
it occupies and the terms which it unites. Is it urged that these 
are the refinements of a highly developed language, but that 
speech is possible with concrete nouns that all summon up images 
of things? No doubt it is, but the more primitive the language you 
speak with me and the poorer in words which express relations, 
the more you are bound to allow for my mind's activity, since you 
compel me to find out the relations which you leave unexpressed: 
which amounts to saying that you abandon more and more the 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
hypothesis that each verbal image goes up and fetches down its 
corresponding idea. In truth, there is here only a question of 
degree: every language, whether elaborated or crude, leaves many 
more things to be understood than it is able to express. Essentially 
discontinuous, since it proceeds by juxtaposing words, speech 
can only indicate by a few guideposts placed here and there the 
chief stages in the movement of thought. That is why I can indeed 
understand your speech if I start from a thought analogous to 
your own and follow its windings by the aid of verbal images 
which are so many signposts that show me the way from time to 
time. But I shall never be able to understand it if I start from the 
verbal images themselves, because between two consecutive ver­
bal images there is a gulf which no amount of concrete represen­
tations can ever fill. For images can never be anything but things, 
and thought is a movement. 
It is vain, therefore, to treat memory-images and ideas as ready­
made things, and then assign to them an abiding place in prob­
lematical centers. Nor is it of any avail to disguise the hypothesis 
under the cover of a language borrowed from anatomy and physi­
ology; it is nothing but the association theory of mind; it has noth­
ing in its favor but the constant tendency of discursive intellect 
to cut up all progress into phases and afterwards to solidify these 
phases into things; and since it is born a priori from a kind of meta­
physical prepossession, it has neither the advantage of following 
the movement of consciousness nor that of simplifying the expla­
nation of the facts. 
But we must follow this illusion up to the point where it issues 
in a manifest contradiction. We have said that ideas - pure recol­
lections summoned from the depths of memory - develop into 
memory-images more and more capable of inserting themselves 
into the motor diagram. To the degree that these recollections 
take the form of a more complete, more concrete and more con-
1 25 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
scious representation, they tend to confound themselves with the 
perception which attracts them or of which they adopt the out­
line. Therefore, there is not, there cannot be in the brain a region 
in which memories congeal and accumulate. The alleged destruc­
tion of memories by an injury to the brain is but a break in the 
continuous progress by which they actualize themselves. And, con­
sequently, if we insist on localizing the auditory memory of words, 
for instance, in a given part of the brain, we shall be led by equally 
cogent reasons to distinguish this image-center from the percep­
tive center or to confound the two in one. Now this is just what 
experience teaches. 
For notice the strange contradiction to which this theory is 
led by psychological analysis on the one hand, by pathological facts, 
on the other hand. One the one hand, it would seem that if per­
ception, once it has taken place, remains in the brain in the state 
of a stored-bp memory, this can only be as an acquired disposition 
of the very elements that perception has affected: how, at what 
precise moment, can it go in search of others? This is, indeed, the 
most natural hypothesis, and Bain 73 and Ribot 74 are content to 
rest upon it. But, on the other hand, there is pathology, which 
tells us that all the recollections of a certain kind may have gone 
while the corresponding faculty of perception remains unimpaired. 
Psychic blindness does not hinder seeing, any more than psychic 
deafness hinders hearing. More particularly, in regard to the loss 
of the auditory memory of words - the only one we are now con­
sidering - there are a number of facts which show it to be regu­
larly associated with a destructive lesion of the first and second 
left temporo-sphenoidal convolutions,7s though not a single case 
is on record in which this lesion was the cause of deafness prop­
erly so-called: it has even been produced experimentally in the 
monkey without determining anything but psychic deafness, that 
is to say, a loss of the power to interpret the sounds which it was 
126 

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
still able to hear.76 So we must attribute to perception and to 
memory separate nervous elements. But then this hypothesis will 
be contradicted by the most elementary psychological observa­
tion; for we see that a memory, as it becomes more distinct and 
more intense, tends to become a perception, though there is no 
precise moment at which a radical transformation takes place, nor, 
consequently, a moment when we can say that it moves forward 
from imaginative elements to sensory elements. Thus these two 
contrary hypotheses, the first identifying the elements of percep­
tion with the elements of memory, the second distinguishing among 
them, are of such a nature that each sends us back to the other 
without allowing us to rest in either. 
How should it be otherwise? Here again distinct perception 
and memory-image are taken in the static condition, as things of 
which the first is supposed to be already complete without the 
second; whereas we ought to consider the dynamic progress by which 
the one passes into the other. 
For, on the one hand, complete perception is only defined and 
distinguished by its coalescence with a memory-image, which we 
send forth to meet it. Only thus is attention secured, and without 
attention there is but a passive juxtapositing of sensations, accom­
panied by a mechanical reaction. But, as we shall show later, the 
memory-image itself, if it remained pure memory, would be inef­
fectual. Virtual, this memory can only become actual by means of 
the perception which attracts it. Powerless, it borrows life and 
strength from the present sensation in which it is materialized. 
Does not this amount to saying that distinct perception is brought 
about by two opposite currents, of which the one, centripetal, 
comes from the external object, and the other, centrifugal, has 
for its point of departure that which we term "pure memory"? 
The first current, alone, would only give a passive perception with 
the mechanical reactions which accompany it. The second, left 
1 27 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
to itself, tends to give a recollection that i s  actualized - more and 
more actual as the current becomes more marked. Together, these 
two currents make up, at their point of confluence, the percep­
tion that is distinct and recognized. 
This is the witness ofintrospection. But we have no right to stop 
there. Undoubtedly, there is considerable risk in venturing, with­
out sufficient evidence, into the obscure problems of cerebral local­
ization. But we have said that to separate from one another the 
completed perception and the memory image is to bring clinical 
observation into conflict with psychological analysis and that the 
result is a serious antinomy in the theory of the localization of mem­
ories. We are bound to consider what becomes of the known facts 
when we cease to regard the brain as a storehouse of memories. 77 
Let us admit, for the moment, in order to simplify the argu­
ment, that stimuli from without give birth, either in the cortex 
or in other cerebral centers, to elementary sensations. In fact, every 
perception includes a considerable number of such sensations, all 
coexisting and arranged in a determined order. Where does this 
order come from, and what ensures this coexistence? In the case 
of a present material object, there is no doubt as to the answer: 
order and coexistence come from an organ of sense, receiving the 
impression of an external object. This organ is constructed pre­
cisely with a view to allowing a plurality of simultaneous exci­
tants to impress it in a certain order and in a certain way, by 
distributing themselves, all at one time, over selected portions of 
its surface. It is like an immense keyboard, on which the external 
object executes at once its harmony of a thousand notes, thus call­
ing forth in a definite order, and at a single moment, a great multi­
tude of elementary sensations corresponding to all the points of 
the sensory center that are concerned. Now suppress the external 
object or the organ of sense or both: the same elementary sensa­
tions may be excited, for the same strings are there, ready to vibrate 
1 2 8  

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
in the same way; but where i s  the keyboard which permits thou­
sands of them to be struck at once, and so many single notes to 
unite in one accord? In our opinion the "region of images," if it 
exists, can only be a keyboard of this nature. Certainly, it is in no 
way inconceivable that a purely psychical cause should directly 
set in action all the strings concerned. But, in the case of mental 
hearing - which we are considering alone now - the localization 
of the function appears certain, since a definite injury of the tem­
poral lobe abolishes it; yet we have set forth the reasons which 
make it impossible for us to admit, or even to conceive, traces of 
images deposited in any region of the cerebral substance. Hence 
only one plausible hypothesis remains, namely, that this region 
occupies with regard to the center of hearing itself the place that 
is exactly symmetrical with the organ of sense. It is, in this case, 
a mental ear. 
But then the contradiction we have spoken of disappears. We 
see, on the one hand, that the auditory image called back by memory 
must set in motion the same nervous elements as the first percep­
tion and that recollection must thus change gradually into per­
ception. And we see also, on the other hand, that the faculty of 
recalling to memory complex sounds, such as words, may con­
cern other parts of the nervous substance than does the faculty of 
perceiving them. This is why in psychic deafness real hearing sur­
vives mental hearing. The strings are still there, and to the influ­
ence of external sounds they vibrate still; it is the internal keyboard 
which is lacking. 
In other terms, the centers in which the elementary sensations 
seem to originate may be actuated, in some way, from two differ­
ent sides, from the front and from behind. From the front they 
receive impressions sent in by the sense-organs, and, consequently, 
by a real object; from behind they are subject, through successive 
intermediaries, to the influence of a virtual object. The centers of 
1 29 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
images, i f  these exist, can only be the organs that are exactly sym­
metrical with the organs of the senses in reference to the sensory 
centers. They are no more the depositories of pure memories, that 
is, of virtual objects, than the organs of the senses are depositories 
of real objects. 
We would add that this is but a much abridged version of what 
may happen in reality. The various sensory aphasias are sufficient 
proof that the calling up of an auditory image is not a single act. 
Between the intention, which is what we call the pure memory, 
and the auditory memory-image properly so called, intermediate 
memories are commonly intercalated which must first have been 
realized as memory-images in more or less distant centers. It is, 
then, by successive degrees that the idea comes to embody itself 
in that particular image which is the verbal image. Thereby mental 
hearing may depend upon the integrity of the various centers and 
of the paths which lead to them. But these complications change 
nothing at the root of things. Whatever be the number and the 
nature of the intervening processes, we do not go from the per­
ception to the idea, but from the idea to the perception; the essen­
tial process of recognition is not centripetal, but centrifugal. 
Here, indeed, the question arises how stimulation from within 
can give birth to sensations, either by its action on the cerebral 
cortex or on other centers. But it is clear enough that we have 
here only a convenient way of expressing ourselves. Pure memo­
ries, as they become actual, tend to bring about, within the body, 
all the corresponding sensations. But these virtual sensations them­
selves, in order to become real, must tend to urge the body to 
action and to impress upon it those movements and attitudes of 
which they are the habitual antecedent. The modifications in the 
centers called sensory, modifications which usually precede move­
ments accomplished or sketched out by the body and of which 
the normal office is to prepare them while they begin them, are, 
1 3 0  

O F  T H E  R E C O G N I T I O N  O F  I M A G E S  
then, less the real cause of the sensation than the mark of its power 
and the condition of its efficacy. The progress by which the vir­
tual image realizes itself is nothing else than the series of stages by 
which this image gradually obtains from the body useful actions 
or useful attitudes. The stimulation of the so-called sensory cen­
ters is the last of these stages: it is the prelude to a motor reaction, 
the beginning of an action in space. In other words, the virtual 
image evolves toward the virtual sensation and the virtual sensa­
tion toward real movement: this movement, in realizing itself, 
realizes both the sensation of which it might have been the natu­
ral continuation and the image which has tried to embody itself 
in the sensation. We must now consider these virtual states more 
carefully, and, penetrating further into the internal mechanism of 
psychical and psycho-physical actions, show by what continuous 
progress the past tends to reconquer, by actualizing itself, the influ­
ence it had lost. 
1 3 1 

M 
Pure memory 
Memory image 
Perception 
A 
B 
6 
c 
o 
Fig. 2 
P 

C H A P T E R  I I I  
Of T h e  Su r v i v a l  o f  I ma g e s. 
Memo r y  a n d  M i n d. 
To sum up briefly the preceding chapters: we have distinguished 
three processes, pure memory, memory-image and perception, of 
which none of them in fact, occurs apart from the others. Percep­
tion is never a mere contact of the mind with the object present; 
it is impregnated with memory-images which complete it as they 
interpret it. The memory-image, in its turn, partakes of the "pure 
memory," which it begins to materialize, and of the perception in 
which it tends to embody itself: regarded from the latter point of 
view, it might be defined as a nascent perception. Lastly, pure 
memory, though independent in theory, manifests itself as a rule 
only in the colored and living image which reveals it. Symboliz­
ing these three terms by the consecutive segments AB, BC, CD, 
of the same straight line AD, we may say that our thought describes 
this line in a single movement, which goes from A to 0, and that 
is impossible to say precisely where one of the terms ends and 
another begins. 
In fact, this is just what consciousness bears witness to when­
ever, in order to analyze memory, it follows the movement of 
memory at work. Whenever we are trying to recover a recollec­
tion, to call up some period of our history, we become conscious 
1 3 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
of an act sui aeneris by which we detach ourselves from the present 
in order to replace ourselves, first, in the past in general, then, in 
a certain region of the past - a work of adjustment, something 
like the focusing of a camera. But our recollection still remains 
virtual; we simply prepare ourselves to receive it by adopting the 
appropriate attitude. Little by little it comes into view like a con­
densing cloud; from the virtual state it passes into the actual; and 
as its outlines become more distinct and its surface takes on color, 
it tends to imitate perception. But it remains attached to the past 
by its deepest roots, and if, when once realized, it did not retain 
something of its original virtuality, if, being a present state, it were 
not also something which stands out distinct from the present, 
we should never know it for a memory. 
The capital error of associationism is that it substitutes for this 
continuity of becoming, which is the living reality, a discontinu­
ous multiplicity of elements, inert and juxtaposed. Just because 
each of the elements so constituted contains, by reason of its ori­
gin, something of what precedes and also of what follows, it must 
take to our eyes the form of a mixed and, so to speak, impure 
state. But the principle of associationism requires that each psy­
chical state should be a kind of atom, a simple element. Hence 
the necessity for sacrificing, in each of the phases we have distin­
guished, the unstable to the stable, that is to say, the beginning to 
the end. If we are dealing with perception, we are asked to see in 
it nothing but the agglomerated sensations which color it and to 
overlook the remembered images which form its dim nucleus. If 
it is the remembered image that we are considering, we are bid­
den to take it already made, realized in a weak perception, and to 
shut our eyes to the pure memory which this image has progres­
sively developed. In the rivalry which associationism thus sets up 
between the stable and the unstable, perception is bound to expel 
the memory-image, and the memory-image to expel pure memory. 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
And thus the pure memory disappears altogether. Associationism, 
cutting in two by a line MO, the totality of the progress AD, sees, 
in the part 00, only the sensations which terminate it and which 
have been supposed to constitute the whole of perception; yet it 
also reduces the part AO to the realized image which pure memory 
attains to as it expands. Psychical life, then, is entirely summed 
up in these two elements, sensation and image. And as, on the 
one hand, this theory drowns in the image the pure memory, which 
makes the image into an original state, and, on the other hand, 
brings the image yet closer to perception by putting into percep­
tion, in advance, something of the image itself, it ends up by find­
ing between these two states only a difference of degree, or of 
intensity. Hence the distinction between strong states and weak states, 
of which the first are supposed to be set up by us as perceptions of 
the present, and the second (why, no man knows) as representa­
tions of the past. But the truth is that we shall never reach the past 
unless we frankly place ourselves within it. Essentially virtual, it 
cannot be known as something past unless we follow and adopt 
the movement by which it expands into a present image, thus 
emerging from obscurity into the light of day. In vain do we seek 
its trace in anything actual and already realized: we might as well 
look for darkness beneath the light. This is, in fact, the error of 
associationism: placed in the actual, it exhausts itself in vain 
attempts to discover in a realized and present state the mark of its 
past origin, to distinguish memory from perception, and to erect 
into a difference in kind that which it condemned in advance to 
be but a difference of magnitude. 
To picture is not to remember. No doubt a recollection, as it 
becomes actual, tends to live in an image; however, the converse 
is not true, and the image, pure and simple, will not be referred to 
the past unless, indeed, it was in the past that I sought it, thus 
following the continuous progress which brought it from dark-
1 3 5  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
ness into light. This i s  what psychologists too often forget when 
they conclude, from the fact that a remembered sensation becomes 
more actual the more we dwell upon it, that the memory of the 
sensation is the sensation itself beginning to be. The fact which 
they allege is undoubtedly true: the more I strive to recall a past 
pain, the nearer I come to feeling it in reality. But this is easy to 
understand, since the progress of a memory precisely consists, as 
we have said, in its becoming materialized. The question is: was 
the memory of a pain, when it began, really pain? Because the 
hypnotized subject ends by feeling hot when he is repeatedly told 
that he is hot, it does not follow that the words of the suggestion 
were themselves hot. Neither must we conclude that, because 
the memory of a sensation prolongs itself into that very sensation, 
the memory was a nascent sensation: perhaps, indeed. this memory 
plays, with regard to the sensation which follows it, precisely the 
part of the hypnotizer who makes the suggestion. The argument 
we are criticizing, presented in this form, is then already of no 
value as proof; still, it is not yet a vicious argument because it 
profits by the incontestable truth that memory passes into some­
thing else by becoming actual. The absurdity becomes patent when 
the argument is inverted (although this ought to be legitimate on 
the hypothesis adopted), that is to say, when the intensity of the 
sensation is decreased instead of the intensity of pure memory 
being increased. For then, if the two states differ merely in degree, 
there should be a given moment at which the sensation changed 
into a memory. If the memory of an acute pain, for instance, is but 
a slight pain, inversely, an intense pain which I feel, will end, 
as it grows less, by being an acute pain remembered. Now the 
moment will come, undoubtedly, when it is impossible for me to 
say whether what I feel is a slight sensation, which I experience, 
or a slight sensation, which I imagine (and this is natural, because 
the memory-image is already partly sensation), but never will 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
this weak state appear to me to be the memory of a strong state. 
Memory, then, is something quite different. 
But the illusion which consists in establishing only a differ­
ence of degree between memory and perception is more than a 
mere consequence of associationism, more than an accident in 
the history of philosophy. Its roots lie deep. It rests, in the last 
analysis, on a false idea of the nature and of the object of external 
perception. We are bent on regarding perception as only an instruc­
tion addressed to a pure spirit, as having a purely speculative inter­
est. Then, as memory is itself essentially a knowledge of this kind, 
since its object is no longer present, we can only find between 
perception and memory a difference of degree - perceptions being 
then supposed to throw memories back into the past, and thus to 
reserve to themselves the present simply because right is might. 
But there is much more between past and present than a mere 
difference of degree. My present is that which interests me, which 
lives for me, and in a word, that which summons me to action; in 
contrast, my past is essentially powerless. We must dwell further 
on this point. By contrasting it with present perception we shall 
better understand the nature of what we call "pure memory." 
For we should endeavor in vain to characterize the memory of 
a past state unless we began by defining the concrete note, accepted 
by consciousness, of present reality. What is, for me, the present 
moment? The essence of time is that it goes by; time already gone 
by is the past, and we call the present the instant in which it goes 
by. But there can be no question here of a mathematical instant. No 
doubt there is an ideal present - a pure conception, the indivisi­
ble limit which separates past from future. But the real, concrete, 
live present - that of which I speak when I speak of my present 
perception - that present necessarily occupies a duration. Where 
then is this duration placed? Is it on the nearer or on the further 
side of the mathematical point which I determine ideally when I 
1 3 7  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
think of the present instant? Quite evidently, it is both on this 
side and on that, and what I call "my present" has one foot in my 
past and another in my future. In my past, first, because "the 
moment in which I am speaking is already far from me"; in my 
future, next, because this moment is impending over the future: 
it is to the future that I am tending, and could I fix this indivisible 
present, this infinitesimal element of the curve of time, it is the 
direction of the future that it would indicate. The psychical state, 
then, that I call "my present," must be both a perception of the 
immediate past and a determination of the immediate future. Now 
the immediate past, in so far as it is perceived, is, as we shall see, 
sensation, since every sensation translates a very long succession 
of elementary vibrations, and the immediate future, in so far as it 
is being determined, is action or movement. My present, then, is 
both sensation and movement; since my present forms an undi­
vided whole, then the movement must be linked with the sensa­
tion, must prolong it in action. Whence I conclude that my present 
consists in a joint system of sensations and movements. My pre­
sent is, in its essence, sensori-motor. 
This is to say that my present consists in the consciousness I 
have of my body. Having extension in space, my body experiences 
sensations and at the same time executes movements. Sensations 
and movements being localized at deterʁined points of this 
extended body, there can only be, at a given moment, a single 
system of movements and sensations. That is why my present 
appears to me to be a thing absolutely determined, and contrast­
ing with my past. Situated between the matter which influences 
it and that on which it has influence, my body is a center of action, 
the place where the impressions received choose intelligently the 
path they will follow to transform themselves into movements 
accomplished. Thus it, indeed, represents the actual state of my 
becoming, that part of my duration which is in process of growth. 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
More generally, i n  that continuity of becoming which i s  reality 
itself, the present moment is constituted by the quasi-instantaneous 
section effected by our perception in the flowing mass, and this 
section is precisely that which we call the material world. Our 
body occupies its center; it is, in this material world, that part of 
which we directly feel the flux; in its actual state the actuality of 
our present lies. If matter, so far as extended in space, is to be 
defined (as we believe it must) as a present which is always begin­
ning again, inversely, our present is the very materiality of our 
existence, that is to say, a system of sensations and movements 
and nothing else. And this system is determined, unique for each 
moment of duration, just because sensations and movements occupy 
space, and because there cannot be in the same place several things 
at the same time. Why is it that it has been possible to misunder­
stand so simple, so evident a truth, one which is, moreover, the 
very idea of common sense? 
The reason lies simply in the fact that philosophers insist on 
regarding the difference between actual sensations and pure memory 
as a mere difference in degree, and not in kind. In our view the 
difference is radical. My actual sensations occupy definite por­
tions of the surface of my body; pure memory, on the other hand, 
interests no part of my body. No doubt, it will beget sensations as 
it materializes, but at that very moment it will cease to be a memory 
and pass into the state of a present thing, something actually lived. 
I shall then only restore to it its character of memory by carrying 
myself back to the process by which I called it up, as it was vir­
tual, from the depths of my past. It is just because I made it active 
that it has become actual, that is to say, a sensation capable of 
provoking movements. But most psychologists see in pure memory 
only a weakened perception, an assembly of nascent sensations. 
Having thus effaced, to begin with, all difference in kind between 
sensation and memory, they are led by the logic of their hypothe-
1 3 9  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
sis to materialize memory and to idealize sensation. They perceive 
memory only in the form of an image, that is to say, already embod­
ied in nascent sensations. Having thus attributed to it that which 
is essential to sensation, and refusing to see in the ideality of memory 
something distinct, something contrasted with sensation itself, 
they are forced, when they come back to pure sensation, to leave 
to it that ideality with which they have thus implicitly endowed 
nascent sensations. For if the past, which by hypothesis is no longer 
active, can subsist in the form of a weak sensation, there must be 
sensations that are powerless. If pure memory, which by hypothe­
sis interests no definite part of the body, is a nascent sensation, 
then sensation is not essentially localized in any point of the body. 
Hence the illusion that consists in regarding sensation as an ethe­
real and unextended state which acquires extension and consoli­
dates in the body by mere accident: an illusion which vitiates 
profoundly, as we have seen the theory of external perception and 
raises a great number of the questions at issue between the vari­
ous metaphysics of matter. We must make up our minds to it: 
sensation is, in its essence, extended and localized; it is a source 
of movement. Pure memory, being inextensive and powerless, does 
not in any degree share the nature of sensation. 
That which I call my present is my attitude with regard to the 
immediate future; it is my impending action. My present is, then, 
sensori-motor. Of my past, that alone becomes image and, conse­
quently, sensation, at least nascent, which can collaborate in that 
action, insert itself in that attitude, in a word make itself useful; 
but, from the moment that it becomes image, the past leaves the 
state of pure memory and coincides with a certain part of my 
present. Memory actualized in an image differs, then, profoundly 
from pure memory. The image is a present state, and its sole share 
in the past is the memory from which it arose. Memory, on the 
contrary, powerless as long as it remains without utility, is pure 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
from all admixture of sensation, i s  without attachment to the 
present, and is, consequently, unextended. 
This radical powerlessness of pure memory is just what will 
enable us to understand how it is preserved in a latent state. With­
out as yet going to the heart of the matter, we will confine our­
selves to the remark that our unwillingness to conceive unconscious 
psychical states is due, above all, to the fact that we hold conscious­
ness to be the essential property of psychical states: so a psychical 
state cannot, it seems, cease to be conscious without ceasing to 
exist. But if consciousness is but the characteristic note of the 
present, that is to say, of the actually lived, in short, of the active, 
then that which does not act may cease to belong to conscious­
ness without therefore ceasing to exist in some manner. In other 
words, in the psychological domain, consciousness may not be 
the synonym of existence, but only of real action or of immediate 
efficacy; limiting thus the meaning of the term, we shall have less 
difficulty in representing to ourselves a psychical state which is 
unconscious, that is to say, ineffective. Whatever idea we may frame 
of consciousness in itself, such as it would be if it could work 
untrammeled, we cannot deny that, in a being which has bodily 
functions, the chief office of consciousness is to preside over action 
and to enlighten choice. Therefore, it throws light on the imme­
diate antecedents of the decision, and on those past recollections 
which can usefully combine with it; all else remains in shadow. 
But we find here once more, in a new form, the ever-recurrent 
illusion which, throughout this work, we have endeavored to dis­
pel. It is supposed that consciousness, even when linked with bodily 
functions, is a faculty that is only accidentally practical and is 
directed essentially toward speculation. Then, since we cannot 
see what interest, devoted as it is supposed to be to pure knowl­
edge, it would have in allowing any information that it possesses 
to escape, we fail to understand why it refuses to throw light on 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
something that was not entirely lost to it. From this we conclude 
that it can possess nothing more de jure than what it holds de 
facto, and that, in the domain of consciousness, all that is real is 
actual. But restore to consciousness its true role: there will no 
longer be any more reason to say that the past effaces itself as soon 
as perceived than there is to suppose that material objects cease 
to exist when we cease to perceive them. 
We must insist on this last point, for here we have the central 
difficulty, and the source of the ambiguities which surround the 
problem of the unconscious. The idea of an unconscious representation 
is clear, despite current prejudice; we may even say that we make 
constant use of it, and that there is no conception more familiar 
to common sense. For every one admits that the images actually 
present to our perception are not the whole of matter. But, on 
the other hand, what can be a nonperceived material object, an 
image not imagined, unless it is a kind of unconscious mental state? 
Beyond the walls of your room, which you perceive at this moment, 
there are the adjoining rooms, then the rest of the house, finally 
the street and the town in which you live. It signifies little to 
which theory of matter you adhere; realist or idealist, you are evi­
dently thinking, when you speak of the town, of the street, of the 
other rooms in the house, of so many perceptions absent from 
your consciousness and yet given outside of it. They are not cre­
ated as your consciousness receives them; they existed, then, in 
some manner, and since, by hypothesis, your consciousness did 
not apprehend them, how could they exist in themselves unless 
in the unconscious state? How comes it then that an existence out­
side of consciousness appears clear to us in the case of objects, but 
obscure when we are speaking of the subject? Our perceptions, 
actual and virtual, extend along two lines, the one horizontal, AB, 
which contains all simultaneous objects in space, the other verti­
cal, cr, on which are ranged our successive recollections set out 

O F  T H E 
S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
Fig. 3 
c 
A 
B 
in time. The point I ,  at the intersection of the two lines, is the 
only one actually given to consciousness. Whence comes it that 
we do not hesitate to posit the reality of the whole line AB, although 
it remains unperceived, while, on the contrary, of the line eI, the 
present I which is actually perceived is the only point which appears 
to us really to exist? There are, at the bottom of this radical dis­
tinction between the two series, temporal and spatial, so many 
confused or half-formed ideas, so many hypotheses devoid of any 
speculative value, that we cannot all at once make an exhaustive 
analysis of them. In order to unmask the illusion entirely, we should 
have to seek its origin and follow through all its windings, the 
double movement by which we come to assume objective reali­
ties without relation to consciousness, and states of conscious­
ness without objective reality - space thus appearing to preserve 
indefinitely the things which are there juxtaposed, while time in 
its advance devours the states which succeed each other within it. 
Part of this work has been done in our first chapter, where we 
discussed objectivity in general; another part will be dealt with 
in the last pages of this book, where we shall speak of the idea of 
matter. We confine ourselves here to a few essential points. 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
First, the objects ranged along the line AB represent to our 
eyes what we are going to perceive, while the line CI contains 
only that which has already been perceived. Now the past has no 
longer any interest for us; it has exhausted its possible action or 
will only recover an influence by borrowing the vitality of the 
present perception. The immediate future, on the contrary, con­
sists in an impending action, in an energy not yet spent. The unper­
ceived part of the material universe, big with promises and threats, 
has then for us a reality which the actually unperceived periods of 
our past existence cannot and should not possess. But this dis­
tinction, which is entirely relative to practical utility and to the 
material needs oflife, takes in our minds the more and more marked 
form of a metaphysical distinction. 
We have shown that the objects which surround us represent, 
in varying degrees, an action which we can accomplish upon things 
. or which we must experience from them. The date of fulfilment 
of this possible action is indicated by the greater or lesser remote­
ness of the corresponding object, so that distance in space mea­
sures the proximity of a threat or of a promise in time. Thus space 
furnishes us at once with the diagram of our near future, and, as 
this future must recede indefinitely, space which symbolizes it 
has for its property to remain, in its immobility, indefinitely open. 
Hence the immediate horizon given to our perception appears to 
us to be necessarily surrounded by a wider circle, existing though 
unperceived, this circle itself implying yet another outside it and 
so on, ad infinitum. It is, then, of the essence of our actual per­
ception, inasmuch as it is extended, to be always only a content in 
relation to a vaster, even an unlimited, experience which con­
tains it; this experience, absent from our consciousness, since it 
spreads beyond the perceived horizon, nevertheless, appears to 
be actually given. But while we feel ourselves to be dependent 
upon these material objects which we thus erect into present real-
144 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
lues, our memories, on the contrary, inasmuch as they are past, 
are so much dead weight that we carry with us, and by which we 
prefer to imagine ourselves unencumbered. The same instinct, in 
virtue of which we open out space indefinitely before us, prompts 
us to shut off time behind us as it flows. And while reality, in so far 
as it is extended, appears to us to overpass infinitely the bounds of 
our perception, in our inner life that alone seems to us to be real 
which begins with the present moment; the rest is practically abol­
ished. Then, when a memory reappears in consciousness, it pro­
duces on us the effect of a ghost whose mysterious apparition must 
be explained by special causes. In truth, the adherence of this 
memory to our present condition is exactly comparable to the 
adherence of unperceived objects to those objects which we per­
ceive; and the unconscious plays in each case a similar part. 
But we have great difficulty in representing the matter to our­
selves in this way because we have fallen into the habit of empha­
sizing the differences and, on the contrary, of slurring over the 
resemblances, between the series of objects simultaneously set out 
in space and that of states successively developed in time. In the 
first, the terms condition each other in a manner which is entirely 
determined, so that the appearance of each new term may be fore­
seen. Thus I know, when I leave my room, what other rooms I 
shall go through. However, my memories present themselves in 
an order which is apparently capricious. The order of the repre­
sentations is then necessary in the one case, contingent in the other; 
it is this necessity which I hypostatize, as it were, when I speak of 
the existence of objects outside of all consciousness. If I see no 
inconvenience in supposing, given the totality of objects which I 
do not perceive, it is because the strictly determined order of these 
objects lends to them the appearance of a chain, of which my pre­
sent perception is only one link. This link communicates its actu­
ality to the rest of the chain. But, if we look at the matter closely, 
145 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
we shall see that our memories form a chain of the same kind, and 
that our character, always present in all our decisions, is indeed 
the actual synthesis of all our past states. In this epitomized form 
our previous psychical life exists for us even more than the exter­
nal world, of which we never perceive more than a very small part, 
whereas, on the contrary, we use the whole of our lived experi­
ence. It is true that we possess merely a digest of it, and that our 
former perceptions, considered as distinct individualities, seem 
to us to have completely disappeared or to appear again only at 
the bidding of their caprice. But this semblance of complete 
destruction or of capricious revival is due merely to the fact that 
actual consciousness accepts at each moment the useful and rejects 
in the same breath the superfluous. Ever bent upon action, it can 
only materialize those of our former perceptions which can ally 
themselves with the present perception to take a share in the final 
decision. If it is necessary, when I would manifest my will at a 
given point of space, that my consciousness should go successively 
through those intermediaries or those obstacles of which the sum 
constitutes what we call distance in space, "So, on the other hand, it 
is useful, in order to throw light on this action, that my conscious­
ness should jump the interval of time which separates the actual 
situation from a former one which resembles it; and as conscious­
ness goes back to the earlier date at a bound, all the intermediate 
past escapes its hold. The same reasons, then, which cause our 
perceptions to range themselves in strict continuity in space, cause 
our memories to be illumined discontinuously in time. We have 
not, in regard to objects unperceived in space and unconscious 
memories in time, to do with two radically different forms of exis­
tence, but the exigencies of action are the inverse in the one case 
of what they are in the other. 
But here we come to the capital problem of existence, a prob­
lem we can only glance at, for otherwise it would lead us step by 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
step into the heart of metaphysics. We will merely say that with 
regard to matters of experience - which alone concern us here 
- existence appears to imply two conditions taken together: 
(1) presentation in consciousness and (2) the logical or casual con­
nection of that which is so presented with what precedes and with 
what follows. The reality for us of a psychical state or of a material 
object consists in the double fact that our consciousness perceives 
them and that they form part of a series, temporal or spatial, of 
which the elements determine each other. But these two condi­
tions admit of degrees, and it is conceivable that, though both are 
necessary, they may be unequally fulfilled. Thus, in the case of 
actual internal states, the connection is less close, and the deter­
mination of the present by the past, leaving ample room for con­
tingency, has not the character of a mathematical derivation -
but then, presentation in consciousness is perfect, an actual psy­
chical state yielding the whole of its content in the act itself, 
whereby we perceive it. On the contrary, if we are dealing with 
external objects it is the connection which is perfect, since these 
objects obey necessary laws; but then the other condition, pre­
sentation in consciousness, is never more than partially fulfilled, 
for the material object, just because of the multitude of unper­
ceived elements by which it is linked with all other objects, appears 
to enfold within itself and to hide behind it infinitely more than 
it allows to be seen. We ought to say, then, that existence, in the 
empirical sense of the word, always implies conscious apprehen­
sion and regular connection; both at the same time, although in 
different degrees. But our intellect, of which the function is to 
establish clear-cut distinctions, does not so understand things. 
Rather than admit the presence in all cases of the two elements 
mingled in varying proportions, it prefers to dissociate them, and 
thus attribute to external objects, on the one hand, and to inter­
nal states, on the other hand, two radically different modes of exis-
147 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
tence, each characterized by the exclusive presence of the condition 
which should be regarded as merely preponderating. Then the 
existence of psychical states is assumed to consist entirely in their 
apprehension by consciousness, and that of external phenomena, 
entirely also, in the strict order of their concomitance and their 
succession. Whence the impossibility ofleaving to material objects, 
existing, but unperceived, the smallest share in consciousness, and 
to internal unconscious states the smallest share in existence. We 
have shown, at the beginning of this book, the consequences of 
the first illusion: it ends by falsifying our representation of mat­
ter. The second illusion, complementary to the first, vitiates our 
conception of mind by casting over the idea of the unconscious an 
artificial obscurity. The whole of our past psychical life condi­
tions our present state, without being its necessary determinant; 
whole, also, it reveals itself in our character, although none of its 
past states manifests itself explicitly in character. Taken together, 
these two conditions assure to each one of the past psychological 
states a real, though an unconscious, existence. 
But we are so much accustomed to reverse, for the sake of 
action, the real order of things, we are so strongly obsessed by 
images drawn from space, that we cannot hinder ourselves from 
asking where memories are stored up. We understand that physico­
chemical phenomena take place in the brain, that the brain is in 
the body, the body in the air which surrounds it, etc.; but the 
past, once achieved, if it is retained, where is it? To locate it in the 
cerebral substance, in the state of molecular modification, seems 
clear and simple enough because then we have a receptacle, actu­
ally given, which we have only to open in order to let the latent 
images flow into consciousness. But ifthe brain cannot serve such 
a purpose, in what warehouse shall we store the accumulated 
images? We forget that the relation of container to content bor­
rows its apparent clearness and universality from the necessity laid 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
upon us of always opening out space in front of us and of always 
closing duration behind us. Because it has been shown that one 
thing is within another, the phenomenon of its preservation is not 
thereby made any clearer. We may even go further: let us admit 
for a moment that the past survives in the form of a memory stored 
in the brain; it is then necessary that the brain, in order to pre­
serve the memory, should preserve itself. But the brain, insofar as 
it is an image extended in space, never occupies more than the 
present moment: it constitutes, with all the rest of the material 
universe, an ever-renewed section of universal becoming. Either, 
then, you must suppose that this universe dies and is born again 
miraculously at each moment of duration, or you must attribute 
to it that continuity of existence which you deny to conscious­
ness, and make ofits past a reality which endures and is prolonged 
into its present. So that you have gained nothing by depositing 
the memories in matter, and you find yourself, on the contrary, 
compelled to extend to the totality of the states of the material 
world that complete and independent survival of the past which 
you have just refused to psychical states. This survival of the past 
per se forces itself upon philosophers, then, under one form or 
another; the difficulty that we have in conceiving it comes simply 
from the fact that we extend to the series of memories, in time, 
that obligation of containing and being contained which applies only 
to the collection of bodies instantaneously perceived in space. 
The fundamental illusion consists in transferring to duration itself, 
in its continuous flow, the form of the instantaneous sections 
which we make in it. 
But how can the past, which, by hypothesis, has ceased to be, 
preserve itself? Have we not here a real contradiction? We reply 
that the question is just whether the past has ceased to exist or 
whether it has simply ceased to be useful. You define the present 
in an arbitrary manner as that which is, whereas the present is sim-
149 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
ply what is being made. Nothing is less than the present moment, if 
you understand by that the indivisible limit which divides the past 
from the future. When we think this present as going to be, it 
exists not yet, and when we think it as existing, it is already past. 
If, on the other hand, what you are considering is the concrete 
present such as it is actually lived by consciousness, we may say 
that this present consists, in large measure, in the immediate past. 
In the fraction of a second which covers the briefest possible per­
ception of light, billions of vibrations have taken place, of which 
the first is separated from the last by an interval which is enor­
mously divided. Your perception, however instantaneous, consists 
then in an incalculable multitude of remembered elements; in 
truth, every perception is already memory. Practically, we perceive 
only the past, the pure present being the invisible progress of the 
past gnawing into the future. 
Consciousness, then, illumines, at each moment of time, that 
immediate part of the past which, impending over the future, seeks 
to realize and to associate with it. Solely preoccupied in thus 
determining an undetermined future, consciousness may shed a 
little of its light on those of our states, more remote in the past, 
which can be usefully combined with our present state, that is 
to say, with our immediate past: the rest remains in the dark. 
It is in this illuminated part of our history that we remain seated, 
in virtue of the fundamental law of life, which is a law of action: 
hence the difficulty we experience in conceiving memories which 
are preserved in the shadow. Our reluctance to admit the integ­
ral survival of the past has its origin, then, in the very bent of 
our psychical life - an unfolding of states wherein our interest 
prompts us to look at that which is unrolling, and not at that which 
is entirely unrolled. 
So we return, after a long digression, to our point of depar­
ture. There are, we have said, two memories which are profoundly 
1,0 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F 
I M A G E S 
distinct: the one, fixed in the organism, is nothing else but the 
complete set of intelligently constructed mechanisms which ensure 
the appropriate reply to the various possible demands. This memory 
enables us to adapt ourselves to the present situation; through it 
the actions to which we are subject prolong themselves into reac­
tions that are sometimes accomplished, sometimes merely nascent, 
but always more or less appropriate. Habit rather than memory, it 
acts our past experience but does not call up its image. The other 
is the true memory. Coextensive with consciousness, it retains 
and ranges alongside of each other all our states in the order in 
which they occur, leaving to each fact its place and, consequently, 
marking its date, truly moving in the past and not, like the first, in 
an ever renewed present. But, in marking the profound distinc­
tion between these two forms of memory, we have not shown their 
connecting link. Above the body, with its mechanisms which sym­
bolize the accumulated effort of past actions, the memory which 
imagines and repeats has been left to hang, as it were, suspended 
in the void. Now, if it be true that we never perceive anything but 
our immediate past, if our consciousness of the present is already 
memory, the two terms which had been separated to begin with 
cohere closely together. Seen from this new point of view, indeed, 
our body is nothing but that part of our representation which is 
ever being born again, the part always present, or rather that which, 
at each moment, is just past. Itself an image, the body cannot store 
up images, since it forms a part of the images, and this is why it is a 
chimerical enterprise to seek to localize past or even present per­
ceptions in the brain: they are not in it; it is the brain that is in 
them. But this special image which persists in the midst of the 
others, and which I call my body, constitutes at every moment, as 
we have said, a section of the universal becoming. It is then the 
place of passage of the movements received and thrown back, a 
hyphen, a connecting link between the things which act upon me 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Fig. 4 
r----_+----- p 
and the things upon which I act - the seat, in a word, of the sensori­
motor phenomena. If I represent by a cone SAB, the totality of 
the recollections accumulated in my memory, the base AB, situ­
ated in the past, remains motionless, while the summit S, which 
indicates at all times my present, moves forward unceasingly, and 
unceasingly also touches the moving plane P of my actual repre­
sentation of the universe. At S, the image of the body is concen­
trated, and, since it belongs to the plane P, this image does but 
receive and restore actions emanating from all the images of which 
the plane is composed. 
The bodily memory, made up of the sum of the sensori-motor 
systems organized by habit, is then a quasi-instantaneous memory 
to which the true memory of the past serves as base. Since they 
are not two separate things, since the first is only, as we have said, 
the pointed end, ever moving, inserted by the second in the shift­
ing plane of experience, it is natural that the two functions should 
lend each other a mutual support. So, on the one hand, the memory 
of the past offers to the sensori-motor mechanisms all the recol­
lections capable of guiding them in their task and of giving to the 
motor reaction the direction suggested by the lessons of experi-

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
ence. I t  is in just this that the associations of contiguity and like­
ness consist. But, on the other hand, the sensori-motor apparatus 
furnish to ineffective, that is unconscious, memories, the means 
of taking on a body, of materializing themselves, in short of bee om­
ing present. For, that a recollection should reappear in conscious­
ness, it is necessary that it should descend from the heights of pure 
memory down to the precise point where action is taking place. 
In other words, it is from the present that the appeal to which 
memory responds comes, and it is from the sensori-motor ele­
ments of present action that a memory borrows the warmth which 
gives it life. 
Is it not by the constancy of this agreement, by the precision 
with which these two complementary memories insert themselves 
each into the other, that we recognize a "well-balanced" mind, 
that is to say, in fact, a man nicely adapted to life? The characteris­
tic of the man of action is the promptitude with which he sum­
mons to the help of a given situation all the memories which have 
reference to it; yet it is also the insurmountable barrier which 
encounters, when they present themselves on the threshold of his 
consciousness, memories that are useless or indifferent. To live 
only in the present, to respond to a stimulus by the immediate 
reaction which prolongs it, is the mark of the lower animals: the 
man who proceeds in this way is a man of impulse. But he who 
lives in the past for the mere pleasure ofliving there, and in whom 
recollections emerge into the light of consciousness without any 
advantage for the present situation, is hardly better fitted for action: 
here we have no man of impulse, but a dreamer. Between these 
two extremes lives the happy disposition of memory docile enough 
to follow with precision all the outlines of the present situation, 
but energetic enough to resist all other appeal. Good sense, or 
practical sense, is probably nothing but this. 
The extraordinary development of spontaneous memory in most 
15 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
children i s  due to the fact that they have not yet persuaded their 
memory to remain bound up with their conduct. They usually 
follow the impression of the moment, and as with them action 
does not bow to the suggestions of memory, so neither are their 
recollections limited to the necessities of action. They seem to 
retain with greater facility only because they remember with less 
discernment. The apparent diminution of memory, as intellect 
develops, is then due to the growing organization of recollections 
with acts. Thus conscious memory loses in range what it gains 
in force of penetration: it had at first the facility of the memory of 
dreams, but then it was actually dreaming. Indeed we observe this 
same exaggeration of spontaneous memory in men whose intel­
lectual development hardly goes beyond that of childhood. A mis­
sionary, after preaching a long sermon to some African savages, 
heard one of them repeat it textually, with the same gestures, from 
beginning to end.! 
But, if almost the whole of our past is hidden from us because 
it is inhibited by the necessities of present action, it will find 
strength to cross the threshold of consciousness in all cases where 
we renounce the interests of effective action to replace ourselves, 
so to speak, in the life of dreams. Sleep, natural or artificial, brings 
about an indifference of just this kind. It has been recently sug­
gested that in sleep there is an interruption ofthe contact between 
the nervous elements, motor and sensory.2 Even if we do not accept 
this ingenious hypothesis, it is impossible not to see in sleep a 
relaxing, even if only functional, of the tension of the nervous 
system, ever ready, during waking hours, to prolong by an appro­
priate reaction the stimulation received. Now the exaltation of 
the memory in certain dreams and in certain somnambulistic states 
is well known. Memories, which we believed abolished, then reap­
pear with striking completeness; we live over again, in all their 
detail, forgotten scenes of childhood; we speak languages which 
154 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
we no longer even remember to have learned. But there is nothing 
more instructive in this regard than what happens in cases of sud­
den suffocation, in men drowned or hanged. Such a man, when 
brought to life again, states that he saw, in a very short time, 
all the forgotten events of his life passing before him with great 
rapidity, with their smallest circumstances and in the very order 
in which they occurred.3 
A human being who should dream his life instead of living it 
would no doubt thus keep before his eyes at each moment the 
infinite multitude of the details of his past history. And, conversely, 
the man who should repudiate this memory with all that it begets 
would be continually acting his life instead of truly representing 
it to himself: a conscious automaton, he would follow the lead of 
useful habits which prolong into an appropriate reaction the stim­
ulation received. The first would never rise above the particular, 
or even above the individual; leaving to each image its date in 
time and its position in space, he would see wherein it differs from 
others and not how it resembles them. The other, always swayed 
by habit, would only distinguish in any situation that aspect in 
which it practically resembles former situations; incapable, doubt­
less, of thinkinB universals, since every general idea implies the rep­
resentation, at least virtual, of a number of remembered images, 
he would, nevertheless, move in the universal, habit being to action 
what generality is to thought. But these two extreme states, the 
one of an entirely contemplative memory which apprehends only 
the singular in its vision, the other of a purdy motor memory which 
stamps the note of generality on its action, are really separate and 
are fully visible only in exceptional cases. In normal life they are 
interpenetrating, so that each has to abandon some part of its ori­
ginal purity. The first reveals itself in the recollection of differ­
ences, the second in the perception of resemblances: at the meeting 
of the two currents appears the general idea. 
155 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
We are not concerned here to settle once for all the whole ques­
tion of general ideas. Some have not originated in perception alone, 
and have but a very distant connection with material objects. We 
will leave these on one side and consider only those general ideas 
that are founded on what we have called the perception of simi­
larity. We will try to follow pure memory, integral memory, in the 
continuous effort which it makes to insert itself into motor habit. 
In this way we may throw more light upon the office and nature of 
this memory, and perhaps make clearer, at the same time, by regard­
ing them in this particular aspect, the two equally obscure notions 
of resemblance and of generality. 
If we consider as closely as possible the difficulties of a psy­
chological order which surround the problem of general ideas, 
we shall come, we believe, to enclose them in this circle: to gen­
eralize, it is first of all necessary to abstract, but to abstract to any 
purpose we must already know how to generalize. Round this cir­
cle gravitate, consciously or unconsciously, nominalism and con­
ceptualism, each doctrine having in its favor mainly the insufficiency 
of the other. The nominalists, retaining of the general idea only 
its extension, see in it merely an open and unlimited series of 
individual objects. The unity of the idea can then, for them, con­
sist only in the identity of the symbol by which we designate indif­
ferently all these distinct objects. According to them, we begin 
by perceiving a thing, and then we assign to it a word: this word, 
backed by the faculty or the habit of extending itself to an unlim­
ited number of other things, then sets up for a general idea. But, 
in order that the word should extend and yet limit itself to the 
objects which it designates, it is necessary that these objects should 
offer us resemblances which, when we compare them, shall dis­
tinguish them from all the objects to which the word does not 
apply. Generalization does not, consequently, occur without our 
taking into account qualities that have been found to be common 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
and therefore considered in the abstract; from step to step, nomi­
nalism is thus led to define the general idea by its intention and 
not merely by its extension, as it set out to do. It is just from this 
intention that conceptualism starts; the intellect, in this theory, 
resolves the superficial unity of the individual into different quali­
ties, each of which, isolated from the individual who limited it, 
becomes by that very isolation representative of a genus. Instead 
of regarding each genus as including actually a multiplicity of objects, 
it is now maintained, on the contrary, that each object involves 
potentially, and as so many qualities which it holds captive, a mul­
tiplicity of genera. But the question before us is whether individ­
ual qualities, even isolated by an effort of abstraction, do not remain 
individual, and whether, to make them into genera, a new effort 
of the mind is not required, by which it first bestows on each 
quality a name, and then collects under this name a multitude of 
individual objects. The whiteness of a lily is not the whiteness of 
a snowfield; they remain, even as isolated from the snow and the 
lily, snow-white or lily-white. They only forego their individual­
ity if we consider their likeness in order to give them a common 
name; then, applying this name to an unlimited number of sim­
ilar objects, we throw back upon the quality, by a sort of ricochet, 
the generality which the word went out to seek in its application 
to things. But, reasoning in this way, do we not return to the point 
of view of extension, which we just now abandoned? We are then, 
in truth, revolving in a circle, nominalism leading us to conceptu­
alism, and conceptualism bringing us back to nominalism. Gen­
eralization can only be effected by extracting common qualities; 
however, that qualities should appear common, they must have 
already been subjected to a process of generalization. 
Now, when we get to the bottom of these two opposite theo­
ries, we find in them a common postulate; each will have it that 
we start from the perception of individual objects. The first com-
IS"? 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
poses the genus by an enumeration; the second disengages i t  by an 
analysis; but it is upon individuals, considered as so many realities 
given to immediate intuition, that both analysis and enumeration 
are supposed to bear. This is the postulate. In spite of its apparent 
obviousness, we must expect to find, and we do indeed find, that 
experience belies it. 
A priori, indeed, we may expect the clear distinction of indi­
vidual objects to be a luxury of perception, just as the clear repre­
sentation of general ideas is a refinement of the intellect. The full 
conception of genera is no doubt proper to human thought; it 
demands an effort of reflection, by which we expunge from a rep­
resentation the details of time and place. But the reflection on 
these details - a reflection without which the individuality of 
objects would escape us - presupposes a faculty of noticing dif­
ferences, and therefore, a memory of images, which is certainly 
the privilege of man and of the higher animals. It would seem, 
then, that we start neither from the perception of the individual 
nor from the conception of the genus, but from an intermediate 
knowledge, from a confused sense of the strikin8 quality or of resem­
blance: this sense, equally remote from generality fully conceived 
and from individuality clearly perceived, begets both of them by 
a process of dissociation. Reflective analysis clarifies it into the 
general idea; discriminative memory solidifies it into a percep­
tion of the individual. 
But this will be more clearly evident if we go back to the purely 
utilitarian origin of our perception of things. That which inter­
ests us in a given situation, that which we are likely to grasp in it 
first, is the side by which it can respond to a tendency or a need. 
But a need goes straight to the resemblance or quality; it cares 
little for individual differences. To this discernment of the useful 
we .may surmise that the perception of animals is, in most cases 
confined. I t is grass in 8enerai which attracts the herbivorous ani-

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
mal: the color and the smell of grass, felt and experienced as forces 
(we do not go so far as to say, thought as qualities or genera), are 
the sole immediate data of its external perception. On this back­
ground of generality or of resemblance the animal's memory may 
show up contrasts from which will issue differentiations; it will 
then distinguish one countryside from another, one field from 
another field; but this is, we repeat, the superfluity of perception, 
not a necessary part. I t may be urged that we are only throwing 
the problem further back, that we are merely relegating to the 
unconscious the process by which similarity is discovered and gen­
era are constituted. But we relegate nothing to the unconscious 
for the very simple reason that it is not, in our opinion, an effort 
of a psychological nature which here disengages similarity; this 
similarity acts objectively like a force and provokes reactions that 
are identical in virtue of the purely physical law which requires 
that the same general effects should follow the same profound 
causes. Hydrochloric acid always acts in the same way upon car­
bonate of lime whether in the form of marble or of chalk yet we 
do not say that the acid perceives in the various species the char­
acteristic features of the genus. Now there is no essential differ­
ence between the process by which this acid picks out from the 
salt its base and the act of the plant which invariably extracts from 
the most diverse soils those elements that serve to nourish it. Make 
one more step; imagine a rudimentary consciousness such as that 
of an amoeba in a drop of water: it will be sensible of the resem­
blance, and not of the difference, in the various organic substances 
which it can assimilate. In short, we can follow from the mineral 
to the plant, from the plant to the simplest conscious beings, from 
the animal to man, the progress of the operation by which things 
and beings seize from their surroundings that which attracts them, 
that which interests them practically, without needing any effort 
of abstraction, simply because the rest of their surroundings takes 
159 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
no hold upon them: this similarity of reaction following actions 
superficially different is the germ which the human conscious­
ness develops into general ideas. 
Consider, indeed, the purpose and function of our nervous sys­
tem as far as we can infer them from its structure. We see a great 
variety of mechanisms of perception, all bound, through the inter­
mediary of the centers, to the same motor apparatus. Sensation is 
unstable; it can take the most varied shades; the motor mecha­
nism, on the contrary, once set going, will invariably work in the 
same way. We may then suppose perceptions as different as possi­
ble in their superficial details: if only they are continued by the 
same motor reactions, if the organism can extract from them the 
same useful effects, if they impress upon the body the same atti­
tude, something common will issue from them, and the general 
idea will have been felt and passively experienced, before being 
represented. Here then we escape at last from the circle in which 
we at first appeared to be confined. In order to generalize, we 
said, we have to abstract similarity, but in order to disengage simi­
larity usefully we must already know how to generalize. There 
really is no circle because the similarity, from which the mind 
starts when it first begins the work of abstraction, is not the simi­
larity at which the mind arrives when it consciously generalizes. 
That from which it starts is a similarity felt and lived, or, if you 
prefer the expression, a similarity which is automatically acted. 
That to which it returns is a similarity intelligently perceived, or 
thought. And it is precisely in the course of this progress that are 
built up, by the double effort of the understanding and of the 
memory, the perception of individuals and the conception of gen­
era - memory grafting distinctions upon resemblances which have 
been spontaneously abstracted, the understanding disengaging from 
the habit of resemblances the clear idea of generality. This idea of 
generality was, in the beginning, only our consciousness of a like-
160 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
ness of attitude in a diversity of situations; it was habit itself, mount­
ing from the sphere of movement to that of thought. But from 
genera so sketched out mechanically by habit we have passed by 
an effort of reflection upon this very process, to the general idea of 
genus; and when that idea has been once constituted, we have con­
structed (this time voluntarily) an unlimited number of general 
notions. It is not necessary here to follow the intellect into the 
detail of this construction. It is enough to say that the understand­
ing, imitating the effort of nature, has also set up motor appara­
tuses, artificial in this case, to make a limited number of them 
answer to an unlimited number of individual objects: the assem­
blage of these mechanisms is articulate speech. 
Yet these two divergent operations of the mind, the one by 
which it discerns individuals, the other by which it constructs 
genera, are far from demanding the same effort or progressing with 
the same rapidity. The first, requiring only the intervention of 
memory, takes place from the outset of our experience; the sec­
ond goes on indefinitely without ever reaching its goal. The first 
emerges in the formation of stable images, which in their turn are 
stored up in memory; the second comes out in representations 
that are unstable and evanescent. We must dwell on this last point, 
for we touch here an essential problem of mental life. 
The essence of the general idea, in fact, is to be unceasingly 
going backwards and forwards between the plane of action and 
that of pure memory. Let us refer once more to the diagram we 
traced above. At S is the present perception which I have of my 
body, that is to say, of a certain sensori-motor equilibrium. Over 
the surface of the base AB are spread, we may say, my recollec­
tions in their totality. Within the cone so determined, the general 
idea oscillates continually between the summit S and the base AB. 
In S, it would take the clearly defined form of a bodily attitude or 
of an uttered word; at AB, it would wear the aspect, no less 
161 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Fig. 5 
r----+-r----- p 
defined, of the thousand individual images into which its fragile 
unity would break up. And that is why a psychology which abides 
by the already done, which considers only that which is made and 
ignores that which is in the making, will never perceive in this 
movement anything more than the two extremities between which 
it oscillates; it makes the general idea coincide sometimes with 
the action which manifests it or the word which expresses it and 
at other times with the multitudinous images, unlimited in num­
ber, which are its equivalent in memory. But the truth is that the 
general idea escapes us as soon as we try to fix it at either of the 
two extremities. It consists in the double current which goes from 
the one to the other - always ready either to crystallize into uttered 
words or to evaporate into memories. 
This amounts to saying that between the sensori-motor mecha­
nisms figured by the point S and the totality of the memories dis­
posed in AB there is room, as we indicated in the preceding chapter, 
for a thousand repetitions of our psychical life, figured by as many 
sections A/B' ,A"B", etc., of the same cone. We tend to scatter 
ourselves over AB in the measure that we detach ourselves from 
our sensory and motor state to live in the life of dreams; we tend 
162 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
to concentrate ourselves in S in the measure that we attach our­
selves more firmly to the present reality, responding by motor reac­
tions to sensory stimulation. In point of fact, the normal self never 
stays in either ofthese extreme positions; it moves between them, 
adopts in turn the positions corresponding to the intermediate 
sections, or, in other words, gives to its representations just enough 
image and just enough idea for them to be able to lend useful aid 
to the present action. 
From this conception of the lower mental life, the laws of the 
association of ideas can be deduced. But, before we deal with this 
point, we must first show the insufficiency of the current theories 
of association. 
That every idea which arises in the mind has a relation of simi­
larity or of contiguity with the previous mental state, we do not 
dispute; but a statement of the kind neither throws light on the 
mechanism of association nor, indeed, does it really tell us any­
thing at all. For we should seek in vain for two ideas which have 
not some point of resemblance or which do not touch each other 
somewhere. To take similarity first: however profound are the dif­
ferences which separate two images, we shall always find, if we go 
back high enough, a common genus to which they belong, and, 
consequently, a resemblance which may serve as a connecting link 
between them. And, in regard to contiguity, a perception A, as 
we said before, will not evoke "by contiguity" a former image B, 
unless it recalls to us first an image A' , which is like it, because it 
is the recollection A', and not the perception A, which really 
touches B in memory. However distant, then, we suppose the terms 
A and B from each other, a relation of contiguity can always be 
found between them, provided that the intercalated term A' bears 
a sufficiently farfetched resemblance to A. This is as much as to 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
say that between any two ideas chosen at random there is always a 
resemblance, and always, even, contiguity, so that, when we dis­
cover a relation of contiguity or of resemblance between two suc­
cessive ideas, we have in no way explained why the one evokes 
the other. 
What we reallr need to discover is how a choice is effected 
among an infinite number of recollections which all resemble in 
some way the present perception, and why only one of them -
this rather than that - emerges into the light of consciousness. 
But this is just what associationism cannot tell us, because it has 
made ideas and images into independent entities floating, like the 
atoms ofEpicurus, in an inward space, drawing near to each other 
when chance brings them within the sphere of mutual attraction. 
And if we try to get to the bottom of the doctrine on this point, 
we find that its error is that it overly intellectualizes ideas: it attri­
butes to them a purely speculative role, believes that they exist 
for themselves and not for us, and overlooks the relation which 
they bear to the activity of the will. If memories move about indif­
ferently in a consciousness that is both lifeless and shapeless, there 
is no reason why the present perception should prefer and attract 
any one of them: we can only, in that case, note the conjunction, 
when once it has taken place, and speak of similarity or of conti­
guity - which is merely, at bottom, to express in vague terms that 
our mental states have affinities for one another. 
But even of this affinity, which takes the double form of conti­
guity and of similarity, associationism can furnish no explanation. 
The general tendency to associate remains as obscure for us, if we 
adhere to this doctrine, as the particular forms of association. Hav­
ing stiffened individual memory-images into ready-made things, 
given cut-and-dry in the course of our mental life, associationism 
is reduced to bringing in, between these objects, mysterious attrac­
tions, of which it is not even possible to say beforehand, as of physi-

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
cal attraction, by what effects they will manifest themselves. For 
why should an image which is, by hypothesis, self-sufficient, seek 
to accrue to itself others either similar or given in contiguity with 
it? The truth is that this independent image is a late and artificial 
product of the mind. In fact, we perceive the resemblance before 
we perceive the individuals which resemble each other; and, in 
an aggregate of contiguous parts, we perceive the whole before 
the parts. We go on from similarity to similar objects, embroider­
ing upon the similarity, as on their common stuff, or canvas, the 
variety of individual differences. And we go on also from the whole 
to the parts, by a process of decomposition the law of which will 
appear later, a process which consists in breaking up, for the greater 
convenience of practical life, the continuity of the real. Associa­
tion, then, is not the primary fact: dissociation is what we begin 
with, and the tendency of every memory to gather to itself others 
must be explained by the natural return of the mind to the undi­
vided unity of perception. 
But here we discover the radical vice of associationsim. Given 
a present perception which forms by turns, with different recol­
lections, several associations one after another, there are two ways, 
as we said, of conceiving the mechanism of this association. We 
may suppose that the perception remains identical with itself, a 
true psychical atom which gathers to itself others just as these 
happen to be passing by. This is the point of view of associationism. 
But there is also another - precisely the one which we have indi­
cated in our theory of recognition. We have supposed that our 
entire personality, with the totality of our recollections, is pre­
sent, undivided within our actual perception. Then, if this per­
ception evokes in turn different memories, it is not by a mechanical 
adjunction of more and more numerous elements which, while 
remaining unmoved, it attracts around it, but rather by an expan­
sion of the entire consciousness which, spreading out over a larger 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
area, discovers the fuller detail o f  its wealth. So a nebulous mass, 
seen through more and more powerful telescopes, resolves itself 
into an ever greater number of stars. In the first hypothesis (in 
favor of which there is little but its apparent simplicity and its 
analogy with a misunderstood physical atomism), each recollec­
tion is a fixed and independent being, of which we can neither say 
why it seeks to accrue to itself others, nor how it chooses, among 
a thousand memories which should have equal rights, those with 
which to associate itself in virtue of similarity or contiguity. We 
must suppose that ideas jostle each other at random, or that they 
exert among themselves mysterious forces, and, moreover, we have 
against us the witness of consciousness, which never shows us psy­
chical facts floating as independent entities. From the second point 
of view, we merely state a fact, viz. , that psychic facts are bound 
up with each other, and are always given together to immediate 
consciousness as an undivided whole which reflection alone cuts 
up into distinct fragments. What we have to explain, then, is no 
longer the cohesion of internal states, but the double movement 
of contraction and expansion by which consciousness narrows or 
enlarges the development of its content. But this movement, we 
shall see, is the result of the fundamental needs of life; and we 
shall also see why the "associations," which we appear to form in 
the course of this movement, correspond to all the possible degrees 
of so-called contiguity and resemblance. 
Let us, for a moment, suppose our psychical life reduced to 
sensori-motor functions alone. In other words, suppose ourselves 
placed in Figure 5 on page 162 at point S, which corresponds to 
the greatest possible simplification of our mental life. In this state 
every perception spontaneously prolongs itself into appropriate 
reactions, for analogous former perceptions have set up more or 
less complex motor apparatus, which only await a recurrence of 
the same appeal in order to enter into play. Now there is, in this 
166 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
mechanism, an association of simplicity, since the present percep­
tion acts in virtue of its likeness to past perceptions; there is also 
an association of contiguity, since the movements which followed 
those former perceptions reproduce themselves and may even bring 
in their train a vast number of actions coordinate with the first. 
Here then we seize association of similarity and association of con­
tiguity at their very source, and at a point where they are almost 
confounded in one - not indeed thought, but acted and lived. 
They are not contingent forms of our psychical life; they repre­
sent the two complementary aspects of one and the same funda­
mental tendency, the tendency of every organism to extract from 
a given situation that in it which is useful, and to store up the 
eventual reaction in the form of a motor habit, that it may serve 
other situations of the same kind. 
Let us jump now to the other extremity of our mental life, 
and, following our line of thought, go from the psychical exis­
tence which is merely "acted," to that which is exclusively 
"dreamed." In other words, let us place ourselves on the base AB 
of memory in Figure 5 on page 162, where all the events of our 
past life are set out in their smallest details. A consciousness which, 
detached from action, should thus keep in view the totality of its 
past, would have no reason to dwell upon one part of this past 
rather than upon another. In one sense, all its recollections would 
differ from its present perception, for, if we take them in the mul­
tiplicity of their detail, no two memories are ever precisely the 
same thing. But, in another sense, any memory may be set along­
side the present situation: it would be sufficient to neglect in this 
perception and in this memory just enough detail for similarity 
alone to appear. Moreover, the moment that the recollection is 
linked with the perception, a multitude of events contiguous to 
the memory are thereby fastened to the perception - an indefi­
nite multitude, which is only limited at the point at which we 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
choose to stop it. The necessities of life are no longer there to 
regulate the effect of similarity, and, consequently, of contiguity; 
as, after all, everything resembles everything else, it follows that 
anything can be associated with anything. In the first case, the 
present perception continued itself in determinate movements; 
now it melts into an infinity of memories, all equally possible. 
At AB, association would provoke an arbitrary choice, and, in S, 
an inevitable deed. 
But these are only two extreme limits, at which the psycholo­
gist must place himself alternately for convenience of study, and 
which are really never reached in practice. There is not, in man at 
least, a purely sensori-motor state, any more than there is in him an 
imaginative life without some slight activity beneath it. Our psy­
chical life, as we have said, oscillates normally between these two 
extremes. On the one hand, the sensori-motor state S delineates 
the present direction of memory, being nothing else, in fact, than 
its actual and acting extremity; and, on the other hand, this memory 
itself, with the totality of our past, is continually pressing for­
ward, so as to insert the largest possible part of itself into the pres­
ent action. From this double effort result, at every moment, an 
infinite number of possible states of memory, states figured by the 
sections A'B', A"B" of our diagram. These are, as we have said, 
so many repetitions of the whole of our past life. But each section 
is larger or smaller according to its nearness to the base or to the 
summit; moreover, each of these complete representations ofthe 
past brings to the light of consciousness only that which can fit 
into the sensori-motor state and, consequently, that which resem­
bles the present perception from the point of view of the action 
to be accomplished. In other words, memory, laden with the whole 
of the past, responds to the appeal of the present state by two 
simultaneous movements, one of translation, by which it moves 
in its entirety to meet experience, thus contracting more or less, 
168 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
though without dividing, with a view to action; and the other of 
rotation upon itself, by which it turns toward the situation of the 
moment, presenting to it that side of itself which may prove to be 
the most useful. To these varying degrees of contraction corre­
spond the various forms of association by similarity. 
Everything happens, then, as though our recollections were 
repeated an infinite number of times in these many possible reduc­
tions of our past life. They take a more common form when memory 
shrinks most, more personal when it widens out, and they thus 
enter into an unlimited number of different "systematizations." A 
word from a foreign language, uttered in my hearing, may make 
me think of that language in general or of a voice which once pro­
nounced it in a certain way. These two associations by similarity 
are not due to the accidental arrival of two different representa­
tions, which chance brought by turns within the attracting influ­
ence of the actual perception. They answer to two different mental 
dispositions, to two distinct degrees of tension of the memory; in 
the latter case they are nearer to the pure image, in the former, 
they are more disposed toward immediate response, that is to 
say, to action. To classify these systems, to discover the law which 
binds them respectively to the different "tones" of our mental 
life, to show how each of these tones is itself determined by the 
needs of the moment and also by the varying degree of our per­
sonal effort, would be a difficult task: the whole of this psychology 
is yet unmapped, and for the moment we do not even wish to 
attempt it. But every one is clearly aware of the existence of these 
laws, and of stable relations of this kind. We know, for instance, 
when we read a psychological novel, that certain associations of 
ideas there depicted for us are true, that they may have been lived; 
others offend us, or fail to give us an impression of reality, because 
we feel in them the effect of a connection, mechanically and arti­
ficially brought about, between different mental levels, as though 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
the author had not taken care to maintain himself on that plane of 
the mental life which he had chosen. Memory has then its succes­
sive and distinct degrees of tension or of vitality: they are cer­
tainly not easy to define, but the painter of mental scenery may 
not with impunity confound them. Pathology, moreover, here con­
firms - by means, it is true, of coarser examples - a truth of which 
we are all instinctively aware. In the "systematized amnesias" of 
hysterical patients, for example, the recollections which appear 
to be abolished are really present, but they are probably all bound 
up with a certain determined tone ofintellectual vitality in which 
the subject can no longer place himself. 
Just as there are these different planes, infinite in number, for 
association by similarity, so there are with association by contigu­
ity. In the extreme plane, which represents the base of memory, 
there is no recollection which is not linked by contiguity with 
the totality of the events which precede and also with those which 
follow it. Yet at the point in space where our action is concen­
trated, contiguity brings back, in the form of movement, only the 
reaction which immediately followed a former similar perception. 
As a matter of fact, every association by contiguity implies a posi­
tion of the mind intermediate between the two extreme limits. 
If, here again, we imagine a number of possible repetitions of the 
totality of our memories, each of these copies of our past life must 
be supposed to be cut up, in its own way, into definite parts, and 
the cutting up is not the same when we pass from one copy to 
another, each of them being in fact characterized by the particular 
kind of dominant memories on which the other memories lean as 
on supporting points. The nearer we come to action, for instance, 
the more contiguity tends to approximate to similarity and to be 
thus distinguished from a mere relation of chronological succes­
sion: thus we cannot say of the words of a foreign language, when 
they call each other up in memory, whether they are associated by 
1]0 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
similarity or by contiguity. On the contrary, the more we detach 
ourselves from action, real or possible, the more association by 
contiguity tends merely to reproduce the consecutive images of 
our past life. I t is impossible to enter here into a profound study 
of these different systems. But it is sufficient to point out that 
these systems are not formed of recollections laid side by side like 
so many atoms. There are always some dominant memories, shin­
ing points round which the others form a vague nebulosity. These 
shining points are multiplied in the degree to which our memory 
expands. The process of localizing a recollection in the past, for 
instance, cannot at all consist, as has been said, in plunging into 
the mass of our memories, as into a bag, to draw out memories, 
closer and closer to each other, between which the memory to be 
localized may find its place. By what happy chance could we just 
hit upon on a growing number of intercalary recollections? The 
work oflocalization consists, in reality, in a growing effort of expan­
sion, by which the memory, always present in its entirety to itself, 
spreads out its recollections over an ever wider surface and so ends 
by distinguishing, in what was till then a confused mass, the remem­
brance which could not find its proper place. Here again, more­
over, the pathology of memory is instructive. I n  retrogressive 
amnesia, the recollections which disappear from consciousness 
are probably preserved in remote planes of memory, and the patient 
can find them there by an exceptional effort like that which is 
effected in the hypnotic state. But, on the lower planes, these 
memories await, so to speak, the dominant image to which they 
may be fastened. A sharp shock, a violent emotion, forms the deci­
sive event to which they cling; if this event, by reason of its sud­
den character, is cut offfrom the rest of our history, they follow it 
into oblivion. We can understand, then, that the oblivion which 
follows a physical or moral shock should include the events which 
immediately preceded it - a phenomenon which is very difficult 
171 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
to explain in all other conceptions of memory. Let us remark in 
passing that if we refuse to attribute some such waiting to recent, 
and even to relatively distant, recollections, the normal work of 
memory becomes unintelligible. For every event of which the rec­
ollection is now imprinted on the memory, however simple we 
suppose it to be, has occupied a certain time. The perceptions, 
which filled the first period of this interval, and now form with 
the later perceptions an undivided memory, were then really "loose" 
as long as the decisive part of the event had not occurred and drawn 
them along. Between the disappearance of a memory with its var­
ious preliminary details, and the abolition, in retrogressive amne­
sia, of a greater or less number of recollections previous to a given 
event, there is, then, merely a difference of degree, not of kind. 
From these various considerations on the lower mental life results 
a certain view of intellectual equilibrium. This equilibrium will 
be upset only by a perturbation of the elements which serve as its 
matter. We cannot here go into questions of mental pathology; 
yet neither can we avoid them entirely, since we are endeavoring 
to discover the exact relation between body and mind. 
We have supposed that the mind travels unceasingly over the 
interval comprised between its two extreme limits, the plane of 
action and the plane of dream. Let us suppose that we have to 
make a decision. Collecting, organizing the totality of its experi­
ence in what we call its character, the mind causes it to converge 
upon actions in which we shall afterwards find, together with the 
past which is their matter, the unforeseen form which is stamped 
upon them by personality; but the action is not able to become 
real unless it succeeds in encasing itself in the actual situation, 
that is to say, in that particular assemblage of circumstances which 
is due to the particular position of the body in time and space. Let 
17 2 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
us suppose that we have to do a piece of intellectual work, to 
form a conception, to extract a more or less general idea from the 
multiplicity of our recollections. A wide margin is left to fancy, 
on the one hand, to logical discernment on the other hand; but, if 
the idea is to live, it must touch present reality on some side; that 
is to say, it must be able, from step to step, and by progressive 
diminutions or contractions of itself, to be more or less acted by 
the body at the same time as it is thought by the mind. Our body, 
with the sensations which it receives on the one hand and the 
movements which it is capable of executing on the other hand, is 
then, that which fixes our mind, and gives it ballast and poise. 
The activity of the mind goes far beyond the mass of accumulated 
memories, as this mass of memories itself is infinitely more than 
the sensations and movements of the present hour; but these sen­
sations and these movements condition what we may term our 
attention to life, and that is why everything depends on their cohe­
sion in the normal work of the mind, as in a pyramid which should 
stand upon its apex. 
If, moreover, we cast a glance at the minute structure of the 
nervous system as recent discoveries have revealed it to us, we see 
everywhere conducting lines, nowhere any centers. Threads placed 
end to end, of which the extremities probably touch when the 
current passes: this is all that is seen. And perhaps this is all there 
is, if it is true that the body is only a place of meeting and transfer, 
where stimulations received result in movements accomplished, 
as we have supposed it to be throughout this work. But these 
threads, which receive disturbances or stimulations from the exter­
nal world and return them to it in the form of appropriate reac­
tions, these threads so beautifully stretched from the periphery 
to the periphery, are just what ensure by the solidity of these con­
nections and the precision of their interweaving the sensori-motor 
equilibrium of the body, that is to say, its adaptation to the pre-
17 3 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
sent circumstances. Relax this tension or destroy this equilibrium: 
everything happens as if attention detached itself from life. Dreams 
and insanity appear to be little else than this. 
We were speaking just now of the recent hypothesis which 
attributes sleep to an interruption ofthe solidarity among the neu­
rons. Even if we do not accept this hypothesis (which is, however, 
confirmed by some curious experiments), we must suppose, in 
deep sleep, at least a functional break in the relation established 
in the nervous system between stimulation and motor reaction. 
So dreams would always be the state of a mind of which the atten­
tion was not fixed by the sensori-motor equilibrium of the body. 
And it appears more and more probable that this relaxing of ten­
sion in the nervous system is due to the poisoning of its elements 
by products of their normal activity accumulated in the waking 
state. Now, in every way, dreams imitate insanity. Not only are all 
the psychological symptoms of madness found in dreams - to such 
a degree that the comparison of the two states has become a com­
monplace - but insanity appears also to have its origin in an exhaus­
tion of the brain, which is caused, like normal fatigue, by the 
accumulation of certain specific poisons in the elements of the 
nervous system.4 We know that insanity is often a sequel to infec­
tious diseases, and that, moreover, it is possible to reproduce experi­
mentally, by toxic drugs, all the phenomena of madness. 5 Is it not 
likely, therefore, that the loss of mental equilibrium in the insane 
is simply the result of a disturbance of the sensori-motor relations 
established in the organism? This disturbance may be enough to 
create a sort of psychic vertigo and so cause memory and atten­
tion to lose contact with reality. If we read the descriptions given 
by some mad patients of the beginning of their malady, we find 
that they often feel a sensation of strangeness, or, as they say, of 
"unreality," as if the things they perceived had for them lost solid­
ity and relief.6 If our analyses are correct, the concrete feeling 
174 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
that we have of present reality consists, i n  fact, of our conscious­
ness of the actual movements whereby our organism is naturally 
responding to stimulation; so that where the connecting links 
between sensations and movements are slackened or tangled, the 
sense of the real grows weaker, or disappears.7 
There are here, moreover, many distinctions to be made, not 
only between the various forms ofinsanity, but also between prop­
erly so-called insanity and that division of the personality which 
recent psychology has so ingeniously compared with it.8 In these 
diseases of personality, it seems that groups of recollections detach 
themselves from the central memory and forego their solidarity 
with the others. But, then, it seldom occurs that the patient does 
not also display accompanying scissions of sensibility and of motor 
activity.9 We cannot help seeing in these latter phenomena the 
real material substratum of the former. If it be true that our intel­
lectual life rests, as a whole, upon its apex, that is to say, upon the 
sensori-motor functions by which it inserts itself into present real­
ity, intellectual equilibrium will be differently affected as these 
functions are damaged in one manner or in another. Now, besides 
the lesions which affect the general vitality of the sensori-motor 
functions, weakening or destroying what we have called the sense 
of reality, there are others which reveal themselves in a mechani­
cal, not a dynamical, diminution of these functions, as if certain 
sensori-motor connections merely parted company with the rest. 
If we are right in our hypothesis, memory is very differently affected 
in the two cases. In the first, no recollection is taken away, but all 
recollections are less ballasted, less solidly directed toward the 
real; from this a true disturbance of the mental equilibrium arises. 
In the second, the equilibrium is not destroyed, but it loses some­
thing of its complexity. Recollections retain their normal aspect, 
but forego a part of their solidarity, because their sensori-motor 
base, instead of being, so to speak, chemically changed, is mechani-
17 5  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
cally diminished. But neither i n  the one case nor i n  the other are 
memories directly attacked or damaged. 
The idea that the body preserves memories in the mechanical 
form of cerebral deposits, that the loss or decrease of memory 
consists in their more or less complete destruction, whereas the 
heightening of memory and hallucination consists in an excess of 
their activity, is not, then, borne out either by reasoning or by 
facts. The truth is that there is one case, and one only, in which 
observation would seem at first to suggest this view: we mean 
aphasia, or, more generally, the disturbance of auditory or visual 
recognition. This is the only case in which the constant seat of 
the disorder is in a determined convolution of the brain; yet it is 
also precisely the case in which we do not find a mechanical, imme­
diate and final destruction of certain definite recollections, but 
rather the gradual and functional weakening of the whole of the 
affected memory. And we have explained how the cerebral lesion 
may effect this weakening, without the necessity of supposing any 
sort of provision of memories stored in the brain. What the injury 
really attacks are the sensory and motor regions corresponding to 
this class of perception, and especially those adjuncts through which 
they may be set in motion from within, so that memory, finding 
nothing to catch hold of, ends by becoming practically power­
less: now, in psychology, powerlessness means unconsciousness. 
In all other cases, the lesion observed or supposed, never defi­
nitely localized, acts by the disturbance which it causes to the 
whole of the sensori-motor connections, either by damaging or 
by breaking up this mass: whence results a breach or a simplifying 
of the intellectual equilibrium, and, by ricochet, the disorder or 
the disjunction of memory. The doctrine which makes of memory 
an immediate function of the brain - a doctrine which raises insol­
uble theoretical difficulties - a doctrine the complexity of which 
defies all imagination, and the results of which are incompatible 
176 

O F  T H E  S U R V I V A L  O F  I M A G E S  
with the data of introspection - cannot even count upon the sup­
port of cerebral pathology. All the facts and all the analogies are in 
favor of a theory which regards the brain as only an intermediary 
between sensation and movement, which sees in this aggregate of 
sensations and movements the pointed end of mental life - a point 
ever pressed forward into the tissue of events, and, attributing thus 
to the body the sole function of directing memory toward the 
real and of binding it to the present, considers memory itself as 
absolutely independent of matter. In this sense, the brain con­
tributes to the recall of the useful recollection, but still more to 
the provisional banishment of all the others. We cannot see how 
memory could settle within matter; but we do clearly understand 
how - according to the profound saying of a contemporary phi­
losopher - materiality begets oblivion. 1 0  
177 


C H A P T E R  I V  
T h e  De l i m i t i n g  a n d  F i x i n g of I ma g e s. 
Pe rc e p t i o n  a n d  Ma t t e r. 
S o u l  a n d  B o d y . 
One general conclusion follows from the first three chapters of 
this book: it is that the body, always turned toward action, has 
for its essential function to limit, with a view to action, the life of 
the spirit. In regard to representations it is an instrument of choice, 
and of choice alone. It can neither beget nor cause an intellectual 
state. Consider perception, to begin with. The body, by the place 
which at each moment it occupies in the universe, indicates the 
parts and the aspects of matter on which we can lay hold: our 
perception, which exactly measures our virtual action on things, 
thus limits itself to the objects which actually influence our organs 
and prepare our movements. Now let us turn to memory. The func­
tion of the body is not to store up recollections, but simply to 
choose, in order to bring back to distinct consciousness, by the 
real efficacy thus conferred on it, the useful memory, that which 
may complete and illuminate the present situation with a view to 
ultimate action. It is true that this second choice is much less 
strictly determined than the first, because our past experience is 
an individual and no longer a common experience, because we 
have always many different recollections equally capable of squar­
ing with the same actual situation, and because nature cannot here, 
179 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
as i n  the case of perception, have one inflexible rule for delimit­
ing our representations. A certain margin is, therefore, necessarily 
left in this case to fancy; though animals scarcely profit by it, bound 
as they are to material needs, it would seem that the human mind 
ceaselessly presses with the totality of its memory against the door 
which the body may half open to it: hence the play of fancy and 
the work of imagination - so many liberties which the mind takes 
with nature. It is nonetheless true that the orientation of our con­
sciousness toward action appears to be the fundamental law of 
our psychical life. 
Strictly speaking, we might stop here, for this work was under­
taken to define the function of the body in the life of the spirit. 
But, on the one hand, we have raised by the way a metaphysical 
problem which we cannot bring ourselves to leave in suspense; 
on the other hand, our researches, although mainly psychologi­
cal, have on several occasions given us glimpses, if not of the means 
of solving the problem, at any rate of the side on which it should 
be approached. 
This problem is no less than that of the union of soul and body. 
It comes before us clearly and with urgency because we make a 
profound distinction between matter and spirit. And we cannot 
regard it as insoluble, since we define spirit and matter by posi­
tive characters, and not by negations. I t is in very truth within 
matter that pure perception places us, and it is really into spirit 
that we penetrate by means of memory. But, on the other hand, 
while introspection reveals to us the distinction between matter 
and spirit, it also bears witness to their union. Either, then, our 
analyses are vitiated ab origine, or they must help us to issue from 
the difficulties that they raise. 
The obscurity of this problem, in all doctrines, is due to the 
double antithesis which our understanding establishes between 
the extended and the unextended on the one side and between 
180 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
quality and quantity on the other side. I t  is certain that mind, first 
of all, stands over against matter as a pure unity in face of an essen­
tially divisible multiplicity; moreover, our perceptions are com­
posed of heterogeneous qualities, whereas the perceived universe 
seems to resolve itself into homogeneous and calculable changes. 
There would thus be inextension and quality, on the one hand, 
extensity and quantity, on the other hand. We have repudiated 
materialism, which derives the first term from the second; but 
neither do we accept idealism, which holds that the second is 
constructed by the first. We maintain, as against materialism, that 
perception overflows infinitely the cerebral state; but we have 
endeavored to establish, as against idealism, that matter goes in 
every direction beyond our representation of it, a representation 
which the mind has gathered out of it, so to speak, by an intelli­
gent choice. Of these two opposite doctrines, the one attributes 
to the body and the other to the intellect a true power of cre­
ation, the first insisting that our brain begets representation and 
the second that our understanding designs the plan of nature. And 
against these two doctrines we invoke the same testimony, that of 
consciousness, which shows us our body as one image among others 
and our understanding as a certain faculty of dissociating, of dis­
tinguishing, of opposing logically, but not of creating or of con­
structing. Thus, willing captives of psychological analysis and, 
consequently, of common sense, it would seem that, after having 
exacerbated the conflicts raised by ordinary dualism, we have closed 
all the avenues of escape which metaphysic might set open to us. 
But, just because we have pushed dualism to an extreme, our 
analysis has perhaps dissociated its contradictory elements. The 
theory of pure perception, on the one hand, of pure memory, on the 
other hand, may thus prepare the way for a reconciliation between 
the unextended and the extended, between quality and quantity. 
To take pure perception first. When we make the cerebral state 
181 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
the beginning of an action, and in no sense the condition of a per­
ception, we place the perceived images of things outside the image 
of our body, and thus replace perception within the things them­
selves. But then, our perception being a part of things, things par­
ticipate in the nature of our perception. Material extensity is not, 
cannot any longer be, that composite extensity which is consid­
ered in geometry; it indeed resembles rather the undivided exten­
sion of our own representation. That is to say, the analysis of pure 
perception allows us to foreshadow in the idea of extension the pos­
sible approach to each other of the extended and the unextended. 
But our conception of pure memory should lead us, by a paral­
lel road, to attenuate the second opposition, that of quality and 
quantity. For we have radically separated pure recollection from 
the cerebral state which continues it and renders it efficacious. 
Memory is, then, in no degree an emanation of matter; on the 
contrary, matter, as grasped in concrete perception which always 
occupies a certain duration, is in great part the work of memory. 
Now where is, precisely, the difference between the heterogeneous 
qualities which succeed each other in our concrete perception 
and the homogeneous changes which science puts at the back of 
these perceptions in space? The first are discontinuous and can­
not be deduced one from another; the second, on the contrary, 
lend themselves to calculation. But, in order that they may lend 
themselves to calculation, there is no need to make them into 
pure quantities: we might as well say that they are nothing at all. 
I t is enough that their heterogeneity should be, so to speak, suffi­
ciently diluted to become, from our point of view, practically neg­
ligible. Now, if every concrete perception, however short we 
suppose it, is already a synthesis, made by memory, of an infinity 
of "pure perceptions" which succeed each other, must we not 
think that the heterogeneity of sensible qualities is due to their 
being contracted in our memory and the relative homogeneity of 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
objective changes to the slackness of their natural tension? And 
might not the interval between quantity and quality be lessened 
by considerations of tension, as the distance between the extended 
and the unextended is lessened by considerations of extension? 
Before entering on this question, let us formulate the general 
principle of the method we would apply. We have already made 
use of it in an earlier work and even, by implication, in the 
present essay. 
That which is commonly called a fact is not reality as it appears 
to immediate intuition, but an adaptation of the real to the inter­
ests of practice and to the exigencies of social life. Pure intuition, 
external or internal, is that of an undivided continuity. We break 
up this continuity into elements laid side by side, which corre­
spond in the one case to distinct words, in the other to indepen­
dent objects. But, just because we have thus broken the unity of 
our original intuition, we feel ourselves obliged to establish between 
the severed terms a bond which can only then be external and 
superadded. For the living unity, which was one with internal con­
tinuity, we substitute the factitious unity of an empty diagram as 
lifeless as the parts which it holds together. Empiricism and dog­
matism are, at bottom, agreed in starting from phenomena so recon­
structed; they differ only in that dogmatism attaches itself more 
particularly to the form and empiricism to the matter. Empiri­
cism, feeling indeed, but feeling vaguely, the artificial character 
of the relations which unite the terms together, holds to the terms 
and neglects the relations. Its error is not that it sets too high a 
value on experience, but that it substitutes for true experience, 
that experience which arises from the immediate contact of the 
mind with its object, an experience which is disarticulated and, 
therefore, most probably, disfigured - at any rate arranged for the 
greater facility of action and oflanguage. Just because this parcel­
ing of the real has been effected in view of the exigencies of prac-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
tical life, i t  has not followed the internal lines o f  the structure of 
things: for that very reason empiricism cannot satisfy the mind in 
regard to any of the great problems and, indeed, whenever it 
becomes fully conscious of its own principle, it refrains from put­
ting them. Dogmatism discovers and disengages the difficulties 
to which empiricism is blind; however, it really seeks the solution 
along the very road that empiricism has marked out. It accepts, at 
the hands of empiricism, phenomena that are separate and dis­
continuous and simply endeavors to effect a synthesis of them 
which, not having been given by intuition, cannot but be arbi­
trary. In other words, if metaphysic is only a construction, there 
are several systems of metaphysic equally plausible, which conse­
quently refute each other, and the last word must remain with a 
critical philosophy, which holds all knowledge to be relative and 
the ultimate nature of things to be inaccessible to the mind. Such 
is, in truth, the ordinary course of philosophic thought: we start 
from what we take to be experience, we attempt various possible 
arrangements of the fragments which apparently compose it, and 
when at last we feel bound to acknowledge the fragility of every 
edifice that we have built, we end by giving up all effort to build. 
But there is a last enterprise that might be undertaken. It would 
be to seek experience at its source, or rather above that decisive 
turn where, taking a bias in the direction of our utility, it becomes 
properly human experience. The impotence of speculative reason, 
as Kant has demonstrated it, is perhaps at bottom only the impo­
tence of an intellect enslaved to certain necessities of bodily life 
and concerned with a matter which man has had to disorganize 
for the satisfaction of his wants. Our knowledge of things would 
thus no longer be relative to the fundamental structure of our mind, 
but only to its superficial and acquired habits, to the contingent 
form which it derives from our bodily functions and from our lower 
needs. The relativity of knowledge may not, then, be definitive. By 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
unmaking that which these needs have made, we may restore to 
intuition its original purity and so recover contact with the real. 
This method presents, in its application, difficulties which are 
considerable and ever recurrent, because it demands for the solu­
tion of each new problem an entirely new effort. To give up cer­
tain habits of thinking, and even of perceiving, is far from easy: 
yet this is but the negative part of the work to be done; and when 
it is done, when we have placed ourselves at what we have called 
the turn of experience, when we have profited by the faint light 
which, illuminating the passage from the immediate to the useful, 
marks the dawn of our human experience, there still remains to 
be reconstituted, with the infinitely small elements which we thus 
perceive of the real curve, the curve itself stretching out into the 
darkness behind them. In this sense the task of the philosopher, as 
we understand it, closely resembles that of the mathematician who 
determines a function by starting from the differential. The final 
effort of philosophical research is a true work of integration. 
We have already attempted to apply this method to the prob­
lem of consciousness; 1 and it appeared to us that the utilitarian 
work of the mind, in what concerns the perception of our inner 
life, consisted in a sort of refracting of pure duration into space, 
a refracting which permits us to separate our psychical states, to 
reduce them to a more and more impersonal form, and to impose 
names upon them - in short, to make them enter the current of 
social life. Empiricism and dogmatism assume interior states in this 
discontinuous form; the first confining itself to the states them­
selves, so that it can see in the self only a succession of juxtaposed 
facts; the other grasping the necessity of a bond, but unable to find 
this bond anywhere except in a form or in a force - an exterior form 
into which the aggregate is inserted, an indetermined and so to 
speak physical force which assures the cohesion of the elements. 
Hence the two opposing points of view as to the question of free-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
dom: for determinism, the act i s  the resultant of a mechanical 
composition of the elements; for the adversaries of that doctrine, 
if they adhered strictly to their principle, the free decision would 
be an arbitrary fiat, a true creation ex nihilo. It seemed to us that a 
third course lay open. This is to replace ourselves in pure dura­
tion, of which the flow is continuous and in which we pass insen­
sibly from one state to another: a continuity which is really lived, 
but artificially decomposed for the greater convenience of cus­
tomary knowledge. Then, it seemed to us, we saw the action issue 
from its antecedents by an evolution sui generis, in such a way 
that we find in this action the antecedents which explain it, while 
it also adds to these something entirely new, being an advance 
upon them such as the fruit is upon the flower. Freedom is not 
hereby, as has been asserted, reduced to sensible spontaneity. At 
most, this would be the case in the animal, of which the psychical 
life is mainly affective. But, in man, the thinking being, the free 
act may be termed a synthesis of feelings and ideas and the evolu­
tion which leads to it a reasonable evolution. The artifice of this 
method simply consists, in short, in distinguishing the point of 
view of customary or useful knowledge from that of true knowl­
edge. The duration wherein we see ourselves acting, and in which it is 
useful that we should see ourselves, is a duration whose elements 
are dissociated and juxtaposed. The duration wherein we act is a 
duration wherein our states melt into each other. It is within this 
that we should try to replace ourselves by thought, in the excep­
tional and unique case when we speculate on the intimate nature 
of action, that is to say, when we are discussing human freedom. 
Is a method of this kind applicable to the problem of matter? 
The question is, whether, in this "diversity of phenomena" of which 
Kant spoke, that part which shows a vague tendency toward exten­
sion could be seized by us on the nearer side of the homogeneous 
space to which it is applied and through which we subdivide it -
186 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
just as that part which goes to make up our own inner life can be 
detached from time, empty and indefinite, and brought back to 
pure duration. Certainly, it would be a chimerical enterprise to 
try to free ourselves from the fundamental conditions of external 
perception. But the question is whether certain conditions, which 
we usually regard as fundamental, do not rather concern the use 
to be made of things, the practical advantage to be drawn from 
them, far more than the pure knowledge which we can have of 
them. More particularly, in regard to concrete extension, continu­
ous, diversified and at the same time organized, we do not see 
why it should be bound up with the amorphous and inert space 
which subtends it - a space which we divide indefinitely, out 
of which we carve figures arbitrarily, and in which movement itself, 
as we have said elsewhere, can only appear as a multiplicity of 
instantaneous positions, since nothing there can ensure the coher­
ence of past with present. It might, then, be possible, in a certain 
measure, to transcend space without stepping out from exten­
sity; and here we should really have a return to the immediate, 
since we do indeed perceive extensity, whereas space is merely 
conceived -being a kind of mental diagram. It may be urged against 
this method that it arbitrarily attributes a privileged value to imme­
diate knowledge? But what reasons should we have for doubting 
any knowledge - would the idea of doubting it ever occur to us ­
but for the difficulties and the contradictions which reflection 
discovers, but for the problems which philosophy poses? And would 
not immediate knowledge find in itself its justification and proofif 
we could show that these difficulties, contradictions and problems 
are mainly the result of the symbolic diagrams which cover it up, 
diagrams which have for us become reality itself, and beyond which 
only an intense and unusual effort can succeed in penetrating? 
Let us choose immediately, among the results to which the 
application of this method may lead, those which concern our 
187 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
present enquiry. We must confine ourselves to mere suggestions; 
there can be no question here of constructing a theory of matter. 
l. Every movement, inasmuch as it is a passage from rest to rest, is 
absolutely indivisible. 
This is not an hypothesis, but a fact, generally masked by 
an hypothesis. 
Here, for example, is my hand, placed at the point A. I carry it 
to the point B, passing at one stroke through the interval between 
them. There are two things in this movement: an image, which I 
see, and an act, of which my muscular sense makes my conscious­
ness aware. My consciousness gives me the inward feeling of a 
single fact, for in A was rest, in B there is again rest, and between 
A and B is placed an indivisible or at least an undivided act, the 
passage from rest to rest, which is movement itself. But my sight 
perceives the movement in the form of a line AB, which is trav­
ersed, and this line, like all space, may be indefinitely divided. It 
seems then, at first sight, that I may at will take this movement to 
be multiple or indivisible, according as I consider it in space or 
in time, as an image which takes shape outside of me or as an act 
which I am myself accomplishing. 
Yet, when I put aside all preconceived ideas, I soon perceive 
that I have no such choice, that even my sight takes in the move­
ment from A to B as an indivisible whole, and that if it divides 
anything, it is the line supposed to have been traversed, and not 
the movement traversing it. It is indeed true that my hand does 
not go from A to B without passing through the intermediate posi­
tions, and that these intermediate points resemble stages, as numer­
ous as you please, along the route; but there is, between the divisions 
so marked out and stages properly so-called, this capital differ­
ence, that at a stage we halt, whereas at these points the moving 
188 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
body passes. Now a passage is movement and a halt is an immobil­
ity. The halt interrupts the movement; the passage is one with the 
movement itself. When I see the moving body pass any point, I 
conceive, no doubt, that it might stop there; even when it does 
not stop there, I incline to consider its passage as an arrest, though 
infinitely short, because I must have at least the time to think of 
it; yet it is only my imagination which stops there, and what the 
moving body has to do is, on the contrary, to move. As every point 
of space necessarily appears to me fixed, I find it extremely diffi­
cult not to attribute to the moving body itself the immobility of 
the point with which, for a moment, I make it coincide; it seems 
to me, then, when I reconstitute the total movement, that the 
moving body has stayed an infinitely short time at every point of 
its trajectory. But we must not confound the data of the senses, 
which perceive the movement, with the artifice of the mind, 
which recomposes it. The senses, left to themselves, present to 
us the real movement, between two real halts, as a solid and undi­
vided whole. The division is the work of our imagination, of which 
indeed the office is to fix the moving images of our ordinary expe­
rience, like the instantaneous flash which illuminates a stormy 
landscape by night. 
We discover here, at its outset, the illusion which accompanies 
and masks the perception of real movement. Movement visibly 
consists in passing from one point to another and consequently, 
in traversing space. Now the space which is traversed is infinitely 
divisible; and as the movement is, so to speak, applied to the 
line along which it passes, it appears to be one with this line and, 
like it, divisible. Has not the movement itself drawn the line? 
Has it not traversed in turn the successive and juxtaposed points 
of that line? Yes, no doubt, but these points have no reality 
except in a line drawn, that is to say, motionless. And by the very 
fact that you represent the movement to yourself successively in 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
these different points, you necessarily arrest i t  in each of them; 
your successive positions are, at bottom, only so many imaginary 
halts. You substitute the path for the journey, and because the 
journey is sub tended by the path, you think that the two coin­
cide. But how should a progress coincide with a thing, a movement 
with an immobility? 
What facilitates this illusion is that we distinguish moments 
in the course of duration, like halts in the passage of the moving 
body. Even if we grant that the movement from one point to another 
forms an undivided whole, this movement, nevertheless, takes a 
certain time, so if we carve out of this duration an indivisible instant, 
it seems that the moving body must occupy, at that precise moment, 
a certain position, which thus stands out from the whole. The 
indivisibility of motion implies, then, the impossibility of real 
instants; indeed, a very brief analysis of the idea of duration will 
show us both why we attribute instants to duration and why it 
cannot have any. Suppose a simple movement, like that of my hand 
when it goes from A to B. This passage is given to my conscious­
ness as an undivided whole. No doubt it endures; but this dura­
tion, which in fact coincides with the aspect which the movement 
has inwardly for my consciousness, is, like it, whole and undi­
vided. Now while it presents itself, qua movement, as a simple 
movement, as a simple fact, it describes in space a trajectory which 
I may consider, for purposes of simplification, as a geometrical 
line, and the extremities of this line, considered as abstract lim­
its, are no longer lines, but indivisible points. Now, if the line, 
which the moving body has described, measures for me the dura­
tion of its movement, must not the point, where the line ends, 
symbolize for me a terminus of this duration? And if this point is 
an indivisible oflength, how shall we avoid terminating the dura­
tion of the movement by an indivisible of duration? If the total 
line represents the total duration, the parts of the line must, it 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
seems, correspond to parts of the duration and the points of the 
line to moments in time. The indivisibles of duration, or moments 
of time, are born, then, of the need of symmetry; we come to 
them naturally as soon as we demand from space an integral pre­
sentment of duration. But herein, precisely, lies the error. While 
the line AB symbolizes the duration already lapsed of the move­
ment from A to B already accomplished, it cannot, motionless, 
represent the movement in its accomplishment nor duration in 
its flow. And from the fact that this line is divisible into parts 
and that it ends in points, we cannot conclude either that the 
corresponding duration is composed of separate parts or that it is 
limited by instants. 
The arguments of Zeno of Elea have no other origin than this 
illusion. They all consist in making time and movement coincide 
with the line which underlies them, in attributing to them the 
same subdivisions as to the line, in short, in treating them like 
that line. In this confusion Zeno was encouraged by common sense, 
which usually carries over to the movement the properties of its 
trajectory, and also by language, which always translates move­
ment and duration in terms of space. But common sense and lan­
guage have a right to do so and are even bound to do so, for, since 
they always regard the becoming as a thing to be made use of, they 
have no more concern with the interior organization of movement 
than a workman has with the molecular structure of his tools. In 
holding movement to be divisible, as its trajectory is, common 
sense merely expresses the two facts which alone are of impor­
tance in practical life: first, that every movement describes a space; 
second, that at every point of this space the moving body might 
stop. But the philosopher who reasons upon the inner nature of 
movement is bound to restore to it the mobility which is its essence, 
and this is what Zeno omits to do. By the first argument (the 
Dichotomy) he supposes the moving body to be at rest and then 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
considers nothing but the stages, infinite in number, that are along 
the line to be traversed: we cannot imagine, he says, how the body 
could ever get through the interval between them. But, in this 
way, he merely proves that it is impossible to construct, a priori, 
movement with immobilities, a thing no man ever doubted. The 
sole question is whether, movement being posited as a fact, there 
is a sort of retrospective absurdity in assuming that an infinite num­
ber of points has been passed through. But at this we need not 
wonder, since movement is an undivided fact, or a series of undi­
vided facts, whereas the trajectory is infinitely divisible. In the 
second argument (the Achilles) movement is indeed given; it is 
even attributed to two moving bodies, but, always by the same 
error, there is an assumption that their movement coincides with 
their path and that we may divide it, like the path itself, in any 
way we please. Then, instead of recognizing that the tortoise has 
the pace of a tortoise and Achilles the pace of Achilles, so that 
after a certain number of these indivisible acts or bounds Achilles 
will have outrun the tortoise, the contention is that we may disar­
ticulate as we will the movement of Achilles and, as we will also, 
the movement of the tortoise: thus reconstructing both in an arbi­
trary way, according to a law of our own which may be incompati­
ble with the real conditions of mobility. The same fallacy appears, 
yet more evident, in the third argument (the Arrow), which con­
sists in the conclusion that, because it is possible to distinguish 
points on the path of a moving body, we have the right to distin­
guish indivisible moments in the duration of its movement. But 
the most instructive of Zeno's arguments is perhaps the fourth 
(the Stadium) which has, we believe, been unjustly disdained, and 
of which the absurdity is more manifest only because the postu­
late masked in the three others is here frankly displayed.2 With­
out entering into a discussion which would be out of place here, 
we will content ourselves with observing that motion, as given to 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
spontaneous perception, is a fact which is quite clear, and that 
the difficulties and contradictions pointed out by the Eleatic school 
concern far less the living movement itself than a dead and artifi­
cial reorganization of movement by the mind. But we now come 
to the conclusion of all the preceding paragraphs: 
II. There are real movements. 
The mathematician, expressing with greater precision an idea 
of common sense, defines position by the distance from points of 
reference or from axes, and movement by the variation of the dis­
tance. Of movement, then, he only retains changes in length; and 
as the absolute values of the variable distance between a point and 
an axis, for instance, express either the displacement of the axis with 
regard to the point or that of the point with regard to the axis, just 
as we please, he attributes indifferently to the same point, repose 
or motion. If, then, movement is nothing but a change of distance, 
the same object is in motion or motionless according to the points 
to which it is referred, and there is no absolute movement. 
But things wear a very different aspect when we pass from mathe­
matics to physics, and from the abstract study of motion to a con­
sideration of the concrete changes occurring in the universe. 
Though we are free to attribute rest or motion to any material 
point taken by itself, it is nonetheless true that the aspect of the 
material universe changes, that the internal configuration of every 
real system varies, and that here we have no longer the choice 
between mobility and rest. Movement, whatever its inner nature, 
becomes an indisputable reality. We may not be able to say what 
parts of the whole are in motion; motion there is in the whole, 
nonetheless. Therefore, it is not surprising that the same think­
ers, who maintain that every particular movement is relative, speak 
of the totality of movements as of an absolute. The contradiction 
19 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
has been pointed out i n  Descartes, who, after having given to the 
thesis of relativity its most radical form by affirming that all move­
ment is "reciprocal,"3 formulated the laws of motion as though 
motion were an absolute.4 Leibniz and others after him have 
remarked this contradictions: it is due simply to the fact that 
Descartes handles motion as a physicist after having defined it as a 
geometer. For the geometer all movement is relative: which sig­
nifies only, in our view, that none of our mathematical symbols can 
express the fact that it is the moving body which is in motion rather than 
the axes or the points to which it is referred. And this is very natural 
because these symbols, always meant for measurement, can express 
only distances. But that there is real motion no one can seriously 
deny: if there were not, nothing in the universe would change, 
and, above all, there would be no meaning in the consciousness 
which we have of our own movements. In his controversy with 
Descartes Henry More makes jesting allusion to this last point: 
"When I am quietly seated, and another, going a thousand paces 
away, is flushed with fatigue, it is certainly he who moves and I 
who am at rest."6 
But if there is absolute motion, is it possible to persist in regard­
ing movement as nothing but a change of place? We should then 
have to make diversity of place into an absolute difference and 
distinguish absolute positions in an absolute space. Newton7 went 
as far as this, followed moreover by Euler8 and by others. But can 
this be imagined, or even conceived? A place could be absolutely 
distinguished from another place only by its quality or by its rela­
tion to the totality of space: so space would become, on this hypoth­
esis, either composed of heterogeneous parts or finite. But to finite 
space we should give another space as boundary, and beneath het­
erogeneous parts of space we should imagine an homogeneous space 
as its foundation: in both cases it is to homogeneous and indefi­
nite space that we should necessarily return. We cannot, then, 
194 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
hinder ourselves either from holding every place to be relative or 
from believing some motion to be absolute. 
I t may be urged that real movement is distinguished from rela­
tive movement in that it has a real cause, that it emanates from a 
force. But we must understand what we mean by this last word. In 
natural science force is only a function of mass and velocity: it is 
measured by acceleration: it is known and estimated only by the 
movements which it is supposed to produce in space. One with 
these movements, it shares their relativity. Hence the physicists, 
who seek the principle of absolute motion in force defined in this 
way, are led by the logic of their system back to the hypothesis of 
an absolute space which they had at first desired to avoid.9 So it 
will become necessary to take refuge in the metaphysical sense of 
the word and attribute the motion which we perceive in space to 
profound causes, analogous to those which our consciousness 
believes it discovers within the feeling of effort. But is the feeling 
of effort really the sense of a profound cause? Have not decisive 
analyses shown that there is nothing in this feeling other than the 
consciousness of movements already effected or begun at the periph­
ery of the body? It is in vain, then, that we seek to found the real­
ity of motion on a cause which is distinct from it: analysis always 
brings us back to motion itself. 
But why seek elsewhere? So long as we apply a movement to 
the line along which it passes, the same point will appear to us, by 
turns, according to the points or the axes to which we refer it, 
either at rest or in movement. But it is otherwise if we draw out 
of the movement the mobility which is its essence. When my 
eyes give me the sensation of a movement, this sensation is a real­
ity, and something is effectually going on, whether it is that an 
object is changing its place before my eyes or that my eyes are 
moving before the object. A fortiori I am assured of the reality of 
the movement when I produce it, after having willed to produce 
195 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
it, and my muscular sense brings me the consciousness of it. That 
is to say, I grasp the reality of movement when it appears to me, 
within me, as a change of state or of quality. But then how should it 
be otherwise when I perceive changes of quality in things? Sound 
differs absolutely from silence, and also one sound from another 
sound. Between light and darkness, between colors, between 
shades, the difference is absolute. The passage from one to another 
is also an absolutely real phenomenon. I hold then the two ends 
of the chain, muscular sensations within me, the sensible quali­
ties of matter without me, and neither in the one case nor in the 
other do I see movement, if there be movement, as a mere rela­
tion: it is an absolute. Now, between these two extremities lie 
the movements of external bodies, properly so-called. How are we 
to distinguish here between real and apparent movement? Of what 
object, externally perceived, can it be said that it moves, of what 
other, that it remains motionless? To put such a question is to 
admit that the discontinuity established by common sense between 
objects independent of each other, having each its individuality, 
comparable to kinds of persons, is a valid distinction. For, on the 
contrary hypothesis, the question would no longer be how, in 
given parts of matter are changes of position produced, but how, in 
the whole, is a change of aspect effected - a change of which we 
should then have to ascertain the nature. Let us then formulate at 
once our third proposition: 
I I I .  All division of matter into independent bodies with absolutely 
determined outlines is an artifiCial division. 
A body, that is, an independent material object, presents itself 
at first to us as a system of qualities in which resistance and color 
- the data of sight and touch - occupy the center, all the rest 
being, as it were, suspended from them. Yet the data of sight and 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
touch are those which most obviously have extension in space, 
and the essential character of space is continuity. There are inter­
vals of silence between sounds, for the sense of hearing is not always 
occupied, between odors, between tastes, there are gaps, as though 
the senses of smell and taste only functioned accidentally: as soon 
as we open our eyes, on the contrary, the whole field of vision 
takes on color; and, since solids are necessarily in contact with 
each other, our touch must follow the surface or the edges of objects 
without ever encountering a true interruption. How do we parcel 
out the continuity of material extensity, given in primary percep­
tion, into bodies of which each is supposed to have its substance 
and individuality? No doubt the aspect ofthis continuity changes 
from moment to moment; why then do we not purely and simply 
realize that the whole has changed, as with the turning of a kalei­
doscope? Why, in short, do we seek, in the mobility of the whole, 
tracks that are supposed to be followed by bodies supposed to be 
in motion? A moving continuity is given to us, in which everything 
changes and yet remains: why then do we dissociate the two terms, 
permanence and change, and then represent permanence by bodies 
and change by homogeneous movements in space? This is no teaching 
of immediate intuition; but neither is it a demand of science, for 
the object of science is, on the contrary, to rediscover the natural 
articulations of a universe we have carved artificially. Moreover, 
science, as we shall see, by an evermore complete demonstration 
of the reciprocal action of all material points upon each other, 
returns, in spite of appearances, to the idea of universal conti­
nuity. Science and consciousness are agreed at bottom, provided 
that we regard consciousness in its most immediate data and sci­
ence in its remotest aspirations. Why then the irresistible ten­
dency to set up a material universe that is discontinuous, composed 
of bodies which have clearly defined outlines and change their 
place, that is, their relation with each other? 
197 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Besides consciousness and science, there is life. Beneath the 
principles of speculation, so carefully analyzed by philosophers, 
there are tendencies of which the study has been neglected, and 
which are to be explained simply by the necessity of living, that 
is, of acting. Already the power conferred on the individual con­
sciousness of manifesting itself in acts requires the formation of 
distinct material zones, which correspond respectively to living 
bodies: in this sense, my own body and, by analogy with it, all 
other living bodies are those which I have the most right to dis­
tinguish in the continuity of the universe. But this body itself, as 
soon as it is constituted and distinguished, is led by its various 
needs to distinguish and constitute other bodies. In the humblest 
living being nutrition demands research, then contact, in short, a 
series of efforts which converge toward a center: this center is 
just what is made into an object - the object which will serve as 
lood. Whatever the nature of matter, it may be said that life will 
at once establish in it a primary discontinuity, expressing the dual­
ity of the need and of that which must serve to satisfy it. But the 
need of food is not the only need. Others group themselves round 
it, all having for object the conservation of the individual or of 
the species; and each of them leads us to distinguish, besides our 
own body, bodies independent of it which we must seek or avoid. 
Our needs are, then, so many searchlights which, directed upon 
the continuity of sensible qualities, single out in it distinct bod­
ies. They cannot satisfy themselves except upon the condition 
that they carve out, within this continuity, a body which is to be 
their own and then delimit other bodies with which the first can 
enter into relation, as if with persons. To establish these special 
relations among portions thus carved out from sensible reality is 
just what we call Jiving. 
But if this first subdivision of the real answers much less to 
immediate intuition than to the fundamental needs oflife, are we 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
likely to gain a better knowledge of things by pushing the division 
yet further? In this way we do indeed prolong the vital move­
ment, but we turn our back upon true knowledge. That is why 
the rough-and-ready operation, which consists in decomposing 
the body into parts of the same nature as itself, leads us down a 
blind alley, where we soon feel ourselves incapable of conceiving 
either why this division should cease or how it could go on ad 
infinitum. It is nothing, in fact, but the ordinary condition of use­
ful action, unsuitably transported into the domain of pure knowl­
edge. We shall never explain by means of particles, whatever these 
may be, the simple properties of matter: at most we can thus fol­
low into corpuscles as artificial as the corpus - the body itself -
the actions and reactions ofthis body with regard to all the others. 
This is precisely the object of chemistry. It studies bodies rather 
than matter; and so we understand why it stops at the atom, which 
is still endowed with the general properties of matter. But the 
materiality of the atom dissolves more and more under the eyes 
of the physicist. We have no reason, for instance, for repre­
senting the atom to ourselves as a solid, rather than as liquid or 
gaseous, nor for picturing the reciprocal action of atoms by shocks 
rather than in any other way. Why do we think of a solid atom, 
and why do we think of shocks? Because solids, being the bodies 
on which we clearly have the most hold, are those which interest 
us most in our relations with the external world, and because 
contact is the only means which appears to be at our disposal in 
order to make our body act upon other bodies. But very simple 
experiments show that there is never true contact between two 
neighboring bodieslO, and besides, solidity is far from being an 
absolutely defined state of matter. ! !  Solidity and shock borrow, 
then, their apparent clearness from the habits and necessities of 
practical life - images of this kind throw no light on the inner 
nature of things. 
!99 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Moreover, i f  there i s  a truth that science has placed beyond 
dispute, it is that of the reciprocal action of all parts of matter 
upon each other. Between the supposed molecules of bodies the 
forces of attraction and repulsion are at work. The influence of 
gravitation extends throughout interplanetary space. Something, 
then, exists between the atoms. It will be said that this some­
thing is no longer matter, but force. And we shall be asked to pic­
ture to ourselves, stretched between the atoms, threads which 
will be made more and more tenuous, until they are invisible and 
even, we are told, immaterial. But what purpose can this crude 
image serve? The preservation of life no doubt requires that we 
should distinguish, in our daily experience, between passive thinBs 
and actions effected by these things in space. As it is useful to us to 
fix the seat of the thinB at the precise point where we might touch 
it, its palpable outlines become for us its real limit, and we then 
see in its action a something, I know not what, which, being alto­
gether different, can part company with it. But since a theory of 
matter is an attempt to find the reality hidden beneath these cus­
tomary images which are entirely relative to our needs, from these 
images it must first of all set itself free. And, indeed, we see force 
and matter drawing nearer together the more deeply the physicist 
has penetrated into their effects. We see force more and more 
materialized, the atom more and more idealized, the two terms 
converging toward a common limit and the universe thus recov­
ering its continuity. We may still speak of atoms; the atom may 
even retain its individuality for our mind which isolates it, but 
the solidity and the inertia of the atom dissolve either into move­
ments or into lines of force whose reciprocal solidarity brings back 
to us universal continuity. To this conclusion were bound to come, 
though they started from very different positions, the two physi­
cists of the last century who have most closely investigated the 
constitution of matter, Lord Kelvin and Faraday. For Faraday the 
200 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
atom is a center of force. He means by this that the individuality 
of the atom consists in the mathematical point at which cross, 
radiating throughout space, the indefinite lines of force which 
really constitute it: thus each atom occupies the whole space to 
which gravitation extends and all atoms are interpenetrating.12 
Lord Kelvin, moving in another order ofideas, supposes a perfect, 
continuous, homogeneous and incompressible fluid, filling space: 
what we term an atom he makes into a vortex ring, ever whirling 
in this continuity, and owing its properties to its circular form, its 
existence and, consequently, its individuality to its motion.13 But 
on either hypothesis, the nearer we draw to the ultimate elements 
of matter the better we note the vanishing of that discontinuity 
which our senses perceived on the surface. Psychological analysis 
has already revealed to us that this discontinuity is relative to our 
needs: every philosophy of nature ends by finding it incompatible 
with the general properties of matter. 
In truth, vortices and lines of force are never, to the mind of 
the physicist, more than convenient figures for illustrating his cal­
culations. But philosophy is bound to ask why these symbols are 
more convenient than others and why they permit of further 
advance. Could we, working with them, get back to experience, 
if the notions to which they correspond did not at least point out 
the direction in which we may seek for a representation of the 
real? Now the direction which they indicate is obvious; they show 
us, pervading concrete extensity, modifications, perturbations, changes 
of tension or of energy and nothing else. It is by this, above all, that 
they tend to unite with the purely psychological analysis of motion 
which we considered to begin with, an analysis which presented 
it to us not as a mere change of relation between objects to which 
it was, as it were, an accidental addition, but as a true and, in 
some way, independent, reality. Neither science nor conscious­
ness, then, is opposed to this last proposition: 
201 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
IV. Real movement is rather the transference of a state than of a thing. 
By formulating these propositions, we have, in reality, only been 
progressively narrowing the interval between the two terms which 
it is usual to oppose to each other - qualities, or sensations, and 
movements. At first sight, the distance appears impassable. Quali­
ties are heterogeneous, movements homogeneous. Sensations, 
essentially indivisible, escape measurement; movements, always 
divisible, are distinguished by calculable differences of direction 
and velocity. We are inclined to put qualities, in the form of sen­
sations, in consciousness, while movements are supposed to take 
place independently of us in space. These movements, compounded 
together, we confess, will never yield anything but movements; 
our consciousness, though incapable of coming into touch with 
them, yet by a mysterious process is said to translate them into 
sensations, which afterwards project themselves into space and 
come to overlie, we know not how, the movements they trans­
late. Hence two different worlds, incapable of communicating 
otherwise than by a miracle - on the one hand, that of motion in 
space, on the other hand, that of consciousness with sensations. 
Now certainly the difference is irreducible (as we have shown in 
an earlier work 14) between quality on the one hand and pure quan­
tity on the other. But this is just the question: do real movements 
present merely differences of quantity, or are they not quality itself, 
vibrating, so to speak, internally, and beating time for its own exis­
tence through an often incalculable number of moments? Motion, 
as studied in mechanics, is but an abstraction or a symbol, a com­
mon measure, a common denominator, permitting the compari­
son of all real movements with each other; yet these movements, 
regarded in themselves, are indivisibles which occupy duration, 
involve a before and an after, and link together the successive 
moments of time by a thread of variable quality which cannot be 
202 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
without some likeness to the continuity of our own conscious­
ness. May we not conceive, for instance, that the irreducibility of 
two perceived colors is due mainly to the narrow duration into 
which are contracted the billions of vibrations which they exe­
cute in one of our moments? If we could stretch out this dura­
tion, that is to say, live it at a slower rhythm, should we not, as the 
rhythm slowed down, see these colors pale and lengthen into suc­
cessive impressions, still colored, no doubt, but nearer and nearer 
to coincidence with pure vibrations? In cases where the rhythm 
of the movement is slow enough to tally with the habits of our 
consciousness - as in the case of the deep notes of the musical 
scale, for instance - do we not feel that the quality perceived analy­
zes itself into repeated and successive vibrations, bound together 
by an inner continuity? That which usually hinders this mutual 
approach of motion and quality is the acquired habit of attaching 
movement to elements - atoms or what not - which interpose 
their solidity between the movement itself and the quality into 
which it contracts. As our daily experience shows us bodies in 
motion, it appears to us that there ought to be, in order to sustain 
the elementary movements to which qualities may be reduced, 
diminutive bodies or corpuscles. Motion becomes then for our 
imagination no more than an accident, a series of positions, a change 
of relations; and, as it is a law of our representation that the stable 
drives away the unstable, the important and central element for 
us becomes the atom, between the successive positions of which 
movement then becomes a mere link. But not only has this con­
ception the inconvenience of merely carrying over to the atom all 
the problems raised by matter; not only does it wrongly set up as 
an absolute that division of matter which, in our view, is hardly 
anything but an outward projection of human needs; it also rend­
ers unintelligible the process by which we grasp, in perception, 
at one and the same time, a state of our consciousness and a reality 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
independent of ourselves. This mixed character of our immediate 
perception, this appearance of a realized contradiction, is the prin­
cipal theoretical reason that we have for believing in an external 
world which does not coincide absolutely with our perception. 
As it is overlooked in the doctrine that regards sensation as entirely 
heterogeneous with movements, of which sensation is then sup­
posed to be only a translation into the language of consciousness, 
this doctrine ought, it would seem, to confine itself to sensations, 
which it had indeed begun to do by setting them up as the actual 
data, and not add to them movements which, having no possible 
contact with them, are no longer anything but their useless dupli­
cate. Realism, so understood, is self-destructive. Indeed we have 
no choice: if our beliefin a more or less homogeneous substratum 
of sensible qualities has any ground, this can only be found in an 
act which makes us seize or divine, in quality itself, something which 
goes beyond sensation, as if this sensation itself were pregnant with 
details suspected yet unperceived. Its objectivity - that is to say, 
what it contains over and above what it yields up - must then 
consist, as we have foreshadowed; precisely in the immense mul­
tiplicity of the movements which it executes, so to speak, within 
itself as a chrysalis. Motionless on the surface, in its very depth it 
lives and vibrates. 
As a matter-of-fact, no one represents to himself the relation 
between quantity and quality in any other way. To believe in reali­
ties, distinct from that which is perceived, is above all to recog­
nize that the order of our perceptions depends on them, and not 
on us. There must be, then, within the perceptions which fill a 
given moment, the reason of what will happen in the following 
moment. And mechanism only formulates this belief with more 
precision when it affirms that the states of matter can be deduced 
one from the other. It is true that this deduction is possible only if 
we discover, beneath the apparent heterogeneity of sensible quali-
204 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
ties, homogeneous elements which lend themselves to calcula­
tion. But if these elements are external to the qualities of which 
they are meant to explain the regular order, they can no longer 
render the service demanded of them, because then the qualities 
must be supposed to come to overlie them by a kind of miracle, 
and cannot correspond to them unless we bring in some pre­
established harmony. So, do what we will, we cannot avoid placing 
those movements within these qualities, in the form of internal 
vibrations, and then considering the vibrations as less homoge­
neous, and the qualities as less heterogeneous, than they appear, 
and lastly attributing the difference of aspect in the two terms to 
the necessity which lies upon what may be called an endless mul­
tiplicity of contracting into a duration too narrow to permit the 
separation of its moments. 
We must insist on this last point, to which we have already 
alluded elsewhere, and which we regard as essential. The dura­
tion lived by our consciousness is a duration with its own deter­
mined rhythm, a duration very different from the time of the 
physicist, which can store up, in a given interval, as great a num­
ber of phenomena as we please. In the space of a second, red light 
- the light which has the longest wavelength, and of which, con­
sequently, the vibrations are the least frequent - accomplishes 
400 billion successive vibrations. If we would form some idea of 
this number, we should have to separate the vibrations sufficiently 
to allow our consciousness to count them or at least to record 
explicitly their succession, and we should then have to enquire 
how many days or months or years this succession would occupy. 
Now the smallest interval of empty time which we can detect 
equals, according to Exner, 0.002 seconds; and it is even doubt­
ful whether we can perceive in succession several intervals as short 
as this. Let us admit, however, that we can go on doing so indefi­
nitely. Let us imagine, in a word, a consciousness which should 
205 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
watch the succession of 400 billion vibrations, each instantaneous, 
and each separated from the next only by the 0.002 of a second 
necessary to distinguish them. A very simple calculation shows 
that more than 25 ,000 years would elapse before the conclusion 
of the operation. Thus the sensation of red light, experienced by 
us in the course of a second, corresponds in itself to a succession 
of phenomena which, separately distinguished in our duration with 
the greatest possible economy of time, would occupy more than 
250 centuries of our history. Is this conceivable? We must distin­
guish here between our own duration and time in general. In our 
duration - the duration which our consciousness perceives - a 
given interval can only contain a limited number of phenomena 
of which we are aware. Do we conceive that this content can 
increase; and when we speak of an infinitely divisible time, is it 
our own duration that we are thinking of? 
As long as we are dealing with space, we may carry the division 
as far as we please; we change in no way, thereby, the nature of 
what is divided. This is because space, by definition, is outside us; 
it is because a part of space appears to us to subsist even when we 
cease to be concerned with it; so, even when we leave it undi­
vided, we know that it can wait and that a new effort of our imagi­
nation may decompose it when we choose. As, moreover, it never 
ceases to be space, it always implies juxtaposition and, consequently, 
possible division. Abstract space is, indeed, at bottom, nothing 
but the mental diagram of infinite divisibility. But, with dura­
tion, it is quite otherwise. The parts of our duration are one with 
the successive moments of the act which divides it; if we distin­
guish in it so many instants, so many parts it indeed possesses; and 
if our consciousness can only distinguish in a given interval a defi­
nite number of elementary acts, if it terminates the division at a 
given point, there also terminates the divisibility. In vain does 
our imagination endeavor to go on, to carry division further still, 
206 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
and to quicken, so to speak, the circulation of our inner phe­
nomena: the very effort by which we are trying to effect this fur­
ther division of our duration lengthens that duration by just so 
much. And yet we know that millions of phenomena succeed each 
other while we hardly succeed in counting a few. We know this 
not from physics alone; the crude experience of the senses allows 
us to divine it; we are dimly aware of successions in nature much 
more rapid than those of our internal states. How are we to con­
ceive them, and what is this duration of which the capacity goes 
beyond all our imagination? 
It is not ours, assuredly; but neither is it that homogeneous 
and impersonal duration, the same for everything and for every 
one, which flows onward, indifferent and void, external to all that 
endures. This imaginary homogeneous time is, as we have endeav­
ored to show elsewhere,15 an idol of language, a fiction whose 
origin is easy to discover. In reality there is no one rhythm of dura­
tion; it is possible to imagine many different rhythms which, slower 
or faster, measure the degree of tension or relaxation of different 
kinds of consciousness and thereby fix their respective places in 
the scale of being. To conceive of durations of different tensions is 
perhaps both difficult and strange to our mind, because we have 
acquired the useful habit of substituting for the true duration, lived 
by consciousness, an homogeneous and independent Time; how­
ever, in the first place, it is easy, as we have shown, to detect the 
illusion which renders such a thought foreign to us, and, secondly, 
this idea has in its favor, at bottom, the tacit agreement of our 
consciousness. Do we not sometimes perceive in ourselves, in sleep, 
two contemporaneous and distinct persons one of whom sleeps a 
few minutes, while the other's dream fills days and weeks? And 
would not the whole of history be contained in a very short time 
for a consciousness at a higher degree of tension than our own, 
which should watch the development of humanity while contract-
207 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
ing it, so to speak, into the great phases of its evolution? I n  short, 
then, to perceive consists in condensing enormous periods of an 
infinitely diluted existence into a few more differentiated moments 
of an in tenser life, and in thus summing up a very long history. To 
perceive means to immobilize. 
To say this is to say that we seize, in the act of perception, 
something which outruns perception itself, although the mate­
rial universe is not essentially different or distinct from the repre­
sentation which we have of it. In one sense, my perception is indeed 
truly within me, since it contracts into a single moment of my 
duration that which, taken in itself, spreads over an incalculable 
number of moments. But, if you abolish my consciousness, the 
material universe subsists exactly as it was; only, since you have 
removed that particular rhythm of duration which was the condi­
tion of my action upon things, these things draw back into them­
selves, mark as many moments in their own existence as science 
distinguishes in it; and sensible qualities, without vanishing, are 
spread and diluted in an incomparably more divided duration. Mat­
ter thus resolves itself into numberless vibrations, all linked together 
in uninterrupted continuity, all bound up with each other, and 
traveling in every direction like shivers through an immense body. 
In short, try first to connect together the discontinuous objects 
of daily experience; then, resolve the motionless continuity of 
their qualities into vibrations on the spot; finally, fix your atten­
tion on these movements, by abstracting from the divisible space 
which underlies them and considering only their mobility (that 
undivided act which our consciousness becomes aware of in our 
own movements): you will thus obtain a vision of matter, fatigu­
ing perhaps for your imagination, but pure, and freed from all that 
the exigencies of life compel you to add to it in external percep­
tion. Now bring back consciousness, and with it the exigencies of 
life: at long, very long, intervals, and by as many leaps over enor-
208 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
mous periods of the inner history of things, quasi-instantaneous 
views will be taken, views which this time are bound to be picto­
rial, and of which the more vivid colors will condense an infinity 
of elementary repetitions and changes. In just the same way the 
multitudinous successive positions of a runner are contracted into 
a single symbolic attitude, which our eyes perceive, which art repro­
duces, and which becomes for us all the image of a man running. 
The glance which falls at any moment on the things about us only 
takes in the effects of a multiplicity of inner repetitions and evo­
lutions, effects which are, for that very reason, discontinuous, and 
into which we bring back continuity by the relative movements 
that we attribute to "objects" in space. The change is everywhere, 
but inward; we localize it here and there, but outwardly; thus we 
constitute bodies which are both stable as to their qualities and 
mobile as to their positions, a mere change of place summing up 
in itself, to our eyes, the universal transformation. 
That there are, in a sense, multiple objects, that one man is 
distinct from another man, tree from tree, stone from stone, is an 
indisputable fact; for each of these beings, each of these things, 
has characteristic properties and obeys a determined law of evolu­
tion. But the separation between a thing and its environment can­
not be absolutely definite and clear-cut; there is a passage by 
insensible gradations from the one to the other: the close solidar­
ity which binds all the objects of the material universe, the 
perpetuality of their reciprocal actions and reactions, is sufficient 
to prove that they have not the precise limits which we attribute 
to them. Our perception outlines, so to speak, the form of their 
nucleus; it terminates them at the point where our possible action 
upon them ceases, where, consequently, they cease to interest our 
needs. Such is the primary and the most apparent operation of the 
perceiving mind: it marks out divisions in the continuity of the 
extended, simply following the suggestions of our requirement 
209 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
and the needs of practical life. But, in order to divide the real in 
this manner, we must first persuade ourselves that the real is divisi­
ble at will. Consequently we must throw beneath the continuity 
of sensible qualities, that is to say, beneath concrete extensity, a 
network, of which the meshes may be altered to any shape what­
soever and become as small as we please: this substratum which is 
merely conceived, this wholly ideal diagram of arbitrary and infi­
nite divisibility, is homogeneous space. Now, at the same time 
that our actual and so to speak instantaneous perception effects 
this division of matter into independent objects, our memory solid­
ifies into sensible qualities the continuous flow of things. It pro­
longs the past into the present, because our action will dispose of 
the future in the exact proportion in which our perception, enlarged 
by memory, has contracted the past. To reply, to an action received, 
by an immediate reaction which adopts the rhythm of the first 
and continues it in the same duration, to be in the present and in a 
present which is always beginning again - this is the fundamental 
law of matter: herein consists necessity. If there are actions that are 
really free, or at least partly indeterminate, they can only belong 
to beings able to fix, at long intervals, that becoming to which 
their own becoming clings, able to solidify it into distinct moments, 
and so to condense matter and, by assimilating it, to digest it into 
movements of reaction which will pass through the meshes of nat­
ural necessity. The greater or lesser tension of their duration, which 
expresses, at bottom, their greater or lesser intensity of life, thus 
determines both the degree of the concentrating power of their 
perception and the measure of their liberty. The independence of 
their action upon surrounding matter becomes more and more 
assured in the degree that they free themselves from the particu­
lar rhythm which governs the flow of this matter. So that sensible 
qualities, as they are found in our memory-shot perception, are, 
in fact, the successive moments obtained by a solidification of the 
2 10 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
real. But, in order to distinguish these moments, and also to bind 
them together by a thread which shall be common alike to our 
own existence and to that of things, we are bound to imagine a 
diagrammatic design of succession in general, an homogeneous 
and indifferent medium, which is to the flow of matter in the 
sense of length as space is to it in the sense of breadth: herein 
consists homogeneous time. 
Homogeneous space and homogeneous time are then neither 
properties of things nor essential conditions of our faculty of know­
ing them: they express, in an abstract form, the double work of 
solidification and of division which we effect on the moving con­
tinuity of the real in order to obtain there a fulcrum for our actior., 
in order to fix within it starting points for our operation, in short, 
to introduce into it real changes. They are the diagrammatic design 
of our eventual action upon matter. The first mistake, which con­
sists in viewing this homogeneous time and space as properties of 
things, leads to the insurmountable difficulties of metaphysical 
dogmatism - whether mechanistic or dynamistic - dynamism erect­
ing into so many absolutes the successive crosscuts which we make 
in the course of the universe as it flows along, and then endeavor­
ing vainly to bind them together by a kind of qualitative deduc­
tion; mechanism attaching itself rather, in any one of these crosscuts, 
to the divisions made in its breadth, that is to say, to instanta­
neous differences in magnitude and position, and striving no less 
vainly to produce, by the variation of these differences, the suc­
cession of sensible qualities. Shall we then seek refuge in the other 
hypothesis, and maintain, with Kant, that space find time are forms 
of our sensibility? If we do, we shall have to look upon matter and 
spirit as equally unknowable. Now, if we compare these two hypoth­
eses, we discover in them a common basis: by setting up homoge­
neous time and homogeneous space either as realities that are 
contemplated or as forms of contemplation, they both attribute 
2 1 1  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
to space and time an interest which i s  speculative rather than vital. 
Hence there is room, between metaphysical dogmatism, on the 
one hand, and critical philosophy, on the other hand, for a doc­
trine which regards homogeneous space and time as principles of 
division and of solidification introduced into the real, with a view 
to action and not with a view to knowledge, which attributes to 
things a real duration and a real extensity, and which, in the end, 
sees the source of all difficulty no longer in that duration and in 
that extensity (which really belong to things and are directly mani­
fest to the mind), but in the homogeneous space and time which 
we stretch out beneath them in order to divide the continuous, 
to fix the becoming, and provide our activity with points to which 
it can be applied. 
But our erroneous conceptions about sensible quality and space 
are so deeply rooted in the mind that it is important to attack 
them from every side. We may say then, to reveal yet another 
aspect, that they imply this double postulate, accepted equally 
by realism and by idealism: first, that between different kinds 
of qualities there is nothing common, and second, that neither 
is there anything common between extensity and pure quality. 
We maintain, on the contrary, that there is something common 
between qualities of different orders, that they all share in exten­
sity, though in different degrees, and that it is impossible to 
overlook these two truths without entangling in a thousand diffi­
culties the metaphysic of matter, the psychology of perception 
and, more generally, the problem of the relation of consciousness 
with matter. Without insisting on these consequences, let us con­
tent ourselves for the moment with showing, in the various theo­
ries of matter, the two postulates which we dispute and the illusion 
from which they proceed. 
The essence of English idealism is to regard extensity as a prop­
erty of tactile perceptions. As it sees nothing in sensible qualities 
2 1 2 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
but sensations, and in sensations themselves nothing but mental 
states, it finds in the different qualities nothing on which to base 
the parallelism of their phenomena. It is therefore constrained to 
account for this parallelism by a habit which makes the actual per­
ceptions of sight, for instance, suggest to us potential sensations 
of touch. If the impressions of two different senses resemble each 
other no more than the words of two languages, we shall seek in 
vain to deduce the data of the one from the data of the other. 
They have no common element; consequently, there is nothing 
common between extensity, which is always tactile, and the data 
of the senses other than that of touch, which must then be sup­
posed to be in no way extended. 
But neither can atomistic realism, which locates movements 
in space and sensations in consciousness, discover anything in com­
mon between the modifications or phenomena of extensity and 
the sensations which correspond to them. Sensations are supposed 
to issue from the modification as a kind of phosphorescence, or, 
again, to translate into the language of the soul the manifestations 
of matter; but in neither case do they reflect, we are told, the 
image of their causes. No doubt they may all be traced to a com­
mon origin, which is movement in space; but, just because they 
develop outside of space, they must forego, qua sensations, the 
kinship which binds their causes together. In breaking with space 
they break also their connection with each other; they have noth­
ing in common between them, nor with extensity. 
Idealism and realism, then, only differ in that the first rele­
gates extensity to tactile perception, of which it becomes the exclu­
sive property, while the second thrusts extensity yet further back, 
outside of all perception. But the two doctrines are agreed in main­
taining the discontinuity of the different orders of sensible quali­
ties, and also the abrupt transition from that which is purely 
extended to that which is not extended at all. Now the principal 
2 1 3 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
difficulties which they both encounter i n  the theory o f  percep­
tion arise from this common postulate. 
For suppose, to begin with, as Berkeley did, that all percep­
tion of extensity is to be referred to the sense of touch. We may, 
indeed, if you will have it so, deny extension to the data of hear­
ing, smell and taste; however, we must at least explain the genesis 
of a visual space that corresponds to tactile space. It is alleged, 
indeed, that sight ends by becoming symbolic of touch and that 
there is nothing more in the visual perception of the order of things 
in space than a suggestion of tactile perception. But we fail to 
understand how the visual perception of relief, for instance, a per­
ception which makes upon us an impress sui generis, and indeed 
indescribable, could ever be one with the mere remembrance of a 
sensation of touch. The association of a memory with a present 
perception may complicate this perception by enriching it with 
an element already known, but it cannot create a new kind of 
impress, a new quality of perception: now the visual perception 
of relief presents an absolutely original character. It may be urged 
that it is possible to give the illusion of relief with a plane surface. 
This only proves that a surface, where the play oflight and shadow 
on an object in relief is more or less well imitated, is enough to 
remind us of relief; but how could we be reminded of relief if relief 
had not been, at first, actually perceived? We have already said, 
but cannot repeat too often, that our theories of perception are 
entirely vitiated by the idea that if a certain arrangement produces, 
at a given moment, the illusion of a certain perception, it must 
always have been able to produce the perception itself - as if the 
very function of memory were not to make the complexity of the 
effect survive the simplification of the cause! Again, it may be urged 
that the retina itself is a plane surface, and that if we perceive by 
sight something that is extended, it can only be the image on the 
retina. But is it not true, as we have shown at the beginning of this 
2 14 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
book, that i n  the visual perception of an object the brain, nerves, 
retina and the object itself form a connected whole, a continuous 
process in which the image on the retina is only an episode? By 
what right, then, do we isolate this image to sum up in it the whole 
of perception? And then, as we have also shown,16 how could a 
surface be perceived as a surface otherwise than in a space that has 
recovered its three dimensions? Berkeley, at least, carried out his 
theory to its conclusion; he denied to sight any perception of exten­
sity. But the objections which we raised only acquire the more 
force from this, since it is impossible to understand the spontane­
ous creation, by a mere association of memories, of all that is ori­
ginal in our visual perceptions of line, surface and volume, 
perceptions so distinct that the mathematician does not go beyond 
them and works with a space that is purely visual. But we will not 
insist on these various points, nor on the disputable arguments 
drawn from the observation of those, born blind, whose sight has 
been surgically restored: the theory of the acquired perceptions 
of sight, classical since Berkeley's day, does not seem likely to resist 
the multiplied attacks of contemporary psychology. 17 Passing over 
the difficulties of a psychological order, we will content ourselves 
with drawing attention to another point, in our opinion, essen­
tial. Suppose for a moment that the eye does not, at the outset, 
give us any information as to any of the relations of space. Visual 
form, visual relief, visual distance, then become the symbols of 
tactile perceptions. But how is it, then, that this symbolism suc­
ceeds? Here are objects which change their shape and move. Vision 
takes note of definite changes which touch afterwards verifies. 
There is, then, in the two series, visual and tactile, or in their 
causes, something which makes them correspond one to another 
and ensures the constancy of their parallelism. What is the princi­
ple of this connection? 
For English idealism, it can only be some deus ex machina, 
2 15 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
and we are confronted with a mystery again. For ordinary realism, 
it is in a space distinct from the sensations themselves that the 
principle of the correspondence of sensations one with another 
lies. But this doctrine only throws the difficulty further back and 
even aggravates it, for we shall now want to know how a system of 
homogeneous movements in space evokes various sensations which 
have no resemblance whatever with them. Just now the genesis of 
visual perception of space by a mere association of images appeared 
to us to imply a real creation ex nihiloj here all the sensations are 
born of nothing or at least have no resemblance with the move­
ment that occasions them. In the main, this second theory differs 
much less from the first than is commonly believed. Amorphous 
space, atoms jostling against each other, are only our tactile per­
ceptions made objective, set apart from all our other perceptions 
on account of the special importance which we attribute to them, 
and made into independent realities - thus contrasting with the 
other sensations which are then supposed to be only the symbols 
of these. Indeed, in the course of this operation, we have emptied 
these tactile sensations of a part of their contentj after having 
reduced all other senses to being mere appendages of the sense of 
touch, touch itself we mutilate, leaving out everything in it that 
is not a mere abstract or diagrammatic design of tactile percep­
tion: with this design we then go on to construct' the external 
world. Can we wonder that between this abstraction, on the one 
hand, and sensations, on the other hand, no possible link is to be 
found? But the truth is that space is no more without us than within 
us, and that it does not belong to a privileged group ofsensations. 
All sensations partake of extensityj all are more or less deeply rooted 
in itj and the difficulties of ordinary realism arise from the fact 
that, the kinship of the sensations one with another having been 
extracted and placed apart under the form of an indefinite and 
empty space, we no longer see either how these sensations can 
2 16 

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
partake of extensity or how they can correspond with each other. 
Contemporary psychology is more and more impressed with 
the idea that all our sensations are in some degree extensive. I t  
i s  maintained, not without an appearance o f  reason, that there 
is no sensation without extensity1 8  or without a feeling "of 
volume."19 English idealism sought to reserve to tactile percep­
tion a monopoly of the extended, the other senses dealing with 
space only insofar as they remind us of the data of touch. A more 
attentive psychology reveals to us, on the contrary, and no doubt 
will hereafter reveal still more clearly, the need of regarding all 
sensations as primarily extensive, their extensity fading and dis­
appearing before the high intensity and usefulness of tactile, and 
also, no doubt, of visual, extensity. 
So understood, space is indeed the symbol of fixity and ofinfi­
nite divisibility. Concrete extensity, that is to say, the diversity of 
sensible qualities, is not within space; rather is it space that we 
thrust into extensity. Space is not a ground on which real motion 
is posited; rather is it real motion that deposits space beneath itself. 
But our imagination, which is preoccupied above all by the con­
venience of expression and the exigencies of material life, prefers 
to invert the natural order of the terms. Accustomed to seek its 
fulcrum in a world of ready-made motionless images, of which 
the apparent fixity is hardly anything else but the outward reflec­
tion of the stability of our lower needs, it cannot help believing 
that rest is anterior to motion, cannot avoid taking rest as its point 
of reference and its abiding place. Therefore, it comes to see move­
ment as only a variation of distance, space being thus supposed to 
precede motion. Then, in a space which is homogeneous and infi­
nitely divisible, we draw, in imagination, a trajectory and fix posi­
tions: afterwards, applying the movement to the trajectory, we 
see it divisible like the line we have drawn, and equally denuded 
of quality. Can we wonder that our understanding, working thence-
2 17 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
forward on this idea, which represents precisel y the reverse of the 
truth, discovers in it nothing but contradictions? Having assimi­
lated movements to space, we find these movements homoge­
neous like space; and since we no longer see in them anything 
but calculable differences of direction and velocity, all relation 
between movement and quality is for us destroyed. So that all we 
have to do is to shut up motion in space, qualities in conscious­
ness, and to establish between these two parallel series, incapa­
ble, by hypothesis, of ever meeting, a mysterious correspondence. 
Thrown back into consciousness, sensible qualities become inca­
pable of recovering extensity. Relegated to space, and, indeed, to 
abstract space, where there is never but a single instant and where 
everything is always being born anew - movement abandons that 
solidarity of the present with the past which is its very essence. 
And as these two aspects of perception, quality and movement, 
have been made equally obscure, the phenomenon of perception, 
in which a consciousness, assumed to be shut up in itself and 
foreign to space, is supposed to translate what occurs in space, 
becomes a mystery. But let us, on the contrary, banish all precon­
ceived idea of interpreting or measuring, let us place ourselves 
face-to-face with immediate reality: at once we find that there is 
no impassable barrier, no essential difference, no real distinc­
tion even, between perception and the thing perceived, between 
quality and movement. 
So we return, by a roundabout way, to the conclusions worked 
out in the first chapter of this book. Our perception, we said, is 
originally in things rather than in the mind, without us rather than 
within. The several kinds of perception correspond to so many 
directions actually marked out in reality. But, we added, this per­
ception, which coincides with its object, exists rather in theory 
2 1 8  

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
than in fact: it could only happen if we were shut up within the 
present moment. In concrete perception, memory intervenes, and 
the subjectivity of sensible qualities is due precisely to the fact 
that our consciousness, which begins by being only memory, pro­
longs a plurality of moments into each other, contracting them 
into a single intuition. 
Consciousness and matter, body and soul, were thus seen to 
meet each other in perception. But, in one aspect, this idea 
remained for us obscure because our perception and consequently, 
also our consciousness seemed thus to share in the divisibility which 
is attributed to matter. If, on the dualistic hypothesis, we natu­
rally shrink from accepting the partial coincidence of the perceived 
object and the perceiving subject, it is because we are conscious 
of the undivided unity of our perception, whereas the object appears 
to us to be, in essence, infinitely divisible. Hence the hypothesis 
of a consciousness with inextensive sensations, placed over against 
an extended multiplicity. But, if the divisibility of matter is entirely 
relative to our action thereon, that is to say, to our faculty of modi­
fying its aspect, if it belongs not to matter itself but to the space 
which we throw beneath this matter in order to bring it within 
our grasp, then the difficulty disappears. Extended matter, regarded 
as a whole, is like a consciousness where everything balances and 
compensates and neutralizes everything else; it possesses in very 
truth the indivisibility of our perception; so, inversely, we may 
without scruple attribute to perception something of the exten­
sity of matter. These two terms, perception and matter, approach 
each other in the measure that we divest ourselves of what may be 
called the prejudices of action: sensation recovers extensity, the 
concrete extended recovers its natural continuity and indivisibil­
ity. And homogeneous space, which stood between the two terms 
like an insurmountable barrier, is then seen to have no other real­
i ty than that of a diagram or a symbol. I t interests the behavior of a 
2 19 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
being which acts upon matter, but not the work of a mind which 
speculates on its essence. 
Thereby also some light may be thrown upon the problem 
toward which all our enquiries converge, that of the union of body 
and soul. The obscurity of this problem, on the dualistic hypothe­
sis, comes from the double fact that matter is considered as essen­
tially divisible and every state of the soul as rigorously inextensive, 
so that from the outset the communication between the two terms 
is severed. And when we go more deeply into this double postu­
late, we discover, in regard to matter, a confusion of concrete and 
indivisible extensity with the divisible space which underlies it 
and also, in regard to mind, the illusory idea that there are no 
degrees, no possible transition, between the extended and the unex­
tended. But if these two postulates involve a common error, if 
there is a gradual passage from the idea to the image and from the 
image to the sensation; if, in the measure in which it evolves toward 
actuality, that is to say, toward action, the mental state draws nearer 
to extension; if, finally, this extension once attained remains undi­
vided and therefore is not out of harmony with the unity of the 
soul; we can understand that spirit can rest upon matter and, con­
sequently, unite with it in the act of pure perception, yet never­
theless be radically distinct from it. It is distinct from matter in 
that it is, even then, memory, that is to say, a synthesis of past and 
present with a view to the future, in that it contracts the moments 
of this matter in order to use them and to manifest itselfby actions 
which are the final aim of its union with the body. We were right, 
then, when we said, at the beginning of this book, that the dis­
tinction between body and mind must be established in terms 
not of space but of time. 
The mistake of ordinary dualism is that it starts from the spa­
tial point of view: it puts, on the one hand, matter with its modi­
fications, in space; on the other hand, it places unextended 
2 2 0  

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S 
sensations in consciousness. Hence the impossibility of understand­
ing how the spirit acts upon the body or the body upon spirit. 
Hence hypotheses which are and can be nothing but disguised state­
ments of the fact - the idea of a parallelism or of a preestablished 
harmony. But hence also the impossibility of constituting either a 
psychology of memory or a metaphysic of matter. We have striven 
to show that this psychology and this metaphysic are bound up 
with each other and that the difficulties are less formidable in a 
dualism which, starting from pure perception, where subject and 
object coincide, follows the development of the two terms in their 
respective durations: matter, the further we push its analysis, tend­
ing more and more to be only a succession of infinitely rapid 
moments which may be deduced each from the other and thereby 
are equivalent to each other; and spirit, being in perception already 
memory, and declaring itself more and more as a prolonging of 
the past into the present, a progress, a true evolution. 
But does the relation of body and mind become thereby clearer? 
We substitute a temporal for a spatial distinction: are the two terms 
any the more able to unite? It must be observed that the first dis­
tinction does not admit of degree: matter is supposed to be in 
space, spirit to be extraspatial; there is no possible transition 
between them. But if, in fact, the humblest function of spirit is to 
bind together the successive moments of the duration of things, if 
it is by this that it comes into contact with matter and by this also 
that it is first of all distinguished from matter, we can conceive an 
infinite number of degrees between matter and fully developed 
spirit - a spirit capable of action which is not only undetermined, 
but also reasonable and reflective. Each of these successive degrees, 
which measures a growing intensity oflife, corresponds to a higher 
tension of duration and is made manifest externally by a greater 
development of the sensori-motor system. But let us consider this 
nervous system itself: we note that its increasing complexity appears 
2 2 1  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
to allow an ever greater latitude to the activity of the living being, 
the faculty of waiting before reacting, and of putting the excita­
tion received into relation with an ever richer variety of motor 
mechanisms. Yet this is only the outward aspect; and the more 
complex organization of the nervous system, which seems to assure 
the greater independence of the living being in regard to matter, 
is only the material symbol of that independence itself. That is to 
say, it is only the symbol of the inner energy which allows the 
being to free itself from the rhythm of the flow of things and to 
retain in an ever higher degree the past in order to influence ever 
more deeply the future - the symbol, in the special sense which 
we give to the word, of its memory. Thus, between brute matter 
and the mind most capable of reflection there are all possible inten­
sities of memory or, what comes to the same thing, all the degrees 
of freedom. On the first hypothesis, that which expresses the dis­
tinction between spirit and body in terms of space, body and spirit 
are like two railway lines which cut each other at a right angle; on 
the second hypothesis, the rails come together in a curve, so that 
we pass insensibly from the one to the other. 
But have we here anything but a metaphor? Does not a marked 
distinction, an irreducible opposition, remain between matter prop­
erly so-called and the lowest degree of freedom or of memory? 
Yes, no doubt, the distinction subsists, but union becomes possi­
ble, since it would be given, under the radical form of a partial 
coincidence, in pure perception. The difficulties of ordinary dual­
ism come, not from the distinction between the two terms, but 
from the impossibility of seeing how the one is grafted upon the 
other. Now, as we have shown, pure perception, which is the low­
est degree of mind - mind without memory - is really part of 
matter, as we understand matter. We may go further: memory does 
not intervene as a function of which matter has no presentiment 
and which it does not imitate in its own way. If matter does not 
2 2 2  

T H E  D E L I M I T I N G  A N D  F I X I N G  O F  I M A G E S  
remember the past, i t  is because i t  repeats the past unceasingly, 
because, subject to necessity, it unfolds a series of moments of 
which each is the equivalent of the preceding moment and may 
be deduced from it: thus its past is truly given in its present. But a 
being which evolves more or less freely creates something new 
every moment: in vain, then, should we seek to read its past in 
its present unless its past were deposited within it in the form of 
memory. Thus, to use again a metaphor which has more than once 
appeared in this book, it is necessary, and for similar reasons, that 
the past should be acted by matter, imagined by mind. 
2 2 3 


Summa r y  a n d  C o n c l u s i o n  
I. The idea that we have disengaged from the facts and confirmed 
by reasoning is that our body is an instrument of action, and of 
action only. In no degree, in no sense, under no aspect, does it 
serve to prepare, far less to explain, a representation. Consider 
external perception: there is only a difference of degree, not of 
kind, between the so-called perceptive faculties of the brain and 
the reflex functions of the spinal cord. While the spinal cord trans­
forms the excitations received into movements which are more 
or less necessarily executed, the brain puts them into relation with 
motor mechanisms which are more or less freely chosen; but that 
which the brain explains in our perception is action begun, pre­
pared or suggested, it is not perception itself. Consider memory. 
The body retains motor habits capable of acting the past over again; 
it can resume attitudes in which the past will insert itself; or, again, 
by the repetition of certain cerebral phenomena, which have pro­
longed former perceptions, it can furnish to remembrance a point 
of attachment with the actual, a means of recovering its lost influ­
ence upon present reality: but in no case can the brain store up 
recollections or images. Thus, neither in perception, nor in memory, 
nor a fortiori in the higher attainments of mind, does the body 
2 25 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
contribute directly to representation. By developing this hypoth­
esis under its manifold aspects and thus pushing dualism to an 
extreme, we appeared to divide body and soul by an impassable 
abyss. In truth, we were indicating the only possible means of 
bringing them together. 
II. All the difficulties raised by this problem, either in ordinary 
dualism, or in materialism and idealism, come from considering, 
in the phenomena of perception and memory, the physical and 
the mental as duplicates of one another. Suppose I place myself at 
the materialist point of view of the epiphenomenal consciousness: 
I am quite unable to understand why certain cerebral phenomena 
are accompanied by consciousness, that is to say, of what use could 
the conscious repetition of the material universe I have begun by 
positing be, or how could it ever arise. Suppose I prefer idealism: 
I then allow myself only perceptions, and my body is one of them. 
But whereas observation shows me that the images I perceive are 
entirely changed by very slight alterations of the image I call my 
body (since I have only to shut my eyes and my visual universe 
disappears), science assures me that all phenomena must succeed 
and condition one another according to a determined order, in 
which effects are strictly proportioned to causes. I am obliged, 
therefore, to seek, in the image which I call my body, and which 
follows me everywhere, for changes which shall be the equiva­
lents - but the well-regulated equivalents, now deducible from 
each other - of the images which succeed one another around my 
body: the cerebral movements, to which I am led back in this 
way again are the duplicates of my perceptions. It is true that 
these movements are still perceptions, "possible" perceptions -
so that this second hypothesis is more intelligible than the first; 
but, on the other hand, it must suppose, in its turn, an inexplica­
ble correspondence between my real perception of things and my 
2 26 

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
possible perception of certain cerebral movements which do not 
in any way resemble these things. When we look at it closely, we 
shall see that this is the reef upon which all idealism is wrecked: 
there is no possible transition from the order which is perceived 
by our senses to the order which we are to conceive for the sake of 
our science, - or, if we are dealing more particularly with the 
Kantian idealism, no possible transition from sense to understand­
ing. So my only refuge seems to be ordinary dualism. I place matter 
on this side, mind on that, and I suppose that cerebral movements 
are the cause or the occasion of my representation of objects. But 
if they are its cause, if they are enough to produce it, I must fall 
back, step-by-step, upon the materialistic hypothesis of an epi­
phenomenal consciousness. If they are only its occasion, I thereby 
suppose that they do not resemble it in any way, and so, depriving 
matter of all the qualities which I conferred upon it in my repre­
sentation, I come back to idealism. Idealism and materialism are 
then the two poles between which this kind of dualism will always 
oscillate; and when, in order to maintain the duality of substances, 
it decides to make them both of equal rank, it will be led to regard 
them as two translations of one and the same original, two paral­
lel and predetermined developments of a single principle, and thus 
to deny their reciprocal influence, and, by an inevitable conse­
quence, to sacrifice freedom. 
Now, if we look beneath these three hypotheses, we find that 
they have a common basis: all three regard the elementary opera­
tions of the mind, perception and memory, as operations of pure 
knowledge. What they place at the origin of consciousness is either 
the useless duplicate of an external reality or the inert material of 
an intellectual construction entirely disinterested: but they always 
neglect the relation of perception with action and of memory with 
conduct. Now, it is no doubt possible to conceive, as an ideal limit, 
a memory and a perception that are disinterested; but, in fact, it 
2 27 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
i s  toward action that memory and perception are turned; i t  is 
action that the body prepares. Do we consider perception? The 
growing complexity of the nervous system shunts the excitation 
received onto an ever larger variety of motor mechanisms and so 
sketches simultaneously an ever larger number of possible actions. 
Do we turn to memory? We note that its primary function is to 
evoke all those past perceptions which are analogous to the pre­
sent perception, to recall to us what preceded and followed them, 
and so to suggest to us that decision which is the most useful. 
But this is not all. By allowing us to grasp in a single intuition 
multiple moments of duration, it frees us from the movement of 
the flow of things, that is to say, from the rhythm of necessity. 
The more of these moments memory can contract into one, the 
firmer is the hold which it gives to us on matter: so the memory 
of a living being appears indeed to measure, above all, its powers 
of action upon things and to be only the intellectual reverbera­
tion of this power. Let us start, then, from this energy, as from the 
true principle: let us suppose that the body is a center of action, 
and only a center of action. We must see what consequences then 
result for perception, for memory, and for the relations between 
body and mind. 
III. To take perception first. Here is my body with its "perceptive 
centers." These centers vibrate, and I have the representation of 
things. On the other hand, I have supposed that these vibrations 
can neither produce nor translate my perception. It is, then, out­
side them. Where is it? I cannot hesitate as to the answer: posit­
ing my body, I posit a certain image, but with it also the aggregate 
of the other images, since there is no material image which does 
not owe its qualities, its determinations, in short, its existence, 
to the place which it occupies in the totality of the universe. My 
perception can, then, only be some part of these objects them-
2 2 8  

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
selves; it is in them rather than they in it. But what is i t  exactly 
within them? I see that my perception appears to follow all the 
vibratory detail of the so-called sensitive nerves; yet I know that 
the role of their vibrations is solely to prepare the reaction of my 
body on neighboring bodies, to sketch out my virtual actions. Per­
ception, therefore, consists in detaching, from the totality of 
objects, the possible action of my body upon them. Perception 
appears, then, as only a choice. It creates nothing; its office, on 
the contrary, is to eliminate from the totality of images all those 
on which I can have no hold, and then, from each ofthose which I 
retain, all that does not concern the needs of the image which I 
call my body. Such, at least, much simplified, is the way we explain 
or describe schematically what we have called pure perception. 
Let us mark out at once the intermediate place which we thus 
take up between realism and idealism. 
That every reality has a kinship, an analogy - in short, a rela­
tion with consciousness - this is what we concede to idealism by 
the very fact that we term things "images." No philosophical doc­
trine, moreover, provided that it is consjstent with itself, can escape 
from this conclusion. But, if we could assemble all the states of 
consciousness, past, present and possible, of all conscious beings, 
we should still only have gathered a very small part of material 
reality because images outrun perception on every side. It is just 
these images that science and metaphysic seek to reconstitute, 
thus restoring the whole of a chain of which our perception grasps 
only a few links. But, in order thus to discover between percep­
tion and reality the relation of the part to the whole, it is neces­
sary to leave to perception its true office, which is to prepare actions. 
This is what idealism fails to do. Why is it unable, as we said just 
now, to pass from the order manifested in perception to the order 
which is successful in science, that is to say, from the contingency 
with which our sensations appear to follow each other to the deter-
2 29 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
minism which binds together the phenomena of nature? Precisely 
because it attributes to consciousness, in perception, a specula­
tive role, so that it is impossible to see what interest this con­
sciousness has in allowing to escape, between two sensations, for 
instance, the intermediate links through which the second might 
be deduced from the first. These intermediaries and their strict 
order thus remain obscure, whether, with Mill, we make the inter­
mediaries into "possible sensations," or, with Kant, hold the 
substructure of the order to be the work of an impersonal under­
standing. But suppose that my conscious perception has an entirely 
practical destination, simply indicating, in the aggregate of things, 
that which interests my possible action upon them: I can then 
understand that all the rest escapes me, and that, nevertheless, all 
the rest is of the same nature as what I perceive. My conscious­
ness of matter is then no longer either subjective, as it is for English 
idealism, or relative, as it is for the Kantian idealism. It is not 
subjective, for it is in things rather than in me. It is not rela­
tive, because the relation between the "phenomenon" and the 
"thing" is not that of appearance to reality, but merely that of the 
part to the whole. 
Here we seem to return to realism. But realism, unless cor­
rected on an essential point, is as unacceptable as idealism and for 
the same reason. Idealism, we said, cannot pass from the order 
manifested in perception to the order which is successful in sci­
ence, that is to say, to reality. Inversely, realism fails to draw from 
reality the immediate consciousness which we have of it. Taking 
the point of view of ordinary realism, we have, on the one hand, a 
composite matter made up of more or less independent parts, dif­
fused throughout space, and, on the other hand, a mind which 
can have no point of contact with matter, unless it be, as material­
ists maintain, the unintelligible epiphenomenon. If we prefer the 
standpoint of the Kantian realism, we find between the "thing-in-

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
itself," that is to say, the real, and the "sensuous manifold" from 
which we construct our knowledge, no conceivable relation, no 
common measure. Now, if we get to the bottom of these two 
extreme forms of realism, we see that they converge toward the 
same point: both raise homogeneous space as a barrier between 
the intellect and things. The simpler realism makes of this space a 
reaJ medium, in which things are in suspension; Kantian realism 
regards it as an ideaJ medium, in which the multiplicity of sensa­
tions is coordinated; but for both of them tis medium is given to 
begin with, as the necessary condition of what comes to abide in it. 
And if we try to get to the bottom of this common hypothesis, in 
its turn, we find that it consists in attributing to homogeneous 
space a disinterested office: space is supposed either merely to 
uphold material reality or to have the function, still purely specu­
lative, of furnishing sensations with means of coordinating them­
selves. So the obscurity of realism, like that of idealism, comes 
from the fact that, in both of them, our conscious perception and 
the conditions of our conscious perception are assumed to point 
to pure knowledge, not to action. But now suppose that this homo­
geneous space is not logically anterior, but posterior to material 
things and to the pure knowledge which we can have of them; 
suppose that extensity is prior to space; suppose that homoge­
neous space concerns our action and only our action, being like 
an infinitely fine network which we stretch beneath material con­
tinuity in order to render ourselves masters of it, to decompose it 
according to the plan of our activities and our needs. Then, not 
only has our hypothesis the advantage of bringing us into harmony 
with science, which shows us each thing exercising an influence 
on all the others and, consequently, occupying, in a certain sense, 
the whole of the extended (although we perceive of this thing 
only its center and mark its limits at the point where our body 
ceases to have any hold upon it). Not only has it the advantage, in 
2 3 1 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
metaphysic, of suppressing or lessening the contradictions raised 
by divisibility in space - contradictions which always arise, as 
we have shown, from our failure to dissociate the two points of 
view, that of action from that of knowledge. It has, above all, 
the advantage of overthrowing the insurmountable barriers raised 
by realism between the extended world and our perception of it. 
For whereas this doctrine assumes, on the one hand, an external 
reality which is multiple and divided, and, on the other hand, 
sensations alien from extensity and without possible contact 
with it, we find that concrete extensity is not really divided, any 
more than immediate perception is in truth unextended. Starting 
from realism, we come back to the point to which idealism had 
led us; we replace perception in things. And we see realism and 
idealism ready to come to an understanding when we set aside 
the postulate, uncritically accepted by both, which served them 
as a common frontier. 
To sum up: if we suppose an extended continuum, and, in this 
continuum, the center of real action which is represented by our 
body, its activity will appear to illuminate all those parts of mat­
ter with which at each successive moment it can deal. The same 
needs, the same power of action, which have delimited our body 
in matter, will also carve out distinct bodies in the surrounding 
medium. Everything will happen as if we allowed to filter through 
us that action of external things which is real, in order to arrest 
and retain that which is virtual: this virtual action of things upon 
our body and of our body upon things is our perception itself. But 
since the excitations which our body receives from surrounding 
bodies determine unceasingly, within its substance, nascent reac­
tions - since these internal movements of the cerebral substance 
thus sketch out at every moment our possible action on things, 
the state of the brain exactly corresponds to the perception. It is 
neither its cause, nor its effect, nor in any sense its duplicate: it 

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
merely continues it, the perception being our virtual action and 
the cerebral state our action already begun. 
IV. But this theory of "pure perception" had to be both qualified 
and completed in regard to two points. For the so-called "pure" 
perception, which is like a fragment of reality, detached just as it 
is, would belong to a being unable to mingle with the perception 
of other bodies that of its own body, that is to say, its affections; 
nor would it be able to mingle with its intuition of the actual 
moment that of other moments, that is to say, its memory. In other 
words, we have, to begin with, and for the convenience of study, 
treated the living body as a mathematical point in space and con­
scious perception as a mathematical instant in time. We then had 
to restore to the body its extensity and to perception its duration. 
By this we restored to consciousness its two subjective elements, 
affectivity and memory. 
What is an affection? Our perception, we said, indicates the 
possible action of our body on others. But our body, being extended, 
is capable of acting upon itself as well as upon other bodies. Into 
our perception, then, something of our body must enter. When 
we are dealing with external bodies, these are, by hypothesis, sep­
arated from ours by a space, greater or lesser, which measures the 
remoteness in time of their promise or of their menace: this is 
why our perception of these bodies indicates only possible actions. 
But the more the distance diminishes between these bodies and 
our own, the more the possible action tends to transform itself 
into a real action, the call for action becoming more urgent in the 
measure and proportion that the distance diminishes. And when 
this distance is nil, that is to say, when the body to be perceived is 
our own body, it is a real and no longer a virtual action that our 
perception sketches out. Such is, precisely, the nature of pain, an 
actual effort of the damaged part to set things to rights, an effort 
2 3 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
that is local, isolated, and thereby condemned to failure, in an 
organism which can no longer act except as a whole. Pain is, there­
fore, in the place where it is felt, as the object is at the place where 
it is perceived. Between the affection felt and the image perceived 
there is this difference, that the affection is within our body, the 
image outside our body. And that is why the surface of our body, 
the common limit of this and of other bodies, is given to us in the 
form both of sensations and of an image. 
In this interiority of affective sensation consists its subjectiv­
ity; in that exteriority of images in general, their objectivity. But 
here again we encounter the ever-recurring mistake with which 
we have been confronted throughout this work. It is supposed 
that perception and sensation exist for their own sake; the phi­
losopher ascribes to them an entirely speculative function; and, 
as he has overlooked those real and virtual actions with which 
sensation and perception are bound up and by which, according 
as the action is virtual or real, perception and sensation are char­
acterized and distinguished, he becomes unable to find any other 
difference between them than a difference of degree. Then, prof­
iting by the fact that affective sensation is but vaguely localized 
(because the effort it involves is an indistinct effort) at once he 
declares it to be unextended, and these attenuated affections or 
unextended sensations he sets up as the material with which we 
are supposed to build up images in space. Thereby he condemns 
himself to an impossibility of expfaining either whence arise the 
elements of consciousness, or sensations, which he sets up as so 
many absolutes, or how, unextended, they find their way to space 
and are coordinated there, or why, in it, they adopt a particular 
order rather than any other, or, finally, how they manage to make 
up an experience which is regular and common to all men. This 
experience, the necessary field of our activity, is, on the contrary, 
what we should start from. Pure perceptions, therefore, or images, 
2 34 

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
are what we should posit at the outset. And sensations, far from 
being the materials from which the image is wrought, will then 
appear as the impurity which is introduced into it, being that part 
of our own body which we project into all others. 
V. But, as long as we confine ourselves to sensation and to pure 
perception, we can hardly be said to be dealing with the spirit. 
No doubt we demonstrate, in opposition to the theory of an epi­
phenomenal consciousness, that no cerebral state is the equiva­
lent of a perception. No doubt the choice of perceptions from 
among images in general is the effect of a discernment which fore­
shadows spirit. No doubt also the material universe itself, defined 
as the totality of images, is a kind of consciousness, a conscious­
ness in which everything compensates and neutralizes everything 
else, a consciousness of which all the potential parts, balancing 
each other by a reaction which is always equal to the action, recip­
rocally hinder each other from standing out. But to touch the real­
ity of spirit we must place ourselves at the point where an individual 
consciousness, continuing and retaining the past in a present 
enriched by it, thus escapes the law of necessity, the law which 
ordains that the past shall ever follow itself in a present which 
merely repeats it in another form and that all things shall ever be 
flowing away. When we pass from pure perception to memory, 
we definitely abandon matter for spirit. 
VI. The theory of memory, around which the whole of our work 
centers, must be both the theoretic consequence and the experi­
mental verification of our theory of pure perception. That the 
cerebral states which accompany perception are neither its cause 
nor its duplicate, and that perception bears to its physiological 
counterpart the relation of a virtual action to an action begun -
this we cannot substantiate by facts, since on our hypothesis every-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
thing i s  bound to happen as i f  perception were a consequence of 
the state of the brain. For, in pure perception, the perceived object 
is a present object, a body which modifies our own. Its image is 
then actually given, and therefore, the facts permit us to say indif­
ferently (though we are far from knowing our own meaning equally 
well in the two cases) that the cerebral modifications sketch the 
nascent reactions of our body or that they create in consciousness 
the duplicate of the present image. But with memory it is other­
wise, for a remembrance is the representation of an absent object. 
Here the two hypotheses must have opposite consequences. If, in 
the case of a present object, a state of our body is thought suffi­
cient to create the representation ofthe object, still more must it 
be thought so in the case of an object that is represented though 
absent. It is necessary, therefore, in this theory, that the remem­
brance should arise from the attenuated repetition of the cerebral 
phenomenon which occasioned the primary perception and should 
consist simply in a perception weakened. Therefore this double 
thesis: Memory is only a function of the brain, and there is only a differ­
ence of intensity between perception and recollection. If on the contrary, 
the cerebral state in no way begets our perception of the present 
object but merely continues it, it may also prolong and convert 
into action the recollection of it which we summon up, but it 
cannot give birth to that recollection. And as, on the other hand, 
our perception of the present object is something of that object 
itself, our representation of the absent object must be a phenome­
non of quite another order than perception, since between pres­
ence and absence there are no degrees, no intermediate stages. 
Thus this double thesis, which is the opposite of the former: memory 
is something other than a function of the brain, and there is not merely a 
difference of degree, but of kind, between perception and recollection. The 
conflict between the two theories now takes an acute form, and 
this time experience can judge between them. 

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C D N C L U S I D N  
We will not here recapitulate i n  detail the proof we have tried 
to elaborate, but merely recall its essential points. All the argu­
ments from fact, which may be invoked in favor of a probable accu­
mulation of memories in the cortical substance, are drawn from 
localized disorders of memory. But, if recollections were really 
deposited in the brain, characteristic lesions of the brain would 
correspond to definite gaps in memory. Now, in those forms of 
amnesia in which a whole period of our past existence, for exam­
ple, is abruptly and entirely obliterated from memory, we do not 
observe any precise cerebral lesion; on the contrary, in those dis­
orders of memory where cerebral localization is distinct and cer­
tain, that is to say, in the different types of aphasia and in the 
diseases of visual or auditory recognition, we do not find that cer­
tain definite recollections are as it were torn from their seat, but 
it is the whole faculty of remembering that is more or less dimin­
ished in vitality, as if the subject had more or less difficulty in bring­
ing his recollections into contact with the present situation. The 
mechanism of this contact was, therefore, what we had to study 
in order to ascertain whether the office of the brain is not rather to 
ensure its working than to imprison the recollections in cells. 
We were thus led to follow through its windings the progres­
sive movement by which past and present come into contact with 
each other, that is to say, the process of recognition. And we found, 
in fact, that the recognition of a present object might be effected 
in two absolutely different ways, but that in neither case did the 
brain act as a reservoir of images. Sometimes, by an entirely pas­
sive recognition, acted rather than thought, the body responds to a 
perception that recurs by a movement or attitude that has become 
automatic: in this case, everything is explained by the motor appa­
ratus which habit has set up in the body, and lesions of the memory 
may result from the destruction of these mechanisms. Sometimes, 
on the other hand, recognition is actively produced by memory-
2 3 7  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
images which go out 'to meet the present perception; but then it 
is necessary that these recollections, at the moment that they over­
lie the perception, should be able to set going in the brain the 
same machinery that perception ordinarily sets to work in order 
to produce actions; if not foredoomed to impotence, they will 
have no tendency to become actual. And this is why, in all cases 
where a lesion of the brain attacks a certain category of recollec­
tions, the affected recollections do not resemble each other by all 
belonging to the same period, for instance, or by any logical rela­
tionship to each other, but simply in that they are all auditive or 
all visual or all motor. That which is damaged appears to be the 
various sensorial or motor areas, or, more often still, those append­
ages which permit of their being set going from within the cor­
tex, rather than the recollections themselves. We even went further, 
and by an attentive study of the recognition of words and also of 
the phenomena of sensory aphasia, we endeavored to prove that 
recognition is in no way effected by a mechanical awakening of 
memories that are asleep in the brain. It implies, on the contrary, 
a more or less high degree of tension in consciousness, which goes 
to fetch pure recollections in pure memory in order to material­
ize them progressively by contact with the present perception. 
But what is this pure memory and what are pure recollections? 
By the answer to this inquiry we completed the demonstration of 
our thesis. We had just established its first point, that is to say, 
that memory is something other than a function of the brain. We 
had still to show, by the analysis of "pure recollection," that there 
is not between recollection and perception a mere difference of 
degree but a radical difference of kind. 
VII .  Let us point out to begin with the metaphysical, and no longer 
merely psychological, bearing of this last problem. No doubt we 
have a thesis of pure psychology in a proposition such as this: rec-

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
ollection i s  a weakened perception. But let there be no mistake: 
if recollection is only a weakened perception, inversely, percep­
tion must be something like an intenser memory. Now the germ 
of English idealism is to be found here. This idealism consists in 
finding only a difference of degree, and not of kind, between the 
reality of the object perceived and the ideality of the object con­
ceived. And the belief that we construct matter from our interior 
states and that perception is only a true hallucination, also arises 
from this thesis. It is this belief that we have always combated 
whenever we have treated of matter. Either, then, our conception 
of matter is false, or memory is radically distinct from perception. 
We have thus transposed a metaphysical problem so as to make 
it coincide with a psychological problem which direct observa­
tion is able to solve. How does psychology solve it? If the memory 
of a perception were but this perception weakened, it might make 
us, for instance, take the perception of a slight sound for the rec­
ollection of a loud noise. Now such a confusion never occurs. But 
we may go further, and say that the consciousness of a recollec­
tion never occurs as an actual weak state which we try to relegate 
to the past so soon as we become aware of its weakness. How, 
indeed, unless we already possessed the representation of a past 
previously lived, could we relegate to it the less intense psychical 
states, when it would be so simple to set them alongside of strong 
states as a present experience which is confused, beside a present 
experience, which is clear? The truth is that memory does not 
consist in a regression from the present to the past, but, on the 
contrary, in a progression from the past to the present. It is in the 
past that we place ourselves at a stroke. We start from a "virtual 
state" which we lead onwards, step-by-step, through a series of 
different planes of consciousness, up to the goal where it is material­
ized in an actual perception; that is to say, up to the point where it 
becomes a present, active state - up to that extreme plane of our 
2 3 9  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
consciousness against which our body stands out. I n  this virtual 
state, pure memory consists. 
How is it that the testimony of consciousness on this point is 
misunderstood? How is it that we make of recollection a weak­
ened perception, of which it is impossible to say either why we 
relegate it to the past, how we rediscover its date, or by what right 
it reappears at one moment rather than at another? We do so sim­
ply because we forget the practical end of all our actual psychical 
states. Perception is made into a disinterested work of the mind, 
a pure contemplation. Then, as pure recollection can evidently 
be only something of this kind (since it does not correspond to a 
present and urgent reality), memory and perception become states 
of the same nature, and between them no other difference than a 
difference of intensity can be found. But the truth is that our pre­
sent should not be defined as that which is more intense: it is that 
which acts on us and which makes us act; it is sensory and it is 
motor - our present is, above all, the state of our body. Our past, 
on the contrary, is that which acts no longer but which might act, 
and will act by inserting itself into a present sensation from which 
it borrows the vitality. It is true that, from the moment when the 
recollection actualizes itself in this manner, it ceases to be a rec­
ollection and becomes once more a perception. 
We understand then why a remembrance cannot be the result 
of a state of the brain. The state of the brain continues the remem­
brance; it gives it a hold on the present by the materiality which it 
confers upon it: but pure memory is a spiritual manifestation. With 
memory we are, in truth, in the domain of spirit. 
VIII. It was not our task to explore this domain. Placed at the 
confluence of mind and matter, desirous chiefly of seeing the one 
flow into the other, we had only to retain, of the spontaneity of 
intellect, its place of conjunction with bodily mechanism. In this 
240 

S U M M A R Y 
A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
way we were led to consider the phenomena of association and 
the birth of the simplest general ideas. 
What is the cardinal error of associationism? It is to have set 
all recollections on the same plane, to have misunderstood the 
greater or lesser distance which separates them from the present 
bodily state, that is from action. Thus associationism is unable to 
explain either how the recollection clings to the perception which 
evokes it, or why association is effected by similarity or contigu­
ity rather than in any other way, or, finally, by what caprice a par­
ticular recollection is chosen among the thousand others which 
similarity or contiguity might equally well attach to the present 
perception. This means that associationism has mixed and con­
founded all the different planes of consciousness and that it persists 
in regarding a less complete recollection as one that is less com­
plex, whereas it is in reality a recollection less dreamed, more imper­
sonal, nearer to action and, therefore, more capable of molding 
itself - like a ready-made garment - upon the new character of 
the present situation. The opponents of associationism have, more­
over, followed it onto this ground. They combat the theory because 
it explains the higher operations of the mind by association, but 
not because it misunderstands the true nature of association itself. 
Yet this is the original vice of associationism. 
Between the plane of action - the plane in which our body has 
condensed its past into motor habits - and the plane of pure 
memory, where our mind retains in all its details the picture of 
our past life, we believe that we can discover thousands of differ­
ent planes of consciousness, a thousand integral and yet diverse 
repetitions of the whole of the experience through which we have 
lived. To complete a recollection by more personal details does 
not at all consist in mechanically juxtaposing other recollections 
to this, but in transporting ourselves to a wider plane of conscious­
ness, in going away from action in the direction of dream. Neither 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
does the localizing of a recollection consist i n  inserting i t  mechani­
cally among other memories, but in describing, by an increasing 
expansion of the memory as a whole, a circle large enough to 
include this detail from the past. These planes, moreover, are l!0t 
given as ready-made things superposed the one on the other. Rather 
they exist virtually, with that existence which is proper to things 
of the spirit. The intellect, forever moving in the interval which 
separates them, unceasingly finds them again or creates them anew: 
the life ofintellect consists in this very movement. Then we under­
stand why the laws of association are similarity and contiguity rather 
than any other laws, and why memory chooses among recollec­
tions which are similar or contiguous certain images rather than 
other images, and, finally, how by the combined work of body 
and mind the earliest general ideas are formed. The interest of a 
living being lies in discovering in the present situation that which 
resembles a former situation, and then in placing alongside of that 
present situation what preceded and followed the previous one, 
in order to profit by past experience. Of all the associations which 
can be imagined, those of resemblance and contiguity are there­
fore at first the only associations that have a vital utility. But, in 
order to understand the mechanism of these associations and above 
all the apparently capricious selection which they make of memo­
ries, we must place ourselves alternately on the two extreme planes 
of consciousness which we have called the plane of action and the 
plane of dream. In the first are displayed only motor habits; these 
may be called associations which are acted or lived, rather than 
represented. Here resemblance and contiguity are fused together, 
for analogous external situations, as they recur, and have ended by 
connecting together certain bodily movements; thenceforth, the 
same automatic reaction, in which we unfold these contiguous 
movements, will also draw from the situation which occasions 
them its resemblance to former situations. But, as we pass from 

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
movements to images and from poorer to richer images, resem­
blance and contiguity part company: they end by contrasting sharply 
with each other on that other extreme plane where no action is 
any longer affixed to the images. The choice of one resemblance 
among many, of one contiguity among others, is, therefore, not 
made at random: it depends on the ever-varying degree of the tension 
of memory, which, according to its tendency to insert itselfin the 
present act or to withdraw from it, transposes itself as a whole 
from one key into another. And this double movement of memory 
between its two extreme limits also sketches out, as we have 
shown, the first general ideas - motor habits ascending to seek 
similar images, in order to extract resemblances from them, 
and similar images coming down toward motor habits, to fuse them­
selves, for instance, in the automatic utterance of the word which 
makes them one. The nascent generality of the idea consists, then, 
in a certain activity of the mind, in a movement between action and 
representation. And this is why, as we have said, it will always be 
easy for a certain philosophy to localize the general idea at one of 
the two extremities, to make it crystallize into words or evapo­
rate into memories, whereas it really consists in the transit ofthe 
mind as it passes from one term to the other. 
IX. By representing elementary mental activity in this manner to 
ourselves, and by thus making of our body and all that surrounds 
it the pointed end ever moving, ever driven into the future by the 
weight of our past, we were able to confirm and illustrate what 
we had said of the function of the body, and at the same time to 
prepare the way for an approximation of body and mind. 
For after having successively studied pure perception and pure 
memory, we still had to bring them together. If pure recollection 
is already spirit, and if pure perception is still in a sense matter, 
we ought to be able, by placing ourselves at their meeting place, 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
to throw some light on the reciprocal action of spirit and matter. 
"Pure," that is to say, instantaneous, perception is, in fact, only an 
ideal, an extreme. Every perception fills a certain depth of dura­
tion, prolongs the past into the present, and thereby partakes of 
memory. So that if we take perception, in its concrete form, as a 
synthesis of pure memory and pure perception, that is to say, of 
mind and matter, we compress within its narrowest limits the prob­
lem of the union of soul and body. This is the attempt we have 
made especially in the latter part of this essay. 
The opposition of the two principles, in dualism in general, 
resolves itself into the threefold opposition of the inextended and 
the extended, quality and quantity, freedom and necessity. If our 
conception of the function of the body, if our analyses of pure 
perception and pure memory, are destined to throw light on any 
aspect of the correlation of body and mind, it can only be on con­
dition of suppressing or toning down these three oppositions. We 
will, then, examine them in turn, presenting here in a more meta­
physical form the conclusions which we have made a point of draw­
ing from psychology alone. 
First. If we imagine on the one hand the extended really divided 
into corpuscles, for example, and, on the other hand, a conscious­
ness with sensations, in themselves inextensive, which come to 
project themselves into space, we shall evidently find nothing com­
mon in such matter and such a consciousness to body and mind. 
But this opposition between perception and matter is the artifi­
cial work of an understanding which decomposes and recomposes 
according to its habits or its laws: it is not given in immediate 
intuition. What is given are not inextensive sensations: how should 
they find their way back to space, choose a locality within it, and 
coordinate themselves there so as to build up an experience that 
is common to all men? And what is real is not extension, divided 
into independent parts: how, being deprived of all possible rela-

S U M M A R Y 
A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
tionship to our consciousness, could i t  unfold a series of changes 
of which the relations and the order exactly correspond to the 
relations and the order of our representations? That which is given, 
that which is real, is something intermediate between divided 
extension and pure inextension. It is what we have termed the 
extensive. Extensity is the most salient quality of perception. It is 
in consolidating and in subdividing it by means of an abstract space, 
stretched by us beneath it for the needs of action, that we consti­
tute the composite and infinitely divisible extension. But it is in 
subtilizing it, in making it, in turn, dissolve into affective sensa­
tions and evaporate into a counterfeit of pure ideas, that we obtain 
those inextensive sensations with which we afterwards vainly 
endeavor to reconstitute images. And the two opposite directions 
in which we pursue this double labor open quite naturally before 
us because it is a result of the very necessities of action that exten­
sion should divide itself up for us into absolutely independent 
objects (whence an encouragement to go on subdividing exten­
sion) and that we should pass by insensible degrees from affection 
to perc'eption (whence a tendency to suppose perception more 
and more inextensive). But our understanding, of which the func­
tion is to set up logical distinctions, and, consequently, clean-cut 
oppositions, throws itself into each of these ways in turn and fol­
lows each to the end. It thus sets up, at one extremity, an infi­
nitely divisible extension and at the other, sensations which are 
absolutely inextensive. And it creates thereby the opposition which 
it afterwards contemplates amazed. 
Second. Far less artificial is the opposition between quality and 
quantity, that is to say, between consciousness and movement: but 
this opposition is radical only if we have already accepted the other. 
For if you suppose that the qualities of things are nothing but 
inextensive sensations affecting a consciousness, so that these quali­
ties represent merely, as so many symbols, homogeneous and cal-

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
culable changes going on i n  space, you must imagine between these 
sensations and these changes an incomprehensible correspondence. 
On the contrary, as soon as you give up establishing between them 
a priori this factitious contrariety, you see the barriers which seemed 
to separate them fall one after another. First, it is not true that 
consciousness, turned round on itself, is confronted with a merely 
internal procession of inextensive perceptions. I t is inside the very 
things perceived that you put back pure perception, and the first 
obstacle is thus removed. You are confronted with a second obsta­
cle, it is true: the homogeneous and calculable changes on which 
science works seem to belong to multiple and independent ele­
ments, such as atoms, of which these changes appear as mere acci­
dents, and this multiplicity comes in between the perception and 
its object. But if the division of the extended is purely relative to 
our possible action upon it, the idea of independent corpuscles is 
a fortiori schematic and provisional. Science itself, moreover, allows 
us to discard it, and so the second barrier falls. A last barrier remains 
to be jumped over: that which separates the heterogeneity of quali­
ties from the apparent homogeneity of movements that are 
extended. But, just because we have set aside the elements, atoms 
or whatnot, to which these movements had been affixed, we are 
no longer dealing with that movement which is the accident of a 
moving body, with that abstract motion which the mechanician 
studies and which is nothing, at bottom, but the common mea­
sure of concrete movements. How could this abstract motion, 
which becomes immobility when we alter our point of reference, 
be the basis of real changes, that is, of changes that are felt? How, 
composed as it is of a series of instantaneous positions, could it 
fill a duration of which the parts go over and merge each into the 
others? Only one hypothesis, then, remains possible; namely, that 
concrete movement, capable, like consciousness, of prolonging 
its past into its present, capable, by repeating itself, of engender-

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
ing sensible qualities, already possesses something akin to con­
sciousness, something akin to sensation. On this theory, it might 
be this same sensation diluted, spread out over an infinitely larger 
number of moments, this same sensation quivering, as we have 
said, like a chrysalis within its envelope. Then a last point would 
remain to be cleared up: how is the contraction effected - the 
contraction no longer of homogeneous movements into distinct 
qualities, but of changes that are less heterogeneous into changes 
that are more heterogeneous? But this question is answered by 
our analysis of concrete perception: this perception, the living 
synthesis of pure perception and pure memory, necessarily sums 
up in its apparent simplicity of moments. Between sensible quali­
ties, as regarded in our representation of them, and these same 
qualities treated as calculable changes, there is therefore only a 
difference in rhythm of duration, a difference of internal tension. 
Thus, by the idea of tension we have striven to overcome the oppo­
sition between quality and quantity, as, by the idea of extension, 
that between the inextended and the extended. Extension and 
tension admit of degrees, multiple but always determined. The 
function of the understanding is to detach from these two genera, 
extension and tension, their empty container, that is to say, homo­
geneous space and pure quantity, and thereby to substitute, for 
supple realities which permit of degrees, rigid abstractions born 
of the needs of action, which can only be taken or left - to create 
thus, for reflective thought, dilemmas of which neither alterna­
tive is accepted by reality. 
Third. But if we regard in this way the relations of the extended 
to the inextended, of quality to quantity, we shall have less diffi­
culty in comprehending the third and last opposition, that of free­
dom and necessity. Absolute necessity would be represented by a 
perfect equivalence of the successive moments of duration, each­
to-each. Is it so with the duration of the material universe? Can 
247 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
each moment b e  mathematically deduced from the preceding 
moment? We have throughout this work, and for the convenience 
of study, supposed that it was really so; and such is, in fact, the 
distance between the rhythm of our duration and that of the flow 
of things, that the contingency of the course of nature, so pro­
foundly studied in recent philosophy, must, for us, be practically 
equivalent to necessity. So let us keep to our hypothesis, though 
it might have to be attenuated. Even so, freedom is not in nature 
an imperium in imperio. We have said that this nature might be 
regarded as a neutralized and consequently, a latent conscious­
ness, a consciousness of which the eventual manifestations hold 
each other reciprocally in check, and annul each other precisely 
at the moment when they might appear. The first gleams which 
are thrown upon it by an individual consciousness do not there­
fore shine on it with an unheralded light: this consciousness does 
but remove an obstacle; it extracts from the whole that is real a 
part that is virtual, chooses and finally disengages that which inter­
ests it; and although, by that intelligent choice, it indeed mani­
fests that it owes to spirit its form, it assuredly takes from nature 
its matter. Moreover, while we watch the birth of that conscious­
ness we are confronted, at the same time, by the apparition of 
living bodies, capable, even in their simplest forms, of spontane­
ous and unforeseen movements. The progress ofliving matter con­
sists in a differentiation of function which leads first to the 
production and then to the increasing complication of a nervous 
system capable of canalizing excitations and of organizing actions: 
the more the higher centers develop, the more numerous become 
the motor paths among which the same excitation allows the liv­
ing being to choose, in order that it may act. An ever greater lati­
tude left to movement in space - this indeed is what is seen. What 
is not seen is the growing and accompanying tension of conscious­
ness in time. Not only, by its memory of former experience, does 

S U M M A R Y  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N  
this consciousness retain the past better and better, so as to orga­
nize it with the present in a newer and richer decision; but, living 
with an intenser life, contracting, by its memory of the immedi­
ate experience, a growing number of external moments in its pre­
sent duration, it becomes more capable of creating acts of which 
the inner indetermination, spread over as large a multiplicity of 
the moments of matter as you please, will pass the more easily 
through the meshes of necessity. Thus, whether we consider it 
in time or in space, freedom always seems to have its roots 
deep in necessity and to be intimately organized with it. Spirit 
borrows from matter the perceptions on which it feeds and restores 
them to matter in the form of movements which it has stamped 
with its own freedom. 
249 


N o t e s  
I NTRODUCTIO N  
1 .  We have laid stress on this particular point in an essay on "Le paralogisme 
psycho-physiologique," Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale (Nov., 1904). 
2. F. Moutier, L'Aphasie de Broca, Paris, 1908; especially Chapter VI I. Cf. the 
work of Professor Pierre Marie. 
3. P. Janet, Les Obsessions et la psychasthenie, Paris, 1903; in particular, pp. 474-502. 
CHAPTER I 
1 .  The word representation is used throughout this book in the French sense, 
as meaning a mental picture, which mental picture is very often perception. 
(Translators' note.) 
2. Lotze, Metaphysic, Oxford, 1887, vol. ii, p. 206. 
3. Schwarz, Das Wahrnehmungsproblem, Leipzig, 1892, pp. 313ff. 
4. 
The word "spiritualism" is used throughout this work to signify any philoso­
phy that claims lor spirit an existence of its own. (Translators' note. ) 
CHAPTER I I  
I .  Robertson, "Reflex Speech," Journal of Mental Science (April, 1888). Cf. the 
article by Ch. Fere, "Le langage reflexe," Revue Philosophique (jan., 1 896). 
2. Oppenheim, "Ueber das Verhalten der musikalischen Ausdrucksbewegungen 
bei Aphatischen," (harite Annalen, xiii ( 1888) pp. 348ff. 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
3 .  Ibid., p. 365 . 
4. See, on the subject of this sense of error, the article by Muller and Schumann, 
"Experimentelle Beitrage zur Untersuchung des Gedacthtnisses," Zeitschr. f 
Psych. u. Phys. der Sinnesorsane ( Dec., 1 893), p. 305 . 
5 .  W.G. Smith, "The Relation of Attention to Memory," Mind (Jan., 1 895 ). 
6. Ibid., p. 23. 
7. Something of this nature appears to take place in that affection which German 
authors call Dyslexie. The patient reads the first words of a sentence correctly, 
and then stops abruptly, unable to go on, as though the movements of articula­
tion had inhibited memory. See, on the subject of dyslexie: Berlin, Eine besondere 
Art der Wortblindheit (Dyslexie), Weisbaden, 1887, and Sommer, "Die Dyslexie als 
functionelle Starung," Arch. f Psychiatrie ( 1893). We may also compare with 
these phenomena the remarkable cases of word deafness in which the patient 
understands the speech of others, but no longer understands his own. (See exam­
ples cited by Bateman, On Aphasia, p. 200; by Bernard, De J'aphasie, Paris, 1 889, 
pp. 143 and 144; and by Broadbent, "Case of Peculiar Affection of Speech," Brain 
[ 1878-79J, pp. 484ff. ) 
8. 
Mortimer Granville, "Ways of Remembering," Lancet, Sept. 27, 1899, p. 458. 
9. Kay, Memory and How to Improve It, New York, 1888. 
1 0. See the systematic treatment of this thesis, supported by experiments, in 
Lehmann's articles, "Ueber Wiedererkennen," Philos. Studien Wundt, vol. v, pp. 96ff, 
and vol. vii, pp. 169ff. 
1 1 .  Pillon, "La formation des idees abstraites et generales," Crit. Phi/os. (1885), 
vol .  i, pp. 208ff. Cf. Ward, "Assimilation and Association," Mind (July, 1893 and 
Oct., 1894). 
1 2. Brochard, "La loi de similarite," Revue Philosophique, vol. ix ( 1880), p. 258. 
M. Rabier shows himself also of this opinion in his "Le<;:ons de philosophic," 
Psych% sie, vol. i, pp. 1 87-92. 
1 3. Pillon, "La formation des idees abstraites et generales," p. 207. Cf. James 
Scully, The Human Mind, vol. i, London, 1 892, p. 331. 
14. I-Ioffding, "Ueber Wiedererkennen, Association und psychische Activitiit," 
Vierteljahresschrift f wissenschaftliche Philosophie ( 1889), p. 433. 

N O T E S  
1 5 .  Munk, Veber die Functionen der Grosshirnrinde, Berlin, 1881, pp. \08fl: 
16. Die Seelenblindheit als Herderscheinung, Wiesbaden, 1887, p. 56. 
1 7. "Ein Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Seelenblindheit," Arch. f Psychiatrie, vol. xxiv 
(1892). 
1 8. "Ein Fall von Seelenblindheit," Arch. f Psychiatrie ( 1889). 
1 9. Reported by Bernard, "Un cas de suppression brusque et isolee de la vision 
mentale," Progres Medical, july 21, 1 883. 
20. Kussmaul, Die Stiirungen der Sprache, Leipzig, 1 877, p. 181. Allen Starr, "Apraxia 
and Aphasia," Medical Record, Oct. 27, 1 888. Cf. Laquer, "Zur Localisation der 
Sensorischen Aphasic," Neurolog. Centralblatt,june 15, 1888; and Dodds, "On Some 
Central Affections ofYisions," Brain ( 1885 ). 
2 1 .  "Les mouvements et leur importance psychologique," Revue Philosophique, 
vol. viii (1879), pp. 271ff. Cf. Psychologie de I'attention, Paris, 1889, p. 75. 
22. Physiology of Mind, pp. 206ff. 
23. In one of the most ingenious chapters of his Psychologie, vol .  i, p. 242, Paris, 
1893, Fouillee says that the sense of familiarity is largely due to the diminution 
of the inward shock which constitutes surprise. 
24. Arch. f Psychiatrie ( 1889-90), p. 224. Cf. Wilbrand, p. 140; and Bernhardt, 
"Eigenthumlicher Fall von Hirnerkrankung," Berliner klinische Wochenschrift (1877), 
p. 581. 
25. Arch. f Psychiatrie, vol. xxiv, p. 898. 
26. Arch. f Psychiatrie (1 889-90), p. 233. 
27. Marillier, "Remarques sur Ie mecanisme de l'attention," Revue Philosophique, 
vol. xxvii (1889). Cf. Ward, art. "Psychology" in the Encyclopaedia Britannica; and 
Bradley, "Is There a Special Activity of Attention?" Mind, vol. xi ( 1886) p. 305. 
28. Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i, p. 247. 
29. Wundt, "Grundzuge der physiologischen," Psychologie, vol. iii, pp. 331ff. 
30. Maudsley, Physiology of Mind, p. 299. Cf. Bastian, "Les processus nerveux dans 
l'attention," Revue Philosophique, vol. xxxiii, pp. 360ff. 
3 1 .  W. james, Principles of Psychology, vol. i, p. 441. 
32. Psychologie de I'attention, Paris, 1 889. 
2 5 3  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
33. Marillier, op. cit. Cf. J .  Sully, "The Psycho-physical Process in Attention," 
Brain (1890) p. 1 54. 
34. N. Lange, "Beitr. zur Theorie der Sinnlichen Aufmerksamkeit," Philos. 
Studien Wundt, vol. vii, pp. 390-422. 
35. Beitrage zur Experimentellen Psychologic, vol .  iv, pp. 15fl'. 
36. Grundriss der Psychologie, Leipzig, 1893, p. 185. 
37. "Zur Physiologie und Pathologie des Lesens," Zeitschr. f Klinische Medicin (1893). 
Cf. McKeen Cattell, " Ueber die Zeit der Erkennung von Schriftzeichen" Philos. 
Studien ( 1 885-86). 
38. "Ueber Aphasie und ihre Beziehungen zur Wahrnehmungen," Arch. f Psychiatrie 
vol. xvi ( 1880). 
39. Lichtheim, "On Aphasia," Brain (Jan., 1 885), p. 447. 
40. Ibid., p. 454. 
4 1 .  Bastian, "On Different Kinds of Aphasia," British Medical Journal (Oct. and 
Nov., 1887) p. 935. 
42. Romberg, Lehrbuch der Nervenkrankheiten, vol. ii (1853 ). 
43. Quoted by Bateman, On Aphasia, London, 1890, p. 79. Cf. Marce, "Memoire 
sur quelques observations de physiologie pathologique," Mem. de la Soc. de Biologie, 
2nd series, vol. ii, p. 102. 
44. Forbes Winslow, On Obscure Diseases of the Brain, London, 1861, p. 505. 
45. Kussmaul, Die Storungen der Sprache, Leipzig, 1877, pp. 5 5ff. 
46. Arnaud, "Contribution a I'etude clinique de la surdite verbale," Arch. de 
Neurologie ( 1 886), p. 192. Spamer, "Ueber Asymbolie," Arch. f Pƽvchiatrie, vol. vi, 
pp. 507 and 5 24. 
47. See, in particular: P. Serieux, "Sur un cas de surditc verbale pure," Revue de 
Medecine, 1893; pp. 733ff. Lichtheim, loc. cit.; p. 461; and Arnaud, "Contrib. a 
I'etude de la surdite verbale ( 2e article), "Arch. de Neurologie (1886), p. 366. 
48. Adler, "Beitrag zur Kenntniss der seltneren Formen von sensorischer Aphasie," 
Neurol. Centralblatt, ( 1891). pp. 296ff. 
49. Bernard, De I'Aphasie, Paris, 1 889, p. 143. 
50. Ballet, Lc Langage interieur, Paris, 1888, p. 85. 
5 1 .  See the three cases cited by Arnaud in the Archives de Neurologie (1886), 

N O T E S  
pp. 366ff. ("Contrib. clinique a I'etude de la surdite verbale," 2nd article). Cf. 
Schmidt's case, "Gehors- und Sprachstorung in Folge von Apoplexie," Allg. 
Zeitschriften f Psxchiatrie vol. xxvii ( 1 871), p. 304. 
52. Stricker, Studien uber die Sprachvorstellung, Vienna, 1 880. 
53. Bernard, pp. 172 and 179. Cf. Babilee, Les Troubles de la memoire dans l'alcoolisme, 
Paris, 1886 (medical thesis), p.44. 
54. Rieger, Beschreibung der lntelligenzstiirungen in Folge einer Hirnverletzung, Wurz­
burg, 1889, p. 35. 
55. Wernicke, Der aphasische Svmptomencomplex. Breslau, 1 874, p. 39. Cf. Valentin, 
"Sur un cas d'aphasie d'origine traumatique," Revue Medicale de l'Est, (1880), p. 171. 
56. Ribot, Les Maladies de la memoire, Paris 1881, pp. I3lff. 
57. Forbes Winslow, On Obscure Diseases of the Brain, London, 1861. 
58. Ibid., p. 372. 
59. Pierre Janet, Etat mental des hpteriques, vol. ii, Paris, 1 894, pp. 263ff. Cf. 
L 'Automatisme psXchologique, Paris 1889, by the same author. 
60. See Grashey's case, studied afresh by Sommer, and by him declared to be 
inexplicable according to the existing theories of aphasia. In this instance, the 
movements executed by the patient seem to me to have been Signals addressed 
by him to an independent memory. (Sommer, "Zur Psychologie der Sprache," 
Zeitschr. f Psxchol. u. Phpiol. der Sinnesorgane, vol. ii, (1 891), pp. 143ff. Cf. Sommer's 
paper at the Congress of German Alienists, Arch. de Neurologie, vol. xxiv, ( 1892). 
6 1 .  Wundt, Grundzuge der phpiologische PsXchologie, vol. i, Leipzig, 1903, pp. 314-15 .  
62. Bernard, De l'Aphasie, Paris, 1889, pp. 1 7 1  and 1 74. 
63. Graves cites the case of a patient who had forgotten all names but remem­
bered their initial, and by that means was able to recover them (quoted by Bernard, 
De l'Aphasie, p. 179). 
64. Bernard, De l'Aphasie, p. 37. 
65. Broadbent, "A Case of Peculiar Affection of Speech," Brain (1 879), p. 494. 
66. Kussmaul, Die Stiirungen der Sprache, p. 182. 
67. Lichtheim, "On Aphasia," Brain ( 1 885 ). Yet we must note the fact that 
Wernicke, the first to study sensory aphasia methodically, was able to do with­
out a center for concepts (Der aphasische Sxmptomencomplex, Breslau, 1 874). 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
68. Bastian, "On Different Kinds of Aphasia," Brit. Med. Journal ( 1887). Cf. the 
explanation (indicated as merely possible) of optical aphasia by Bernheim: "De la 
cecite psychique des choses," Revue de Midecine ( 1885 ). 
69. Wysman, "Aphasie und verwandte Zustande," Deutsches Archiv. fiir Klinische 
Medecin (1 880). Magnan had already opened the way, as Skwortzoff's diagram 
indicates, "De la cecite des mots," Th. de Med. ( 1881), p. i. 
70. Moeli, "Ueber Aphasie bei Wahrnehmung der Gegenstande durch das Gesicht," 
Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift, Apr. 28, 1890. 
7 1 .  Freud, Zur AuffassunB der Aphasien, Leipzig, 1891. 
72. Sommer, "Addressing a Congress of Alienists," Arch. de NeuroloBie, vol. xxiv 
( 1892). 
73. The Senses and the Intellect, p. 329. Cf. Spencer, Principles of PsycholoBY, vol. i., 
p. 456. 
74. Ribot, Les Maladies de la memoire, Paris, 1881, p. 10. 
75. See an enumeration of the most typical cases in Shaw's article, "The Sensory 
Side of Aphasia," Brain ( 1 893), p. 501. Several authors, however, limit to the first 
convolution the lesion corresponding to the loss of verbal auditory images. See, 
in particular, Ballet, Le LanBaBe interieur, p. 153. 
76. Luciani, quoted by J .  Soury, Les Fonctions du cerveau, Paris, 1892, p. 211. 
77. The theory which is here sketched out resembles, in one respect, that of 
Wundt. We will give the common element and the essential difference between 
them. With Wundt, we believe that distinct perception implies a centrifugal 
action; thereby we are led to suppose with him (although in a slightly different 
sense) that the so-called image centers are rather centers for the grouping of 
sense-impressions. But whereas, according to Wundt, the centrifugal action lies 
in an "apperceptive stimulation," the nature of which can only be defined in a 
general manner, and which appears to correspond to what is commonly called 
the fixing of the attention, we maintain that this centrifugal action bears in each 
case a distinct form, the very form of that "virtual object" which tends to actual­
ize itselfby successive stages. Hence an important difference in our understand­
ing of the office of the centers. Wundt is led to assume: First, a general organ of 
apperception, occupying the frontal lobe; Second, particular centers which, though 

N O T E S  
most likely incapable of storing images, retain nevertheless a tendency or a dis­
position to reproduce them. Our contention, on the contrary, is that no trace of 
an image can remain in the substance of the brain, and that no such center of 
apperception can exist. Instead, there are merely, in that substance, organs of 
virtual perception, influenced by the intention of the memory, as there are at the 
periphery organs of real perception, influenced by the action ofthe object. (See 
Grundzii8e der physiol08ische Psychol08ie, vol. i, pp. 320-27). 
CHAPTER I I I  
I .  Kay, Memory and How to Improve It, p .  1 8 .  
2. Mathias Duval, "Theorie histologique d u  sommeil," C. R .  de la Soc. de Biol08ie 
( 1895 ), p. 74. cr. Lepine, ibid., p. 85; and Revue de Medecine (Aug., 1 894); and, 
especially, Pupin, Le Neurone et les hypotheses histol08iques, Paris, 1 896. 
3. Forbes Winslow, Obscure Diseases of the Brain, pp. 25ff.; Ribot, Maladies de la 
memoire,pp. 139ff.; Mauro, Le Sommeil et les reves, Paris, 1 878, p. 439; Egger, "Le 
Moi des mourants," Revue philosophique (Jan. and Oct., 1 896). CF. Ball's dictum: 
"Memory is a faculty which loses nothing and records everything." (Quoted by 
Rouillard, Les Amnesies [medical thesis], Paris, 1885 , p. 25.) 
4. This idea has recently been developed by various authors. A systematic account 
of it will be found in the work of Cowles, "The Mechanism ofInsanity," Ameri­
can Journal ofInsanity (1890·91). 
5 .  See, especially, Moreau de Tours, Du Haschisch, Paris, 1845 . 
6. Ball, Le,ons sur les maladies mentales, Paris, 1890, pp. 608ff. Cf. a curious analysis: 
"Visions, a Personal Narrative," Journal of Mental Science (1896), p. 284. 
7. See "Visions," p. 176. 
8. Pierre Janet, Les Accidents mentaux, Paris, 1 894, pp. 292ff. 
9. Pierre Janet, L'Automatisme psychol08ique, Paris, 1898, pp. 95ff. 
10. Ravaisson, La Philosophie en France au xix siecle, 3rd ed., p. 176. 
CHAPTER IV 
1 .  H .  Bergson, Time and Free Will, Sonnenschein \910. Translation of Les Donnees 
immediates de la conscience. 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
2 .  We may here briefly recall this argument. Let there be a moving body which 
is displaced with a certain velocity, and which passes simultaneously before two 
bodies, one at rest and the other moving toward it with the same velocity as its 
own. During the same time that it passes a certain length of the first body, it 
naturally passes double that length of the other. Whence Zeno concludes that "a 
duration is the double of itself." A childish argument, it is said, because Zeno 
takes no account of the fact that the velocity is in the one case double that which 
it is in the other. Certainly, but how, I ask, could he be aware of this? That, in the 
same time, a moving body passes different lengths of two bodies, of which one is 
at rest and the other in motion, is clear for him who makes of duration a kind of 
absolute and places it either in consciousness or in something which partakes of 
consciousness. For while a determined portion of this absolute or conscious dura­
tion elapses, the same moving body will traverse, as it passes the two bodies, 
two spaces of which the one is the double of the other, without our being able 
to conclude from this that a duration is double itself, since duration remains 
independent of both spaces. But Zeno's error, in all his reasoning, is due to just 
this fact, that he leaves real duration on one side and considers only its objective 
track in space. How, then, should the two lines traced by the same moving body 
not merit an equal consideration, qua measures of duration? And how should 
they not represent the same duration, even though the one is twice the other? In 
concluding from this that "a duration is the double of itself," Zeno was true to 
the logic of his hypothesis, and his fourth argument is worth exactly as much as 
the three others. 
3. 
Descartes, Principes, ii, 29. 
4. Principes, part ii, § 37. 
5. Leibni7, "Specimen dynamicum" Mathem. Schriften, Gerhardt, 2nd section, 
vol. ii. p. 246. 
6. H. Morus, Scripta PhiJosophica, 1679, vol. ii, p. 248. 
7. Newton, Principia, Thomson, ed, 1871, pp. 61f. 
8. Euler, Theoria motus corporum solidorum, 1765, pp. 30-3 3. 
9. Newton, in particular. 
10. See, on this subject, Clerk-Maxwell, "Action at a Distance," in SCientific Papers, 

N O T E S  
Cambridge, 1890, vol. ii, pp. 31 3-14. 
1 1 . Clcrk-Maxwell, "Molecular Constitution of Bodies," in SCientific Papers, vol. 
ii. p. 618. Van der Waals has shown, on the other hand, the continuity of liquid 
and gaseous states. 
1 2 .  Faraday, "A Speculation Concerning Electric Conduction," Philos. Magazine, 
3rd series. vol. xxiv. 
1 3 .  Thomson, "On Vortex Atoms," Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of Ed in. ( 1867). An hypoth­
esis of the same nature had been put forward by Graham, "On the Molecular 
Mobility of Gases," Proc. of the Roy. Soc. ( 1863), pp. 621ff. 
14. Bergson, Time and Free Will. 
1 5 .  Bergson, Time and Free Will. 
1 6. Bergson, Time and Free Will. 
1 7. See on this subject: Paul Janet, "La perception visuelle de la distance," Revue 
philosophique, vol. vii ( 1 879 ), pp. Iff.; William James, Principles of Psychology, 
vol. ii, chap. xxii. Cf. on the subject of the visual perception of extensity: 
Dunan, "L'espace visuel et I'espace tactile," Revue Philosophique (Feb. and Apr., 
1888, Jan., 1889). 
1 8. Ward, Art. "Psychology" in the Encyd. Britannica. 
19. W. James, Principles of Psychology, vol. ii, pp. 1 34ff. We may note in passing 
that we might, in strictness, attribute this opinion to Kant, since The Transcenden­
tal AEsthetic allows no difference between the data of the different senses as far as 
their extension in space is concerned. But it must not be forgotten that the point 
of view of the Critique is other than that of psychology, and that it is enough for 
its purpose that all our sensations should end by being localized in space when 
perception has reached its final form. 
2 59 


B i b l i o g r a p h y  
Compiled by Bruno Paradis 
The purpose of this bibliography is threefold: (1) to recall the dates 
of the original French publication of Bergson's works and to list 
the available English language translations; ( 2 )  to provide a selec­
tion of general commentaries as well as critical studies (all texts 
which specifically address Matter and Memory are marked by an aster­
isk); and (3) to allow for the possibility of dialogue, with a special 
focus on the question of time, between Bergson and great thinkers 
in the philosophical tradition, and between Bergson and impor­
tant trends in contemporary science. 
TEXTS BY BERGSON 
Essai sur les donnees immediates de 10 conscience. Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1889. 
"Quid Aristoteles de loco senserit" ( 1 889). French translation by R.-M. Mosse-
Bastide in I.es Etudes Bergsoniennes, 2 ( 1949):27-104. 
Matiere et memoire. Paris: Presses l1niversitaires de France, 1 896. 
I.e rire. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1900. 
I. 'evolution wiatrice. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1907. 
I. 'energie spirituelle. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1919. 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
Duree et simu/taneite. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1922. 
Les deux sources de 10 morale et de 10 relillion. Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1932. 
La pensee et Ie mouvant. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1934. 
Bergson, Eaits et paroles. Edited by R.-M. Mosse-Bastide. 3 vols. (texts of 1878-1904, 
1905-15, 1915-39). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1957, 1958, 1959. 
The above texts are also available in: 
Bergson, Oeu,'res (DI, MM, R, EC, ES, MR, PM ), edition du centenaire. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 196 3 .  
Bergson, MC/anges (QA, DS, Correspondance, Pieces diverses, Documents). Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1972. 
ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS 
Time and Free Will. Translated by F. L. Pogson. Ne\\' York: Macmillan, 1919. 
,Hatter and MemorJ'. Translated by Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer. New 
York: Zone, 1991. 
Crcati"e Em/ution. Translated by Arthur Mitchell . Ne\\' York: Henry Holt, 1911. 
,Hind Energv. Translated by H .  Wildon Carr. Ne\\' York: I lenry Holt, 1920. 
Duration and Simu/taneitJ'. Translated by Leon Jacobson. Indianapolis: Bobbs-
Merrill, I965 . 
The T\\'o Sources of Moralin and Reli£lion. Translated by R. Ashley Audra and 
Cloudesley Brereton with the assistance of W. I lorsfall Carter. New York: I lenry 
Holt, 1935 . 
The Creati,'e Mind. Translated by Mabelle Andison. Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press, 1946. 
TEXTS ON BERGSON 
Adam, M. Die intellektuelle Anschauun£l hei Schelling in ihrem Verhdltnis fur .Ilethode der 
Intuition bei Bergson. Paschkau, 1926. 
Adolphe, Lydie. "Bergson et la science d'aujourd'hui." hudes Philosophit/ues, \4, 
no. 4 ( 1959 ): 479-88. 
262 

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
Aichelle, Ronald B. "Russell on 'The Theory of Continuity.' " Dianiiia, 5 (Spring, 
1969): 1-1 1. 
Alexander, J .  W. Bergson, Philosopher of ReJlection. London, 1957. 
"'Amidou, Philippe R. /J1emoƾv and Duration in Bergson: A Study of Terminology in 
Matter and Memory and an "lntroductio.n to Metaphpics." Ph. D. dissertation, 
St. Louis, 1968. 
Armstrong, A. C. "Bergson, Berkeley, and Philosophical Intuition." Philosophical 
Review, 23, no. 4 ( 1914): 430-38. 
Barthelemy-Madaule, Madeleine. Bergson et Tei/hard de Chardin. Paris: Seuil, 1963. 
__ . Bergson, adversaire de Kant: etude critique de 10 conception bergsonienne du 
kantisme. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1966. 
Barreau, Herve. "Bergson et Zenon d'Elee." Revue Philosophique de Louvain, 67, 
no. 94 (May, 1969): 267-84; no. 95 (August, 1969): 389-430. 
Berger, Gaston. "Le progres de la reflex ion chez Bergson et chez Husser\." In 
Henri Bergson, Beguin and Thevenax (Eds. ), 257-63. 
Bergson et nous. Actes du Xc Congres. Bulletin de 10 Societe Franƿaise de Philosophie (in 
2 vols. ). Paris: 1959. 
Boudot, M. "L'cspace selon Bergson." Revue de Metaphvsique et de Morale, 85, 
no. 3 ( 1980): 332-56. 
Brehier, Emile. "Images plotiniennes, images bergsoniennes." Les Etudes Berg­
soniennes, 2 (1949): 105-28. 
Campanale, D. "Scienza e metafisica nei pensiero di Henri Bergson." Rassegna di 
scienza fIlasafiche, 7, no. 2 (1964): 1 37-67; no. 3 ( 1964): 306-33. 
Canguilhem, Georges. "Commentaire du troisieme chapitre de L 'evolution creatrice." 
Bulletin de 10 Facu/te des Lettres de Strasbaurg, 21, nos. 5-6 (1943 ): 126-43; no. 7 
(1943 ): 199-214. 
Capek, Milic. "Stream of Consciousness and 'duree reelle.' '' Philosophy and Phe­
nomenological Research, 20, no. 3 (March, 1950): 331-5 3. 
__ . "La genese ideale de la matiere chez Bergson: la structure de la duree." 
Revue de Metaphvsique et de Morale, 57, no. 3 (1952 ): 325-48. 
__ . "La theorie bergsonienne de la matiere et la physique moderne." Revue 
Philosophique de 10 France et de I'Etranger, 43, nos. 1-3 (January-March, 1953 ). 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
__ . "La theorie biologique de connaissance chez Bergson ct sa signification 
actuelle." Revue de MCtaphvsique et de Morale, 64, no. 2 ( 1959 ): 194-211. 
__ . The Philosophical Impact ofContemporaǀv Physics. New York: Van Nostrand, 
1961. 
__ . "La signification actuelle de la philosophie de James." Revue de Meta­
physique et de Morale, 67, no. 3 ( 1962): 291-321. 
':' __ . Bergson and Modern Physics: A Reinterpretation and Reevaluation. Dordrecht: 
D. Reidel, 1971. 
__ . "Bergson, Nominalism and Relativity." The Southwestern Journal of Phi­
losophy, 9, no. 3 ( 1978 ): 127-31. 
__ . "Ce qui est vivant et ce qui est mort dans la critique bergsonienne de la 
relativite." Revue de Synthese Fran<;aise, 101, no. 99 ( 1980): 3 13-44. 
Cariou, Marie. L 'atomisme: trois essais: Gassendi, Leibniz, Bergson et Lucrece. Paris: 
Aubier-Montaigne, 1978. 
Casey, E.S. "Habitual Body and Memory in Merleau-Ponty." Man and World, 17, 
no. 3-4 (1984): 279-97. 
Chahine, O. La duree creatrice dans la mCtaphysique de Bergson. Paris, 1954. 
':' Couchoud, Paul Louis. "La metaphysique nouvelle: Matiere et memoire de M. 
Bergson." Revue de Metaphvsique et de Morale, 10 ( 1902 ): 225-43. 
Dayan, M. "L'inconscient chez Bergson." Revue de M<itaphvsique et de Morale, 70, 
no. 3 ( 1965 ): 287-324. 
Delattre, Floris. "William James bergsonien." Revue Anglo-Americaine, I, no. 2 
( 1923-24): 1 35-44. 
':'Delbos, Victor. "Matiere et memoire, etude critique." Revue de M<itaphysique et 
de Morale, S (1 897): 35 3-89. 
Deleuze, Gilles. " La conception de la difference chez Bergson." Les Etudes 
Bergsoniennes, 4 (1956): 77-112. 
__ . Bergsonism. New York: Zone Books, 1991. 
Delhomme, Jeanne. "Duree et vie chez Bergson." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 2 ( 1949): 
129-91. 
__ . "L'exercice de la pensee et ses conditions dans la philosophie d'Henri 
Bergson." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 3 ( 1952 ): 151-58. 

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
__ . Vie et conscience dc la vic: essai sur Bergson. Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1954. 
__ . "Le probleme de I'intcriorite: Bergson et Sartre." Revue Internationale de 
Philosophic, 48, no. 2 ( 1959): 201-19. 
__ . "Nietzsche et Bergson: la representation de la verite." Les Etudes 
Bcrgsonicnncs, 5 ( 1960): 37-62. 
Devaux, Philippe. "Le bergsonisme de Whitehead." Revue Intcrnationale de 
Philosophic, 15, no. 56-57 (1961 ): 2 17-36. 
':'Dewey, John. "Perception and organic action." The Journal of Philosophy, 9, no. 24 
(November, 1912 ): 645-68. 
__ . "Spencer and Bergson." Revue de Mitaphysiquc ct dc Moralc, 70, no. 3 
(1965 ): 325-33. 
Dumoncel, J .-c. "Popper et Bergson." Rcvuc d'Enseignement Philosophique, 32, 
no. 3 ( 1982 ): 37-48. 
Fabre-Luce de Gruson, Franc;:oise. "Bergson, lecteur de Kant." Lcs Etudes Bcrg­
sonicnnes, 5 ( 1960): 169-90. 
__ . "Sens commun et bon sens chez Bergson." Revue Internationale de 
Philosophic, 13, no. 2 ( 1959): 187-200. 
':'Fawcett, Edward Douglas. "Matter and Memory." Mind, 21, no. 82 (April, 1912): 
201-32. 
Felt, J. W. "Philosophy, Understanding and the Continuity of Becoming." Inter­
national Philosophical Qt1artcrly, 18, no. 4 ( 1978): 375-93. 
Fressin, Augustin. La perception chez Bergson et chez Merleau-Ponty. Paris: Societe 
d'editions d'Enseignement superieur, 1967. 
Frieden-Markevitch, Nathalie. La philosophie de Bergson, aper(u sur un stofcisme 
inconscient. Fribourg: Editions Universitaires, 1982. 
George, Andre. "Bergson et Einstein." Documents de la Vie Intellectuelle, 1, no. 4 
(January, 1930): 52-60. 
Germino, Dante. Political Philosophy and the Open Society. Baton Rouge: Louisiana 
State University Press, 1982. 
Gilson, Bernard. L 'individualite dans la philosophie de Bergson. Paris: J. Vrin, 1978. 
Gilson, Etienne. "Souvenir de Bergson." Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale, 64, 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
no. 2 (April, 1959): 129-40. 
Giroux, Laurent. Duree pure et temporalite: Bergson et Heidegger. Tournai (Belgium): 
Beliarmin, 1971. 
__ . "Bergson et la conception de temps chez Platon et chez Aristote." 
Dialogue, 10, no. 3 ( 197] ): 479-503. 
Gouhier, Henri. "Maine de Biran et Bergson." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 1 ( 1948): 
129-73. 
__ . "Bergson et I'histoire des idees." Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 3, 
no. 10 ( 1949): 434-44. 
__ . Bergson et Ie Christ des ivangiles. Paris: Fayard, 1961. 
Gregoire, Franz. "La collaboration de I'intuition et de I'intelligence." Revue Inter­
nationale de Philosophie, 3, no. 3 ( 1949 ): 392-406. 
'"Grimaldi, Nicholas. "Matiere et tradition." Revue de Mitaphysique et de Morale, 76, 
no. 2 (April-June, 197] ): 167-95. 
Gross, David. "Bergson, Proust and the Revaluation of Memory." International 
Philosophical Qt1arterly, 25, no. 4 ( 1985 ): 369-80. 
Gueroult, Martial. "Perception, idee, objet, chose chez G. Berkeley: la formule 
bergsonienne." Revue Philosophique de la France et de I'Etranger, 143, no. 2 (April, 
1953 ): 181-200. 
__ . "Bergson en face des philosophes." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 5 (1960): 9-35. 
':'Gunter, Pete Addison Y. Bergson and the Evolution of Physics. Knoxville, TN: Uni­
versity of Tennessee Press, 1969. 
':' __ . "Bergson's Theory of Matter and Modern Cosmology." Journal of the 
History of Ideas, 32, no. 4 (October-December, 197] ): 525-42. 
__ . Henri Bergson: A Bibliography. Bowling Green, OH: Philosophy Documen­
tation Center, Bowling Green University, 1974. 
__ . "Bergson, Conceptualism and Indeterminacy: A Rejoinder to Capek." 
The Southwestern Journal of Philosophy, 9, no. 3 (1978 ): 135-37. 
Gurvitch, George. "Deux aspects de la philosophie de Bergson: temps et Iiberte." 
Revue de Mitaphysique et de Morale, 65, no. 3 (1 960): 307-1 1. 
':'Harward, J. "What Does Bergson Mean by Pure Perception?" Mind, 27, no. 106 
(1918 ): 203-07; vol. 28, no. 112 ( 1919): 463-70. 
266 

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
I leidsieck, Franʃois. Henri llerfiSon et la notion d'espace. Paris, 1961. 
Heintz, Joseph Walter. La notion de conscience chez William james ct Henri Ilergson. 
Ph.D. dissertation, Paris, 1950. 
Herman, Daniel J. The Philosophy oj' Henri Ilergson. Washington: University Press 
of America, 1980. 
Horkheimer, Max . "Zur Henri Bergson Metaphysik der Zeit." ZeitschriJi Jur 
SO/ialforschung, 3 ( 1934): 32 \-42. 
Husson, Leon. L'intellectualisme de Bergson: genese et devcloppement de la notion 
bergsoniennc c/'intuition. Paris, 1947. 
__ . "Les aspects meconnus de la liberte bergsonienne." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 
4 ( 1956 ): 157-201. 
Hyppolite, Jean. "Henri Bergson ('t I'existentialisme." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 2 
(1949 ): 208-12. 
':' __ . "Aspects divers de la memoire chez Bergson." Revue Internationale de 
Philosophie, 3, no. 10 ( 1949): 373-92. 
Ingarden, R. "Intuition und Intellekt bei Henri Bergson." jahrbuch fur Philosophic 
und phiinomenologische Forschung, 5 ( 1922 ): 285-461. 
James, William. "The Philosophy of Bergson." Hibbert journal, 7, no. 3 (April, 
1909 ): 562-77. Reprinted as "Bergson and His Critique ofIntellectualism" in 
A Pluralistic Universe. New York: Longman, Green, Co., 1919, pp. 223-72. 
__ . "Bradley or Bergson?" journal of Philosopǁv, 7, no. 2 (January, 1910): 29-33. 
__ . "A Great French Philosopher at Harvard." Nation, 90, no. 2335 (March 
31, 1910): 312-14. 
Janicaud, Dominique. Une gentfalogie du spiritualisme frant;ais. Aux sources du bergsonisme: 
Ravaisson et la metaphvsique. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1969. 
Jankelevitch, Vladimir. Henri Bergson. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1954. 
':'Lattre, Alain de. "Remarques sur I'intuition comme principe regulateur de la 
connaissance chez Bergson." Les Etudes Bergsoniennes, 8 ( 1966): 195-215. 
Joussain, A. "Schopenhauer et Bergson." Archives de Philosophic, no. 1 ( 1963 ): 71-89. 
':'Lechalas, Georges. "Matiere et memoire: d'apres un nouveau livre de M. Bergson." 
Annales de Philosophic Chrtitienne, 26 ( 1897): 146-64. 
Leroy, Andre Louis. "Influence de la philosophie berkleyenne sur la pensee 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
continentale." Hermathema, 82, no. 2 (November, 195 3 ): 27-48. 
Levi, Albert William. "Substance, Process, Being: A Whiteheadian-Bergsonian 
View." journal of Philosophy, 5 5 ,  no. 18 (August 29, 1958): 749-61. 
':'Marietti, Angele. Les formes du mouvement chez Bergson. Paris: Les Cahiers du Nouvel 
Humanisme, 195 3. 
Marneff, J. "Bergson's and Husserl's Concepts of Intuition." Philosophical áar­
terlv, 23, no. 3 (1960): 169-80. 
Mathieu, Vittorio. "Bergson technicien." Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 13, 
no. 48 ( 1959): 173-86. 
__ . "I! tempo ritrovato: Bergson e Einstein." Filosofia, 4, no. 4 (1953): 625-56. 
':'May, William Eugene. "The Reality of Matter in the Metaphysics of Bergson." 
International Philosophical áarter{v, 10, no. 4 ( 1970): 611-42. 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. L 'union de rame et du corps chez Malebranche, Biran et Bergson. 
Paris: Vrin, 1978. 
':'Milet, Jean. Bergson et Ie calcul infinitesimal: 10 raison et Ie temps. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1974. 
Mosse-Bastide, Rose-Marie. Bergson educateur. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
195 5 .  
__ . Bergson et Plotin. Paris: Presses Universitaires d e  France, 1959. 
':'Mourelos, G. Bergson et les niveaux de rea lite. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
1964. 
Muirhead, J. "Philosophy of Bergson." Hibbert journal, 9, no. 4 (July, 191 1): 895-907. 
Murillo, Zamora. La notion de causalite dans la philosophie de Bergson. San Jose, Costa 
Rica: Ciudad Universitaria, 1968. 
Pariente, Jean-Claude. "Bergson et Wittgenstcin." Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 
23, nos. 88-89 ( 1969): 1 83-204. 
':'Paulus, Jean. "Les deux directions de la psychologie bergsonienne: behaviorisme 
et introspection dans Matiere et memoire." Tijdschrift voor Philosophie, 6, nos. 3-4 
(1944): 297-332. 
Peguy, Charles. Note sur M. Bergson et la philosophie bergsonienne. Note sur Descartes et 
la philosophie cartesienne. Paris: Gallimard, 1935. 
Pennartz, C. M. A. "The Relationship between Time and Consciousness: A Study 
2 6 8  

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
Referring to Husserl and Bergson." In Nature, Time and History (vol. 2 ). P. A. 
Kroes (Ed.). Nijmegen: Fakulteit der Wiskunde en Natuurwetenschappen, 
Katholicke Universiteit, 1985 (pp. 21-32 ). 
Piaget, Jean. "Lettre." Revue de Theologie et de Philosophic, 9, no. 1 ( 1959). 
Pilkington, Andrew E. Bergson and His Influence: A Reassessment. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1976. 
" Rideau, Emile. Les rapports de la nature et de /'esprit dans Ie bergsonisme. Paris: Felix 
Alcan, 1932. 
" Robinet, Andre. "Le passage a la conception biologique: De la perception de 
I'image et du souvenir chez Bergson: Notes pour un commentaire du chapitre 
II de Matiere et memoire." Etudes Philosophiques, 15, no. 3 ( 1960): 375-88. 
__ . Bergson et les metamorphoses de la duree. Paris: Seghers, 1965. 
Russell, Bertrand. "The Philosophy of Bergson." Monist, 22, no. 3 (July, 1912): 
321-47. 
___ . "On the Notion of Cause." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 13 (1912-13): 
1-26. 
Sarnoff, S. "A Bergsonian View of Agent Causation." International Philosophical 0!ar­
tcrly, 25, no. 98 ( 1985 ): 185-96. 
Scharfstein, Ben Ami. "Bergson and Merleau-Ponty: A Preliminary Comparison." 
Journal of Philosophy, 52, no. 14 (1955 ): 380-86. 
Seyppel, Joachim H. "A Criticism of Heidegger's Time Concept with Reference 
to Bergson's 'duree.' "  Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 10, no. 4 ( 1956): 503-08. 
Stallknecht, Newton P. Studies in the Philosophy of ere at ion with Especial Reference to 
Bergson and Whitehead. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1934. 
':'Taylor, Alfred Edward. "Review of Malter and Memory by Henri Bergson." Interna­
tionalJournal of Ethics, 22, no. 1 (October, 1911): 101-07. 
Thibaudet, Albert. Lc bergsonisme. Paris: N.R.F., 1922. 
Trotignon, Pierre. L'idee de vie chez Bergson et la critique de la mi!taphysique. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1968. 
Van Peursen, C. A. "Henri Bergson, phenomenologue de la perception." Revue de 
Metaphvsique et de Morale, no. 3 ( 1960): 317-26. 
Vinson, A. "Le fini, I'infini et I'indefini." Revue d'Enseignement Philosophique, no. 3 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
( 1986): 1-14. 
Wahl, Jean. Bergson. Paris: Centre de Documentation Universitaire, 1965 . 
TEXTS CONCERNING B E RGSO N :  DIALOGUE A N D  DE BATE 
Aristotle. Physics IV ( 10-14). 
__ . De anima. 
Augustine. Confessions ( Book xI). 
Bachelard, Gaston. L 'intuition de i'instant. Paris: Stock, 1932. 
__ . La dialectique de 10 duree. Paris: Boivin, 1936. 
__ . Les intuitions atomistiques: essai" de classifcation. Paris: Boivin, 1933. 
__ . L 'activit" rotionaliste de 10 physique contemporaine. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 195 1 .  
Broglie, Louis de. Matiere e t  lumiere. Paris: Albin Michel, 1932. 
__ . "Individualite et interaction dans Ie monde physique." Revue de 
Metaphysique et de Morale, 1937. 
__ . Continu et discontinu en physique moderne. Paris: Albin Michel, 1941. 
__ . "L'espace et Ie temps dans la physique quantique." In Ordre. desordre. 
lumiere. Paris: Vrin, 1952 ( pp. 104-15 ). 
__ . La physique quantique restero-t-elle indeterministe? Paris: Gauthier­
Villars, 195 3. 
Canguilhem, Georges. La connaissance de 10 vie. Paris: Vrin, 1965 . 
Cassirer, Ernst. The Philosoph v of Forms. Translated by R. Manheim. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1965 . 
Costa, F. "La theorie du temps chez Brentano." Revue de Metaphvsique et de 
Morale, no. 4 ( 1962 ): 450-74. 
Costa de Beauregard, Olivier. La notion du temps: eqUivalence avec l'espace. Paris: 
Herman, 1963. 
Deleuze, Gilles. Diffc!rence et repetition (cf. ch. 2, "La repetition pour ellc­
meme" and passim). Paris: 1968. 
__ . Cinema I: The Movement-Image. Translated by H. Tomlinson and B. 
Habberjam. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1986. 
__ . Cinema 2: The Time-Image. Translated by H. Tomlinson. Minneapolis: 
270 

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
University of Minnesota Press, 1990. 
Einstein, Albert. "A propos de la deduction relativiste de Meyerson." Revue 
Philosophique de la France et de I'Etranger, 105, nos. 3-4 (March-April, 1928): 
161-66. 
Evellin, Franc;:ois. Infini et quantite: etude sur Ie concept de I'infini en philosophie 
et dans les sciences. Paris: Bailliere, 1 880. 
Freud, Sigmund. Wit and Its Relation to the Unconscious. New York: Moffat, 
Yard, 1916. ( References to Bergson's Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of 
the Comic on pages 301-60. ) 
Heisenberg, Werner. Physicist's Conception of Nature. Translated by A. Pomeraus. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1958. 
__ . Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. London: George 
Allen and Unwin, 1959. 
Flournoy, Theodore. Philosophy of William James. Ayer, 1917. 
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Translated by J. Macquarrie. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1962. 
Husser!, Edmund. Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness. Translated by 
J. Churchill. Midland, 1961. 
__ . "Ideen zu einer reinen Phanomenologie und phanomenologischen 
Philosophie ( 1 ): Allgemeine Einfiirhung in die reine Phanomenologie" 
(1913). In Husserliana (vol. 3 ), Walter Beirne! (Ed. ). The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1950. 
__ . The Idea of Phenomenology. Translated by W. Alston and G. Nakhnikian. 
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964. 
Hyppolite, Jean. Sens et existence dans la philosophic de Merleau-Ponty. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1963. 
James,William. Pragmatism. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1975 . 
__ . A Pluralistic Universe. Longman, Green, 1919. 
Levi-Strauss, Claude. Totemism. (cf. ch. 5 ). Translated by Rodney Needham. 
Boston: Beacon Press, 1963. 
;'Levinas, Emmanuel. Time and the Other. Translated by R. Cohen. Pittsburgh, 
PA: Duquesne University Press, 1987. 
27 1 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. The Structure of Behal'ior. Translated by Alden Fisher. 
Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press, 1983. 
__ . Eloer de la philosophic. Paris: Gallimard, 195 3. 
__ . PhenomenoloB-1" of Perception. Translated by C. Smith. New York: Human­
ities Press, 1962. 
__ . Signs. Translated by R. C. McCleary. Evanston, 1L: Northwestern Uni­
versity Press, 1964. 
__ . The Visible and the Invisible. Translated by A. Lingis. Evanston, IL: North­
western University Press, 1969. 
Pariente, Jean-Claude. Le langage et I'individucl (cf. ch. I, "Hesitations berE/soniennes "). 
Paris: Armand Colin, 1973. 
Poulet, Georges. Studies in Human Time. Translated by E. Coleman. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood, 1956. 
Plato. Parmenides. 
__ . Timaeus. 
Plotinus. Enneades. P. Henry and H .  R. SchwYler (Eds. ). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1964. 
Poincare, H. Demicres pensees. Paris: Flammarion, 1913. 
__ . La I'aleur de la science. Paris: Flammarion, 1918. 
Prigogine, lIya, and Isabelle Stengers. Order Out of Chaos: klan 5 Nell' DialoE/ue with 
Nature. New York: Bantam, 1984. 
Russell, B. An Essai' on the Foundations ofGeometrv, Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1897. 
__ . Mpticism and LOE/ic, and Other Essap. London: George Allen & Unwin, 
1950. 
Sartre, Jean-Paul. The Psycho lOB-v of ImaE/ination ( ef. ch. 2 . 2 ). Westport, CT: 
Greenwood, 1978. 
__ . BeinE/ and NothinE/ness. Translated by H. Barnes. New York: Philosophical 
Library, 1956. 
Serres, Michel. Hermes IV: La distribution (cf. "Bolt/mann et Bergson "). Paris: 
Minuit, 1977. 
__ . Hermes: Literature. Science, Philosophy. J. Harari and D. Bell ( Eds. ). Balti-

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983. 
Whitehead, Alfred N. Science and the Modern World. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1926. 
__ . Process and Realitv: An Essar in Cosmol0t/y. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1929. 
__ . hwn in Science and Philosophy. New York: Philosophical Library, 1948. 
__ . The Concept o{Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 195 5 .  
27 3  

I 
I 

I n d e x  
ACHILLES, The, orZeno, 192. 
Action, and pure knowledge, 13; and 
pure memory, planes of, 161; and 
time, 33; necessary, 20; needs of: 
and bodies, 198; orientation of con­
sciousness toward, 179; plane of, 
106; 166-7; possible, 21-2; real 
and virtual, 233; reflex and volun­
tary, 73; the true point of departure, 
63; useful, and pure knowledge, 
199; virtual and real, 56. 
Actual sensation and pure memory 
differ in kind, 139. 
Adaptation, the general aim of life, 84. 
Adler, l I S ,  254. 
Affection, 233; always localized, 59; 
and perception, difference be­
tween, 53; has, Ii·om the outset, 
some extensity, 59; impurity in 
perception, 58; its source, 56. 
Affections, 17; an invitation to act, 17. 
Affective states, vaguely localized, 53. 
Amnesia, retrogressive, 171. 
Amnesias, systematized, 1 70. 
Aphasia, 176; cases of, 112-3; concep-
tion of, 12; diagrams of sensory, 
123; sensory, 1 19; sensory, evidence 
from certain forms of, 113. 
Aphasias, the true, 120. 
Apraxia, 93. 
Arnaud, 254. 
Arrow, The, of Zeno, 192. 
Association, not the primary fact, 165; 
of ideas, in what it consists, 88; of 
ideas, laws of, 163; of perceptions 
with memory, 91. 
Associations, of similarity and conti­
guity, 163ff. 
Associationism, error of, 1 34, 163, 
241 ; intellectualizes ideas too 
much, 164. 
Attention, and recognition, 99; a 
power of analysis, 102; compared 
to telegraph clerk, 102; first, an 
adaptation of the body, 99; nega­
tively, inhibition of movement, 99; 
perception and memory, relations 
of, 99ff; to life, 173; to life, condi­
tioned by body, 172. 
Atom, Faraday's theory of, 201; Kel­
vin's theory of, 201; modern theo­
ries of, 201; properties of, 199. 
Auditory, image, 86; memory, 108; 
memory of words, 1 26. 
Automatic, the and the voluntary, 1 16. 
Automatism, 93; wide range of, 86. 
27 5  

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
BABILEE, 255. 
Bain, 126. 
Ball, 257. 
Ballet, 254, 256. 
Bastian, 1 13 ,  253, 254. 
Becoming, instantaneous section of, 
77. 
Berkeley, and Descartes, 1O-11; and 
'mechanical philosophers,' 10; and 
the object, 10; on extensity, 214ff. 
Berlin, 252. 
Bernard, 252, 253, 254, 255. 
Bernhardt, 253. 
Blindness and deafness, psychic, 107; 
word, 107; psychic, 91, 93, 1 26; 
psychic, as a disturbance of motor 
habit, 96; psychic, two kinds of, 
96; word, two kinds of, 108. 
Bodies, distinct, and the needs of 
life, 198. 
Body, a center of action, 20, 138; a 
center of perceptions, 46; and 
mind, relation of, 221; and soul, 
relation of, 1 80; an instrument of 
action, 225; an instrument of 
choice, 1 79; a moving boundary 
between future and past, 78; a 
moving, trajectory of, 1 88; a place 
of passage, 151; conditions atten­
tion to life, 172; consciousness of, 
is my present, 138; does not give 
rise to representation, 20; educa­
tion of, 1 1 3 ;  is that which fixes the 
mind, 173; known from within as 
well as from without, 17; provides 
for the exercise of choice, 20; re­
ceives and gives back movement, 
20; structure of, 18; the l iving, its 
unique place, 17. 
Bradley, 253. 
Brain, and memory, relation between, 
99; an instrument of analysis and 
of choice, 30; a telephonic ex­
change, 30; cannot beget represen-
tation, 73; concerned with motor 
reaction, 22; functions of the, 29; 
injuries to the, effect of, 176; 
lesions aflect movements, not recol­
lections, 79; lesions affect nascent 
or possible action, 99; lesions and 
recognition, attentive and inatten­
tive, 108; lesions and the motor 
diagram, 115; not concerned with 
conscious perception, 22. 
Broadbent, 123, 252, 255. 
Brochard, 252. 
CENTER O F  REPRESENTATI ON, the 
body, 61. 
Centers, offorce, 201; of perception, 
126; of verbal images, problematic, 
125. 
Cerebral, localization, 107; mechan­
ism, conditions memories, does 
not ensure their survival, 75; mech­
anism, links the past with action, 
78; vibrations, cannot create 
images, 23; vibrations, contained 
in the material world, 23. 
Change, and permanence, 197. 
Character, a synthesis of past states, 
146. 
Charcot, 92, liS, 123. 
Chemistry, studies bodies rather than 
matter, 199. 
Clerk-Maxwell, 258-9. 
Colors, and rhythm of movement, 
203. 
Common sense, and matter, 10; and 
object, 10. 
Conceptualism and nominalism, criti­
cism of, 156. 
Consciousness, actual, deals with use­
ful, rejects the superfluous, 146; 
and matter, 208fT; and the inner 
history of things, 208; chief office 
of, 141; different planes of, 238ff; 
double movement in, 166; illusion 

I N  0 E X 
in regard to, 141; its office in per­
ception, 65; its part in affection, 
18; not the synonym of existence, 
141; of another tension than ours, 
207; orientation of, toward action, 
179; rhythm of, 205 ; the fringe of, 
85; the note of the present, 141. 
Conscious perception, a discernment, 
52; is our power of choice, 38; 
materialist's view of, 24. 
Contiguity and similarity, associations 
of, 1631'1'. 
Continuity, universal, and science, 
197. 
Cowles, 257. 
DAWN, of human experience, 185 . 
Deafness, and blindness, psychic, 107; 
and blindness, word, 107; psychic, 
does not hinder hearing, 126; word, 
two kinds of, 108; word, with reten­
tion of acoustic memory, 114. 
Descartes, 258; and Berkeley, \1; and 
the laws of motion, 194. 
Diagram, the motor, and brain 
lesions, 115. 
Diagrams, of sensory aphasia, 123. 
Dichotomy, The, ofZeno, 191. 
Direction, sense of, 96. 
Dissociation, is primary, 165. 
Dodds, 253. 
Dogmatism and empiricism, ignore 
duration, 185 . 
Drawing, methods of, 97. 
Dream, plane 01', 167; power 01', 83. 
Dreamer, the, 153. 
Dreams, memory in, 154. 
Drugs, toxic, effect of, 174. 
Dualism, ordinary, 220fl; transcended, 
181. 
Dunan, 259. 
Duration, 186; our own, and quality, 
205 ; tension of, determines the 
measure of liberty, 210; tensions 
01' 207. 
Duval, 257. 
Dynamists and mechanists, 15. 
Dyslexie, 152. 
EAR, the mental, 129. 
Egger, 257. 
Eleatics, paradoxes 01', 193. 
Empiricism and dogmatism, 183; 
ignore duration, 185. 
Epiphenomenalism, 12. 
Epiphenomenon, and recollection, 
89. 
Equilibrium, intellectual, how 
upset, 172. 
Euler, 194, 258. 
Existence, capital problem of, 146; 
conditions implied in, 147; implies 
conscious apprehension and regular 
connection, 147-8; outside of con­
sciousness, 142; real though unper­
ceived, in time and in space, 144. 
Exner, and empty time, 205 . 
Experience, human, dawn of, 185; 
the true starting-point, 2 34. 
Extended, the, and the inextended, 
244. 
Extension, 244; and artificial space, 
187; concrete, not bound up with 
inert space, 186; idea of, 182. 
Extensity, and inextension, 181; con­
crete, and homogeneous space, 
210; concrete, not within space, 
217; perceived, space conceived, 
187; perception of and sight, 215; 
visual and tactile, 62. 
FARADAY, and centers of force, 38; 
and the atom, 200-1, 259. 
Force, centers of, 38, 201; in natural 
science, 195; metaphysical sense 
of the word, 195. 
Fouillee, 253. 
Freedom and necessity, 210, 2441'1'., 
277 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Freedom and necessity (continued) 
247ff; degrees of, 222; two oppos­
ing points of view concerning, 186. 
Freud, 256. 
Future, no grasp of without outlook 
over past, 65. 
GEN ERAl lDEA, essence of the, 161. 
Generality, 156. 
Genus, general idea of, 161. 
Goldscheider, 103. 
Granville, Mortimer, 252. 
Grashey, 103, 255. 
Graves, 255. 
HABIT, 80; interpreted by memory, 
the study of psychologists, 83. 
Habit-memory, 80; acts, not repre­
sents, the past, 82; advantageous, 
83; comparatively rare, 83; inhib­
its spontaneous memory, 85; sets 
up a machine, 84. 
Habits, amassed in the body, 81; 
formed in action, influence specu­
lation, 16. 
Hallucinations, negative, 120; veridi­
cal, 68. 
Hamilton, 253. 
Hearing, intelligent, starts from the 
idea, 116; mental, 119, 129. 
Heterogeneity, qualititative, 70. 
H6ffding, 252. 
Human experience, dawn of, 185. 
IDEA, and sound, in speech, 121-2. 
Ideas, association of, laws ofthe, 163. 
Ideas, general, 155, 241; always in 
movement, 161; first experienced, 
then represented, 160; the essence 
of, 161. 
Idealism, and materialism, 181; and 
realism, 9; and realism have a com­
mon postulate, 28, 213; English, 
212, 215, 217; makes science an 
accident, 28; the reef on which it 
is wrecked, 227. 
Idealist, the, starts from perception, 
26. 
Idealists and realists, 15. 
Image, a privileged, 61; formed in the 
object, 41; none without an object, 
43; present and representing, 36; 
representation and thing, 9; visual 
or auditory, 86. 
Image-center, a kind of keyboard, 129. 
Image-centers, 108. 
Images, and the body, 17; belong to 
two systems, 25; never anything 
but things, 125; not created by 
cerebral vibrations, 23; preserved 
for use, 66; recognition of, 77; the 
delimiting and fixing of, 179. 
Imagination, is not memory, 135. 
Indetermination, of the will, 41; 
requires preservation of images per­
ceived, 65; the true principle, 31. 
Inextended, the, and the extended, 
244. 
Inextension, and extensity, 181. 
Insanity, a disturbance of the sensori­
motor relations, 174; and present 
reality, 17 3-4. 
Intellectual equilibrium, how upset, 
172. 
Intellectual process, two radically dis­
tinct conceptions of, 104. 
Interpretation, general problem of, 
116. 
Intuition, actual and remembered, 
66; and contact with the real, 185; 
pure, gives an undivided continu­
ity, 1 83. 
JAMES, William, 253, 259. 
Janet, Paul, 259. 
Janet, Pierre, 120, 251, 255, 257; 
study of neuroses, 251. 
278 

I N  D E X  
KANT, 259; and diversity of 
phenomena, 186; and speculative 
reason, 184; and the impersonal 
understanding, 230; on space and 
time, 211. 
Kantian criticism, I I .  
Kantian idealism, 227. 
Kay, 252, 257. 
Kelvin, and the atom, 201. 
Keyboard, the internal, 129. 
Knowledge, relativity of, 184; useful 
and true, 186. 
Kulpe, 103. 
Kussmaul, 114, 253, 254, 255. 
LANGE, 254. 
Language, elaborate and primitive, 
124; the hearing of an unknown, 
109. 
Laquer, 253. 
Learning by heart, 79ff. 
Lehmann, 252. 
Leibniz, on Descartes, 194, 258. 
Leibnizian monads, 38. 
Lepine, 257. 
Lesions, brain and the motor diagram, 
115. 
Liberty, measure of determined by 
tension of duration, 210. 
Lichtheim, 113, 254, 255. 
Light, red, 205. 
Lissauer, 92, 97. 
Living matter, progress of, 64. 
Localization, cerebral, 107. 
Lotze, 251. 
Luciani, 256. 
MAGNAN, 256. 
Man ofimpulse, 153. 
Marillier, 253, 254. 
Marce, 254. 
Materialism and idealism, 181. 
Materialism and spiritualism, 25. 
Materialism, essence of, 72; true 
method of refuting, 72. 
Materiality, begets oblivion, 177. 
Matter, an aggregate of images, 10; 
and common sense, 10; and con­
sciousness, 208ff; and perception, 
10, 70; and perception, differ only 
in degree, 71; and perception, kin­
ship of, 219; and spirit, reciprocal 
action of, 243; and spirit, transi­
tion between, 221; an ever-renewed 
present, 138; artificial division of, 
196; coincides with pure percep­
tion, 73; considered before dissocia­
tion into existence and appearance, 
10; definition of, 22; existence and 
essence of, 15-6; has no occult 
power, 71, 73; in concrete percep­
tion, 182; living, progress of, 
248; metaphysic of, 221; not the 
substratum of a knowledge, 74; 
philosophers' conception of, 9; 
philosophical theory of, 199ff; phi­
losophy of, 72; the vehicle of an 
action, 74. 
Maudsley, 94, 253. 
Maury, 257. 
"Mechanical philosophers" and 
Berkeley, 10. 
Mechanism of speech, 113. 
Mechanists and dynamists, I S .  
Memories, conditioned by cerebral 
mechanism, 75; supposed destruc­
tion of, 126; where stored, fallacy 
involved, 148. 
Memory, actualized in an image dif­
fers from pure memory, 140; and 
brain, 77; and brain, relation be­
tween, 99; and perception point 
to action, 228; a principle inde­
pendent of matter, 73; a privileged 
problem, 13, 74; auditory, of words, 
117; bodily and true, their relation, 
152; capital importance ofprob­
lem of, 73; circles of, 104; con-
279 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Memory (continued) 
traction of, 106; different planes 
of, lOs ; empirical study of, 75; 
expansion of, 104; function of, in 
relation to things, 210; gives sub­
jective character to perception, 
73; habit, recalls similarity, 155; 
habit, inhibits spontaneous mem­
ory, 85; how it becomes actual, 
1 27; independent, an appeal to, 
80; in dreams, 1 54; intersection of 
mind and maUer, 13; is spirit, 235; 
its apparent oneness with the body, 
74; its part in perception, 66; its 
twofold operation, 73; loss of, 1 19; 
mixed forms of, 89; needs motor 
aid to become actual, 120; not a 
manifestation of matter, 235; not 
an emanation of matter, 182; not 
destroyed by brain lesions, 108; of 
a sensation is not a nascent sensa­
tion, 1 36; of words, localization of 
denied, 15; perception and atten­
tion, relations of, 100ff; phenomena 
of, 73; primary function of, 228; 
psychological mechanism of, 74; 
psychology of, 221; pure, and 
action, planes of, 161; pure, and 
the memory-image, 133; pure, de­
tached from life, 1 39; pure, differs 
in kind from actual sensation, 1 39; 
pure, inextensive and powerless, 
140; pure, interests no part of the 
body, 1 39; pure, its reference to 
spirit, 71; representative, 82ff; 
reverberation, in consciousness, of 
indetermination, 65; spontaneous, 
in children and savages, 1 53-4; 
spontaneous, its exaltation and 
inhibition, 86; spontaneous, recalls 
differences, 1 5 5 ;  subjective side of 
knowledge, 34; supplanting percep­
tion, 33; the condensing power of, 
70; the two forms of79ff; to be 
sought apart from motor adapta­
tion, 99; true, records every 
moment of duration, 82; two 
forms, support each other, 85-6; 
two kinds of, 150-1; visual, 92. 
Memory-image, and habit memory, 
their coalescence, 88; and motor 
habit, distinct in kind,.89; and 
pure memory, 133. 
Memory-images, and recognition, 81; 
and the normal consciousness, 84; 
recognition by, 98; utility deter­
mines retention of, 85. 
Mental and physical, the, not mere 
duplicates, 225. 
Mental functions, utilitarian charac-
ter of, 16. 
Mental hearing, 119, 1 29. 
Mental life, tones of, 169. 
Mental states, unconscious, 142. 
Metaphysical problems, empirical solu-
tion of, 74-5. 
Metaphysics and psychology, relation 
of, 1 5 .  
Mill, J .S., and possible sensation, 230. 
Mind, and body, relation of, 221; nor-
mal work ofʁ 172. 
Mnemonics, 87. 
Moeli, 256. 
Moment, the present, how consti-
tuted, 1 38. 
More, Henry, and Descartes, 194. 
Moreau de Tours, 257. 
Motion, and its cause, 195; in mechan­
ics, only an abstraction, 202. 
Motor aphasia, does not involve word 
deafness, 112. 
Motor apparatus, in course of con­
struction, 94. 
"Motor diagram," the, 111, 121; and 
brain lesions, 1 1 5 .  
Movement, absolutely indivisible, 
188ff.; and its trajectory, 191ff.; as 
a change of quality, 196; can only 
280 

I N  D E X  
produce movement, 99; essence 
of, 218; real, akin to consciousness, 
202; real, and apparent, 196; real, 
for the physicist, 193; real, quality 
rather than quantity, 202; real, the 
transference ofa state, 202; rela­
tive, for the mathematician, 193; 
rhythm of, and colors, 203; rhythm 
of, and sounds, 203. 
Movements, consolidated, difficulty 
in modifying their order, 94; indi­
visibles, occupying duration, 202; 
in space and qualities in conscious­
ness, 202; of imitation, 102; prepare 
the choice among memory-images, 
95; real, not merely change of posi­
tion, 194. 
Movir.g body, 188ff. 
Miiller, 92, 97, 103, 252. 
Munk, 253. 
Miinsterberg, 103. 
NECESSITY, and freedom, 244, 247ff; 
natural and freedom, 2 10. 
Negative hallucinations, 120. 
Nerves, section of, 21. 
Nervous system, 18, 28, 173; a conduc­
tor, 44; channel for the transmission 
of movements, 73; constructed in 
view of action, 31. 
Newton, 194, 258. 
Nominalism and conceptualism, criti­
cism of, 156ff. 
OBJECT, the, and common sense, 10. 
Objects and facts are carved out of 
reality, 183. 
Oblivion and materiality, 177. 
Oppenheim, 251. 
Order of representation, necessary or 
contingent, 145 . 
Orientation of consciousness, toward 
action, 179. 
2 8 1  
PAIN, a local effort, 5 5 ;  real signifi­
cance of, 5 5 ;  the nature of, 233. 
Parallelism, 12. 
Past, an idea, 68; and present, differ 
in more than degree, 1 37; essen­
tially virtual, 1 3 5 ;  that which acts 
no longer, 68; has ceased to be 
useful, 149; how stored up, 77; 
survival of, 149; survives in two 
forms, 78. 
Past states, synthesized in character, 
1 46. 
Pathology, evidence from, 108. 
Perception, al ways full of memory 
images, 1 3 3 ;  always occupies some 
duration, 34; and affection, differ­
ence between, 53; and matter, 9; 
and matter, kinship of, 219; and 
memory, difference between, 67; 
and memory, differ in kind, 69; 
and memory-image, not things but 
a progress, 127; and memory, inter­
penetrate, 67; and memory point 
to action, 228; and space, 32; a 
question addressed to motor activ­
ity, 45; attention and memory, 
relations of, 100ff.; attentive, a 
reflexion, 102; centers of, 126, 228; 
directed toward action, 31; displays 
virtual action, 22; distinct, brought 
about by two opposite currents, 
127; gives us "things-in-them­
selves," 230-1 ;  impersonal, 34; less 
objective in fact than in theory, 
66; limitation of, 40; means inde­
terminate action, 32; mixed charac­
ter of, 204; never without affection, 
57; of individual objects, not pri­
mary, 157-8; of matter, definition 
of, 22; of matter, discontinuous, 
49; of things, of utilitarian origin, 
158, primary, a discernment of the 
useful, 158; pure, 34, 61; pure, an 
intuition of reality, 75; pure, a 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y  
Perception (continued) 
system of nascent acts, 69; pure, 
its reference to matter, 71; pure, 
lowest degree of mind, 222; pure, 
theory of, 65; reflective, is a cir­
cuit, 104; subjectivity of, 69; var­
ies with cerebral vibrations, 24-5 . 
Perceptive fibers, centrifugal, 103. 
Permanence and change, 197. 
Personality, dilatation of, 14; diseases 
of, 175; division of, 175; present 
undivided in perception, 165. 
Philosophy, the method of, 183. 
Photography, mental, and subcon­
sciousness, 87. 
Phrases and words, 118. 
Physical and mental, the, not mere 
duplicates, 226. 
Physical exercise, how learned, 111. 
Pillon, 252. 
Place, diversity of, not absolute, 194; 
every, relative, 195. 
Plane, of action, 167; of dream, 167. 
Presence and representation, 35. 
Present, at once sensation and move-
ment, 138; definition of, 149; ideal, 
137; ideo-motor, 68; is conscious­
ness of the body, 138; is sensori­
motor, 138; materiality of our life, 
138; real, 137; that which is acting, 
69; unique for each moment, 138. 
Present moment, how constituted, 
138-9. 
Progress of the idea, 121. 
Psychasthenic disease, how explained, 
15. 
Psychic blindness, 92, 93; and deaf­
np-ss, 107; as a disturbance of motor 
habits, 97; does not hinder seeing, 
1 26; two kinds of, 97. 
Psychic life, the normal, 168; funda­
mental law of, 179. 
Psychical states, wider than cerebral 
states, 13; have a practical end, 
2 8 2  
240; unconscious, 141. 
Psychology and metaphysics, relation 
of, 15. 
Pupin, 257. 
Pure memory and the memory-image, 
133. 
QUALITIES, in consciousness, and 
movements in space, 202; of dif­
ferent orders, share in extensity, 
212-3. 
Quality, and our own duration, 205; 
and quantity, 181, 244; sensible, 
and space, 212; suggests something 
other than sensation, 205. 
Quantity and quality, 181, 244. 
RABIER, 252. 
Ravaisson, 257. 
Reaccion, immediate and delayed, 32. 
Reading, a work of divination, 103; 
mechanism ofʂ 103 . 
Realism, atomistic, 213; Kantian, 231; 
makes perception an accident, 27; 
ordinary, 216. 
Realism and idealism, 10, 25, 68; 
their common posmlate, 213. 
Realist, the, starts from the universe, 
26. 
Realists and idealists, 15; views of 
universe, 54. 
Reality, every, has a relation with 
consciousness, 229; what it con­
sists in for us, 147. 
Recognition, and attention, 99; ani­
mal, 82; attentive, 98; attentive, a 
circuit, 116; automatic, 98; basis of, 
a motor phenomenon, 93; bodily, 
92; by memory-images, 98; com­
monly acted before it is thought, 
95; diseases of, 96; erroneous the­
ories of, 91; essential process of, 
not centripetal but centrifugal, 130; 
how constituted, 78; in general, 

I N  0 E x 
90; intellectual, 116; of images, 
77; of words, 108; process of, 237. 
Recollection, spontaneous, perfect 
from the outset, 83. 
Recollections, disappearance of, 119. 
"Region of images," 129. 
Relativity ofknowledge, 184. 
Repetition, addressed to the intelli-
gence of the body, 111. 
Representation, at first impersonal, 
46; image and thing, 9; less than 
existence, 36; measure of possible 
action, 38; of the universe, 19; of 
things, reflected by freedom, 37; 
unconscious, 142; use of word, 251. 
Resemblance, 156; and difference, 
1 60. 
Rhythm, of our consciousness, 205. 
Ribot, 94, 100, 126, 255, 256, 257; 
his law, 119. 
Rieger, 255. 
Robertson, 251. 
Romberg, 114, 254. 
Rouillard, 257. 
SCHUMANN, 252. 
Schwarz, 251. 
Science, and consciousness, 26; and 
universal continuity, 197. 
Self, the normal, 163. 
Sensation, localized and extended, 
140; supposed unextended, 5 2. 
Sensations, order and coexistence of, 
128; tactile and visual, 215fT. 
Sense, good, 153. 
Senses, data of, 196; education of, 48. 
Sensori-motor system, 172. 
Serieux, 254. 
Shaw, 256. 
Shock, effect of, 119, 171. 
Sight, and the perception of exten­
sity, 215. 
Similarity and contiguity, associations 
of, 163ff. 
Skwortzoff, 256. 
Sleep, and present reality, 174; its 
eRect on memory, 154. 
Smith, W.C., 252. 
Sommer, 252, 255, 256. 
Soul and body, their relation, 11; union 
of, 180. 
Sounds, and rhythm of movement, 
203. 
Soury, 256. 
Space, abstract, 206; and sensible 
quality, 212; and time, homogene­
ous, not properties of things, 211; 
artificial, and extension, 187; con­
ceived, extensity perceived, 187; 
homogeneous, a diagram, 219; 
homogeneous, and concrete exten­
sity, 210; homogeneous and the 
new hypothesis, 231; the symbol 
of fixity, 217; the symbol of infi­
nite divisibility, 217. 
Spamer, 254. 
Specific energy of the nerves, 50. 
Speculation, influenced by habits 
formed in action, 16. 
Speech, mechanism of, 1\3; to hear 
it intelligent! y, 121. 
Spencer, 256. 
Spirit, an independent reality, 74; life 
of, how limited, 179. 
Spirit and matter, reciprocal action 
of, 243; transition between, 221. 
Spiritualism, error of in relation to 
matter, 72; use of word, 251. 
Stadium, The, ofZeno, 192. 
Starr, Allen, 253. 
States, psychical, have a practical end, 
240; strong and weak, 206. 
Stricker, 116, 255. 
Subject and object, their distinction 
and union, 70. 
Subjectivity, a kind of contraction of 
the real, 34; of affective states, 53. 
Suggestions, with point de repere, 120. 

M A T T E R  A N D  M E M O R Y 
Sully, 252, 254. 
Survival, of the past, 149. 
Symbols, mathematical, express only 
distances, not real movement, 194. 
TENSION, 245 ; idea of, 183; in mem-
ory, 168, 169; psychic, 1 5 .  
Thing, image, and representation, 9 .  
Things, and their environment, 209. 
"Time and Free Will," 257, 259. 
Time, homogeneous, an idol oflan-
guage, 207. 
Time and space, homogeneous, not 
properties ofthings, 211; the uncon­
scious in relation to, 144. 
Tones, of mental life, 169. 
Toxic drugs, effect of, 174. 
Trajectory, of a moving body, 188. 
UNCONSCIOUS MENTAL STATES, 142; 
representation, 142. 
Unconscious, the, in relation to time 
and space, 145; mechanism of, 67; 
problem of, 142. 
Unity, the factitious, 183; the living, 
183. 
VALENTIN, 255. 
Van der Waals, 259. 
Verbal images, discontinuous, 125. 
Verbs, why retained longest, in apha-
sia, 120. 
Veridical hallucinations, 68. 
Vertebrates, nervous system in, 28. 
Virtual image and virtual sensation, 
131. 
Visual image, 86. 
Voisin, 1 14. 
Voluntary, the, and the automatic, 116. 
Vortex rings, 201. 
WARD, James, 252, 253, 259. 
Wernicke, 255. 
Wilbrand, 253. 
Winslow, Forbes, 1 14, 119, 254, 
255, 257. 
Word blindness and deafness, 107; 
two kinds of, 108. 
Word deafness, and motor aphasia, 
112; with retention of acoustic 
memory, 113. 
Words, and phrases, 118; auditory 
memory of, 118. 
World, material, not part of the 
brain, 19. 
Wundt, 253, 255, 256; his theory of 
perception, 1 28. 
Wysman, 256. 
ZENO, paradoxes of, 191, 258. 
"Zones of indetermination," 39. 

