
Best Practice in Inventory Management

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Best Practice in Inventory
Management
Second edition
Tony Wild
OXFORD
AMSTERDAM
BOSTON
LONDON
NEW YORK
PARIS
SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO
SINGAPORE
SYDNEY
TOKYO

Butterworth-Heinemann
An imprint of Elsevier Science
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP
225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, MA 01801-2041
First published by John Wiley & Sons 1997
Second edition published by Elsevier Science Ltd 2002
Copyright © 2002, Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any material form (including
photocopying or storing in any medium by electronic means and whether
or not transiently or incidentally to some other use of this publication) without
the written permission of the copyright holder except in accordance with the
provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of
a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road,
London, England W1T 4LP. Applications for the copyright holder’s written
permission to reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed
to the publisher
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN 0 7506 5458 9
For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications visit
our website at www.bh.com
Composition by Genesis Typesetting, Rochester, Kent
Printed in Great Britain

Contents
Preface
ix
Introduction
1
1
The basis of inventory control
4
The role of inventory management
4
Objectives for inventory control
7
Profit through inventory management
9
Reasons for the current stock
11
2
Customer service
17
Meeting customer requirements
17
Measuring availability
18
Demand management
25
3
Managing the inventory
33
Using Pareto analysis for control
33
Stock cover
43
Practical methods of reducing stockholding
51
The approach – how to reduce stocks successfully
54
4
Just-in-time management
59
The zero inventory philosophy
59
JIT environment
64
Advantages of JIT
71
Stock control using JIT
74

vi
CONTENTS
5
Organization and management
78
Where stock control fits into the organization
78
Responsibilities and targets
80
Inventory valuation
87
Skills and systems
92
6
Safety stocks
96
Learning from history
96
Normal demand patterns
100
Evaluation of safety stocks
104
7
Setting the right stock levels
112
Simple assessment of review levels
112
Managing lead times
117
Target stock levels
124
8
The changing role of purchasing
129
Modern supply practice
129
Supply partnerships
137
The ordering process
139
Order quantities
141
Purchasing processes
148
9
Forecasting demand
152
Options for assessing demand
152
Causes of forecasting inaccuracy
158
Methods of improving forecasts
162
10
Historical forecasting techniques
164
Basic forecasting techniques
164
Weighted averages
170
Choosing the best forecast
178
Monitoring forecasts
181
11
Advanced forecasting methods
187
More forecasting tools
187
Forecasting for seasonal sales
192
Other methods
195

CONTENTS
vii
12
Material requirements planning – an alternative to
forecasting
197
Avoiding uncertainty
197
Material requirements planning
199
Master planning
205
Batch sizes
210
13
The future – inventory and logistics
212
The basis of the lean supply chain
212
Logistics
217
Review
228
Questions and answers
231
Index
263

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Preface
In the distant past when I ascended from being a scientist to the heights of
inventory analyst, I was surprised at the lack of helpful written work on the
subject. Although there are now many books, manuals and papers, there
does not seem to be much written on the very important subject of ‘how to
do inventory control faced with the real inventory, customers, and an
assortment of inventory records and styles of suppliers’.
Yet better control of stock (inventory) can give major benefits to the
profitability of all companies. This book is aimed at showing how good
inventory control can be used in practice. It is a result of working
continuously on inventory control with a large number of companies over
many years. It contains the distilled techniques which have been tried out
and proven to work.
This book contains two main ingredients, namely:
 the basics of inventory management as covered in the Institute of
Operations Management (IOM) Diploma syllabus
 the application of these techniques to real inventory management.
The applications are what really count, since the knowledge is not at all
interesting without application. The experience of the author has been to
use the basics to provide powerful changes in inventory and profitability. In
several cases millions of pounds of inventory value have been saved and in
others customer service has been greatly improved. The topics here have
been tried, tested and approved. They are all a matter of common sense, but
which piece of common sense to use in a particular situation is a matter that
needs deeper understanding.

x
PREFACE
The book is a driver’s manual for Inventory Controllers. It covers the
working of the engine (how inventory control techniques work) how to use
the controls (what the techniques do and how to manage them), and how
to get the best out of the vehicle (how to optimize inventory). Understand
the text and it will show the way to guaranteed improved inventory control,
reduced stock levels and higher availability.
In preparation for this book there have contributions from the many
thousands of people to whom I have presented courses on these ideas, and
who have helped to hone the concepts. My thanks also to those companies
who have let me loose on their inventory, carrying out consultancy projects
which have extended my knowledge and proved the effectiveness and scope
for different techniques.
Central to the development of inventory techniques has been the
Institute of Operations Management (formerly BPICS) which has been a
channel for professional debate, friendship, and technical information. This
book has been created with the support of Richard Turner as Secretary of
the Institute.
The evolution of this book has been a two-handed operation. The
concepts have been blended into a logical text through the work of myself
and Elaine Duckworth, who has shared the task of developing a useful and
readable handbook.
Dr Tony Wild

Introduction
 Why we need professional inventory management
 Structure of the book
 Focus on developing theory that works in practice
Everyone is an inventory controller, at home and at work. We all keep food,
clothes, domestic items, paper, pens and many other goods. We also have
shortages and emergency purchases. Some people regularly have to throw
out the contents of the refrigerator because they have been there a while and
changed in character. So inventory control is a natural occupation that
everyone undertakes, some more successfully than others.
There are many other activities that people do, such as sport, carpentry,
music and medicine, and for these it is generally accepted that a level of
technical expertise is needed. In carpentry and music there are people who
become highly skilled through their natural talents. Success appears to
come from a mixture of talent, determination, practice and knowledge. In
medicine, particularly in surgery, we are more likely to rely on those who
have studied the subject and have a deep knowledge of both theory and
practice. Lawyers cannot function without knowledge; often a common-
sense approach does not work for them.
As with any profession, inventory control (or the subject of Professional
Inventory Management) has a body of techniques and knowledge which
differentiates the professional from the do-it-yourself (DIY) enthusiast.
This expertise is the result of 100 years of development and refining. Now
there are professional inventory managers with recognized qualifications,
including Diploma in Production and Inventory Management (DPIM) and
Certificate in Operations Management (COM). There are still colleagues
who believe that inventory can be managed using a clear brain and common
sense. It is unlikely that they would be happy with the same competency in
their doctor or financial adviser.

2
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
If you want to do better you need to train.
This book is for the inventory control practitioner. With the techniques
described many people have been able to manage their stock of inventory so
that their customers are happier and so are the accountants. The reduction of
inventory value, the avoidance of unnecessary work and the improvement of
customer service can be accomplished at the same time through simple
application of the techniques discussed. Improved inventory management
has been shown to halve stocks and improve service at the same time.
The techniques described are the basic concepts which inventory
controllers should have at their fingertips. The more complex theoretical
approaches can be left to those developing sophisticated systems, or those
with excellent inventory control (and over the years I have not met any of
these!). Inventory practitioners should be able to use this book to
understand the best approaches and then to apply them to their own
circumstances. Simple application of the methods is most successful, while
modifications usually result in less effective outcomes.
The text covers the syllabus for the technical qualifications including
DPIM and COM. It discusses good practice, inventory theory and the
practical application of the techniques. The structure of the book is to start
on inventory structure with target setting in Chapters 1 and 2, and how to
structure inventory in Chapter 3. This chapter shows how a big impact on
inventory levels can be made easily. The approach continues to give major
benefits in tightening control. Continuing the theme of restructuring stock
leads to the ultimate in stock management – the zero inventory approach –
just in time (JIT), discussed in Chapter 4. Gradual absorption of the
philosophy throughout inventory management is proving a great benefit,
and it is worth examining how to utilize JIT in each stock environment. The
rate of progress is often governed by the attitude and/organization in a
company, and the development of lean inventory management practice is
reviewed in Chapter 5.
The discussion then gets down to the detail of item-level inventory
management, the essence of real inventory management. Chapters 6 to 8
are the elixir of item-level stock control, the secret recipe for success.
Chapter 6 concentrates on how to keep out of trouble – a rational approach
to the risks of stockouts, Chapter 7 shows how to use this information to set
stock levels and Chapter 8 discusses the options for ensuring suppliers are
agreeable and flexible.
The third aspect of inventory management, one which is usually carried
out poorly, is forecasting. Forecasting methods are relatively well advanced,

INTRODUCTION
3
but there is less practical application of these in most companies. This is an
opportunity, discussed in Chapter 9, while the basic techniques are
discussed in Chapter 10. Chapter 10 also includes the techniques used to
ensure that forecasts produce sensible results. In practice there are items
where it is worth managing the stock in more detail, so in Chapter 11 there
are some more techniques which are commonly used and provide good
forecasts.
The one item at a time approach to inventory management is really not
appropriate in many situations. Users often require a range of items to do
a job. For example, servicing the car requires filters, plugs, oil, etc., all
available at one time. Inventory controllers should therefore balance the
stocks to meet the structure demand. Unfortunately, the usual techniques
do not help, and so the approach described in Chapter 12 is applied. The
technique, developed over many years in manufacturing, is an important
tool for general inventory management, although the application does not
need the complexity used in manufacturing.
The inventory manager who has a good knowledge of these topics can
then look round for new challenges. Industry has not been slow to provide
them. In addition to the increasing pressure on inventory value and
availability levels, there are new dimensions being added. The new
challenges are in logistics and supply chain management. The balancing of
inventory in one store is not sufficient; now the inventory, distribution costs
and manufacturing efficiency have all to be optimized at the same time.
Chapter 13 reviews the opportunities in this area.
Chapters 3, 6 and 7 are the bedrock of inventory practice. From
experience, inventory management as described in this book works well,
and the purpose of these pages is to enable more individuals to use the
methods with confidence.
Readers outside the UK may find that a little translation is required. For
instance in America the term ‘inventory management’ is applied to the
whole subject, whereas in the UK it is normally known as ‘stock control’.
The terms ‘inventory’ and ‘stock’ are both used in the text to mean the
same (in the UK inventory has a financial flavour and stock an operational
context). It is hoped that this and other nuances of translation do not cloud
the understanding of this technical and fascinating subject, whatever it is
called.

1
The basis of inventory control
 The conflicts which beset inventory controllers.
 What inventory is there to achieve?
 How good inventory management will improve profitability.
 Analysing current stockholding.
The role of inventory management
The success of a venture depends on its ability to provide services to
customers or users and remain financially viable. For an organization which
is supplying goods to its customers, the major activity is to have suitable
products available at an acceptable price within a reasonable timescale.
Many parts of a business are involved in setting up this situation. Initially
these are the marketing and design departments. Then purchasing, and in
some cases, manufacture is involved. For an item which is already in the
marketplace, the main activity is providing a continuity of supply for the
customers.
Inventory control is the activity which organizes the availability of items
to the customers. It co-ordinates the purchasing, manufacturing and
distribution functions to meet the marketing needs. This role includes the
supply of current sales items, new products, consumables, spare parts,
obsolescent items and all other supplies.
Inventory enables a company to support the customer service, logistic or
manufacturing activities in situations where purchase or manufacture of the
items is not able to satisfy the demand. Lack of satisfaction could arise
either because of the speed of purchasing or manufacturing is too
protracted, or because quantities cannot be provided without stocks.
Stock control exists at a crossroads in the activities of a company (Figure
1.1). Many of the activities depend on the correct level of stock being held,
but the definition of the term ‘correct level’ varies dependent upon which
activity is defining the stock. Stock control is definitely a balancing act
between the conflicting requirements of the company, and the prime reason

Operating
efficiency
Customer
service
Low
inventory
?
Purchase
price
reduction
THE BASIS OF INVENTORY CONTROL
5
for the development of inventory management is to resolve this conflict in
the best interest of the business. A conventional supply organization will
have many departments including sales, purchasing, finance, quality
assurance, contracts and general administration. In some cases there will
also be manufacturing, distribution or support services or a variety of
industry-specific activities. Each of these has a particular view of the role of
stock control. Note the terms ‘inventory’ and ‘stock’ are used to mean the
same thing in this book.
Sales consider that good stock control enables the company to have
available any item which will meet immediate sales for as large a quantity as
demanded: this requires large stock. For service companies where parts
service is involved, the control of stock at the customer interface is
traditionally left with the person carrying out the service, and this has led
to overstocking and poor control. Similarly in distribution, the effect of
bulking up shipments will lead to high stock levels, and a compromise has
to be reached.
Inventory control keeps balancing conflicting requirements.
Purchasing consider that stock control provides the opportunity for goods
to be purchased so that optimum prices can be obtained. Buying items in
bulk often reduces the purchase price and it improves the efficiency within
the purchasing department. The store is a means of keeping the bulk
purchase items after buying advantageously.
Figure 1.1 Which direction?

6
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Finance departments have a problem with stock because it consumes vast
amounts of working capital and upsets the cash flow. One benefit of stock
from a financial standpoint is that provisions can be made in case the stock
turns out to be unsaleable, and this value can be adjusted to modify the
profit figure in times of good or bad financial results. However, the
existence of these provisions in the first place is detrimental to the finances
of the company.
Quality management normally has the effect of slowing down the
progress of stock while the necessary checks are made. This means that
quality and inventory personnel effectively work in opposition. The gradual
introduction of formal quality standards for supply and manufacture has
reduced this conflict in most organizations. Supplier conformance has been
improved enabling intrusive checking to be minimized.
General management see stock control, rightly, as a source of informa-
tion. Some managers consider that they should be able to use stock control
to give an immediate supply of information, statistics and forecasts. This
can result in large amounts of unstructured work collecting, analysing and
providing information.
The traditional view of manufacturing companies has been that large
batches reduce the direct production costs. Manufacturing management
tends to aim more for plant and labour efficiency and allow high stocks in
order to avoid the disruptions caused by shortages, breakdowns and
changing customer demand.
Good stock controllers (or materials management) will keep the stock
down as long as they are responsible for stocks of everything, including raw
materials, finished and semi-finished stocks, consumables, tools, work on
the shop floor and, in fact, all inventory items.
Do not confuse high stock with good availability.
These views are now subject to question. Those who agree with these ideas
should be considering a rethink and change to a consensus on stock
management. The development of stock control practice has been given
impetus by the move toward total quality management (TQM) and JIT
concepts. These have focused on the possibility that good management,
particularly, is both desirable and profitable, and has brought into question
all the attitudes which are presented above as alternative views of stock
control.
The responsibility for maintaining the correct balance is normally left to
inventory management. (The actual name for the activity varies but the task
remains the same: the controller could be materials or inventory manager,

THE BASIS OF INVENTORY CONTROL
7
stock planner or controller, or even considered as a buyer or logistics
controller.)
Demand for the product results from changes in market and financial
forces and the amount and type of stock control varies in tune with this.
Stock control is a dynamic activity, and the successful inventory manager
has to ensure that the balance is kept right. This requires both communica-
tions skills and professional inventory techniques. Operating methods
should be continuously revised to reflect the changes and systems should be
altered to suit new situations and operating policies.
Objectives for inventory control
The first consideration is the overall objective of the work of stock control.
Like all other activities in the company, inventory management has to
contribute to the welfare of the whole organization. The logistic operation
must aim to ‘contribute to profit by servicing the marketing and financial
needs of the company’. The aim is not to make all items available at all times,
as this may well be detrimental to the finances of the company. The normal
role for stock control is to ‘meet the required demand at a minimum cost’.
Our aim towards long-term profitability has then to be translated into
operational and financial targets which can be applied to our daily
operations. The purpose of the inventory control function in supporting the
business activities is to optimize the three targets:
 customer service
 inventory costs
 operating costs.
The most profitable policy is not to optimize one of these at the expense of
the others. The inventory controller has to make value judgements. If profit
is lacking, the company goes out of business in the short term. If customer
service is poor, then the customers disappear and the company goes out of
business in the longer term. Balancing the financial and marketing aspects
is the answer: the stock controller has a fine judgement to make.
The first target, customer service, can be considered in several ways,
depending on the type of demand (discussed in Chapter 2). In a general
stores environment the service will normally be taken as ‘availability ex
stock’, whereas in a supply to customer specification, the service expected
would be delivery on time against customer requested date.
The second target, inventory costs, requires a minimum of cash tied up
in stock. This target has to be considered carefully, since there is often the

8
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
feeling that having any stock in stores for a few months is bad practice. In
reality, minimizing the stock usually means attending to the major costs:
very low-value items are not considered a significant problem. Low
inventory can also be considered in terms of space, or other critical
resource. Where the item is voluminous, or the stores space restricted, the
size of the items will also be a major consideration.
The third target, avoiding operating costs, has become more of an issue
as focus has been placed on inventory management. The prime operating
costs are the stores operations, inventory control, purchasing and the
associated services. The development of logistics, linking distribution costs
with inventory, has added this new set of transportation costs to the
analysis.
Optimizing the balance of these three objectives is the focus of stock
control. The better the balance the greater the profits provided for the
company (as will be shown in the next section, profit through inventory
management). The improvement in stock control has been slow and
gradual, created by new technology, financial need and competitive
pressure. Those companies who can tighten their control faster than the
average will flourish, but those which do not keep up with the average, even
if they are improving, will gradually dwindle. The way to achieve much is
relatively simple, and is outlined in the remainder of this book. The trick of
the good inventory controller is to meet the objectives simultaneously, not
one at a time, and of course ‘the better the control the smaller the cost, the
lower the stock levels, and the better the customer service’.
In reality: more inventory = worse delivery on time.
One of the dichotomies of inventory control is that at item level, the more
stock the better the availability. (This is discussed quantitatively in Chapter
6, in the section on evaluation of safety stocks.) However for the whole
inventory, experience has shown that the businesses with the highest stock
are often those which have the worst availability. These observations are not
in conflict if the causes of this are considered. Stockouts result from holding
too little stock for the offending lines, because the forecasts, monitoring or
controls are inadequate. High stock levels arise because too much stock has
been purchased, through bad forecasting, monitoring or controls. High
stock and poor availability are caused simultaneously as a result of poor
control. The problem rests with the inventory controller, and the solution is
in improved techniques. By using the techniques discussed in the
remainder of this book the reader can reduce stockholding by 25 per cent
even where the control is already reasonable.

THE BASIS OF INVENTORY CONTROL
9
Profit through inventory management
There is obviously a link between financing stock and profits. This can be
seen most clearly using an example.
An example of the effect of stock on profitability
There are two companies in the same industry, M. Tight Ltd. and The
Slack Company. Each has annual sales of £5 million and employs eighty-
five people. They both have fixed assets of £2.5 million in plant and
buildings, and operate in an industry where the value of customer debtors
is balanced by the credit owed to suppliers.
In their organization the two companies differ. Tight is a small,
independent company and Slack is a small part of a multinational group.
Although they manage to achieve similar customer service, M. Tight Ltd.
has concentrated on inventory control and has reduced stocks to £500 000,
while the Slack Company have poorly defined responsibilities in this area
and hold £2.5 million worth of stock.
The Slack Company have to finance an extra £2 million inventory, and
they can borrow this from their head office. However, the company expects
a 15 per cent return on investment and so charges Slack £300 000 per
annum in interest. They also have the costs of controlling, holding and
organizing the extra stock which is stored in an adjacent warehouse. These
warehousing costs are shown in Table 1.1.
Looking at company finance, the size of expected profit will depend on
the size of the company. Therefore, to compare how well different
Table 1.1
Warehousing costs
Cost element
Cost (£ p.a.)
Stores: extra area rent, heating etc.
500
Stores, equipment; trucks and racking
depreciation
1 000
Maintenance
1 000
Stock obsolescence
5 000
Storekeeper’s wages and employment costs
14 000
Annual stocktaking
500
Control systems and computer time
1 000
Total
23 000
Plus financing charge £2 million @ 15%
300 000
Total extra cost
323 000

10
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
businesses are doing, the profit has to be scaled to company size. The two
most common ways of doing this are:
Return on sales =
Profit
Annual sales
Return on assets =
Profit
Assets employed
The assets include both:
 fixed assets (plant, buildings, land, etc.)
 variable assets (stock and debtors).
Now examine the Profit and Loss account for the two companies. The
difference between sales revenue and costs is £250 000 for each
company.
M. Tight Ltd has a return on turnover of 5 per cent, making £250 000
profit on the £5 million sales.
Slack has extra costs of £323 000 and thus makes a loss of £73 000.
Good stock control has made the difference between profit for M. Tight Ltd
and loss for The Slack Company.
The next year M. Tight Ltd made £500 000 profit on the same £5
million turnover, a ‘return on sales’ of 10 per cent. The Slack Company had
a profit of £500 000 – £323 000 = £177 000 because of their annual
stockholding costs.
Although M. Tight Ltd has a return on sales of 10 per cent, The Slack
Company only get
177 000
5 000 000
= 3.5 per cent
This shows how important it is to the profit of a company, that stockholding
costs are minimized.
That is a surprisingly significant difference and, when we look at return
on capital, the situation is even more dramatic.
Both companies have plant and buildings worth £2.5 million, with total
assets consisting of the fixed element of plant and machinery, working
capital tied up in inventory and creditors who are offset by outstanding
debtors.

THE BASIS OF INVENTORY CONTROL
11
M. Tight Ltd also has £500 000 worth of stock, making a total capital
investment of £3 million.
The return on assets for M. Tight Ltd is therefore
500 000
3 000 000
= 16.67 per cent
The Slack Company has £2.5 million of stock making a total investment of
£5 million. Their return on assets is therefore
177 000
5 000 000
= 3.5 per cent.
Hold a minimum of the right items to be profitable.
By running the same business with two different inventory plans, we can
earn anything from 17 per cent to 3 per cent for our trouble.
M. Tight Ltd has cash available for investment, wages, better working
conditions, and to share out to the pension schemes, insurance companies
and other investors in their company.
The Slack Company has little cash to spare other than to pay off the
bank. Imagine the situation: poor profitability leading to disillusionment,
poor working conditions and fears for the future.
Reasons for the current stock
It is easy to assess the effectiveness of inventory control in a company. All
that is required is a visit to the stores. The stock level is a result of the
effectiveness of the stock control, but what is there is probably not ideal!
Instead of considering the detailed ordering history for each item (and there
are some interesting causes for stockholdings), the inventory can be
classified according to why it is now in stock. An examination of the factors
which give rise to the stock in a typical store reveals causes that are detailed
in the following sections.
Your current stock shows what is going wrong.
Purchase order quantity
There are several aspects which affect the ideal batch size. For example,
most stores have items that are bought in bulk but sold in smaller quantities.

12
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
At any time there is a balance of receipts in stock – a half-empty box or
pallet. This is usually an acceptable situation for keeping stocks at the right
level, but that stock nevertheless still contributes to inventory value.
The size of logistic inventory is often determined by the transport
methods chosen and the batch size of delivery which results. Changing the
delivery method can change the stock levels in the stores.
Where items are being manufactured, the rate of production in one stage
of the process may be greater than at other stages. The ideal solution to this
would be Kanban (see the section on pull systems in Chapter 4), but often
there is a stock of items manufactured slowly awaiting to fill a process load.
Alternatively a bulk process, or one where items are produced at a fast rate,
will create stocks which are subsequently used up at a much slower rate.
Frequent, small deliveries keep stock low.
Safety stock
In many situations customers do not provide information of their demands
far enough in advance. To compensate for this problem there are two
tactics. The first is to organize the customer to give more forewarning. Is
this impossible? Manufacturers of specialist, make to order or highly sought
after products may make their customers wait until the product is ready. In
more competitive situations, however, the customer has more power and
may not be prepared to wait. This puts the pressure on suppliers to reduce
the lead times and better to forecast demand. With better knowledge of the
customer’s demand, the unexpected peaks would no longer be a surprise
and stocks could be varied to cover these occasions. The second option is to
hold sufficient stock to cope with unexpected or excess demand. Safety
stock (or buffer stock as it has been called) is there to cover our inability to
predict demand. The inventory manager has an investment choice. Either
invest in inventory or invest in information. Those who can accurately
predict the customer requirements do not need safety stock.
Let the source of the risk hold the inventory.
A secondary role for safety stock is to compensate for failure on the supply
side, non-delivery of purchased goods, information failures, technical
breakdown or, even, industrial action. You cannot be too careful! Generally
the approach to these situations is to monitor the situation continually, and
there are several standard ways of doing this (see lead times and schedules
in Chapter 7).

THE BASIS OF INVENTORY CONTROL
13
Market change
Customers change their mind, contracts are lost, markets vary. These all
cause excess or even obsolete stocks. But this should not be of a significant
value. The changes that cause a build-up of inventory are either step
changes or gradual changes. A gradual change is the most common, and
leads to lots of minor excesses of stock. The cause is normally a forecasting
method that is not reactive enough, and the simple cure is often to use a
more advanced forecasting method. Methods discussed in Chapter 11 and
used in the right way can avoid this situation.
A sudden reduction in demand can only be anticipated through
understanding or information. Input from sales personnel is important in
avoiding excesses as well as stockouts. Sales can warn of impending major
changes, even if they are not good at identifying the size or the timing of
changes. This is the best way to avoid having items remaining after demand
is satisfied.
Detect trends and react automatically.
Obsolescence
In addition to excess stock caused by customers, a significant amount of
obsolete stock can be caused within the company itself. Consider several
situations:
1 The marketing department put an item on promotion without informing
the inventory controller. The demand increases as the promotion starts;
inventory control see demand escalate and stocks run out. They therefore
order more. The promotion ends just as the new stock arrives. The
company now has three years’ worth of stock cover at the normal usage
rate, and the major customers have already bought extra during the
promotion.
2 The design department has replaced the old version of a product with an
improved one; the sales team were extremely pleased with the new
product and started selling it immediately. However, there was a large
amount of the old product left in stock which was not sold.
3 The marketing department has just launched the new season’s catalogue.
It contains some new items, and some old ones have been deleted. There
are still good stocks of some of the deleted items.
4 The sales director has bought a job lot of items which are going to be sold
as a new line.

14
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
All these are common occurrences in some businesses. They all cause self-
inflicted obsolete stocks and can be avoided by improving communications
between departments. The responsibility for organizing this communica-
tion revolution lies with stock control, since the other departments rarely
understand the challenges of inventory management or the concept of lead
time. (Refer to the excess and obsolete items section in Chapter 6.)
Poorly defined responsibility
When buyers procure to optimize purchasing costs and operations, and
sales sell to suit customers, in the middle are the stores, accumulating stock
and controlling the conflict between the two activities. Stock control in this
case becomes simply recording and storing. Inventory management should
have the responsibility for assessing the demand pattern, determining the
appropriate stock levels to support this and then instructing purchasing
what and when to reorder.
Planned inventories
Cyclic demand, on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis, may be supported
most economically by constantly holding high stock levels. In the stores
there may be stock which is building up to satisfy a demand event or which
is stored to cover a definite requirement. The feature of these is that they
cover situations where the demand events are certain and in excess of the
supply capabilities, as, for example, in industries where there is an annual
holiday shutdown. Stock has to be provided to cover customer demand over
this period, and it is not possible to acquire the extra quantity at the last
minute to cover the shutdown. The stock is therefore gradually increased
over several weeks to maintain continuity. This effect can be complicated by
different stages in a supply chain taking holidays at different times.
Layout and location of stores
The effect of a stock location must be analysed in the context of the whole
business. In a company where the store is situated inconveniently or a long
way from the users, the users tend to keep their own stock. In fact, they
might keep some just in case the stores have run out when they want some.
This lack of co-operation and control can result in satellite stores being set
up and excess stock being held.
A worse situation results if different departments independently order the
same items. In this case, there are totally independent stock systems, usually
controlled by amateur stock controllers whose major interest is another
aspect of the business and, as a consequence, stocks are excessive.

THE BASIS OF INVENTORY CONTROL
15
Fortunately where this happens the items are normally low-value
consumables.
Where a company has more than one store (such as in distributed
warehousing), a similar range of stock items are held in each, resulting in
duplication of stock. If there are slow-moving items in one store (try to find a
store without slow-moving items!) then the same item can be found in the
other store – still moving slowly, and total stock across all the stores can
exceed the annual demand. This is a natural result of distributed stock. The
safety stock required will increase as the square root of the number of
distributed stores increases; so managers had better think carefully about
setting up local stock points. The increase of stock (by the square root) is
based on the assumption that the local stores are part of an integrated, well-
controlled inventory system. If this is not the case in practice, then the total
stock can go through the roof (literally).
Company strategy
Some inventory controllers do not have complete authority to maximize
availability and minimize costs. This may be because top management has
imposed some constraints such as an extra stockholding imposed through
lack of confidence in the ability of the stock system to provide adequate
customer service. It may result from a commitment to customers to keep an
agreed quantity locally or consignment stocks at customers’ premises.
In the normal course of events the stock control system will provide the
desired availability by adjusting the control parameters and should not need
overriding by management edict. It is up to inventory management staff to
instil confidence in their ability to control stock excesses.
System and control
The time taken to process information can substantially affect the level of
stockholding. Consider a stores where an issue is being made. This causes the
stock to fall below the ordering trigger level. How long does it take before the
supplier gets to know that a new delivery is required? On a conventional order
processing system the procedure is:
 Enter issue on system. (Delay one hour?)
 Print out list of items which need ordering. (Next morning?)
 Confirm that items do need ordering. (Rest of the day?)
 Print purchase orders. (Next day?)
 Get authorization for purchase. (When director is next available!)
 Send order to supplier. (Two days by second class mail?)

16
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
These processes could easily take a week, or much longer if the individual
lines are batched up into a large order. If the supplier is a local stockist, then
the item could arrive the same day, but the total supply lead time would be
one week (internal) plus one day (external), and the stock level would have to
be correspondingly large to compensate for this lead time.
For efficiency use real time procedures.
Slow systems cause extra stock
The solution is to use the computer systems properly, without paperwork,
and to use communications technology, (fax or e-mail) for ordering.
If the stock is analysed according to the headings above, the causes of
stock excess become obvious. Analysis will show that actual stock is not
held in the right balance to meet marketing and financial targets in the most
effective way. By establishing a reason for this, a plan can be devised and
action taken to ensure the lowest stockholding levels necessary to meet
company targets.
Initially, the reason for stockholding has to be determined. It could be to
achieve good customer service, cheap purchase, bulk discount, security or
a large number of other reasons. The stockholding strategy depends directly
on the company objectives and policy. Company policy defines the service
which it intends to provide to customers, what investment to make in stock,
how orders are placed on manufacturers or other principles on which to
base supply plans. This is the first ground rule of stock control – to have a
policy worked out by top management to guide the operation. The more
professional the stock control operation, the closer the policy needs to be
defined so that targets are set against which the activity can be run. This is
a generic, broad-brush approach, but useful for finding out where to put
most effort in stock management.
Key points
 Consider the objectives and need for inventory.
 Target 
availability, 
inventory 
value 
and 
operating 
costs
simultaneously.
 Create profits by avoiding non-essential inventory.
 Determine the causes of stock and use techniques to reduce it.

2
Customer service
 The key to successful business.
 Focus on customer delight.
Objectives
 Identify the purpose of customer service.
 Define the alternative measurements of availability.
 Analyse the components of administering customer service.
 Discuss the role of forecasting.
Meeting customer requirements
The focus on customer service has gradually changed over the years and
suppliers are now becoming really interested in customer service instead of
just talking about it. Customer service is a complex subject of its own, but
there are two main aspects, namely customer relations and availability of
service or items.
Please the customer and measure performance.
Customer relations
Customer relations is about keeping the customer happy. It requires
interpersonal skills to ensure that the customers have the correct level of
expectation of supply and that they are happy with their purchase so that
there is potential for repeat business and wider sales.
This aspect of customer service has gradually emerged because it is the
differentiating factor between many companies. The product can be similar
from a wide variety of vendors, the vendor which is most successful is the
one where the quality of customer relations is best.
Fix the customer. Don’t just supply the item.

18
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Customers may have a perception of suppliers which varies greatly from
their actual performance. It does not matter whether a supplier is good or
bad, what does matter is what the customer thinks about them.
Customers can look for a match between their own style of company and
the style of the supplier. If there is a match, then relations are likely to be
good; if not, then the co-ordination requires more work. The major factors
affecting customer relations are outside the scope of inventory control, in
sales and sales order processing. However, there has to be the same
customer-oriented approach in stock control, which, like the company,
needs to maintain credibility.
The second aspect of customer service – availability – is a key target for
stock control. It requires technical management.
Measuring availability
Availability
The entire reason for stockholding is to have items available but, despite the
key nature of customer service to the success of the business, some
companies do not quantify proper stockholding. They simply take notice of
complaints or other oblique assessments of service. To manage profession-
ally there is a need for solid facts.
For each item in stock the risk of stockout can be reduced by increasing
the stockholding. The larger the investment in inventory for an item the
better the service. This is shown in Figure 2.1 for an individual stock item.
The curve shows that it is relatively inexpensive to give a reasonable level of
availability, but the value of stock increases very rapidly when we try to
achieve very good service. A 100 per cent service is not possible because it
needs an infinite amount of stock! However, 99.99 per cent availability is
possible, but very expensive and no one can tell the difference from 100 per
cent.
Availability: get the facts, then act.
There is obviously a trade off between the investment and the availability
of items from the shape of the curve in Figure 2.1. For each item, the stock
policy can be adjusted to give the appropriate service.
The overall service to the customers, or other stores users, can be
measured from success in meeting demands (on-time availability) on a
daily, weekly or monthly basis. It can be calculated by adding the service

CUSTOMER SERVICE
19
provided on all the individual items, taking into account the issue
frequencies for the total range of items. We can define availability as:
Availability =
Demand satisfied
Total demand
This is the criterion which should be applied to all areas of inventory to
monitor how well the investment in inventory is doing.
When the whole range of stock items is considered, the minimum stock
levels result from all the items being under control at their optimum service
level. Basically, each item should be on the same curve in Figure 2.1. The
only way to reduce the stock beyond this balance, while maintaining
service, is to improve the total control method. After all, the aim is toward
the top left corner of the graph – high service with low stock across the
whole of the inventory.
High stock goes with poor availability.
They are caused by poor control.
Measurement of availability in practice
Within this definition of availability there are a number of ways by which
the service level can be measured, depending upon the type of demand.
For companies supplying single items to individual users as a result of
individual telephone or mail orders, then the definition could be:
Figure 2.1 Availability of a stock item

20
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Availability =
Total number of items supplied
Total number of items ordered
For a department which is sending large export orders, these are often
covered by a ‘letter of credit’ or the whole shipment must be sent in one
crate. In this case the service level would be:
Availability =
Total number of complete orders supplied
Total number of orders
For businesses where the demand is not required to be satisfied
immediately, care must be taken to measure availability at the time required
for dispatch, not the time of receiving the order. This gives the inventory
controller the opportunity to fill the demand from elsewhere rather than
from stock.
Care must also be taken as to the definition of ‘on-time’ delivery.
Delivery should really be measured as the time the customer receives the
stock rather than when it leaves the stores. ‘On time’ is when the customer
needs the stock. Where there is a history of poor delivery the customers are
quite likely to request a delivery date well in advance of their real need, in
order to have a chance of having the items when they need them.
Measure availability in line with typical customer needs.
The type of customer also affects the measurement of availability. For
example, if a customer requires ten and the stock is eight what customer
service can be provided? Is the answer:
 0 per cent because the demand was not completed (non-stock/
manufacturing answer)
 80 per cent because eight out of ten can be supplied (normal answer)
 100 per cent because the balance can be provided before the customer
needs them (for stockholding customers).
Different situations have different priorities. To have an appropriate
measure of availability, the service must be defined in one of the above ways

CUSTOMER SERVICE
21
– the one which suits most customers. In Table 2.1 only two items are being
considered. The demand for item A12 was ten orders totalling 1000 items
of which 990 were sent on time and ten items were not available for one
order. This means that 80 per cent of the orders (and 99 per cent of the
items) were sent on time. The second item is a slow mover and there was
only one order (for ten items) and only five were dispatched on time giving
a 50 per cent service of parts (and complete failure in terms of complete
orders).
How good is the service? Out of 1010 items requested only fifteen were
short, so the number of items dispatched was 98.5 per cent of the total.
However, in terms of item order fill, deliveries of item A12 were 99 per cent
full but B25 was only 50 per cent full, giving an average per line of 74.5 per
cent. If the customer is looking for complete orders, then out of the total of
six orders two were short, corresponding to a 66.7 per cent success rate. As
an order fill per line, this was 80 per cent for A12 and 0 for B25, so the
average was 40 per cent. This illustrates that different assessment of levels
of service which can often occur between customers and suppliers. In this
example the supplier is claiming 98.5 per cent delivery on time, while the
customer is measuring it at 40 per cent! It is important to agree a common
goal between suppliers and customers, and to establish what the customers
need in terms of availability. The appropriate measure can then be used for
monitoring.
Availability policy
Customer service can be structured or focused on a particular group of
customers or a market sector using alternative availability policies. Options
which could be used are:
 the same availability across all the products
 minimizing the total cost of service
Table 2.1
Pitfalls of measuring availability
Part no.
Demand
Shortage
Service level
(%)
No. of
orders
Shortage
Service level
(%)
A12
1000
10
99.0
5
1
80.0
B25
10
5
50.0
1
1
0
Average
74.5
40.0
Sum
1010
15
98.5
6
2
66.7

22
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 concentrating on the most valuable customers
 enhancing the service on the most sensitive products
 greatest availability on the most profitable products, or
 better service on the major turnover items, reduced service on slow
movers.
These alternatives will provide different availabilities for different products,
with a management decision setting availability levels.
Whichever alternative is chosen, proper control of stock requires the
inventory manager to regularly monitor availability.
A better measure takes account of ‘lateness’.
Back-order measurement
The measurement of availability discussed in the measurement of avail-
ability in practice section should always be used, but a further measurement
is necessary for sophisticated stock control.
Once an item has missed its delivery date, it is out of the calculation. This
introduces a further factor into the equation: the priority given to satisfying
back orders. Consider a case where there are two demands for an item, one
which is past the due date and one which is to be delivered on time. In such
circumstances, the availability target calculation requires us to fulfil the
current order, not the old one, since the current one improves the
availability factor, but the other has already failed. In practice there is
normally a need to give precedence to customers whose delivery is late.
Therefore a more rigorous measure of availability would be to measure how
many orders are late and how late they are.
An example of how this can be approached is developed from Table 2.2
(and Figure 2.2) which shows the dispatch position for two companies, A
Table 2.2
Comparison of dispatches for companies A and B (items dispatched in
week 37: analysis of lateness on orders dispatched)
Company A
Company B
Delivered on time
10
30
1 week late
60
15
1 month late
20
40
3 months late
10
15
Total dispatches
100
100

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Company A
Company B
On time
1 wk late
1 mth late
3 mths late
Total
CUSTOMER SERVICE
23
and B. Which company is providing the better service? From our service-
level (level of fill – LOF) approach company B is the better because it gives
30 per cent LOF against 10 per cent LOF for A. However, there is a better
chance of getting the items quickly from company A. Perhaps A is better
after all.
A measure of customer service which takes into account the overall
performance, not just the ‘ex stock’ part, can be developed by using a
weighted average. In Table 2.3 (and Figure 2.3) the arrears (or ‘back
orders’) have been analysed by categories of lateness. By multiplying the
number of orders outstanding by the weeks of lateness, a back-order week
figure has been calculated. This gives an overall figure of merit of 45 arrear
weeks, corresponding to an average for arrears of 2.1 weeks per late item.
By monitoring weeks of lateness against a target level, inventory controllers
can assess the level of service achieved. Obviously, the best practice is to
ensure that the bulk of demands are satisfied on time because those few
items which are long overdue give a negative contribution to the figure of
Figure 2.2 Comparison of dispatches for companies A and B
Table 2.3
Distribution of arrears
Time overdue
(T weeks)
No. of items
(N items)
Weighted average
(T × N)
1
8
2
6
3
4
4
2
5
1
Total
21
45

24
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
merit. If the back orders are satisfied rapidly, the level of service can be
measured in units of days or hours rather than weeks.
In practice the order backlog viewed on the system may not be all true
demand. It often consists of:
 real arrears which are customer orders slightly overdue and a real
priority
 virtual arrears which are often long-standing customer orders without
any urgency to them; these virtual arrears are orders which the
customer does not really want, or where they have bought an
alternative and not cancelled the order for the original item.
Outstanding orders need regular review to ensure that virtual orders are
either rescheduled or removed. If virtual arrears build up they have a
distorting effect on the back-order measurement.
Verify dates required before calculating arrears.
The extent of arrears can be measured in several ways. The number of items
in arrears is the simplest measure, and the aim is to focus the control on the
important items. Measurement in terms of value is not usually recom-
mended since the aim is to provide customer service. Routine assessment of
arrears should be carried out in a similar manner to the monitoring of
availability.
Figure 2.3 Distribution of arrears

CUSTOMER SERVICE
25
Demand management
Order processing
Entering the demand and making sure the customer is happy.
Stock should, of course, fill customer demand. In practice this includes
both having stock available and dispatching it. The physical handling of the
stock is a stores operation’s responsibility, while in many companies the
actual order processing forms part of the stock control function. Demand
management consists of a series of steps:
1 Order receipt.
2 Order processing.
3 Estimating delivery times to customers.
4 Production of dispatch information.
5 Customer feedback.
Order receipt
This is the initial compilation of orders into a form which can be used to
dispatch the goods at the right time to the customer. This information must
be:
 complete
 specific
 accurate.
The information can arrive by post, telephone, electronically or by word of
mouth. A first requirement is that the company has a good item
identification system which enables sufficiently unique identification to
satisfy a discerning customer. This has to be formalized into data for
processing.
Stock control requires an identification code for each item, ideally
provided by the customer. To assist this, some companies provide
customers with catalogues and order forms to enable customers to specify
precisely. It used to be customary for counter-sales customers of all types
not to know code numbers, and to rely on stores personnel to remember
them. This situation is no longer acceptable – if customers want the correct
item, then they should expect to specify their requirement properly. An
order form not only enables the correct data to be collected, it also presents

26
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
it in a standard format, which can be arranged to match computer input or
stores picking procedures.
Order processing
This is the entry of the order into the system. A second requirement is that
the processing of orders translates, reliably, speedily and without creating
errors, the customer order into company information. This process has to
be fast, simple and, above all, accurate. For computer systems this should
be done as a one-stage process with the source (phone, fax, letter, etc.)
being input directly into the system. This avoids errors and delays. Where
printed customer orders are required, these should be printed out from the
data input to the system.
Ensure that the data input is accurate.
For non-computer applications the source document (or a copy of it)
should be used for stock picking. With technology, electronic data
interchange (EDI) can create a demand in the system without any work.
This is good as long as the demand is easy to fulfil. Stock controllers need
the opportunity to vet orders, which means that all EDI orders should be
formally accepted for dispatch. Application of the ‘manage by exception’
principle suggests that most orders are easy to satisfy and can be accepted
without question – automatically. It is only those orders for fast delivery, for
large quantities or for non-standard items which need control. Criteria can
be set up to identify these so that the majority, the other standard orders,
can be accepted without question. The stock control parameters for
establishing these criteria are discussed later.
Estimating delivery times to customers
Estimating delivery times is the activity which causes a high level of
customer confidence to be gained or lost. Promises have to reflect the real
stock and replenishment situation or else customer service will be poor.
(See the following section ‘Estimating delivery times.)
Production of despatch information
The despatch information will consist of two stages:
 picking and delivery note production
 customer invoicing.

B. Order processing with
inaccurate stock records
A. Order processing with
accurate stock records
Customer order receipt
Issue picking list
Pick and confirm quantities
Despatch
note
Inform
customer
Send despatch note
with goods
Issue
pick/
despatch
note
Inform
customer
Alter
stock
record
and
re-submit
order
Send
despatch
note with
goods
If
discrepancy
CUSTOMER SERVICE
27
These stages should be carried out sequentially. The financial (invoicing)
systems should not be allowed to interfere with the stock movement
(dispatch) system, as invoicing is not part of the stock control system. Two
alternative paperwork processes can be used. A delivery note can be
prepared as soon as the order is processed, as long as the stock records are
accurate as shown in Figure 2.4(B). Where records are somewhat suspect,
a safer procedure is the one shown in Figure 2.4(A). This usually causes
extra paperwork.
Customer feedback
Customer feedback to report on progress and to keep the customer feeling
involved in the supply is very important from a customer relations
standpoint (see previous section, ‘Meeting customer requirements’).
Customers often require acknowledgement of order and confirmation of
price as well as a dispatch note and invoice. This confirmation should form
part of the normal information processing procedures.
Consuming forecast demand
In almost all situations business works to a forecast until the real orders
arrive. However, real orders rarely match the forecast and the question is
raised as to whether an actual order received is really part of the forecast.
Figure 2.4 Stock item order processing

ORDERS
1
2
3
4
5
6
TIME (in days or weeks)
New orders
received
Forecast = sales orders expected
28
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Consuming the forecast = take out a forecast demand and replace
with the customer order.
The ideal situation is when a company accurately forecasts demand and
makes that quantity available. As customer orders arrive, available quantity
is allocated and dispatched. When the quantity for the current period has all
been allocated, then customers are provided with items in the next period.
This situation is shown in Figure 2.5. Here the forecast in periods 1 and 2
(shown as the curve) is fully allocated and there are orders for periods 3 and
4 which have already been received. The demand in periods 5 and 6 is all
forecasts as no orders have been received which need satisfying so far
ahead. Orders are constantly being received and product is allocated to
these customers. This consumes the forecast quantity and builds up the
allocations. This approach ensures that a company does not allocate more
than has been provisioned through the forecast. In some fast-turnaround
businesses with period length of a day or less, this situation is acceptable
and almost inevitable. In other businesses more flexibility is required and
there has to be:
 safety stock to meet high demand, or
 extra supply sources available to meet peaks, or
 resources reserved for emergency supply (e.g. allocation of only 90 per
cent of capacity in manufacture leaving 10 per cent for last minute
orders).
Figure 2.5 Consuming the forecast

CUSTOMER SERVICE
29
Where a company agrees to fill every order from customers at a time to
suit the customer, then it is important to forecast carefully, otherwise
delivery achievement will be poor, much management time will be spent
chasing problems, panic purchases will be made and extra deliveries will be
required, causing costs to be high.
The differences between forecast and actual demand are measures of the
quality of the forecast (see Chapter 6). Actions arising from order
processing, besides accepting the customer’s request, could be:
 arrange increase or decrease in stock levels
 bring forward or delay supply
 offer earlier or later delivery date to customer
 reject order or offer alternative item
 provide part shipment.
Limit order book to achievable capacity.
An example
A supplier of fasteners has trouble with widely fluctuating demand
levels on some products. This is because the customer thinks ‘I need
a box of fixings for this job’ and orders enough to do perhaps two
months’ work. Consequently the supplier gets hit by two-months’
demand and then nothing. This is acceptable if there are many
customers, but for the slower moving fasteners demand can be very
erratic. By understanding the supply problem, the customer can be
encouraged to order enough to start the job off with sufficient
supplies, while the supplier, who understands the user’s situation, can
provide the range of fasteners but can get away with much less stock.
Of course, the situation must be carefully monitored and the balance
must arrive before the initial stock has been used up.
Large quantity orders can be filtered out using simple criteria (see
Chapter 6) so that real demand priorities can be fulfilled. Demand can
thus be managed through the order processing activity.
Estimating delivery times
For supply to order items, and for stockouts, an estimate of the delivery
date is usually required. Sales are often not aware of the status of the supply

30
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
and the order book, and so are badly placed to give more than a blanket
estimate of delivery. The stock control or purchasing departments do have
the information and can provide dates which are based on the actual
current situation.
It is the responsibility of inventory management to provide delivery and
availability information in support of customers’ orders. The time taken to
provide an item to a customer depends on the balance between stock
currently held and on order and the quantity already allocated to customer
requirements (see Chapter 12). If the order being accepted is allowed to use
items already allocated to other customers, then the order can be fulfilled
sooner. In general the priority sequence is ‘first come first served’, but there
are often cases where certain customers gain priority. Sales may consider
that promising the items regardless of ability to deliver will secure orders
and keep inventory control people on their toes. This can lead to a mistrust
of the optimistic delivery promises made and poorer customer service. The
solution to this situation is for inventory management to provide customer
delivery dates using priority rules specified in advance by the marketing
department. Where there are exceptional circumstances, then priorities can
be altered within the total availability profile. The request to ‘ring the
supplier and get a faster delivery this once’ should be dismissed on all but
the odd occasion, since it usually results from sales people not being able to
negotiate successfully.
Monitoring delivery dates can become complex. Dates which can be
considered as appropriate are:
1 When the customer placed the order.
2 When the customer requested delivery.
3 When the customer needed the item (usage date).
4 When delivery was originally promised.
5 When delivery is now promised.
6 When the item is dispatched.
7 When the item is received by the customer.
It is also useful to know:
8 Who changed the delivery date.
9 How many times has it been changed.
10 When the delivery date was changed.
Decide carefully what is ‘on-time’ delivery.

CUSTOMER SERVICE
31
The importance of these dates varies from one market to another and one
company to another. There are so many dates and potential monitors, that
companies have to choose which ones are important in their own
circumstances. Providing too many management controls is confusing and
dilutes the important ones. The prime controls would be delivery on time
measured as ‘7–2’ and ‘7–4’.
The difference between the customers’ request for delivery and
expected delivery dates (2–1) is their perception of lead time. This may
be a general indication of market expectations. The difference between
the customer order date and the date they received the goods (7–1) is
the actual customer lead time. Unfortunately, most companies measure
their dispatch dates (6) rather than the customer receipt dates, so there
could be a difference between the two views of delivery performance.
Many carriers now have sophisticated tracking systems that have the
potential to provide suppliers with customer receipt information to use in
their control systems.
Customers may leave an interval between their requested supply date
(2) and the time they actually need the items (3), to compensate for
delivery problems. If information is available to monitor this, it can be
used to improve collaboration between supplier and customer. The
monitoring of delivery performance, as with all other inventory monitor-
ing systems, exists to provide the best factual information for manage-
ment and control. Monitoring systems should therefore differentiate
between when the customer wanted the goods (2), when the delivery was
originally promised (4) and when it is now promised (5). It is useful to
measure credibility (7–4), to ensure that the supply systems are working
correctly. Measuring performance against current delivery promise (6–5)
can fool a company into thinking falsely that it is performing well. The
current delivery promise may bear no relation to when the customer
requires the item, and may be the latest in a succession of promises as
the delivery date slips back. The estimated delivery date can often be
changed so that 100 per cent performance is achieved. Therefore,
monitoring success against current delivery promise is not likely to be a
reliable measure of effectiveness. Monitoring of slippage – the number of
times the delivery promise has changed (8) – can also be revealing in
showing whether the company is providing customers with good infor-
mation and service. However, the reason for late delivery against the
original plan could be simply that the customer does not require the
goods until later. It is therefore useful to examine (9) what proportion of
the changes are due to poor supply and how many are due to customers
changing their mind.

32
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Key points
 Find out how to delight the customer – go for added value.
 Measuring availability is essential for success (more important
than financial reasons).
 Choose an availability measurement that suits the typical customer.
 Ensure that demand-processing procedures are effective.
 Keep the customer informed and involved.

3
Managing the inventory
 The use of Pareto analysis to save time and give control
 ABC for managing inventory
 Stock cover provides a monitoring tool
 Minimizing effort and inventory value
 A guide to reducing inventory levels
Using Pareto analysis for control
Applying effective control
In the stores there are a wide variety of items, with a stock record for each.
Some have high value and others are very cheap. The high-value items are
normally controlled tightly, whereas the low-value items are not treated as
carefully and are issued in bulk in approximate quantities. Most effort
should be put into managing the items which are most important for
achieving the inventory targets. In inventory control the best results are
gained by organizing effort correctly. There is not sufficient management
time to maintain detailed control of all the individual items. If the
immediate aim is to reduce stockholding costs then studying the stock of
low-value items is unlikely to be the best place to start unless the sales
volume is very large. If service is the aim, then attention to a few fast-
moving lines often provides the bulk of the improvement required.
This simple principle is embodied in Pareto’s Law, which is illustrated by
the curve in Figure 3.1. It is also called the 80/20 rule because 80 per cent
of the effect is provided by 20 per cent of the cause. In Figure 3.1 80 per
cent of stock value is caused by 20 per cent of stock lines. The principle can
be applied to many different areas of activity: 80 per cent of the purchased
items come from 20 per cent of the suppliers, and 20 per cent of sales lines
give 80 per cent of turnover. For a warehouse, 80 per cent of the space is
occupied by 20 per cent of the lines. This simple fact makes it obvious
which lines should be received little and often.

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Effect
Cause
34
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Pareto analysis is the technique which forms the basis of inventory
control thinking and is an important management principle which can be
applied to minimize effort and to obtain best results. It can also be applied
for time management, credit control and many other areas of control. To
gain best control, effort has to be directed to the most important areas. The
Pareto curve (see Figure 3.1) is often called the ‘80/20 rule’, but the values
can be read off at any convenient point. For example, the graph shows that
50 per cent of the product lines account for 97 per cent of the sales (or that
the other 50 per cent only provide 3 per cent of the sales – a worrying
thought). The shape of the Pareto curve arises from the range of volumes
and values combined in a statistical distribution. The shape of the curve
does not always give exactly an 80/20 relationship, but this does not affect
the principles of applying Pareto analysis to inventory management.
Stores carry a wide variety of items, with a stock record for each. Some
have high value and others are very cheap. The high-value items are
normally controlled tightly, whereas the low-value items are not treated as
carefully and are issued in bulk in approximate quantities. Most effort
should be put into managing items which are most important for achieving
Figure 3.1 Pareto curve

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
35
inventory targets. In inventory control the best results are gained by
organizing effort correctly. There is not sufficient management time to
maintain detailed control of all individual items. If the immediate aim is to
reduce stockholding costs then studying the stock of low-value items is
unlikely to be the best place to start unless the sales volume is very large. If
service is the aim, then attention to a few fast-moving lines often provides
the bulk of the improvement required.
Use Pareto analysis to save time and get results.
Stores contain items ranging from main products to washers and labels,
with a stock record for each. High stock value items need to be closely
controlled, whereas minor items need not be treated as carefully. To control
the resources of the company most effectively our effort and controls should
be biased towards high cost areas. Pareto analysis formalizes our efforts to
do this. It states that the majority of the effect is produced by a small
proportion of the cause. (80 per cent of the effect is due to 20 per cent of
the cause.)
The application of this to a stores stock control means that 80 per cent of
the total stock value is made up from 20 per cent of the total stock items as
stated. The other 80 per cent of stock items contribute only 20 per cent to
the total inventory value (shown in Figure 3.1. ) In a stock reduction
exercise the majority of our cost saving will be gained by decreasing stocks
of those few major items.
Eighty per cent of stock is in 20 per cent lines –
so reduce the high stock values.
Example
Consider a stock of 12 000 types of items in store. Pareto’s Law
shows that for a stock value of £800 000 we find that 2400 items
account for £640 000 of inventory. The remaining 9600 items are
worth only £160 000. Therefore, by concentrating on the 2400, control
over the total value will be tight. If 2400 is rather too many to review
individually, then the Pareto curve (Figure 3.1) shows that 5 per cent
of items account for 55 per cent of cost so 600 items contribute
£442 000 to the total stock costs. Again by working on these 600 items
carefully the overall stock value can be controlled or decreased.

36
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
ABC analysis
Pareto analysis by the current stock level is good for reducing stock levels,
but a more consistent classification is required when focusing on the
management of inventory. The current stock does not necessarily show
which items are important for the business. In fact there may be some
important items where the current level of stock is low because Stores are
awaiting an impending delivery. On the other hand some items may have a
high stock value simply because no one is buying these. It is therefore usual
to rank the items according to the annual turnover. The annual turnover is
given by
Annual usage × Unit cost
It is not too important whether the unit cost is the standard cost, latest cost
or an average as long as it is consistent across all the items. Annual usage
has to be adjusted in the case of new or obsolescent items to reflect the
future expected demand rate rather than the historical one.
Pareto analysis of this data shows that 80 per cent of the value of demand is
for 20 per cent of the moving items. (There is often a number of items in stock
for which the demand is zero, and therefore these items are not included in
this turnover analysis.) For some businesses the 80/20 rule is not obeyed
exactly, but the use of Pareto analysis is important for all inventory.
To use Pareto analysis properly requires the classification of stock by
issue value, and the simplest way is to use ABC classes. These can be
defined as:
 A = 10 per cent of stock numbers, giving 65 per cent of turnover.
 B = 20 per cent of stock numbers, giving 25 per cent of turnover.
 C = 70 per cent of stock numbers, giving 10 per cent of turnover.
ABC analysis is an excellent technique
for achieving objectives.
This is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
It is important to ensure that ABC analysis is based on turnover, but less
important that the exact percentages are adhered to. In some instances a
further classification (D) is useful to include a large number of very low
turnover items. This enables the number of stock lines included in the A, B
and C classes to be reduced to manageable numbers.

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Effect
Cause
A
C
B
MANAGING THE INVENTORY
37
The purpose of ABC analysis is not to provide different types of service
but to provide service with the least amount of cost and effort. Different
systems of control are used for the three categories of stock. As the A items
carry the most value, accurate systems are required to control them. On the
other hand, the C items are low turnover value but form the bulk of the
inventory. For these the main requirement is to ensure that stock is available
to meet demand.
A class – there aren’t many, so control tightly.
The control requirements for each category are shown in Table 3.1.
Category A items have a disproportionate amount of time and effort used
on them and have to be controlled tightly using systems in conjunction with
market expertise and product knowledge to maintain stock at the lowest
appropriate level.
B class – let the system manage these.
Figure 3.2 ABC analysis

38
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
For category B items computerized techniques are most appropriate. The
number of items involved and the lower values make it a waste of time to
use specialist skill which could be working on category A. The computer
can maintain control through statistics and deal with the complex
calculations using the computer forecasting models which are most
important for B items. The use of management by exception is also
important for B class.
The minor sales items, category C, should be controlled by a simple
system which enables supply to be obtained with a minimum of
administration. However, the control system for C items must be reliable
and not result in stockouts or large excesses. An investment in extra stock
of C class items is inexpensive but can greatly simplify the problems of
controlling large numbers of stock lines. This is an appropriate policy for
the faster moving C class items. For the very slow moving, higher value C
class items a purchase to order policy should be adopted where possible, or
if there is only one customer, they can hold the stock themselves and be
responsible for reordering as required.
C class – don’t take risks, be lazy.
High but not excessive inventory.
The most effective stock control systems are based upon ABC analysis
combined in a common-sense manner with the other techniques we shall be
discussing later.
Table 3.1
ABC inventory control
Characteristics
Policy
Method
A items
Few items
Most of turnover
Tight control
Personal supervision
Communication
JIT approach – balanced safety
stock
Frequent monitoring
Accurate records
Sophisticated forecasting
Service-level policy
B items
Important items
Significant turnover
Lean stock policy
Use classic stock control
Fast appraisal method
Manage by exception
Rely on sophisticated method
Calculated safety stocks
Limit order value
Computerized management
and exception reporting
C items
Many items
Low turnover value
(Few movements
or low value
items)
Minimum supervision
Supply to order where possible
Large orders
Zero or high safety stock policy
Simple system
Avoid stockouts and excess
Infrequent ordering
Automatic system

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
39
ABC analysis is the basis for the total control of stock. It is also used as
the basis for perpetual inventory stores control where annual stocktaking is
avoided by routine counting of a few stock parts each week.
An example of Pareto analysis in action is given in Tables 3.2–3.4 and
Figure 3.3. Table 3.2 shows a number of different stock items, their unit
cost and annual usage in terms of quantity of value.
Table 3.2
Example of Pareto analysis
Item
Annual
usage
(units)
Unit
cost
(£)
Annual
turnover
(£)
Annual
turnover
(%)
Rank
A12
21
7
147
2.1
5
B23
105
11
1155
16.3
2
C34
2
15
30
0.4
10
D45
50
5
250
3.5
4
E56
9
14
126
1.8
6
F67
394
12
4728
66.6
1
G78
5
8
40
0.6
9
H89
500
1
500
7.0
3
I90
11
4
44
0.6
8
J01
3
25
75
1.1
7
Total
7095
100
Re-arrange
Table 3.3
Classification by usage value
Item
Annual
usage
(units)
Unit
cost
(£)
Annual
turnover
(£)
Annual
turnover
(%)
Rank
Class
Cumulative
percentage
F67
394
12
4728
66.6
1
A
66.6
B23
105
11
1155
16.3
2
B
82.9
H89
500
1
500
7.0
3
B
89.9
D45
50
5
250
3.5
4
C
93.4
A12
21
7
147
2.1
5
C
95.5
E56
9
14
126
1.8
6
C
97.3
J01
3
25
75
1.1
7
C
98.4
I90
11
4
44
0.6
8
C
99.0
G78
5
8
40
0.6
9
C
99.6
C34
2
15
30
0.4
10
C
100
Total
7095
100
Classify

100
80
60
40
20
0 0
2
4
6
8
10
Cumulative percentage turnover
Sequence of items
40
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Items are then ranked in order of size of annual turnover value. This is
displayed in Table 3.3 with the items in descending order. The cumulative
annual usage value and percentage of turnover are also calculated. Items are
then classified into A, B and C by assessing the number of items in each
category and their percentage of total turnover value.
In the Table 3.4, classes A, B and C are compared as percentages of
number of items and total value. The table shows that the seven items in
class C have a turnover of £712, whereas the only item in class A has a
turnover of £4764.
Figure 3.3 The cumulative Pareto curve
Table 3.4
Summary of ABC analysis
Classification
Percentage
of items1
Percentage
of value
Value
per class
A
10.0
66.6
4728
B
20.0
23.3
1655
C
70.0
10.1
712
Total
100.0
100.0
7095
Note: 1ABC analysis is carried out only for items with usage.

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
41
Saving time
Applying the Pareto principle is a way of balancing inventory, stock
availability and critical resource spent on each item. How the law can be
applied depends on what the critical resource is considered to be. The critical
resource for all inventory controllers is time, because of the large amount of
information required for tight control and the wide variety and quantity of
stock held. The Pareto principle shows that 80 per cent of the time is spent
doing 20 per cent of the jobs and a significant time saving can be made if a
small reduction can be achieved in these jobs. They may be very frequent
short jobs (such as keying stores issues into a computer) or more infrequent,
long-winded jobs (such as writing a major management report).
Practical considerations in using ABC analysis
The ABC classification is a simple tool to enable the stock manager to
control a large number of items in a limited amount of time. This simple
approach is one of the most powerful tools employed to reduce stock value
and to decrease the workload of busy inventory managers and purchasers.
Experience with this technique over a large number of companies has
suggested that there are some pitfalls and some practical ways to
circumvent them. The situations which arise are typically:
1 Too many A class items.
2 Large numbers of lines (D class).
3 Non-moving lines (O class).
4 Fixed stock level items (F class).
5 Non-stock items.
Use ABC to save time.
Number of A class items
A class items are supposed to be reviewed on a daily basis, or a weekly basis
at least. To be practical, there has to be an upper limit of, say, 300 A class
items per inventory planner. Even where the planner manages many
thousands of items, the number of A class has to be kept small.
D class items
For normal inventories of 3000 lines, the ABC classification works well.
Where there are over 10 000 part numbers there should be a modifica-

42
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
tion to the classification system so that the vast bulk of low-value
turnover items are dumped into a further class, D. The D class contain
the lowest turnover lines, say 50 per cent of the active item numbers
which contribute only 2–3 per cent of the total turnover. The ABCD
classification now is as follows:
 A class: 5 per cent of moving lines (300 per planner maximum).
 B class: 10 per cent of moving lines.
 C class: 35 per cent of moving lines.
 D class: 50 per cent of moving lines.
The classification can alternatively be carried out by turnover value, for
example:
 A class: 45 per cent of turnover.
 B class: 30 per cent of turnover.
 C class: 22 per cent of turnover.
 D class: 3 per cent of turnover.
These classifications can be varied to suit the exact shape of the Pareto
distribution for the inventory to be managed. The principles of use of the
technique do not change even if the distribution is not 80/20.
Non-movers
So far in the discussion the moving inventory has been classified, and the
non-movers have been ignored. Companies do sometimes have a need to
keep non-moving items, or items where the movement is so slow that
they appear as non-movers in the recording systems. These items will
probably be subject to the stock cleansing discussed in the section on
turnover of stock. In the interim they should be provided with a separate
classification. Normally they are given class ‘O’ or ‘X’ which signifies
that they should not be ordered again.
Use ABCOFZ as a practical control method.
Fixed classification
As Pareto analysis is to be used for ordering, there are a few items where the
stock level should not respond to usage rate. (Unfortunately in many older
stock management systems, the stock control parameters are all like that!)

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
43
For example, the employment of two new maintenance fitters in a factory
requires them to be kitted out with protective clothing, tools, tool boxes and
a variety of items. The use of these items is likely to fall rather than rise as
a result of that action since there is less likelihood of further recruitment. By
putting these items in a separate classification (say F), they can be
segregated and identified. The system can then identify that the stock level
parameters from classification F are not updated.
Non-stock items
The decision as to which items are in the stock range is an arbitrary one and
depends on the particular inventory policy and market conditions.
Customers do not usually consider their requirements as ‘stock’ or ‘non-
stock’ items and the difference to them is only in the lead time provided by
the supplier. In fact, non-stock items are continuously being taken into the
stock range and stock items being deleted. For this reason it is useful to
include non-stock items in the ABC analysis. This can either be done by
including them within the ABC classes or, more commonly, to have a
separate classification (say, Z) for non-stock items. This separate classifica-
tion then has the feature that no stock is ordered from suppliers unless the
stock cover is negative (i.e. there is a customer requirement but no stock).
It is very useful to include all goods in the inventory management system as
it provides unified records identification and control over all goods, and
makes management and analysis easy.
Stock cover
Turnover of stock
The current stock levels in the various stores throughout the company may
not all be at the ideal levels, as we have seen. The purpose of controlling the
inventory is to drive the stocks toward their proper level which is
determined by the characteristics of supply and demand patterns. The
major factors are:
 supply lead time
 average demand rate
 variability of demand
 supply frequency
 customer delivery time allowed.

44
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
There are also practical considerations such as:
 reliability of the supplier
 criticality of the item
 availability of item from other sources.
The concept of ‘balance’ is most important in ensuring that the maximum
service is produced from a minimum of stockholding cost.
The best level of service will be provided if there is an equal chance of all
items being available for the customer. High stocks of one item and no
stocks of another will reduce the overall availability and increase the
inventory cost. The percentage availability target (see Chapter 2) should
therefore be the same for all items in the stock range unless there are
specific marketing reasons for favouring some customers or products.
If the cost of managing the inventory is also considered, then the value of
items being ordered and controlled becomes important. Valuable inventory
management resources should be confined to the most cost-effective jobs.
This means that time should be spent on high turnover value items and not
wasted on items whose value is insignificant. The best balance of inventory
leads to an optimization of costs and service over the full range of stock lines
within the time available.
The inventory performance of each item can be monitored using a figure
of merit for stock balance. This is the ‘stock cover’, which is defined as:
Stock cover =
Current stock × 52
Forecast annual usage
This gives the result in terms of weeks on hand. The same answer could be
calculated for a month’s predicted usage and multiplying the stock by 4.2
instead of 52. This is more convenient sometimes, but should only be used
when demand is consistent. It is also convenient to use historical average
usage in this equation. (See Chapters 10 and 11.)
A sample of stock items is shown in Table 3.5. Which of these items
requires attention first?
Stock cover gives an insight into the priority for action. It is not an
infallible guide, but it does indicate where review is required. The first
instinct would be to look at 1P4 and 1P8 in Table 3.5, where the stock cover
is small. However, there may not be a problem with these since a delivery

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
45
may be arriving. At the other end of the scale 1P3, 1P7 and 1P10 have over
a year’s worth of stock, so means of reducing this level will have to be found.
Stock cover shows whether the stock is ‘in the right ballpark’: if it is not
correct, attention to the items which are obviously well outside acceptable
stock levels will keep the shape of the inventory reasonable. Stock cover is
used by inventory controllers because it is easily understood in terms of
usage rates and lead times. Stock cover is the time in which the stock will
run out at average usage rate.
Use stock cover for analysis but not control.
As well as being a crude analysis tool for each stock item, stock cover is also
an important tool for measuring the total inventory. Overall stock cover is
calculated from the total value of stock divided by the annual issue value
and multiplied by 52 to change the answer to weeks. In many distribution
stores the answer is between one and eight weeks. In fast-moving consumer
goods, one to eight days is more appropriate. Financial managers are often
more interested in the use of funds, and therefore measure the effectiveness
of inventory management using ‘stock turnover’ or ‘stockturn’. This is just
the reciprocal of the stock cover, taken on a value basis for the complete
stockholding.
Stock turnover =
Value of annual usage
Value of stock
Table 3.5
Stock cover
Item code
Stock
(units)
Annual usage
(units)
Stock cover
(weeks)
1P1
250
2000
6.50
1P2
700
1625
22.40
1P3
500
400
65.00
1P4
15
1000
0.78
1P5
20
25
41.60
1P6
40
250
8.32
1P7
500
200
130.00
1P8
8
400
1.04
1P9
6
40
7.80
1P10
65
20
169.00

46
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
This calculation gives the number of times the stock would be used up per
year.
Example of stockturn calculation
Value of stock in the stores is £150 000
Issues for the last twelve months amount to £900 000
Stockturn is therefore 900 000 ÷ 150 000 = 6.
This means that the stock value would be used up completely six
times per year so that the stock cover for the total stock will be two
months, or by the stock cover calculation as
Stock cover = 150 000 × 52/900 000 = 8.67 weeks.
Stockturn is based on historical data and is used for financial reporting.
Stock cover is an inventory management tool for planning stockholding and
can be based on known data and the forecast usage rate, so that the stock
will meet the expected demand for the item. When the stock level is being
assessed for accounting purposes, the ratio uses the historical usage rate,
which enables a conservative view to be taken of the stock level. Although
this sometimes leads to a divergence of views on the necessary stock-
holding, the assessed future demand should always be used when
controlling stock or placing orders.
Setting stock targets
For good stock balance the stock cover of all the items should have similar
value. In practice differences in the variability of usage and the order cycles
leads to a range of acceptable values for the items. Stock cover should not
be used for working out reorder levels – there are proper accurate ways of
doing this (see Chapter 7). Stock cover ratios can be used to calculate the
broad ranges of weeks’ cover which would be needed for inventory items.
For instance it is unlikely that more than twenty-six weeks’ worth of stock
is planned for any inventory item, therefore a figure of more than twenty-six
could be the boundary between ‘OK.’ and ‘needs attention’.
As inventory control should be tightest for the A class items, these are the
ones which can be controlled down to lower stock cover figures (leading to

C
B
A
1
2
3
4
8
20
Number of
items
MANAGING THE INVENTORY
47
the paradoxical situation of holding lowest stocks of the best sellers!)
whereas extra stock of the minor C class items adds little to stock value and
significantly reduces the work of controlling.
In practice the stocks could have control limits to avoid extremes of
inventory, and an allowable stock cover range can therefore be set by the
ABC inventory classes in a ratio which is theoretically 1:3:7. An illustration
of the acceptable ranges for category A, B and C items is shown as:
 A class: between one and four weeks.
 B class: between two and eight weeks.
 C class: between three and twenty weeks.
A stockturn ratio (weeks of stock) for all the items in the category should lie
in the ranges shown (see Figure 3.4.)
In theory the distribution of the population of items within a class is
shown in Figure 3.4. Also shown in this figure is what the curve looks like
in practice. (Note that the horizontal scale is logarithmic.) The theoretical
curve allows for the variability of demand, the usage of the safety stock for
some items and some slow movers, causing some of the items in a class to
fall naturally outside the expected limits. The actual population curve when
plotted against cover has an entirely different shape. Some items have high
stock cover ratios, and since the stock value has to be limited, some of the
other items have very low stocks to compensate. The shape of this curve is
caused by the response systems initiated by low stock levels and the less
effective action which normally is seen when the stock levels for some of the
Figure 3.4 Ranges of stock cover

Expected profile
Stock cover (in days or weeks)
Actual profile
Number of lines
48
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
items rise over the maximum. The profiles of stock turn ratio in Figure 3.5
are typical, even where inventory management practices are good.
The weeks of stock cover shown in Figure 3.4 indicate how long it would
take at best to reduce stock levels. If the stock reduction is to be made
through C class items, the time taken to reduce the levels will be in excess
of twenty weeks. For A class items the whole process should be completed
within four weeks.
Pareto stock balance
Pareto analysis enables us to take the discussion of stock balance a step
further. Each Pareto class, calculated according to annual turnover, can
have its own target months of stock range, as shown in Figure 3.4. The use
of these two techniques (ABC analysis and stock cover) together is
fundamental in forming the basis of the stockholding policy. Another
illustration of the power of the Pareto rule is shown when the overall value
of stock has to be reduced to meet a new target. Say the inventory
investment currently amounts to six weeks’ of stock and this needs reducing
by a minimum of 10 per cent, then ABC analysis of the inventory items
would follow the pattern given in Figure 3.5.
In Table 3.6 the A, B and C classes have average stockturns of 2.0, 5.0 and
11.5 weeks, and therefore constitute a well controlled inventory. If these
amounts of stock cover appear to be over generous, then the substitution of
the word ‘day’ for the word ‘week’ in the heading will suit all but those
involved in JIT supply (see Chapter 4). The classes contribute 65 per cent, 25
per cent and 10 per cent to the inventory value, respectively. This means that
the total stock values arising from A, B and C classes are equal.
There are several options for decreasing the stock value. One way is to cut
A items down to an average of 1.5 weeks of stock. This new situation is
Figure 3.5 Expected and actual stock profiles

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
49
shown in the A class calculation in Table 3.7. The net result is a stock
reduction of 0.33 weeks.
An alternative way to achieve the same result is to reduce the stock of C
class parts down to 8 weeks (from 11.5 weeks). The new contribution to
stock cover is 8 × 0.10 (= 0.8) weeks of value, a reduction of 0.35 weeks.
Tighter control of A items is the better alternative because:
 the change required is less (0.5 week as opposed to 3.5 weeks’ cover)
 there are fewer lines involved, so less disruption of planning
 less work will be involved – 100 stock items instead of 700 (last column
of Table 3.7)
 the effect will be more rapid.
This last point can be proved by looking at the stock cover for each of the
ranges in Figure 3.5. The average taken for stock cover for A, B, and C, are
2.0, 5.0 and 11.5 weeks respectively. If the classes were perfectly balanced,
and the supply was stopped, then the A class would run out after 2 weeks,
the B Class after 5 weeks and the C Class after 11.5 weeks. Stock reduction
through natural usage will take at least these respective times. As stocks are
not often perfectly balanced, the true time to reduce the stock is normally
over twice this long.
Table 3.6
ABC stock cover
Class
Moving
lines
(%)
Stock
cover
(weeks)
Turnover
(%)
Weeks
of value
A
0.1
2.0
0.65
1.30
B
0.2
5.0
0.25
1.25
C
0.7
11.5
0.10
1.15
Total
3.70
Table 3.7
Options for reducing stock value
Class
Moving
lines
(%)
Stock
cover
(weeks)
Turnover
(%)
Weeks
of value
Reduction
in weeks
of value
Number
of lines
involved
A
0.1
1.5
0.65
0.975
0.325
100
B
0.2
5.0
0.25
1.250
C
0.7
8.0
0.10
0.800
0.350
700
Total
3.025

50
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Using ABC and stock cover together
saves time and inventory.
Purchase order patterns based on Pareto analysis have been devised to save
stock value and management time. This is well illustrated by the ordering
process shown in Table 3.8. Consider an inventory of 1000 different lines.
If each line is purchased each month from the suppliers, then there are
1000 lines ordered each month, or 12 000 per year, and a stock cover of just
over two weeks plus safety stock. (Stock goes up by 4.2 weeks’ worth on
receipt and then reduces to nil, so the average is 2.1 weeks.) Safety stock
can be omitted from the discussion since it is taken to be independent of the
order pattern. The order pattern is A weekly, B fortnightly.
C then weekly gives a reduction in both inventory and orders.
Further, if the A Class items were ordered twice as frequently and the C
class half as frequently, what would be the effect?
The result is that:
 the total stock value is reduced from 2.1 weeks’ cover down to 1.55
weeks’ cover (excluding safety stock in each case)
 the number of line orders placed is also reduced from 12 000 per year
down to 9750.
This shows that a reduction in effort and a decrease in stock are brought
about at the same time. These results are typical and are borne out in
practice. The effect on customer service from these changes is negligible
because the safety stock remains the same in each instance. (The availability
is based on the calculations shown in Chapter 6.) Stock discussed in Table
3.8 could be the same as overall inventory shown in Figure 3.4, where the
total inventory includes the safety stock in the calculation.
Table 3.8
Number of purchase orders with ABC inventories
Class
Moving
lines
(%)
Stock
cover
(weeks)
Turnover
(%)
Weeks
of value
Orders
per year1
A
10
1
65
0.33
5 200
B
20
4
25
0.50
2 600
C
70
10
10
0.50
3 640
Total
100
100
1.33
11 440
Note: 1Per 1000 lines.

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
51
Practical methods of reducing stockholding
The approach
Going back to the basic principle of
Decrease in stock = Output – input
shows that the way to reduce stock is to decrease input and increase output.
A normal range of stock in stores comprises fast moving parts, a wealth of
obsolescent and special items and fluctuating quantities of other parts,
some in short supply, some overprovisioned. In this situation there is
potential for decreasing stock by a significant amount, probably 30 per cent
over eighteen months.
For many items there is little manoeuvrability to change the unit cost
significantly. However this should be considered, since a 10 per cent
reduction in price will cause a corresponding drop in inventory value in the
long term. The average value of a stock line is given by multiplying
Unit cost × Average stock.
The average stock quantity is typically halfway between maximum and
minimum1 stock. The minimum should be the safety stock and the
maximum occurs immediately after a delivery. If the stock falls to safety
stock level before delivery then:
Average stock =
(max. + min.)
2
=
(Safety stock + Order quantity) + Safety stock
2
= Safety stock + 
(Order quantity)
2
See Figure 3.6.
1 The ‘minimum’ on some systems is set to the review level for triggering resupply even
though the stock continues to fall below this level until the delivery arrives. Here, the
‘minimum’ is the lowest average stock level immediately before delivery.

52
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
In order to reduce the average stock, therefore, there needs to be a
reduction in either
 order quantity, or
 safety stock.
Batch quantity
The lowest inventory will result from receiving the same order size into
stock as the issues to customers and, of course, this will be at a minimum
if the order size is small. For those items which are individual, then the
minimum order size is one. The parameter for order quantity on this basis
is therefore the simple message ‘buy one’. This is also the obvious answer
for the majority of slow moving stock items. It is not so obvious when stated
in the form: ‘hold the least stock cover for the most important stock items’,
a consequence of good stock control and also of JIT supply. Minimizing the
delivery quantities of the A class items (or those contributing to the highest
stock value) is normally the most fruitful way of reducing stock value.
Supplier delivery quantities are more important
than lead times.
Safety stock
Minimizing the safety stock could result in lower customer service. Because
the balance of stock is never perfect and the levels constantly need to be
Figure 3.6 

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
53
changed, availability provided by the stock management needs to be
monitored continuously. Therefore, the first step in controlling the high-
value stocks is to ensure that the safety stock is sufficient to provide the
service required and not more. Achieving a higher availability level than
necessary is very expensive. The availability for each of the high-value items
has to be matched to the requirements of the market. Balancing these
stocks is most important. As the safety stock depends on the availability
required, the lead time and the variability of demand, the next topic to
consider is lead time.
Little and often for A class.
Lead times
By negotiating shorter lead times, the safety stock can be reduced. Modern
purchasing practice should eliminate random demand ‘over the counter’
but it does require collaboration, forecasting and supply chain management
so that the supplier can arrange to make items available by the demand date
with a much shorter lead time. Lead time can be reduced by negotiation,
and in the context of reducing stock investment, it is the few major stock
items which will offer the most opportunity to negotiate.
The third factor is demand pattern. If the demand were ten every week
consistently, then there would be no need for safety stock. (There are
people from some areas of business who would question this simple
statement, since the holding of extra stock would enable extra orders to be
serviced should they arise. This extra stock is not safety stock but an
investment in opportunity – or folly – and should be considered separately.)
The question to be answered is ‘what opportunity is there to smooth out the
demand pattern?’
Example: a case of a pan
The stock records for a range of materials sold by a major supplier of
aluminium were typically as follows:
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Demand
225
2625
75
100
200
50
125
100
0
2050
300
125

54
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The items were aluminium circles (flat round sheets) in various sizes
used for making pans. The conventional stock level calculations
suggested very high stock levels in order to cope with the demand
peaks in weeks 2 and 10. This was introducing a high level of stock
for these items, and inflating the inventory value.
Investigation of this order pattern showed that across the range of
products, these peaks were caused by one major customer who had
an order cycle of two or three months and this was causing the large
demands. There are several solutions to this problem:
 Understand demand – greater understanding of the demand
pattern improves the forecast. Since safety stock is required to
compensate for forecast inaccuracy, the improvement of fore-
casting reduces safety stock. There is, therefore, the opportunity
to try to smooth customer demand by getting the customer to buy
little and often.
 Flatten demand – remove sporadic demand from the stock by
buying to order and giving the customer a longer lead time.
 Agree scheduled supply – It would be better to organize a
continuous supply by scheduling delivery.
The reduction project
Order quantities and safety stocks should be examined to ensure that they
are synchronized, starting with the item with the most stock value and
continuing down the stock value Pareto curve. A target should be set so that
the stock reduction for each item can be judged against it. For example, an
overall stock value reduction of 20 per cent can be achieved through a 25
per cent reduction in stock of the top 20 per cent of lines. Starting from the
highest value stock line, a percentage reduction should be attempted for all
lines. This is unlikely to be achieved for some items, but it is essential to
concentrate on achieving the target for the highest value lines or the overall
target will not be met. The value under-achievement on some items has to
be compensated by extra value savings on other lines.
The approach – how to reduce stock successfully
Stock reduction is usually undertaken as a project, and concentration
should be given to achieving the objective in a short time. By examining

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
55
the first few lines in the Pareto curve, major savings can be achieved in a
short timescale. The next step within each area of activity is to find the
major cost items. By Pareto Analysis it can be assumed that 80 per cent
of the value of stock exists in 20 per cent of the item types. Items with
the most stock value are likely to be a mixture of fast movers with
reasonably high unit value and high-value items where there are relatively
few demands per year. Pareto analysis shows that the way to reduce the
stock value is to concentrate on the high stock value items, whether they
are slow moving or fast moving. The value of inventory is the same for
each and the financial investment is the same. In fact it is easier to vary
the inventory levels for the faster moving items. As far as basic Pareto
classification is concerned, there is no difference between the stock for
fast-moving and slow-moving items with the same stock value. The
differences will be managed through the individual stock calculations for
the items.
High stock value fast movers reduce the fastest.
The stock of a fast-moving item is likely to be consumed quickly and
consistently though servicing a wide variety of demands from a large
customer base. The inventory profile for a fast mover is therefore large
numbers of demands taking a small proportion of the inventory. Demand
is relatively stable. For high-value items, there are relatively few issues to a
smaller number of customers. This means that the demand is more unstable
for two reasons:
 As the stock lasts longer, the risk of demand changing within the stock
cover period is greater and therefore there is an enhanced risk of the
stock remaining as obsolete or excess.
 The demand comes from only a few customers, if any of them reduces
their offtake, this will have a much more significant effect than if there
were more customers.
It is therefore especially important to manage risks on the slow-moving, A
class items by forecasting, ordering little and often, and collaborating with
customers and suppliers. The A items are selected for special control,
applying a scheduling approach where possible and negotiating closely with
the supplier. The supplier may be keeping a stock of these items specially or
can be persuaded to do so if desirable. The delivery quantity for A class
must be cut to a minimum and reviewed each time an order is placed.

56
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The stock reduction project
Specific stock reduction can be achieved through a dedicated project.
Continuous stock reduction is a background job for all inventory
managers, but since insufficient focus is given to it, arranging a project
tends to be more effective. The following steps may be taken:
1 Identify the potential for reducing stock.
(a) Find the total stock value.
(b) Find the annual material usage.
(c) Calculate the total stock cover for the various stores or categories
of stock.
The results can then be tabulated, to identify which areas of stock
have the best potential for significant value reduction, under the
following categories: stock type, stock value, calculated stockturn,
target stockturn.
The analysis of stock type can be generalized for distributors.
Typical classifications are: market sector, product type, supplier, or
other obvious classes. For manufacturers classifications can be into
raw material, work in progress, bought-out parts, finished goods,
consumables, etc.
All that is required is to reduce average stock value of significant
stock lines. With this analysis it is easier to see which areas to
concentrate on in a stock balancing programme. By assessing targets
based on experience an initial plan can be launched, to be followed
by a detailed analysis of appropriate targets at a later time.
2 The next step is to classify stock items into ABC.
3 For the few A class items, it is important that the minimum stock is
held for the availability required. This is where the major effort in
stock reduction should be focused. A items have to be reviewed
individually and the supply arrangements reconsidered. Significant
reductions are to be sought, through supply practice and better
demand forecasting.
4 The reorder level and safety stock depend largely on the lead time. It
is, therefore, important that lead times reflect current trading condi-
tions and are kept low through contact with suppliers (especially for
A class items).
5 For the medium price items, i.e. B class items, computer monitoring
of safety stocks and order sizes will enable smaller batches to be
ordered and safety stock to be reduced.

MANAGING THE INVENTORY
57
6 Avoid ordering more than (say) three months’ supply of anything.
Setting a limit ensures that the amount of slow-moving stock is reduced.
Very long lead time items will have several purchase orders outstanding
simultaneously.
7 Low value items purchased in category C are often standard products
which can be obtained off the shelf. By proper planning, these need not
be kept in stock. They can be purchased to meet demand or provided by
a supplier on consignment. However, an efficient reorder procedure is
necessary or else the works van will be touring the neighbourhood
continuously picking up odds and ends.
8 From the stock turnover figures it becomes obvious that some items
have too much stock cover, and are simply contributing to stock value.
They are either obsolete or have very low sales. From our introduction
to this section the formula shows that this stock has to be disposed of in
order to have a low inventory presence.
The first step is to decide which stock is obsolete and to remove any
chance of it being reordered by marking the records accordingly. The
most profitable way to dispose of stock is through the servicing
department. They can often sell obsolete lines to customers with old
machines at full sales value or at an offer price near to it.
Stores are also likely to hold proprietary products such as compo-
nents, fittings, motors, consumables, bearings and packaging which can
often be sold back to the supplier at a low price. With high inflation over
the past few years this return value can equal the original purchase price
and so there may be no loss of assets involved.
By concentrating on major cost items the value of obsolete stock can
be reduced. It generally takes time to negotiate the sale of items and
therefore can be viewed as an ongoing project. Where these approaches
still leave a significant number of useless items in stock, then disposal
for scrap is the simplest course, and there should be an approved budget
for this. The loss of assets through scrapping stock reflects directly on
profit margins, and overzealous disposal projects can mean a period of
poor financial results.
Armed with a budget for scrapping, items can be thrown out of stores
and written off until the budget is used up. As stores are often short of
space and control of slow movers is tedious, it is convenient to scrap a
large number of the lowest value items in stock, thus reducing the
number of stock lines and consequently freeing most space.
9 Design and planning departments can help to reduce stock requirements
by very large amounts. All they need to do is to use the same items widely
rather than marginally different ones for each application.

58
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
A stock rationalization exercise is normally fruitful for standard items
such as electronic components, motors, fasteners, raw materials,
packaging items, gearwheels and tools. This can be carried out initially
by inventory control and then passed on to technical people to
continue.
10 The order is the cause of increased stock. Therefore it is necessary when
undertaking a stock reduction exercise to look at every order placed to
ensure that:
(a) The item is required at the time purchased.
(b) A minimum is ordered.
(c) There is no stock existing which can be used instead.
11 To maintain overall control of the stock reduction project reliable
management information must be available on a monthly or weekly
basis for such things as the value of items on order, stock cover and
availability. By plotting them on a graph the effect of these actions can
be measured continuously.
Key points
 ABC analysis provides the best tool for saving time and structuring
inventory.
 Stock cover enables inventory managers to look out for likely
problems.
 Stock cover is not used for setting safety stock levels.
 Inventory is reduced chiefly by using Pareto analysis and control-
ling supply.

4
Just-in-time management
 The opportunity for low inventory
 Improving the operating conditions
 How to use just-in-time supply
 Identifying the benefits
The zero inventory philosophy
Conventional and JIT approaches
Stock exists because items have been bought before they are required. It is
normally uncertainty or overcaution that causes inventory. The principle of
JIT is simply that we have items when they are needed and none when they
are not needed.
JIT supply is a result of high-quality supply.
The idea may be simple but the application of JIT has given the opportunity
to decimate stockholding without affecting customers. Instead of trading
availability and stockholding as discussed in Chapter 2, the trade-off is
between organization and stockholding. The better organized and con-
trolled the supply chain, the less inventory is required.
Companies which are considering how JIT can work in their business, or
avoiding it in a Canute-like manner, should realize that JIT is an outcome
of other techniques, not a technique of its own. It is the logical aim of tight
inventory control, effective process planning and plant design, workforce
motivation, cost reduction, logistics and even material requirements
planning (MRP). The optimization of these together inevitably leads to the
JIT approach. The elements of JIT are the techniques to be developed, for
example:
 supply what is required
 supply the quality required

60
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 reduce lead times
 organize effectiveness
 use all the expertise available (i.e. people who do the jobs plus
technical backup).
These are the fundamental changes which lead to JIT – all good inventory
management techniques. The most important of these improvements has
been in quality, particularly in management processes – quality of records,
supply, delivery, forecasting and target setting.
Holding inventory shows we don’t have control.
Stock controllers have been sceptical about the efficiency of frequent
deliveries of smaller batches without investigating all the options and the
potential. There are many instances where the accepted delivery quantity is
now much smaller than it was a few years ago, and is destined to continue
to be reduced. Some of the contrasting features of managing conventional
stock control and JIT control are shown in Table 4.1.
Just in time works as a pull system whereas conventional stock control
and material requirements planning are essentially push systems. In the
push system the stock is provided for the next stage of supply, e.g. buying
items for sales to sell or starting manufacture without having the total
production path clear. The philosophy with push systems could often be
thought of as packing so much into the warehouse or production plant that
they will have to send some items out because there is only limited
space!
With a pull system the first action in the chain is that the item is
demanded. To satisfy this demand there is an item in stock. As soon as this
stock is used up, then another item is supplied, either from outside or from
Table 4.1
Contrasts between conventional and JIT inventory control
Conventional
Just in time
Satisfied with the status quo
Continuous improvement
Lead time is fixed
Reducing lead time is a continuing challenge
Product range is a sales issue
Product range reduction is an inventory issue
Management provide methods
Operators are responsible for practices
Stock in case of customer demand
Purchased to meet demand rate
Convenient purchase batch size
Buy singly or small quantities

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
61
a production process. The supply is organized so that the effective supply
lead time is very short (under one day) and the quantity supplied is small
– a few minutes up to a week’s worth of demand. In production the demand
filters backwards through the processes creating a demand down the bill of
materials, and ending up with issue of one product’s worth of raw
material.
Continuous improvement processes are associated with JIT including
product quality, process efficiency, information systems and operating
value-added activities more effectively while eliminating non-value-added
activities.
Who can use JIT?
Quality process improvement is usually thought of as a continuous journey
of improvement, with no definite ending, since there is always more
potential. From the point of view of material flow the principle of JIT is
obviously ideal but it is often difficult to implement in practical situations
unless the conditions are right. Of course, the right conditions do not
happen by accident and anyone looking for the benefits has to work hard to
create the appropriate situation. Just-in-time supply should be considered
as a quality process, although most of the objections to JIT are based on
lack of quality in some aspect of supply or demand. If stock levels are
incorrect, this is often the result of complacency or lack of understanding
(usually both). There is no perfect solution to stockholding but, like any
other quality improvement process, JIT operations gradually develop an
existing unsatisfactory situation into an improved one. A decrease in lead
times and simplification of processes should be the aim of all inventory
managers. From the viewpoint of JIT, time is a value-added commodity and
wasting it is unprofitable. The more time saved the better, and continuous
improvement means reducing the timescales.
JIT results from best practice in inventory control.
The definition of just in time presented so far can apply to any material
management process which actively minimizes timescales. The purist would
think that there is more to JIT than this simple concept and there are some
specific concepts for achieving this reduction in timescales, particularly:
 desire to improve
 simplification
 demand-led supply (pull)

62
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 quality conformance
 devolution of responsibility.
If these concepts are put into practice, then an operation has a JIT
philosophy (most of these concepts are fundamental to good inventory
management anyway). Supported by improvements in communications
and driven by the need for better service and lower costs, the influence of
JIT has been felt in all types of business and has fuelled change.
JIT in manufacture and warehousing
Just in time was taken up by some sectors of manufacturing originally as a
space efficient method of production. For some supply chains, the
application of JIT is natural because of the nature of the products or the
processes, e.g. in fast-cycle manufacture, where a stage in the production
process takes very little time. In a high-volume manufacture, delays
between processes would cause large stockholding (or, more specifically,
work in progress). In other businesses JIT techniques are less easy to apply.
Retail shops find it important to hold stock so that the customer can have
a choice of several options, so JIT supply would not be appropriate for this
stage of supply without changing the nature of the relationship. If the
customer were buying the same item by mail order, then there is a very
good opportunity to use JIT techniques.
Although the original impetus for JIT was for space saving, the greatest
benefits are financial. In Chapter 1 (section on profit through inventory
management) the benefits of lower stock on profits were illustrated. This
magnitude of improvement is likely to occur for a second time as a result of
applying JIT.
Consider the example used in Chapter 1 with each of the companies
having a £5 million turnover. Often companies find that half their costs are
in purchased materials; let us assume that the same is true for these
companies.
If these companies are distributors, then the stock cover for The Slack
Company is 52 weeks and for M. Tight Ltd is 10.4 weeks. If the application
of JIT on selected lines (product types) could reduce the overall stock cover
to 1 week, then this would result in an inventory holding of only £48 000,
a saving of £202 000 even for M. Tight Ltd. The stock cover and relative
inventory investment are shown in Table 4.2 for a turnover of £5 million.
The decrease in inventory values is large when the initial stock cover is high.
However, as stock cover becomes low the potential savings are lower and

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
63
the risks greater. It is then not the value of inventory that is the driving
factor toward zero inventory, but the operational cost savings.
Applying the same logic to a manufacturing situation shows additional
benefits through the savings in planning resource. The operational situation
is more complex in manufacturing. The material cost starts out as, say, 50
per cent of turnover but then collects added value until it is worth typically
70 per cent of sales value. For simplicity let us assume that there is an equal
balance of inventory throughout manufacture, so that the average inventory
value is 60 per cent of sales value.
Lead time should be reduced –
it results from a planning problem.
A further aspect of manufacturing is the number of jobs in progress. It is
typical for a company with a turnover of £5 million to issue about fifty new
jobs to production each week. (The logic of the following discussion works
just as well for companies with different numbers of jobs and turnover
values.)
Using this figure a manufacturer’s performance table can be created as
shown in Table 4.3. Stock cover in manufacturing is required for the
duration of average throughput time. For The Slack Company the £2.5
million inventory equates to 43.3 weeks’ cover and a total of 2167 jobs in
work (assuming that all the inventory value is in work in progress – WIP).
For Tight Ltd the WIP equates to 8.7 weeks’ cover and 433 jobs.
The advantage of reduced lead times in manufacturing is twofold, as can
be seen from Table 4.3. Inventory investment is reduced as well as the
number of jobs and the complexity of the materials management. It takes a
great deal of effort to control 433 jobs, but much less to track fifty.
Table 4.2
Warehouse stockholding
Stock
cover
Inventory
investment (£)
52 weeks
2500
10.4 weeks
500
6 weeks
288
4.2 weeks
202
1 week
48
1 day
10
1 hour
1.3

64
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Table 4.3 shows that major cost savings go hand in hand with reductions
in manufacturing complexity. Inventory cost savings in particular can be
achieved by cutting the lead time down to a few weeks, days or hours – and
then benefits flow from other operating costs, such as less shop-floor space
required, improved flexibility, less expediting, more control and less
material handling. There is a similar simplification in warehousing where
lower stocks means less to count and less to control.
JIT environment
The ideal situation
Over the years the perception of lead time has changed in most businesses.
Lead times have shortened due to the combined influence of customers and
accountants, the former wanting faster service and the latter lower
inventory. This has been a gradual culture change, but the move to true JIT
requires a further leap in thinking. An attitude of ‘we’re doing alright, don’t
risk it!’, has to be replaced by ‘this is what we need to do, now how do we
make it happen?’ – i.e. continuous development. Just-in-time individuals
have to create an environment where things do not go wrong and their
positive attitude is the basis of JIT philosophy, whose essence is reliability
and consistency. Ideally this reliability must pervade the whole of the
material control operation, not just one stage. Performance is dependent
upon a number of factors, for example suppliers, the market, the company
itself and the individuals within it, and these factors will always throw up a
problem of some sort. (These should be considered as the challenges of
everyday stock control.)
Business needs to use JIT to remain competitive.
Table 4.3
Effect of throughput time on manufacturing inventory
Throughput time
(weeks)
Inventory
investment (£)
Number of jobs
in progress
43.34 weeks
2500.0
2167.00
8.66 weeks
416.0
433.00
6 weeks
288.0
300.00
4.2 weeks
202.0
210.00
1 week
48.0
50.00
1 day
10.0
10.00
1 hour
1.3
1.35

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
65
In high-volume manufacture it is easy to see how items can be transferred
from operation to operation, and lead times and cycle times can be kept
very low. In distribution operations where the demand is variable and
uncertain, then the application of JIT is rather more difficult, but not
impossible.
Typical features of the ideal company where JIT concepts could be
applied would be:
 narrow product range
 manufacturer
 high volume
 stable market
 influential
 good quality management
 local, reliable suppliers
 dependent suppliers
 fast-cycle processes
 affluent.
The one major element which was left out of this ideal list is personal
commitment, and although comparison with one’s own current business
profile might prompt many to discard JIT as inappropriate, a positive
attitude will prompt others to consider how close their business is to these
ideals and how JIT can work in reality. This is a major factor because
successful JIT depends on commitment by a core of people at operational
level and equal dedication of managers and directors. As in all good
management, it is useful to have monitors for success. These are local
targets decided upon by the local team to set and manage their own
performance and criteria for success. Quality and throughput will be part of
these measures.
Repetitive processes
Just in time can be seen to work best in repetitive processes, whether in
warehousing or in manufacturing. Of course, almost all of business is based
on continuity of supply, so this is not really a major constraint. For a usage
of twenty per month, a traditional approach could be to buy twenty at a
time, whereas JIT would require one per day. Such a small order rate may
not appear economic for one item, but it would be when dealing with a
large number of items.

66
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Consider a packing or manufacturing line that each week completes
 2000 of item a
 3000 of item b
 4000 of item c
 2500 of item d
 1000 of item e.
Instead of working on each type of item in turn, it would be better to
provide each item at the rate at which they are required. This can be
achieved in two ways:
 produce at a balanced hourly rate across the whole range
 produce to order and adjust the rate to suit demand.
For the first option the rate of production is consistent. The supply rate is
shown in Table 4.4. For this option to work, there has to be a very consistent
demand or a buffer stock somewhere in the system. This is generally the
way that JIT operates in warehousing and manufacture where internal
planning is on a fast-cycle basis, but customer demand is on a slower-cycle
basis so that demand fluctuations can be smoothed out over the customer
supply cycle.
Examples of this situation are the automotive industry and high
technology equipment manufacture. In these cases the supply can be
geared to a constant rate of output and the resources organized to efficient
and cost effective supply (and production where appropriate). In Table 4.4
the options for the stores or production unit are to have a single throughput
channel which completes an item every 11 seconds, or to have a multiple of
channels which deal with a single or a limited range of items.
Table 4.4
Continuous supply cycle times
Item
Throughput
per week
Throughput
per day
Cycle time
(secs)
A
2 000
400
68
B
3 000
600
45
C
4 000
800
34
D
2 500
500
54
E
1 000
200
135
Total
12 500
2500
11

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
67
By making manufacturing repetitive planning capacity
and materials is easy.
Example
In the automotive industry there is generally one production line
making the variety of processes at the same time but on one car at a
time (with a parallel line for flexibility and offsetting the effects of
changeover or plant failure). In a mail-order warehouse the capital
investment per line is not so great, and stock items are more diverse,
so that generally there is a number of specialized packing lines.
In warehousing it is important to apply JIT where it is easiest to use, and the
conditions discussed earlier in this chapter point toward the A class items
with high usage, more consistent demand patterns and significant benefits
from inventory reduction. The items sold can be split into two types:
 those controlled conventionally
 those using JIT.
The major items will be JIT controlled and the wide variety of low turnover
value items controlled conventionally.
When we have achieved full control through conventional means (see
Chapter 7 for methods) the control for the second option (JIT) becomes an
extension of this. Here the customer requires the items on a fast-cycle basis.
This means that fluctuations in demand have to be taken up by varying the
capacity available. This is less efficient for the use of resources, but may
avoid inventory build-up elsewhere in the supply chain.
JIT supply
Processes can be considered to be suitable for JIT if the timescale is in
hours rather than days. For most suppliers this requires special arrange-
ments for feedback of demand and issue of items within a short timescale.
Effective JIT supply requires the same approach as that used for single
source suppliers (see Chapter 8): there has to be a longer-term agreement
on anticipated throughput levels, quality management and commitment by
the supplier to provide an infallible supply of specified items. The supplier
should be treated like an integral part of the organization.

68
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
One of the changes in attitude that this brings is the approach to
transport. Often the suppliers organize delivery so that they incur the cost.
With JIT supply there is an advantage if the customer collects the items at
a time convenient to them (the pull system being extended in this way
through the transport system), since the transport cost would be incurred
in the final product cost whichever company pays for it.
For a fast pull-type relationship to work, then the supplier has to be local
to the customer, otherwise the reactivity is not good enough. Location is of
significant importance, and some suppliers have moved to the vicinity of a
major customer in order to ensure close cooperation.
JIT and distribution
Just in time requires more frequent deliveries from suppliers but this does
not automatically lead to higher transport costs, although it could do so if
no changes are made to mode and arrangement of supply. Simple examples
of where there is definitely no extra transport cost are:
 when the freight is charged simply by weight
 when a wider variety of items is put into each shipment and these
compensate for the reduced amount of bulk orders
 where freight is charged at a flat contract rate.
Costs might increase where:
 the same delivery method is used more frequently
 batches of items are bought separately from different suppliers
 a flat rate per consignment is charged
 transport is arranged one journey at a time.
Change transport method and get frequent supply.
So these situations are to be avoided.
Just-in-time philosophy requires close co-operation with suppliers of
distribution services as well as of goods. By moving toward longer-term,
higher-volume commitments with suppliers, prices can be reduced based
on the total traffic volume over an extended period. The distributor requires
a continuity of demand and the opportunity to work out routes, loads and
schedules well ahead and this will reduce the operating costs as long as the
business is significant for the distribution partner.
Many people are sceptical about increasing the number of deliveries
without increasing the overall costs. Others who have actually tried

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
69
increasing the delivery frequency have found distribution partners who can
provide the service without increasing financial disadvantage, and there is a
growing number of companies working this way.
The general cost savings produced by JIT are discussed below. The
economics of frequent deliveries can be added to these savings for delivery
processes. Some of the typical benefits are:
1 Smaller delivery quantity means smaller loads, which enable different
transport methods to be used (parcel post instead of lorry load). Small
bulk transport often costs considerably less, since the operating costs are
reduced.
2 Frequent fixed route deliveries enable a carrier to have a base load upon
which to build other business.
3 Frequent deliveries do not require planning and management effort once
set up.
4 Discounts on contracts can be very significant.
5 Standard pack quantities and containers are smaller, less expensive and
recycle faster.
JIT saves costs if it is organized properly.
The secret of success in saving costs on frequent JIT deliveries is to:
 plan carefully so that delivery schedules are not altered at the last minute
(this is easier with JIT since the planning horizon is relatively short)
 be bold – radical changes in delivery methods are required if costs are
to be minimized (this often means a complete change in transport
method)
 negotiate carefully – transport costs are adjustable because they
contain a large fixed element of cost. The apportionment of this cost
(e.g. running a lorry from A to B) can be carried out in any way.
Transport suppliers may be persuaded to apportion the costs away
from routine major deliveries
 be open – the size frequency and costs of delivery required should be
shared with the transporter. Their relevant costs should also be known
in order to ensure that their service is viable.
Quality management
Concurrent with the development of JIT has been a great move to improve
quality. This has taken two forms.

70
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
First there was the move toward consistency through the development of
quality standards (including ISO 9000) which were instrumental in
providing reliable performance not only for the products provided, but also
for procedures and paperwork. These standards have changed attitudes
within industry and there is now an expectation that items provided shall be
correct to specification.
The second was the development of the TQM philosophy, which does
not accept current quality and strives always to provide gradually improving
quality. When this philosophy is applied to the operating processes of the
organization, the key concerns are the elimination of waste and operating
effectiveness. Total quality management then becomes a practical approach
to productivity improvement, standardization of procedures and packaging,
improvement of the quality of delivery on time, record accuracy informa-
tion and operating effectiveness, and the complete operating processes of
the company.
Suppliers should pay a penalty for poor quality.
Quality management principles integrate well into stock control methods
and operations because it is a basic assumption of stock control systems that
the items supplied are fit for their purpose. If a delivery batch is not
acceptable, then it has to be replaced immediately for the stock control
calculations to be correct. Delivery in smaller batch quantities often
reduces the overall effect of rejected supply since it impacts on fewer
customers’ orders and leaves less time before the next delivery. Non-
conformances will cause extra work, especially:
 creation and holding of extra records as a cross-check
 quality inspection on goods inward (also causing booking delays)
 sales personnel requiring physical stock checks rather than relying on
the recorded quantities
 time spent investigating and checking
 arranging replacements and priority deliveries.
Formal specification of inventory management procedures enables them to
be reviewed and identified for quality management processes. As time is
costly, the allocation of time to administration has to be done sparingly. The
cost and benefit accrued by maintaining full records and checking
procedures has to be balanced against their added value benefits. Non-
essential activities have to be avoided (such as paperwork and manual
systems where there are computer records). Procedures have to be

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
71
improved and rationalized continuously, to maintain the impetus of the
quality improvement.
Customer support
Supplier quality is not only measured by the acceptability of the product,
but also by the customer support provided. Rating of suppliers should
include:
 delivery performance
 packaging and labelling
 information systems and communication
 support
 style
 flexibility.
Supplier quality issues are discussed fully in Chapter 8.
Advantages of JIT
Operational benefits
How can it be more efficient to deliver in small quantities, manufacture
in small batches and increase the amount of administration? These are
often the queries from those brought up in the traditional school of
thinking. Equally, someone who only knows JIT would ask:
 Why do you buy things when you don’t need them?
 How do you know what the demand is so far ahead?
 What use is a warehouse?
The accounts of a conventional company show a large investment in
inventory. In the case of the two companies in Chapter 1, the profits
were increased by a low stock philosophy. If M. Tight Ltd were to adopt
a JIT philosophy this could bring the stockholding down even further to
one or two days’ worth, say £20 000 total stock value. This would release
a further £480 000 cash for the business and increase the return on
assets from 16.7 per cent to 20 per cent as a minimum. (As a move to
JIT will eliminate the stores and some overheads, the real improvement

72
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
will be greater than calculated here.) In this case each company had a
large investment in fixed assets. For a distributor with rented ware-
housing the increases in profitability are very large, even if the average
stock value turns out to be weeks’ worth rather than days’ worth.
The operational benefits arising from JIT are:
 inventory investment
 ‘supply to order’ instead of ‘provision for stock’ (see Chapter 7,
section on managing lead times)
 easier forecasting so less slow moving stock
 better flexibility
 simplified administration
 waste elimination
 less scrap should there be a problem.
For each of these operational benefits there is a corresponding cost
benefit which can be offset against any additional costs which arise.
These additional costs usually occur because methods have not been
changed to suit JIT. For instance, if an item is delivered in a batch once
per month, it can be invoiced, delivery documentation produced and
payment made. If through a change to JIT the item is delivered every
day, then it would not be sensible to place a purchase order for each
load, to raise delivery paperwork and to arrange separate payments for
each load. Information is still required for control, but the information
system has to be re-created to meet the new conditions. In the short
term this may not be possible and, so, extra costs can arise. As JIT
embodies the process of continuous improvement, the inefficiency will
eventually be eliminated.
Efficiency benefits
Just in time supports the continuous output of a variety of different
items, which in turn creates a variation of items going through the
processes (picking, manufacture, packing, etc.) Flexibility is essential,
but conventional thinking is that changeovers are to be avoided since
they take up time and use resources. The JIT approach is to find the
output rates as illustrated in Table 4.4 and then determine how to
achieve the throughput and mix. Changeover time is therefore considered
as a variable and this is a basic difference in the JIT approach. Normally
the changeover time is associated with a particular product.

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
73
Example
Conventional logic is that if it takes ten minutes to change over for a
particular item type, there is no point in making just one (which takes
fifteen seconds); better to make at least eighty to be efficient.
Accountants usually back up this type of simplistic logic with financial
break-even analysis (see for example economic order quantity –EOQ
– in Chapter 8). This results in large batches being produced and high
stocks being held. The real situation is that changeover time is a
variable depending on what the change is from and to.
Fast changeovers give the opportunity for lower stockholding. On a packing
line, the change from one type of item can be fast if they are packed in the
same type of box, but slow if the box size has to be changed. The secret of
success is therefore to always run the right job sequence so that the number
of short changeovers will be large and long changeovers small. This requires
planning and load balancing which is difficult when forecasting for weeks
ahead, but easier when looking ahead a few hours as required by JIT.
Cyclic sequencing reduces overheads.
Assuming that the items in Table 4.4 are all processed on the same process
line, then one item needs to be completed every 11 seconds (5.6 per
minute). If the process is carried out on a cyclic basis as shown in Table 4.5,
then the cycle is repeated every 4.5 minutes. The number of each item in
the cycle is shown, together with the output rate required to cope with the
average demand. If the 4.5-minute cycle is to be carried out most
efficiently, then the changeover times between the items need to be
reduced. There are two ways in which the changeover time can be reduced,
namely:
 Improve the planning of production sequences.
 Reduce the time per changeover.
Considering these two options, the improvement of product planning of
sequences can make most changeovers minor. Within a short repetitive
cycle it is much easier to sequence the production to optimize the setup
time than it would be with conventional priority planning. The quantity of
each item can be varied to suit the demand required if this varies, and items

74
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
with the same setup can be substituted should this be required by the
programme.
Changing the production philosophy from weekly batch quantities (see
Table 4.4) to cyclic JIT production (Table 4.5) will reduce stock levels by
a factor of twenty, and also save overall cost. Just in time organizations often
have small management teams with few management levels. This is a result
of the JIT process itself. The planning operation is simple and the
management is largely a repetitive activity which does not require a great
deal of managing, especially as the direct process control is carried out by
the direct operators.
From an accountancy viewpoint, if the cost of supply is split under the
headings of materials, labour and overhead, the major impact of JIT can be
in the lower overheads resulting from the simpler operations. The
proportion of overheads applied to the direct costs are much lower in JIT
operations.
Table 4.5
Cyclic production
Line
Throughput
per minute
Number
per cycle
Item A
0.9
4
Item B
1.3
6
Item C
1.8
8
Item D
1.1
5
Item E
0.4
2
Total
5.6
25
Times per complete cycle = 4.5 mins
Stock control using JIT
Lead time reduction
Inventory control has to work under the conditions imposed by the market.
To get the stock levels right calculations are based on the real information
which is available and not on idealized values. This situation can be
improved because JIT gives potential to improve, particularly the potential
to shorten supply lead times. In working with a dedicated supplier effective
lead times can be changed. The supplier and customer can work together
and share the risk.
Lead times are a result of queuing, distribution and sometimes process
time (see Chapter 7.) For JIT suppliers, the demand is assured by the

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
75
agreement with the customers, but the demand timing and quantity varies.
As the JIT demand is frequent, the effects of these variations cause only
minor stockholding and delays – days’ worth not weeks’ worth. Small
stocks enable the supplier to meet the small daily fluctuations of the
customer very rapidly. Lead times can therefore be reduced.
To set up an effective JIT supply:
 the customer must smooth the forecast
 the supplier needs a regular demand for the item in order to estimate the
average demand rate
 the supplier also needs a good estimate of the long-term demand for
their planning in order to understand the supplier’s constraints.
JIT results from making other things reliable.
Suppliers can extend some aspects of their service and struggle to meet
other aspects:
 Greater understanding improves the match between the needs of the
two companies and builds confidence.
 Trust is the major ingredient for effective collaboration in order to
maximize supplier resources.
 If suppliers know the volume of demand then they can react much
more quickly to individual requirements. For instance a supplier of
painted items could often paint and deliver within a few hours, as long
as the demand for the item is expected and the choice of paint colours
has been agreed previously. This enables them to offer flexibility in
demand changes.
 As short-term demand is always variable, an agreement is needed to
ensure the extent to which demand can be raised or reduced. This
avoids failures in the JIT supply. It is therefore necessary to
communicate and monitor.
Close liaison between the two parties involved is essential. It involves
regular meetings for assessment and review between people at operational
level.
Reducing the lead time is a continuous process starting with the A class
items. These have the greatest cost benefit and are also amongst the
simplest to change. They have most importance to the businesses and are
among the easiest to forecast.

76
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Pull systems
The essential difference between the JIT approach to material control and
the stock planning approach is in the mechanism for triggering replenish-
ment. Conventional inventory control predicts demand, works out how
much stock is required to supply it and then procures that quantity. Just-in-
time operations only acquire stock as a result of demand. This can be
thought of as a ‘pull’ process, with the issue of an item triggering the
demand for another – the number of triggers depends upon the rate at
which demands are received. Stock-level systems purchase items to cover
forecast demand (in larger quantities) and then try to supply the items to
the customers (a ‘push ‘ system). The advantage of the pull system is that
only sufficient stock is held to meet the immediate demand for a few hours
or days. The effective supply lead time is arranged to be short (JIT) and the
deliveries frequent, therefore the stock can be very low.
In inventory management simplicity of operation is the key to success.
Kanban is an operational method, consisting simply of a ticket, which
achieves a pull system from within the company or from a supplier. When
an item is demanded a request must be passed back to the source to provide
another. This information can be a kanban card or a simple signalling
system. The card will identify the item, the quantity required (ideally one,
but possibly more) and where it is required. It will also state times so that
performance can be monitored. This ticket or traveller has to be provided to
the source very rapidly if the supply is to be prompt.
The ticket is held with the physical goods and is an easily maintained and
simple method of informing the previous stage of supply. Using the principle
of the ticket, there are other trigger mechanisms which can be used instead,
such as coloured lights or sound. Fax or network communications can be
used for external supply. The way information is transferred is immaterial so
long as the process is instantaneous, completely reliable and accurate.
An obvious application of JIT is for manufacturers producing large
quantities of similar products. They can set up a flow line and have in-line
stocks of a single item or a small batch between each process stage. The
trigger for manufacture is simply ‘use one so make one’ starting from the
last process and feeding back gradually to the first. The restructuring of
production into a flow line is a most effective way to manufacture. Where
the product range is wider and the process routes differ, cellular production
is more applicable, and the pull system is used between the cells and by the
cell operators for processes within the cells.
For purchased items the supply is triggered in the same way but with
larger batches. The delivery batch would be expected to meet the demands

JUST-IN-TIME MANAGEMENT
77
for a few hours or a day. As the lead time is normally over an hour, a
supplier kanban does not run out before signalling. It has a residual stock
to cover the demand during the supply lead time.
Just in time has made a major impact on manufacturing and the
reduction of lead times is changing the whole of inventory control. The
changes will provide competitive advantage for those companies with the
best ongoing developments of JIT.
Key points
 JIT supply is the aim of best practice in inventory control.
 JIT is a result of improving the quality of everything and organizing
‘flow’.
 JIT business is fundamentally different from the traditional. The key
concepts are:
– pull – only buy when needed (kanban)
– one – only make or buy small quantities
– flow – balance movement throughout supply chain
– simplicity – operating controls should be simple and visible
– quality – high reliability for supply, products and control
processes.
 Apply JIT to where it is most beneficial – A class.

5
Organization and management
 Set the direction
 Identify objectives and targets
 Manage stock value
 How to value and depreciate inventory
Where stock control fits into the organization
Nowadays the inventory controller has extra responsibilities. The job has
grown out from storekeeping to become a management discipline of
maintaining the inventory to meet company policy. Gradually this
responsibility has broadened to include all stock whether inside or outside
the stores. The place of inventory management in the organization has
altered as responsibilities have changed. This is illustrated in Figure 5.1.
The original role of stock control was part of the physical stores control
shown in the structure in Figure 5.1A and its position in an organization
was lowly, working for either purchasing, finance or, in manufacturing
Figure 5.1 Changing inventory management structures

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
79
companies, for production. In this structure stock acquisition was initiated
by buying and sales pressure, and there was no clear responsibility for, or
focus on, inventory control. The tightening of company objectives changed
the approach and separated stores and stock control activities. Inventory
management is now accepted as an operational activity and works alongside
purchasing, as illustrated in Figure 5.1B.
Inventory management is a senior management activity.
This arrangement has gradually evolved into structure C as pressure
increases for better performance. The central role of inventory management
has been recognized in many businesses, both in distribution and
manufacturing, and material management or logistics directors have been
appointed to co-ordinate various aspects of inventory management into one
supply activity. Stock control encompasses:
 purchasing – especially reordering (but see Chapter 8)
 forecasting demand
 planning inventory against company targets
 stock allocation and delivery promising
 monitoring and controlling service and inventory
 production planning and control (for manufacturing).
These are organizational activities. The physical management of inventory,
including stores, dispatch and movement then becomes treated as a
separate problem to be managed by a parallel organization. A similar
relationship can arise in manufacturing between the production control
department, who carry out the planning, and production supervision itself,
which seeks to work to the plans provided by the production control
department.
Where there is a separation of the stock and stock control activities, the
warehouse become responsible not only for managing the movement and
holding of stock, but also for providing information to the rest of the
company. It is particularly important for inventory management that the
information provided is accurate. Checking stock physically is very time-
consuming, and the recording systems should be sufficiently accurate to
make this unnecessary apart from stock auditing.
Stores control takes care of inventory.
Inventory control sets the amount to keep.

80
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Stock control in a professional organization can be carried out at a different
location from the stores. Thus stock controllers can manage site stocks or
multi-location storage as long as there are real-time communications with
the stores. If these activities are split, warehousing can be located at the
most economic location for transport and customers and inventory control
can be located independently at the most convenient place for
management.
Inventory management is in the process of evolution. Targets are being
expanded to include extra aspects of operations, cost and service and there
is much potential for development (see Chapter 13).
Responsibilities and targets
Rationalizing the problem
Inventory controllers have to take a simplified view of the stock items and
treat the majority of them in the same way. In driving a car there is a
distinction between the driver (who may not be able to repair the car) and
the mechanic (who may not be able to drive). In stock control, most people
are the drivers but the stock control vehicle is not well designed, mechanics
are few and, so, the driver is often forced to make improvements. The driver
who understands the mechanics can always get better performance out of a
vehicle.
Inventory management has the same principles
and techniques – only the situation is different.
Every item has its own characteristics, often with a unique story – ‘do you
remember when the supplier’s warehouse burned down?’ ‘The customer
was frozen up for five weeks?’ ‘It was put on a boat to Antarctica by
mistake?’ In the past individuals managed stock through their memory and
understanding but this is not enough to meet the tighter targets of modern
inventory management even though such understanding is an important
additional tool to use for A class items (and a waste of time for C class).
The stock controller should largely ignore the details of the item and
consider the characteristics of the demand pattern and the supply, despite
the widely different types, sizes, shapes, usage, origins and characteristics of
the lines, but whatever the item is, inventory control remains the same. An
arguable point? What about liquids, explosives, perishable foodstuffs, pine
trees? They are all very different. True but, despite the differences, their
supply and demand characteristics are not that different: they depend on

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
81
market conditions and not on the product. Just as financial controls are
applicable across different industries, so is inventory management. The
characteristics of the stock determine the mix of inventory techniques to
use, but the components are the same:
 demand forecasting
 determining safety stocks
 negotiating supply patterns
 avoiding slow-moving stock.
Inventory techniques are common for all businesses, and their skilful
mixing for aggregate and individual item inventory control allows many
different types of stock to be managed. Simplicity is the key, but this is not
the simplicity of systems which give superficial answers. It is the simplicity
of operating processes resulting from rationalization of procedure, systems
and approach. It arises from, say, using the same system for placing all
orders and controlling all the stock; in having the same item identification
throughout the business; in treating priorities through an organized system.
The elements of the simple procedures have to be supported by complex
tools such as software packages for forecasting, modelling and commu-
nicating, but these need not concern the daily operation as long as they
work correctly. The actual logic of such tools has to be intricate to cope with
the complicated nature of inventory planning.
Simplification should be considered as an ongoing challenge for
development of good stock-keeping. The following areas can usually be
improved:
 single stores philosophy
 inventory system applied to everything
 single operating procedure
 paperless information systems
 purchasing as part of inventory management
 real-time systems.
By rationalizing these activities, the professional stock controller can free
time to work on the most beneficial topics, and improve the level of control.
External objectives
Discussion earlier in this book was about setting inventory targets for
availability, inventory value and operating costs. The balance between these

82
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
targets is a matter of inventory policy. The management of inventory relies
upon routine and regular monitoring of these values. The objectives set for
inventory management should be chosen to meet the immediate demands
of the business, and specifically:
 customer service
– measured as stock availability or delivery on time (percentage
against own and customers’ targets)
– analysis of age distribution of lateness
– assessment of customer satisfaction – survey results
 inventory investment
– value
– stock cover ratio
 operating costs
– warehousing and inventory operations costs
– cost per transaction, movement and purchase.
Key objectives – 100 per cent availability, zero inventory,
no operating costs.
The process of setting targets usually begins by measuring current success.
Current levels of achievement are assessed to see whether they are good or
bad. (If inventory control staff consider that they have the correct stock
level, this is often because of their complacency and not because of
adequate achievement assessment.) Targets can then be set through
negotiation with those who are affected by them and with those who have
to achieve them. The three target dimensions are:
 quantity – how much the monitored values will change
 date – the stages by which the quantities will be changed
 responsibility – who will be accountable for achieving the results?
The prime aim is to meet all the inventory targets simultaneously, and not to
sacrifice one to meet another. Measurement methods should meet the prime
business needs (in Chapter 2 alternative ways of measuring customer service
were discussed) and should be chosen to give the most satisfactory results.
Identify all your real objectives.
Routine monitoring of these items is required on a weekly or monthly basis.
The results, both operational and financial, should be available within three

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
83
days of the period end, otherwise the information cannot be used for
control (although it is commonly used for apportioning blame).
Managers should also be aware that targets are set as part of company
policy and the art of correct management is to set targets which are both
achievable and challenging. They should reflect an expectation of perform-
ance, not an achievement under ideal conditions. This can be difficult when
trying to co-ordinate planning with other departments. A good method of
improving the accuracy of planning is to give two targets, one optimistic
and one pessimistic, and to ensure that performance lies between the two.
By adjusting the two limits, a target range can be identified which is both
attainable consistently, and which is acceptable for planning and co-
ordination with other activities.
Internal targets
External targets have to be supported by more detailed objectives within an
inventory management department and these should include personal
objectives for individuals which all contribute to departmental targets.
Customer service can be structured by setting availability targets for
different types of items. Some service is likely to be ex-stock with different
availability levels, while other service will be supplied on a range of lead
times. Information required to give fast direct performance measures
include:
 number of lines out of stock
 number of customers and orders affected by shortages or late
deliveries
 analysis of shortage according to cause
 monitoring of customer complaints
 details of customer-care initiatives.
Set quantitative targets – or you won’t know when you’ve
achieved them.
Stock levels will differ for these product ranges and have different
expectations in terms of stockturns. Items with a JIT-type of operation have
very good stockturns while slow-moving items such as service parts can
inevitably achieve only relatively poor results. In addition to the inventory
value, the investment can be controlled by managing purchase commitment
and write-off value as discussed below.

84
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
We need to aim for several targets at the same time.
Operating costs are increasingly becoming the responsibility of individual
inventory controllers. The elements of cost are controlled through cost
analyses and budgets, and monitoring operational activity levels often
provides the basis for cost reduction. These controls include:
 value of transactions or number of transactions per day (e.g. customer
orders processed, stock reconciliations done, adjustments to stock
levels, etc.)
 processing delays or queue lengths (e.g. allocated customer orders)
 cost per transaction by type
 performance against budget for each activity.
Other targets are required to complete the management of inventory
activities. Prime external targets do not necessarily cover all the require-
ments for good inventory management, and there are additional aspects
which are important as well: requirements for individuals to manage change
and control projects; other business objectives to be met, including quality
management, credibility, legal, motivational, health and safety, commu-
nication and process development. The real requirements for inventory
control are numerous and, where possible, targets are needed to evaluate
and monitor these objectives. Inventory management must also meet
general business objectives. Targets need to be set in the areas of:
 personnel development planning
 improvements in systems and procedures
 quality development for products, service and administration
 management of change processes
 supplier audit
 environmental issues
 presentation, style and image of the department.
For well-managed inventory control, all the requirements of the market, the
operating environment and the supply chain have to be considered. Greater
understanding of the real objectives will improve the effectiveness of the
business as a whole and the worth of inventory management within the
business.
To reduce stock, keep value of receipts less
than issues each week.

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
85
Purchase commitment
One way of maintaining control over inventory value is to balance the values
of input and output. If the value of input is kept to below the value of
output, then stock reduces (as discussed in Chapter 3, in the section on
practical methods of reducing stockholding). The value of supplier
deliveries should be less than the forecast value of customer dispatches in
each time period. Supplier deliveries are a result of purchase order and
schedule commitment, so it is the ordering process which has to be kept
under budgetary control. The control process relies on collecting informa-
tion on:
 the forecast value of demand for each time period (week or month)
 the amount of schedule or order commitment already made for
delivery in each time period
 the typical value of last minute (emergency) orders which are
committed each time period.
A policy on stock reduction, or increase, has also to be defined in terms of
what value change in inventory level is considered practical or desirable
each time period. From this information it is easy to calculate:
1 The maximum delivery value for each time period (= Forecast customer
demand – Value of stock reduction target per period).
2 The maximum value of order commitment for delivery per period (=
Maximum delivery book value – Typical value of emergency orders).
3 The maximum value available for new orders placed for delivery during
that period (= Maximum value of order book commitment – Amount of
order book commitment already made).
This maximum value available for new orders is the ceiling for total order
value for delivery in the time period. If this value is exceeded by placing a
further supply order, then that order should be rescheduled into a later time
Table 5.1
Order book values
Period
Supplier deliveries
already ordered
Value of order book
available to place
Next month
185 000
5 000
1 month ahead
130 000
60 000
2 months ahead
60 000
130 000

86
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
period (or another order delayed) or else the resulting stock value will
increase.
Example
The current order book value with suppliers for delivery over the next
three months is as shown in Table 5.1, and the maximum order book
value for delivery in each time period is calculated in the final column.
The task for the inventory controller in M. Tight Ltd is to ensure that
further purchases are placed so that the planned deliveries next
month are not more than £5000 and then £60 000 for one month
ahead, and £130 000 for the month after that. By monitoring delivery
book value in real time, an inventory manager can maintain the stock
within the required budget. The control of stock reduction using
purchase commitment is illustrated in Table 5.2. (See also Tables, 5.3,
5.4 and 5.5.)
Table 5.2
Inventory management targets – stock value
Location
This week/month
Inventory
value
Slow
movers
value
Weeks
on
hand
Last week/month
Inventory
value
Slow
movers
value
Weeks
on
hand
Target
Inventory
value
Weeks
on
hand
Central
NW store
SW store
NE store
SE store
Table 5.3
Inventory management targets – availability
Location
This week/month
Availability (%)
Last week/month
Availability (%)
Target
Availability (%)
Date
Central
NW store
SW store
NE store
SE store

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
87
Inventory valuation
Unit cost of stock lines
Accounting procedures for stock are usually organized by the accounting
functions of a company . The costing options which are commonly used are
explained below. It is important to have a consistent costing system which
values all items. There are several ways of updating inventory cost when new
items are purchased by changing the unit cost. The preferred costing
method is average value, although standard costing provides better
budgetary control. The costing method should not influence the actual
items being picked, in almost all circumstances picking should be organized
as a first in first out (FIFO) process.
Don’t associate costing methods with individual stock items.
First in first out
Stock is valued at its purchase value. The oldest stock is assumed to be used
first (as is required by good inventory practice) and the stock value is
Table 5.4
Inventory management targets – supply
Purchasing
activity
This week/month
Value
Last week/month
Value
Target
Value
% success
Orders placed
Goods received
Late deliveries
Emergency orders
No. of orders
Qty
Qty
Table 5.5
Inventory management targets – outstanding demand
Location
This week/month
Overdue
More than
x days
Last week/month
Overdue
More than
x days
Target
Overdue
More than
x days
Central
NW store
SW store
NE store
SE store

88
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
therefore the total of the most recent purchases. First in first out is best
used as an accounting procedure, but not for identifying which items in
stores to pick. Stores stock rotation should be arranged through the
warehousing control system.
Last in first out (LIFO)
The issues are valued at the most recent purchase price, leaving the
remaining inventory valued at a previous (generally lower) value. The effect
is to minimize the profit on the stock being sold and to minimize the value
of the remaining inventory. This method of valuation can be used to reduce
the profit reported by a company and decrease the valuation of the stock. It
is, however, only a valuation technique and not appropriate for organizing
stock movements. For example, there is a stock of ten of an item valued at
£80 each, and a new batch of five has been bought at £120. The stock value
is therefore £1400. If a customer buys two, then the stock will be reduced
to thirteen. By LIFO these two issues will be valued at £120 each, and the
new stock value for the thirteen items will be £1160. If the items sell at
£150 each, the recorded gross profit is £60. (Using FIFO, the remaining
stock of thirteen would be valued at £1240 and the gross profit would be
£140.)
Replacement value
Stock is valued at the current price for buying replenishments. This enables
a simple rule to be applied to sales price, (such as ‘sell at purchase price plus
50 per cent’). It increases the value of stockholding but requires market
information to manage.
Standard cost
Fixed item value is calculated financially and held the same for a long time,
usually a year, giving a good stable valuation. Differences from the standard
cost are considered as good or bad variances. Standard costs are used
widely in manufacturing, as they can account for typical costs and
overheads.
Average value
A running average is the safest stock valuation method. The cost of new
deliveries is added to the total stock value and the total value spread over

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
89
the new total stock. For example, there is a stock of twenty of an item with
a unit cost of £10. Ten more are purchased at a cost of £13 each. The total
value is now 20 × £10 + 10 × £13 = £330. The stock is now thirty, so the
average cost is £330/30 = £11. This is the new average cost and any
demand will reduce the stock value by £11 per item.
Stock-keeping unit (SKU)
Stock-keeping units are especially useful in distributed warehousing. These
SKUs acknowledge the fact that the stock value can depend on where the
item is held. If a customer requires an item which can be supplied either
from the main stores or from a satellite store and the cost of distribution is
£15 from either source, where should the supply be made from? Since the
stock in the satellite store has already been transported once (probably at a
cost of £15), then it would be cheaper to supply from the main store since
the satellite stock has already cost more. Stock-keeping units are stock at a
specified location taking into account the transport and purchase costs. It
is normal to talk about a 3000 SKU warehouse, which is equivalent to
saying that there are 3000 lines in that remote location. The actual stock
value element of cost in an SKU could be calculated by any of the preceding
methods.
SKUs take into account logistic costs.
These alternative valuation methods are illustrated by an example in Table
5.6. The ‘cost of the next item to be issued’ is the unit value of the item
remaining in stock which will be issued next to fulfil customer demand.
Each of the valuations give slightly different unit costs. For LIFO and FIFO
methods, allocation of the costs depends on working out from which
supplier delivery the next sales item should be taken.
In Table 5.6 the standard cost set by the accountants is £24, but purchase
costs are higher. There will be a purchase ‘variance’ when the outstanding
orders are received:
Order 1
10 × £2 = £20
Order 2
10 × £4 = £40
Order 3
10 × £0 = £0
At a demand of ten the total (cumulative) variance = £60.

Table 5.6
Alternative methods of determining unit stock value
Date
(week)
Transaction
Type
Quantity
Unit
cost
Stock
balance
(quantity)
Cost of next item to be issued
FIFO
LIFO
Standard
cost
Average
cost
Replacement
value
Stock check1
10
20
10
20
20
24
20.0
20
1
Customer demand
3
7
20
20
24
20.0
20
Supply order 1
10
26
26
3
Customer demand
2
5
20
20
24
20.0
26
Supplier delivery
10
26
15
20
26
24
24.0
26
4
Customer demand
4
11
20
26
24
24.0
26
5
Customer demand
1
10
20
26
24
24.0
Supply order 2
10
28
28
6
Customer demand
6
4
26
26
24
24.0
28
7
Customer demand
3
1
26
26
24
24.0
28
Supplier delivery
10
28
11
26
28
24
27.6
28
9
Customer demand
4
7
26
28
24
27.6
28
Supply order 3
10
24
10
Customer demand
2
5
28
28
24
27.6
24
Note: 1Existing stock of ten is valued at £20 each.

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
91
Aggregate stock valuation
Stores stock can be valued either at full value given by costing at one of the
above costing methods, or by a written down value to acknowledge the fact
that some stock is no longer usable or saleable. There must be an amount
of money deducted from the stock value to account for this. There are two
ways of achieving this: depreciation and provision.
Depreciation
The first is to depreciate the value of stock of each item. The longer an item
is in stock the less it must be saleable. The rate at which depreciation is
allocated will depend on the type of stock. Fashion goods can lose value
very fast. Aircraft spare parts depreciate very slowly. The simplest and most
common way of calculating depreciation is to deduct a portion of the item
value each year it remains in stock. Taking 25 per cent off the original value
each year would mean that items have no value after four years, and would
call forth acknowledgement by the accountants that inventory control have
made the expected mistakes and have squandered company profit on
useless stock. It is not a healthy situation when inventory managers are
forced to minimize the value of stockholding because of poor control.
Depreciation steals profit to cover for mistakes.
Writing down the value of non-moving stock is unfortunate but essential
The accounting code of practice requires stock to be valued at ‘the lesser of
its purchase cost and its realizable value’. This means that items bought at
a discount have to be valued at a discount, and items which have no likely
use have to be valued at zero value.
Provision
A second way of reducing the value of stock is to allow a provision for the
total value likely to be lost in a year. This provision can be based on a
detailed depreciation calculation or a simple assessment. Whereas deprecia-
tion is applied to individual items, provisions are applied at a global level.
This enables the provisions ‘reserve’ to be used for whatever accidents
happen to cause stock obsolescence (sudden changes in legislation,
contract loss, etc.).
Provisions are financial judgements. They can therefore be used in
situations where there is an impending change which will affect inventory,
but which is not predictable from historical information.

92
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Professional stock controllers do not use write down as a method of
reducing stock value because this only transfers funds from company profits
to pay for the write down. (The proper methods for reducing inventory
value were discussed in Chapter 3 in the section on how to reduce stocks
successfully.) For stock control purposes it is therefore good inventory
management practice to value stock at its full value and to apply the
depreciation reserve or provisions later for the financial accounts. This
ensures that the slow-moving, high-value stock receive some priority in the
control activities.
Skills and systems
Systems should not only be designed to perform a task, but also to enable
the user to achieve the objectives most conveniently. The term ‘user-
friendly’ is often applied but seldom true, and the usability of a system
should be geared to suit the type of person expected to use it, and the
knowledge, skill and time they are likely to devote to it. Where a complex
system is in use, all operatives must be fully trained to understand it,
otherwise they will not use it efficiently.
The more professional the user, the more complex the computer system
can be and the better the results achieved by its operatives. This is true from
the user options point of view. A routine operator may only require an
uncluttered transaction screen with the system set up for fast input or
enquiry, showing the relevant information and nothing else. However, if
information is to be accessed by less frequent users, they will still need to
have a thorough understanding of what the system can be made to do. If
they do not understand it, they will not be able to use it effectively. Further,
although systems should be straightforward and user-friendly, their
underlying logic should be complex enough to cope with the many variables
which can occur. For instance, a user with a seasonal demand pattern will
have to disregard a system only providing a simple minimum stock level to
help in reordering. What they require is a seasonal forecasting system using
percentage weighting, base series or Fourier analysis. Just as it is not
necessary to understand the circuit for electronic ignition if you want to
drive a car, so it is not necessary for the user to understand underlying
computer logic as long as the method can be applied, the answer is good
and the forecast type is easy to switch on and off.
Two distinct features for choosing a successful system are:
 apparent simplicity geared to user skill
 system sophistication geared to the importance of the application.

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
93
Successful implementation develops the right balance between systems,
procedures and the user’s knowledge of a particular application. As an
example, take a computerized parts list. A customer requires an item but
does not know the part number. The old hands in stock control with many
years experience will just quote the item number and look at the stock
record, because they know it. A new starter requires support in finding the
number. How can this be achieved? There are basically three methods,
namely:
 training
 support procedures
 system features.
These different approaches are illustrated in Figure 5.2.
Training
If the user has an understanding of the application and memory of the
codes, the system will work effectively. Training is essential for providing
the understanding and knowledge. Inventory personnel need specific job
Figure 5.2 Inventory control options

94
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
skills which enable them to gain the full benefits of their systems and
contribute to operating effectiveness. Investment in training is minuscule
compared with the direct inventory savings.
Support procedures
Where the user of the system is unlikely to have knowledge of the
application (e.g. technical knowledge by sales clerks), the company can
provide the necessary information through supporting procedures. These
can be paperwork or other aids which enable the user to follow a logical
sequence with which to provide or gain the necessary information.
An example of this could be the person who often receives enquiries from
customers needing advice on which stock item to buy. This person has
either to gain sufficient technical knowledge of the stock to give advice or
pass the item on to an expert, or to have the information provided for them
in an appropriate form. A simple method of supporting this person is to
provide a ‘decision tree’ for routine queries consisting of a set of questions.
The answer to one question directs the user to the next question until the
query is resolved. A person without detailed knowledge of a subject can still
be effective using such support procedures.
Development of these procedures has to be overseen by a highly skilled
person. Thus there is an initial cost, but the procedure can then run and
advice can be given without the same level of expertise. This is a cost saving
where the situation occurs regularly.
System features
Stock management systems can be considered as either stock-recording
systems or stock control systems. Stock-recording systems concentrate on
physical movements, recording issues, receipts and orders. Many of these
systems also value the stock and keep a transaction history. ‘Maximum’ and
‘minimum’ levels can be input by the inventory controller and these levels
and the order quantities are left to the discretion of the user.
Make the system produce relevant information,
not large lists.
Stock control systems take this data and provide decision support for
inventory managers. Stock can be analysed into ABC classes and the
historical information used to calculate the (weighted) average demand and
the variability. Once policy on customer service and supply lead times has
been decided, the system calculates the safety stocks and order quantities.

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
95
The outputs of a stock control system are:
 purchase schedules and orders
 expediting notes for suppliers
 management control information
 exceptions – unfulfilled customer orders
– forecast predicting the wrong demand level
– wrong supplier lead times
– excess and obsolete stock analyses
– options for special investigation identified by the user.
A successful system will produce information which can be used without
amendment by the inventory controller. Some data may need modifying
because the full information was not provided to the system, but this should
be rare if the system is operated properly. In practice, most systems fail to
provide this full specification resulting in time being wasted on routine
analysis and interpretation. This time could be much better employed on
customer and supplier liaison, and on ensuring that the system parameters
are accurate. It is therefore important to use a system with stock control
features, and to use these features to manage the majority of inventory.
Key points
 Identify the responsibility for stock management.
 Set quantitative targets (cover all aspects).
 Value all inventory.
 Design systems and information for the user.

6
Safety stocks
 Analysis of historical data
 Demand distribution
 Safety stock calculations – MAD and SD
 Customer service factors to set availability levels
 Determining obsolete and excess stocks
Learning from history
Collecting historical information
Stock is held either because it is convenient to buy in bulk, or because the
item is required faster than the supply can provide it. In the latter case there
is some uncertainty as to the quantity required, and so some safety stock is
needed. In Chapter 2 the balance between the conflicting requirements of
good service, low inventory costs and small operating costs were discussed.
Now the means of achieving the controls can be examined.
The amount of safety stock held in an organization depends upon three
main factors:
 the variability of demand
 the reliability of supply
 the dependability of transport.
The general approach to this situation is to set stock levels to cover the
normal variability of demand and to adjust the other two variables so that
they are relatively insignificant. Quality initiatives have improved the supply
situation but it is usually found that the major uncertainty is caused by
customers and their unpredictable requirements.
Store records show the movement of stock in and out of the warehouse
and such historical information is essential for evaluating what level of stock
to hold (unless the customer provides firm orders). However, the best guide

SAFETY STOCKS
97
to the appropriate stockholding is the amount of demand, rather than the
number of issues.
Note: When using demand history in forecasting, it is conventional to
neglect the demand information from the current, incomplete period unless
the demand is extremely large.
Individual stock movements logged on the stock records have to be
analysed into movements per time period, normally weekly, so that weekly
usage statistics are produced for each stock item. In cases where the
demand is small or very variable, then monthly periods (time buckets) can
be used. For fast-moving and rapidly varying demand (such as chart
music), daily time buckets are required.
Collect data into time buckets.
The first step in analysing demand history is to collect the total demand for
each period, as shown in Table 6.1. Sometimes such a table is used to
estimate the stock levels and order requirements, whereas a little more
understanding would enable accurate stock levels to be established.
The demand pattern can be displayed on a frequency distribution graph
or histogram which shows how many periods the demand was at a certain
rate. Figure 6.1 shows that the demand was between twenty-five and thirty
at three times in Table 6.1 and it was between forty and forty-five once. This
histogram gives a good idea of the usual demand rate and the spread of
rates. In Figure 6.1 rate intervals of five per period were chosen (11–15,
16–20, 21–25, etc.) and the figures on the horizontal axis represent the
maximum figures in the range). As can be seen the most common demand
rate is 31–35.
If the demand comes from a similar type of customer, then the variations
in orders will generally follow the same characteristics, although they are
unpredictable. These demands form part of a population. If this assump-
tion is correct, then the properties of this whole population can be used to
predict the demand pattern. The most common demand pattern is the
Table 6.1
Demand history
Period
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Demand
23
35
28
19
34
25
41
15
39
33
28
48
31
38
28

4
3
2
1
0
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Frequency
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Relative frequency of demand
 4
 3
 2
 1
0
1
2
3
4
Variation from average
98
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Gaussian or ‘normal’ distribution shown in Figure 6.2. This is an idealized
form of Figure 6.1 for a very large number of periods of demand. Using the
small amount of information given in a table such as Table 6.1, the shape of
the curve in Figure 6.2 can be calculated quite accurately.
Demand patterns can be assumed to be ‘normal’. (Even if they are not,
taking them to be normal is much better than simpler methods of control.)
As can be seen from the distribution graphs, most of the time the demand
is near to the average. Sometimes, but less often, it is much more or much
Figure 6.1 Demand distribution
Figure 6.2 Normal distribution

SAFETY STOCKS
99
less. The vertical scale of the graph is frequency – how often that value
occurs. The horizontal scale is really measured from the middle (the mean)
and shows the values at which the populations occur. In practice, careful
batching of the data is needed to produce a distribution like the one shown.
In general, there is just a small amount of data to work with and this is used
to fit a normal distribution.
A key property of the normal distribution is that it can be described using
only two parameters, the average and the average width. Calculation of the
average value is relatively simple. Measuring the width is more difficult.
Analyse the demand into true average and variability.
It is no use taking the highest and lowest figures, as these are usually the
result of atypical situations (stockouts, one-off demands, holidays, etc.) It is
better to take values which are, say, a quarter of the way in from the
extremes of the sample (quartiles) or apply a more rigorous approach which
uses all the available data. In general the measure of width used is standard
deviation (SD), although in stock control a simpler approach is used,
namely mean absolute deviation, MAD (see section on standard deviation
below).
Of course more complicated demand patterns do arise. Occasionally
there is more than one Normal distribution pattern mixed in the demand
for an item. For example, a product could be sold in a local market in single
units, whereas for export it is boxed in fifties. The demand pattern will then
consist of two normal distributions, one with small fluctuations in the
demand pattern, and the other with a more sporadic pattern.
Reasons for safety stock
The normal amount of stockholding can be determined by statistical
methods which rely on history to predict the future, and assume no change
in circumstances during periods ahead. Safety stock is primarily to cover
random variations in demand, but it can also cover many other situations
such as:
 supply failure
 production shortfall
 transport failure
 slow, unreliable or inaccurate information
 and any other source of disruption of service.

100
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Safety stock is the buffer between supply and demand. It decouples
customer service from manufacturing, and enables each to operate
independently and more effectively.
Normal demand patterns
Stock availability
There is the need first to identify the major demand and supply variables
discussed in this chapter and to quantify their variability. The need to cover
for changeability of demand is a central task of inventory control.
Unexpected demand requires a level of safety stock to cover for it. In fact
using the normal distribution, the unexpected demand can be anticipated,
or at least taken into account.
The more safety stock the better the customer service. Going back to the
sample data in Table 6.1, a stock of 100 would probably be far too many
and a stock of thirty-five too few. With a stock of forty-five it looks as though
there will only be a shortage once in fifteen periods. But a surer way of
finding this out would be to use all fifteen sets of data to give an accurate
normal distribution, and then to find the risk of running out of stock.
Consider a supplier who arrives at the start of each period and tops up
the stock to the required amount. One of the items supplied has the usage
history shown in Table 6.1 and a unit cost of £1000. If the average usage
amount, thirty-one, is held in stock at the start of each time period, then the
expectation would be that the stock would run out during half the time
periods, since the demand exceeds the average half the time. (This happens
seven out of the fifteen times in the sample data.) If there were no stock at
all then the stock would run out every time, and of course, if there were an
infinite number in stock, then there would be 100 per cent availability. As
the stock increases, the availability increases, and this relationship is shown
in Figure 6.3. As safety stock is added above the average demand, the
availability increases rapidly, but once the availability becomes high, then it
requires a lot of stock to improve the situation.
Standard deviation
There are several ways of finding the typical variability, but there are two
measurements which are generally used, namely standard deviation and
mean absolute deviation. These are different ways of measuring the same
thing, just as wealth can be measured in dollars or pounds, but the total
value is the same. There are relative merits for both measurements.

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
AVAILABILITY
-3 -2.4-1.8-1.2-0.6 0 0.61.21.82.4 3
VARIATION FROM AVERAGE
SAFETY STOCKS
101
Standard deviation is theoretically the correct measurement, but people
find it more difficult to understand and work with. Standard deviations
should be built into computer systems. Mean absolute deviations are much
more user-friendly. They are easy to understand and, arguably, easier to
bias. (The reason for wanting to bias them will be discussed in Chapter 10.)
Mean absolute deviation is a good enough measure in practice. The
standard deviation will be described first.
Use SDs if they are in the software
or if you like mathematics.
The basic premise for safety stock is that the differences between the
forecast and the actual demand are random. These random variations in
demand usually follow a ‘normal’ distribution (see Figure 6.2). This is
symmetrical about the average value. The size of the variations differ from
one stock item to another and, consequently, the width of the normal
distribution differs also. This width, measured by the SD, is calculated from
the sum of the squares of x, where x is the error, the difference between the
actual value and the average (or the variations of the individual demand
figures from the average). Mathematically this is:
SD = √[(1/N) × xi2]
Figure 6.3 Stock and availability

102
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The SD is calculated by adding up the squares of the errors from a sample
of N values; in our case periods of history. Using the history given in Table
6.1, this gives an SD value of 8.4. If there is only a little history, then N is
low and the value of the SD will be relatively inaccurate. This inaccuracy
(the standard error of the SD) is given by
A standard error of SD = √SD/N.
Mean absolute deviation
Use MADs for ease or to weight for more accuracy.
The MAD is a simple assessment of the variability of the demand pattern.
Like SD, MAD is the basis from which safety stock is calculated. It is easiest
to explain using an example.
Example
For a demand during successive periods of 5, 14, 6, 15 the average
demand is 10.
The swings about that average are –5, +4, –4, +5.
Adding up these values gives 0, which shows that 10 is the true
average. For measuring the variability, it is the size of the errors not
the signs which matter, so forget the signs and add up the numbers.
This gives 18 in total, or an average of 4.5 for the four periods, and is
called adding the ‘absolute deviations’ or ‘moduli’.
A second demand pattern has the form 9, 12, 8, 11 for the four
periods of history, and an average of 10 as in the first example.
By the same analysis. the absolute deviations are now 1, 2, 2, 1
and the MAD 1.5 (6/4). Obviously the safety stock required in this
case will be considerably smaller than in the previous example, in the
ratio 4.5 to 1.5.
The MAD is calculated by this method, or by taking the last value of MAD
and updating it with the latest absolute deviation. The formula for MAD
is:
MAD =
Sum of absolute deviations from mean
Number of periods included in the sum
For a normal distribution. MAD = 0.8 SD.

SAFETY STOCKS
103
The MAD is easily calculated but to avoid the nuisance of recalculating
each time, and to give a better value, an exponentially smoothed MAD, is
normally used (see Chapter 10, section on weighted averages).
Choice of deviation measuring technique
With any statistical distribution, such as the difference between forecast and
actual demand, there is a variety of standard ways for assessing the
dispersion, such as quartiles, MAD and SD. Approaches using the greatest
and least demands are unreliable since the extreme demands usually result
from an abnormal occurrence. Basing the variability (and safety stock) on
a stock cover calculation is a common, but incorrect assessment. This
assumption gives completely the wrong stock balance.
There is a more serious debate about the relative merits of MAD and
standard deviation. Mean absolute deviation is easy to understand, to
calculate and to set up on a computer. Standard deviation is theoretically
more correct, is used throughout statistics and is available as a pre-
programmed function on spreadsheets. It is more difficult to calculate and
understand.
For improved safety stock evaluation, the assessment of variability should
be biased towards using the most recent data and the value should be
exponentially weighted (see Chapter 10, section on improved values for
MAD). This can be done very effectively with MAD, whereas the SD has to
be converted to the variance (= SD2) in order to use the weighting
technique. Exponentially weighted MADs are therefore preferable to SD.
Their use results in improved safety stocks, and offers a better selection of
forecasting techniques to meet future demands (see ‘Choosing the best
forecast’ section in Chapter 10).
The smoothing factor (see Chapter 10, ‘Selection of the smoothing
constant, ) most commonly used for MADs is 0.1, since there is normally
no rapid change in the demand variability. In practice this may prove to be
a little insensitive and 0.15 is often found to work better.
For seasonal demands, the variations in size of the demands are likely to
be greater at the maximum and smaller at the minimum. The MAD can be
considered as a percentage of the demand level. Using this ‘percentage
MAD’ approach enables an appropriate and up-to-date variability to be
maintained and provides the appropriate safety stock levels. The use of
exponentially weighted variances should give better values in theory, but is
seldom used in practice. Table 6.2 shows a simple summary of the options.
There is an arbitrary quality scale included to illustrate the relative merits
of the techniques.

104
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
For appropriate safety stocks, interpret the historical data, measure
demand not sales, and respond to changing variability in demand.
Evaluation of safety stocks
Risk measurement
The reason for having to use SDs and MADs is that they are the only
sensible ways to work out stock levels. The shape of the normal distribution
curve measured in terms of SDs (or MADs) is always the same. This is the
shape of the curves shown in Figures 6.2 and 6.3. These graphs indicate
that when stocks are held at average usage, 50 per cent service is given. The
other values behind Figure 6.3 are given by the customer service factors
shown in Table 6.3. The customer service factors are shown in the table for
both SDs and MADs. Either measure is acceptable and will give similar
answers.
Adding one MAD’s worth of safety stock to the average requirement
means that customer service increases from 50 per cent to 79 per cent; or
when stocks are increased by one SD, the service increases to 84 per cent,
so there is a 16 per cent chance of stockout. By increasing the buffer
stock to twice the SD, service is increased to 97 per cent. Additional
stockholding increases the service toward 100 per cent but the cost in
terms of inventory level is very high. Three SDs’ worth gives 99.86 per
cent and four SDs 99.99 per cent, But these are increases of only 2.1 per
cent and 0.13 per cent respectively for the same investment in stock that
Table 6.2
Summary of deviation measurement techniques
Historical evaluation
technique
Comment
Relative
quality rating
Stock cover
Only for the amateur
A major improvement on continuous inspection
1
MAD
Simple to understand and calculate
Good for most situations
10
SD
Theoretically more accurate
Available on spreadsheets
13
Smoothed MAD
Gives better results
Also suitable for seasonal demand
Easy to put into spreadsheets and software
25
Smoothed variance
Should give best values
30

SAFETY STOCKS
105
Table 6.3
Customer service factors (assuming a normal distribution)
Desired service
level (% periods
without stockout)
Multiply SD by
Multiply MAD by
50.00
0.00
0.00
75.00
0.67
0.84
79.00
0.80
1.00
80.00
0.84
1.05
84.13
1.00
1.25
85.00
1.04
1.30
89.44
1.25
1.56
90.00
1.28
1.60
93.32
1.50
1.88
94.00
1.56
1.95
94.52
1.60
2.00
95.00
1.65
2.06
96.00
1.75
2.19
97.00
1.88
2.35
97.72
2.00
2.50
98.00
2.05
2.56
99.00
2.33
2.91
99.18
2.40
3.00
99.50
2.57
3.20
99.70
2.75
3.44
99.86
3.00
3.75
99.90
3.09
3.85
99.93
3.20
4.00
99.99
4.00
5.00
gave 34 per cent for the first SD and 13.6 per cent for the second. This
raises the question of which service will be too expensive to give, and
whether the customer can tell the difference between 99.86 per cent and
99.99 per cent availability.
The availability level is measured by how often the designed stock level
will meet all the demands during the period. (Other measures would be
‘how many items were short during a year?’ or ‘how many customer orders
were not completed?’)
In Table 6.4 the stock is unable to meet demand in three periods. With
review level at 5.0, average stock is 3.7 units (ignoring negatives).
In Table 6.5 all demand is fulfilled with safety stock of two MADs (four
items). With the review level at 9.5, average stock is 6.5 units.

106
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
An example using stock records
Taking an example, Table 6.4 shows a conventional stores movement
record for one item, with receipts, dispatches and supply orders for a
stores. The average usage per period is 2.5. If the policy is to
purchase sufficient stock to cover three periods, then the order
quantity will be 7.5, rounded to 8. If it takes two periods’ lead time for
the stock to be replenished, then replenishment orders need to be
placed when the stock falls below 5 items. This is called the ‘review
level’1 because when the stock falls to this level the decision should
be taken on whether to order. All too frequently an order is raised at
some arbitrary ‘minimum stock level’ which bears no relationship to
the current usage rate. As a result of assessing the demand, a
purchaser will change the review level, place an order, or both.
The stock levels resulting from this are shown in the ‘stock’ column
in Table 6.4. The orders are raised each time the stock falls below 5.
(This review level is taken as a constant over the short time shown.)
Notice that there is a shortage in periods 6, 7 and 10, resulting from
the large number of sales in period 6 which coincided with the stock
being below the stock review level. It is prudent to hold safety stocks
to cover for these occurrences.
The amount of stock can be assessed from a statistical analysis of
the demand pattern as discussed in the previous sections. The total
sum of the variations from the mean is 20 for the 10 periods (demand
variability in Table 6.4.) This gives a MAD of 2. If the safety stock is
now increased by 4 from 5 to 9, this should give added protection of
2 MADs. (2 × 2 + 4). This corresponds to a 94.5 per cent safety stock.
The stock review level is also increased from 5 to 9 and the orders
have been placed immediately at this level. The new pattern is shown
in Table 6.5. The extra two stock has reduced the number of depleted
weeks from 2 down to nil. It also meant that it was possible to supply
all of the 25 items needed. With no safety stock it was possible to
issue only 21. This calculation will be refined below.
Of course, from the statistics, this level of safety stock will cause a
shortage in 5.5 per cent of the order periods and this may not be good
enough. Additional safety stock can be added to give the service level
required. The higher the safety stock, the more costly is the
stockholding, not only because money is invested in the stock, but
also because an investment in stock may prove fruitless if the item is
superseded or becomes obsolete.
Note: 1Up to this point it has been referred to as ‘reorder level’.

SAFETY STOCKS
107
Table 6.5
Stock record with safety stock
Period
Demand
Stock
Purchase orders
Demand
variability
0
8
1
1
7
Place order for 8
1.5
2
5
2
↓
2.5
3
0
10
Delivery of this order
2.5
4
3
7
Place order for 8
0.5
5
2
5
↓
0.5
6
6
7
Delivery of this order
3.5
7
1
6
Place order for 8
1.5
8
0
6
↓
2.5
9
6
8
Delivery of this order
3.5
10
1
7
1.5
Average
2.5
6.5
2
Additional safety stock
Safety stock is normally calculated on the basis of unknown demand. The
quality of supply from the manufacturers may also prompt an increase in
safety stock, either because the lead time for an item may vary between
placing one order and the next, necessitating extra stockholding, or because
the supplier’s delivery performance against the lead time is unreliable and
delivery is more often late than early. An allowance in stock has to be made
for this factor. If stock has to be held against poor supply, then theoretically
Table 6.4
Stock record
Period
Demand
Stock
Purchase orders
Demand
variability
0
8
1
1
7
1.5
2
5
2
Place order for 8
2.5
3
0
2
↓
2.5
4
3
7
Delivery of this order
0.5
5
2
5
0.5
6
6
–1
Place order for 8
3.5
7
1
–2
↓
1.5
8
0
6
Delivery of this order
2.5
9
6
0
Place order for 8
3.5
10
1
–1
↓
1.5
Average
2.5
37
MAD
2

108
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
a supply performance MAD could be calculated and a safety stock worked
out. This supply safety stock would not be additional to the demand safety
stock, since the same safety stock would cater for either high demand or late
delivery, but not both. It is found that the addition of MAD from different
causes can be added using Pythagoras’ theorem (in a similar way to adding
variances).
Make the supply effective. Don’t hold stock to compensate.
In dealing with the supplier, the supply pattern should be a result of
compromise for both organizations. Whoever is the cause of the extra safety
stock should incur the cost of it. Minimum stock is held when each party
can trust and accept the information provided by the order.
Slow-moving items
For a large number of stock items the usage rate is low. This includes
obsolescent items, non-standard lines and spares. For these the ‘normal’
distribution is squashed against zero usage and is replaced by a skewed
distribution. The chance of an item being required is governed by
Poisson’s distribution law. Compared with the normal distribution, the
Poisson distribution has a longer tail where there is an enhanced (but
small) chance of high demand during a period. To cover for this, a higher
stock would be required where high levels of availability are needed.
Demand for slow movers is a Poisson distribution.
An important feature of the Poisson distribution is that
Standard deviation = √Average demand
This relationship simplifies the review level formula for slow-moving items.
When using the Poisson approximation, the usage events have to be
independent (i.e. issues in ones to unconnected demand). If this is not the
case, then
Standard deviation of sales orders = √Average number of sales
orders.
Using the calculations developed in this chapter and applying the lead times
discussed in the next provides the basic method for inventory management
for the majority of stock.

SAFETY STOCKS
109
Excess and obsolete items
In practice, stocks are never balanced ideally and some items become
excessively slow moving. These items can be described as ‘excess’ or
‘obsolete’. One of the areas which generates little interest and lots of cost is
obsolescent items. The definition of obsolete should be that there is no use
for the item. This information is normally only available when the customer
changes to a direct and improved substitute. In many instances, goods are
classed as obsolete as a result of a long period with no demand: so the
practical definition is usually that an item is obsolete if it has not moved for
‘x’ months.
Have the system identify obsolete items, then remove them.
The selection of ‘x’ varies with the type of item and market, and the position
in the supply chain. It is relatively easy in fast-moving consumer goods to
get rid of items which have not moved for three months and this may well
be the definition in this environment. Suppliers of heavy machinery and
spare parts, where world demand has been zero for two years, may not
regard demand to have finished and they will still desire to keep stock (only
one!). In this case failure to supply quickly may have important strategic or
economic effects, and supply lead times are long. A mechanical part on a
machine which fails every seven years or so is not obsolete, but has a very
low usage rate. The decision to purchase such slow-moving stocks is one
problem, the decision to throw away existing stock is entirely another. Each
company has to decide on a proper obsolescence policy for disposing of
non-moving items.
Excess items
The ‘not moved since’ analysis can cope with non-movers, but there are
other useless items, namely the excess items. If the stock of an item is 1000
and the usage is one per month, the item is certainly not obsolete, but may
be before the stock is used up. Therefore the definition of excess could be
‘Excess items have stock of more thany months’ usage’. Again the value of
‘y’ depends on product, market, position in the supply chain, and also on
the Pareto class of the item, since the stockturn definition is a limit on the
stock investment.
Figure 6.4, with cut off values ‘x’ and ‘y’, shows simple control of excess
and obsolete stock. It allows accountants to identify how much money to
put aside to cover likely stock disposal. Writing down inventory value is, of
course, an admission by the stock controllers that they failed!

Working
inventory
Number of
weeks
(cover) of
inventory
Excess
Number of weeks since last movement
Obsolete
110
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
In theory the values of x and y could be different for each item. For
example, a stock of helicopter rotor assemblies could be held in stock for a
long time before use, but there is a mandatory requirement to change and
repair these units, so the stock is not obsolete, just slow moving. Whether
stock is excess depends on whether the items are now units (bought too
early) or repaired units (which would be in inventory anyway). In practice,
therefore, the cut-offs shown in Figure 6.4 are used, and some allowance is
made for items with stock of one.
The first step in dealing with the phase-out of stock lines is to identify
early the lines in this terminal condition. These lines can then be included
in the ABC classification as ‘O’ or other suitable flag to inhibit normal
ordering. The disposal of excess and obsolete stock has to be carried out
carefully and professionally to avoid a large loss in profits. Before selling a
company, the value of obsolete stock items has to be reduced since it is
illegal to overvalue the company and the stock can be a major part of this
value.
Figure 6.4 Definition of excess and obsolete stock

SAFETY STOCKS
111
Key points
 Safety inventory compensates for unknown demand.
 Supply problems should be removed, not buffered.
 Demand can be split into average and variability.
 Variability (safety stock) should be calculated using MAD (or SD)
but not estimated.
 Customer service factors should be used to decide the level of
availability necessary.
 Identification of obsolete and excess items will enable old inventory
to be used up more effectively.

7
Setting the right stock levels
 Order patterns with safety stock
 Successful calculation of review level
 When to expedite
 The effect of supply lead times
 Co-ordinating supply with target stock levels
Simple assessment of review levels
The basic calculation
Our aim in stock control is to maintain a balanced inventory so that
customer service for each stock item is maintained within its proper limits.
The time at which we can influence the stock levels most effectively is when
we order, and it is at this point that the major opportunity occurs for
ensuring a balanced inventory. This is the major control mechanism for
ensuring a balanced inventory. It is also the point at which customer
satisfaction or excess inventories are created. The technique for calculating
the right time to order inventory is crucial to balancing these conflicting
pressures.
Originally stock-recording systems used to include stock control levels as
‘minimum’ and ‘maximum’ stock levels. These basic concepts are still
applied today as a simplistic approach where tight control over stock is not
necessary. The use of a minimum stock level for order control is not
sensible, since the minimum occurs immediately before delivery. Items
have to be ordered well in advance of this, so control is through a ‘reorder
level’ not a minimum stock. However, a minimum stock level is vital for
ensuring that there is warning of low stocks. In a stock control system,
therefore, there is a need for both reorder level and minimum stock level.
These are called the ‘review level’ and ‘safety stock’ (see Figure 7.1).
The review level is triggered by the information from the system that
stock is low (i.e. it has fallen below the ‘reorder level’) and makes a decision

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
113
as to whether to order. Where the demand has increased or lead times
increased, orders are necessary; where the lead time is reduced or demand
has diminished, then there is no need to purchase. Since demand can go up
or down, the trigger level is treated in practice as a review level.
Minimum stock has also been replaced by the safety stock which is
calculated as discussed in Chapter 6, and allowing for lead time (the
analysis is shown below). Maximum stock is a result of negotiation with
suppliers on delivery quantities. The maximum stock level should be a
result, rather than a direct control. It is therefore necessary to control the
delivery quantities directly by using three parameters to carry out simple
and effective stock control, as shown in Figure 7.1, namely:
 review level
 safety stock
 delivery quantity.
The starting point is the calculation of the safety stocks. A quick look at the
historical demand for the two items illustrated in Figure 7.2 shows that the
second will require a great deal more safety stock than the first if the
customers are going to be equally satisfied. The average demand rate is the
same in each case. The more the variability of demand, the more safety
stock is required. Therefore the safety stock does not depend on the
demand rate. (This means that safety stock calculated as number of weeks’
demand is simply wrong.) The safety stock for periodic delivery items is
Figure 7.1 Stock controls

114
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
given by multiplying the customer service factor by the standard deviation
(or MAD) of the demand during the period.
Safety stock depends on demand variability
and not demand rate.
If the demand is thirty per month and the supply lead time is two weeks,
then there had better be fifteen in stock or on order or else there will be a
shortage. This is because the time to order is given by:
Review level = Usage rate × Supply lead time
and to be safe:
Review level = Usage rate × Supply lead time + Safety stock
The safety stock calculation discussed in Chapter 6 showed that the stock
depends on the variability of demand (MAD or SD) and the availability
level required (customer service factor). Although the effect of supply lead
Figure 7.2 Historical demand patterns
Table 7.1
Variation of safety stock with lead time
Per day
Per week
Per month
Per year
SD scaled proportional to lead time
0.4
2
8
100
SD scaled as the square root of lead time
0.9
2
4
14

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
115
time was not discussed, the safety stock also depends on the supply lead
time.
Example
For an item with a demand of five per week plus or minus two (i.e.
MAD = 2) what is likely to be the variation in demand per day, per
month or per year? Two options are suggested for the answer in Table
7.1. The average demand per period increases linearly with time
period. The uncertainty of the demand, however, does not increase at
the same rate. The average is more likely to be achieved over a long
period of time than over a short period. The annual sales of an item
are often similar to the year before, but from day to day the demand
will vary widely. The weekly sales will also be quite widely dispersed
but the monthly results are quite consistent. If the SD (or MAD) were
to increase in proportion to the time period (see Table 7.1), then the
inaccuracy in the long-term forecast would be great. However,
because of the ‘compensating errors’ over longer time periods, the
deviations are relatively small. In fact it is found (and can probably be
proved) that the SD only increases as the square root of the time
period. This is shown as the last line of Table 7.1.
This same effect can be illustrated in Figure 7.2B. A short sample could
give a wide variety of answers to the average use, whereas a longer sample
will give a more reliable answer. In other words, the longer the sample
period (in the case under discussion – the lead time) the less the relative
safety stock need be. From Chapter 6 this would be a square root
relationship. As the variation in demand is largely a statistical effect, the
square root relationship occurs very frequently in stock control.
The full formula for safety stock is therefore:
Safety stock = Customer service factor × SD × √lead time
For values of customer service factor, see Table 6.3. This equation can then
be used in the review level calculation above.
The full calculation of review level can be carried out for the item with
the demand history shown at the start of Chapter 6 (Table 6.1). The average
was thirty-one and the MAD was 6.8. Some practical information is now

116
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
required, namely, the supplier’s lead time and the availability level to be
offered to customers.
Assuming that the lead time is three periods and the required customer
service is 90 per cent, the customer service factor for 90 per cent customer
service is 1.6 MAD from Table 6.3. First the safety stock has to be
calculated:
Safety stock = Customer service factor × MAD × √lead time
= 1.6 × 6.8 × √3
= 18.84
From this the review level can be calculated:
Review level = (Usage rate × Lead time) + Safety stock
= (31 × 3) + 18.84
= 111.84
This means that if the stock falls to 111, then more need ordering
(assuming there are not enough on order already to cover the 111). If it is
decided that 90 per cent service is not good enough and 98 per cent is more
appropriate, then the customer service factor becomes 2.56, the safety
stock 30.15 and the review level 123.15.
In reality, all the items do not need to be in stock to provide availability
for customers as long as they are on order and due for delivery before the
current stock runs out. In the example above, if the stock is currently sixty
then there is a problem. However if there are already 100 on order, there is
no need to raise another order. Therefore the condition for ordering is
when:
Current stock + Supply orders outstanding < Review level
(To be exact, the supply orders which count here are only those which are
due for delivery within the supply lead time.) The purpose of the review
level is to trigger replenishment orders at the right time. Of course,
triggering the order at the right time does not necessarily ensure that there
is stock in the stores. The review level calculation just described is the most
important piece of stock control theory.
Reordering triggers orders but does not eliminate stockouts.

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
117
When to expedite supplies
From the purchasing point of view the supplier has to deliver on time and
should be chased if the delivery is late. From a stock control point of view,
we rely on the supplier delivering at a fixed lead time. However, if the
supply is late, it does not necessarily cause a problem if the rate of issue has
not been as fast as expected (and the stock is still relatively high). In other
circumstances the demand may be higher than average and it would be
convenient to receive delivery early. In the example discussed before, a 90
per cent availability means that once in every ten time periods a stockout is
to be expected. When this happens it would be useful to try to enhance
availability by rushing in supplies. Therefore, a warning is needed for when
the physical stock is getting low, not when the supply is late. As the supply
should, on average, arrive when the stock gets down to the safety stock level
(see Figure 7.1), then the safety stock level is a suitable trigger level to
remind the supplier that goods should be arriving. Sometimes this reminder
will be after the proper lead time (if delivery is late), or it could be before
the item is due when the demand is above average. In either case there is
still the safety stock to use before there is crisis. The condition for chasing
supplier is therefore when current stock is less than safety stock. This
should be a standard routine printout from the system used for automatic
expediting.
Chase suppliers when you start using safety stock.
Managing lead times
Lead time
Lead time is the time between a shortage occurring and items being
available to maintain supply. The lead time for supply is a balance between
what the supplier wants and what the customer wants. If the suppliers are
powerful, they will specify a long lead time (such as a one year firm
programme). If the customers have the upper hand, they will expect to be
supplied immediately, without any commitment. Both of these extreme
cases increase the total operating costs. The compromise is a lead time
which gives the suppliers sufficient supply time but do not force the
customers to commit themselves further than they can predict. The
accuracy of their forecasts of requirements reduces rapidly the further
ahead they look. Long lead times and large batch supply produce an order
pattern which is irregular and subject to change. Stocks are needed where
the sales lead time is shorter than the supply lead time. If this can be altered

118
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
so that supply lead time becomes less than sales lead time, the stockholding
can be avoided.
Lead times for purchasing are governed by production and transport.
Lead times for manufacturing result from capacity, material availability and
production planning. Lead times required by customers depend upon
availability and supply policy (make to order, assemble to order,
stockhold).
Components of lead time
Lead time can be analysed into several components, some of which are
essential and some avoidable. The supply lead time comprises:
 order review time – the intervals at which the low stock situation is
reviewed (e.g. printout every day, hourly, weekly, etc.)
 order processing time purchasing and communication) – the time it
takes to:
– review the order
– decide to buy
– transmit to the ordering system
– raise an order
– gain the appropriate authority
– inform the supplier (post, fax, e-mail)
 supplier lead time (vendors’ manufacturing, buying and dispatch)
 transport time – transfer of the item from supplier to receiving bay
 receiving time – time taken for goods inwards and updating the stores
records.
From this analysis, the actual supply lead time contains some elements of
administration in addition to the lead time quoted by the supplier.
In stock control equations, the supply lead time is assumed to be
constant. It is very important that the estimate of lead time in the system
reflects the true lead time. If the supply lead changes, then the lead time in
the calculation should be changed to reflect this. It is a continuous task and
part of the maintenance of the stock systems. Changes can normally be
made by groups of items from the same source, or by using the actual lead
time to update an (exponentially weighted) standard lead time.
Keep the lead time realistic.

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
119
Setting the lead times
If the lead time on the control system is set too short, this will lead to
stockouts, since the stock level will be kept too low. If the lead time is set
overcautiously (long), excess stock will result. The compromise for setting
the lead time is a fine judgement for the inventory controller.
Minimizing the lead time
Longer lead times make forecasting more difficult and increase the safety
stock. Reducing the lead time is therefore desirable and can lead to
stockless supply if the supply lead time is short enough. It is part of
inventory management, therefore, to work on reducing the overall lead
time.
One of the simplest ways of reducing the lead time is to specify it
more precisely. ‘Delivery in the month of June’ as a request gives the
supplier plenty of leeway. ‘Delivery on 12 June at 11.18 a.m.’ suggests an
entirely different expectation, and is likely to gain a much better delivery
performance (during the day required rather than the month).
Numerous experiments attempting this have shown that a majority of
suppliers will improve their delivery precision greatly, simply by being
asked.
Companies also find that supplier reliability is often affected by lead
time. With a lead time of one day, if the supplier of an A class item is a
day late, then this can be a major issue. If the lead time is twelve weeks
and the supplier is a day late, this is often expected, or even considered
as on time. One day’s worth of stock is held to offset this. The
perception of delivery performance is as a proportion of lead time.
However, from an inventory perspective, a day’s worth of stock is the
same value, whether it is added to an extra six weeks’ worth or to one
day’s worth of total inventory.
From the analysis of lead time above, the total lead time should be
minimized by:
 inputting information to stores and computer systems without delay
(removing administration leadtime). It is important to minimize the
time between:
– the stock getting low in the stores and the supplier receiving the
purchase order
– receiving the delivery and the event being displayed on the company
computer system

120
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 partnership with major suppliers (giving schedule flexibility or
kanbans).
Once these elements of lead time are small enough, (see also Chapter 8,
section on purchasing procedures) the suppliers’ lead times should also be
examined. Supply lead time consists of actual physical transport time,
manufacturing time in some instances and organizational time. Lead time
should be a negotiated time, not something that happens without
manipulation.
Example
A supplier quotes six-week delivery. What does this mean? It could
be:
 all the existing stock is allocated to someone else
 there is a stockout because the safety stock was not high enough
or the reordering procedure broke down
 it takes six weeks to get these from their supplier.
In the first two cases, the six weeks are caused by priorities, first,
because the order is not jumping the queue and, second, because the
supplier does not consider the order important enough to put in higher
safety stock or improved systems. This is a matter for the supplier and
the customer to negotiate. The third case could be argued as similar.
If their supplier is a manufacturer, then the six weeks could reflect the
manufacturing time. However, only a very little part of manufacturing
time is taken up with production. The manufacturing time per unit
assessed by work measurement (time being worked on) is much
smaller than the production lead time taken for the work to pass
through the manufacturing plant. This is usually more than ten times
the measured work content. There is, therefore, potential for
manufacturing lead time to be collapsed to a much smaller timescale.
However, this cannot be done on a one-off basis; it is has to be done
gradually for repetitive products because of its effect on capacity
balance and replanning. The amount of replanning manufacture has
to be minimized in the short term or else the plant becomes inefficient
and delivery performance suffers. Again, collaboration with suppliers
may enable them to reduce their own lead time.

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
121
Because of the large numbers of items in inventory, reduction of lead time
has to be carried out for selected types of items. These are initially:
 A class items
 items where a small change in lead time can make them into supply-to-
order items.
Effects of lead time
Lead time does not govern stockholding. Order quantity is not affected by
lead time. It is possible to order twenty weeks’ worth of an item with one
week’s lead time and one week’s worth of an item with a twenty-week lead
time (as long as further orders are placed each week). True the review level
is calculated using the lead time, but the review level determines only what
order cover is required and not how much stock is held.
Lead time does affect the amount of safety stock to hold. The longer the
lead time, the wider the absolute variation in demand and therefore the
higher the safety stock for a given service level. Fortunately the amount of
extra stock only increases as the square root of the lead time.
In summary, the effects of long lead time are generally:
 forecasting demand to cover the supply period is more difficult
 the reliability of the supplier may be poorer.
Errors in forecasting cause higher stocks to be held. If demand is certain
over the lead time, then stocks can be very low. A short lead time means
that:
 the forecast is more likely to be correct
 errors will be smaller.
Dealing with inconsistent lead times
With closer partnerships and higher expectations, inconsistent delivery is
not the problem that it used to be. However, customers are now more
sensitive to supply reliability, so strategies should be considered for any
supplier where delivery is inconsistent and changing supplier is
undesirable.
It is difficult to set reasonable stock levels or to provide good customer
service if lead times are not known accurately. The policy on inconsistent
lead times should be determined by the impact of the problem, and on

122
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
whether the financial risk is high or low. For high turnover value items (A
class) the inconsistency has to be resolved through scheduling and working
more closely with suppliers to smooth out the inconsistencies. The objective
should be to smooth out the variations rather than to improve the updating,
since each time the lead time is updated, the stock parameters will be
changed and the order book modified.
For low turnover value items (C class) the situation is not so important
unless there are very many inconsistent suppliers. The strategy for avoiding
the problem for routine supplies is to use pessimistic lead time in
calculations. This will cause higher stocks, which may be necessary if the
item is important. However, as the purchase quantity is probably large,
there are only a few occasions on which there is a chance of running out so
C class items may not be worth the investment in extra stock to provide the
extra availability.
In some instances lead times are cyclic. This is the result of the supplier
having a fixed plan and not responding to customer demand.
Examples of this are where there is a logical sequence of production
which cannot be broken such as size (steel-mill rolling plan – thickest
to thinnest over several weeks), contamination (pure to impure in
process industries, light to dark in injection moulding) or other cycles
(food crops etc.).
In this case supply orders should ideally be placed when the lead time is
minimum. Using target stock levels (described at the end of this chapter)
the timing of orders can be arranged to achieve this. However, the process
can only work if any changes to the supply cycle is communicated to the
customer.
Effect of order frequency on safety stock
The safety stock calculated by the methods described earlier in this chapter
are adequate for most practical situations. However the calculations can be
improved because the risk of stockout is not constant all the time.
Availability is good when there has just been a delivery. The risk of running
out are greatest when the stock is lowest, i.e. while the goods are below the
review level and a delivery is expected. The main risk during a year is,
therefore, the risk during the lead times. This depends upon the order

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
123
frequency. The more replenishment orders for an item that are placed per
year, the higher the risk and the greater should be the safety stock. This
factor is usually small compared to the benefits of ordering more frequently
and reducing the inventory costs and risks of obsolescence. A simple
addition to the calculation above suffices for control, as shown in the
following example.
More refined calculation adjusts for batch size.
Example
Assume that the historical data for an item is as follows:
 Annual demand = 10 000 (200 per week)
 MAD = 100 (weekly)
 Service level required = 94 per cent (2 MADs) (measured as
number of items short per year)
 Lead time = 4 weeks
 Order frequency = 6 weeks
So the total stock shortfall allowed = l – (94 per cent of 10 000) = 600
per year.
If there are 50 ÷ 6 orders per year (8.3 orders per year) then the
allowed stock deficit per stockout is:
600
50
× 6 = 72 (assuming 50 sales weeks per year)
Usage in the lead time =
10 000
50
× 4 = 800
The allowed stockout is therefore 72 in the lead time (LT) demand of
800 so
Service level required = 1 – 
72
800
= 91 per cent
91 per cent = 1.5 (MADs) but this is for a 4-week MAD since the
period is the lead time, so
Safety Stock (SS) = 1.5 × 100 × 4 = 300

124
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
and
Review level = 300 + 200 × 4 = 1100
The average stock level is SS + 1/2 order quantity
= 300 + 1/2 × 6/50 × 10 000
= 300 + 600 = 900
Now if the order frequency is changed to 10 weeks, then there are
now 5 orders per year
Allowed stock deficit per stockout =
600
5
= 120
The usage in the LT = 800 (as before), but because there are less risk
periods
Service level required = 1 –
120
800
= 85 per cent
Eighty-five per cent is 1.2 MADs (i.e. 4-week MADs). Therefore:
Safety stock = 1.2 × 100 × 4 (in weekly MADs)
Safety stock = 240
Review level = SS + usage in LT = 240 + 800 = 1040
Average stock level = 240 + 1/2 × 10/50 × 10 000 = 1240
The review level and safety stocks are less, but the average stock is
more because of the larger order quantities. If the order frequency is
changed to 4 weeks, the service level per stockout becomes 94 per
cent, the same as the simple calculation. This is to be expected since
there is continuous exposure to stockout risk. The safety stock
becomes 400, the review level 1200 and the average stock 800.
Target stock levels
Application of target stock levels
The target stock level (TSL) is a maximum stock level which can be used
to calculate the order quantities. Target stock levels marginally differ from

SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
125
the review level approach to ordering: Review levels fix the order quantity
and vary the order frequency, whereas TSLs fix the order frequency and
vary the order quantities.
When ordering regularly from a supplier, this enables the stock controller
to have a cyclic work routine, (such as always ordering from supplier X on
Thursdays) and the TSL approach is therefore good to use for the regular
demand items, and is recommended for A class products.
Target stock levels support efficient purchasing.
The TSL is a level to which the stock is topped up (theoretically) when the
cycle time for ordering arrives. The process for setting up the ordering
procedure is, first, to establish a routine for placing orders on the various
suppliers by specifying the day each week or month on which the order is
going to be dealt with and, second, on the allotted day, review the stock of
all the goods supplied by that supplier. The amount to be ordered is given
by the formula:
Order quantity = TSL – Free stock – Supply orders outstanding
Here the ‘orders outstanding’ are, of course, only those orders which are
due within the current supply lead time. Orders booked further ahead are
not included in the calculation.
Example
TSL has been calculated as
34
Free stock is currently
16
Outstanding order due tomorrow
5
Therefore
Order quantity = 34 – 16 – 5
= 13
Calculation of target stock levels
The calculation of TSLs is very similar to that for review levels. An extra
factor is included in the calculation of the TSL. The effective difference is

126
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
that stock replenishment now needs to cover the period until the review
cycle comes round again. If the review cycle were a month and the supply
lead time only one day, then the TSL would have to cover a month’s extra
usage (plus safety stock) because the next order would be placed only in a
month’s time. Thus the formula for the TSL is given by:
TSL = [Usage rate × (Lead time + Review period)]
+ Safety stock
And there is a similar adjustment to increase the safety stock level:
TSL = [Usage rate × (Lead time + Review period)]
+ Safety stock
Safety stock = Customer service factor × MAD
× √(Lead time + Review period)
The demand ‘in review period’ is included because the stock level may not
be checked continuously, or deliveries may only be made once per month.
If we do not include the extra time in these processes then the risk of
running out of stock is increased.
Example
Review period for an A class item = 1 week.
Supply lead time
= 5 weeks.
Average demand rate
= 4 per week.
MAD
= 2.5 measured on a
week basis.
Required customer service
= 90 per cent
(this gives a customer
service factor of 1.6).
Therefore,
Safety stock = 1.6 × 2.5 × √(5 + 1)
= 9.8
and
TSL = 4 × (5 + 1) + 9.8
= 33.8

Lead
time
Safety stock
Time
Quantity
1
2
3
Target
level
Order
quantity
SETTING THE RIGHT STOCK LEVELS
127
Applying target stock levels
The TSLs are levels of stock to which the free stock never rises in a stable
situation (see Figure 7.3.) The actual stock will rise to a maximum level
which is
TSL – (Usage rate × Lead time)
The TSLs can be used for long review periods (e.g. one month) with
short lead times or, of course, with short review periods (one week) and
long supply lead times. In this latter case, there will always be one or more
orders outstanding on the suppliers. This does not affect the validity of the
calculation.
It is important to keep on adjusting the TSLs to match the usage rates
and lead times which are experienced, or else this approach can lead to last
minute purchases and extra work.
It is also important to ensure that the stock does not run out without
warning during the order cycle. This is why it is essential to monitor
continuously to find those items where the stock is falling below the safety
stock level, calculated in this chapter.
Figure 7.3 Target stock levels

128
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Key points
 Review levels should be continuously updated in line with
demand.
 Review levels do not avoid stockouts; to do this requires expediting
when physical stocks get low.
 Batch sizes are more important than lead time in keeping stocks
low.
 Using target stock levels is good when buying many items from one
supplier.

8
The changing role of purchasing
 The role of procurement
 Single sourcing
 Supply partnerships
 Vendor evaluation and rating
 Types of orders
 Calculating delivery quantities
 Effective purchasing administration
Modern supply practice
Improving the supply
The development of supply chain management changes the relationships
between companies providing goods to one another. This has affected the
role of the purchasing function. Purchasing has traditionally been an order-
by-order process based on obtaining the best combination of price, quality
and delivery (availability). Estimates are requested, best options are
negotiated, orders are placed and delivery is monitored.
This approach has been eroded over the years and the time-consuming
task of obtaining estimates is not now usual in routine material supply. The
development of supplier relationships has introduced longer-term arrange-
ments involving contracts, call-offs and schedules. This has changed the
role of the purchasing function. Instead of individual orders, supply is
negotiated less frequently. This has meant a different style of purchasing
activity because low level routine negotiation is being replaced by high level
contracts. The number of suppliers is also reduced.
Purchasing people are no longer order processors.
These changes have a major effect on the type of expertise required in
purchasing. The traditional type of ‘buying’ is being superseded by a

130
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
combination of high-level contract management and supply scheduling as
part of the material control activity. This means that materials management
will absorb the purchasing operations as part of control and scheduling.
Why is this now practical and possible? The answer lies in the current
supply environment:
 total quality – supply to specification is expected
 supplier partnerships – work closely with supplier
 logistic control – consider production and transfer costs
 linear production – manufacture products through same process route
 single sourcing – only one supplier for each item
 supply chain management – maximize effectiveness and minimize total
supply cost.
The new role of purchasing in a company is in negotiation – a skill which
inventory management has been practising internally for a long time.
Purchasing no longer requires the wheeler-dealer, buying from a favoured
source, hard-hitting on price and always with a good idea of where to go for
a cheap deal or a quick supply. Purchasers must now be contract managers,
working in partnership and shrewd enough to balance the well-being of
their company with the aspirations of their supply partners. They will have
fewer suppliers and maintain multilevel collaboration within the supplying
and user company. In fact, in some companies the purchasing agreements
will be carried out by top executives, as they were in the early days of
business enterprise. This situation arises because of the improvement in
communication between companies and the better organization of the
supply chain.
The purchasing environment
The environment in most businesses has changed from a supplier-led to a
customer-led operation. This has resulted from the increase in international
trading, multinational competition and the improvements in transport
systems.
The development of the customer-led market has caused major changes
in supply structures. There have been significant developments:
 Supplier relations are much closer.
 Quality management works on audit, not inspection.
 Stock control philosophy is to keep low inventory.
 Supply chain structure is fixed.

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
131
 Number and type of suppliers – there are fewer suppliers and these are
comparable sized companies.
 Distribution has become reliable and a direct cost, not an overhead.
 Administration has less people with tighter targets.
There has been a gradual change of power from supplier to customer
leading to changes from a product-based supplier to a service-based supply
(see Table 8.1).
This means that the requirements for suppliers and customers have
changed (see Table 8.2).
Table 8.1
Changing attitudes to service
Service was supplier led
Service is customer driven
Manufacturer provides products
Customer requires solutions
Supplier provides narrow range of options
Customer sources wider range from each
supplier
Non-standard individual items
Items are commodities, system
components
Generic service
Different service for each customer
Delivery when available
Fast reliable service
‘Provide products’ philosophy
Packaged items ready for customers to use
or sell
Table 8.2
Effects of changing attitudes to service
Issues for service providers
Issues for users
Supplier-led service
Supply lead times
Variety of suppliers
Single logistic chain
Many orders to control
High demand rates
Good margins
Customer-led service
Good availability
Convenience
Wider type of demand
Good control and price
Stock and supply risks
Single source
Commodity type supply
Supplier partnerships

132
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Single sourcing
Work closely with fewer suppliers.
A major development in purchasing has been in the area of supplier relations,
with a pressure to decrease the number of suppliers and to develop
partnerships with them. This stems from the need for improved supply, and
has led to tighter control and higher quality standards. One solution to the
supply problem is seen to be a single supplier for each item, providing the
supply risks can be minimized. The approach toward single sourcing can be
made in the same way as any other quality improvement process:
 Improve process until a problem is encountered.
 Identify the cause of the problem.
 Find means of solving or avoiding the issue.
 Advance to the next problem.
Managers often consider that their own situation is not appropriate for
single-source supply. Traditionally, companies purchased items from a
variety of suppliers, choosing a supplier at any time on the grounds of cost or
availability or, less often, quality. Such a formal, arm’s length relationship
with the customer giving an ‘order’ to the most fitting supplier, was more
costly and time-consuming than a single-sourcing arrangement, and did not
necessarily give the customer the best service.
A supplier who is not confident of the customer will:
 present a price from which to negotiate
 only meet the customer’s specification and no more
 offer improvements only under duress
 provide no add-on services
 consider only the short-term profit
 fear losing the next order.
This negative attitude stops the supply chain from being co-ordinated
properly. The exception to this situation is where the customer is so dominant
that the supplier is treated like a part of the customer’s company and is
dictated to by the customer. (This is the situation in many Japanese
companies.)
The normal objections to single sourcing are:
 the supplier has too much power
 inflated prices

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
133
 risk of poor delivery performance
 lack of flexibility
 supplier may cease trading
 divulging sensitive information
 risk of quality problems.
Focus on least total cost operating, not lowest unit price.
These are real fears for those not accustomed to single sourcing and present
the first barriers to be crossed.
There must be compensating benefits to encourage companies to adopt
single sourcing. These benefits can be considered as short-term operational
advantages, and as long-term improvements. The long-term benefits are:
 supplier is responsible for the item
 closer relationship with suppliers
 joint improvement programmes to reduce cost
 buyers’ leverage is enhanced
 focus on quality and efficiency
 fewer vendor contracts
 more stable schedules.
Looking at single sourcing from the supplier’s point of view, the advantages
are:
 higher share of business
 better opportunity to plan resources
 confidence in continuing demand
 opportunity for product and process development.
The disadvantages are:
 more dependence on one customer
 need to divulge financial information.
In the long term, the development of mutual confidence and a close
working relationship will enable two partners in the supply chain to plan
facilities to match the ongoing demand, focus on quality and delivery (just
in time?), eliminate formalities (time and paperwork), and provide a service
rather than simply a supply of items. The aim is to optimize added value
throughout the supply chain to the benefits of both partners. This requires
a commitment by both parties to collaboration over several years.

134
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The short-term benefits of single sourcing can be classified as:
 reduction in buying and paperwork
 less vendor management
 easier traceability for non-conformancies
 single shipping route
 consolidated deliveries
 faster replenishment cycle.
To make single sourcing work in practice, management have to be
convinced that the cost savings from these benefits far outweighs the
potential costs of the risks identified.
Take the supplier point of view.
What really is single sourcing? The obvious answer is ‘only one supplier for
each item’. This does not mean putting all your eggs in one basket, but it
does mean relying on a supplier for a particular size of egg. This always gives
the back-up that the size 3 egg supplier could be persuaded to provide size
2 if there is a big supply problem. Single sourcing also means empowering
the supplier to provide the quantity, quality and delivery without fail.
Strategies to support single sourcing are therefore:
 ensure supplier profitability
 ensure that demand is important to supplier (significant turnover)
 partnership relationship
 management and monitoring of performance.
Vendor appraisal
The traditional purchasing targets of good quality, price and delivery
should be interpreted to mean total quality, long-term total cost and
consistent or JIT supply.
Quality is the responsibility of the supplier. Quality issues at the supplier
interface are concerned with the provision of usable goods, delivered safely
and on time, and accurate information including the customer’s identity
code, about what is sent, shipment by shipment, box by box.
It has been normal practice in some industries, to inspect goods arriving,
on a 100 per cent basis in some instances, and on a sample basis in more
advanced companies. It is also customary for manufacturers to inspect
goods being dispatched. Items are therefore inspected on dispatch from one

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
135
company and inspected on arrival at the next, either to ensure the integrity
of the transport or because there is a degree of mistrust. The integrity
problem is relatively easy to solve, at least within one country. The mistrust
is more difficult.
There are always stories of suppliers sending wrong quantities or wrong
items, even though the consignment may have been inspected on dispatch,
particularly if the supplier is also the manufacturer. The integrity of the
method of supply may also be questioned, more so if it involves
international or long-distance transportation. If a customer inspects a
delivery and finds it defective in some way, he or she will complain to the
supplier, and the questions which then arise are:
 Who paid for a full inspection and when?
 Who separates the defective parts?
 Who pays for the return transport?
 Who owns the problem?
 Who pays for a vendor rating and quality control system?
In most cases the answers to these questions is the customer. If the supplier
is not worried about this aspect of customer service (especially for a single
source or accredited supplier), then getting the customer to carry out the
quality checks seems to be a good cost-saving idea. Only where the
supplier’s business is jeopardized by the quality situation is the matter
resolved. The options for the customer are:
 Send the whole shipment back.
 Establish and circulate a league table for supplier rating.
 Charge the suppliers for the cost of inspecting their work.
 Communicate serious problems to their chief executive.
Make suppliers pay for cost of their quality.
The ability of a business to meet commitments to its customer depends on
the quality of support from its suppliers. If that support is missing, the
business must look elsewhere for better service.
Appraisal criteria
Audit is necessary as part of vendor assessment, to ensure that the
excellence of supply is maintained. The purchaser’s appraisal consists of
three major areas:

136
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 Technical – is the item fit for function?
 Supply – is the quality, quantity, timing, identification and cost
acceptable?
 Support – is the supplier assisting in developments, queries, re-
engineering?
The appraisal criteria in each of these areas can be listed and ranked
according to importance – some features will be essential and others merely
desirable, and suppliers can be classified by their past achievements against
the set criteria. Results can then be used to rate the suppliers, as shown in
Table 8.3 for the type of inspection required.
Vendor rating systems are operated by most major companies to ensure
that their suppliers meet specified criteria. The final result is usually to
categorize the suppliers into these classes:
 Certified vendor list – these are the small band of good suppliers who
need little supervision and minimal quality checks. They should
include the major suppliers.
 Qualified vendor list – medium supplier performance, but causing some
non-conformance costs. Acceptable but needs work to improve.
 Approved vendor list – this includes all the other suppliers. Their
performance history is either low quality or unproven, so they require
a quality assessment project to either upgrade their achievement or
dismiss them.
Table 8.3
Classification of suppliers
Class
Status
Inspection
Certified vendor list
First choice
No inspection
Close relationship
Qualified vendor list
Select group of suppliers
Minor audit inspection
Business quality audited
Offered expanding business
Approved vendor list
Used on occasions
Guarantees or full inspection
Items not available elsewhere
Prototypes, non-inventory
items, office supplies

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
137
Operating vendor rating
To establish and maintain vendor rating, a programme of vendor liaison has
to be created, which should include not only a rating system, but also:
frequency of inspections; inspection topics, focus and method; other visits
and liaisons; the duration of the visits and methods of recording and
relaying the results.
For those suppliers not given a top classification, the purchaser should
report back on areas of concern, publicize to the suppliers the selection
criteria and objectives, and agree an improvement programme.
When a rating system has been specified, it has to be actioned. It is,
therefore, useful to specify in advance the conditions under which suppliers
would be abandoned or supported. It may not be possible in all cases to
apply these conditions because of restrictions on supply, but it is useful to
have prime criteria defined for the best working partnership.
The objectives of vendor selection are primarily to ensure adequate
supplier performance, and an agreement on financial rewards and penalties
is very useful to make it work in practice. The supplier gets a premium if the
rating is excellent and the purchaser gets a discounted price if the rating is
poor. The overall effect of this can be to reduce the total quality cost
between the two companies. As a spin-off from vendor selection further
benefits accrue, namely:
 fewer suppliers
 certified suppliers
 objective performance data
 long-term business relationships
 better understanding and dialogue.
Supply partnerships
Organizing a partnership
The modern relationship of supplier and customer is considered in terms
of:
 long-term collaboration
 open relationships
 mutual development
 supply chain management
 quality conformance.

138
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
There are also some practical considerations including geographic location
and flexibility.
The supplier base consists of a wide variety of different types of suppliers
providing individual blends of services. These services should provide what
the purchaser requires but, of course, there is always room to improve in
one way or another. Some suppliers are retained because they are essential
(particularly where one part of an organization is purchasing from another);
others are retained because they are excellent. There is a continuing need to
develop supplier relationships, to secure improvements and, sometimes, to
seek alternative sources where suppliers are unable to meet the
requirements.
When selecting possible vendors, both long-term and short-term
considerations should be used. What information is there on the supplier,
and do they meet, or are they capable of meeting, the supply quality
standards? It is important to ensure that the proposed demand level will not
overload the suppliers, causing them to fail. If the style, objectives and
business ethic of the supplier match the customer’s, then a partnership is
more likely to be successful.
Partnerships give long-term success.
The main reason for supply partnerships is to improve effectiveness for each
of the participants through better inventory management. Improved
mutual trust means better forecasting, less safety stock, availability of stock
records to each party, shared risk and, therefore, low inventory. Successful
partnerships agree on attainable targets which stretch both partners to give
an equal share. The effects go outside inventory management into sharing
development skills, operational and financial data, and providing support to
each other.
The process for developing a new supply partner is usually:
 Select vendor.
 Assess expertise.
 Accredit.
 Agree supply type.
 Test performance.
 Set up agreement.
 Monitor performance.
This monitoring is then fed back to the supplier and maintained on a
continuous basis.

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
139
Pricing method
Because of the huge variation in market and trading conditions, the
purchase price can be fixed in a number of ways:
 market price – variable from day to day
 fixed price – optional supply channel, mandatory supply channel
 market adjusted price – using an agreed formula
 fixed term contract – with discounts.
Each of these has advantages for supplier and customer in different
markets, and the choice should be one which both partners consider to be
fair.
The ordering process
Planning orders
There are two separate aspects of procurement to be considered, namely:
 purchasing
 reordering.
A large proportion of inventory control in a mature business will be
the reordering of supplies from an agreed vendor, and begins with
a communication that a further delivery is required. This situation is
more 
about 
material 
control 
and 
scheduling 
than 
traditional
purchasing.
If the purchasers can separate out those items where there are routine
orders from those which are not likely to be repeated, then a different focus
can be made in the initial negotiations.
The strategy for supply should take into consideration the overall
commercial, logistic, inventory and added-value services which are to be
provided by the supply chain, and a variety of purchasing options can be
considered, as appropriate. Supply can be obtained from:
 the open market
 a manufacturer
 a dedicated provider (specialist or distributor).

140
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Each of these supply sources has different characteristics which should be
examined to ensure their use is right for the items to which they are
applied (see section on order types below). Current practice is to set up
a supply pipeline which goes through as few stages as possible. However,
the nearer the original source (manufacturer) of the item, the less
flexibility there is likely to be, the longer the lead times and the higher the
supply volumes.
Order types
With the increased pressure for effective supply, simple one-off purchasing
processes are largely irrelevant. No longer does a buyer act as a dealer,
seeking a number of suppliers, negotiating price and delivery, and ordering a
batch. This is far too time-consuming and ineffective for the bulk of stock
items.
Scheduling suppliers is part of inventory control.
Ordering practices separate the purchasing aspects from the reordering
aspects. Purchasing is strategic and carried out at intervals to set the
structure, volume and price of supply. Reordering is carried out as a result
of stock control and forecasting processes as necessary for managing
replenishment. The two aspects require different skills and can be carried
out by different individuals. Supply orders can be broadly classified into:
 one-off orders
 bulk purchases
 annual contracts
 split delivery purchases
 rolling schedules.
An analysis of these types of orders and their application is shown in Table
8.4. The more organized companies use JIT or scheduled supplies.
Unfortunately, much of the software used in purchasing systems assume
one-off orders will be placed, and so schedulers are forced to carry out extra
work and make schedules look like split delivery orders. Rolling schedules
and JIT supply are the only options which meet the real needs of both the
supplier and the customer.

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
141
Order quantities
If the aim is to minimize overall cost, by keeping order quantities low,
efficient stock monitoring and goods received systems are required. If this
necessitates more frequent ordering, then the purchasing workload is
increased. However, an increase in inventory actually results from the
delivery, not from the ordering, and the prime task must be to reduce the
delivery quantity. Sometimes this is easy where reducing the order quantity
is more difficult. There are several approaches, including:
 supply scheduling (see next section)
 multiple item deliveries
 source from suppliers who sell in small quantities.
A reduction in delivery quantities can be achieved in two ways, namely:
 increase the variety of items per delivery
 increase the delivery frequency.
The stock value is decreased in direct proportion to the number of lines
delivered.
Consider the simplistic situation of a weekly delivery from one supplier
who delivers one item one week and another the alternate week. They
deliver a fortnight’s worth of each item each time, which causes an average
of one week’s stock of each. Instead, it is agreed that half the quantity of
Table 8.4
Analysis and application of supply orders
Order type
Advantages
Risks
Application
One-off orders
No commitment
No continuity of
supply
Capital purchase
Bulk purchases
Traditional method
for low prices
High inventory; high
risk
C class items
Annual
contracts
Assured supply from
awkward supplier
Need to forecast
accurately one year
ahead
Seasonal purchases
(food)
Split delivery
purchases
Lower inventory
Large stock cover or
commitment
‘Order’ based
supplier; C or B class
items
Rolling
schedules
Assured supply, low
inventory, low
commitment
Non-adherence to
schedule, poor
forecast adjustment
A class items, delivery
more frequent than
fortnightly
Just in time
‘Zero’ inventory pull
system; short effective
lead time
Delivery failure;
unreliable forecast of
demand
High volume limited
range; responsible
suppliers

142
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
each will be delivered every week The delivery quantity is now enough for
one week and the average stock is then half a week’s worth.
Go for less orders and more frequent deliveries.
The stock is halved by simply splitting the order quantity between the items
supplied.
As paperwork would be increased by the smaller deliveries, it is
important to minimize the effect of the extra time spent by limiting this
approach to A class items.
Pareto-based order quantities
The key decisions in stock control are when to order (discussed in Chapter 7)
and how much to order because the larger the order quantity, the higher the
risk of excess stockholding. The order quantity depends on the value and
usage rate of the item, and purchase order quantities should be related to the
predicted requirements. The use of the Pareto technique described in Chapter
3 provides the best balance between usage rate, costs and ordering effort.
The simple logic is to order A class items frequently to avoid stock value
and order C class infrequently to avoid too many orders and deliveries.
A typical order pattern would be:
 A class: order enough for one week.
 B class: order enough for one month.
 C class: order enough for ten weeks.
This, of course, is not dependent on the lead time taken by the supplier.
Deliveries can be arranged every day even if the lead time is four weeks, it just
means that there are about twenty supply orders outstanding all the time. The
lead time does affect the safety stocks and therefore the overall stock level.
Get A class items delivered weekly or daily.
It is a gross assumption that a week’s worth of stock is the appropriate order
quantity for A class, but it appears to be generally correct across a wide
range of businesses and markets. The main exceptions are fast moving
goods where there is daily delivery and the equivalent balance in days is
used as the order level. Companies where A items are delivered less
frequently than fortnightly have large stores and unbalanced stocks, or they
have several months’ lead times for slow moving A items. They have the
wrong idea.

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
143
The effects of ordering pattern on the number of line orders placed per
year has already been discussed in Chapter 3, a reduction from 12 000 orders
per year to 11 440 per year. If the above order pattern is applied to the
example provided in Table 3.8, then the values shown in Table 8.5 result.
The result, compared with monthly purchase for everything, is a
reduction of stock from 2 weeks’ worth to 1.325 weeks’ worth (plus safety
stock in each case) and a decrease in line orders of just under 5 per cent.
This gives more orders but less stock than shown in Table 3.8, and is better
balanced.
The ABC order quantities reflect the natural ordering practice for many
inventory controllers, but the Pareto technique provides rules for control-
ling all the stock in an appropriate manner and makes it work better.
Scheduling supply
Rolling schedules reserve supply and reduce risks.
The best arrangement for ensuring reliable supply and low stocks is the
rolling schedule. It is commonly thought that parts which take a long time
to arrive should be ordered in big batches. This is not necessary. Large
savings in inventory cost can be made by receiving regular small amounts of
the high turnover value items which have long lead times. For example an
imported part may take two months from the order to receipt into stores. If
there are 420 used per month, then an order could be placed every month
for about 420. This would lead to a stock of 210 on average (plus safety
stock). Alternatively, an order can be placed each week for delivery in two
months’ time from the date of each order. This would mean a delivery
quantity of 100 each time and average batch stock of fifty. However it might
be possible to place orders every day, in which case the batch stock would
be reduced to an average of ten. (Distribution methods have to be altered
Table 8.5
Pareto order patterns for 1000 stock lines
Class
Moving lines
(%)
Order cover
(weeks)
Turnover
(%)
Average weeks
of value
Orders
per year1
A
10
1
65
0.325
5200
B
20
4
25
0.500
2600
C
70
10
10
0.500
3640
Total
100
100
1.325
11 440
Note: 1For 1000 moving stock lines.

144
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
to deal with more frequent transfers without incurring extra costs.) This is
a significant reduction in stock and cost without any effect on customer
service. The number of orders per year may increase, but the workload can
be reduced instead by using supply schedules rather than single orders.
Rolling schedules are not fixed on an annual basis because this may lead
to a problem at the end of the year where there is either a shortfall or a large
unwanted amount still to be delivered. The best schedule is an agreement
between supplier and customer to the supply of an agreed quantity over a
number of weeks. Outside this period the customer indicates the expected
requirement so that the supplier can organize capacity and materials to
cover it. Although the supplier would prefer a long fixed schedule, while the
customer would like very short commitment, the scheduling technique has
many advantages when operated properly with the full commitment of both
supplier and customer to keep to the schedule. They include:
 less risk for both customer and supplier
 reduced stocks for the customer
 reduced stocks for the supplier
 the opportunity to plan supplies
 regular flow of materials.
A further advantage of scheduling arises from a regular flow of orders
where, instead of placing an order or a new schedule, the old schedule can
be used and extended. This enables a continuous supply of items at the
average rate without the need for any purchasing action. There should be a
simple agreement between supplier and customer that the schedule
quantity rolls forward unless there is specific instruction otherwise, so that
supplies are ensured. The only reason for changing schedules should be to
adjust rather than create.
Not only does the rolling schedule embody the principle of ‘no change –
no action’ (the classic management by exception principle) but it improves
the stability of supply. Even if the supplier’s lead time varies, the scheduled
quantity is not affected, nor should the regularity of deliveries be affected
either. A schedule is essentially a sequence of delivery times, not order
placement times, so the equivalent of lead time for schedules is the inflexible
front end of the schedule. The only change should be in the length of the fixed
part of the schedule. In consequence, as the lead time increases, the
customer has a longer time ahead before the programme can be changed.
Schedules solve many of the problems of ordering and minimize the risks.
To use schedules successfully, both supplier and customer have to be
committed to the quantities agreed. There should also be no sudden changes

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
145
in schedule outside the fixed part of the schedule. These are caused by late or
overcorrection to demand or stock levels and, if not avoided, will give a stop-
go ordering pattern. When usage changes the schedules should be modified
gradually. Minor action early prevents a major problem later on.
Accurate systems are required to control scheduled orders. Running
orders and continual deliveries are included on the schedule, and the
cumulative delivery quantities have to be correct with a check to show which
scheduled delivery is actually being received. A computerized technique is an
advantage where there are many items to schedule.
The economic order quantity approximation 
Where there are no other guidelines to determine the order quantity a
theoretical model can be used, the ‘economic order quantity’ (EOQ). This
model considers batch size, Q, which results from balancing the cost of
holding stock and the cost of ordering it. All costs are assumed either to
vary with the batch quantity or to be invariant with the order cost. For an
item with a cost of P and annual sales of A, the cost of holding stock is given
by 1
2 × r × P × Q, where r is the financing factor. The half arises through
averaging the usage rate to get stock levels. r is usually 20 per cent to 30 per
cent, because it takes into account the cost of borrowing the money for the
stock and the running cost of the warehouse. The order cost, S, contains the
cost of running the order department, goods receiving, and supply
progressing and can be typically US$100 per order.
Consider an item with a usage of 420 per month (5040 per year) and a cost
of $35. Using typical values of $100 for the cost(s) of raising an order and 25
per cent for the return expected on the stock investment, the ordering
options are shown in Table 8.6. The costs for various order patterns show a
minimum for fifteen orders per year, so this is said to be the EOQ.
EOQ does not work in reality.
At the bottom of Table 8.6 is the actual minimum value, fifteen orders
per year. This has been calculated using the formula:
Q = 
2 × A × S
r × P
Substituting the values in this equation gives the economic order quantity,
Q, of 339, which suggests that the item should be ordered fifteen times per
year.

146
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Although the EOQ theory gives simple answers, it generally gives too
high a stock level and should only be used where there is no alternative.
There are many reasons why EOQ gives the wrong answer in practice.
These include:
 Order and stockholding costs are assumed to be fixed, but these costs
should vary according to the stock and ordering situation.
 The valuation will give different results when estimating by full or
marginal costs.
 The demand is assumed to be regular, and ignores batching and timing
of issues which have a major impact on order costs in reality.
 Split deliveries and schedules do not fit well into the cost equations
 The EOQ ignores the balancing of stocks which is the most important
factor in manufacturing and many other cases.
 There is no allowance for co-ordination of orders for similar items
where the order cost can be shared.
There are other more minor problems which arise from the impractical
assumptions made by the model. The application of this EOQ technique is
therefore in the quick assessment of the stock and ordering situation. It is
not appropriate for use in manufacturing, nor should it be used as part of
a stock control system.
As can be seen in the example, the total cost is insensitive to the number
of orders per year near the minimum cost. An increase of order frequency
from fifteen times per year to twenty times per year only increases the total
cost by 4 per cent but decreases the inventory by 26 per cent. Even ordering
Table 8.6
Balancing order and stockholding costs
Orders
per year
(N)
Weeks
between
orders
Order
quantity
(OQ) (A/N)
Ordering
cost (OC)
(N × S)
Stock cost (SC)
(0.5 × OQ × P)
Total cost
(OC + SC)
1
52.0
5040
100
22 050
22 150
2
26.0
2520
200
11 050
11 225
4
13.0
1260
400
5 513
5 913
15
4.0
388
1 300
1 696
2 096
26
2.0
194
2 600
848
3 448
35
1.5
144
3 500
630
4 130
52
1.0
97
5 200
424
5 624
104
0.5
48
10 400
212
10 612
Balance
15
3.5
339
1485
1 485
2 970

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
147
every two weeks rather than every 3.5 weeks will increase the total cost by
14 per cent but decrease the inventory by 43 per cent as evaluated from the
table.
Good techniques can reduce the order quantities below those given by
the economic order calculation without increasing the costs. In many
situations, batch sizes in the region of 60 per cent of EOQ minimize the
actual costs. The best answers are given by considering the practical
situation and keeping the delivery quantities as small as can be sensibly
achieved.
Other order size considerations
There are situations where the supplier imposes a minimum batch quantity,
or a penalty for ordering small quantities. This suggests that there is a
mismatch between the supplier’s perception of a ‘reasonable amount’ and
that of the customer’s requirements, and is a sign that the supplier is not
interested in the amount of business which is available. Good liaison
between purchaser and supplier could set up a rolling schedule to assure the
supplier of continued custom, albeit for small quantities.
Minimum order quantities, as set by suppliers, are generally arbitrary
round numbers. It is possible to erode them by a few per cent in many
instances, and gradually move to the required quantity.
Minimum order constraints on A class items should be studied
energetically to avoid expensive stockholding. Where the minima are
imposed on C class, then the solution may be to accept the constraint as
long as goods are likely to be used in under a year. The minimum order
quantity problem can be resolved in a number of ways offering different
degrees of flexibility as shown in Table 8.7.
Table 8.7
Minimum order constraints
Constraint
Initial policy
Long-term changes
Minimum order
value
Place order for phased delivery
Negotiate on volume of
annual business
Minimum
shipment size
Co-ordinate orders for widest
mix of purchases
Change method of shipment
Minimum order
quantity per line
Order for phased delivery
Schedule, or arrange payment
when stock is used
Minimum delivery
quantity per line
Share item with others
(locations or competitors)
Renegotiate or look for
alternative supply

148
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Where the supplier is a sole source, then more effort has to be made to
resolve the situation:
 Customers may be persuaded to accept an alternative.
 A second source may be found.
 The item can be sourced through a third party (avoiding significant cost
increase).
 The item could be destocked and the minimum quantity supplied direct
to the customer.
Negotiation and an understanding of the situation can sometimes lead to a
sensible accommodation on both sides.
Apart from minimum order constraints there are other situations requir-
ing specific policies. In many situations, the forecast will be considered to be
acceptably accurate for a number of weeks ahead, up to a limit, commonly
called the ‘planning horizon’ illustrated here for each. (Note: planning hori-
zon is the length of forward planning. In Table 12.4 it is ten weeks.)
Inventory should flow through the business.
Different situations give rise to different order policies:
 Single warehouse – forward cover to horizon fixed by Pareto class.
 Standard product – cover to horizon against forecast.
 Distributed stockholding – co-ordinate supply to all stores.
 Manufacture to order – buy and make required quantity plus scrap
allowance.
 Parts for assemblies – make balanced sets.
In manufacturing, batch quantities should be the same for purchase and
production where possible. The actual batch sizes are often determined by
the practical limits of capacity on a process, the overall process throughput
time and the physical need to make a batch a more easily handled quantity.
By co-ordinating the manufacture of like products the batch size of each
can be reduced because the set-up costs are reduced. Thus a slow-moving
item should be produced in small batches along with similar fast-moving
items.
Purchasing processes
The stages of purchasing for a reorder are usually as follows:
1 Usage causes requirement.
2 System identifies need to purchase.

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
149
3 Need is assessed and actioned if necessary.
4 Purchase is initiated.
5 Order is produced.
6 Order is authorized (if high value).
7 Order is sent to supplier.
8 Supplier initiates supply.
If the workload in purchasing is too high to allow proper vendor
development and liaison, companies must find ways to reduce the ordering
workload by attending to the eight stages and rationalizing them, as
follows:
1 Usage causes requirement. This is the initial step in the reorder process and
the whole supply process is dependent on the information being
accurate. The first issue is to ensure that the stock and demand
information is correct.
2 System identifies need to purchase. Much time can be wasted searching
through printouts, screens or even stores, to see what is really required.
Systems should identify by exception reporting those items considered to
be ready for reordering. The reporting of this should err on the safe side
by selecting all items which need ordering plus extra items whose
demand patterns may lead to a high usage, a decision on which can then
be taken by the inventory controller.
It is always useful to have a communication from stores which reports
what they consider to be at risk. This avoids orders getting overlooked
and adds weight to the supplier-expediting process.
3 Need is assessed and actioned if necessary. The information provided by the
system should initiate orders for a minimum of 85 per cent of the items
where orders are recommended. If this is not the case, then the stock
control system is inadequate and requires improving. The development
of good stock control systems through forecasting or MRP is not a
complex computer problem. Solutions are available for most situations,
including sporadic demand and seasonal sales.
4 Purchase is initiated. The actual purchasing process can be a simple
confirmation at the press of a computer key, or a time-consuming
discussion with one or more suppliers. Some companies even require a
quotation for routine supplies! For fast-moving items, the ordering
process should be done in a flash once the order quantity has been
decided. (For most items the order quantities should be determined
using the formulae discussed previously.)

150
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
5 Order is produced. Order production is part of the normal computerized
purchasing system and is printed automatically. Manual orders are to be
avoided since they complicate the system.
Organize routines minimizing purchasing workload.
There is a good argument for a petty cash purchase system where over-
the-counter purchases of low value are carried out by an authorized
person outside the normal purchasing system. This will avoid a large bulk
of formal purchases and immediate access to the items required (often
maintenance parts). Control over these purchases should be through the
monitoring of monthly purchase values.
6 Order is authorized (if high value). For capital goods and non-routine
purchases, there has to be executive involvement in the commitment of
company money. For routine supplies, this process only serves to delay
the purchase, and is a great disadvantage. The signing of reams of
purchase orders by a senior person wastes their time and usually the
orders are not investigated during this process. There should therefore be
generous spend limits for buyers. Executives need to control the
purchases by:
(a) monitoring the value of order placed and outstanding order
commitment weekly or monthly
(b) signing the major value orders (say twenty per week)
(c) auditing the general order level by random checks each week
(d) setting targets for reduction of value of purchases relative to
demand.
7 Order is sent to supplier. By post an order can take two days to reach the
supplier, longer for overseas suppliers. The use of fax or more modern
methods enable the supplier to receive the information immediately. The
use of e-mail, wide area networks (WANs) or the data superhighway is
important for ensuring fast ordering. This saves stockholding as well as
improving communication. The well-organized purchaser will not have
to use the telephone for normal routine orders. The telephone is time-
consuming, and should be reserved for supplier liaison and
negotiation.
8 Supplier initiates supply. The information sent to the supplier should then
be processed into their supply system. Any delivery problems should be
relayed to the customer without them having to prompt. In situations
where the customer is apt to alter the demand, there is a tendency not to
report difficulties.

THE CHANGING ROLE OF PURCHASING
151
Key points
 Buying consists of creating strategic contracts and supply
scheduling.
 Close co-operation with suppliers pays dividends.
 Single sourcing is best, but risks have to be identified and
ameliorated.
 Quantitative assessment of suppliers will identify potential
problems.
 Organize ordering to minimize delivery quantities and effort.
 Use Pareto ABC as a basis.
 Avoid the use of EOQ.
 Review purchasing control and administration to reduce work.

9
Forecasting demand
 The role of forecasting
 Types of forecasts
 Avoiding forecast data error
 Managing data for forecasts
 Benefits of group forecasting
Options for assessing demand
Buying safety stock, or purchasing a batch quantity, means making a
prediction that the items will eventually be sold. This is a crude type of
forecast. In order to improve the stockholding (increase availability and
reduce stock) the quality of the forecast has to be improved. If forecasts were
excellent and the supplier could predict when the customers would want
items, they could be obtained and delivered just when they were needed:
Good forecasting means low stock. Poor forecasting means high stock.
Forecasting should be based on data which is accurate and appropriate
for the purpose. This is often a problem, and a forecast frequently has to
rely more on balanced estimates of future sales rather than history. The data
used to calculate the forecast include established demand patterns but
ignore irregular demands for which stock is not normally held, such as
scheduled customer orders (for which specific purchases are required to
cover the demands). For example:
 one-off promotions
 sales campaigns
 one-off very large orders (generally orders where the demand is more
than four MADs).
Good forecasting results in low stocks.
The selection of the forecasting technique is a difficult decision and either
the inventory controller selects the most appropriate one or employs a focus

FORECASTING DEMAND
153
forecasting technique. In general, it pays to use the most sophisticated
technique available because it is a better model for the demand pattern and
gives better results. Forecasting techniques can be divided in many ways.
One simple classification is between forecasts which use prediction and
those which use history, another is between qualitative and quantitative
figures, and another between intrinsic forecasting and extrinsic
forecasting.
Considering these concepts in turn, historical forecasts rely on looking
back to predict the future. Historical forecasting forms the basis of most
inventory forecasting because it has sufficient detail, and demand for
products usually changes continuously. However, it is obvious that looking
back to go forward could lead to disaster and this is where predictive
forecasting plays a role. People will predict an event based on under-
standing of future changes, rather than extending what has already
happened. The problem with predictive forecasting is that it is often
qualitative. A sales campaign will increase demand, but by how much? The
qualitative prediction is marginally useful, but for stock control a
quantitative assessment is necessary.
The difference between intrinsic and extrinsic is that the intrinsic
forecasting is based on information which is available within the system.
Extrinsic forecasting uses information which comes from external sources
such as trade statistics or market information. It is convenient to split
extrinsic information into leading indicators, concurrent indicators and
lagging indicators, according to whether the information collected shows
future, current or past activity. For instance, government statistics on
housing starts is likely to be a useful leading indicator to a national roof tile
manufacturer. The same information would be a concurrent indicator,
showing what is happening to the general demand this month, to a
company hiring digging equipment for house foundations, and for
architects it would explain the level of activity which they had already
experienced. Obviously, leading indicators are the most useful, even though
the information provided is often qualitative.
The manipulation of forecasts is part of the inventory manager’s art,
since computerized systems are unable to provide the right interpretations
when conditions change.
Types of inventory forecasts
Some types of forecasting are used only for specialized purposes. Of those
used regularly by inventory managers, the following five approaches are the
most useful and form the basis of stock control:

154
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
1 Market research. There is nothing like knowing for sure what customers
are going to buy. Firm orders are the ideal! Sometimes it is possible to
obtain firm order commitment, but more often it is possible to gain only
estimates from customers. Good liaison with the biggest customers, or
the biggest users of A class items, can have a major impact on forecasting
accuracy. If customers trust a supplier, they will provide accurate
information, since they should be in the best position to know their
market and their likely order requirements.
An alternative would be to carry out surveys to discover trends in the
market. These can be particularly useful in one-off investigations for new
products or for determining the effect of different sales or promotional
policies. It is a skilled and complex job to devise market surveys which
give factual results for calculating the demand level. A market survey is
only cost-effective as an ongoing exercise for a narrow item range where
the volume is high.
Another method of assessing customer requirements is to ask the sales
people. The risk with this is that sales staff sometimes confuse the
difference between maximum potential sales and expected average sales.
Consequently, their estimates often have to be interpreted before use!
2 Market demand models. These are generally based on knowledge of the
customer’s markets. If the major factors which cause the demand can be
identified, then a model can be created. The influence of each factor can
be assessed and put into an equation, or the factors can be input into a
simulation which can develop its own parameters.
Choose the right forecasting technique for each product.
Models are very effective where there are leading indicators, and where
there are simple deterministic relationships causing demand. Some
models can be financial (expenditure on promotion versus increased
turnover), others technical (item needs replacing every × years) or based
on commercial factors.
3 Historical techniques. Forecasts should be based on historical data, and
then modified by the influences. The only exceptions to this rule are for
new products, and those which have a causal link to another forecast (via
a model or MRP).
There is a wide variety of historical techniques to choose from. Some
are simple and give adequate results, others are much more sophisticated
and give excellent results in the right circumstances. In general, the more
sophisticated the technique, the more data is required to realize its
potential, so established products can be forecast best using these. Also,

FORECASTING DEMAND
155
a weighted average technique will be better than a simple average. There
are many approaches to historical forecasting, favoured by a variety of
authorities. The basic models for these will be discussed in the following
chapters.
4 Minimum stock levels. Many systems, both manual and computer have a
‘minimum stock level’ field displayed. This field is usually used for the
‘reorder level’ instead of for the minimum stock, and is either a user input
field or fixed by some useless rule (such as cover for ‘x’ weeks).
With a large range of stock items, it is a very big task to maintain stock
levels up to date. In practice, where the minimum is too low, the stock
controller will increase the minimum level, but where the stock is too
high, there is no availability problem and so fewer adjustments are made.
As a result, the stockholding can easily increase gradually.
Minimum stock levels should be avoided and proper safety stock levels
should be recalculated on a regular bases by a computer system. An area
of development of stock control has been the improvement in forecasting
techniques used by the professional stock controller. These should
continue to be used to the maximum.
5 Demand patterns. The demand for stock items often follows a pattern
which results from a variety of customer requirements for each item.
There are two general approaches predicting demand patterns:
(a) treat the usage as a pattern and analyse the demand profile (an
intrinsic approach)
(b) investigate the causes of the demand and forecast the requirements
separately (an extrinsic approach).
The first alternative has the advantage that it is based on accessible
information and is quick and easy to apply. This type of modelling does
not normally predict rapid changes to the usage rate because it is
essentially based on the historic demand pattern.
If a change in demand is understood, predictions can be made of likely
usage and total likely requirements. This method should provide a more
accurate answer, but requires thorough communication, knowledge and
management.
Predicting for a group is more accurate than for each item.
In practice option 1 based on historical data is used for the majority of
items. High-value items and critical items are usually treated by the second
method, often through an informal system, although such systems should
be avoided if possible in favour of extrinsic forecasting which will manage
stock more efficiently.

100
80
60
40
20
0
Demand
Time
1
2
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
156
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Product life cycle
For a company’s marketing and manufacturing departments, a product has
a life cycle of three phases – design, development and manufacture. The
end of manufacture is determined by marketing strategy and the
introduction of a new more competitive product. This product life cycle is
shown in Figure 9.1. It should be noted that product life cycles are getting
much shorter with new technology. The product life cycle for the
mechanical typewriter was more than twenty-five years; for the modern
word processor it is frequently less than one year.
For a service organization, the need for stockholding may extend beyond
the product manufacturing cycle since customers will retain products for
many years after the end of manufacture and still expect spares to be
available to support a service for their equipment. For some companies,
products manufactured more than twenty years ago are still in use and
being repaired as required. In some cases, service organizations have
announced stop dates for service in conjunction with sales initiatives to sell
customers new products. However, this has frequently failed since third
party maintenance organizations have seen an opportunity and taken over
a segment of the business which is very lucrative.
The product life cycle for the service organization is different from the
marketing and manufacturing life cycle and can be divided into three
phases:
Figure 9.1 Product life cycle

FORECASTING DEMAND
157
 introductory phase
 supply phase
 obsolescence phase.
Introductory phase
During this period, which should coincide with the design and develop-
ment phases, the inventory planner will be working with the product project
team, when the customer service strategy for the product should be
decided. To determine the stock requirement, the inventory planner will
want to know the forecast demand and the possible geographical
distribution of customers, which will enable the planner to determine the
requirement and place time-phased orders for the items necessary to
support the market strategy for the product ahead of the launch date.
Product launch is a critical period in the life of the item and it is essential
to have sufficient to support the first customers. However, if too much is
bought initially, the profit can be seriously impacted because much of the
initial purchase may never be used if too much ‘just in case’ inventory is
bought. The planner must monitor carefully early life usage as the sales
build up and adjust his ordering accordingly.
Supply phase
Established products have a steady or slowly varying demand pattern, and
during this part of the product life cycle major demand of stock items
occurs. Inventory control is concerned at this time with maintaining
availability. The ongoing requirement can be determined from historical
usage data. Standard stock control systems with provisioning facilities can
be used for reordering replenishment stock. At some point during this
period, manufacturing may cease which will create a ‘last time buy’
opportunity for distributors. Discretion is needed to ensure excessive ‘just
in case’ inventory is not bought at this time.
Obsolescence phase
It is important that the inventory planner is involved as the requirement for
the product declines. The task now is to prevent a build-up of surplus stock,
and the stock control system should order fewer replenishment parts as the
usage fails. However, a large proportion of inventory will still be in place to
meet the requirements of customer service. When the product demand
ceases then all the inventory should be withdrawn promptly. Companies
find this a valuable exercise since it provides an opportunity to redeploy

158
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
inventory in other countries where the product life cycle is in its
introductory or supply phase, and not its obsolescence phase.
During this obsolescence phase, consideration should be given to the
relative importance of customer support and the high risk of having to write
off unsold stock.
Causes of forecasting inaccuracy
People sometimes say ‘you can’t forecast this’ – a statement which is untrue.
Everything is capable of being forecast, but some things can be forecast well
and others are very difficult to forecast. To improve the quality of forecasts,
and therefore of stock control, it is useful to review what risks there are and
what causes forecast inaccuracy. Typical pitfalls for the forecaster are as
follows:
 inaccurate data
 sales information rather than demand statistics
 bias
 speed of response to change
 poor assessment of supply capability
 inclusion of extra demand in the forecast
 shortage of data.
Inaccurate data
The whole of inventory management depends upon knowing how much
stock is available so that the appropriate controls are maintained and
actions taken. Inaccurate data leads to poor availability, unreliable
customer service and excess stocks. It is therefore imperative for stores to
maintain records accurately, and not just to maintain records by a weekly or
monthly physical stock check. Records should be maintained accurately
through a variety of techniques including:
 automatic recording and checking
 batch control
 stores empowerment
 perpetual inventory checking
 bar coding.
If records are not accurate, then it is not worth improving inventory
management processes until inaccuracies are small enough to be a minor
influence on customer service.

FORECASTING DEMAND
159
Sales information rather than demand statistics
When considering inventory statistics, it is normal to discuss ‘demand’.
However, most companies’ records focus on ‘sales’. The difference is only
important where the actual amount issued does not correspond with the
amount ordered. This could happen in a number of ways, including sending
boxed quantities, or when there is a stockout. In the case of a stockout, the
lack of sales could lead to the conclusion that no stock is required if no
notice were taken of the actual demand.
Professional stock records should therefore monitor ‘demand’ (order
requirements at their delivery dates) rather than just sales.
Example
Taking an extreme example: if an item has a demand in three months
of thirty, forty-five and forty, but there is no stock of the item in the first
two months and then a delivery during the next month, the sales
records would give monthly sales of 0, 0 and 115. The actual
fluctuations in demand are only about ten whereas the sales statistics
would give a much higher value to month 3.
Bias
Sales tend to use a forecast either as a motivator to the sales team by
exaggerated optimism, or to ensure that stock is available. As a con-
sequence, projections from sales departments are notoriously high. Stock
controllers have to resolve this basic issue either by interpreting sales data
during forecasting, or by making sales (or marketing) departments more
responsible for the accuracy of their forecasts. This can be done by
apportioning financial responsibility for excesses.
Get the data right, then you can forecast.
Speed of response to change
It is difficult to get the right compromise between overreaction to events
and lack of response. One or two periods of high demand could signify an
increase in market demand or simply a statistical variation. Either
assumption will cause risk. Similarly when considering what time intervals

160
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
to use for collecting data, if the time period is long (e.g. a month), there
could have been major changes in customer demand profile within that
time or, for short periods, demand can be erratic and make it difficult to
interpret trends.
Poor assessment of supply capability
Fulfilment of increasing demand may be restricted by availability from
suppliers. This can happen even with good suppliers who are used
increasingly until they become overloaded and cease to supply successfully.
This will result in forecasts which are not achieved. Supplier restrictions
have to be understood by the forecaster. If a supplier cannot cope with
peaks in demand, then there is no point in including them in forecasts for
peak rates.
Inclusion of extra demands in the forecast
Special offers, campaigns and fixed scheduled orders should not be
included in the routine forecasts. They add variation to the demand rate
which is not true random demand. Instead, there should be planned supply
to meet the requirement which is assessed separately. For example, a
demand pattern may be:
20
510
30
5
25
520
15
35
25
515
and the reason for this may be one major customer who requires 500 every
four weeks plus a variety of customers who are taking about fifteen per
week. A sensible policy is to stock for the many small demands and to order
in specially for the 500 to arrive just before it is required. The 500 would
therefore not be included in the data for forecasting but as a separate type
of demand in the item stock record.
The ability to forecast closely to the actual demand rate will depend on
the selection of the method of forecasting. This can be done automatically
by the computer from the historical models, but staff may also possess
additional information which could be significant in forecasting future
demand.
One-off abnormal demands can be excluded from forecasts by using a
filter set at, say four MADs so that demands outside this range are treated
as non-stock sales.

FORECASTING DEMAND
161
Shortage of data
For a ‘good’ historical forecast, sufficient data is required. It would be
sensible to go back into history until the demand became different but it is
often difficult to assess this from the data. For seasonal sales, it is essential
to have data for more than one year.
The smaller the amount of information available, the less accurate will be
the forecast. For example, the statement ‘last two months’ sales were 500’
gives very little information on which to base stock levels. If the information
available is ‘the sales were 300 for month 1 and 200 for month 2’ then this
starts to give an indication of the demand pattern. If weekly demand data
were available, then it would be possible to see whether the demand was:
 only two customer orders or sporadic demand
 regular orders each week or each day
 decreasing demand.
This suggests that it is better to use more smaller time periods rather than
large ones, unless the demands in the time periods become non-standard
(e.g. if demands on Fridays are different from the rest of the week, daily
time periods would give cyclic demand with a peak each Friday). How
much data is needed to make a decision? The answer is indicated in Figure
9.2. The size of the forecast error depends on how erratic the demand is –
Figure 9.2 Effect of sample size on accuracy of mean

162
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
as indicated by the vertical scale. Figure 9.2 suggests that there is a
reasonable degree of accuracy afforded by twelve periods of demand
history.
Work with the data available – it’s the best you have!
Methods of improving forecasting
Feedback and monitoring
The simplest improvement to forecasting comes from ensuring that the
forecasts are modified to reflect actual demand. This simply requires the re-
evaluation of forecasts at the end of each period. New forecasts have then
to be applied to inventory calculations to optimize the stockholding.
Problem items can easily be identified in each period using a stock cover
exception report (see Chapter 3).
Feedback from the forecast error can show where the forecast technique
is lacking and can identify when the forecasting method is not coping and
needs changing.
Data aggregation
Statistically there is a major benefit from using as much data as possible by
going back further in time or spreading wider geographically, locally and
globally.
The obvious risks of using old information are:
 undetected population changes have altered the usage rates
 demand patterns have changed through modifications in user practice
 items have been substituted by alternatives or modified
 contracts or customer base have changed significantly.
If a wider geographic population is used, then the risks are:
 usage patterns differ regionally
 different demand patterns (or modification mix) exist locally
 data from different sources may not be compatible.
It is therefore a matter of assessment and balance as to the range of data
which can be used for individual items. In general, the wider the
information base, the more reliable the forecast. The accuracy improves as
the square root of the amount of data included.

FORECASTING DEMAND
163
Comparative items
For a high usage item, random fluctuations are small compared with the
forecast demand. Where demand is small, fluctuations can be large
compared to the forecast. Alternatives to aggregation are, first, to find a
similar item which is expected to have the same demand profile and,
second, to vary the forecast for a minor item by scaling the forecast for a
major item.
Example
Consider two items in the same product range, one with a demand of
100 per month and the other with a demand of 2 per month. The
forecast for the major item shows that the forecast has drifted from 100
per month to 110 per month. Assuming that the profiles are similar, the
demand for the minor item should increase by 10 per cent as well – to
2.2. It is much more difficult to detect confidently a change from 2 to 2.2
than from 100 to 110. It does not matter whether the two items change
in exactly the same way. This technique works if the minor item is more
likely to follow the major item than to remain static.
If there are a large number of items in a product range with low usages,
comparison with the major items can be a very good way of allowing for
changes in the underlying level of demand. The forecast for each item can
be based on individual historical demand, and the resultant forecast
multiplied by the relative change factor used on the major item.
Key points
 Better forecasting gives low stock levels.
 There are many techniques and options so several should be
used.
 Forecast can be predictive, based on product or sales information,
or on historical data.
 Record accuracy is paramount for realistic forecasting.
 An ongoing effort should be made to keep the records accurate.
 Extending the amount of data (by aggregation or copying profiles)
increases the reliability of the forecasts.

10
Historical forecasting techniques
 Historical averages
 Better forecasts with weighted averages
 Choosing the weighting factors
 Choosing the best forecast
 Warning when forecasts are bad
Basic forecasting techniques
Forecasting
Minimum stocks are possible when a good knowledge of demand exists. If
demand were known accurately enough and far enough in advance, then no
stock would be necessary. On the other hand, if there is very little market
information, high stocks are needed to ensure reasonable customer service.
Forecasting is therefore one of the important aspects of stock control. It is
a complex art which embraces many factors.
There are two basic approaches to forecasting:
 assessing future market requirements
 using demand history.
Assessment of demand
Assessment of demand requires the knowledge of customers, products and
background conditions. That comes from discussion and evaluation with
users further down the supply chain and through techniques such as market
research, questionnaires and customer surveys. The strength of these
techniques lies in providing general information on the levels of business
and on the likely uptake of a new product, or the phase-out of an old one.
This information is invaluable where large changes in demand level are
likely to occur.

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
165
These techniques need to be better managed to make them more
acceptable as forecasting tools for each line item, and inventory manage-
ment need to work with sales departments to ensure that they do not draw
optimistic conclusions – higher demand – which then has to be second
guessed for planning stocks. However, assessment of the market demand is
an essential tool for the professional stock controller, and the technique
should be used for A class items and those at the start and end of the
product life cycles.
One method of determining customer demand is to assess potential sales.
Many companies produce estimates, enquiry responses or have contracts
and formal agreements. Using a proven conversion factor on this
information to calculate an expected average demand by item number can
be the best way of estimating demand. Of course, a customer order could
be considered as a market prediction, since there is always the possibility of
them changing the date or quantity.
Demand history
The second approach to forecasting, using demand history, provides a
convenient basis for predicting demand. For most items it is:
 readily available
 detailed by item number
 generally reliable
 easy to use.
However, using demand history is rather like rowing a boat. To go forward
means sitting looking backwards and working hard. This is fine if there is no
obstruction in the way, but it is advisable to look round from time to time
to see what is in front. In a similar manner, inventory controllers use history
to determine the future. They have the problem that they are steering many
hundreds of items at the same time, and it is not practical to look round for
each one to see if it is heading for collision. What is required is a general
warning mechanism to detect impending disaster, and a forward look for
the more sensitive and important items.
Historical forecasting works for the vast majority of items and is therefore
a basic tool of inventory control. The more sophisticated the forecast, the
better the results, but there is always the need to keep abreast of real
changes in the market so that forecasts can be overridden if necessary.
Base forecasts on history.

166
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
In practice, a variety of simplified models, based on major features of the
demand pattern, can be used to meet stock control requirements for
standard items. More sophisticated forecasting methods are applied to the
non-standard items.
Historical forecasting methods are based on the mathematical manipula-
tion of historical data. This approach is fine for most items, and can lead to
excellent forecasts where the demand pattern is consistent. It is preferable
to off-the-cuff estimates because it is:
 consistent
 rapidly calculated
 frequently updated
 based on facts not reaction to pressures.
However it should be stressed again that it is desirable to modify forecasts
in the light of additional information.
Moving average
The most straightforward method of forecasting the next period’s sales is to
take the average of sales for each preceding period, add them up and divide
by the number of months. The moving average technique is a formal way of
calculating this for each period in turn, taking into account a fixed number
of preceding periods (usually weeks or months). Financial accounts have a
fixed annual cycle in which history builds up from the start of the year. This
data is unsuitable for stock control, since a fixed number of periods of
history is required. The moving average can be calculated from:
Average demand =
Demand for N periods
N
where N is the number of periods over which the average is taken. The
selection of N is of prime importance in getting the best from the moving
average technique. It is a compromise between the inaccuracy caused either
by too little data (see Figure 9.2) or by using old irrelevant data. Often the
average is taken over twelve months (or fifty-two weeks) to avoid
complications due to holidays or seasonality. However, it has to be
remembered that by averaging fifty-two weeks of history, the data used is on
average twenty-six weeks old: a lot may have changed since then! Therefore
it could be safer to use a shorter moving average.

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
167
Example
Take, for example, the demand history for three items over a twelve-
week period, as shown in Figure 10.1. The average demand for all of
them is 20.5 but the reliability of the figure 20.5 as a forecast for the
next week could be different in each case. In Figure 10.1A the
demand is in between 11 and 28, and 20.5 is quite a reliable forecast.
For Figure 10.1B demand is more sporadic and 20.5 is not such a
good estimate – perhaps more data would be useful. In Figure 10.1C
there is a gradual increase in demand and 20.5 is rather low, so taking
a shorter average would give a better answer in this case (i.e. a
smaller number of periods).
Figure 10.1 Historical demand patterns

168
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
In general a ‘suitable’ number of periods is chosen for a whole range of
stock items. This is not the best option but a practical solution. Calculations
including many time periods are best where underlying demand is static,
where there are large variations between demand in each period (Figure
10.1B), where stock level is not too critical and the forecasting is allowed to
run itself without much supervision. Reducing the number of periods in the
average enables the forecast to cope faster with a changing demand level
(Figure 10.1C). This is useful where the demand is smooth or where the
sales in a period are dependent upon those in the previous period
(autocorrelation).
Each inventory line needs its own averaging technique.
Taking an average is really a method of segregating trends and random
fluctuations. If the average includes data for a long period then any spurious
effects are damped out, but this will also make the result insensitive to
trends. Conversely a short moving average with N small, gives good
response to changes in market but is affected by fluctuation.
Example
The histories plotted in Figure 10.1 are provided with six-week
moving averages whereas three-week moving averages are used
in Figure 10.2. Notice that the smoothest line is the six-week
average. The three-week average is more variable, but it also
responds better to the trend in Figure 10.2C. In practice a three-
week moving average contains rather a small amount of data, so if
it provides the best forecast, then there is a major trend and a
more advanced forecasting method would normally be used or, if
not, then the three weeks could be split into days or half weeks to
get a reasonable amount of data.
Alternative calculation methods for a moving average
Calculating the moving average by summation month by month can be long
winded, especially when dealing with twelve-month averages. There is a
shorter way of generating the new moving averages.

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
169
Example
Consider that the demand for an item over the previous seven months
was:
Month
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Demand
17
11
15
12
14
15
?
The average demand, Ao = 14 for the first six months. In the following
month the sales were 11. The new six-month average demand AN is
therefore 13.
To calculate the old moving average, Ao the total six-month demand
of 84 was divided by 6. The demand for 17 in month 1 is not now
included in the calculation, since it is older than six months. However
a simple way of calculating that AN is 78 was 84 – 17 + 11 = 78.
Figure 10.2 Moving averages

170
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Therefore the new average can be calculated by working out:
New average =
Total demand + New demand – Oldest demand
N
Even easier, and more practical, is to find the difference between the old
demand data (to be discarded) and the new period data, and divide the
difference by the number of periods in the moving average. Then this can
be added to the old average to give the new average, or:
New average = Old average + 
(New demand – Oldest demand)
N
Moving average is the most common forecasting method because it is
simple to apply and easy to understand. However, it is not the most
favoured forecasting method because it has to be calculated from data
extending back over the month by month period, and equal weights are
given to all periods. It is a matter of judgement whether the most recent
information is more important in a particular instance. Often it is, and
better techniques are required.
Moving averages for C class items.
Moving average is most successful where the demand fluctuates widely,
because more sophisticated methods cannot identify demand trends and
profiles in the presence of sporadic demand. Moving average is often used
for C class items because the demand for these is often very variable
compared with the mean, and it is more important to have a forecast which
is generally reliable rather than one which requires some management.
Weighted averages
Benefits of weighted averages
The moving average technique suffers from two difficulties. First, it does
not respond well to changes, as it gives equal importance to all periods and,
second, a large amount of information is required to recalculate the average
each time.
An average which takes more notice of recent history and less notice of
older data has major benefits. The use of a weighted average improves
historical forecasting. There are many options for weighting the averages

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
171
but there is one option which is better than the others and is used almost
exclusively.
The technique of exponential smoothing avoids both the problems
outlined above. It produces a weighted average which is based on all the
information available (see Figure 10.4). The calculation of a new average
only requires the old average, the new demand and a weighting factor.
Exponential smoothing
The simplest proper forecasting technique is exponential
smoothing.
The name ‘exponential smoothing’ comes from the fact that contributions
from history for an exponential curve go backwards in time. There is
theoretically a contribution from many years of data, although this will
become increasingly insignificant as it ages.
Forecasting with exponential weighting is the simplest of the professional
forecasting tools. A new forecast demand, or historical average, is obtained
by mixing a portion of the old average with a portion of the new
demand.
New forecast =  × Demand in Last Period + (1 – )
× Forecast for last period
The mixing portion, , is the smoothing factor.
A new forecast has to be calculated as soon as the data for the previous
week or month (i.e. last period) has been collected. The new forecast then
applies to the week or month starting at that time.
The weighted forecast is easier to use when written down
mathematically:
A = D + (1 – B)
where
A is new forecast
B is the old forecast
D is the demand in the period just completed
 is the smoothing factor.

172
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
‘A’ can be described as the ‘average’, which it is, although it is being used
as a ‘forecast’. The value of  is between 0.1 and 0.4 as discussed below.
The smoothing effect of exponential smoothing is illustrated in Table
10.1 and Figure 10.3. Like moving averages, this calculation simply
analyses the demand to give an average plus the remainder which is treated
as statistical fluctuation. The smoothing factor, , defines the amount of
notice which is taken of each period’s demand.
Selection of the smoothing constant, 
The nature of the forecast can be changed just as for moving averages, by
altering the value of the smoothing constant, . Low values of  make the
forecast consistent; high values make it reactive to change. Making it too
high would render the result unreliable because it would depend too heavily
upon demand in the last period. For effective exponential forecasting, the
range of values which can be chosen for  are 0.1 to 0.4.
If the demand varies slowly then a low value of , say 0.1, is suitable (see
Figure 10.3). If there are changes in average demand level to which the
forecast should adapt then a high value of , say 0.4, is chosen.
If the variability of the demand is high from month to month, then a low
 is required to show up a stable average. Where the demand is smoother a
larger value of  can be used. This responds more rapidly to trends in the
average. If little is known about the item, or a value of  is required for a
range of items, then a median value of  = 0.2 can be used initially. The
Table 10.1
Exponential forecasting
Month
Sales
Forecast
Error
Forecast
Error
Cumulative
Error
 = 0·1
 = 0·3
1
10
10
0.00
0.00
10
0.00
2
14
10.00
4.00
4.00
10.00
4.00
3
6
10.40
–4.40
4.40
11.20
–5.20
4
8
9.96
–1.96
1.96
9.64
–1.64
5
16
9.76
6.24
6.24
9.15
6.85
6
12
10.39
1.61
1.61
11.20
0.80
7
7
10.55
–3.55
3.55
11.44
–4.44
8
11
10.19
0.81
0.81
10.11
0.89
9
13
10.27
2.73
2.73
10.38
2.62
10
5
10.55
–5.55
5.55
11.16
–6.16
11
10
9.99
0.01
0.01
9.31
0.69
12
8
9.99
–1.99
1.99
9.52
–1.52
MAD = 2·74
MAD = 2·90

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
173
value of  is then reviewed at regular intervals and altered where
necessary.
In Figure 10.1 a sales pattern has been predicted each month using
exponential smoothing with  = 0.1 and  = 0.3. The forecast for the next
month has been worked out using the old average and the error. The
success of the forecasting has been gauged by calculating the MAD in each
case. The result indicates that  = 0.1 gives better answers in this particular
case.
Figure 10.3 Effect of different values of 

174
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Alternative formula
This formula has an alternative, more convenient, method of calculation
using the error on the forecast instead of the actual demand, which differs
from the original form as follows:
New forecast =  × Actual demand + (1 – ) × Old forecast
=  × Actual demand –  × Old forecast + Old
forecast
= Old forecast +  (Actual demand – Old
forecast)
so
New forecast = Old forecast +  (Error in old forecast)
This formula is used as frequently as the original but it is important to
ensure that any negative signs are taken into account when using this
version.
In exponential smoothing (and moving average), the forecast for
subsequent periods is the same as that for the next period. It is possible to
project this forecast further ahead, but its accuracy will be poorer since it
will not predict a trend in demand (up or down).
Let the computer do the calculations and keep them updated.
Contributions of history
The moving average takes data at full value until it becomes too old and
falls off the end of the data table. With exponential smoothing, history never
gets discarded, it just becomes less significant. The forecast for this week,
with  = 0.2 is 20 per cent of last week’s demand and 80 per cent of history.
But that 80 per cent was calculated from 20 per cent of the demand of the
week before and 80 per cent of the previous history, i.e. last week is 20 per
cent of the forecast, the week before 16 per cent (20 per cent of the 80 per
cent) and previous forecasts are 64 per cent (80 per cent of 80 per cent).
Taking it back further, the contribution from three weeks ago is 12.8 per
cent and from four weeks ago is 10.24 per cent.
The contribution from each period to the forecast is shown in Figure
10.4 going back twelve periods for  = 0.4,  = 0.2 and  = 0.1. The
forecast using  = 0.4 takes little heed of demands which are more than

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
175
about six periods old. The forecast using  = 0.1 still has significant
contributions from twelve-month-old data, and demands from as long ago
as eighteen months can affect the answer significantly.
Initializing the forecast
The fact that exponential smoothing depends on old history gives a
problem of when to start the forecast. What should be taken as the ‘old
forecast’ in the equation? There are two ways of solving this, namely,
estimate and history.
For a new product, or for the addition of a new item to the stock range,
it is best to make an estimate of expected demand to start off the
forecasting. This can be done by:
 inspired estimate
 model or replicate a similar item
 an arithmetic average of such data as is available
 historical forecast.
The effect of this estimate will become reduced at the rate shown in Figure
10.4. It is not a good practice to start with zero as the ‘old forecast’ since it
takes too long to settle down, especially with low values of .
Where there is some usage information, a large number of items to
forecast or inexperienced staff, then a historical forecast is better. If the
Figure 10.4 Contribution from each period to the average

176
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
item already has eighteen months’ worth of usage history, then the
technique is to work out a six-month average for the demand up to one year
before. This can then be used as the ‘old forecast’ to start twelve months of
calculation using the exponential formulae to bring the forecast up to the
present day. Once the initial forecast has been established, the exponential
average is self-perpetuating.
Improved values for mean absolute deviation
Any tabulated information can be weighted using exponential smoothing. It
is important that the forecast is weighted towards the most recent data, and
that the variability data incorporates the most reliable up-to-date informa-
tion to set the safety stocks. The calculation of MAD or SD should
therefore be exponentially weighted to allow their wide application in
assessing forecasts and calculating safety stocks with exponentially weigh-
ted MAD and forecast error functions. Where standard deviations are used,
the weighting has to be applied to the variance (SD)2. Updating of the
MAD can be done most conveniently using the second version of the
exponential smoothing formula:
New MAD = old MAD +  (Error in MAD)
where
Error in MAD = Actual absolute deviation – Old MAD
and  is the MAD smoothing constant and is exactly the same as  but
using  shows that it is the MAD that is being smoothed rather than the
forecast.
It is normal to take  = 0.1 when smoothing the MAD. The reason for
this is that the MAD reflects the characteristics of the demand pattern, and
this would only be expected to alter gradually. If there is a sudden change
in the variability of demand it is likely to be detected first through a change
in demand level and forecast bias.
If the forecast for period 1 in the example (Table 10.2) is 36.2 and the
MAD 8.5 from a previous assessment, the new MAD can be calculated
either by taking the errors from the last six periods and averaging them to
get a simple average, or by taking an exponentially weighted average. The
last two columns in Table 10.2 show the difference between the simple and
exponentially weighted average.

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
177
Examples
1 MAD Forecast = 4, actual absolute deviation = 6
New MAD = 4 + 0.1 × (6 – 4) = 4.2
2 MAD forecast (old MAD) = 4
Demand forecast = 17
Actual demand for period = 15
so actual absolute deviation = 2
new MAD = 4 + 0.1 (2 – 4) = 3.8
This calculation would be the same if the actual demand was 19.
Although MAD always has a positive value, the error in the MAD can
be positive or negative.
Exponentially weighed MADs, which give a better assessment of current
variability, should be used wherever possible. An example using exponen-
tially weighted averages and MADs is shown in Figure 10.5 together with
the exponentially weighted errors of the mean. The exponentially weighted
standard deviation is insensitive to variances during each time period
because a low value of  is used. This is a good feature for ensuring a stable
calculation of safety stock, but it does make the task of setting the initial SD
more critical. The initial estimate used for MAD or SD will affect the
Table 10.2
Exponentially weighted MAD
Period
(wk/mth)
Demand
Exponential
forecast
( = 0·2)
Error
Simple
MAD
(6 period)
Smoothed
MAD
( = 0·1)
1
28
36.20
8.20
8.50
8.50
2
45
34.56
10.44
8.47
3
33
36.65
3.65
8.67
4
39
35.92
3.08
8.17
5
19
36.53
17.53
7.66
6
27
33.03
6.03
8.57
8.64
7
22
31.82
9.82
8.16
8.38
8
48
29.86
18.14
8.43
8.53
9
36
33.49
2.51
9.71
9.49
10
25
33.99
8.99
9.52
8.79
11
18
32.19
14.19
10.50
8.81
12
41
29.35
11.65
9.95
9.35
Forecast for period 13
31.68
10.88
9.58

178
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
calculation for many cycles, and can give misleading results if not chosen
carefully. (An initial assumption of zero for MAD or SD is not good
enough.)
In order to compensate for a change in variance or to reduce the effect of
initial conditions, the weighting factor can be increased for a few periods
but  should be kept below 0.2.
Choosing the best forecast
Application of forecast types
The forecast models discussed previously give a variety of estimates for the
future, some of which will turn out to be better than others. The problem
is how to choose the best option. At one time, it was necessary to decide in
advance what the characteristics of the demand pattern were, and to choose
the best model to use. Nowadays, technology can choose the best forecast,
so long as the rules are defined.
The general principles which have been used to choose between the
simple forecasting models are shown in Table 10.3. (The forecasting models
are described in this chapter and the next.)
The exponentially weighted models have the advantage that they are
more sensitive to recent events and, therefore, are generally to be preferred
Figure 10.5 Exponential forecasts and MADS

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
179
over the simple averaging techniques such as moving average, regression, or
trend measurement.
Table 10.3 can be taken as an indication of which method is likely to give
best results in any circumstances, or it could be used to set the model for
each item for forecasting. With the large number of lines in many stores,
some gross assumptions have to be applied, and rules can be suggested such
as those shown in Table 10.4.
Focus forecasting
With the technology now available it is not necessary to make these
assumptions. The approach is to calculate a range of options and then to
select the best average.
An assumption in making this selection is that the forecast which has
been most successful recently will be the best one for the period being
forecast. This assumption is open to debate, but is the best working option.
Table 10.3
Uses of simple forecasting models
Forecasting model
Demand characteristics
Moving average
Static demand level, irregular pattern
Regression analysis
Continuous trend, irregular pattern
Exponential smoothing
Variable demand, gradual changing level, and slow
moving spares items
Base series
Seasonal demand, mature products with low variability
Double exponential
Varying trend in demand, low variability, product
phase-in and obsolescence
Fourier
Product with long history, cyclic demand
More sophisticated techniques
Much history often needed, for longer-term forecasting
Specific models
Based on market knowledge, potentially most accurate
Table 10.4
Simplistic selection of forecasting models
Pareto class
Model
Method of use
A
Double exponential
Monitor and use knowledge
B
Single exponential
Exemption report and control
C
Moving average
Accept forecast
Other
Product specific
Supply to order

180
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
In inventory control the forecasts are usually for a short period ahead,
making this concept more acceptable.
Do many forecasts and choose the smallest MAD.
The question still remains as to which forecast can be considered the best.
The best forecast is the most accurate one, of course. The most accurate
forecast is the one which has the least errors (errors are the difference
between the actual demand and the forecast). Therefore, the choice of the
best forecast can be made by finding the one which recently has
demonstrably given the least errors.
Now the basis of a safety stock calculation is that stock is required to
cover a divergence between the forecast and the actual demand (perfect
forecasts mean no safety stock). The calculation of the safety stock is based
on finding an average divergence (SD or MAD) as one does in working out
the accuracy of the forecast. The MAD is a measure of the forecast errors
– this is focus forecasting.
If there are, say, three different forecasts for the same item, created in
different ways, then the way to choose the best one is to calculate the MAD
for each (see Table 10.5). The best forecast is the one with the smallest
MAD.
The use of a simple MAD is reasonable but, as in the case of safety
stocks, a better measure is readily available. This is because a forecast which
was brilliant a few months ago, could now be rather poor and it would be
preferable to choose a forecast which has given reasonable results in the last
couple of periods. For this reason a weighted MAD is used – in fact an
exponentially weighted MAD (see the section on improved values for mean
Table 10.5
Three different forecasts for the same item
Month
Demand
Forecasts
1
28
Model
Forecast
Error
2
45
Moving
12 period
demand
(MAD)
3
33
averages
6 period
26.8
5.9
4
39
Exponential
 = 0.1
22.0
7.4
5
17
smoothing
 = 0.2
28.3
9.5
6
27
 = 0.3
24.7
6.2
7
22
 = 0.4
23.8
5.7
8
24
Double
 = 0.2
23.9
5.2
9
15
exponential
 = 0.3
21.9
5.4
10
18
smoothing
 = 0.4
21.8
5.0
11
28
21.4
5.7
12
25

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
181
absolute deviation, earlier in this chapter). This provides a more reliable
method of assessing the potential of alternative forecasts.
Monitoring forecasts
Forecast tracking using cumulative sum of errors
The forecasting methods discussed will cope with most demands, but they
need adjustment from time to time when the method is inappropriate to the
conditions. We therefore need a monitoring process to enable prompt
action to be taken.
Tracking signals provide a monitor of how well the forecast is performing.
When the errors fall outside acceptable limits, the tracking signal identifies
the problem or modifies the controls.
Example
The demand pattern for an item over the past twelve periods is shown
in the two left-hand columns of Table 10.5. As a result the forecasts in
the three right-hand columns were calculated. By looking at the MAD
column, it can be seen that the best forecast is double exponential
smoothing with  = 0.3, and the worst forecast is exponential
smoothing with  = 0.1. Therefore the forecast to choose is 21.8.
However at the next period end a different forecast might well prove
to be even more accurate.
The Cusum technique provides a warning signal when there is a significant
asymmetric shift of actual results from the forecast. It is very simply
obtained by cumulating the errors in forecast over successive periods (see
the last column of Table 10.1). When the forecast is correct, the actual
demand is distributed equally above and below the forecast and cumulative
error is small. Once the forecast diverts from the average demand, the
errors build up period by period.
If the Cusum reaches an unacceptably high level, an error signal can be
triggered and the forecast adjusted. The size of the error in the mean
depends on the variability of the demand pattern and so the limit on
acceptable forecast errors is set in terms of MAD – six times the MAD.
However, for important items, values above four times the MAD should be
investigated.

182
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
When the Cusum has signalled a problem by a high error value, the
Cusum should be reset to zero. Otherwise the controlled forecast will give
a level which is consistently high.
Monitor forecast performance.
Improving control – Trigg’s tracking signal
When the Cusum indicates that there is a significant discrepancy, the
forecast needs to be changed rapidly. For exponentially weighted averages
this means increasing the smoothing constant,  (see section on selection of
the smoothing constant, ). Where there is a large variety of items this will
result in many changes to be made. Trigg’s method is a way of feeding back
the Cusum information automatically and using it to modify . Instead of
generating the cumulative SUM of error, the tracking signal first works out
the average error. This is done using the exponential smoothing formula on
the forecast errors and is called the ‘smoothed error’, calculated from the
actual errors, in the normal way:
St = et + (1 – )St–1
Where S is the standard error, e is the actual error and  is the smoothing
factor for the errors. The subscripts on the standard errors, t and t–1, stand
for this period just completed and last period. This is similar to the usual
exponential smoothing of the MAD:
MADt = et–1 + (1 – )MADt–1
 and  are set to the same value (0.1 or 0.15).
The tracking signal provides a figure of merit for the quality of forecast,
and is calculated by the ratio
Tracking signal =
St
MADt
The tracking signal shows whether the forecast is good or not. It is
considered good if it is not biased (i.e. not consistently high or consistently
low) where S and MAD are the exponentially smoothed values. The
difference between the calculation of S and MAD is simply that S takes into
account whether the forecast errors are up or down, and the MAD only
uses the size (absolute value) of the forecast errors. Hence the biggest value

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
183
that the ratio, the tracking signal, can have is 1, when all the errors are either
positive or negative. The smallest value is zero where the smoothed errors
compensate and are very small compared with the individual fluctuations in
demand.
Trigg used this to give direct feedback into the  factor in the forecast.
The argument is that an accurate forecast gives a low value for tracking
signal, and it needs little modification, so a low value of  is best. If the
tracking signal is large, there is a significant error in the forecast so a high
 factor is required to alter the forecast. The tracking signal can therefore be
used as the smoothing constant for the forecast, and this will enable an
exponentially weighted forecast to be more self-compensating each period.
For this purpose, the tracking signal has to be a positive number and so any
negative tracking signals (TS) are changed to positive.
The forecast F, is then determined by:
Ft+1 = Ft + |TSt| × et
where e is the forecast error for the latest period, and the value of TS is
always positive. The tracking signal can be used for feedback into
exponential smoothing or double exponential smoothing. It is also possible,
but less beneficial, to calculate a tracking signal using normal averages. To
make the tracking signal work properly the value of  has to be the same as
the value of . Since both of these are usually set to 0.1 this does not present
a problem.
There is a danger when using Trigg’s method that the  factors become
very high (above 0.4) when it tends to overcompensate for small changes. In
the discussion of exponential forecasting, it was stated that the value of 
should be below 0.5. It is therefore advisable in practice to modify the
formula so that values above 0.5 are not created.
The tracking signal is very useful and allows a computer-calculated
forecast to monitor itself and warn the inventory manager when it is
producing bad forecasts. The tracking signal can be used simply as a
warning flag. If the tracking signal is high, say above 0.4, then a manual
adjustment to the forecast is required, and an exception report can be
triggered.
Trigg’s forecasts can be a more accurate method.
The tracking signal can be combined with focus forecasting, the optimum
forecast being selected by choosing the one with the smallest smoothed
MAD as normal. If this forecast has a tracking signal below, say 0.4, then

184
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
the forecast is acceptable. If the tracking signal is greater than the
unreliability level (0.4), then the forecast with the next smallest MAD can
be chosen. This is a simple, mechanical and effective way of getting good
forecasts across the range of stock items.
Example
In Table 10.6 the characteristics of the demand pattern change after
period 12.
The forecast gradually drifts up and the MAD increases. The
smoothed error which was very small up to period 12 starts to
increase. This is because the change in forecast lags behind the
actual demand level. Consequently the tracking signal increases. It
reaches 0.5 in period 11, which is quite quick. At that stage the
forecast can be readjusted or an alternative model used, or it
continues to give poor results for a whole (periods 12 to 14).
Table 10.7 shows what happens when the tracking signal is fed
back to change the  as proposed by Trigg. The  factors are much
smaller at the beginning. For the first few periods this is a result of the
initial condition that the smoothed error is set to zero. The tracking
signal stabilizes and responds less to the low demand in period 7,
which is sensible given the consistently larger demand in the previous
periods. When the demand level changes, the tracking signal
increases and enables the forecast to rise faster to cope with the
problem. However, this does not fully compensate and the tracking
signal still rises above 0.4 . The forecast rose quickly to the new level
as the  factor increased. It did this without the inventory controller
having to intervene. The effect is shown graphically in Figure 10.6,
which contrasts the demand, the forecast with  = 0.2 and the
forecast using Trigg’s method. The data are taken from Tables 10.6
and 10.7 and represents a typical demand level change. The only
problem in period 19 is that the tracking signal is still rather large. As
the smoothed error continues to decrease because the forecast is
again accurate, this tracking signal will reduce gradually.
Although it is not the ideal answer, since it lags behind the demand
pattern significantly in a period of change, it is an improvement where
there are many stock items and little time to manage them
individually. However, it would be expedient to limit the maximum
value of tracking signal fed back to 0.4 and to manually readjust when
it exceeds this value.

HISTORICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
185
Table 10.6
Forecast tracking
Period
Demand
Exponential
forecast
( = 0.2)
Error in
forecast
Smoothed
MAD
 = 0.1
Smoothed
error
 = 0.1
Tracking
signal
1
13
16.00
–3.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
2
1
15.40
–14.40
5.04
–1.44
–0.29
3
10
12.52
–2.52
4.79
–1.55
–0.32
4
17
12.02
4.98
4.81
–0.89
–0.19
5
11
13.01
–2.01
4.53
–1.01
–0.22
6
19
12.61
6.39
4.71
–0.27
–0.06
7
16
13.89
2.11
4.45
–0.03
–0.01
8
15
14.31
0.69
4.08
0.04
0.01
9
26
14.45
11.55
4.82
1.19
0.25
10
38
16.76
21.24
6.47
3.20
0.49
11
31
21.01
9.99
6.82
3.88
0.57
12
40
23.01
16.99
7.84
5.19
0.66
13
35
26.40
8.60
7.91
5.53
0.70
14
32
28.12
3.88
7.51
5.36
0.71
15
Forecast
28.90
Table 10.7
Forecast using Trigg’s tracking signal
Period
Demand
Trigg’s
exponential
forecast
Error in
forecast
Smoothed
MAD
 = 0·1
Smoothed
error
 = 0·1
Tracking
signal
1
13
16.00
–3.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
2
1
16.00
–15.00
5.10
–1.50
–0.29
3
10
11.59
–1.59
4.75
–1.51
–0.32
4
17
11.08
5.92
4.87
–0.77
–0.16
5
11
12.02
–1.02
4.48
–0.79
–0.18
6
19
11.84
7.16
4.75
0.00
0.00
7
16
11.84
4.16
4.69
0.42
0.09
8
15
12.21
2.79
4.50
0.66
0.15
9
26
12.62
13.38
5.39
1.93
0.36
10
38
17.41
20.59
6.91
3.79
0.55
11
31
28.72
2.28
6.44
3.64
0.57
12
40
30.01
9.99
6.80
4.28
0.63
13
35
36.30
–1.30
6.25
3.72
0.60
14
32
35.52
–3.52
5.98
3.00
0.50
15
Forecast
33.76

186
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Key points
 Historical forecasting is essential for basic stock control.
 It is necessary to add information about future events.
 A rolling average gives a basic forecast.
 This can be greatly improved using exponential smoothing.
 Carry out several forecasts, then select that with the smallest
MAD.
 A tracking signal shows when the forecast is wrong.
Figure 10.6 Effect of Trigg’s forecast feedback

11
Advanced forecasting methods
 Better forecasting for rising or falling demand
 Coping with seasonal demand
 Other techniques
More forecasting tools
Improved forecasting techniques
Exponential smoothing is the basic model, which can, of course, be
improved. It splits demand into two components:
 average, which is recalculated each period
 random fluctuations about the averages.
The next stage of complexity is to add either:
 a constant increase or decrease in demand, using double exponential
smoothing, or
 a seasonal variation of demand, using base series forecasting.
Alternatively, entirely different approaches to intrinsic forecasts can be used
giving:
 unweighted average trends (regression analysis)
 profitability of changes in demand (Baysian forecasting)
 curve fitting (Fourier analysis)
 or more complex methods. (These are noted but not discussed as
exponential methods are a better option.)
The mathematics can become quite complex and are usually left to the
computer. In general, the more complex the model the more history is

Demand
Trend
Exponential
average
Time periods
188
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
required which is why simple forecasting has been acceptable until recently.
Intrinsic forecasts are best for data collected under similar conditions, even
when the demand is erratic. Then it is quite possible that exponential
forecasting with  = 0.1, or even long moving averages are best. If a change
from single to double exponential smoothing gives a significant improve-
ment in the forecast for an item, then perhaps more sophisticated methods
would work better, but there are fewer and fewer items benefiting from the
better forecasting techniques. As a general rule forecasting can benefit more
by improving the customer communications to detect changes in the
market than by going to highly sophisticated models.
Double exponential smoothing
As stated in the last section, single exponential smoothing splits the demand
into ‘average + fluctuations’. This is improved in double exponential
smoothing by analysis into ‘average + trend + fluctuations.’ In Figure 11.1
the difference in forecast can be seen. The exponential forecast for the next
period will show a weighted average, whereas by adding the average trend,
the predicted rate of demand will be higher, and the forecast will be
better.
To understand double exponential smoothing it is best to go back to
simple mathematics. Figure 11.2 shows a normal straight-line graph given
by the formula y = bx + a, with slope m and cutting the y axis at point c. The
double exponential model is equivalent to this straight line, with y being the
demand and x being time. Single exponential smoothing is like the line ‘a’
above the x axis.
Figure 11.1 Improved forecasting through double exponential
smoothing

y or demand
x or time periods
1
2
y
bx
d
=
+
a
b
ADVANCED FORECASTING METHODS
189
In double exponential smoothing the forecast of demand, Ft, is therefore
composed of two factors. Ft+1 = at + bt, with one factor arising from the
movement of the average due to random fluctuations, similar to single
exponential smoothing. The second factor calculates the trend of variations
and adds a ‘slope’ factor. This has important advantages because the
extrapolation to future periods continues, the increase or decrease being
observed rather than assuming a static demand level.
In addition to this, double exponential smoothing can also compensate
for lag in the forecast. It is obvious in graph (C) of Figure 10.1 that the
forecasts are lagging behind an increasing demand level (and will signal a
tracking error). Double exponential smoothing can bring the forecast in
line with the demand once a linear trend has been established. This can be
very useful when there is a gradually increasing or decreasing average
demand.
The lag in an exponentially weighted average is simply given by the
expression
Lag = 
1 – 
  × Trend
where  is the smoothing factor.
From Figure 11.2 it can be seen that the double exponential forecast for
one time period ahead is a + b (demand + trend). The forecast for two
periods ahead will be a + 2b (demand + twice trend).
There are several versions of the double exponential formula. The
simpler version is Brown’s model. A more comprehensive model is Holt’s
Figure 11.2 Double exponential model

190
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
model, but this requires two smoothing constants (one for the base forecast
‘a’, and one for the trend ‘b’). Holt’s method does allow optimization of the
smoothing factors for selected items by iterative programming.
The simpler formula is adequate normally and uses only one smoothing
factor, which can be denoted as  since it behaves like the single
exponential smoothing factor. The method of calculating values of ‘a’ and
‘b’ and the forecast is shown in Figure 11.3.
The general forecast for n periods ahead is:
Ft + n = ‘a’ + ‘b’n
By this linear extrapolation of trend, a much more accurate forecast of
demand in future periods can be made, if a linearly increasing or decreasing
sales pattern is expected.
For items with widely varying demand patterns, the estimated trend can
be misleading. A high or low value for the previous month’s demand reflects
too heavily on the calculated trend. If  is reduced to compensate, then the
model becomes unresponsive. In this case it is better to take a longer sample
period to even out the statistical variations, and this is often done by
Figure 11.3 Double exponential smoothing

ADVANCED FORECASTING METHODS
191
calculating the average demand over the last three periods and using the
averaged error to modify ‘a’ and ‘b’.
The trend calculation is smoothed through the demands over preceding
periods. Therefore, the greater the smoothing the slower is the trend to
respond to change in trend. This causes lag – the amount of lag is shown in
Table 11.1.
Changing forecast methods to double exponential smoothing means that
the initial values of ‘a’ and bt–1 have to be estimated. The smoothing
constant behaves like the smoothing constant for single exponential
smoothing. The larger the value, the faster it responds to change, but the
more unreliable is the value.
As the constant is squared for double exponential smoothing, selection of
the correct value is more important. Lower values of  are chosen. In
Figure 11.4 the equivalent future demand is shown for single and double
exponential smoothing.
The method of estimating ‘a’ and ‘b’ depends upon how much
information is available. If the demand for one period only is known or an
estimate of it, then there is little alternative to setting ‘a’ equal to that value,
‘b’ to zero, and using a high value of smoothing constant so that the forecast
will respond rapidly to the actual trend. Thereafter, the smoothing constant
can be reduced to a more stable value.
Table 11.1
Double exponential forecast
Time
period
Forecast
F
Demand
D
Error
e
Demand
level a
Trend
b
65
–5.00
1
66.0
55
5.0
58.2
–5.20
2
53.0
50
3.0
51.9
–5.32
3
46.6
45
1.6
46.0
–5.38
4
40.6
55
–14.4
45.8
–4.81
5
41.0
80
–39.0
55.0
–3.25
6
51.8
105
–53.2
70.9
–1.12
7
69.8
130
–60.2
91.5
1.29
8
92.8
155
–62.2
115.2
3.77
9
118.9
180
–61.1
140.9
6.22
10
147.1
205
–57.9
168.0
8.53
11
176.5
230
–53.5
195.8
10.67
12
206.4
255
–48.6
223.9
12.61
13
236.5
Note:  = 0.2

192
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
For an established product, the history is known and the values of ‘a’ and
‘b’ can be estimated accurately. In this case it is best to plot a graph and
estimate the value of demand, Ft, and a trend ‘bt.’ Then
‘at’ = Ft – bt
These values of ‘a’ and ‘b’ can then be used as a starting condition for
double exponential forecasting.
An example of double exponential smoothing is given in Table 11.1 and
the effect of single period forecasting in Figures 11.4 and 11.5.
Forecasting for seasonal sales
Forecasts do not cope with seasonal demand without using
base series.
For many products seasonal or cyclic demand patterns exist. This can be
caused by natural seasonal factors, for example temperature, rainfall or the
probability of thunder storms, or by other seasonal factors like holiday
patterns, Christmas or other religious festivals, or financial year ends. These
factors can be the overriding cause of demands, or a small reason for fine
tuning the forecast. Seasonal demands can be masked by the sporadic
Figure 11.4 Forecasting several periods ahead

1200
Demand and forecasts
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
Time periods
Forecasting with changing demand levels
Demand
Exponential
Double exponential
1000
800
600
400
200
0
-200
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
ADVANCED FORECASTING METHODS
193
nature of the demand for an item. Where this happens, as is often the case
for C class items, it may well be expedient to ignore the seasonal variation
and treat this as a random fluctuation too. Here a twelve-month moving
average is a simple solution, although the safety stock will, of course, inflate
the service outside the faster moving season and cause more stockouts
during the season.
Historical data
To use history to forecast seasonal demand requires at least a year’s worth
of data! In fact the more years for which data are available, the more reliable
the forecast, unless there has been a change in the pattern of requirements
for the item. This is usually a matter of interpretation, since the data is often
distorted by specific, non-repeating factors to do with the market, price
changes at irregular intervals or large contracts. The historical data often
has to be interpreted to get the best forecast.
Generally seasonal data is collected in monthly buckets, although
where Christmas dominates the sales, weekly information around
November and December is often needed. The average demand for each
corresponding month for three years or more is averaged so that an
Figure 11.5 Forecasting with changing demand levels

194
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
average monthly demand pattern emerges. It is useful to use weighted
averages of demand to bias the data in favour of the most recent years.
Where history is shorter, seasonal data can be used but there is less
confidence in the results.
Base series technique
The classic technique for calculating seasonal demand is base series
forecasting. This is a method of producing a seasonal demand forecast as
an extension to exponential smoothing, and makes the following assump-
tions: that the seasonal variation is known (from the data) and that
forecast errors are due to changes in the average demand level or to
random fluctuations.
The process for updating the forecast is:
1 Take the new month’s (or week’s) demand.
2 De-seasonalize it.
3 Compare with the forecast.
4 Update the forecast for the next months (exponentially).
5 Re-seasonalize the forecast.
Before the forecasting can start, seasonal demand factors have to be
calculated, and an initial forecast made for the average demand. The
processes 1 to 5 are then carried out.
Example
Demand for July is forecast as thirty-six. This is because the average
monthly demand is thirty and history has shown that the demand next
month is typically 20 per cent above average. At the end of the month,
the records showed that thirty-three were sold. What is the likely
demand for August, which has typically proved to be 10 per cent
above average?
The demand in July should have been 30 × 1.20 = 36, but instead
it was 33, which is 27.5 × 1.2. (The assumption is that the seasonal
factor is correct.) The de-seasonalized forecast should have been 30
but was 27.5. Therefore the forecast was too high and can be
exponentially smoothed downwards (assuming  is 0.2 here) as
follows:

ADVANCED FORECASTING METHODS
195
New de-seasonalized forecast =  × de-seasonalized
demand
+ (1 – ) × old
de-seasonalized forecast
= 0.2 × 27.5 + (1 – 0.2) × 30
+ 29.5
If the de-seasonalized forecast is 29.5, and the demand for
August is 10 per cent above average, then the new
expected sales for August are 29.5 + 10 per cent of 29.5,
i.e. 32.45.
The de-seasonalized demand forecast of 29.5 can be
used to forecast all future months by multiplying by their
respective seasonal factors.
Other methods
From the wide variety of forecasting methods available, only the simplest
have been described. Others such as regression analysis, Fourier analysis
and Baysian forecasting are based on different assumptions about the
demand pattern.
More comprehensive approaches such as Holt Winters and Wagner
Within, which extend the methods to greater sophistication, can be used
to give more accurate forecasts, but require more historical information.
As the quality of sales information is often inconsistent, the opportu-
nity to use refined techniques is limited but the development of improved
forecasting will make it easier for the stock controller to use better
techniques in future. Meanwhile, application of exponential techniques is
adequate for many purposes although changes will be required in other
areas including:
 the measurement of demand not sales
 the segregation of stock from non-stock demand for an item
 time bucket control.
The application of refined forecasting will then provide useful benefits.

196
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Key points
 Double exponential smoothing gives tangible benefits where
there are
– significant trends in demand
– long lead times for A class.
 Double exponential works best where demand is consistent.
 Seasonal demand has to be forecast using base series.
 More sophisticated techniques need better data and may not
make a significant improvement in the forecasts.

12
Material requirements planning – an
alternative to forecasting
 Identifying dependent demand
 The MRP process
 Benefits of using MRP
 Structured demand and bills of materials
 Triggering orders – projected available
 Meeting demand – available to promise
Avoiding uncertainty
When there is a clear picture of the demand for a particular item then stock
can be minimized. No stockholding would be needed if demand were
known precisely and far enough in advance because supply could be
matched exactly with demand.
For items outside the range stocked, the customer orders and receives the
supply after a lead time. There may be some transient stock because the
supplier is asked to deliver in advance of the time that the customer requires
it. The greater the confidence in supply, the shorter time items can spend in
stores.
Treat demand as dependent to reduce inventory.
The situation with non-stock supply is mirrored for raw materials in
manufacturing and for production components in assembly. Stock is
required to feed the process, and firm plans exist for usage rate just as for
scheduled customer orders and non-stock supplies. The approach to these
types of inventory is to treat them as dependent demand rather than the
independent demand as discussed in the previous chapters. The contrasts
between dependent and independent demand are shown in Table 12.1. The
essential feature of dependent demand is that it is calculated from the

198
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
demand of the next item up the supply chain; the aim is to have stock when
it is to be used and no stock the rest of the time.
The inventory profile for dependent demand is shown in Figure 12.1.
When the need is identified an order is placed. After the supply lead time,
the delivery arrives. The items are then transferred or transformed for the
customer and, when this is complete (which takes the process lead time),
then the item can be sent out. The stock is therefore only on site during the
process lead time and the investment in stock is very low. There is
potentially some safety stock included in case the customer order quantity
turns out to be greater than that originally agreed. The safety stock here can
be calculated from the forecast errors; in this case the ‘forecast’ is the
originally agreed delivery quantity. Ideally the safety stock should be
zero.
A basic concept used in planning dependent demand is backward
scheduling. This is simply the process of taking the delivery date required by
Table 12.1
Dependent and independent demand
Independent
Dependent
Inventory-level system
MRP system
Forecast
Calculated
Keeps stock
Supply as required
All lines separate
Lines co-ordinated
Reactive
Proactive
Good customer service
Very good customer service
High inventory
Low inventory
Figure 12.1 Inventory levels for dependent demand

MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
199
the customer, and working back to identify when the item needs ordering
from the supplier. ‘Offsetting by the lead time’ is the jargon used for this
method. In Figure 12.1 the ‘issues’ should be made at the time requested by
the customer. Moving back by the ‘process lead time’ gives the time to start
on that order. If the system is working properly, this should happen just as the
supplier delivered (marked ‘receive’ in the Figure 12.1). Going back further
by the supply lead time identifies when to place the purchase order.
If this calculation results in a date which has already passed, the options are
either to find a way of reducing the lead time or to forward schedule from
today’s date. This forward schedule will then estimate a later customer
delivery date, so that the customer can be informed and the plan delayed.
Material requirements planning
The structure
There is a well-developed technique for planning dependent demand called
material requirements planning. This is a generally applicable technique for
all types of dependent demand. The basic concept is to have stock when it is
needed and to have none the rest of the time. With dependent demand, the
size and timing of the requirements are known from the next level down the
supply chain. Material requirements planning can therefore give good
control. It is used extensively in manufacturing because there can be several
levels of dependent demand in a product (assemblies made from sub-
assemblies made from components made from purchased materials.) Here
MRP is well developed and complex. In many inventory situations MRP is a
much simpler process.
The MRP process
Material requirements planning is a useful planning tool outside manu-
facturing. Normal stock management treats each item as completely
independent, unaffected by usage rates of any other item and the demand is
assumed to happen at random. The MRP approach is entirely different,
based on:
 interdependent usage rates between stock lines
 acquiring stock for when it will be used.
Many customers tend to use items together, so demand is not truly
independent. For example, there must be a connection between the

200
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
demand for hinges and doors, paint and paint brushes, nuts and bolts,
although, in general business, there is no certainty that the sale of one item
will be matched by the sale of the linked item. If a customer buys 100 bolts,
there will be no automatic order for 100 nuts. They may already have a
stock of nuts, or use some in threaded holes or, even, buy from elsewhere.
The situation will become clear after a while. For example, it may work out
in the long term that for every 100 bolts bought by a customer, they require
forty nuts of one type and twenty of another. This relationship could be
consistent, because the customer’s use is consistent, sometimes without
identifying the reason. The demand for these items could therefore be
interlinked, and could vary as their level of business changes. It is
important, therefore, for the items to be balanced in stock.
Material requirements planning links in the inventory systems with the
sales and financial plans of the company. It is a professional technique for
a modern company and it requires adequate information, particularly:
 a master schedule of planned supply to customers for each product,
projected far enough ahead to permit ordering of bought-out items,
raw materials and components. This ‘planning horizon’ must be long
enough to cover the procurement lead time for bought-out items plus
the total manufacturing time
 a well defined ‘bill of materials’ showing purchased items and
manufactured components to identify what to make and buy
 lead times for the purchase or manufacture of all parts, realistic times
taken
 accurate records of stock, work in progress and on-order parts.
Material requirements planning enables parts to be scheduled for the day
that they are required. The advantages over the traditional inventory level
systems are shown in Table 12.2.
Table 12.2
Advantages of MRP over traditional inventory levels
Inventory-level system
Material requirements planning
Treats each part individually
Deals with structure
Depends on demand history
Looks at future plans
Assumes average
Handles erratic demands
Aims to keep stock levels up
Holds stock only to cover demand
Priorities inflexible
Sensitive to priority changes
Mainly runs itself
Needs managing

MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
201
The two main attributes of MRP, namely ‘time-phasing’ and ‘structure’
are now being applied in a wide variety of stocking situations outside
manufacturing. If it is known, or can be forecast, when major customers
want their supplies, any business can create a master schedule, with the
consequential reduction in stocks.
Material requirements planning is a business planning tool as well as a
material supply calculation. The planning of MRP is shown in Figure 12.2.
The process, known as manufacturing resource planning (or MRP II),
starts with a long-term plan, which identifies what range of items are
offered, how fast, with what market focus, and all the policy decisions to
enable inventory control to operate successfully. As a result of this long-
term process, actions should have been taken to ensure that the resources
(people, plant, systems, logistics, organization) are available to make the
policies work successfully. This long-term plan stretches ahead at least six
months and, typically, by two to three years, depending how fast-changing
the market is. Long-term planning is usually carried out by product group
rather than by product. A master schedule is generated from the long-term
plan, and is simply a list of what the business is going to send out, allowing
for the real constraints (see section below).
Material requirements planning logic
The MRP backward scheduling process starts by identifying the customer
requirement in the ‘master schedule’. Once the output to customers has
been decided, then the focus is on achieving it. If there is already stock, how
far ahead on the schedule will it last? If there is no inventory, then what has
to be purchased – the item itself or are there components which are needed?
Figure 12.2 Material requirements planning

Do this by time bucket – If there isn't enough – Get some.
Opening stock
on hand
Plus supply
deliveries
Stock
Minus demand
(orders)
Gives closing
stock on hand
202
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
A bill of materials is required to cover this. At the same time, information
on how long the supply will take and where it will be done – the lead times
and routings – is needed. All this information is fed into the MRP
calculation.
The actual MRP calculation is very simple. First it batches up all the
requirements within each time bucket (week or day) so that there is no
differentiation between different customer orders. Inventory is deducted
from this total requirement. If the inventory is sufficient to cover the
demand, then the same calculation is carried out for the next period. If the
inventory is insufficient then delivery (order receipt) is required.
The process is simply shown in Figure 12.3.
Initial stock + Receipts – Demand = Closing stock
If closing stock is above zero (or safety stock) repeat calculation for next
‘time bucket’. If closing stock is below zero (or safety stock) then create
more receipts by ordering more. This then causes extra supply for orders
and demand for that component.
This netting off process is carried out for all periods of the final process
first, and then it is repeated for the supplying level (components or
assemblies) if there is one.
The result is a list (or a series of lists) of what has to be done by when;
a list of when to place and receive purchase orders and, where appropriate,
Figure 12.3 MRP logic

Final despatched combination
Components
Final despatched combination
Sub-assembly
Assembly
Components
MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
203
a manufacturing ‘work to’ programme for each production area (called
‘manufacturing plans’ in Figure 12.2).
Bill of materials
Classic stock control deals with each item individually, independent of all
others. However, for most inventory, the usage of one item is linked to that
of others, e.g. printer cartridges and paper. Inventory controllers need a
way to acknowledge this link and to save the work of two forecasts where
one will suffice (see Table 12.1). This can be done using an inventory bill of
materials.
Traditionally, a bill of materials (BOM) is the list of parts, ingredients or
materials needed to produce or assemble the required end product. The bill
of materials for a product is not simply a parts list. It contains more
information. Most products are packaged and the box, packaging material,
pallet and even the documentation is part of the full BOM. The BOM can
also include essential tooling for production. This is a useful way of
planning for all the resources necessary for the process.
In manufacturing, an assembly is made up of components. If they are all
bought out and given to an operator to assemble and pack, then the BOM
Figure 12.4 Balanced demand – bill of materials
Figure 12.5 Structured demand – bill of materials

204
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
is as shown in Figure 12.4. This is a flat BOM. If the assembly and packing
are separate, then the BOM is as shown in Figure 12.5. In a supply chain
this would correspond to different suppliers of items which are to be sold
together in the end.
Time delays between processes require recording and therefore add levels
on to the BOM.
Planning the structure of supply
Example
In many situations there is a balance between the usage of different
items. For example, DIY stores know that someone fitting a door
hinge will probably need screws. They will either have the screws
added to the pack, or remind the purchaser that they are needed.
Many activities result in the use of a variety of items, and if this usage is a
fixed ratio, or even if the ratio of usages is consistent on average, then the
ratio can be expressed in a loose ‘bill of materials’ .This could be used by
a supplier providing a range of items to major customers. If the causes of
use are understood, a planning (statistical) BOM can be created even
though there is no manufacture involved. The use of this tool cuts down the
amount of forecasting, since one forecast will provide the information for all
the items included in the BOM.
Find similarity in demand, then use it.
The inventory control BOM usually consists of two levels, the same as a JIT
manufacturing bill. The top level is the demand profile for the collection of
stock items. The level below is the dependent demand for each of the item
codes. Since the relative usage rates are not entirely fixed, the bill has to be
monitored and corrected according to the usage changes of the ratios. This
situation is very similar to a manufacturer where there is major variation in
process yield or there is product scrap.
The demand for each item within the statistical BOM will vary for
individual customer orders. This means that actual safety stock of each item
will consist of two components:
 safety stock against the error in the overall forecast
 individual line safety stock against the variances in the demand BOM.

MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
205
In practice, the statistical BOM is an excellent and underutilized method
for distributors to give enhanced service where customers buy a range of
items.
Master planning
Master scheduling
Improvements over classic stock control can also be made by considering
exactly when the demand will occur.
Example
If there is a known demand for fifty this week, a hundred next week
and sixty the week after, a knowledgeable traditional controller could
work out the average demand as seventy per week with an MAD of
twenty and then decide on the appropriate safety stock. A different
approach would be to identify the demand in each week as fifty, a
hundred and sixty and arrange supply accordingly.
To do this requires a new type of record. Instead of the normal record
of what has been issued each week, the requirement is for a list of what
will be issued each week, showing individual weeks (or days) into the
future. This is a master schedule. The result of using a master schedule
instead of a review level is that the inventory is kept lower and large
fluctuations in demand can be accommodated. There is still the option
to keep some safety stock, calculated from the inaccuracy of the
schedule each week.
The master scheduling process for receiving orders converts the
existing demand forecast into firm customer demand by placing the
order on the master schedule. This is a management function, not a
clerical function. The master scheduler is responsible for arranging
customer demands into an achievable plan. Normally, particularly out-
side the demand lead times, the forecast quantity will be greater than
the total quantity ordered for each time period (a day or a week).
However, if orders are received which exceed the forecast, decisions are
required to deal with this.

206
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Example
If the forecast is a hundred per week and the first order is for seventy
in the first week, then it is no problem. If a second order is received for
thirty for the first week it can also be supplied. However, if a third order
is received for fifty for that week, this will have to be met from the
forecast in the second week unless it is convenient to change the
schedule.
The logic of allocation is, therefore, that the forecast is filled up by real
customer orders to the forecast level each week. However, if the customers
require more, then the master scheduler has to decide whether to:
 provide later delivery or part shipment to the customer
 reallocate goods already promised to another customer
 overload the forecast and cause panic buying and inefficiency.
The last option is commonly used but should be avoided since it upsets
supplier relations. There is sometimes the option of increasing capacity by
overtime, but the material supply chain may not be able to react to short-
term schedule changes.
The master plan in its simplest form is a list of how many of each item the
company is intending to supply to the customers each week (or each day for
JIT business) – see Table 12.3.
Master planning takes the forecast and plans to supply parts to meet this
demand at the right time. In the more detailed master plan (Table 12.4) the
scheduled receipts are the delivery date of current firm outstanding supply
orders, and the stock on hand is the inventory which results if no action is
taken. The first three columns show the current situation. The remaining
Table 12.3
Master schedule
Item
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Product 1
1000
500
2300
600
1300
1300
Product 2
300
150
450
300
350
600
Product 3
3000
2000
3000
3000
3000
3000
Product 4
1500
~
~
~
~
~
Product 5
~
~
~
~
~
~
Product 6
~
~
~
~
~
~

MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
207
three show what has to be done to meet the forecast demand (i.e. plan in
new supply).
Set up supply using projected available.
The planned order receipts are calculated to minimize stock and, at the
same time, give the information necessary to supply forecast. The resultant
stock level is shown in the next column headed ‘Projected available’, i.e. the
stock levels resulting from these actions. With a four-week supply lead time,
the order release (last column) has to precede the order receipt by four
weeks. If a planned order release occurs in the current week, then an order
has to be placed. Alternatively the planned order release column is used as
the time phased gross demand for the items on the next level down on the
BOM, or as a supply schedule for purchasing.
Placing the order results in the order quantity being deducted from the
planned order release and the ‘planned order receipt’ being transferred to a
scheduled receipt. If a safety stock is appropriate instead of letting stock go
down to zero, then the stock on hand can trigger a planned order receipt at
the safety stock level instead of negative stock. A safety stock of 1000 would
mean that stock would be too low by the end of week 5 (Table 12.4). The
planned order receipt and release would therefore be required a week
earlier.
Apply it to customers using available to promise.
Table 12.4
Planned supply – planned order release
Week
Forecast
Scheduled
receipts
(a)
Stock
on hand
Planned
order
receipts
Projected
available
Planned
order
release (b)
Current
500
500
0
1
3000
5000
2500
2500
0
2
4000
5000
3500
3500
5000
3
2000
1500
1500
0
4
2000
5000
4500
4500
5000
5
4000
500
500
5000
6
3000
–2500
5000
2500
0
7
1000
–3500
1500
0
8
3000
–6500
5000
3500
0
9
4000
–10 500
5000
4500
0
10
2000
–12 500
2500
Note: Assumes a fixed batch size of 5000 and a supply lead time of four weeks.

208
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Delivery promising
The master plan shows what is available for customers and
when.
When the customer orders are received, the forecast quantities should be
available. The calculation of projected available and planned order release
enables the supply to be planned. This calculation accepts the forecast and
works out what supply is required to meet it. The amount of the item
remaining to fulfil outstanding demand can be calculated in a similar way
Figure 12.6 Control of supply and demand

MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
209
by looking at the actual orders instead of the forecast. The allocation of the
projected available stock to real orders enables customer delivery times to
be estimated using the MRP logic. This process is shown in Figure 12.6.
Creating an order book according to Table 12.4 gives the availability
shown in Table 12.5. This shows the actual customer demand at the present
moment but orders are constantly being received, so the situation may well
change within a few minutes. The scheduled receipts and the planned order
receipt are the values calculated from the projected available stock shown in
Figure 12.6. The stock on hand and the available to promise columns are
calculated from the real customer demand column.
Example
In week 1 there are 5000 received and 2600 issued to customers. The
stock which was originally 500 is therefore 2900 by the end of that
week, and these could be used to fulfil customer demand. However in
week 3 the available to promise is down to 100, and the supply lead
time is four weeks. If more than 100 out of the 2900 are issued in
week 1, then there will be a shortage in week 3. The delivery promise
for quantities up to 100 can therefore be in the current week; the
delivery promise for up to 1900 can be week 4, and greater quantities
can be promised either up to a maximum of the forecast or in excess
of the cumulative forecast, as long as the forecast is changed to
match the demand.
Table 12.5
Available to promise
Delivery
promising
Customer
orders
Scheduled
receipts
Stock
on hand
Planned
order
receipts
Available
to promise
Planned
order
release
Current stock
500
1
2600
5000
2900
2900
2
6600
5000
1300
1300
3
1200
100
100
4
3200
5000
1900
1900
5000
5
1200
700
700
5000
6
600
100
5000
5100
7
4000
–3900
1100
8
100
–4000
5000
6000
9
–4000
5000
11 000
10
–4000
11 000

210
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
This change has to take account of the fact that the large demand is
probably part of the forecast and therefore the forecast for other weeks will
need to be reduced.
The two sectors – projected available and available to promise – ensure
that customer demand is managed in line with supply. It avoids difficulties
which result from accepting orders on a fixed or short lead time which then
cause emergency sourcing or failing to provide delivery on time to other
customers.
Batch sizes
The master schedule is an excellent tool for managing and monitoring
stocks, especially where there is variable demand which can be estimated.
It enables lower stock to be held than can be achieved by statistical stock-
centred methods. It also links in very well with supplier scheduling. Getting
the best out of master planning does require more effort because of the
regular reviews and reforecasting. However, in a pure stock environment, it
is only necessary to use MRP on the A class items and items where the
demand is understandable and variable. The triggering of MRP by this
schedule enables companies to forecast for whole ranges of stock with a
single evaluation and give a balance of stock for customers who require co-
ordinated supply.
(In classic MRP, a number of batch rules have been developed as many
of these are based on ‘economic batch sizes’, which produce batch
quantities which are unbalanced and too large for customer order
requirements.)
The same logic can be used for MRP order quantities as for normal stock
control. The three main alternatives are:
 lot for lot
 fixed batch size
 period cover.
Lot for lot is the first choice because it leads to a minimum of inventory.
Example
The rule is to bring in the balance required in each time period. In
Table 12.4 the scheduled receipts for weeks 1, 2 and 3 would have
been 2500, (3000 forecast demand less the 500 stock) 4000 and
2000, and the projected on hand would always be zero.

MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
211
This gives a variable supply quantity which is inconvenient is some
circumstances.
Fixed batch sizes are used widely to illustrate MRP. They are overused in
practice since changes in demand level should be reflected in changes in
order quantities. Fixed batch sizes are convenient to use but are only
essential where there is a restriction in vessel size (distribution or
manufacturing). Batch sizes based on price breaks are the result of too
simplistic an approach to costing.
Choose batch sizes to minimize work and inventory.
Period cover is a way of taking the demand for the next few periods and
batching it up. It is the same as lot for lot but with several time periods
added together. Again the order quantity is variable, and the stock level is
significantly higher. This technique reduces the number of orders and
increases their size at the expense of higher inventory. The application is
therefore to C class items where this is the most beneficial option.
Key points
 Look for structure in demand patterns.
 Working with dependent demand keeps inventory low.
 MRP is a simple way to trigger future supply orders – especially
where order levels vary.
 Using ‘available to promise’ gives more accurate delivery dates.
 Batch sizes have to be defined using rules which minimize total
costs and workload.

13
The future – inventory and logistics
 Viewing the full inventory and distribution picture
 Continuing development – the lean approach
 The basis – getting the records right
 Structuring inventory at each level
 The role of consignment stocks
 Structuring the distribution chain
 Location and depth of inventory
 Replenishment systems – fair shares & DRP
 Summary
The basis of the lean supply chain
Extending inventory management
The science of inventory management has gradually developed, not
because the theories have leapt forward, but because requirements change.
No longer is inventory management a single problem but it is integrated
into the whole of logistics of supply. The manager is now co-ordinating
 warehouse operations
 inventory control
 distribution
 suppliers
 customer operations
and attempting to optimize the profit for the supply chain rather than just
keep delivery on time up and inventory down.
However, the targets are still the same but in a wider context:
 better customer service
 lower inventory
 decreased operating costs,

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
213
but now the focus is on the whole supply being lean, not on the individual
echelon.
The development in information technology (IT) communications
enables information to be gathered and exchanged immediately and
accurately, and makes the information available to everyone. However, the
challenge is now:
 collecting data accurately
 being willing to share it along the supply chain
 understanding how to use it most beneficially
 working for the good of the supply chain and not for political gain.
The techniques discussed in previous chapters are the basic methods to be
used in each step of this chain. They then have to be put together to make
the chain effective and competitive.
Lean supply
The concept of lean supply concentrates on the very essence of good
inventory management:
 customer focus – exceeding the customers’ expectations
 aim for perfection – not just better than the competition
 added value – only carry out activities which directly benefit the
customer
 flow – so that inventory does not stop, it continues from one stage to
the next
 unit movement – small batches (e.g. kanbans) moved frequently
 simplicity – in operation so that things are obvious and do not go
wrong
 individual responsibility – at operator level for developing more
effective operation
 integrated design approach – with additional features for the customer
and ease of manufacture at low cost
 quality – always create the correct quality first time.
Use lean supply ideas to see how to develop inventory control
and logistics.
Although there are many principles here, they are all interlinked and
working on one is supported by working on another. Improvement is a
circular process of tightening up one area then moving on to the next and
eventually back again to the original as it has become the weakest area

214
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
again. When companies change to a lean attitude there are a lot of minor
changes which add up to major developments. These improvements are
made continuously, so the operation gets better and better.
Lean supply involves the whole business from purchasing through to
dispatch. The achievement of good flow of supply requires this full
participation. Purchasing has to ensure that goods are delivered on time,
they are fit for purpose and labelled and packaged correctly and
consistently. A design department has to ensure that a small number of
products satisfy a wide range of customers and are composed of as small a
number of components as possible. They should also ensure that
components and modules satisfy the widest range of products. What is more
the lean approach causes a continuous reassessment of the design, taking
into account the change in customers’ values and the needs to rationalize
production processes and components.
The quality department does not inspect; it sets up the processes which
either avoid mistakes occurring or enable the work to be checked as it is
carried out. Purchasing is not concerned with lowest unit price of
purchases, but is involved with minimizing the total cost to the customer
and maximizing the value to the customer. Manufacturing need to focus on
supporting customer requirement and not on throughput.
The break with traditional concepts is that improvement is part of normal
work for everyone. The gradual development of the operations is led by the
people carrying out the processes – the management play a supportive and
guidance role rather than being the promoters of change.
The foundations of lean supply lie in the development of JIT processes
described earlier in this book. Lean supply takes this concept wider so that
greater benefits are gradually accrued.
Information accuracy
More accurate records will reduce inventory holding.
All the work on inventory management will come to nothing if the base
information is not correct. There are many companies where the quality of
the information on the system is very poor. If the same quality standards
were applied to products, then these organizations would quickly be out of
business. Part of the development of better inventory control is therefore to
ensure that the information on the formal system is
 real time
 accurate.

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
215
Computer systems are accurate, so it is a matter of making failsafe the
information systems and making people believe that it can be correct.
Inaccurate records have a high cost arising from continuously checking to
see if items are there and holding extra inventory to avoid stockouts, not to
mention the obvious cost when customers cannot have the items promised
to them. It is another challenge to get stock records right. And this goes
hand in hand with the development of inventory control.
Control methods
The achievement of tighter targets has largely been the result of better
communication and simple controls. Customer pressure has improved
delivery performance, and financial pressure has decreased operating
costs.
The key tools have been the exception reports of ‘these stocks are too
low’ and ‘these stocks are too high’, which keep the stock broadly correct so
long as orders are placed at approximately the right time. The use of ABC
analysis, dynamic review levels, forecasting techniques and JIT supply
enables inventories to be improved significantly. Effective implementation
of these techniques has been slow because conditions did not encourage it.
In the past, supply lead time was unreliable so that review level calculations
could not be relied upon. Now that suppliers are expected to guarantee
reliable delivery the calculations give the correct results and there is no need
to add a bit extra (lead time, inventory, etc). The techniques described in
previous chapters have proved invaluable in meeting the demands of the
new market environment. Once a company is operating these successfully
it is ready to contribute to the logistic effectiveness of the supply chain.
There are other techniques, built into some advanced software, which are
waiting to be used more widely, and more advanced inventory control
techniques will show significant advantages for the user. (It has been known
for decades that Newton’s Law of gravity is not quite right, and Einstein’s
theory of relativity is nearer the truth, but Newton’s Law is good enough for
those of us who are not space travellers or who move below the speed of
light. Similarly in inventory control, the review level calculations are not
exactly correct and delivery frequency does affect the safety stock.)
Aim to get it nearly correct now rather than perfect sometime
in the future.
Better formulae are readily available, but from observation, stocks are so far
out from the ideal that a small amendment to the safety stock level is not

216
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
going to alter the real inventory. Similarly Gaussian statistics, simple
availability calculations and independent demands are all concepts which
are questionable theoretically, but which work in practice.
More advanced forecasting methods provide better answers when the
future can be relied upon to mirror history (see Chapter 11). Crude tools
like ABC analysis could be replaced by tools which take into account the
potential different stock policies for high-value slow movers and low-value
fast movers. Or ABC could be developed into a differential value analysis,
which gives an individual class for each item code and optimizes every
inventory line. This evaluation will take place when companies have
exhausted the current methods and realize that they can benefit.
Consignment stock (consignment inventory)
A popular technique in the supply chain is the creation of consignment
inventory. This can be defined as ‘Inventory owned by a supplier at the
customer’s site’. (There are a variety of similar arrangements to this, but the
essential feature is that the inventory is near the customer and owned by the
supplier.) On the face of it there seems to be great benefit. Sales people like
it because:
 there is effectively a captured market
 the customer should not have shortages
 supply can be slow and regular to stock instead of short lead time to
customer order.
Customers like consignment stock because they can have:
 immediate availability
 supply without problems
 ability to change requirements at will
 less administration when ordering.
However, consignment stocks are a bad thing. By reviewing the situation
from a distance, it can be seen that a consignment stock will:
 require the supplier to have an extra stores stock
 have inventory in the stores which is relatively slow moving
 take the pressure off efficient supply
 transfer the responsibility for the inventory from customer to supplier.

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
217
Looking at these points in turn, the first arises because the consignment is
stock in a remote location and, therefore, not available to other customers.
There may be duplication of stock between the supplier’s own stores
feeding the consignment and the consignment inventory itself.
The second point is that a smaller stores has throughput because the
MAD for small throughput is relatively large (decreases by the square root
of the volume). Therefore the consignment will have a surfeit of stock, even
if it is controlled very well. (The chances are that the inventory level is either
set very high by the supplier or agreed with the customer at an inflated
level.)
If the supply chain with the consignment is in competition with one
without, then the one without will have lower cost, and therefore a
competitive advantage. The consignment stock is a palliative to poor
planning: it may however be a short term (few months) solution to cover a
specific problem.
There are a few simple rules that should be used when applying
consignments:
 Do not set stock levels; set availability targets instead.
 Review variety of inventory and levels regularly (every few weeks).
 Use consignments only for a few fast-moving item types.
 Arrange who is charged with inventory left over through change of
design, demand pattern and any other non-moving inventory.
 Allow consignment to be available for other users if necessary.
 Have a formal agreement for a limited period of time.
Consignment is only a temporary fix.
Logistics
Objectives of logistics
Logistics management presents new challenges to the inventory manager,
who has to maintain and balance distributed stocks, additional inventories,
manufacturers’ work in progress, supply partnerships, and other new
dimensions, including distribution costs. The need for this integration
results from the changes in market structure given in Figure 13.1.
The development of supply chain strategy means that stock controllers
from suppliers and customers should be sharing information and inventory
in order to optimize the operation of the supply chain.

218
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Management of logistics is a simple extension of inventory management,
characterized by the same basic underlying themes. The most successful
supply chains are:
 integrated
 consistent
 fast moving (short lead time)
 service oriented
 customer specific.
Optimize the complete inventory structure, not each stage.
Supply chain structure
The management of a supply chain requires inventory to be held in
different locations, even in different operating companies. The inventory
controller can then optimize the stock across many locations. The structure
of the supply chain can be altered to meet the needs of the market, and the
overall balance between availability, stock investment and operating cost
can be optimized by selecting the number of stages (echelons) in the supply
chain and the number of stock sites in each echelon.
This can be established most simply by modelling the cost balance:
generally it is more economical to hold inventory as near to the start of the
supply chain as can be allowed by the demand lead time. Once the
distribution structure has been decided, the proportion of stock held at
each inventory level has to be calculated, as shown in Table 13.1.
Figure 13.1 Changes in the distribution environment

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
219
The compensating factor in deciding where to hold stock is the
distribution cost. In general, it is considered that:
 fast delivery costs more
 the greater the distance, the greater the cost
 the smaller the load, the higher, relatively, is the distribution cost.
However, there are other considerations to make, including the
following:
 Regular shipments cost less than one-offs.
 Distribution costs are largely loading and unloading, mainly independ-
ent of distance.
 Consolidation saves cost and is easier for small, regular deliveries.
 Small loads need smaller transport and facilities which are cheaper.
The complexity arising from these latter considerations makes transport
costing difficult. When considering JIT supply (Chapter 4) one of the
principles discussed was continuous improvement (kaizen). This approach
has to be used when reducing distribution costs and, therefore, inventory.
However, to have a significant effect on the cost balance, bold leaps have to
be made in distribution structure. The size and frequency of shipment have
to be altered dramatically. This usually means a change in means of
transport to provide smaller units faster. The savings in inventory and
warehousing costs should be greater than any marginal increase in
distribution costs.
The correct balance of stockholding and the location of the stock are
different for each stock line, depending on their usage rates and values.
Low-value, high-usage items are better nearer the point of use. High-value
items with occasional usage can be held centrally.
Table 13.1
Supply chain inventory options
All stocks in a single central warehouse
Stock all held by end user or local stores
Minimum investment in stock
Items are available more rapidly
Accurate forecasting
Sensitive to local conditions
Higher demand rate
Duplication of stockholding
Reduced safety stocks
Poorer control
Low warehousing costs
Higher inventory investment
Better formal physical control
Greater risk of obsolescence.

220
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The whole inventory system can be considered as a pipeline for supplying
the fluid ‘stock’ to the point of sale (or use). The input to the pipeline is a
continuous (scheduled) flow. For the high-usage items the pipeline can
continue to the point of use. For low-usage items the movement includes a
reservoir, a central stores from which the items are dispensed as required.
This analogy highlights some interesting aspects of the supply chain, and
poses the questions:
 Should the system required be a stock control system or should it be a
supply flow system?
 Which parts of the supply chain are best served by scheduled supply and
which by batch ordering?
 If stocks are held at one echelon, do they need to be held at others as
well?
For fast-moving goods, the central warehouse can act as a reservoir
replenishing the local storage tanks. It is better if the central store is used
purely as a transhipment point for these items. The pipeline is then connected
to the distributed stocks. The central function becomes stock management
co-ordinating ordering and supply, and ensuring consistent delivery.
Slow-moving items can all be held at the central stores, as long as there
is the means to withdraw them and transfer them to the final customer
within an acceptable time. This reduces the overall stockholding of these
items. The resultant stock is structured with each stock-keeping unit (SKU)
having a specified stock level based on its usage and value.
Multi-location supply chains are used commonly in some industries.
Using an integrated stock information system, duplication and proliferation
of stocks can be avoided. Distribution warehouses in different localities
should be treated as a single level where all stock is considered as holdings
of a single store apart from the safety stocks. The aim is to keep the
appropriate amount at each location and if supply from the originator or
manufacturer is rapid, then a central stock location can be avoided, with a
corresponding reduction in stock. Careful supervision of delivery time is
necessary to avoid duplication of stockholding at several locations.
The degree to which a company can take advantage of these techniques
is limited by their organization and systems. Often it is necessary to make
improvements as a two-stage process:
1 Introduce the ‘stock to stock’ system to get the control.
2 When control is good, reduce the stock at each stage in the system by
improving the inventory control techniques.

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
221
Organizational control
For control of inventory in the distribution chain, the costs have to be
minimized and service maximized. Distribution systems are neither ‘pull’
nor ‘push’ methods of stock control. Such methods imply that either
distribution (pull) or manufacturing (push) are entirely responsible for the
organization of distributed inventory. Modern techniques centre around
an
 accessible database of information
 realistic schedules
 replenishment of distribution sites based on requirements, lead times
and item availability.
Start from minimizing the total cost, then work out the
nearest practical solution.
If the supply chain is to be operated most efficiently, then there has to be
some co-ordination and organization for the whole chain. This will
generally require:
 good information fed back from all the distributed stores (it helps to
have integrated systems)
 central decision-making of the allocation of stock.
This is a statistical reality. Assessment of demand is more accurate for the
total demand than for individual warehouses, since the larger volume has a
smaller MAD. (The MAD only increases as the square root of the volume.)
This means that historical forecasting is most accurate when carried out by
a central planner. However, if a demand pattern changes (new large
customer, loss of contract, etc.) then the local knowledge of these events
needs to be included in the forecast (see Chapter 9).
The techniques commonly used for managing the distribution channel
are basically:
 fair shares (for allocating available stock)
 distribution requirements planning (DRP) ( for planning supply).
Both the fair shares and DRP techniques are concerned with the quantity
of stock to be shipped through the distribution network.

222
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Distributed inventory
For an inventory planner controlling stock in several regions, the issues to
resolve are:
1 Where the stock is to be held.
2 What level of stock to hold in each region.
3 How to maintain supply at the lowest cost.
The first question is answered by working out the general distribution and
inventory cost balance from the factors just discussed in the first section in
this chapter. The second issue is easily resolved using the classic inventory
management approach described in Chapter 7. The third issue is to ensure
that the transfers are carried out most economically within the framework
arranged by (1) and (2). This is an optimization process. The cost of
providing items at a remote warehouse depends largely on two factors:
 the item cost
 the distribution cost.
There is a unique cost for each item at each site, and SKUs provide the
information required to evaluate distribution needs. The stock in some
distributed warehouses is likely to be larger than necessary, particularly if
they are the delivery points for outside supply, while others require
supplying with stock to meet demand. Stock therefore has to be
redistributed at the least cost from one location to another at the same
echelon of the distribution network. If the costs of distribution between
each of the stores is known, then the total costs can be optimized. This is
particularly important where transport is expensive, or where there are
significant differences in transport costs, as found in a multinational supply
operation.
Fair shares
Fair shares analysis approaches the regional stock issue as an inventory
control problem, assuming that distribution costs are not the prime
concern.
The purpose of fair shares analysis is to distribute stock through the
supply chain to alternative distributed storage. Stock is not held at a central
warehouse but distributed to regional stores nearer to the customer
demand. An implicit assumption is that the supply to the network can be

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
223
accomplished by short lead time orders. If the lead time is longer, the
planning aspects of DRP have to be used.
When stock is delivered into a distributed stores network, it has to be
reallocated to the various stores in the most equitable manner. The sensible
approach is to cover priorities first and then share out the rest to meet
future demand. Fair shares analysis is a method for achieving this using a
standard procedure. The logical process is to identify the safety stocks in the
supplying warehouse and in the other warehouses, and then to allocate the
total available stock to meet the requirements in proportion to the demand
rate.
The fair shares allocation of stock normally distributes stock in the
following sequence:
1 Customer back orders unsatisfied.
2 Expected demand within supply lead time.
3 Safety stock at distributed stores.
4 Safety stock if required at supplying warehouse.
5 Allocation of remaining stock in proportion to demand rate.
6 Redistribution where a stores stock exceeds its share.
If stock is insufficient to meet the full requirement at any stage, it is
allocated logic. The actual stock transfers used to achieve this distribution
can be optimized through the transport algorithm. A simple example of the
use of the fair shares logic is shown in Tables 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4.
A manufacturer sells items in batches of 400 to a central supply
warehouse. This warehouse holds some safety stock, but distributes the
items out to three regional stores. Estimates for the usage at the stores are
given in Table 13.2 together with the safety stocks. If a delivery of 400
arrives from the manufacturer just at the start of week 1, the total stock
available is 400 plus 200 central stock plus 280 at the regional stores
(= 880). Table 13.3 shows the lead times, and develops the supply chain
Table 13.2
Stock and forecast demand
Safety
stock
Current
stock
Week
1
Week
2
Week
3
Week
4
Week
5
Week
6
North stores
20
70
50
40
70
20
50
50
South stores
46
200
100
140
60
110
150
150
West stores
12
10
20
30
0
50
20
20
Total
78
280
170
130
130
180
220
220
Supply warehouse
37
200

224
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
calculation. There are no back orders, so the first allocation of stock is to
cover regional demand in the lead time (185), then regional stores safety
stocks (seventy-eight), then supply warehouse safety stocks (thirty-seven).
Deducting these from the total available leaves 580 items to be split up
across the regional stores. This can be done either by netting off the
individual forecasts until the stock is exhausted (where these are accurate
and contain real orders). Alternatively the average week’s cover can be
calculated. The total demand is 187 per week, so 580 will last 3.10 weeks
on average. Multiplying the demand by 3.10 gives the fair share for each
store. This is shown in Table 13.4.
Table 13.3
Fair shares priority allocation
Location
Average demand
Lead time (wks)
Demand in lead time
North stores
46
1.2
56
South stores
118
1.0
119
West stores
23
0.4
10
Total
187
4.0
185
Stock
Balance
Current stock
280
Supply warehouse stock
200
Current delivery
400
Total
880
880
Shortages
0
Demand in lead time
185
695
Stores safety stock
78
617
Warehouse safety stock
37
580
Table 13.4
Fair shares apportionment of stock1
Stores
3.1
weeks’
demand
Demand
in lead
time
Safety
stock
Current
stock
Delivery
required
Total
stock
North stores
143
56
20
70
149
219
South stores
366
119
46
200
331
531
West stores
71
10
12
10
83
93
Total
580
185
78
280
563
843
Supply warehouse
37
600
–563
Note: 1Number of weeks’ cover = 580/187 = 3.10 weeks.

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
225
Each store is then given a fair share consisting of:
Any customer back orders + Demand in the lead time
+ Safety stock + 3.10 weeks’ demand – Current stock.
This is also shown in Table 13.4. All the stock and delivery to the supply
warehouse has been allocated, apart from the safety stock (thirty-seven). If
one regional store already had had sufficient, then either the excess can be
transferred, or that regional store (and its stock) can be excluded from the
analysis and a fair share worked out among the others.
Distribution requirements planning
Distribution requirements planning provides planners with a complete
forward schedule for all dispatches, arranged by date order by warehouse.
Each store at the demand end of the supply chain generates a forecast for
demand which is used to identify the orders they are likely to place on their
supply warehouse (supply). The forecast is for demand well in advance of
the normal replenishment lead times. Since the supply is planned to meet
the requirement well ahead, the demand rate may have changed so the
resultant replenishment delivery may be too early or late by the time
demand is met.
The delivery requirements calculated by the netting logic of DRP show
the latest shipping dates associated with each warehouse requirement (see
Figure 13.1). Distribution requirements planning is an extension of the
MRP process for distributed warehouses. The netting logic used for DRP is
exactly the same as for MRP (see Chapter 12, section on MRP logic):
 The future requirement is split into time periods of a week or a day.
 The expected demand each time period is identified.
 Starting with the current period, the demand is netted off against the
available stock.
 If the remaining stock is above the safety stock then this quantity is
carried forward to the next time period and the calculation is repeated.
 If the available stock is less than the safety stock, then a receipt is
required. The quantity requested depends on the batch rules being
used.
 The request generates a supply order a lead time earlier. (The lead time
corresponds to the picking, packing, transfer and receiving time.)
By using DRP, supply planners can receive a complete forward schedule for
all dispatches, arranged by date and by warehouse. Transport must be made

226
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
to fit the schedule. Distribution requirements planning builds on that master
scheduling, and looks at demand far past the normal lead time. The purpose
of DRP is to produce a time-phased shipping requirement for the suppliers.
Distribution requirements planning is a method for planning the
replenishment for the distribution network. The logic closely follows that of
MRP. Like MRP the supply chain is planned by backward scheduling from
the customer. This requires the establishment of fixed supply lead times and
batch quantities. If this is organized by the manufacturer, the batch size can
be large and the intervals of distribution correspondingly long. This, of
course, adds stock throughout the supply chain and so the use of a just in time
approach with very short lead times is a great advantage.
An example is shown in Table 13.5. In this table the items are distributed
from a supply warehouse to three regional stores. The stores have given their
estimates of demand (shown as ‘forecast’) and from these the stock and
demand pattern needed to keep the ‘projected on hand’ positive are given in
the‘Stock’ and ‘Supply’ rows. The item is distributed in batches of 100 in this
case. (This is the same calculation as for ‘projected on hand’ and ‘planned
receipts’ for MRP in Chapter 12.)
There is a lead time of one week for delivery to the north and south stores
from the supply warehouse. This is caused by the order processing, picking
and transport: delivery is very fast to the west stores. The dispatches from the
supply warehouse required to meet this are given in the lower half of the
table, taking into account the week offset in the two cases. If the supply
Table 13.5
Example of distribution requirements planning
Current
Wk1
Wk2
Wk3
Wk4
Wk5
Wk6
North stores
Forecast
50
40
70
20
50
50
Stock
70
20
80
10
90
40
90
Supply
100
100
100
South stores
Forecast
100
140
60
110
150
150
Stock
200
100
60
0
90
40
90
Supply
100
200
100
200
West stores
Forecast
20
30
0
50
20
20
Stock
10
90
60
60
10
90
70
Supply
100
100
Supply warehouse
Demand upon
North stores
100
0
100
0
100
?
supply warehouse
South stores
100
0
200
100
200
?
West stores
100
0
0
0
100
0
Total
300
0
300
100
400
0
Stock balance
200
300
300
0
300
300
300
Deliveries
400
400
400

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
227
warehouse receives the goods in batches of 400, the required delivery
schedule can be worked out as in the ‘Deliveries’ line. The resultant stock at
the central warehouse is also shown. Once demand at this supply echelon has
been determined, the demand on manufacturing can be placed into the
master schedule. Again a supply lead time has to be allowed for the
distribution process.
Distribution requirements planning is far simpler than fair shares and is
easier to manage. An important practical difference between DRP and fair
shares is that DRP relies on lot-sized quantities with pre-scheduled dispatch
times. In DRP there is normally a resultant stock caused by the batch sizes, as
illustrated in Table 13.5.
Some pitfalls which have to be avoided when using DRP rather than fair
shares are:
 DRP is less flexible.
 It focuses on each site rather than the total system.
 Its sole concern is the balance of forecast and available stock, with little
reference to customer service.
 It fixes and depends on the supply performance.
The technique is relatively rigid, since the quantities must be sent on the days
scheduled. In this sense it is limited in value for transportation planners
(transport must be made to fit the schedule). With DRP, quantities shown are
planned, with the implication that stock is not usually currently available.
Consequently, changes to shipment schedules have to be long term rather
than immediate. There is little possibility of responding to shortages since the
quantities shown are planned to be available, not currently available.
Distribution requirements planning is best suited to situations of relatively
steady demand: it is most successful where fixed delivery quantities are
physically necessary (such as container loads).
Fair shares can be made to work in conjunction with DRP by making the
best allocation of the shipments arriving into the network.
Wherever possible, the manufacturing and distribution systems should be
synchronized, thus reducing the amount of inventory carried throughout the
system. This could be achieved in the example shown in Table 13.5.
The interface between the computed lot-size requirements and the master
schedule is the gross requirement from the supply warehouse, taking into
account any finished goods stock held by the manufacturer. In practice, the
DRP gross requirement can be exceeded by the master schedule and
products can be planned in advance of the DRP schedule dates if it is
beneficial for manufacturing planning and efficiency.

228
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The distribution quantities calculated by the forecasting techniques and
apportioned by fair shares often have to be adjusted because of other
influences. The total shipment may have to be phased because of space
limitation in a particular stores. The distribution quantities could well be
rounded to the nearest pack size, or altered to take advantage of a
distributor’s cost structure.
Traditionally forecast demand would be made at the product level.
Distribution requirements planning allows the forecast to be conducted at
the SKU level. A consequence of this is the need to aggregate the local
forecasts to generate forecast demand for each product and, ultimately, for
product families.
It will have been observed from the example that DRP results in
considerable unevenness of the gross requirements. This is caused by the
fixed lot sizes. If the lot size were smaller, this effect would be minimized, but
the number of deliveries would be increased.
Review
The development of inventory management is a dynamic activity, with new
approaches being made, techniques being refined and new challenges being
met. Successful inventory management is a balance between the use of basic
techniques which are easy to use and give reasonable results, and
sophisticated techniques which can give better control if they are used
properly. Modern inventory managers have the opportunity to use better and
more effective controls.
It is imperative that the challenges are met, since continuing competitive-
ness is based on ever-improving customer service and ever-reducing
inventory costs. The approaches discussed in this book give companies major
improvements in their efficiency across all types of business. Understanding
the full implications and applications is a gradual process, but worth the
effort because of the tremendous benefits.
The science of inventory management as developed in this book has to be
carried out by an organized, aware and dedicated artist. The manager has to
focus on the simple basic requirements of creating the most profit for the
organization through the best customer service. This means:
 excellent forecasting
 low inventory value
 small operating costs.
The direction is towards perfect service, no costs and no inventory. To
manage this it is essential to have operating controls and targets – monitoring

THE FUTURE – INVENTORY AND LOGISTICS
229
of current performance and tighter targets (which are achievable and agreed
with those required to reach them).
There is also the balance between long-term and short-term requirements.
Paying extra delivery costs to help the customer may be good for relations. As
a one-off it is fine, but as a frequent activity it can damage the viability of the
business. The inventory controller has always to look simultaneously at the
long-term and short-term detailed picture and overall plan. By steering a
consistent course, based on a set of operating principles, work is reduced and
effectiveness increased.
As better control is introduced and the performance improves in one area,
so it can be integrated with other activities and new challenges adopted.
Take a simple example of a manufacturer that used to hold raw materials
inventory and then supply the finished items into a warehouse from where it
was distributed to regional stores. Each stage of the process was struggling to
gain good control in its own separate way. (Some people are still at base 1 and
wrestling with these challenges.) There is a natural process of evolution from
this setup:
1 Gain control over manufacturing (using MRP for example).
2 Add the finished warehouse stock to the manufacturing control process
(form materials management activity).
3 Include distribution costs in the cost balance.
4 Form partnerships with suppliers to avoid duplicating the raw material
stockholding.
5 Introduce flow through the business and work on the supply pipeline to
eliminate work in progress and stores inventory.
6 Integrate the distributed regional stores into the inventory management
system.
7 Optimize inventory along the supply chain.
8 Appoint supply chain management to optimize supply chain costs.
9 Extend the integrated management throughout all stages of the supply
pipeline.
If the company is using the same methods as five years ago,
it has a problem.
This may be a large step for companies where the supply chain members are
not all fixed and where there are many companies involved. However, it is
necessary if businesses are to remain competitive. Other companies are
developing and improving, so maintaining the present situation is not a
viable option.

230
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The key to success is simplicity of operation. The concepts can be
complicated, just as reality is, and the inventory management system has to
reflect this. It does not mean that the actual day-to-day operation should be
difficult. In fact, the more sophisticated the system, the more reliable it
should be and the less effort to operate. However, a good system requires
setting up to operate properly and this requires good inventory manage-
ment expertise, using the professional techniques described in this book.
Using the forecasting described here, along with ABC analysis and stock
level calculations, the author has saved millions of pounds worth of
inventory in many companies. Most businesses want to generate more
profits: many have not recognized the key role of inventory management in
increasing turnover and reducing costs.
Inventory management is a collection of techniques developed by
practical people and proven in the real world. It is no use using general good
management practice in this area where there are specific inventory control
methods required. These have taken many years to develop and refine.
There are refinements beyond those described in this book, but in
practice the methods discussed give such good benefits that other areas
become the focus of improvements before these are required. In these pages
there is an attempt to illustrate the application of the methods as well as the
techniques themselves. The reader should be able to gain significant
improvements in the stockholding simply from implementing the concepts
described – and that is the next challenge. Understanding the full
implications and benefits is a gradual process, as is the implementation of
the techniques. Taking up the challenge is definitely worth it because of the
tremendous impact on the business.
Key points
 When the inventory in a stores has been improved, consider the
supply chain as a whole.
 Minimize 
the 
logistic 
costs 
whilst 
exceeding 
customer
expectations.
 Decide upon the best places to situate the stock and the amount of
stock to hold in each, using inventory management principles.
 Employ the techniques described in this book for the best results,
then add expertise to enhance those items which are important,
new or exceptional.
 Set up your systems to take the work out of inventory control.

Questions and answers
Questions
1 What are the three key objectives of inventory control?
2 Which departments put pressure on inventory managers, and what are
their objectives?
3 ‘More stock gives better availability.’ Challenge this conventional view.
4 Two companies distribute fast moving consumer goods. Their results for
last year were:
Annual accounts data
Ace Distributors
(£ million)
Deuce Associates
(£ million)
Sales turnover
8
26
Fixed assets
2
5
Cost of sales
6.2
21
Stock value
4
8
You have been offered the job of inventory manager by both companies.
Which one would you take and, based on the data provided, explain
why.
5 The aim for Ace Distributors (in question 4) is to reduce the stock to
£1.5 million. What will be the return on assets then?
6 What change in the return on capital (as a percentage) will there be when
a company has reduced its stock value by £500 000, given the following
data:

232
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Return on capital =
Annual profit
Total capital employed
where
capital employed
= stock + capital plant
sales turnover
= £3 million
profit
= £400 000
capital plant
= £1.1 million
stock before reduction
= £1.5 million
7 Discuss the ways in which the JIT approach differs from conventional
inventory management.
8 How does a company give good customer service? A company is
distributing a range of fast-moving items to stockists. The following is a
list of dispatches for one day. What is their customer service level,
assuming this to be a normal day?
Order No 1A
Quantity requested
by customer
Quantity dispatched
from stores
Item no. 1
20
15
Item no. 2
100
100
Item no. 3
50
20
Order No. 2B
Quantity requested
by customer
Quantity dispatched
from stores
Item no. 1
60
40
Item no. 2
150
100
Item no. 3
20
20

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
233
Order No. 3C
Quantity requested
by customer
Quantity dispatched
from stores
Item no. 1
10
10
Item no. 2
70
70
Item no. 3
50
20
Item no. 4
25
25
9 Which items in the following list are in the A, B and C classes? How do
you determine this?
Item
code
Weekly
demand
Unit price
(£)
A901
2
3.00
B662
2
8.00
C355
20
4.00
D523
40
0.50
E191
10
65.00
F807
1
9.00
G010
3
1.00
H244
1
170.00
J459
10
3.50
K488
22
0.50

234
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
10 If the current stock of the items in question 9 were as shown below:
Item
Stock quantity
A901
6
B662
10
C355
50
D523
60
E191
50
F807
50
G010
12
H244
5
J459
20
K488
5
(a) What is the stock cover for each of the items?
(b) What would be the first task resulting from this analysis?
(c) What is the stock cover value for the total stock?
11 A stores is offering ex stock delivery to a wide variety of customers. Item
35721 is a non-seasonal item which has the following usage
characteristics:
Weekly usage:
200.
MAD:
50.
Supply lead time:
four weeks.
(a) If deliveries are brought in every week, what is the target stock level if
85 per cent availability ex stock is required?
(b) If the supplier is persuaded to deliver daily, what would be the new
target stock level?
(c) How would the change affect the value of stockholding if the items cost
£10 each?

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
235
12 The statistics on the stock of a range of items is as follows:
Item no.
Unit cost (£)
Annual usage
2A32
25.00
12
2B44
0.50
360
3D10
0.10
120
3E82
40.00
1
3F66
2.00
40
4G19
5.00
520
4H95
4.00
7
5J53
20.00
5
7N78
0.30
200
9P21
12.00
50
The stores controller is under pressure from the management to reduce the
stock level to below half a month’s usage. The stores personnel are adamant
that they are not going to do any extra work. Show what the stock policy
should be in these conditions and how the target is achieved. (Assume that
safety stock is not necessary in this case.)
13 Stock levels are as follows:
A items:
£28 000, 130 items
B items:
£6500, 350 items
C items:
£3500, 600 items
Obsolete items:
£2000, 200 items.
Within the budget for next year, the estimated usage rate for each is:
A items:
£133 000 per month
B items:
£16 000 per month
C items:
£2000 per month
Obsolete items:
nil.
What is the best way to reduce the stock by £2000?
14 Do you believe that JIT simply passes the burden of holding stock on to
the supplier?

236
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
15 Your managing director has asked for a short report on ways of reducing
work in progress and throughput time. At present, batch sizes are about
fifteen, setups average three hours, processing time per unit is two minutes,
and WIP stands at thirteen weeks. Create a short report outlining in simple
language the measures you would take.
16 (a) What are the financial benefits to a company through setting up a
linear flow kanban system?
(b) A company is intending to set up a kanban system for production.
Comment on the changes which will be required in:
responsibility
layout
operator training
quality management.
17 What is the role of safety stock, and why is it often not required in a JIT
environment?
18 ‘JIT is a good theoretical idea but cannot work in our company’ said the
production director. ‘We have customers who change their minds, a variety
of processes, many products, and real people who cannot always be relied
upon.’ Set out the arguments you would make to persuade this director that
JIT is a good idea for the company.
19 The data below is the stock record for item 345.
Date
Receipts
Unit cost
Issues
Balance
14/3
10
11
10
12/4
3
7
22/5
2
5
10/6
5
15
10
30/6
3
7
17/7
2
5
(a) What is the value of the last issue (17/7) of item 345, based on:
FIFO costing
average costing
LIFO costing.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
237
(b) If you needed to reduce the stock value in your stores by £500 000,
what items would you look at first and what techniques would you use
to reduce the stock value?
20 Why is safety stock held?
21 What are the three factors which determine safety stock?
22 The usage for two items over the past five weeks has been:
Item
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
D523
60
30
20
40
50
K488
30
15
0
65
0
(a) What are the values of average demand and variability for each?
(b) The items cost 50p each and the lead time from the supplier is two
weeks. The inventory controller is deciding whether to try to provide a
service level of 90 per cent or 95 per cent. What is the additional cost
of the better service?
23 ABC Distributors have the UK dealership for a well known manu-
facturer of pre-packaged confectionery. Their main activity is the supply of
goods to the local retailers ex stock. At the recent stocktake, ABC
Distributors had 1280 different stock lines with a total value of £40 000.
They order all their items during the week they fall below the reorder
level.
The system works well except for the fact that the stores manager and his
assistant are overloaded with work – in fact they are currently three weeks
behind with the ordering. As they are ordering one month’s requirement at
a time, there are often times when the stock runs out. The suppliers take
two months to deliver, and the shortfalls cannot therefore be rectified
immediately.
What are the changes in operating practice which you would suggest to
assist them? What controls should they use which will bring the changes
into effect?

238
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
24 ‘Re-ordering systems are not designed to stop you running out of stock.’
Give two reasons why this statement can be justified.
25 What factors do you consider when setting stock levels for an
independent demand item?
26 The demand history of item XX1 is as follows:
Week
Demand
The items are supplied weekly in boxes of 100. Work out:
(a) the review level (reorder point)
(b) the average stockholding.
(You can assume a safety factor of 2 for 94 per cent customer service.)
27 Explain why, for some A items, we can expect the review level to always
be higher than the physical stock level?
28 A company is putting expensive fountain pens into boxes at a rate of
about 250 per week, together with ink cartridges. The stock controller has
decided that the pens they buy are class A, while the cartridges and boxes
are class C. Suggest order and delivery patterns and order quantities for the
three types of item, and discuss why you have chosen them.
29 (a) It has been remarked that ‘stock level for an item does not depend
on its lead time’. Defend this remark using examples, and discuss
why the statement is not precisely true.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
239
(b) Calculate the reorder level for the supply of umbrellas given the
following data:
Lead time = 2 months.
Customer service level expected is 90 per cent.
Demand over the last six months has been 11, 20, 8, 15, 10 and 14.
(c) Discuss the assumptions which you have made in using this
calculation.
30 A company is proposing to schedule in supplies of twenty key items each
week instead of ordering them monthly.
(a) What preparatory work do they need to do with the suppliers?
(b) If the purchase value of these items is £1 million per year, by how much
will the average inventory be reduced?
(c) What are the benefits and extra jobs caused by scheduling?
31 What factors determine the delivery quantity?
32 Discuss ways in which stock can be reduced by suppliers and customers
managing a supply chain together. What are the prerequisites for successful
supply partnerships?
33 What is the difference between a target stock level system and a review
level system?
34 Weekly sales of a product are:
Week
Demand
1
12
2
14
3
8
4
16
5
13
6
18
(a) Discuss what forecasting techniques can be used to determine the
demand for the next week. Indicate which you would prefer to use
and the reasons for your choice.

240
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
(b) If the initial forecast for week 1 was ten, work out the forecast
demand for each week using exponential smoothing, and give your
prediction for week 7. (You can use an  factor of 0.2 for this
calculation).
35 What items of data (inputs) are required for the MRP calculation? For
each, state the level and type of accuracy necessary to ensure reasonable
results.
36 A watch manufacturer has a schedule for assembly covering ten weeks.
The schedule is:
Watch X
Manufacturing orders for 1000 watches due in weeks 2, 4,
6, 8 and 10.
Assembly lead time per batch is 1 week.
Watch Y
Manufacturing orders for 500 watches due in weeks 3, 6
and 9.
Assembly lead time per batch is 2 weeks due to a special
processing on the watch cover.
Watch Z
Manufacturing orders for 100 watches due every week.
Assembly lead time is half a week. The parts for the batch
of week 1 have already been issued.
Watches X and Y use the same module A and batteries (two per watch).
Watch Z uses a different module B and the same batteries but only one per
watch. Batteries and modules come in boxes of 500. There are seven boxes
of batteries and three boxes of modules in stock. The buyer has outstanding
purchasing orders for a total of 20 000 batteries and 6000 of each module,
half quantities to arrive in weeks 4 and 10.
(a) What would you expect your MRP package to recommend for
purchasing? (Assume that the package is not capable of recommending
rescheduling.)
(b) What would you recommend should be done?
37 A product is manufactured in two stages. The material for the process
consists mainly of one basic, bought out ingredient. Expected sales of the
product are as follows:

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
241
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Sales
210
300
140
65
200
260
150
100
190
220
The stock situation is:
raw material
500
semi-finished
220
finished goods
650
The manufacturing and supply situation is:
Operation
Lead time
Purchasing
Three weeks
Bulk production
One week
Finishing
Two weeks
(a) What should the weekly purchase plan be on a lot-for-lot system?
(b) What should it be using with a 500 batch size?
38 (a) What different underlying assumptions are there between DRP and
fair shares allocation of goods?
(b) What is the fair shares priority logic for distributing stocks to
regional warehouses?
39 Prepare a manufacturing schedule, using the DRP technique, for the
following forecast demands and lot size replenishment quantities.
Lot
size
Period demand
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Current
stock
London
600
150
320
370
190
150
320
370
600
Manchester
250
70
70
70
70
70
70
70
230
Newcastle
400
90
150
150
90
90
150
150
310
Internal
sales
Monthly
call-off
30
30
30
30
30
30
30

242
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Lot size for manufacturing store is 1000.
Current stock for manufacturing store is 1650.
Replenished lead time for all warehouses is two periods, internal sales are
replenished immediately, manufacturing lead time is three weeks.
40 What are the advantages and disadvantages of keeping stock in retail
stores rather than in supply depots?
41 The following ten items are the range of stock held in a small stores.
Item no.
Unit cost (£)
Annual usage
1
150
2
2
125
100
3
85
4
50
5
40
6
26
7
20
8
10
9
7
300
10
6
20
(a) Identify which are the A, B and C class items.
(b) Discuss how ABC is used in purchase ordering.
(c) Review another use of this Pareto classification.
42 The following data is available for the demand for an item:
Week
1
2
3
4
5
Demand
10
20
5
10
15

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
243
What would you estimate to be the average quantity held in stock to
meet the demand for this item, treating it as:
(a) Independent demand (assuming that a 99.2 per cent customer service
level is required).
(b) Dependent MRP demand (level 2) (assuming a one week lead time).
(c) JIT supply (assuming a one-day delivery interval).
Specify any assumptions you make.
Answers
1
Availability (delivery on time).
Minimum inventory cost.
Minimum operating cost.
See text, Chapter 1.
2
Purchasing, if they try to buy large batches to reduce unit cost.
Sales if they want large stocks to service possible demand.
Accounts who require lowest investment in inventory to improve cash
flow.
In manufacturing, production traditionally want to make large batches and
to have buffer stock in case of problems.
Also pressure comes from elsewhere – designers who specify items too late
and management who keep changing the targets.
See text, Chapter 1.
3 High stocks result from poor control, and poor service results from poor
management of supply and forecasts. The better the inventory manage-
ment, the better the availability and the less stock cover is required.

244
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
4
Annual accounts data
Ace Distributors
(£ million)
Deuce Associates
(£ million)
Annual profit1
1.8
5
Return on sales
1.8
5
=
22.5%
19.2%
Assets are
2 + 4
2 + 4
Return on assets
1.8
5
=
30.0%
38.5%
Note: 1Sales turnover – cost of sales.
Ace has better margin and more potential for improvement in stock
control.
5 51.4 per cent.
Annual accounts data
Ace Distributors (£ million)
Annual profit
1.8
Return on sales
1.8/8 = 22.5%
New value of assets are
2+1.5 = 3.5
Return on assets
1.8/3.5 = 51.4%
6
Capital employed before reduction = Stock + Capital plant
= £1.5 million + £1.1 million
= £ 2.6 million
Capital employed after reduction
= £ 2.6 million – £500 000
= £ 2.1 million
Return on capital before reduction = £400 000/£2 600 000
= 15 per cent
Return on capital after reduction
= £400 000/£2 100 000
= 19 per cent

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
245
7 There are two key ways in which JIT is a different approach:
 The level of inventory is not a simple calculation – it is a negotiated
quantity.
 JIT does not set a permanent inventory situation – it empowers the
people to improve and reduce the levels required.
This means that those involved with managing the supply chain always have
to see ways of improving reliability of performance, reducing timescales and
costs and, therefore, removing the need for inventory.
The timescales of JIT operations are measured in hours, under the
umbrella of a long-term relationship and smooth supply. Conventional
inventory management works with days or weeks of lead time and inventory
levels and any demand pattern.
8 Solving customer requirements by providing quality goods service,
information and ongoing support, and by delivery on time (see text).
Demand satisfied on time:
Dispatched
Requested
%
By order
0
3
0
By order line
5
10
50
By item code:
Item 1
65
90
72
Item 2
270
320
84
Item 3
60
120
50
Item 4
25
25
50
Total
420
555
Average line availability
77
Average item availability
76

246
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Different answers are used in different situations (see text).
9
Item
code
Weekly
demand
Unit price
(£)
Turnover
(£)
Rank
Class
A901
2
3.00
6
9
C
B662
2
8.00
16
6
C
C355
20
4.00
80
3
B
D523
40
0.50
20
5
C
E191
10
65.00
650
1
A
F807
1
9.00
9
8
C
G010
3
1.00
3
10
C
H244
1
170.00
170
2
B
J459
10
3.50
35
4
C
K488
22
0.50
11
7
C
See also text, Chapter 3.
10 (a)
Item
Stock
Usage
Cover
A901
6
2
3.0
B662
10
2
5.0
C355
50
20
2.5
D523
60
40
1.5
E191
50
10
5.0
F807
50
1
50.0
G010
12
3
4.0
H244
5
1
5.0
J459
20
10
2.0
K488
5
22
0.23
(b) Ensure that supplies of item K488 are arriving within one day.
(c) This is calculated on a financial basis.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
247
Stock
Usage
Unit value
(£)
Stock value
(£)
Turnover
(£)
A901
6
2
3.00
18
6
B662
10
2
8.00
80
16
C355
50
20
4.00
200
80
D523
60
40
0.50
30
20
E191
50
10
65.00
3250
650
F807
50
1
9.00
450
9
G010
12
3
1.00
12
3
H244
5
1
170.00
850
170
J459
20
10
3.50
70
35
K488
5
22
0.50
3
11
4963
1000
Stock cover for all stock = £4963/£1000
= 4.96 weeks
11
(a) TSL = Demand in lead time and review period plus safety stock
in IT and RP
= 200*(4 + 1) + 1.3 * 50 * ((4 + 1))
= 1000 +145.3
= 1145.3
(b) Assuming that the lead time is still four weeks and orders are
placed daily:
TSL = 200*(4 + 0.2) + 1.3 * 50 * ( (4 + 0.2))
= 840 + 133.2
= 973.2
(c) This would be a reduction of 172.1 in TSL. The average stock is
TSL – half usage in (LT + RP). So reduction would be from
645.3 to 553.2. Reduction 92.1 units at £10 each = £921.

248
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
12 There are several ways of getting to this answer. The easiest is to
perform Pareto Analysis and then apply batch sizes. Say A = every week,
B = every fortnight, C = every four months. If every item is ordered
each month, then there are 120 purchase events
Item
no.
Unit
cost
(£)
Annual
usage
Usage
value
per year
(£)
Class
No of
orders
per year
Average
stock value
(£)
Percentage
of value
2A32
25.00
12
300
B
24
6.25
7.5
2B44
0.50
360
180
C
3
30.00
4.5
3D10
0.10
120
12
C
3
2.00
0.3
3E82
40.00
1
40
C
1
20.00
1.0
3F66
2.00
40
80
C
3
13.33
2.0
4G19
5.00
520
2600
A
52
25.00
65.0
4H95
4.00
7
28
C
3
4.67
0.7
5J53
20.00
5
100
C
3
16.67
2.5
7N78
0.30
200
60
C
3
10.00
1.5
9P21
12.00
50
600
B
24
12.50
15.0
Total
4000
119
140.42
Stock cover = 42.
From the table, the number of order events is now 119 (so no more work)
and the stock is 0.42 of a month instead of 0.5. (See Chapter 3.)
13
Class
Stock
(£)
Budget
(£)
Stock cover
(weeks)
% reduction
required for £2000
A
28 000
133 000
0.91
7
B
6 500
6 500
1.76
31
C
3 500
2 000
7.58
57
2 000
0
Infinite
100

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
249
Although the stock cover for A class is already under a week, it should be
easier to gain £2000 by reducing this because it represents the majority of
stock value. This can be achieved by scheduling or kanban. In practice some
inventory reduction may also come from the other classes. (See Chapter
3.)
14 It does not pass on inventory, it eliminates it. However suppliers have to
be able to respond rapidly to supplying to the smooth demand pattern
required. (See Chapter 4.)
15 From the figures, the average batch only takes thirty minutes to produce
but takes three hours to change over. This is inefficient. There needs to be
a concerted effort on reducing the setup time. At the same time product
design could be reviewed to see whether common parts can be created, so
that set-ups can be avoided. There is also a problem with high WIP. Looking
at the wasted time in between operations will show where this wasted time
can be eliminated. The use of a kanban pull system would cause the WIP to
decrease dramatically. (See Chapter 4.)
16 (a) The costs of manufacture and stockholding are reduced. Kanban
create an environment where the WIP of the A class items is less than a day’s
worth between each process. The processes are linked together so that there
is a flow of work. This enables efficient manufacture, and a reduction in
waste, which contribute to lower operating costs.
The improvement in speed through the process means that any reject
work is caught earlier and therefore can be rectified before too much
material and capacity has been used up. There is also the direct reduction
in inventory which removes working capital costs.
(b) Responsibility. Shop floor responsible for triggering supply of next
item/batch without fail. Supplying operation responsible for replenishing in
time.
Layout. Processes arranged in sequence with minimum distance between
the processes.
Operator training. Operator responsible for their area and processes within
it. Teamworking skills required as well as multiskilling. Operators need to
be able to transfer from one process to the next in case there is a
bottleneck.
Quality management. Excellent quality is a precursor to introducing kanban.
Quality should be built into the process so that it will not go wrong. Quality
is part of the manufacturing process, not a separate activity.

250
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
17 Safety stock decouples one process from the next. In JIT, the aim is to
couple all the processes together to minimize timescales and inventory.
Where JIT systems operate, the demand is smoothed to give similar
requirements every day; consequently there is not the need for significant
safety stock. Safety stock will be required where demand exceeds the
flexibility of the manufacturing process.
18 Just in time throughput time is small, therefore there is not the need for
detailed planning far ahead. This gives flexibility. By not having to forecast
far ahead, then the forecasting process is more accurate. Manufacturing
smaller batches means continuity of work and simpler planning, therefore
less problems and less cost.
Many companies have been using JIT successfully for many years. They
create the correct working environment, and applying a lean approach.
They have great advantages over their competition because the costs of
storage, interprocess stocks and non-value-added work are reduced.
19
Date
Receipts
Unit
cost
Issues
Balance
No.
left
14/3
From
10/6
Average
cost
14/3
10
11
10
10
11
12/4
3
7
7
11
22/5
2
5
5
5
11
10/6
5
15
10
5
5
13
30/6
3
7
2
5
13
17/7
2
5
0
13
So, value of issue of the two items was:
(a) FIFO 22; average 26; LIFO 30.
(b) Highest stock value lines independent of usage rate. Reduce supply. See
text, Chapter 5.
20 To absorb the different rates of supply and usage in two processes. The
calculation of safety stocks normally only takes into account the variations
in demand. The variation in supply is avoidable and should be controlled
properly so that it is insignificant. The variation in demand is caused by the

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
251
‘customer’ and is therefore to be coped with and negotiated. The better the
forecast of demand, the smaller the safety stock will have to be. (See
Chapter 6.)
21 The calculation of safety stock depends on:
The level of service being offered (acceptable risk of running out).
The predictability of the demand (MAD as a measure of forecast
accuracy).
The replenishment lead time (but only as the square root of lead time).
(See Chapter 6.)
22 (a)
Item
Wk 1
Wk 2
Wk 3
Wk 4
Wk 5
Average
D523
60
30
20
40
50
40.0
K488
30
15
0
65
0
22.0
MAD
MADP
D523
20
10
20
0
10
12.0
30%
D488
8
7
22
43
22
20.4
93%
(b) Lead time two weeks:
CSF 90 per cent 1.6
CSF 95 per cent 2.06
MAD
SS 90%
SS 95%
Increase
Extra
cost
% of
turnover
D523
12.0
27.15
34.96
7.81
3.90
20
K488
20.4
46.16
59.43
13.27
6.64
60
10.54
Answer is £10.54.

252
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
23 Apply Pareto’s Law, then organize the supply to save work (see also
question 12). Change the order pattern for the 128 A class parts to weekly
and schedule in to avoid paperwork and time. Order the B class every four
weeks as they fall below the review level, and order the 896 C class items
every eight weeks to reduce the workload.
Then work out the better safety stocks, and flexibility of supply for the A
class. It is important to measure customer service level and inventory levels
while the change is happening, and also to make sure that the number of
orders are reducing significantly. (See Chapter 7.)
24 The reordering system creates replenishment orders, which open the
supply. However demand may not be satisfied because:
 From the theory. The review level is calculated assuming a customer
service factor which gives a small risk of stockouts (zero risk is
impossible).
 In practice. Supply may be later than expected and the stock is
insufficient to cope with the longer lead time.
25 To set the safety stock requires demand. To set the average stock level or
to order requires in addition:
delivery quantity variability of demand (MAD or SD)
level of availability required (customer service factor)
supply lead time.
To set the review level requires in addition, forecast.
Underlying the forecast and MAD calculations are therefore an
assessment of demand pattern using historical information backed up by
understanding of how future demand may vary from this.
26
Average 65: safety stock = 16.67.
MAD 8.33: review level = 81.67.
average stock = 131.67.
27 The reorder level is used to trigger new replenishment orders when the
stock + supply orders outstanding become low. If the delivery frequency is
shorter than the lead time then the stock is low, delivery quantities are small
and there are always supply orders outstanding. Hence, for long lead time
A class items, ordering is frequent and stock is always less than the review
level.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
253
28
A class – order in daily, if possible on Kanban.
C class – order in weekly.
See Chapter 7.
29 (a) Stock level depends mainly on supply delivery quantities, customer
service and demand pattern. Lead time variation is only as the
square root. (However, delivery performance may be lead time
dependent also.)
Average stock = half delivery quantity + customer service factor ×
MAD × lead time.
So changing the lead time has the least effect on stock levels.
(b) Average
= 13.
MAD
= 3.33.
Customer service factor is 1.6.
Safety stock = 1.6 × 3.33 × (2) = 7.53
Reorder level = 13 × 2 + 7.53
= 33.53
(c) Continuous demand.
Continuation of the same demand pattern.
Normal distribution and non-seasonal demand.
Supplier delivers on time.
30 (a) Work out with the supplier:
Benefits to supplier as well as customer (continuous demand,
earlier payment, more consistent demand).
Delivery arrangements (transport, packaging).
Dispatch and receiving reorganization.
Information processing (schedules and invoicing).
(b) Reduction in inventory:
Average stock = half delivery quantity + safety stock.
Assume the safety stock remains the same.
Delivery quantity goes from four weeks’ worth to one week’s worth,
so stock saving is two weeks to half a week.
At £1 million per year 1.5 weeks is £28 846.

254
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
(c) Benefits:
Lower inventory investment – better cash flow.
Less stores space required.
Easier movement within stores.
Improved information system (paperwork?) efficiency.
Extra employment in the long term.
More frequent (but smaller deliveries).
More receiving document processing.
More monitoring of inventory and co-ordination with suppliers.
31 The delivery quantity primarily depends on how frequently the supplier
is prepared to deliver without significant increase in cost. It will depend
upon:
The number and variety of other items bought from the same supplier.
The type of items (e.g. handlable, slow-moving).
The quantity in which they are to be consumed.
The turnover value of the item.
32
Better forecasting.
Treating demand as dependent and avoiding safety stock effects.
Measuring end user usage, structuring supply source.
Integrating systems
Square root of warehouses effect.
33 Target stock levels: variable order quantities fixed time interval between
deliveries. Ideal where supply of many B and C class items are sourced from
a single supplier. Organize purchasing to look at suppliers in rotation.
Review level system: interval between ordering is variable, order
quantities are fixed by an ordering rule. Normal way to trigger orders.
Good for A class items and slow-moving and one-product suppliers.
(See Chapter 8.)
34 (a) Extrinsic forecasts to give causes of demand.
Market analysis and surveys.
Historical techniques.
Moving average: OK as demand is random and varying much.
Exponential smoothing: better since there could be a slight trend.
Double exponential: will be overreactive until a trend is seen.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
255
Base series: not appropriate as seasonality not established.
Regression: no advantage over other methods.
More sophisticated techniques: insufficient data for these.
(For details, see Chapter 10.)
(b) Exponential smoothing with  = 0.2.
Week
Demand
Forecast
1
12
10.00
2
14
10.40
3
8
11.12
4
16
10.50
5
13
11.60
6
18
11.88
7
?
13.10
35 MRP requires:
master schedule: 95 per cent accurate.
bills of materials: 98 per cent accurate
inventory records: 95 per cent accurate
and
lead times (for suppliers and any manufacturing processes).
manufacturing routings (where appropriate).
36 Components
Watch
Modules
Battery quantity
X
A
2
Y
A
2
Z
B
1

256
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Manufacturing orders
Watch
type
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
X
1000
1000
1000
1000
1000
Y
500
500
500
Z
100
100 100
100 100
100 100
100 100
100
Component demand
Module A
Gross requirement
1500 0 1000
500
1000
0
1500
0
1000
0
Stock on hand
1500
0 0 –1000 –1500 –2500 –2500 –4000 –4000 –5000 –5000
Purchases outstanding
3000
3000
Projected on hand
0 0 –1000 2500
1500
1500
0
0 –1000
2000
New orders for module A of 1000 for week 3 and 1000 for week 9.
Module B: excessive stock of module B is building up.
Battery
Gross requirement
3100100 2100 1100 2100
100 3100
100
2100
100
Stock on hand
3500 400300–1800–2900–5000–5100–8200–8300–10 400–10 500
Purchases outstanding
6000
6000
Projected on hand
400300–1800 3100 1000
900–2200–2300 –4400
1500
Planned receipts
2000
2500
Projected available
400300
200 5100 3000 2900 2300 2200
100
6000
New orders for the battery of 2000 for completion in week 3 and 2500 for
week 7.
(b) Recommend that schedule is smoothed. There are many ways of doing
this. One option is:

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
257
Module A
Module A
Week
1 2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Gross requirement
1500 0
1000
500
1000
0
1500
0
1000
0
Stock on hand
1500
0 0 –1000 –1500 –2500 –2500 –4000 –4000 –5000 –5000
Reschedule receipts
1500
500
1000
500
1000
500
1000
500
Projected on hand
0 0
500
500
500
1000
500
1000
1000
1500
Try to reschedule the module supply as the schedule above.
Battery
Battery
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Gross requirement
3100 100 2100 1100 2100
100 3100
100
2100
100
Stock on hand
3500 400 300–1800–2900–5000–5100–8200–8300–10 400–10 500
Reschedule receipts
1400 1400 1400 1400 1400 1400 1400
1400
1400
Projected on hand
4001700 1000 1300
600 1900
200 1500
800
2100
Try to reschedule the battery supply to 1400 per week
37 (a)
Week
Stock
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Sales
210
300
140
65
200
260
150
100
190
220
FG
650
440
140
0
435
235
475
325
225
35
315
Order receipt
500
500
500
Order release
0
500
0
500
0
0
0
500
Semi-finished
220
220
220
220
220
220
220
220
220
220
220
Order receipt
500
500
500
Order release
0
500
0
500
0
0
0
500
Raw material
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Purchase receipt
500
500
Purchase ordering
500
500

258
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
(b)
Week
Stock
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Sales
210 300 140
65 200 260 150 100 190 220
FG
650 440 140
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Order receipt
65 200 260 150 100 190 220
Order release
0
65 200 260 150 100 190 220
Semi-finished
220 220 155
0
0
0
0
0
0
Order receipt
45 260 150 100 190 220
Order release
0
45 260 150 100 190 220
0
Raw material
500 500 455 195
45
0
0
0
0
Purchase receipt
55 190 220
Purchase ordering
0
0
55 190 220
38 (a) Distribution requirements planning takes the forecast from ware-
house and aggregates it into the master schedule. It therefore depends upon
the warehouses to forecast in the first place.
Fair shares can manufacture against a forecast and then allocate the
inventory against the warehouse requirement.
(b) The logic is:
1 Any unfulfilled demand from the warehouses.
2 Forecast usage which will be unfulfilled within the supply lead time.
3 Top up warehouse safety stock.
4 Allocate to central stock safety level if appropriate.
5 Distribute remainder in proportion to the forecast warehouse usage
rates.
6 Transfer excesses to other warehouses if appropriate.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
259
39
Week
Stock
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
London sales
150
320
370
190
150
320
379
Current stock
600
450
130
360
170
20
300
521
Order receipt
600
600
600
Order release
600
0
0
600
600
0
0
Manchester sales
70
70
70
70
70
70
70
Current stock
230
160
90
270
200
130
60
240
Order receipt
250
250
Order release
250
0
0
0
250
0
0
Newcastle sales
90
150
150
90
90
150
150
Current stock
310
220
70
10
10
10
40
70
Order receipt
90
90
90
180
180
Order release
90
90
90
90
180
180
Internal sales
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
Total
970
120
120
720
1060
210
30
Current stock
1650
680
560
440
720
660
450
420
Order receipt
1000
1000
Order release
1000
1000
0
0
Manufacturing orders required in weeks 1 and 2.
40 Advantages:
Retail stores satisfy customer demand and, therefore, stock is available
immediately to meet demand.
Any distribution problems do not affect availability.
No central stock is necessary.
Slow distribution method can be used to the retail stores.
Disadvantages:
More stock is required because there are more stock points.
Any change of products requires emptying the whole supply chain.
Redistribution of excess or supply to meet an individual shortage is more
difficult.

260
BEST PRACTICE IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
41
Item
no.
Unit
cost
Annual
usage
Turnover
%
turnover
Cumulative
% turnover
2
125
100
12 500
62.5
62.5
4
50
70
3500
17.5
80.0
9
7
300
2100
10.5
90.5
3
85
10
850
4.3
94.8
6
26
20
520
2.6
97.4
1
150
2
300
1.5
98.9
10
6
20
120
0.6
99.5
7
20
3
60
0.3
99.8
5
40
1
40
0.2
100.0
8
10
1
10
0.1
100.0
Total
527
20 000
(a) A class: item 2.
B class: items 4, 9.
C class: items 3, 6, 1, 10, 7, 5, 8.
(b) ABC determines delivery quantity and reduces purchase workload (see
Chapter 3).
(c) Discussion of optimizing profits, lead time reduction or cycle
counting.
42 (a) Independent demand
Assume that a 99.2 per cent customer service level is required.
Average demand
= 12.
MAD
= 4.4.
Customer service factor = 3.
Safety stock
= 3 × 4.4 × (1)
= 13.4
Delivery quantity
= 12.
Average stock
= Half delivery quantity + safety stock
= 6 + 13.4
= 19.4

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
261
(b) Dependent MRP demand (level 2), assuming no safety stock is
required, stock would be:
Week
0
1
2
3
4
5
Demand
10
20
5
10
15
Average stock = 12.
(c) JIT supply
Assume that demand is the same every day.
(Alternative assumptions are that there should be a safety stock calculated
as (a) or as one-day lead time.)
Week
0
1
2
3
4
5
Demand
10
20
5
10
15
Daily demand
2
4
1
2
3
Assuming that demand is dispatched every day:
Average stock = half day’s demand:
1, 2, 0.5, 1, 1.5
So average stock during the period is 1.2 (assuming a one-day delivery
interval).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Index
ABC Analysis, 36–42
Accurate records, 200, 214
Aggregate inventory, 81
Aggregate stock valuation, 91
Allocation of stock, 79, 221
Assessment of demand, 164
Availability, measurement of, 18–21
of stock, 100
Average value, 88
Backorder, 22–4
Backward scheduling, 198
Bar coding, 158
Base series technique, 194
Batch, 6, 11, 52, 60, 68, 158, 191,
202
sizes, 210
Baysian forecasting, 187
Bias, 159
Bill of material (BOM), 200, 203
Collecting historical information, 96
Company strategy, 15
Consignment stock, 216
Consuming forecast demand, 27
Contributions of history, 174
Control methods, 215
Customer feedback, 27
relations, 17
service, 4, 7, 16, 17–32, 52, 82,
100, 112, 198, 212
service factors, 105
support, 71
Cusum technique, 181
Data aggregation, 162
Delivery promising, 208
times estimation, 26, 29
Demand history, 165
management, 25–31
patterns, 155
Dependent and independent demand,
198
Depreciation, 91
Despatch information, 26
Deviation measurement technique,
103
Distributed inventory, 222
Distribution requirements planning
(DRP), 225
Double exponential smoothing, 188
Economic order quantity (EOQ), 73,
145
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 26
Excess and obsolete items, 109
Expediting, 95, 117, 149
Exponential smoothing, 171–4
Fair shares, 222
First in, first out (FIFO), 87
Fixed classification, 42
Forecasting advanced, 187–96
choosing the best types, 178
demand, 152–4
focus, 179
historical, 164–86, 193
inaccuracy, 158

264
INDEX
Forecasting advanced – continued
methods for improvement, 162
monitoring, 162, 181
seasonal, 192
tracking, 182
Fourier analysis, 187
Gaussian, 98
Historical data analysis, 96
forecasting, 164–86
Information accuracy, 214
Initializing the forecast, 175
Inventory control objectives, 7
forecast types, 153
investment, 48, 62, 72, 82
management, 4–16, 33–58
valuation, 87
Just in time management, 59–77
Kanban, 12, 76
Lag, 189
Last in, first out (LIFO), 88
Layout and location of stores, 14
Lead time, effects of, 121
inconsistent, 121
management, 117–20
reduction, 53–8, 74, 119
Lean supply chain, 212
Logistics, 7, 59, 78, 129, 217
Lot for lot, 210
Manufacturing lead time, 119
Market change, 13
Master planning, 205–11
scheduling, 205
Material requirements planning,
197–211
Mean absolute deviation (MAD), 99,
102, 152, 176, 217
Minimum stock levels, 155, 164
order constraints, 147
Moving average, 166
Non-movers, 42
Non-stock items, 43
Normal demand patterns, 100
Obsolescence, 13, 109, 157
Order processing, 26, 118
Order quantities, 141
Ordering, 139
Organization and management, 78
Overheads, 71, 74, 88
Pareto based order quantities, 142
Pareto stock balance, 48
Pareto’s Law, 33–42, 109
Perpetual inventory, 39, 62, 158
Physical distribution, 222
Physical inventory, 158
Planned inventories, 14
Planning the structure of supply, 204
Poisson’s Law, 108
Pricing method, 139
Product life cycle, 156
Profit through inventory management,
9
Projected available, 207
Pull (system), 60, 76, 221
Purchase commitment, 85
order, 15, 50, 57, 72, 95, 119,
139–41
order quantity, 11
Purchasing, 129–51
Push (system), 60, 76–7, 221
Quality management, 69
Queue, 84
Reasons for stock, 11
Record accuracy, 70, 214

INDEX
265
Reducing stockholding, 51–8
Regression analysis, 187
Reorder point, 139–40
quantity, 149
Repetitive processes, 65
Replacement value, 88
Replenishment systems, 213, 225–8
Review levels, 112–16
Review of techniques, 212
Review period, 126
Risk measurement, 104
Safety stock, 12, 47, 50, 52, 81,
96–111, 112, 152, 197, 204
Scheduled supply, 143
Setting stock levels, 112
stock targets, 46
Single sourcing, 132
Skills and systems, 92
Slow moving items, 108
Slow systems, 16
Smoothing constant, 172
Standard cost, 88
Standard deviation, 100, 114
Stock availability, 100
cover, 43
distribution, 222
Stockkeeping unit (SKU), 89, 220
Stores layout, 14
Supplier lead time, 95, 118, 143
Supply chain, 129, 218
Supply practice, 129
partnerships, 137
practice, 129
structure, 204
Systems and control, 15
Target stock levels, 124–8
Total quality management (TQM), 70
Tracking signal, 182
Training, 93
Transport algorithm, 223
Trigg’s tracking signal, 182
Turnover of stock, 43
Unit cost of stock lines, 87
Variance, 103
Vendor appraisal, 134–7
Weighted averages, 170
Work in process (WIP), 200
Zero inventories, 59

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

