“This is a must-read for any serious student of equity market valuations.
Holland and Matthews systematically debunk the widely held view that EPS
and other ﬂawed accounting metrics are what drive stock markets. Cash
ﬂow is king and this book provides a step-by-step guide to calculating a
vastly superior measure of corporate performance, the Cash Flow Return on
Investment metric.”
John Birkhold, Partner, Origin Asset Management
“This fascinating book is a must-read for all serious investors and business
leaders who want to understand how companies really create value for share-
holders.”
Nigel Bolton, Chief Investment Oﬃcer Fundamental Active Equity,
BlackRock
“HOLT CFROI is a useful framework through which we can compare a
stock’s market valuation versus what the economic enterprise’s cash ﬂow
prospects are ultimately likely to support, and this book does a great job
explaining it in a plain-English fashion.”
Gunnar Miller, Global Director of Research, Allianz Global Investors
“The HOLT CFROI framework focuses on what really matters in company
valuation. A must-read for every serious fundamental investor!”
Michael Schmidt, Deka Investment, Managing Director Asset
Servicing and Alternative Investments, Member of Board
“This is by far the best book I have read on corporate valuation. Every board
member should read this book.”
Aled Smith, Director of Global Equities, M&G Investments
“This book makes a signiﬁcant contribution to performance evaluation and
valuation methodology. The authors explain the use of the HOLT framework
and CFROI to measure corporate performance and value creation.”
Emeritus Professor Carlos Correia, University of Cape Town

“This book is indispensable to anyone wanting to use HOLT for valuation;
for those not familiar with HOLT, however, the book may more appropri-
ately be seen as a form of reference book, to warn the reader about potential
problems in valuation and to suggest possible solutions.”
Professor Dr. Michel Habib, University of Zurich
“I would argue that every Director of any public company should spend
about a week going through this material very carefully. If they cannot pass
an examination on this text they are not ﬁt to be custodians of shareholder
capital.”
Emeritus Professor Brian Kantor, University of Cape Town; Chief
Economist & Investment Strategist, Investec Wealth & Investment
“Beyond Earnings introduces the concepts of Cash Flow Return on
Investment (CFROI) and Economic Proﬁt. Holland and Matthews bring
these abstract concepts to life, as they apply them to real world examples of
publicly-listed companies. They show that, as well as helping to judge the
eﬀectiveness of corporate management teams, CFROI and Economic Proﬁt
can be invaluable in helping to identify mispriced securities. I have no
hesitation in recommending this book to anyone interested in investment or
corporate ﬁnance.”
Tom Mann, Senior Portfolio Manager, Schroder Investment
Management
“Using a time-tested, total systems, CFROI approach to valuation,
Holland and Matthews oﬀer theoretical and implementation insights about
valuation that are missing from mainstream ﬁnance. The HOLT valuation
technology is now an integral part of the investment process at a large
number of worldwide money management organizations.”
Bartley J. Madden, Author, Value Creation Thinking
“A must-read for anyone with a mindset of improving their long term invest-
ing skills.”
Jacob Gemmel, Senior Portfolio Manager, Swedbank Robur Asset
Management

“In our age of alternative truths in politics as well as ﬁnance, HOLT
has proven to be one of very few truthful voices in analyzing corporate
performance.”
Henrik Andersson, Fund Manager, Didner & Gerge

BEYOND EARNINGS

BEYOND EARNINGS
Applying the HOLT CFROI®
and Economic Proﬁt Framework
David A. Holland
Bryant A. Matthews

Copyright © 2018 by Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher,
or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright
.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley
.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eﬀorts in preparing
this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents
of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose.
No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate.
Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
CFROI is a trademark of CSFB HOLT LLC.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993, or fax
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included with
standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to
media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is Available:
ISBN 9781119440482 (Hardcover)
ISBN 9781119440505 (ePDF)
ISBN 9781119440529 (ePub)
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © De Space Studio/Shutterstock
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is dedicated to the memory of Bob Hendricks who passed away on
May 28, 2017. The global success of the HOLT CFROI framework never
would have been realized without Bob’s vision, persistence, and uncanny
marketing skills. Bob brought the CFROI framework to life for countless fund
managers, corporate clients and HOLT employees. He distilled the art of stock
selection to its essence in his famous 2-minute drills. He reminded us that
investing was fun but required many hours of attention.
Bob was an amazing presenter – one of the best we’ve seen. To be on the same
presentation bill with him was daunting. We recall having to precede him at
a seminar in Germany after he had retired. Bob was the keynote speaker.
After a full day of lectures on the mechanics of ﬁnancial performance analysis
and equity valuation, when listeners were surely mentally exhausted, he held
the audience of fund managers spellbound. Bob de-mystiﬁed stock analysis,
breezed through 2-minute drills, and told tales from his forty years in the
ﬁnancial industry. At the end of his speech, the audience jumped out of their
seats and enthusiastically applauded. The Director of Research at a
distinguished fund manager told us that he leapt up wondering why Bob
Hendricks hadn’t been awarded a Nobel prize only to realize after calm
reﬂection that the presentation simply described the skilled application of a
discounted cash ﬂow model. Bob brought the subject of investing to life!

CONTENTS
Introduction
xix
The Pricing Puzzle: Foundational HOLT Concept and a Key
to Better Valuation
xix
Overview of Book Chapters
xxvi
Who Are We and What Do We Hope to Achieve
xxviii
I
Financial Performance Assessment
1
Never Forget the Golden Rule: Pursue Strategies with
Positive NPV
3
Key Learning Points
3
Introduction
4
What Do Corporate Financial Managers Do During the Day?
6
What Is Value?
8
The Golden Rule of Financial Decision Making
12
Back-of-the-Envelope Basics
15
Is the NPV Rule Foolproof?
20
The Price of Short-Termism
22
Thinking Clearly about Actions, Reactions, and Value
28
2
The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
31
Key Learning Points
31
Measures of Corporate Performance
32
Return on Equity
33
What about Debt and Leverage?
36
Return on Assets
39
xi

Contents
Return on Invested Capital
39
P/E as a Valuation Metric and Discounted Cash Flow
Valuation Approach
44
Hallmarks of a Sound Economic Performance and Valuation
Model
51
Chapter Appendix
53
3
Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
57
Key Learning Points
57
Is CFROI a Better Measure of Performance?
58
Return on Invested Capital (ROIC)
62
Cash Return on Gross Assets (CROGA)
63
Cash Flow Return on Investment (CFROI)
63
CFROI Adjustments Using Amazon’s 2013 Annual Report
65
Inﬂation-Adjusted Gross Investment
66
Depreciating Assets
68
Gross Plant Recaptured
81
Total Depreciating Assets
81
Non-Depreciating Assets
82
Asset Life
89
Gross Plant Asset Life
90
Life of Capitalized Operating Leases
91
Capitalized R&D Life
91
Calculating the Life of Depreciating Assets
91
Gross Cash Flow
94
Net Income after Tax
95
Depreciation and Amortization
97
Interest Expense
97
Rental Expense
98
Research and Development Expense
98
Net Monetary Asset Holding Gain
99
FIFO Proﬁts
99
Stock Compensation Expense
100
Pension Expense
101
Minority Interest
102
Special Items
102
CFROI Calculation for Amazon
103
Understanding the Relative Wealth Chart
105
xii

Contents
A Comment on Goodwill
106
Chapter Appendix: Gross Plant Recaptured
109
II
Discounted Cash Flow and Economic Proﬁt
Valuation
4
What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
113
Key Learning Points
113
A Review of Conventional Valuation Approaches
114
The Entity Free Cash Flow Approach
114
Valuing the End of the Line
118
Economic Proﬁt Approach
124
What Is Fade?
127
Fade in Economic Proﬁt Equation
129
HOLT Approach to FCFF Valuation
130
Nominal Gross Cash Flow
130
Total Investment
132
Debt and Equivalents
136
Valuing Diﬀerent Forecast Scenarios for Amazon in the
HOLT Framework
138
Valuing Air Liquide in HOLT Lens
145
5
Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
151
Key Learning Points
151
Introduction
152
The Worst Investment I Ever Made
154
Quantifying the Magnitude and Sustainability of CAP
158
Thought Experiment: The Valuation of Core Unlimited
164
The Probability of Permanent Disruption
168
The Characteristics of Competitive Advantage
169
Fade Is a Value Driver
172
The Fundamental Pricing Model
172
The Value Driver Tree
174
ROIC
174
Investment Growth
175
xiii

Contents
Fade
175
Cost of Capital
177
Investment Growth Is a Value Driver
177
Applying the Fundamental Pricing Model
178
Final Thoughts for the Moment
183
Chapter Appendix
184
Valuation Mathematics
184
Inputs for Valuing Macy’s and Assessing Its Competitive
Advantage Period
186
A Detour Through the Twilight Zone: Making Sense of
P/E
187
6
HOLT Economic Proﬁt
191
Key Learning Points
191
Introduction
193
Calculating CFROI as a Ratio
196
HOLT Economic Proﬁt
200
The Power of Simplicity: Spread, Fade, and Growth in an EP
Framework
204
Using Economic Proﬁt to Measure the Value of Acquisitions
205
Decomposing Value Creation into Delta EP Components
208
What about Goodwill?
210
Case Study: Danaher Corporation
212
7
Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
217
Key Learning Points
217
Risk, Return, and Diversiﬁcation
218
What Is Risk?
221
How Do Corporate Managers Discount Cash Flows to
Present Value?
223
How Should Investors Think about Risk When
Discounting Cash Flows?
223
How Large Is the Equity Risk Premium (ERP)?
226
Should I Use the Arithmetic or Geometric Average?
228
Other Risk Factors to Consider
228
xiv

Contents
Introduction to the HOLT Approach of Estimating a Firm’s
Discount Rate
231
Relating the HOLT Discount Rate and Framework to
CAPM and APV
237
What Type of Discount Rate Is the HOLT Cost of
Capital?
238
Valuation Method Equivalence
239
Capital Cash Flows
243
Cost of Capital and Its Relationship to Debt
243
Chapter Appendix: Do Equity Discount Rates Mean Revert?
245
General Observations about Annual Changes in the U.S.
Discount Rate
247
How Does the Monthly Change in the U.S. Discount
Rate Behave?
249
Does the Discount Rate Mean-Revert?
250
How Do Changes in the Discount Rate Manifest in the
Equity Risk Premium?
252
The Bitter Truth about Mean Reversion
253
III
Value Driver Forecasting
8
The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate
Evolution
257
Key Learning Points
257
Introduction
258
What Is Fade?
262
The Competitive Life-Cycle
262
Determining a Firm’s Life-Cycle Position
264
Question Marks (Early Life-Cycle)
265
Stars
267
Cash Cows
270
Dogs (Turnarounds or Restructuring)
274
Final Remarks on the Competitive Life-Cycle
276
Essential Facts about the Competitive Life-Cycle
278
9
The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
281
Key Learning Points
281
xv

Contents
Long-Term Real Return on Investment
282
The Long-Term Real Required Rate of Return
283
Measuring Persistence
286
Transition Matrices as a Means of Quantifying Fade
286
Industry Persistence: Does Industry Matter?
287
Reversion to the Mean
290
Competitive Advantage and Its Eﬀect on Fade
292
Industry CFROI Persistence
295
Does CFROI Persistence Vary over Time?
296
Putting It All Together: Developing a Mean-Reverting
Forecast Model
297
Conclusion
300
10
Forecasting Growth
303
Key Learning Points
303
Median Real Asset Growth Rate
306
The Average Growth Rate as Companies Mature
307
Is Corporate Growth Mean-Reverting?
309
The Sustainability of Growth
312
Forecasting Growth
313
Measuring a Firm’s Sustainable Growth Rate
313
Why HOLT Uses a Normalized Growth Rate
315
Forecasting Growth: Near-Term and Long-Term
Dynamics
317
Conclusions
319
11
Evaluating Market Expectations
321
Key Learning Points
321
The Relative Wealth Chart as a Decision Aid for Eﬃciently
Assessing Stock Opportunities
322
Distilling Expectations from a Stock Price
323
Can It Beat the Fade?
326
The Green Dot
328
Thinking about Expectations at Diﬀerent Life-Cycle States
332
Why the Green Dot Is So Helpful
336
Picking Stocks Across the Life-Cycle
340
xvi

Contents
Question Mark (Tesla)
340
Star (Amazon)
343
eCAP (Nestlé)
346
Cash Cow (DuPont)
348
Dog (BP)
349
Final Remarks
353
Chapter Appendix: Gauging Expectations Using PVGO
356
12
Closing Thoughts
359
Index
363
xvii

INTRODUCTION
THE PRICING PUZZLE: FOUNDATIONAL HOLT
CONCEPT AND A KEY TO BETTER VALUATION
On May 13, 2017, the Financial Times reported that “investors wiped
$4.6bn from the market value of the U.S. department store sector in the
space of two days, as concern mounted about sliding sales and the eﬀects
of online competition.” U.S. department stores suﬀered an astonishing fall
in market value of over 16% in two days.1 Who is responsible for this
vaporization of shareholder value? All ﬁngers were pointed at Amazon, the
biggest online retailer, which accounts for 5% of retail spending in the
United States, and is presently the world’s ﬁfth most valuable company.2
In 1994, Amazon was just a ﬂedgling start-up. The Internet was begin-
ning to take oﬀas a vehicle for commerce, and growth rates were forecast to
be into the hundreds of percent. Seeing an opportunity, JeﬀBezos launched
Amazon as an online retail bookstore from his garage. Over the last decade,
Amazon has grown its revenue to almost 13 times from where it started for
a compound annual growth of 29%.3 To say it is disrupting traditional
retailers and ways of doing business is an understatement.
1Adam Samson, Mamta Badkar, and Nicole Bullock, “US Retail Sector’s Misery—In Charts,” Financial
Times, May 13, 2017.
2Reported in “Primed,” The Economist, March 25, 2017, pp. 24–26.
3Even as late as 2014 when we began writing this book, we would have been skeptical of Amazon
increasing its sales from $74bn in 2013 to $136bn in 2016. According to our study of sales growth
in Chapter 10, Amazon only had a 13% probability of growing sales at this rate or higher over three
years.
xix

Introduction
Amazon’s share price has increased 63,990% since its IPO on May 15,
1997, versus 300% in total return for the S&P 500 over the same period.4
Amazon surpassed the mighty Wal-Mart in 2015 as the most valuable
retailer in America. Despite this stellar performance, Amazon regularly
posts poor earnings numbers and a subpar return on equity (ROE) yet
consistently trades at a price-to-book (P/B) ratio in the neighborhood of
20. Is there something missing in the accounting ﬁgures?
JeﬀBezos, CEO and founder of Amazon, gives us a clue in his 1997
Letter to Shareholders: “When forced to choose between optimizing the
appearance of our GAAP accounting and maximizing the present value of
future cash ﬂows, we’ll take the cash ﬂows.” Treating Amazon’s research and
development (R&D) cost as a long-term investment instead of an account-
ing expense provides a completely diﬀerent perspective on the company’s
economic proﬁtability and value. The capitalization of R&D is explored in
the Asset Life section of Chapter 3. Accounting data does not convey a clear
picture of a ﬁrm’s economic performance, and is becoming less relevant as
intangible assets become more important than physical assets in generating
economic value.5 A framework that focuses on economic returns and ties
them to intrinsic value is crucial for equity investors and corporate man-
agers when pricing assets and strategies. We show how cash ﬂow return on
investment (CFROI) improves upon accounting measures of proﬁtability
in Chapter 3, using Amazon’s 2013 annual report. We explore discounted
cash ﬂow (DCF) and discounted economic proﬁt (EP) valuation meth-
ods in Chapters 4 and 6. The tools and techniques are the same for fund
and corporate managers, and we welcome both groups to apply this book’s
lessons in valuing companies and assessing their proﬁtability.
A thread that runs throughout the book from its opening is the impor-
tance of capital allocation and investing in positive net present value (NPV)
strategies. We demonstrate the connection between project economics and
corporate valuation. Company managers who focus on making positive
4Nicole Bullock, and Mamta Badkar, “Amazon’s 20 Years as ‘Pre-Eminent Disrupter of Retail,’”
Financial Times, May 16, 2017.
5For more on the increasing irrelevance of accounting numbers, see Baruch Lev and Feng Gu, The End
of Accounting and the Path Forward for Investors and Managers, John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
xx

Introduction
NPV investments will increase the economic proﬁt and intrinsic value of
their ﬁrms. Beware when acquisitions and investments are made for “strate-
gic” reasons. This excuse often means that ﬁnancial reasons are lacking.
Capital allocation, NPV, EP, and intrinsic value are intimately linked.
Successful equity investing requires an ability to gauge the expectations
of others (what’s priced into the stock) and to skillfully weigh this
expectation against the likelihood of success. Accurately predicting a
company’s future proﬁtability doesn’t necessarily lead to outperformance.
Instead, large gains accrue to investors who identify stocks that will beat
expectations. It doesn’t matter if the expectations are for failure or enor-
mous success: If a company can better those expectations, shareholders
will reward the company by pushing its share price higher.
The professional employer services ﬁrm Automatic Data Processing
(ADP) makes this point clear. Since 1991, ADP has earned impressive
operating margins that rank it in the top twentieth percentile of proﬁtabil-
ity in the world. ADP ranks as one of the 50 most proﬁtable ﬁrms over
the past 25 years.
Despite ADP’s impressive track record of performance, price expecta-
tions as of April 2004 showed investors were anticipating even greater suc-
cess. And investors got it right! Over the next 10 years, ADP outpunched
rivals and steadily earned increasing proﬁts. What an impressive achieve-
ment: Investors anticipated this success and embedded it into the stock
price as early as 2004. But here’s the key point: ADP’s shareholder returns
over this ten-year period were lackluster, and investors earned no more than
benchmark performance despite ADP’s stunning record of proﬁtability.
How could this happen? It’s simple, really: If you bought ADP in April
of 2004, you paid for stellar future operating performance. ADP met this
expectation; it did not exceed it. Instead of reaping huge gains as prof-
its rose, shareholders earned exactly what they paid for in the form of
benchmark returns. Upon reﬂection, this should be viewed as an entirely
reasonable outcome: If stocks are priced eﬃciently, then companies that
meet expectations should return only their cost of equity.
xxi

Introduction
Starbucks, the purveyor of ﬁne coﬀee, had similarly high expectations in
January 2009. Its cash ﬂow return on investment (CFROI) was expected
to rise from 8.5% to 9.3% over the ensuing ﬁve years. This seemingly
small upward improvement was empirically a 20% probability event,
meaning that 80% of ﬁrms with similar proﬁtability throughout history
were unable to lift CFROI above 9.3%. This placed the odds of success
at 1-in-4 (0.2/0.8). But, instead of just meeting expectations, Starbucks
brewed proﬁts well above this level, pushing CFROI over the brim toward
12%. This success was unanticipated, and Starbucks share price leapt
ahead of its benchmark, nearly quadrupling it by 2013. Finding stocks
that can beat expectations is the key to earning large returns. We explore
how to evaluate market expectations in Chapter 11.
The ultimate aim of equity analysts and portfolio managers is to select
future winners and avoid tomorrow’s losers. This requires a considerable
measure of predictive skill (or luck). Like a garden, forecasting skill can
be cultivated to yield greater output. We provide empirical results for the
behavior of corporate growth and proﬁtability in Chapters 8, 9, and 10,
and show how you can improve your forecasts of growth and proﬁtability.
Growth and proﬁtability both exhibit reversion to the mean, which we
describe and model as “fade.”
A key to superior stock picking is utilizing a framework that facilitates
consistent and rigorous evaluation of an investment’s positive and negative
merits. The HOLT framework is designed to help investors do a better job
at grading stock ideas. At the heart of this objective is an eﬀort to de-bias
the investor by exposing a stock’s embedded price expectations. HOLT’s
framework is a proven and reliable system that has been rigorously ﬁeld
tested by investment professionals for over 40 years.
This book relies on the Pricing Puzzle as a useful aid for thinking crit-
ically about the intrinsic value of a ﬁrm (Exhibit I.1). The Pricing Puzzle
contains all of the key elements that inﬂuence a stock’s price, including
fundamental and behavioral drivers. Familiarity with this tool can help you
quickly and eﬀectively think through how changes in fundamental drivers
are likely to inﬂuence the value of a company.
xxii

Introduction
EXHIBIT I.1 The Pricing Puzzle and chapter that corresponds to each driver.
Warranted
Price
Free Cash
Flown
Asset
CFROI
Growth
Fade
(1+DRn)n
3
10
7
3
9
5
4
∑
=
=
N
n 1
HOLT’s valuation model is predicated on a life-cycle perspective of
corporate evolution. From start-up to mature veteran or restructuring
candidate, empirical evidence shows that companies share similar traits at
each state of development and that these traits can be helpful in predicting
future proﬁtability and growth. Few ﬁrms can sustain high proﬁtability
for decades. Most companies become cost-of-capital operations within
ﬁve to ten years.
HOLT’s valuation model embeds competitive fade (reversion to the
mean) into forecasts of future proﬁtability and growth. Beginning with a
ﬁrm’s asset base, stated in current dollars, the principle drivers of corporate
value are the ﬁrm’s economic rate of return (CFROI), asset growth rate,
and its likely fade rate in proﬁtability. These three drivers are used to esti-
mate a ﬁrm’s free cash ﬂows. Over time, proﬁtability converges toward the
cost of capital and growth converges toward a long-term sustainable level.
The Pricing Puzzle can be elegantly stated as a simple but powerful for-
mula that estimates a mature ﬁrm’s value. We call this the Fundamental
Pricing Model:
P = B(ROC1 −g + f )
(r −g + f )
where B is book value, ROC is the forward return on capital, g is the asset
growth rate, and f is the rate at which proﬁtability fades to the cost of
xxiii

Introduction
EXHIBIT I.2 Perspectives for application of the Fundamental Pricing Model.
Perspective:
Equity Holders
Capital Providers
(Conventional)
Capital Providers
(HOLT)
P:
Equity value
Enterprise value
Enterprise value
B:
Book equity value
Invested capital
Inﬂation-adjusted gross
investment (IAGI)
ROC:
ROE
ROIC
CFROI
g:
Growth in book equity
Growth in invested capital
Real growth in IAGI
r:
Cost of equity, re
Weighted-average cost of
capital (WACC)
Real cost of capital, HOLT
DR
f:
ROE fades to re
ROIC fades to WACC
CFROI fades to HOLT DR
capital r.6 Exhibit I.2 shows the corresponding variables for diﬀerent per-
spectives.7 Consistency is paramount!
This equation introduces a vital component missing from traditional
valuation models, such as the Gordon Growth Model: fade (f) is the
rate at which proﬁtability reverts toward the mean. The slower the
fade, the longer the competitive advantage period (CAP) of a ﬁrm with
attractive proﬁtability and the greater its intrinsic value. Shifting B to the
left-hand side of the equation restates the formula as price-to-book, P/B,
which can be calculated on the back of an envelope for stable, mature
ﬁrms.
Note that when the return on capital equals the cost of capital, growth
and fade create no value since no excess rents are earned and P/B equals
1. When CFROI is greater than the cost of capital, P/B is greater than
1. When fade is high, proﬁtability changes quickly. Fade drives down or
reduces the intrinsic value of a proﬁtable ﬁrm, but drives up or enhances
the value of an unproﬁtable one. The strong statistical relationship between
6The HOLT framework uses the inﬂation-adjusted gross assets as the asset base to minimize accounting
and inﬂationary distortions. To obtain the intrinsic enterprise value, the inﬂation-adjusted accumulated
depreciation must be subtracted from the calculated price, which represents a gross value in the HOLT
formulation. These nuances and their beneﬁts are explored in the book.
7The earnings form of the model is: P = E1
(
1−
[ g−f
ROC1
])
(r−g+f )
, where the forward earnings E1 is net income,
NOPAT, or gross cash ﬂow for the equity, invested capital and HOLT perspectives respectively. For the
full derivation, see our report “Don’t Suﬀer from a Terminal Flaw, Add Fade to your DCF” issued by
Credit Suisse HOLT in June 2016.
xxiv

Introduction
EXHIBIT I.3 The Pricing Puzzle using Economic Proﬁt and the chapter that
corresponds to each driver.
Warranted
Price
Economic
Net Assets
Economic
Profitn
Asset
CFROI
Growth
Fade
(1+DRn)n
3
10
7
3
3
9
5
6
∑
=
=
N
n
1
HOLT P/B and CFROI supports the utility of this pricing equation.8
The Fundamental Pricing Model is worth remembering; every student and
practitioner of ﬁnance should commit it to memory. We explore the use
of this equation in Chapter 5 to quickly and eﬀectively estimate a ﬁrm’s
value, understand its competitive advantage period, and gauge expectations
embedded in a stock’s price.
We praise the virtue of cash ﬂow over earnings throughout the book,
which begs the question: Is negative free cash ﬂow a bad thing in the short
to medium term if a company has a host of positive NPV strategies to invest
in? The answer is a resounding “No!” Capital providers will excitedly queue
to invest in positive NPV projects, each of which increases the company’s
intrinsic value by the expected value of its NPV. For this reason, it is gen-
erally easier for company managers to think in terms of economic proﬁt,
where a capital charge is subtracted from operating proﬁt. Firms investing
in positive NPV projects will create positive economic proﬁt regardless of
whether the short to medium term free cash ﬂow is negative. We cover this
topic in detail in Chapter 6. The Prizing Puzzle can also be written in terms
of economic proﬁt (Exhibit I.3).
8R2 values are typically above 0.7, making CFROI a signiﬁcant variable in explaining a stock’s market
enterprise value. We use HOLT P/B and economic P/E, which is HOLT P/B divided by CFROI,
as screening variables and stock-picking factors. Economic PE provides an excellent signal of relative
attractiveness.
xxv

Introduction
OVERVIEW OF BOOK CHAPTERS
This book is divided into three sections and 11 chapters, with each focusing
on a particular aspect of the Pricing Puzzle.
Section I: Financial Performance Assessment
In Chapter 1, we emphasize a core principle for corporate managers and
investors: Always pursue positive NPV strategies. The NPV Rule states that
any project that delivers returns in excess of its opportunity cost has merit.
Managers should continually strive to create value by maximizing NPV.
They can accomplish this by focusing their talents and eﬀorts on building
a sustainable competitive advantage for their ﬁrm. To be clear, short-term
pursuit of proﬁts should not dominate long-term value creation. Any ten-
sion that might arise between short-term and long-term objectives is resolv-
able when managers align their core responsibilities with the purpose of the
ﬁrm. This logical and useful connection between the two is summarized by
Bart Madden: “Maximizing shareholder value is best positioned not as the
purpose of the ﬁrm, but as the result of achieving the ﬁrm’s purpose.”9
Peter Drucker said, “The purpose of business is to create and keep a cus-
tomer.” He concluded that a ﬁrm retains customers, creates its competitive
advantage and generates excess proﬁts through innovation and marketing.
Chapter 2 reviews popular proﬁtability metrics and discusses how these
measures can be gamed by managers and how investors can sidestep some
of these weaknesses. We show the relationship between P/E and a DCF
valuation. We introduce the principles of value creation.
In Chapter 3, we describe how CFROI, HOLT’s measure of a ﬁrm’s eco-
nomic return on investment, is determined from accounting information.
We use Amazon as a case study and show how CFROI can be calculated
from standard ﬁnancial reporting statements and the notes from annual
ﬁlings. We explain the adjustments and their economic reasons.
9Bartley J. Madden, Value Creation Thinking, LearningWhatWorks, Naperville, IL, 2016.
xxvi

Introduction
Section II: Discounted Cash Flow and Economic Proﬁt
Valuation
Chapter 4 shows how to value a ﬁrm. The present value of free cash ﬂows,
not earnings, is the ultimate measure of a ﬁrm’s intrinsic worth. Companies
that earn returns on investment in excess of their opportunity cost will
trade at a premium to book because they are generating economic value
from their assets that exceeds the cost of their use. Companies that earn
returns on investment below their opportunity cost waste investor capital
and destroy shareholder value.
Chapter 5 explains the connection between a ﬁrm’s competitive advan-
tage period (CAP) and its fade in proﬁtability. We show how the fade rate
can be easily incorporated into a DCF model. The impact of changes in
CAP on intrinsic value can be assessed. The fade rate is a critical value
driver when valuing successful companies whose return on capital exceeds
their cost of capital.
Chapter 6 describes HOLT’s measure of economic proﬁt. Economic
proﬁt is the earnings that a ﬁrm generates in excess of its opportunity cost.
Firms that earn positive economic proﬁts generate signiﬁcant economic
value for investors. Valuations from the free cash ﬂow and economic proﬁt
methods are equal for a given forecast. We demonstrate the equivalence.
The goal for a company is not to increase earnings but rather to increase
economic proﬁt. Management bonuses should be tied to increases in eco-
nomic proﬁt.
In Chapter 7, we focus on investors’ required rate of return. This chapter
examines popular measures of the cost of capital. We demonstrate how
HOLT’s market-implied approach is related to these measures. This is a
must-read chapter for HOLT veterans and newcomers who desire a better
understanding of risk.
Section III: Value Driver Forecasting
In Chapter 8, we examine the importance of the competitive life-cycle as
a framework for thinking about a ﬁrm’s likely future evolution. Instead of
xxvii

Introduction
classifying ﬁrms as value or growth, we split them into four groups based on
proﬁtability and expected economic growth: Question Marks, Stars, Cash
Cows, and Dogs. We share our research on the probabilities of transitioning
from one group to another.
Chapter 9 introduces the concept of fade, or what academics call per-
sistence. This is a ground-breaking chapter that explores the notion of
reversion to the mean in corporate proﬁtability. We oﬀer detailed evidence
of mean-reversion in corporate proﬁtability and show how investors can
distinguish between random proﬁtability, sustained proﬁtability, and rever-
sion to the mean. This is an essential chapter for directors of research,
portfolio managers, and analysts who wish to improve the plausibility of
their forecasts.
In Chapter 10 we investigate the persistence of revenue, earnings, and
asset growth. We ﬁnd overwhelming evidence that growth rates are volatile
and quickly revert to the mean. Earnings growth is like white noise and
reveals little of predictive value. Forecasts of sustained earnings growth are
typically worthless. Few ﬁrms maintain high growth rates for long periods.
Finally, in Chapter 11 we wrap it up by focusing on how investors
can eﬀectively gauge the expectations embedded in a ﬁrm’s stock price.
HOLT provides several valuable tools to aid in this eﬀort. This is an essen-
tial chapter for investors who seek to hone their skills at picking winning
stocks using HOLT Lens.
WHO ARE WE AND WHAT DO WE HOPE TO ACHIEVE
We are valuation practitioners. We have worked with corporate and fund
managers to value decisions, divisions, stocks, and strategies. Both sides
can use the same metrics and valuation approaches to perform fundamental
company analysis. Because we work closely with fund managers and equity
analysts, we have focused much of our Credit Suisse HOLT research on
reﬁning fundamental valuations by improving forecasts of value drivers.
Better probabilistic forecasts result in more accurate valuations.
Our purpose in writing this book is to improve:
xxviii

Introduction
• Financial performance analysis for corporate and fund managers
when assessing a company’s historical and forecast proﬁtability
• The pricing model and its assumptions when performing
discounted cash ﬂow and economic proﬁt valuations
• Value driver forecasting to improve fundamental valuation and
stock picking
Return on equity (ROE) is a poor measure of a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability since it
focuses only on equity investors and not the quality of the ﬁrm’s operations.
Earnings can be gamed by accounting shenanigans and are also dependent
on a ﬁrm’s leverage. In short, ROE is not to be trusted. Return on invested
capital (ROIC) is a better measure of proﬁtability but liable to account-
ing distortions. Although it takes more eﬀort to calculate cash ﬂow return
on investment (CFROI), it is a comprehensive measure of a company’s
proﬁtability. Because CFROI reverses accounting distortions and adjusts
for inﬂation, it is comparable across borders and industries and over time.
This is highly advantageous to corporate and fund managers when assessing
proﬁtability and the plausibility of forecast proﬁtability. What’s the upside?
A better measure of proﬁtability results in improved capital allocation deci-
sions and fundamental valuation.
Earnings and P/E ratios are too unreliable for valuation, so we take you
beyond earnings in this book. Although we prefer CFROI as a measure
of proﬁtability, the valuation methods we derive are general and can also
utilize ROE, ROIC, or other metrics. Asset light businesses might not
require the rigor of the CFROI inﬂation adjustments but will probably
necessitate the capitalization of intangible assets such as R&D. It is
essential that consistency reigns when measuring ﬁnancial performance
and valuing companies. Amazon provides an excellent case study, and
is used throughout the book. We prefer the economic proﬁt approach
when discussing valuations since the present value of future economic
proﬁts equals the total NPV of all present and future investments. The
relationship is one-to-one and connects project economics to corporate
valuation. A relentless focus on this connection will lead to improvements
xxix

Introduction
in capital allocation for corporate executives and their boards. We explore
the nuances of using net assets (invested capital) versus inﬂation-adjusted
gross investment in the assessment of economic proﬁt.
The ﬁnal section of the book is targeted at fundamental stock pickers
but should be of interest to corporate managers and strategists try-
ing to assess the plausibility of a forecast or determine a company’s
market-implied expectations. Knowing what’s in the price of suppliers,
competitors, customers, and entire industries is valuable information.
Better forecasts of the value drivers, CFROI, asset growth, and fade,
should result in more accurate valuations and improved performance for
stock pickers. We share our latest thinking and empirical ﬁndings from
many years of observations.
When deciding which metrics and valuation approach to use for a spe-
ciﬁc company or investment decision process, it is best to recall the words
of Albert Einstein: “Everything should be as simple as it can be but not
simpler.”
xxx

Section I
Financial Performance
Assessment
1
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

1
NEVER FORGET THE
GOLDEN RULE: PURSUE
STRATEGIES WITH
POSITIVE NPV
“Cash ﬂow is a fact, earnings an opinion.”
—written on a subway wall
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Rational investors prefer more value to less.
• The responsibilities of corporate ﬁnancial managers are varied but
revolve around making decisions that increase economic value.
• Accounting value is what’s been put into a business while eco-
nomic value is what can be taken out in future cash ﬂows. Don’t
confuse earnings and cash ﬂow.
• The golden rule of ﬁnance is to pursue strategies and projects with
a positive net present value.
3
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• The growing annuity equation is useful for back-of-the-envelope
valuations.
• Decision trees help visualize and value the outcomes from deci-
sions and chance events.
• The price of short-termism can be high. Investors pay for the long
term.
• The Law of Conservation of Value speciﬁes that if expected cash
ﬂows don’t change, then the intrinsic value shouldn’t change.
INTRODUCTION
If we oﬀered you the chance to buy a crisp $100 bill for $80, you would
undoubtedly accept the deal since its immediate proﬁt, or net present value
(NPV), is $20 in your favor. You would surely decline an opportunity to
purchase a $100 bill for $120. The NPV would be a loss of $20, resulting
in an immediate decline in your wealth. Simply stated, rational investors
prefer more value to less.
This statement might strike you as blindingly obvious, but there is no
shortage of corporate examples where it has been violated. A National
Bureau of Economic Research study estimated that shareholders lose
$5.90 for every $100 spent on acquiring public companies.1 Sprint, a U.S.
telecommunications company, paid $36 billion in 2005 to acquire Nextel
in a deal many thought was richly valued. It proved disastrous. They failed
to integrate their networks and cultures. Sprint wrote oﬀ$30bn on the
purchase in 2008, and the name Sprint Nextel became extinct in 2013
after years of very poor performance relative to the S&P 500.
Hewlett-Packard (HP), the famed Silicon Valley pioneer, paid $10.3
billion for the UK software company Autonomy in 2011, and wrote oﬀ
$8.8 billion of the value one year after the acquisition. The premium it
paid was 79% and considered excessive at the time. How did HP get it so
wrong? According to Bloomberg, “One former HP executive who worked
1S.B. Moeller, F.P. Schlingemann, and R.M. Stulz. “Do Shareholders of Acquiring Firms Gain from
Acquisitions?” NBER Working Paper No. 9523, March 2003.
4

Never Forget the Golden Rule
there at the time says it appeared that Apotheker (HP’s CEO) and the
board didn’t know what to do and were trying anything they could think
of. ‘It wasn’t a strategy,’ he says. ‘It was total chaos.’”2 HP paid $100 for a
$10 bill.
Fund investors are also guilty of forgetting that rational investors prefer
more value to less. Andrew Ang provides ample evidence in his excellent
book on asset management that mutual funds, hedge funds, and private
equity investments don’t pay oﬀfor most investors after all the fees and
risks are taken into account.3 The fees are lower and your odds of better
relative performance are higher when buying an S&P 500 ETF rather than
an actively managed fund with the S&P 500 as its benchmark. Active funds
are suﬀering massive outﬂows from their portfolios into those of passive
funds.
Despite diﬀerent opinions and time frames, all shareholders will agree
that they are better oﬀif a company’s managers make decisions that increase
the value of their shares. Rational investors prefer corporate managers to
invest in wealth creating projects and to increase the value of their company.
One reason managers and investors forget this simple rule is because
they confuse earnings and cash ﬂow. An obsessive ﬁxation with earnings
inﬂuences markets from closing in Tokyo to opening on Wall Street. Earn-
ings and accounting-based performance metrics are easily gamed and can
destroy shareholder value when executives get rewarded for hitting them as
targets. CEOs who are rewarded for growing earnings per share (EPS) can
do it quite easily by repurchasing shares instead of paying dividends.
There is an antidote. Modern ﬁnance provides ample evidence that
stock prices are based on long-term cash ﬂow expectations, not short-term
caprice. HOLT’s cash ﬂow return on investment (CFROI) framework
pierces the veil of accounting gimmickry and attempts by corporate
executives at window dressing, and oﬀers a reliable system for investment
analysis.
2Aaron Ricadela, “Why Hewlett-Packard’s Impulse Buy Didn’t Pay Oﬀ,” Bloomberg, November 30,
2012. According to the article, Larry Ellison, the CEO of Oracle, described Autonomy’s asking pricing
as “absurdly high.”
3Andrew Ang, Asset Management: A Systematic Approach to Factor Investing, Oxford University Press,
2014.
5

Beyond Earnings
Cash is king and discounted cash ﬂow (DCF) analysis is the appropriate
way to value projects and corporations. There is a clear connection between
decisions that managers make and the value of their company. Both cor-
porate and fund managers can use the same tools to estimate the intrinsic
value of their decisions.
WHAT DO CORPORATE FINANCIAL MANAGERS DO
DURING THE DAY?
To appreciate how equity investors value companies, it helps to understand
how companies value their decisions. The main responsibilities of corporate
ﬁnancial managers are:
• Deciding what investments to make
• Deciding how the corporation is ﬁnanced
• Managing the corporation’s cash needs
• Reporting the health of the business to its stockholders
Financial managers help decide in which strategies and projects the ﬁrm
invests. Projects include expansion, outsourcing, licensing, R&D, business
or product development, mergers, acquisitions, and disposals.
Financial managers report the ﬁrm’s operating results to stakeholders
and oﬀer guidance on its prospects. This requires an estimate of the likely
value of present and future projects. Risks, opportunities, and alternate
scenarios need to be assessed so that corporate executives can make
high-quality, rational decisions.4 The purpose of the ﬁrm is to prosper
by building a sustainable competitive advantage and selecting the most
valuable portfolio of projects, strategies, and businesses from its palette of
choices. Shareholder value will be maximized if the ﬁrm and its directors
remain vigilant in this pursuit.
4For an excellent introduction to the art and science of decision analysis, and how to improve decision
quality, see Peter McNamee and John Celona (2007), Decision Analysis for the Professional, 4th edition,
SmartOrg, Inc.
6

Never Forget the Golden Rule
Financial managers decide on and manage the ﬁrm’s capital structure—
its mix of equity, debt, and hybrid instruments such as convertible debt
to fund the ﬁrm’s investments. In a perfect capital market of no taxes or
market frictions, Modigliani and Miller demonstrated that a ﬁrm’s market
value is independent of capital structure.5 The value of a ﬁrm cannot be
altered by changing capital structure or dividend policy in a perfect capital
market. Any eﬀects on value from changes in capital structure or dividend
policy are due to frictions such as taxes, government policy, and transac-
tion costs. Because interest payments on debt are tax deductible in many
countries, it is valuable for ﬁrms to use debt. Unfortunately, there’s no such
thing as a free lunch. As the proportion of debt increases, the ﬁrm’s ability
to service its debt is threatened due to the rising possibility of default. A
corporate ﬁnance team manages the issuance of debt and equity to fund
investment, as well as the ﬁrm’s overall debt level. It is vital to consider the
trade-oﬀbetween the tax beneﬁts of debt and the costs of ﬁnancial distress.
Financial managers must cope with the need for cash to run the
business. The terms and conditions extended to customers and negotiated
with creditors must be directed and administered. Short-term ﬁnancing
to buy inventory and respond to seasonal spikes in sales is an important
task. The intelligent management of working capital is a key contributor
to a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability, return on capital, and value.
Executives and line managers require management reports to monitor
operations and remind themselves of targets. The results of individual
projects are consolidated into the ﬁrm’s aggregate ﬁnancial reports. These
management accounts are conﬁdential and remain inside the ﬁrm to
provide timely and critical information about the company’s performance.
Publicly listed ﬁrms provide investors four main ﬁnancial statements on
an annual basis:
5For more on Modigliani and Miller’s Propositions I and II, see Jonathan Berk and Peter DeMarzo
(2014), Corporate Finance, 3rd edition, Pearson, 478–501. For the ground-breaking original paper, see
F. Modigliani and M. Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
Investment,” American Economic Review 48(3), 261–297.
7

Beyond Earnings
• The balance sheet, or what’s oﬃcially termed the statement of
ﬁnancial position
• The income statement, now known as the statement of comprehen-
sive income, and commonly called the proﬁt and loss account, or
simply the P&L
• The statement of cash ﬂows, or more commonly, the cash ﬂow
statement
• The statement of changes in shareholders’ equity
Performance metrics should align employees and managers with the
goal of building a sustainable competitive advantage and maximizing
the value of the ﬁrm.6 Metrics matter because they inﬂuence behavior.
As the old medical saying goes, “What gets measured, gets managed.”
Financial managers play a central role in communicating operating results
to both internal and external stakeholders. Investors and analysts will be
confused and less interested in owning stock if the chief ﬁnancial oﬃcer
(CFO) can’t clearly connect the ﬁrm’s decisions and operating perfor-
mance to its intrinsic value when communicating the ﬁrm’s results, plans,
and expectations. Meaningful ﬁnancial metrics indicate the economic
performance of the ﬁrm and help judge the plausibility of its expectations.
The best place to look for what drives executive behavior is the annual
ﬁnancial statement’s section on remuneration. Are reward metrics aligned
with value creation or accounting shenanigans?
WHAT IS VALUE?
Suppose you have a chance to buy a new car from Cash Is King Motors
or Royal Earnings Carport. You have agreed on a price of $50,000 for the
6It is our view that maximizing shareholder value is best positioned not as the purpose of the ﬁrm, but
as the result of achieving the ﬁrm’s purpose (see Madden). However, to gauge performance and assess
the potential of alternate strategies, the NPV rule dominates all other methods by linking opportunity
cost to net value creation. It is incumbent upon business managers to carefully weigh the value poten-
tial of short-term investments versus long-term bets whose value eﬀects may be meaningfully larger
but more diﬃcult to quantify. Real options and decision models can be helpful in quantifying and
visualizing them.
8

Never Forget the Golden Rule
same model, but the salesman from Royal Earnings is under pressure to hit
his sales target and throws in a sweetener. He says you can have the car for
$50k if you sign now and pay within 365 days. That’s a no brainer, right?
If you have cash, you place $50k in a savings account, pay for the car in
364 days, and pocket the interest. The time value of money makes this deal
attractive to you, and you would wait until the last minute to complete the
transaction.
How does this deal work its way through Royal Earnings ﬁnancial
reports? Their income statement reports a proﬁt after the sale despite no
cash in the till. Thus, earnings are up, but so are accounts receivable on the
balance sheet, which have to be collected at a future date. Let’s assume the
salesman is paid a commission of 2% and the cost of the car is $47,000.
The recorded gross proﬁt is plus $2,000, and managers congratulate
themselves when they see it reported on the P&L statement:
Gross Proﬁt = $50,000 −$47,000 −0.02 × $50,000 = $2,000
But not everyone is happy. The ﬁnancial manager gets a headache
because she has proﬁt but no cash. To top it oﬀ, she is losing the time
value of money and is exposed to credit risks and the possibility of losing
any proﬁt if you are unable to pay. Assuming a 10% cost of capital, we
can calculate today’s cash equivalent of receiving $50k in 364 days by
discounting this amount. The net present value (NPV) in today’s cash
would be:
NPV = $50,000
1.10
−$47,000 −0.02 × $50,000 = −$2,545.45
Accounting earnings are up (+$2,000), but the economic value of Royal
Earnings is down (−$2,545). Economic value represents the residual value
after imposing a charge on capital that could have earned a return by being
invested elsewhere. In this case, Royal Earnings suﬀers a current dollar loss
of value. To make matters worse, Royal Earnings might have to pay tax on
the reported earnings before being paid in cash by the customer.
This example highlights a fundamental diﬀerence between ﬁnancial
economics and accounting. The former concerns itself with cash and the
9

Beyond Earnings
timing of those cash ﬂows while the latter attempts to match revenue and
expenses in an income statement, and tallies the net value in a balance
sheet. Warren Buﬀett explains that “book value is an accounting concept,
recording the accumulated ﬁnancial input from both contributed capital
and retained earnings. Intrinsic business value is an economic concept,
estimating future cash output discounted to present value. Book value
tells you what has been put in; intrinsic business value estimates what can
be taken out.”7 Cash receipts and accounting income are rarely the same.
Following the money is the best way to understand value since you want
to be paid in cash, not promises.
The diﬀerence between a ﬁrm’s assets and liabilities is shareholders’
equity, which can be found on the balance sheet. This is also known as
book value of equity. It is an accounting measure of the net worth of the
ﬁrm. It is not an economic or market value of the ﬁrm’s equity. While
shareholders’ equity is measured strictly in dollars, many of the ﬁrm’s most
valuable assets are not captured on the balance sheet:
• The expertise of employees
• The ﬁrm’s reputation
• Relationships with customers and suppliers
• The value of future projects
• Quality of management and corporate culture
• The value of its brands
The market value of a company does not depend on the cost of its assets,
which is a sunk cost. It depends on the present value of cash ﬂows that
investors expect those assets to produce in the future. Exhibits 1.1 and 1.2
show how a balance sheet diﬀers from the perspective of a ﬁnancial accoun-
tant and that of a ﬁnancial economist.
Let’s consider the case of Amazon from both an accounting and
economic point of view. Amazon may trade in books but it certainly does
not trade at book. Its price-to-book ratio (P/B) is 21 compared to 2 for an
7Warren E. Buﬀett, “1983 Letter to Shareholders,” Berkshire Hathaway 1983 Annual Report.
10

Never Forget the Golden Rule
EXHIBIT 1.1 The accountant’s balance sheet equation is Total Assets equals
Total Liabilities plus Shareholders’ Equity. The latter is what
remains in book terms.
Current assets
• Cash
• Accounts receivables
• Inventory
• Other current assets
Long-term assets
• Net PP&E
• Goodwill
• Investments
• Other long-term assets
Shareholders’ equity
• Common stock
• Retained earnings
• Treasury stock
• Other equity
Current liabilities
• Short-term debt
• Accounts payable
• Other current liabilities
Long-term liabilities
• Long-term debt
• Deferred taxes
• Other long-term liabilities
EXHIBIT 1.2 The ﬁnancial economist’s balance sheet equation is Market
Value of Assets equals Market Value of Total Liabilities plus
Market Value of Shareholders’ Equity. The latter is better known
as market capitalization, or market cap.
Market value-added
• Premium over book equity
Shareholders’ equity
• Common stock
• Retained earnings
• Treasury stock
• Other equity
Current liabilities
• Short-term debt
• Accounts payable
• Other current liabilities
Long-term liabilities
• Long-term debt
• Deferred taxes
• Other long-term liabilities
Intangible assets
• Competitive advantage
• Management
• R&D, patents
• Brand value
Current assets
• Cash
• Accounts receivable
• Inventory
• Other current assets
Long-term assets
• Net PP&E
• Goodwill
• Investments
• Other long-term assets
11

Beyond Earnings
average U.S. company because investors expect the company to generate
attractive cash ﬂows well into the future.8 You might be shocked to learn
that Amazon reported negative shareholders’ equity from 2000 to 2004
and paltry operating earnings, yet investors never considered the company
insolvent. Shareholders weren’t bothered by the seemingly dreadful state of
Amazon’s accounting statements. JeﬀBezos has maintained since his 1997
Letter to Shareholders that, “When forced to choose between optimizing
the appearance of our GAAP accounting and maximizing the present
value of future cash ﬂows, we’ll take the cash ﬂows.”
Let’s shift from ratios to absolute amounts to bring home this essential
point. Amazon’s equity book value was $11.8bn on June 30, 2015, and its
market cap was $252bn on September 17, 2015. It was priced to generate
$240bn of economic value in current dollars on its existing and future
businesses (market premium equals market cap minus equity book value
(252 −12 = 240)).
The market value of equity can also be less than its book value. This
occurs in depressed industries where proﬁtability is low and there is excess
capacity, or for ﬁrms with grim prospects.
THE GOLDEN RULE OF FINANCIAL DECISION
MAKING
Hindustan Unilever’s guiding maxim is “what is good for the people of
India is good for Hindustan.” Similarly, what is good for the sustainable
competitive advantage of a ﬁrm is good for the investors of a ﬁrm. And,
what is good for investors is to increase their economic wealth since they
have a choice of investment opportunities. A business decision whose ben-
eﬁts exceed its costs is valuable. Comparing beneﬁts and costs is often
complicated because they occur at diﬀerent points in time, could be in
diﬀerent currencies, or may have diﬀerent risks associated with them. At
its essence, value is the money you make minus the total cost of making
8P/B ratio for Amazon on September 17, 2015, based on the most recent quarter.
12

Never Forget the Golden Rule
that money, or simply what’s left in the cash box after the transaction is
complete. Paying additional charges for interest, collection fees, refunds,
and product recalls reduces the cash in the till that can be paid as dividends
to shareholders. Shortsightedness is not in the best interest of long-term
investors.
Corporate ﬁnance is concerned with the present value of an investment,
which represents today’s cash value of future cash ﬂows. To compare cash
ﬂows at diﬀerent points in time, we need to state them in a single period’s
cash-equivalent value. It is standard to state cash ﬂows in today’s value. As
an example, consider exchanging a bond that matures in six months for
cash today, or an oil futures contract that matures in one year. In either
case, discussing the value of the bond or futures contract in today’s dollar
value allows for comparison between investments and instant appreciation
of their relative merit.
The fundamental measure of value creation is net present value (NPV),
which is the present value of all future and present cash inﬂows and out-
ﬂows related to a strategy or project. Cash outﬂows are negative and inﬂows
are positive.
NPV = PV of Beneﬁts −PV of Costs
If the expected NPV of an investment is negative, it should be rejected.
You wouldn’t trade £10,000 for $10,000 if the exchange rate were $1.60
per £, nor would you invest £10,000 in a risky venture if you were only
guaranteed £10,000 in one year’s time. A decision increases the value of
a ﬁrm when its expected NPV is positive. The Golden Rule of Finance
is to pursue projects that are NPV positive. This objective necessarily
includes a comprehensive examination of all the costs and proﬁts associated
with the project, those that occur today as well as those that may occur
many years into the future, such as cleanup costs and the probability of
stranded assets.
This is important because investment decisions and their associated
NPVs are related to the market value of a company’s equity. The market
13

Beyond Earnings
cap of a company equals its book value plus the NPV of all its present and
future projects, even those yet to be imagined:9
Market Value of Equity = Book Value of Equity + Market Premium
Market Premium = NPV of All Projects
If a company is growing but all its growth is into projects that create zero
NPV, then growth is irrelevant and the company should trade at its book
value. Growth can decrease the value of a ﬁrm if investments are poured
into negative NPV projects. You will be reminded of this point throughout
the book. Growth is not always value additive.
The Law of One Price—or the absence of arbitrage—is central to modern
ﬁnance. Investments that oﬀer the same payoﬀmust trade at the same price
in well-functioning markets. In a perfect market, the NPV of ﬁnancial
transactions will be zero. Exchanging currencies, commodities, or ﬁnan-
cial instruments at a discount suggests arbitrage (risk-free proﬁt), which is
rapidly eliminated whenever it appears. It is rare to ﬁnd a $100 note lying
on the ground because anyone seeing it is instantly wealthier after picking
it up.
By extension, the NPV decision rule states that when considering
investments, take the alternative with the highest NPV.10 Choosing this
alternative is equivalent to receiving its NPV in cash today. Because
present value is additive, the NPV of a ﬁrm is the sum of its strategies’
NPVs. This is precisely what connects project economics to the value
of the corporation and is properly known as the value additivity prin-
ciple. The NPV decision rule helps maximize the value of the ﬁrm by
aligning management’s goals with strategies best suited for commercial
and long-term ﬁnancial success. Decisions and their expected values
matter.
9We are assuming that the book value of equity is a fair estimate of its liquidation value in this
formulation.
10We stress, again, that the NPV decision rule must be guided by an honest and ethical assessment of
all associated costs, those that occur now and many years into the future. For instance, the decision to
extract coal from a proﬁtable mine cannot ignore the potentially damaging long-term eﬀects on the
local geography and the signiﬁcant costs that might be associated with cleanup and restoration.
14

Never Forget the Golden Rule
Investment projects are either mutually exclusive or independent.
A mutually exclusive decision involves choosing one project from among
a group of projects. Examples include choosing one plant or product
design; in-house manufacturing instead of outsourcing; or acquiring
one company rather than another. The NPV rule for mutually exclusive
decisions is to choose the one with the highest NPV because that is the
investment that will maximize the corporation’s total value. Though this
statement seems blatantly obvious, it often eludes corporate executives
when they make investment decisions. For example, there is signiﬁcant
evidence that acquisitions tend to destroy economic value for the acquiring
shareholders. Hubris and nebulous “strategic reasons” often result in an
overly optimistic assessment of synergies and the expected value creation
from mergers and acquisitions. Directors of the ﬁrm choose unwisely
when they seek to diversify the ﬁrm’s risk on behalf of its investors, who
are capable of doing it at a far lower cost and with far more relevance to
their individual portfolios.
Independent projects are trickier, but the rules remain the same. To max-
imize the value of the entire ﬁrm, managers should make decisions that
maximize NPV. All positive NPV projects should be accepted until reason-
able constraints such as lack of skilled employees interfere. When budget
constraints get in the way of accepting all of them, then projects should be
ranked and those with the lowest net present value should be rejected or
delayed. Metrics such as proﬁtability index (PI) help with the ranking but
the rule is clear. If management is convinced that an investment will gen-
erate positive net present value, then the CFO should pick up the phone
and raise capital.11
BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE BASICS
By converting all cash ﬂows to a common point in time, we can compare
the costs and beneﬁts of an investment, and calculate its NPV, which is the
11Just because NPV is positive doesn’t necessarily mean that a project should be commenced immedi-
ately. A project might be worth more if waiting is valuable. Decision analysis and real options are useful
for understanding the value implications of waiting, gathering more information, and ﬂexibility.
15

Beyond Earnings
net beneﬁt of the project in terms of cash today.
NPV =
N
∑
n=0
CFn
(1 + r)n
(1.1)
The variable CFn is the cash ﬂow in year n, N is the life of the project,
and r is the discount rate, or opportunity cost of the funds provided.
Three basic rules apply when translating cash ﬂows:
1. Only cash ﬂows occurring at the same point in time can be com-
pared or combined.
2. To move cash ﬂow forward in time, you must compound it.
FVn = PV × (1 + r)n
3. To move cash ﬂow backward in time, you must discount it.
PV =
FVn
(1 + r)n
To compound the value of cash (move it forward in time), apply an
interest rate. If you wish to know a company’s expected total shareholder
return in one year’s time, then compound today’s share price by the com-
pany’s cost of equity. To discount the value of cash (move it backward in
time),applyadiscountrate.Ifyouwishtoknowthepresentvalueofaspecial
dividend in one year’s time, then discount it by the company’s cost of equity.
At this stage, it is useful to derive a few simple relationships. A constant
annual payment that lasts forever is called a perpetuity. It has a surprisingly
simple solution called the perpetuity equation.12
PV =
∞
∑
n=1
CF
(1 + r)n = CF
r
(1.2)
If DivCo pays a constant dividend of $2bn into perpetuity and its
risk-adjusted cost of equity is 10%, then its market cap should trade at
12This can be proved by multiplying PV times (1 + r) and then subtracting PV from it. PV ×
(1 + r) – PV = r × PV. The summation times (1 + r) equals CF + PV, thus r × PV = CF + PV – PV,
which simpliﬁes to PV = CF/r.
16

Never Forget the Golden Rule
$20bn in a competitive market. Similarly, if DivCo could take out $2bn
in after-tax costs on a sustainable basis, its market cap would rise by
$20bn minus the investment needed to take out the costs. Let’s assume
an investment of $5bn is necessary. The NPV of the investment would be
$15bn:
NPV = −$5bn + $2bn
0.10 = $15bn
The value of the ﬁrm would increase to $35bn based on the value addi-
tivity principle. Because it is a positive NPV project, the ﬁrm should invest.
It can issue $5bn worth of equity to pay for it. Assuming the ﬁrm starts
with 1 billion shares, its market cap would immediately jump to $35bn
after the announcement ($20bn + $15bn = $35bn). Existing sharehold-
ers would pocket the full gain as the share price jumps from $20 to $35
($20bn/1bn shares = $20/share to $35bn/1bn shares = $35/share). The
ﬁrm would only have to issue 143 million shares to pay for the investment
($5bn/($35/share) = 143m shares). The dividend per share would increase
to $4bn divided by the total number of shares outstanding, 1.143bn, which
equals $3.50 per share, or according to the perpetuity equation, a share
price of $35 (P = $3.50/0.10 = $35 per share) (Exhibit 1.3).
The value of clear communication to investors should not be underes-
timated. In this example, announcing the savings initiative is critical. If
the potential upside of an investment is properly communicated, existing
shareholders will get all the additional expected value. If DivCo were to
issue shares without announcing the savings, the share price would remain
at $20 instead of immediately jumping to $35. Existing shareholders would
share the gain with those who bought the issued shares, i.e., 250m shares
would be issued at $20 per share and the share price would eventually settle
at $32, costing existing shareholders $3 per share in potential gain due to
poor communication. New shareholders would delight in their luck and
the blunder of management in failing to publicize the savings.
An important equation to remember is the formula for valuing a grow-
ing annuity in which cash ﬂow grows at a constant rate g for N years, and
then stops. An annuity is a ﬁxed sum. The growing annuity formula meets
17

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 1.3 DivCo has an opportunity to save $2bn per year and increase its
dividend. It issues shares to fund a $5bn investment to generate
the savings.
Timeline
Start
Announce
Reaction
Issue
Result
Dividend ($bn)
2
2
4
Shares (bn)
1
1
1.143
DPS ($/share)
2.00
2.00
3.50
Cost of equity
10%
10%
10%
Market cap ($bn)
20
35
40
Share price ($/share)
20.00
35.00
35.00
Savings announcement
After-tax savings ($bn)
2
PV of savings ($bn)
20
Investment ($bn)
−5
NPV ($bn)
15
Share issuance
Issue shares ($bn)
5
Issue price ($/share)
35.00
Shares (bn)
0.143
the requirements of Herbert Stein’s law, “If something cannot go on forever,
it will stop.”
PV =
N
∑
n=1
CF1 × (1 + g)n
(1 + r)n
=
CF1
(r −g)
[
1 −(1 + g)N
(1 + r)N
]
(1.3)
This equation should be permanently stamped into your memory or
placed on standby in your tablet! The ﬁrst term is simply a growing perpe-
tuity. The compound term accounts for the truncation of cash ﬂow after N
years. If N is inﬁnity, it simpliﬁes to the growing perpetuity equation, PV
= CF1/(r – g). If g is zero and N is inﬁnity, it simpliﬁes to the perpetuity
equation, PV = CF1/r. From the growing annuity equation, we can quickly
determine the perpetuity, growing perpetuity, and annuity equations. This
opens a whole new world to performing back-of-the-envelope calculations!
Suppose Bad Karma Pharma has just learned that it will have to pull
a valuable cash cow product from the market. The CEO calls you in, the
eager ﬁnancial analyst sporting a pen, envelope, and calculator. He is clearly
upset and asks you to calculate the hit on the share price, explaining that
18

Never Forget the Golden Rule
after-tax cash ﬂow will be reduced by $800m a year forever and the cost
of equity is 10%. In a jiﬀy, you realize this is a perpetuity and tell him the
market cap will take a hit of $8bn once the news is public. There goes the
yacht he planned to buy with stock options.
PV =
CF1
(r −g)
[
1 −(1 + g)N
(1 + r)N
]
= CF
r
= −$800m
0.10
= −$8bn
The CFO interjects that it might be worse since the product’s cash ﬂow
has been growing with inﬂation at 2%, which is expected to persist. No
problem, plenty of space on your envelope. This is a growing perpetuity.
PV =
CF1
(r −g)
[
1 −(1 + g)N
(1 + r)N
]
=
CF1
(r −g) =
−$800m
(0.10 −0.02) = −$10bn
The CEO turns pale when you quickly respond that this increases the
total hit to the market cap to $10bn. The Sales Director says it won’t be that
bad since she expects only 10 more years of cash ﬂow before the product
becomes uncompetitive. You mutter to yourself, “No sweat,” but this will
require a calculator and the envelope.
PV =
CF1
(r −g)
[
1 −(1 + g)N
(1 + r)N
]
=
−$800m
(0.10 −0.02)
[
1 −(1 + 0.02)10
(1 + 0.10)10
]
= −$5.3bn
The CEO sighs with relief when you say the total hit reduces to $5.3bn.
The Director of Research adds with an air of authority that there is a 30%
chance the ﬁndings were incorrect and that the product won’t have to
be pulled, but that it will cost $190m to contest the ﬁndings. The CEO
winces at the expense and asks if it is a wise decision to contest the ﬁnd-
ings. You sketch a probability tree and calculate an expected loss of $3.9bn
(Exhibit 1.4).13 You add that he can pay up to $1.59bn to contest the
ﬁndings, which is the value of perfect information, making the $190m
13A decision tree is useful for mapping and valuing decisions, uncertainties, and real options. Squares
represent decision points such as invest, delay, or kill. Circles represent uncertainties such as the likeli-
hood of success or potential values.
19

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 1.4 Bad Karma Pharma NPV Tree. Squares represent decision
points, and circles represent uncertainties and their
probabilities. The path with the greatest expected value should
be chosen.
30%
30%
0
–190
TRUE
Test results incorrect?
–190
–3,900
70%
70%
–5,300
–5,490
Contest findings?
–3,900
FALSE
0.0%
–5,300
–5,300
Expected Present
Value
No
Yes
Yes
No
expenditure seem like a bargain.14 The CEO realizes the news is bad but
now knows what he can expect when the market opens. He authorizes the
expenditure to contest the ﬁndings and thanks you profusely for making
such complicated ﬁnancial calculations under ﬁre and in a pinch.
IS THE NPV RULE FOOLPROOF?
Don’t let the rule fool with your head. Let’s take the case of Woody
Rock, a music impresario, who combs the clubs of London looking for
up-and-coming bands. He wears an easy smile and possesses that rare
quality of understanding the music business. You meet him at a club and
wonder if the NPV rule applies to the music business. He tells you that
one out of ten bands he signs has a successful ﬁrst release. He typically
invests £10,000 to record a band. Nine turn out to be duds that claw back
14The value of perfect information is the maximum amount that should be paid for the decision maker
to be indiﬀerent to contesting the ﬁndings. An expense greater than $1.59 would lead to a negative
expected value: Value of perfect information = 5.3bn – (0.3 × 0 + 0.7 × 5.3bn) = 1.59bn. It is
worthwhile to contest the ﬁndings unless it costs more than $1.59bn, thus a cost of $190m is a wise
expenditure.
20

Never Forget the Golden Rule
half of the investment and one band proves to be commercially successful,
grossing £55,000 for his production company. You run the numbers in
your head and conclude that it is breakeven. He explains that it takes
a year until he sees any cash ﬂow. You scribble the NPV on a napkin,
assuming a 10% discount rate.
NPV = −10 × 10,000 + 9 × 5,000
1.10
+ 1 × 55,000
1.10
= −£9,091
You’re scratching your head. The more he invests in bands, the more
value he destroys, yet Rock’s wearing the best money can buy on Bond
Street. This is not making sense and perhaps a ﬁtting occasion to give up
on modern ﬁnance.
You decide to explain the NPV rule and show him the napkin. Rock has
no idea what you’re babbling about but is intrigued because he likes making
money while messing with the establishment. “Mate, when I sign a band,
I have an option to produce the next two albums.” You press ahead with a
few questions about probabilities and expected earnings. “I only continue
with bands that succeed with their ﬁrst album. Most get the same result
with the second album, but 25% of the time the next album grosses 10
times as much while another 25% turn out to be ﬂash-in-the-pans that
gross one-tenth as much.” You draw the probability tree in your tablet and
re-commit yourself to the NPV rule. Despite the poor odds (90% of his
signings generate a negative NPV), Rock’s expected NPV per signing is
£49,466 for the ﬁrst three releases (Exhibit 1.5). With a committed team
and a lot of luck, he’ll win at the start, scale up, and watch his options
pay oﬀ!
Options have value and should be part and parcel of investment
analyses. Just because a project has a negative NPV doesn’t mean that
subsequent contingent options don’t have attractive value. Just like record
companies, pharmaceutical ﬁrms bet on many potential products but
have few actual winners. When the investments succeed, the payoﬀcan
be huge.
21

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 1.5 Woody Rock’s NPV. Real options have value. All values shown
are net present values.
25.0%
0.625% 
4,122,231
4,606,777
25.0%
3rd release
444,545
1,729,545
50.0%
1.25%
413,223
897,769
25.0%
0.625%
31,322
515,868
10.0%
2nd release
40,000
543,750
25.0%
1.25%
403,223
488,678
50.0%
3rd release
45,455
205,455
50.0%
2.5%
41,322
126,777
25.0%
1.25%
–5,868
79,587
25.0%
2.5%
–5,455
34,545
Initial signing
49,466
90.0%
90.0%
–5,455
–5,455
Woody Rock’s
NPV
Failure
Success
Worst
Best
Best
Base
Worst
Base
Best
Base
Worst
THE PRICE OF SHORT-TERMISM
According to David Larcker of Stanford University, “Companies want
long-term shareholders in particular because it allows them to implement
their corporate strategy and make long-term investments without the
distraction and short-term performance pressures that come from active
traders.”15 Most companies believe their share price would trade 15%
higher on average with a volatility that is 20% lower if they were able
to attract their ideal shareholder base. This is an extraordinary ﬁnding.
15Anne Beyer, David F. Larcker, and Brian Tayan, “2014 Study on How Investment Horizon Expec-
tations of Shareholder Base Impact Corporate Decision-Making,” Rock Center for Corporate Gover-
nance at Stanford University and NIRI.
22

Never Forget the Golden Rule
It implies that corporate investor relations professionals have recognized
the connection between decisions, value, and communication but are
unsuccessful in convincing investors of the merits of their companies’
long-term plans. Is the market so shortsighted or ineﬃcient that it prefers
accounting gimmicks and short-term earnings over decisions that increase
NPV over the long term? Numerous studies point to the opposite, namely
that the market sees through actions intended to increase accounting
earnings without increasing cash ﬂow.16
We wonder who is responsible for this specious issue of having the
wrong shareholders. In a famous survey, Graham, Harvey, and Raj-
gopal found that 80% of CFOs would cut spending on discretionary
future-oriented activities such as marketing and R&D to meet short-term
earnings targets.17 We have personally experienced situations where group
executives pressure managers to book revenue and earnings within the
artiﬁcial constraint of a ﬁnancial year even if it means oﬀering better
terms and discounts. Financial analysts will spot this trick by comparing
net income to operating cash ﬂow. This is uneconomic behavior and not
doing the “right thing” for long-term shareholders.
Academic research has shown that R&D intensive ﬁrms have generated
substantial future risk-adjusted shareholder returns.18 Cutting the R&D
budget to boost short-term earnings would hurt the share prices of
most successful technology and pharmaceutical companies. Paradoxi-
cally, successful ﬁrms can often surprise the market by an unexpected
increase in their R&D expenditure and increase their share price while
earnings drop.19
16Tim Koller, Marc Goedhart, and David Wessels (2010), Valuation: Measuring and Manag-
ing the Value of Companies, Chapter 16, John Wiley & Sons. The authors point out numerous
examples.
17John R. Graham, Cam Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate
Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 40 (2005), 3–73.
18Mustafa Ciftci, Baruch Lev, and Suresh Radhakrishnan, “Is Research and Development Mispriced
or Properly Risk Adjusted?” Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance 26(1) (January 2011), 81–116.
19For an interesting case study on how an improved decision analysis process shifted SmithKline
Beecham from cutting R&D to increasing it, see Paul Sharpe and Tom Keelin, “How SmithK-
line Beecham Makes Better Resource-Allocation Decisions,” Harvard Business Review, March-April
1998.
23

Beyond Earnings
As Mauboussin and Callahan point out in their study “A Long Look at
Short-Termism,” “concerns about short-termism have been around for a
long time.”20 Here is a recent example that they cite:
“… the shadow of short-termism has continued to advance—and the
situation may actually be getting worse. As a result, companies are less
able to invest and build value for the long term, undermining broad
economic growth and lowering returns on investment for savers.
The main source of the problem, we believe, is the continuing
pressure on public companies from ﬁnancial markets to maximize
short-term results.”21
Contrast this sentiment with Amazon’s pitiful accounting earnings and
superlative market rating, and what JeﬀBezos said in 1997 and reiterates
every year, “We believe that a fundamental measure of our success will
be the shareholder value we create over the long term.” Amazon’s average
return on equity over the past ﬁve years is a meager 1.4% yet it trades
at a price-to-book (P/B) multiple of 21.22 It doesn’t have a trailing
price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio since it reported negative earnings in 2014.
Its forward P/E is an astronomical 112 compared to a longer-term average
of around 14 for most ﬁrms.
In Apple’s release of its third quarter 2015 results, the world’s most
valuable and followed company beat analysts’ expectations, yet its share
price dropped 8%.
The Financial Times reported, “Revenues for the three months ending
in June were up 33 per cent to $49.6bn with earnings up 45 per cent
to $1.85—the ninth consecutive quarter that Apple has beaten earnings
forecasts.”23
Although Apple beat quarterly sales and earnings expectations, concerns
about the iPhone’s longer-term growth, and prospects for revenue growth
20Michael J. Mauboussin and Dan Callahan (2014), “A Long Look at Short-Termism: Questioning
the Premise,” Credit Suisse Global Financial Strategies.
21Dominic Barton and Mark Wiseman, “Focusing on the Long Run,” Harvard Business Review, January
2014.
22Amazon’s ROE based on average book equity from 2010 to 2014 was respectively: 4.8%, 2.2%,
−0.1%, 0.8%, and −0.6%. The P/B and forward P/E values are as of September 17, 2015.
23Tim Bradshaw. “Apple Shares Tumble after Third Quarter Results,” Financial Times, July 21, 2015.
24

Never Forget the Golden Rule
from China and the Apple Watch, brought down the share price. Apple lost
$30bn in market cap despite posting stellar numbers. Apple is expected to
generate $525bn in NPV on its present and future as-yet-unknown busi-
nesses!24 The market is already paying for enormous value creation and
growth. It is no wonder that investors get twitchy when it appears future
growth engines might disappoint.
Mauboussin deﬁnes short-termism as “the tendency to make decisions
that appear beneﬁcial in the short term at the expense of decisions that have
a higher payoﬀin the longer term.” Although short-termism is often cited
by the press as a plague infecting the investment and corporate community,
it is diﬃcult to prove. We maintain that investors prefer more value to
less, and that they prefer decisions that increase the long-term NPV of the
ﬁrm over short-term antics and accounting manipulation meant to fool
investors. In fact, companies that frequently restate their ﬁnancial reports
tend to underperform the stock market.25
Corporate valuation is based on the present value of a ﬁrm’s future cash
ﬂows. Fledgling companies that are burning cash and not yet making prof-
its may trade at rich P/E and P/B ratios because investors are willing to pay
juicy premiums for future growth and proﬁtability that they expect from
projects that have yet to break ground. High valuations relative to book
value indicate that the market is paying for the long term. When investors
have a short-term horizon, they are unwilling to pay much for the future.
Most investors take a longer-term view, and are willing to pay for many
years of cash ﬂow when they purchase the shares of highly successful ﬁrms
that demonstrate durable competitive advantages.
A simple example illustrates the connection between time and value
(Exhibit 1.6). Franck Dangereux is an extraordinary chef from France who
moved to Cape Town in the 1990s. His Foodbarn has been a favorite
restaurant of this section’s author for over a decade (mainly as a tourist
24On September 17, 2015, Apple’s market cap was $650bn, and its book equity value was $126bn as
of June 30, 2015. Apple is presently feeling pressure from activist shareholders since it holds $201bn
in short- and long-term investments, and cash.
25Conversations with and studies performed by Ron Graziano of Credit Suisse HOLT.
25

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 1.6 A simple example connecting time and value with the culinary
delights of Cape Town’s Foodbarn.
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Gross Proﬁt
2,500 2,700 2,916 3,149
3,401
3,673
3,967
4,285
4,627
4,998
x PV factor
0.909 0.826 0.751 0.683
0.621
0.564
0.513
0.467
0.424
0.386
= PV of Gross
Proﬁt
2,273 2,231 2,191 2,151
2,112
2,073
2,036
1,999
1,962
1,927
PV of Cumulative
GP
2,273 4,504 6,695 8,846 10,958 13,031 15,067 17,066 19,028 20,955
but now as a resident).26 What is the ﬁnancial value of my visits to the
restaurant?
Let’s say I visit the Foodbarn four times a year with three other people.
In the next year, the total bill for each visit will average R2,500 before tip
and VAT. Let’s assume a gross margin of 25% for Foodbarn, which is the
diﬀerence between the price of the meals to me and the cost of the food
and its preparation to Chef Dangereux. If I further assume a discount rate
of 10%, the present value for the next year’s gross proﬁt is R2,273, which
is stated in the currency of South African rand, R.
PV Gross Proﬁt = 4 visits × R2,500 per visit × 25%
1.10
= R2,273
The present value for ﬁve years of loyal dining is R10,958 if Franck
can increase prices 8% annually due to demand. If he continues to inspire
and delight customers for ten years, the present value leaps to R20,955.
Every time I walk into Foodbarn, I am greeted as warmly as R21,000 in
today’s cash. And the free round of port at the meal’s conclusion is a sound
investment on Franck’s part.
Five hundred like-minded foodies are worth R10.5m in today’s cash.
If every visit leads to enthusiastic recommendations and new customers
for Franck, then Foodbarn’s value multiplies and marketing is free. Let’s
assume that out of 4 visits per a year, a new loyal customer is smitten by
Franck’s culinary skill. Starting with me, the family tree grows to 16 in
26David Holland lived in Cape Town from 1995 to 2002 and moved back to Cape Town in 2012.
26

Never Forget the Golden Rule
5 years for a present value of R66,497 and 512 in 10 years for a present
value of R2m. The network eﬀect compounds handsomely.
Loyal Customer Tree
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
Loyal Gross Proﬁt
2,500 5,400 11,664 25,194 54,420 117,546 253,900 548,424 1,184,595 2,558,726
PV of Loyal GP
2,273 4,463
8,763 17,208 33,790
66,352 130,291 255,844
502,384
986,500
PV of Cumulative
Loyal GP
2,273 6,736 15,499 32,707 66,497 132,849 263,140 518,983 1,021,368 2,007,867
If Franck’s attention wanders, and food quality and service deteriorate,
then the value of my visits drops to R2,273, and he loses a loyal, long-term
fan. He’ll have to spend money on advertising and oﬀer discounted
specials to attract new customers. Proﬁts will shrink. His wallet will
wither. Short-term tricks such as overbilling, using poorer quality ingredi-
ents, or reduced service will hurt long-term value. Aggressive expansion,
which means taking his eye oﬀhis franchise restaurant, can easily
backﬁre.
In addition to creating long-term value, Franck must also be socially
responsible. If Franck were to begin treating his staﬀin a repulsive manner
or expressing odious views in the local paper, patronage of his restaurant
would fall. It is in his long-term interest to behave in a socially responsible
manner.
A company can suﬀer tremendous economic loss when its reputation
is damaged. The British public relations ﬁrm Bell Pottinger declared
bankruptcy in 2017 after it was linked to a racially derisive PR campaign
in South Africa. In 2015, Chipotle suﬀered share price losses totaling
more than $10bn due to contamination of its chicken through E. coli
bacteria. In 1993, when four people died from E. coli bacteria after eating
hamburgers at Jack-in-the-Box, the ﬁrm’s market value fell more than
30%. In 1982, someone put potassium cyanide in Tylenol capsules and
placed the bottles back on the shelf. Seven people who took those capsules
died. Johnson & Johnson, the maker of Tylenol, suﬀered a loss of two
billion dollars in market value. Its direct costs to recall the product and in
litigating lawsuits were a tenth of that. These ﬁrms all suﬀered a direct hit
to the value of their long-term cash ﬂows.
27

Beyond Earnings
From a fundamental point of view, the long term clearly matters to
investors. Because valuations are highly sensitive to changes in expectations
about long-term proﬁtability and growth, it is little wonder that share
prices can be quite volatile. Essentially, investors make short-term bets on
long-term outcomes. If your analysis leads you to conclude a stock is selling
at the wrong price during the short term, there is an opportunity to create
value for yourself in the long term by purchasing it today.
THINKING CLEARLY ABOUT ACTIONS, REACTIONS,
AND VALUE
How can you digest everything from company announcements to govern-
ment policy changes in a clear, uncluttered way without getting lost in
distractions and abstractions? We ﬁnd the Law of Conservation of Value to
be enormously beneﬁcial and an appropriate way to end this chapter. This
law states that anything that doesn’t change an asset’s expected cash ﬂows,
or the riskiness of those cash ﬂows, doesn’t change the intrinsic value of the
asset.
Value =
N
∑
n=1
E[CFn]
(1 + r)n
(1.4)
The term E[CFn] is the expected cash ﬂow in year n.
When an announcement is made or an event occurs, you should ask two
simple questions about how the new information aﬀects the numerator and
denominator of this equation:
• Will the expected cash ﬂows change?
• Will the riskiness of those cash ﬂows change?
If the answer is no to both questions, then the intrinsic value shouldn’t
change no matter what an army of investment bankers or television pun-
dits armed with P/E ratios might suggest. If an action does not increase
expected cash ﬂows, then it should not increase value.
Equipped with this law, you can disentangle countless arguments and
sleights of hand:
28

Never Forget the Golden Rule
• If a company axes R&D to increase next quarter’s earnings—and
the expected NPV from the R&D is positive—then future
expected cash ﬂows will be lower.
• Idle (excess) cash destroys value, and should be distributed to
shareholders. Activist shareholders know this and press for it
to extinguish the temptation of value-destroying acquisitions and
investments. Yet according to Larcker et al. 87% of companies
agree or strongly agree that activist shareholders are undesirable.
Why should they be feared if they are presenting ideas to increase
the share price? Activists are unlikely to attack companies that
act in shareholders’ best long-term interests. Companies get the
shareholders they deserve.
• Don’t be fooled by whether earnings are accretive or dilutive in a
company takeover. If the expected increase in cash ﬂow does not
exceed the premium paid for the acquisition, then intrinsic value
will be lower and destroy value for shareholders. Don’t fall for
arguments that hail diversiﬁcation as a key beneﬁt when mergers
and acquisitions are promoted. As Brealey, Myers, and Allen point
out, “Value additivity also means that you can’t increase value by
putting two whole companies together unless you thereby increase
the total cash ﬂow. In other words, there are no beneﬁts to mergers
solely for diversiﬁcation.”27
• Don’t get suckered by the sunk cost fallacy. If the NPV of
future cash ﬂows is negative, it doesn’t matter how much was
invested—the project should be stopped at once and written
oﬀ. It is for this reason that the market shrugs when companies
write oﬀbillions in bad investments if the market has already
taken a negative view on those investments. Mining giants BHP
Billiton, Rio Tinto, and Anglo American made big bets during
the commodity super cycle of the mid-noughties that were later
written oﬀwhen commodity prices crashed. Despite totaling
27Richard A. Brealey, Stewart C. Myers, and Franklin Allen, Principles of Corporate Finance,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2014.
29

Beyond Earnings
tens of billions of dollars, the write-oﬀs didn’t alter expected
cash ﬂows and share prices on their dates of announcement.
Expectations for future cash ﬂow and shares prices had already
dropped in line with sinking commodity prices.
• If you wish to understand the impact of government policy on
a company’s value or country’s wealth, follow the change in
expected cash ﬂow. Will the policy increase expected cash ﬂow,
or reduce uncertainty in any of the ﬁrm’s projects? Margaret
Thatcher earned a degree in chemistry and probably recalled sci-
entiﬁc and economic conservation principles when she observed,
“The problem with socialism is that you eventually run out of
other people’s money.”
We suggest that you commit the Law of Conservation of Value and
its two simple questions to memory. They will save you time, breath,
and money.
When in doubt on how to think about or value a decision or strategy,
always remember that the NPV rule is the golden rule of ﬁnance. Countless
managers and investors live to regret forgetting it. Here’s what the new
CEO of the once mighty South African mining giant Anglo American had
to say while the company was struggling to survive calamitous acquisitions,
onerous debt obligations, and devastating shareholder returns: “The ﬂaw
in the strategy was growth that was not pinned to returns or aﬀordability.
You have to protect your balance sheet.”28 That is an astonishing admission
of value destruction.
28Mark Cutifani, CEO of Anglo American, quoted in the Financial Times on February 14, 2016. In
an earlier interview with The Globe and Mail in 2014, the article stated, “Today, the new focus is on
boring but worthy pursuits, like capital discipline and shareholder value, not the fun but destructive
activities like growth for the sake of growth. ‘We were forcing growth through the system and that’s
partly how we got into trouble,’ Mr. Cutifani says.” The ignominious acquisition of Brazilian iron ore
assets was over $10bn of trouble, but it was made on the previous CEO’s account. See Eric Reguly,
“The Lunch: At Helm of Anglo American, Consummate Miner Digs Deep for Savings,” The Globe and
Mail, April 25, 2014.
30

2
THE FLYING TRAPEZE OF
PERFORMANCE METRICS
“As managements and board members improve their knowledge of the link
between ﬁrms’ economic performance and share price, they will increas-
ingly look beyond accounting earnings. They will gain conviction that large
investments in core competencies and long-lived, viable projects in which
the ﬁrm has demonstrated skill can raise the company’s stock price, even if
near-term accounting results suﬀer from it.”
—Bartley J. Madden1
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Return on equity (ROE), a commonly used measure of proﬁtabil-
ity, is subject to numerous distortions and, therefore, unreliable.
• Return on invested capital (ROIC) is a better measure of a ﬁrm’s
proﬁtability. It is not inﬂuenced by capital structure.
1Bartley J. Madden (1999), CFROI Valuation: A Total System Approach to Valuing the Firm,
Butterworth–Heinemann.
31
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• The P/E ratio can be related to a DCF model but is highly restric-
tive and subject to numerous distortions. Relative valuation
metrics such as P/E and P/B should only be used as sanity checks.
• All things being equal, an increase in proﬁtability results in an
increase in value. All asset growth is not equal. Companies should
only expand if they can generate returns on capital that exceed the
cost of capital.
• The hallmarks of a sound economic performance and valuation
framework are outlined.
MEASURES OF CORPORATE PERFORMANCE
Proﬁt is a measure of gain from investment. Proﬁtability is a measure of
relative gain, typically scaled by the investment. A popular metric for assess-
ing proﬁtability is to compare reported or expected net income to the
book value of stockholders’ equity. This ratio is known as return on equity
(ROE). Let’s see how return on equity can be gamed.
Amazon traded at a price-to-earnings ratio (P/E) of 169 and
price-to-book ratio (P/B) of 13.8 in December 2014 indicating that the
market had buoyant expectations for the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability and growth.2
Amazon spends billions of dollars on marketing, improving its technology,
and investing in new areas like web services (Exhibit 2.1).3
EXHIBIT 2.1 Amazon increased the amount it spent on marketing
and technology during this period.
Amazon
2011
2012
2013
Net Sales ($m)
48,077
61,093
74,452
Marketing ($m)
1,630
2,408
3,133
Marketing / Sales
3.4%
3.9%
4.2%
Technology & Content ($m)
2,909
4,564
6,565
T&C / Sales
6.1%
7.5%
8.8%
2Amazon’s closing share price was $307.32, and its market cap was $142 billion on December 12,
2014. The P/E ratio is based on the expected FY2014 earnings and the P/B ratio on the most recent
quarter. Both ratios were taken from www.bloomberg.com on the same day.
3These ﬁgures were taken from Amazon’s FY2013 annual report.
32

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
Marketing expense increased from 3.4% of sales to 4.2% from 2011 to
2013. Amazon invested heavily in technology and content over this period,
increasing that investment from 6.1% to 8.8% of sales.
RETURN ON EQUITY
Return on equity (ROE) is a traditional accounting metric used to assess
the performance of companies.
ROE = Net Income
Book Equity
Most practitioners use average book equity since net income represents
earnings for the entire ﬁnancial year. Valuations should be based on the
beginning-of-year (BOY) equity since all cash ﬂows are relative to opening
assets. Companies that can maintain an ROE that exceeds the cost of equity
should trade at a premium to book value (P/B > 1), and companies that
are unable to meet the cost of equity should trade at a discount (P/B < 1).
Amazon’s ROE suﬀered because investments were expensed rather than
capitalized (Exhibit 2.2). Expenses that are expected to generate future cash
ﬂows are more accurately recognized as an investment (or an intangible
asset), and as such, they are placed on the balance sheet. Over time, as
revenue is recognized, the asset is amortized in keeping with the matching
principle in accounting. This is known as a capital expense.
EXHIBIT 2.2 Amazon’s return on equity (ROE) and price-to-book ratio (P/B).
Market capitalization is based on the December year-end value.
Amazon
2011
2012
2013
Net Income ($m)
631
(39)
274
÷ Beginning Equity ($m)
7,757
8,192
9,746
= ROE (boy)
−0.5%
3.3%
= ROE (avg)
−0.5%
3.1%
Market cap ($m)
78,761
113,895
183,045
÷ Beginning Equity ($m)
7,757
8,192
9,746
= P/B
10.2
13.9
18.8
33

Beyond Earnings
If earnings were the be-all and end-all of valuation, Amazon should
have traded at a discount to its book value. Its ﬁscal year 2013 ROE of
3.1% is hardly the level of return investors get excited about and is more
symptomatic of a mature company in a dying industry than a highly prof-
itable star. Amazon’s P/B of 18.8 at the end of 2013 tells a diﬀerent story
and is indicative of a ﬁrm with sky high returns and growth. Amazon
could have improved its earnings by cutting its marketing and technol-
ogy expenses, which were respectively 11× and 24× the 2013 reported net
income. We would venture that the share price would have taken a hard
knock since a cut in these expenses aﬀects future growth and long-term cash
ﬂow generation (don’t forget the Law of Conservation of Value described
in Chapter 1). Clearly, neither Amazon nor its investors view technology
and content as an operating expense but rather as an investment in the
company’s future.
If Amazon had cut spending on technology and content to zero, its
2013 ROE would have jumped to over 50% and the company would
have reported record earnings (Exhibit 2.3). Wouldn’t shareholders wel-
come the leap in ROE and earnings? Most certainly not, as the share price
would have plummeted. There is an expectation by shareholders that Ama-
zon’s managers invest in positive NPV projects and that they will reduce
EXHIBIT 2.3 Amazon’s ROE if it cut its technology and content spending
to zero.
Cut Amazon’s R&D
2011
2012
2013
Net Income
631
(39)
274
+ Technology & Content
2,909
4,564
6,565
−Tax Adjustment @ 35%
1,018
1,597
2,298
= Adjusted Net Income
2,522
2,928
4,541
÷ Book Equity ($m)
7,757
8,192
9,746
= ROE (boy)
37.7%
55.4%
= ROE (avg)
36.7%
50.6%
34

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
capital expenses as attractive projects dry up. If this expectation did not
exist, Amazon would trade at a signiﬁcantly lower price-to-book value.
Cutting the entire technology expense would be quite drastic. An astute
analyst should parse the technology expense into a maintenance expense,
and a development investment, and adjust earnings and the balance sheet
accordingly. We will soon see that R&D is more appropriately treated as an
investment and therefore capitalized on the balance sheet when calculating
CFROI.
Reclassifying a short-term operating expense as a long-term capital
expense will aﬀect earnings and ROE, but it will not aﬀect cash ﬂow. The
increase in earnings will be oﬀset by an increase in investment, so the net
cash ﬂow will stay the same.4 Reclassiﬁcation will inﬂuence the accounting
results and can be used to boost earnings, but it has no eﬀect on the
ﬁrm’s economics, which is the chief focus of long-term investors.5 Despite
this fact, 80% of CFOs said they would cut discretionary spending on
value-enhancing activities to meet short-term earnings targets.6 This
behavior is at odds with the rules of corporate ﬁnance we outlined in
Chapter 1.
JeﬀBezos’s thoughts on this topic and how they apply to Amazon are
instructive, “We will continue to make investment decisions in light of
long-term market leadership considerations rather than short-term prof-
itability considerations or short-term Wall Street reactions.”7 Amazon’s aim
is to create value for its customers and shareholders, not to hit quarterly
earnings targets and placate equity analysts.
4There is an immediate tax beneﬁt to expensing R&D. Once the tax beneﬁts are accounted for, there
is no diﬀerence in cash ﬂow if R&D is expensed or capitalized. The latter is preferable for ﬁnancial
performance analysis if the R&D expense is expected to result in long-term cash ﬂows.
5WorldCom covered up its poor performance and inﬂated its earnings by capitalizing connection line
costs, which were removed as operating expenses on the income statement and shifted to the balance
sheet as sham assets. The asset base was inﬂated by some $11bn over three years. WorldCom’s fraud
ended in bankruptcy and a signiﬁcant loss in wealth for its shareholders.
6John R. Graham, Cam Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal (2005), “The Economic Implications of Corporate
Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 40, p. 3–73.
7JeﬀBezos, 1997 Letter to Shareholders, Amazon.com 1997 Annual Report.
35

Beyond Earnings
WHAT ABOUT DEBT AND LEVERAGE?
Let’s continue our investigation into measuring corporate performance
by assessing three ﬁctitious airlines with identical expectations regarding
return on investment, growth, and the timing of cash ﬂows, but diﬀerent
opinions on employing debt. We will demonstrate how accounting ratios
can be distorted, making comparison diﬃcult.
Safe Way is very conservative and employs no debt; Daedalus Way
follows a middle route, employing a modest amount of debt, and thereby
avoids ﬂying too high or too low; and Icarus is run by blue sky daredevils
who are deeply in debt. The airlines industry is highly competitive and
no ﬁrm has a signiﬁcant competitive advantage. Historically, the airlines
industry has generated operating returns at or below its cost of capital,
meaning it has generated proﬁts below investors’ expectations. Volatile
earnings and operating returns are correlated to macroeconomic strength.
When the economy is riding high, businessmen and tourists take to the
skies and travel.
Each airline in this example has the same operating assets but diﬀerent
levels of gearing (Exhibit 2.4).8 We consider two possible scenarios with
equal chance that the economy will be either depressed or buoyant. The
two economic scenarios are expressed as “low” and “high” in next year’s
potential earnings before interest and tax (EBIT), which is identical for
each airline. Because they employ diﬀerent levels of debt, their net income
scenarios are diﬀerent. Safe Way will earn either $16m if the economy tum-
bles or $49m if it booms on $775m of equity; Daedalus Way will earn $6m
or $38m on $525m of equity; and Icarus Way will lose $4m or earn $29m
on only $300m of equity. The results are summarized in Exhibit 2.4.
If the economy soars, then Icarus leads the way with an ROE of 9.6%
while Safe Way gets by with an ROE of 6.3%. If the economy crashes, the
ranking inverts: Icarus reports a loss and ROE of −1.2% while Safe Way
leads the pack with a low but positive ROE of 2.1%.
8The term gearing is synonymous with leverage, and used commonly outside the United States.
36

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
EXHIBIT 2.4 Flying high or low the Safe, Daedalus, and Icarus Way.
Safe Way
Daedalus Way
Icarus Way
Income statement
Low Expected High
Low Expected High
Low Expected High
EBIT
23
47
70
23
47
70
23
47
70
Interest @ 6%
–
–
–
(15)
(15)
(15)
(29)
(29)
(29)
Tax @ 30%
(7)
(14)
(21)
(2)
(9)
(16)
2
(5)
(12)
Net income
16
33
49
6
22
38
(4)
13
29
Opening Balance sheet
Current assets
250
250
250
250
250
250
250
250
250
Long-term assets
750
750
750
750
750
750
750
750
750
Total assets
1,000
1,000 1,000 1,000
1,000 1,000
1,000
1,000 1,000
Current liabilities
225
225
225
225
225
225
225
225
225
Long-term debt
–
–
–
250
250
250
475
475
475
Stockholders’ equity
775
775
775
525
525
525
300
300
300
Total liabilities & equity 1,000
1,000 1,000 1,000
1,000 1,000
1,000
1,000 1,000
Metrics
Debt / Equity
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.48
0.48
0.48
1.58
1.58
1.58
ROE
2.1%
4.2% 6.3% 1.1%
4.2% 7.3% −1.2%
4.2% 9.6%
ROA
1.6%
3.3% 4.9% 0.6%
2.2% 3.8% −0.4%
1.3% 2.9%
ROIC
2.1%
4.2% 6.3% 2.1%
4.2% 6.3%
2.1%
4.2% 6.3%
The impact of debt to shareholders depends on its cost and the
debt-to-equity ratio (D/E). If a ﬁrm is exposed to highly volatile revenue
and has a high ﬁxed-cost base, that is, overhead costs which do not
typically vary with revenue such as salaries and rent, its operating cash
ﬂow will also be highly volatile, which increases uncertainty. Debt adds
value only if the ﬁrm is generating enough operating cash to cover its debt
obligations in desperate scenarios. Not only do we see that debt can be a
bane (low scenario) or boon (high scenario), but that it leads to a greater
variance in the ROE, which can be seen in Exhibit 2.5. The standard
deviation for Safe Way is 2.1%; for Daedalus, 3.1%; and for Icarus, 5.4%.
An increase in debt makes returns to shareholders less predictable and this
demands a higher cost of equity. Leverage comes with a cost.
37

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 2.5 The effect of gearing on ROE for the high and low scenarios
for each airline.
Safe
Daedalus
Icarus
–2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
ROE
Gearing D/E
Effect of Gearing on the ROE
Expected
Low
High
As a general rule, if the return on equity with no debt exceeds the after-
tax cost of debt, then ROE will rise with increasing debt. On the other
hand, if the return on equity with no debt is less than the after-tax cost
of debt, then ROE will decrease as debt increases, eventually resulting in
a loss in earnings. A ﬁrm with stable operating cash ﬂow can carry more
debt and take greater advantage of its tax beneﬁt. Debt investors demand a
higher interest rate for riskier loans. In our example, Safe Way can increase
the market value of its equity by using debt to buy back shares or pay
a special dividend. Icarus is too risky and needs to raise equity to lower
its debt. Daedalus and its middle way is the most sensible and valuable
approach.
If anything is clear, it is that ROE is not only distorted by accounting
conventions but highly sensitive to and muddied by leverage. For these
reasons, ROE is not a reliable measure of performance for industrial and
service ﬁrms. Earnings and ROE are simply not comparable unless ﬁrms
have identical risks and gearing, and if they trade in environments with
similar inﬂation. There are ways to get around these issues and improve
the performance metric.
38

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
RETURN ON ASSETS
One approach is to measure the return on assets (ROA), which is net
income divided by total assets. The results for the airline example are shown
in the Metrics section of Exhibit 2.4. When comparing the performance of
two ﬁrms, ROA is superior to ROE because it removes the distortive eﬀect
of leverage embedded in equity. ROA has a short-coming: It measures the
earnings of equity investors relative to assets funded by both equity and
debt investors. Thus, its numerator and denominator are inconsistent and
provide an incomplete perspective on the performance of the ﬁrm. ROA
decreases as leverage increases in our example.
Metrics should be consistent with their intent. The numerator of ROA
will be consistent with its denominator if interest paid is added back to net
income.
ROAadj = Net Income + Interest Paid
Total Assets
This measure is better than ROE when comparing the performance of
ﬁrms but still prone to bias. If a ﬁrm were to increase current assets and
current liabilities by the same amount, its ROA would drop without any
change in cash ﬂow.
The ROA and adjusted ROA calculations for Amazon are shown in
Exhibit 2.6. Amazon’s adjusted ROA in 2013 based on its assets at the
beginning of year was an unimpressive 1.1%. This accounting metric
doesn’t explain why Amazon was trading at a multiple well above its book
value.
RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL
Accounts payable and other non-interest-bearing current liabilities are
essentially short-term sources of capital to fund a ﬁrm’s operations,
and should be subtracted from current assets to determine invested
capital:
Net Working Capital = Current Assets −Current Liabilities
39

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 2.6 Return on asset calculation for Amazon in 2012 and 2013.
Amazon.com ($m)
2011
2012
2013
Net income
631
(39)
274
+ interest paid
65
92
141
= adjusted net income
696
53
415
Balance Sheet
Total current assets
17,490
21,296
24,625
Property & equipment, net
4,417
7,060
10,949
Goodwill
1,955
2,552
2,655
Other assets
1,416
1,647
1,930
Total assets
25,278
32,555
40,159
Total current liabilities
14,896
19,002
22,980
Long-term debt
1,415
3,830
5,181
Other long-term liabilities
1,210
1,531
2,252
Total stockholders’ equity
7,757
8,192
9,746
Liabilities & stockholders’ equity
25,278
32,555
40,159
ROA (avg)
−0.1%
0.8%
Adjusted ROA (avg)
0.2%
1.1%
Excess cash and short-term debt (the current portion due on long-term
liabilities) are usually removed from current assets and liabilities. They are
shifted to the funding side of invested capital since they are not part of the
ﬁrm’s day-to-day operations.
Invested Capital = Equity + LT Debt + ST Debt
−Excess Cash + Other LT Liabilities
Invested capital can be tallied from either the operating (business) or
funding (investor) points of view, which must balance.
Invested Capital = Net Working Capital + Net Fixed Assets
+ Other LT Assets
You can think of invested capital in two ways. It represents the amount
of net assets a company needs to run its business (the left side of the bal-
ance sheet). But, it is also the amount of ﬁnancing (money) a company’s
40

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
creditors and shareholders supply to fund those assets (the right side of
the balance sheet). Since double-entry accounting requires that both sides
of the balance sheet equal one another, there is no real diﬀerence in the
two points of view. Our preference is to calculate invested capital from the
asset side of the balance sheet to track how eﬃciently the company is using
capital.9 Also, it is easier to address issues such as goodwill and investments
in associates from the asset side of the balance sheet.
Return on invested capital (ROIC) relates the net operating proﬁt after
tax (NOPAT) to the operating invested capital from all sources:
ROIC =
NOPAT
Invested Capital
NOPAT can be derived from the top down (starting with revenue) or
bottom up (starting with earnings) where Tc is the cash tax rate:
NOPAT = EBIT × (1 −Tc)
NOPAT = Net Income + Net Interest Paid × (1 −Tc)
Financing eﬀects are eliminated by adding back the after-tax net interest
paid to net income. NOPAT is a measure of unlevered proﬁt and treats the
ﬁrm as if it is independent of debt. This is essential for accurately comparing
the operating performance of ﬁrms.
Return on invested capital is superior to ROE as a measure of corpo-
rate performance. It is the return to all providers of capital, which is a
more sensible way of assessing the performance of a business since it is typ-
ically funded by both debt and equity investors. In the airline example,
Exhibit 2.4 shows that leverage has no impact on ROIC, and that for
the unlevered Safe Way, ROE and ROIC are identical. In conventional
approaches to calculating the value of a business, the tax shield beneﬁt of
interest paid on debt is accounted for by using an after-tax cost of debt in
the discount rate.
9Eﬃciency ratios such as asset utilization (Sales/Assets) and working capital turns (Sales/Working Cap-
ital) are helpful in understanding how many dollars of revenue are associated with each dollar of a
particular asset classiﬁcation.
41

Beyond Earnings
Amazon’s NOPAT, invested capital (IC), and ROIC are calculated in
Exhibit 2.7.10 Amazon was holding a signiﬁcant amount of cash and cash
equivalents, which we netted against debt. The other key adjustment was
to remove short-term debt from current liabilities since short-term debt is
really the current portion of long-term interest-bearing debt that has come
due. Amazon receives a signiﬁcant degree of funding from its operating
creditors. Note that its net working capital in ﬁscal year 2013 was negative
$5.3bn, which reduces the invested capital. Also note that the operating
and funding sides of the balance sheet are equal. Despite the “free” creditor
funding, Amazon’s ROIC in 2013 was only 3.9%. Once again, this return
on capital does not bear the imprimatur of a leading global wealth creator.
Consistency in measurement is essential. If assets are considered neces-
sary to business operations, then all income related to those assets should
be treated as operating income. Non-operating investments and assets are
often excluded from the invested capital, which requires that any income
associated with these assets be removed from operating income. We will
demonstrate these adjustments for CFROI. Numerous textbooks demon-
strate how to calculate invested capital and its associated metrics, such
as ROIC.11
Firms need assets to operate. Decisions must be made about how a busi-
ness will ﬁnance and acquire assets. This decision should not aﬀect the
operating economics of the business, though it may aﬀect the ﬁnancing
economics through tax advantages or the risk of ﬁnancial distress. When a
10Since investments and other assets are included in our invested capital tally, we have included invest-
ment income in NOPAT. Consistency is paramount. A better approach would be to separate ﬁnancial
investments from operating assets, which we will do later in the book. Besides a large cash balance, Ama-
zon also had marketable securities of $3.364bn and $3.789bn sitting in its current assets for FY2012
and FY2013 respectively. We left this item in current assets and accordingly included any income
associated with marketable securities in NOPAT.
11An excellent reference book is Aswath Damodaran (2012), Investment Valuation: Tools and Techniques
for Determining the Value of Any Asset. 3rd edition, John Wiley & Sons. The most common adjustments
are to exclude cash and short-term debt from invested capital and thus to exclude interest received and
interest paid from NOPAT. Equity investments and joint ventures are usually excluded from invested
capital and for the sake of consistency equity investment income and JV income must be excluded from
NOPAT. Acquisition goodwill should be excluded from invested capital if the goal is to measure the
ﬁnancial performance of operating assets. If you wish to measure whether executives pay too much for
acquisitions, then include goodwill and any impairments to goodwill in invested capital. McKinsey’s
Valuation is a handy source for adjustments to NOPAT and invested capital.
42

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
EXHIBIT 2.7 Return on invested capital calculation for Amazon in 2012
and 2013.
Amazon.com ($m)
2011
2012
2013
Income from operations
862
676
745
Other income
76
(80)
(136)
EBIT
938
596
609
−Cash taxes @ 35%
(328)
(209)
(213)
+ Investment income, net of tax
(12)
(155)
(71)
NOPAT
598
232
325
Employment of capital (operating)
Total current assets
17,490
21,296
24,625
−Cash & cash equivalents
(5,269)
(8,084)
(8,658)
Current assets (operating)
12,221
13,212
15,967
−Total current liabilities
(14,896)
(19,002)
(22,980)
+ Short-term debt
524
1,134
1,736
−Current liabilities (operating)
(14,372)
(17,868)
(21,244)
Net working capital
(2,151)
(4,656)
(5,277)
Property & equipment, net
4,417
7,060
10,949
Goodwill
1,955
2,552
2,655
Other assets
1,416
1,647
1,930
Invested capital
5,637
6,603
10,257
Capital employed (funding)
Short-term debt
524
1,134
1,736
+ Long-term debt
1,415
3,830
5,181
−Cash & cash equivalents
(5,269)
(8,084)
(8,658)
Net debt
(3,330)
(3,120)
(1,741)
Other long-term liabilities
1,210
1,531
2,252
Total stockholders’ equity
7,757
8,192
9,746
Invested capital
5,637
6,603
10,257
ROIC (boy)
4.1%
4.9%
ROIC (avg)
3.8%
3.9%
business leases an asset, it will aﬀect accounting ﬁgures but not operating
eﬃciency.
Financial decisions serve the company and its investors by adjusting
the timing and risk of cash ﬂows. Financial transactions in normally
functioning markets neither create nor destroy value—they are zero NPV
43

Beyond Earnings
transactions. Operating decisions inﬂuence the success and value of the
ﬁrm. The separation of a ﬁrm’s investment and ﬁnancing choices is termed
the Separation Principle.12 We can evaluate projects and the ﬁrm without
explicitly considering the diﬀerent ﬁnancing possibilities the ﬁrm might
choose. Before we do, let’s demonstrate the failings of P/E as a technique
for estimating value.
P/E AS A VALUATION METRIC AND DISCOUNTED
CASH FLOW VALUATION APPROACH
The most distressing area of confusion between accounting and economics
is valuation. Often, once the accounting analysis is complete, a ratio based
on that analysis is used to estimate value. For example, a forward P/E ratio
relies on an earnings estimate but gives no thought to the quality of earnings
or the balance sheet needed to support those earnings, that is, what it costs
to generate those earnings. The use of a P/B ratio to perform a relative
valuation requires no earnings estimate and less analysis.
What’s Wrong with P/E?
It is possible to relate the P/E ratio to a DCF model for a mature, stable
ﬁrm where the ﬁrm’s growth cannot exceed the long-term growth of the
economy. The derivation is worthwhile and leads to important lessons. Let’s
assume Cash Cow Dairy has a low growth g that remains constant into
perpetuity. The growing perpetuity equation from Chapter 1 should spring
to mind and might be naively written as:
P =
E1
(re −g)
The term re represents the cost of equity and E1 is the forward earnings.
Simple, right? If the ﬁrm can grow faster, its price should be higher.
12Berk and DeMarzo deﬁne the Separation Principle as “Security transactions in a normal market
neither create nor destroy value on their own. Therefore, we can evaluate the NPV of an investment
decision separately from the decision the ﬁrm makes regarding how to ﬁnance the investment or any
other security transactions the ﬁrm is considering.” Jonathan Berk, and Peter DeMarzo. Corporate
Finance, 3rd edition, Pearson, 2014.
44

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
There is a critical error in the above P/E equation, namely that it does
not account for the cost (investment required) to grow earnings. It implies
that earnings growth is free and thus that the incremental ROE is inﬁnite.
Instead of discounting future earnings, we need to discount future cash
ﬂow to equity providers. In addition to the constant earnings growth g, let’s
also assume that the ﬁrm has a constant perpetual return on equity, ROE.
FCFE = Earnings −Change in Equity
FCFE is the free cash ﬂow to equity holders and the change in equity
ΔB is the investment required to support growth:13
ΔB1 = g × E1
ROE
Instead of calculating the present value of a growing earnings stream,
we calculate the present value of a growing FCFE stream by courtesy of the
growing perpetuity equation:14
P = E1 × (1 −g∕ROE)
(re −g)
The forward P/E for our stable ﬁrm is:
P∕E1 = (1 −g∕ROE)
(re −g)
(2.1)
The P/E ratio is a function of earnings growth and more importantly,
the quality of earnings indicated by ROE. With a bit of algebra, the
price-to-book ratio is easily derived (Exhibits 2.8 and 2.9).15
P∕B0 = (ROE −g)
(re −g)
(2.2)
13All things equal, i.e., ROE is constant forever, then earnings growth and equity growth are equivalent.
The full algebraic derivation is: ΔB1 = B1 −B0 = (1 + g) × B0 −B0 = g × B0 = g ×
E1
ROE
14The algebra follows: P = FCFE1
(re−g) =
E1−g ×
E1
ROE
(re−g)
= E1 × (1−g∕ROE)
(re−g)
15Gordon’s dividend growth model can be readily derived from this equation. The sustainable dividend
payout ratio D1/E1 equals (1 – g/ROE), which leads to P = D1/(re – g). Earnings, equity, and dividends
all grow at a constant rate g. If growth is zero, then the ﬁrm pays all earnings as a dividend, the dividend
yield equals the cost of equity and the price never appreciates (unless the ﬁrm were to repurchase shares
instead of paying dividends).
45

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 2.8 The P/E ratio for different combinations of constant growth and
ROE assuming a 10% cost of equity. It decreases as growth
increases for the value destroyer; equals the inverse of the cost
of equity for value-neutral corks; and increases with growth for
value creators.
P/E matrix
ROE
5%
10%
20%
0%
10.0
10.0
10.0
Growth
2%
7.5
10.0
11.3
4%
3.3
10.0
13.3
EXHIBIT 2.9 The P/B ratio for different combinations of perpetual growth
and ROE assuming a 10% cost of equity. It decreases as growth
increases for the value destroyer; equals unity when ROE equals
the cost of equity; and increases with growth for value creators.
P/B matrix
ROE
5%
10%
20%
0%
0.5
1.0
2.0
Growth
2%
0.4
1.0
2.3
4%
0.2
1.0
2.7
Several fascinating insights can be discovered from these equations:
• If g = 0, then the P/E ratio is simply the inverse of the cost
of equity, re. Conversely, the cost of equity equals the forward
earnings yield, E/P. The P/B ratio equals ROE/re when there
is no growth. If ROE equals the cost of equity, then P/B
should equal 1. When ROE exceeds the cost of equity, then the
price should exceed the book value. If the ﬁrm is not meeting
its cost of equity, the P/B should be less than 1. This result
should be obvious since the denominator will be larger than the
numerator.
• If g < ROE, then cash ﬂow will be positive. The FCFE can be
distributed to shareholders, used to fund more growth, or pay
46

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
down debt. If growth exceeds the ROE, then funds must be raised,
which is not sustainable in this growing annuity example since it
implies a negative price.
• If ROE = re, then growth is irrelevant. This company is value
neutral, it neither creates nor destroys value. P/E equals 1/re and
P/B equals 1. The chief lesson is that mature ﬁrms meeting their
cost of equity should focus on improving operating margins and
increasing asset utilization (sales/assets) to improve ROE rather
than growing their business. Earnings growth should come from
eﬃciency improvements not expansion.
• As ROE decreases, the quality of earnings deteriorates along with
the free cash ﬂow to equity providers. This leads to an extraordi-
nary bifurcation.
– If ROE > re then the P/E ratio increases with growth when
g < ROE.16 The higher ROE is relative to the cost of equity, the
higher the quality of earnings and subsequent P/E ratio. Firms
that can generate returns greater than the cost of capital should
reinvest and grow. In this case, investors want high return on
equity AND earnings growth.
– If ROE < re, then the P/E ratio decreases as growth increases.
In other words, the more a ﬁrm with miserable proﬁtability
tries to grow, the more value it destroys. P/B also suﬀers, drop-
ping farther below 1 as growth increases. Warren Buﬀett warns
about investing in industries with poor economics. These are
often the companies guiltiest of trying to grow out of a hole,
which only makes the hole deeper. Unless there is a credible
catalyst for change, low-quality ﬁrms are best avoided, espe-
cially those that are obsessed with growth.
16This does not mean that ﬁrms with this luxury should limit growth to ROE. It simply means they
need to raise capital to fund all of their attractive growth opportunities. In these instances, capital is
not a scarce resource. Once growth slows to a level below ROE, the ﬁrm will become cash ﬂow positive
and can pay dividends.
47

Beyond Earnings
The quality of earnings clearly matters. Besides the highly restrictive
assumptions in this derivation, earnings and the subsequent ROE can be
altered by any number of accounting decisions:
• Asset aging and depreciation policy (changing earnings through
the depreciation charge and net assets through accumulated
depreciation)
• Leasing of assets (removing the asset from the balance sheet and
increasing operating expenses on the income statement)
• Leverage and ﬁnancial structure (altering the amount of equity on
the balance sheet and the resulting net income)
• Historical acquisitions and goodwill amortization policy (altering
both income statement and balance sheet)
• Timing of expenses and revenue (altering both income statement
and balance sheet through the level of accruals)17
If that’s not enough, there are additional problems created by ﬁrms
having diﬀerent strategies for tax and accounting purposes. To minimize
taxes, earnings are reduced for the tax books, but inﬂated for reporting pur-
poses to impress investors. This can lead to discrepancies in the eﬀective and
marginal tax rates. That, in turn, can increase the probability of predicting
earnings that never materialize. If we had a choice, we would prefer the tax
books and their lower earnings which can then be consistently adjusted.
Note how important ROE is to the P/E ratio. A higher return always
improves P/E, all else being equal. The same cannot be said for growth.
The quality of earnings should be an explicit consideration when using
P/E ratios but is rarely mentioned. The lower the ROE, the more it costs
the ﬁrm to grow its earnings. Empirical results agree with this conclusion.
17Booking sales in advance to enhance earnings is a common trick. If a sale is accompanied by a price
discount to speed up the transaction, then the economic value of the transaction is reduced. Companies
that booked earnings early to inﬂate reported net income include Tesco, Toshiba, WorldCom, Xerox,
Global Crossing, and Sunbeam. Toshiba’s executives manipulated the company’s accounts over many
years to the tune of hundreds of billions of Yen before unceremoniously taking a bow.
48

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
EXHIBIT 2.10 Forward P/E versus forward earnings growth for U.S. ﬁrms with
a market cap exceeding $5bn on September 24, 2015.
–50
–30
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
y = 0.223x + 15.2
R2 = 0.11
10
30
Forward Earnings Growth %
Forward P/E
50
70
90
Exhibit 2.10 shows a plot of forward P/E versus forward earnings growth
for U.S. ﬁrms with a market cap exceeding $5bn.
The relationship between earnings growth and P/E is weak at best with
an R-squared of 0.11 for this winsorized sample. The point many forget
when discussing earnings growth is that it has two components: investment
growth and eﬃciency growth (Exhibit 2.11). The latter is almost always
desirable all things being equal. Investment growth is only positive if the
ﬁrm is investing in positive NPV strategies, e.g., growth in earnings isn’t
due to paying excessive premiums for acquisitions to boost earnings that
destroy shareholder value. It is important to understand the source of earn-
ings growth. Growth due to eﬃciency gains is not sustainable and requires
explicit forecasting.
If two ﬁrms are identical, then their multiples should match exactly.
Identical in our example means they have the same ROE, growth, and
equivalent risk to have the same P/E and P/B ratios. Thus, a critical
weakness of relative valuation measures is that they do not account for
diﬀerences in growth, proﬁtability, risk, and accounting methods. If that’s
49

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 2.11 Earnings growth is comprised of two components: investment
and efﬁciency growth. The former is only value additive when
investments are made in positive NPV projects. Efﬁciency
growth can be accomplished by increasing margins and/or
turns.
Earnings
Growth
Efficiency
Growth
Δ ROE / ROE
Δ Net Margin
Δ Equity Turns
Investment
Growth
Retention Ratio
1 – Dividend
Payout Ratio
Earnings / Book
Equity
ROE
x
+
not enough to shake the intrepid investor, ROE is also highly dependent
on inﬂation.18 Multiples should be used only for sanity checks.
Professor Alfred Rappaport, a pioneer in developing the principles of
shareholder value creation declared, “There is no greater enemy of stock
market allocation eﬃciency than earnings obsession.”19 We have illustrated
the relationship between measuring corporate performance and valuation,
and how that link can be distorted by using traditional accounting ﬁgures
such as earnings and ROE. Discounted cash ﬂow methods oﬀer the poten-
tial to be more accurate and to yield better insights. In addition, sensitivity
analysescanbeconductedontheﬁrm’soperatingdriverstoassesstheimpact
18Net income is in current dollars while book equity is in historical dollars. Inﬂation distorts the
timing diﬀerence in this ratio, particularly if investments are lumpy in high-inﬂation environments.
Imagine calculating the ROE on a ﬂeet of power stations that were built thirty to forty years ago in a
country that has experienced from 6% to 15% inﬂation over this period. We have, and CFROI resolved
the dilemma. Unfortunately, our advice was not heeded by the controlling shareholder, which led to
operating and ﬁnancial distress.
19Alfred Rappaport, “The Economics of Short-Term Performance Obsession,” Financial Analysts
Journal, 61(3) (May/June 2005), 77.
50

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
on cash ﬂow and corporate value. Models that measure economic per-
formance and relate it to valuation aim to correct distortions caused by
accounting. Don’t forget that earnings are an opinion and cash ﬂow is a fact.
HALLMARKS OF A SOUND ECONOMIC
PERFORMANCE AND VALUATION MODEL
The hallmarks of a sound model of economic performance and
valuation are:
• It should correct distortions caused by accounting so that the
measure of operating performance mirrors the ﬁrm’s underlying
economics as closely as possible. We will show that CFROI
reverses accounting distortions and places hidden assets (such as
operating leases) back on the balance sheet.
• The measure of operating performance should mirror standard
economic analyses used to evaluate projects and value their
anticipated cash ﬂow, such as NPV and internal rate of return
(IRR). It should account for diﬀerences between non-depreciating
assets (which do not wear out) and depreciating assets (which
require replacement), and consider the life of the assets. We will
show that CFROI is a cross-sectional weighted-average IRR
measure, and that the present value of future economic proﬁt
(EP) equals the NPV of existing and future investments. We will
show how the CFROI and HOLT EP valuation model reconciles
to project economics.
• Inﬂationary eﬀects should be removed from the measure of
operating performance so that results are comparable over time,
across borders and across industries. Although inﬂation is at
modest levels in many developed economies, it has been high in
the past and continues to distort important line items. Without
adjusting for inﬂation, trend analysis across years and between
companies from diﬀerent countries becomes futile. Inﬂation
artiﬁcially boosts earnings and accounting returns, which can
51

Beyond Earnings
lead to uneconomic results and inferior decisions. CFROI is a
real, inﬂation-adjusted measure.
• The valuation model should focus on determining the present
value of future cash ﬂows. Cash is king and the only true mea-
sure of a ﬁrm’s value is based on its future cash ﬂow potential. The
HOLT CFROI valuation model is a discounted cash ﬂow model
which allows key value drivers such as investment growth, returns,
and competitive advantage period to be ﬂexed. Whether we dis-
count future cash ﬂows or economic proﬁts, we obtain the same
valuation for a given forecast.
• Competitive forces continuously bring about change, upheaval,
and innovation. A competitive life-cycle process can be integrated
into the valuation model to reﬂect that fortune and high returns
decay over time. A key component of the HOLT CFROI valua-
tion model is the notion of a competitive life-cycle.
The aim of a well-designed corporate performance measurement and
valuation system is to provide a structured, economic way of thinking
about the key drivers of value. The HOLT CFROI framework is a total
system approach that enables users to compare historical corporate per-
formance to market expectations in an eﬃcient, comprehensive manner.
Because CFROI is a real return (not nominal), it is possible to compare
historical operating returns to forecast returns. This adds a new dimension
of plausibility to forecasting and calibrating investor expectations. A ﬁrm’s
CFROI can be compared to its cost of capital to gauge whether the ﬁrm is
creating or destroying economic value, which is imperative when assessing
capital allocation choices.
Do empirical results provide evidence of a strong relationship between
market-to-book value and proﬁtability? You betcha. We plotted the
HOLT price-to-book ratio versus CFROI for U.S. industrial and service
companies in Exhibit 2.12. Note the highly signiﬁcant R-squared of 0.74
between relative value (HOLT P/B) and the quality of earnings (CFROI).
Time to get started!
52

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
EXHIBIT 2.12 HOLT price-to-book ratio versus forward CFROI for U.S.
industrial and service ﬁrms with a market cap exceeding $5bn
on September 24, 2015. The HOLT price-to-book ratio is the
market enterprise value divided by the inﬂation-adjusted net
assets. A stock’s premium is a function of the quality of its
earnings (CFROI).
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
10
20
30
40
Forward CFROI %
HOLT Price-to-Book Ratio
60
70
50
y = 0.2315x - 0.1573
R2 = 0.744
CHAPTER APPENDIX
Be suspicious when terms such as “dilution” get thrown around by invest-
ment professionals. A common fallacy is that ﬁrms should take on debt
instead of issuing shares since the latter dilutes the value of existing shares.
If a ﬁrm issues new shares at a fair price, there will be no gain or loss to new
or existing shareholders. The cash raised by the new shares exactly oﬀsets
the dilution of the shares.
Earnings dilution gets bandied about liberally by analysts and com-
mentators when acquisitions are the subject of discussion. If an acqui-
sition immediately dilutes EPS, then it is considered bad. The opposite
occurs when an acquisition that grows EPS is considered a good one. The
NPV rule remains the golden rule of ﬁnance when discussing the issuance,
53

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 2.13 Should Impress Industries buy Superstar or Superdud?
Impress Industries Pre-raise Post-raise Superstar Impress Star Superdud Impress Dud
Market cap
1,000
1,500
500
1,500
500
1,500
Earnings
80
80
25
105
50
130
Shares outstanding
20
30
30
30
Share price
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00
EPS
4.00
2.67
3.50
4.33
P/E
12.5
18.8
20.0
14.3
10.0
11.5
repurchase or dilution of shares. Let’s take the case of Impress Industries, a
mature ﬁrm with no growth on the horizon but captained by an ambitious
new CEO (Exhibit 2.13).
Impress is trading at $50 a share and has a market cap of $1bn (see
column “Pre-raise”). Impress is expected to generate $4.00 a share and
trades at a prosaic P/E of 12.5. The CEO convinces the market that he
will not pay too much for an acquisition and raises $500m in prepara-
tion for the acquisition. The NPV of the cash raised is zero, and according
to the Law of One Price, investors should be willing to purchase 10 mil-
lion new shares for $50 a share (see column “Post-raise”). Although the
share price remains the same and no value is created, the trailing EPS
gets diluted from $4.00 a share to $2.67 a share. The share price does not
take a beating due to the dilution since value has been neither created nor
destroyed. Rather, the trailing P/E jumps from 12.5 to 18.8 to conserve
value. Earnings dilution and P/E provide no insight into the economics of
this event.
The CEO has two potential acquisition targets in mind but can only
choose one:
1. Superstar Incorporated, which is growing and trades at a
forward P/E of 20 (see column “Superstar” for its stand-alone
numbers); or
2. Superdud Incorporated, which lives up to its reputation and
trades at a P/E of 10 (see column “Superdud” for its stand-alone
numbers).
54

The Flying Trapeze of Performance Metrics
Each target can be purchased at a fair market value of $500m and there
is nothing Impress can do to enhance subsequent value.
Sure enough, the acquisition of Superstar results in earnings dilution for
the new Impress Star Industries. EPS drops from a pre-raise value of $4.00
to post-merger value of $3.50, but the P/E increases from 12.5 to 14.3.
Because the NPV of this acquisition is zero, the share price remains the
same at $50.00. EPS dilution is a red herring.
The acquisition of Superdud provides an interesting ruse to excite
accountants and analysts capitalizing earnings by P/E ratios. In this
case, earnings are accretive and jump from a pre-raise EPS of $4.00 to
a post-merger EPS of $4.33 (it is even more impressive if you consider
the post-raise diluted EPS of $2.67 jumping to $4.33). The naive analyst
might simply multiply the pre-raise P/E of 12.5 times the post-merger
EPS of $4.33, and set his target price to $54.17 for an increase of 8.3%
in the share price. This would be incorrect. The only way the share price
should increase is if the NPV of the acquisition is greater than zero.
Impress would have to increase the value of Superdud to $625m through
merger synergies and cost savings to generate an NPV of $125m and share
price of $54.17.
The next time somebody mentions dilution or accretion, please ask them
for the expected NPV of the transaction. If accounting results change but
future cash ﬂows and their risk do not, then there should be no change in
value. Anything that doesn’t increase cash ﬂows doesn’t create value.
55

3
ACCOUNTING TO CASH
FLOW RETURN ON
INVESTMENT
“The CFROI measure was developed to minimize accounting distortions in
measuring ﬁrms’ economic performance, particularly distortions related to
inﬂation. A time series of CFROIs helps in forecasting a ﬁrm’s likely returns
on future investments. The CFROI is best understood not as a stand-alone
performance metric, but as part of a valuation model.”
—Bartley J. Madden1
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• ROIC is inﬂuenced by asset age and can be increased by simply
allowing assets to depreciate.
• CFROI is a comprehensive measure of operating perfor-
mance. Accounting and inﬂationary distortions are reversed.
1Bartley J. Madden, CFROI Valuation: A Total System Approach to Valuing the Firm, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1999.
57
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
Depreciating assets and non-depreciating assets are separated.
Asset life is an essential input.
• The calculation of CFROI requires four inputs: gross cash ﬂow,
inﬂation-adjusted gross investment, non-depreciating assets, and
asset life. We show how each input is calculated using Amazon as
an example.
• Investments in R&D and operating lease expenses should be cap-
italized to improve the understanding of a ﬁrm’s economics and
enhance comparability to peers.
• Inﬂationary eﬀects can be signiﬁcant, particularly for ﬁrms with
long-life assets and countries with high inﬂation rates. CFROI
is an inﬂation-adjusted measure of proﬁtability, which makes it
possible to compare companies over time and across borders.
• An improved measure of proﬁtability is beneﬁcial when assessing
the plausibility of proﬁtability forecasts.
IS CFROI A BETTER MEASURE OF PERFORMANCE?
To understand the logic and beneﬁts of the cash ﬂow return on investment
(CFROI) operating performance measure, let us imagine a simple invest-
ment scenario. Suppose you invested £1m in your cousin Greg’s “Braai
Design & Build” business. Braai is the South African term for barbeque,
where to braai with wood is a favorite national pastime.2 Greg is passionate
about braai equipment and outdoor cooking skills, and wishes to pro-
mote this custom in the UK. He requires an eight-year investment with
£800,000 to support the shop and its ﬁttings, and £200,000 for work-
ing capital. The shop equipment and ﬁttings are depreciating assets that
need to be replaced after eight years. The working capital will be used to
purchase inventory and allow for day-to-day management of the business.
You are the sole investor in this business and Greg’s salary is an operating
2Braai is Afrikaans for barbeque or grill and is pronounced brāı. It is used as a noun and verb to refer to
barbeque activities throughout South Africa. A traditional braai uses wood. The use of gas is frowned
upon and condescendingly referred to as a barbeque.
58

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
expense. He boldly promises that the business will generate a return of
greater than 20%.
Since your cousin is a trustworthy fellow, you leave him to run the
business and attend to your other investments. You receive a check for
£200,000 every year, which is a 20% return on your original investment.
After six-years, you decide to pay Greg a visit and check on your invest-
ment. When you arrive at his shop, business is booming and Greg exclaims
that he expects the business to break through the 20% return barrier.
Greg apologizes for the slow start but conﬁdently tells you that the busi-
ness earned 20% last year and shows you his forward estimates of the return
on invested capital (ROIC) with returns increasing to 33% (Exhibit 3.1).
After pondering his apology and scratching your head over his rather
astounding forecast, you attempt to deconstruct his ﬁnancial analysis. You
ask Greg, “How exactly did you arrive at that 20% return?” Greg answers,
“The business earned £100,000 after tax on net assets of £500,000. Next
year the return will increase to 25% and we’ll really be coining it!”
EXHIBIT 3.1 The evolution of CFROI and other ﬁnancial performance metrics
for Greg’s Braai Design & Build business. Each return calculation
is based on its beginning-of-year asset base.
Year (£’ 000)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Net income
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
+ Depreciation
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Gross cash ﬂow
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
Gross ﬁxed assets
800
800
800
800
800
800
800
800
800
(Accum depreciation)
(100)
(200)
(300)
(400)
(500)
(600)
(700)
(800)
Net ﬁxed assets
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
–
+ Working capital
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
–
Net assets
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
–
Gross assets
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
–
RONA … (a÷h)
10.0% 11.1% 12.5% 14.3% 16.7% 20.0% 25.0% 33.3%
CROGA … (c÷i)
20.0% 20.0% 20.0% 20.0% 20.0% 20.0% 20.0% 20.0%
CFROI … (RATE(8,c,-i,g))
13.9% 13.9% 13.9% 13.9% 13.9% 13.9% 13.9% 13.9%
Net cash ﬂow
(1,000)
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
400
IRR
13.9%
59

Beyond Earnings
This enigmatic discussion carries on to the pub where you call a friend
who works for an investment bank. He tells you that ROIC is highly
dependent on reinvestment and depreciation rates. He explains that
investors are regularly fooled by trying to compare returns on new assets
versus old assets. “The quickest way to increase returns is to cut capex
for a few years. It might kill the business, but it’ll look like the company
is improving on paper and might command a higher price for a while.
Don’t be fooled by that trick, old chap.” You explain this to Greg over a
second pint and tell him that the investment banker suggested that they
measure the cash return on gross assets (CROGA), which is the gross cash
ﬂow divided by the gross assets (Exhibit 3.1). Because you are the sole
capital provider, the gross cash ﬂow equals the net income plus the depre-
ciation charge, which tallies to £200,000 in this example, and a constant
20% return.
Across the pub, you spot your private banker from Credit Suisse and
decide to ask her for a second opinion. She laughs and tells you that she
just attended a HOLT seminar where she learned that “you also have to
account for asset life, and the split between non-depreciating and depreci-
ating assets when performing a comprehensive return on capital analysis.”
Now you are at your wits end and order a ﬁnal round to help translate
the private banker’s advice. After declining your kind oﬀer, the Credit
Suisse banker calculates an internal rate of return (IRR) of 13.9%, much
lower than the return Greg promised. She explains that the ﬁxed assets will
have fully depreciated after eight years and will have little or no residual
value. However, the business will be able to liquidate its non-depreciating
assets, or working capital, after eight years. This argument makes sense and
reminds you of the project analyses you did many years ago, studying cor-
porate ﬁnance. The private banker then shows you how to calculate the
single-period IRR, or cash ﬂow return on investment (CFROI), for every
ﬁnancial year. The CFROI is a constant 13.9% which reconciles to the IRR
and makes perfect sense since the business economics have been—and are
expected to remain—constant. You thank the lady from Credit Suisse and
stick Greg with the lunch bill.
60

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
This example illustrates the problem of measuring performance
based on net assets, sometimes referred to as the “old plant trap.”3 As
a business or project gets older, the return on net assets increases, all
things being equal. Have the economics changed? No. Simple ROE,
ROIC, and economic proﬁt (EP) calculations increase only because ﬁxed
assets depreciate, which decreases the amount of net assets each year.4
Metrics can be gamed, particularly accounting ratios, and mislead unwary
investors. Since measurement inﬂuences behavior, investors and analysts
need to carefully consider management’s measures of performance, as well
as their own. Inappropriate measurement promotes uneconomic behavior.
Corporate managers who are rewarded on ROIC or EP might be inclined
to cut capital expenditure (capex) and to resist investing in positive net
present value (NPV) projects to maintain or increase the present ROIC.
This is a classic agency conﬂict between shareholders (who hire managers
to maximize the ﬁrm’s value) and managers (who wish to maximize their
own rewards). Managers are quite crafty when it comes to maximizing
their pay.
Does this happen in the real world? Tesco introduced ROIC as a perfor-
mance metric in 2002. It used property sales and lease-backs to artiﬁcially
lower the invested capital on the balance sheet, and booked the proﬁts on
the disposals as an operating item. Performance didn’t turn out well for
shareholders. On the ﬂipside, Wal-Mart and Walgreens act as responsible
stewards of investor funds by capitalizing operating leases when calculating
return on capital. Their income statements and balance sheets are consis-
tent. Saint Gobain uses ROIC as a performance metric and relies on all the
3Fabozzi, F. J., and J. L. Grant, Value-Based Metrics: Foundations and Practice, New York, John Wiley &
Sons, 2000. A sure-ﬁre way to increase ROIC is to cut capex and allow the net plant, property, and
equipment (PP&E) to reduce via depreciation. Although ROIC might increase, the sustainability of
the business could be imperiled. Also, managers might be rejecting positive NPV projects to maintain
a target ROIC.
4There are numerous acronyms for similar measures. Return on invested capital (ROIC), return
on net assets (RONA), and return on capital employed (ROCE) typically measure the net
operating proﬁt after tax to all capital providers. Measures of gross cash ﬂow to gross assets
include CROGA, and cash return on capital invested (CROCI). The numerator and denomi-
nator should be consistent, for example, ROE is net income to shareholders divided by book
equity.
61

Beyond Earnings
tricks in the books to boost it: leases, aging assets, and asset impairments.
EasyJet capitalizes the jets its leases.
Fund managers prefer performance metrics that are comparable across
many ﬁrms and a valuation framework that objectively estimates intrinsic
values. Corporate executives want the same properties but are much more
interested in a simple measure that is easy to communicate and administer.
Elimination of accounting and inﬂationary distortions enhances compara-
bility across time, regions, and industries. Once the accounting distortions
are cleaned up, we can evaluate if companies are creating or destroying
value and perform more accurate valuations.
The HOLT CFROI and Economic Proﬁt framework ﬁts this descrip-
tion. The aim of CFROI is to mirror the IRR economic performance metric
as closely as possible. The present value of HOLT EP is the ﬁrm’s NPV,
which clariﬁes decisions and action. There are four key inputs to IRR: gross
investment, gross cash ﬂow, asset life, and salvage value. Their analogs can
be found in the CFROI calculation.
Return on Invested Capital (ROIC)
ROIC measures net operating proﬁt after tax (NOPAT) divided by net
assets. It is important to note that net operating proﬁt is stated in current
dollar value while net assets are stated at historical cost. This incongruity
makes comparison between ﬁrms more diﬃcult and ROIC less reliable
unless the asset base is restated in current dollar value.
In year six, when you visit your cousin Greg, he calculates the return
by dividing £100k of NOPAT by £500k of beginning-of-year net assets
(NOPAT equals net income in this example since you are the sole supplier
of capital). The result is the return of 20%. If you had solely relied on
Greg’s ﬁnancial statements every year you would have had the misleading
impression that he had increased the returns on his business from 10%
to 20%, when in fact nothing changed in the economics of the business
except net assets declined. Beware of the old plant trap! It shows up all the
time in industries characterized by lumpy investments.
62

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Cash Return on Gross Assets (CROGA)
CROGA improves on ROIC by measuring the gross cash ﬂow in current
dollars against the gross historical cost. Again, there is a mismatch in
dollar values, but any misrepresentation caused by declining net plant is
eliminated. In this example, the year 6 return is 20% (£200k/£1,000k).
With CROGA, management is held accountable for the full investment
albeit in historical dollars, and management cannot claim success by
simply writing oﬀsome bad investments or changing the depreciation
policy, thereby improving returns. Issues with CROGA are that it does
not take into account the composition of assets and their useful life. It is
also distorted by inﬂation.
Cash Flow Return on Investment (CFROI)
CFROI is based on the inﬂation-adjusted gross assets with two additional
requirements: asset life and a separation of the gross investment into
depreciating (PP&E) and non-depreciating (working capital) assets. CFROI
is a comprehensive metric that takes account of the asset life and the asset
release at the end of the project. Also, the gross investment is marked to
current dollars instead of historical cost, which further reﬁnes and improves
the reliability of this metric. CFROI is a single-period, inﬂation-adjusted
hurdle rate which, if applied to a stream of cash ﬂows and non-depreciating
asset release, results in zero NPV.5 Stated another way, CFROI is the clear-
ing rate at which the present value of the cash ﬂows and non-depreciating
asset release exactly equals the investment. In the previous example,
CFROI for Greg’s business is constant and equals IRR. This result makes
great sense since it is based on economic principles, not accounting
conventions.
CFROI is conceptually equivalent to an IRR capital investment analysis,
except the CFROI calculation is a real (inﬂation-adjusted) number. It is the
5In Excel spreadsheet terms the RATE function is used where RATE (nper, pmt, pv, fv) is the calculation
for IRR, nper equals asset life, pmt equals gross cash ﬂow, pv equals gross investment, and fv equals
non-depreciating asset release.
63

Beyond Earnings
weighted-average single-period IRR on all the ﬁrm’s projects. Calculating
CFROI requires four inputs:
• Present value (pv) of the total investment: Gross investment
(IAGI) in the company adjusted for inﬂation. In Exhibit 3.2 it is
the big down arrow and requires a negative sign in Excel’s RATE
function.
• Payment (pmt) or cash ﬂow: Gross cash ﬂow (GCF) adjusted
for inﬂation and non-cash expenses. GCF can be thought of
as the annual operating cash ﬂow generated from the gross
investment.
• Project life (nper): Asset life estimated by the depreciation expense
and gross depreciating assets.
• Future value (fv): Non-depreciating assets which include working
capital (current assets less current liabilities) and other non-
depreciating assets such as land. The logic is that these
non-depreciating assets are released at the end of the project and
can be converted to cash.
Exhibit 3.2 shows the CFROI calculation for Greg’s Braai Design &
Build business. If £1,000k is invested in an eight-year project, that gener-
ates £200k per year and releases £200k in salvage value at the end of year
eight; the resulting CFROI is 13.9%. You can perform the calculation in
Excel:
CFROI = RATE(nper = 8, pmt = 200, p𝑣= −1000, f 𝑣= 200)
= 13.9%
Note that for CFROI, the use of debt or equity reﬂects a ﬁnancing deci-
sion that does not aﬀect the calculation of the operating return.6
6In reality since there is a tax advantage to debt, the ﬁnancing of the ﬁrm will aﬀect taxes, which in
turn aﬀects gross cash ﬂow, which will have a minor impact on the CFROI calculation.
64

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.2 CFROI / IRR equivalence for Greg’s Braai Design & Build
business.
£1,000
Inflation-adjusted
gross investment
Gross cash flow
£200
Non-depreciating
assets
£200
8-year asset life
CFROI = 13.9 %
WARNING
If you are not interested in a detailed explanation of the adjustments
necessary to calculate CFROI, then please skip to the Understanding
the Relative Wealth Chart section.
CFROI ADJUSTMENTS USING AMAZON’S 2013
ANNUAL REPORT
Amazon describes itself in press releases as:
“Amazon.com opened on the World Wide Web in July 1995. The
company is guided by four principles: customer obsession rather than
competitor focus, passion for invention, commitment to operational
excellence, and long-term thinking. Customer reviews, 1-Click shop-
ping, personalized recommendations, Prime, Fulﬁllment by Amazon,
AWS, Kindle Direct Publishing, Kindle, Fire phone, Fire tablets, and
Fire TV are some of the products and services pioneered by Amazon.”
Investment in technology is crucial to Amazon’s success and growth. It
has expanded into web services via AWS. Here’s a snippet from page 40 of
Amazon’s 2013 annual report:
“We serve developers and enterprises of all sizes through AWS, which
provides access to technology infrastructure that enables virtually any
type of business.”
65

Beyond Earnings
Amazon has long held the view that its focus should be on long-term
value creation and future cash ﬂow. You can’t get any clearer about this
intention than this bullet point from the 1997 letter to shareholders, which
has been reproduced in every annual report:
“When forced to choose between optimizing the appearance of our
GAAP accounting and maximizing the present value of future cash
ﬂows, we’ll take the cash ﬂows.”
We will focus on Amazon’s proﬁtability and return on invested capital
by assessing its CFROI. In this section, we discuss the logic behind the
accounting adjustments necessary to calculate CFROI. In the HOLT
framework, these adjustments and additional industry-speciﬁc modiﬁ-
cations are systematically applied to all ﬁrms. We will use Amazon to
demonstrate how each calculation is performed and indicate where the
numbers come from. Our task will be to ﬁll out the CFROI calculation
template (Exhibit 3.3).
We will tackle each of the four key inputs separately. Let’s begin with
the inﬂation-adjusted gross investment (IAGI).
Inﬂation-Adjusted Gross Investment
The inﬂation-adjusted gross investment (IAGI) represents the total capital
invested in the ﬁrm as of December 2013.
EXHIBIT 3.3 Inputs for calculating Amazon’s 2013 CFROI.
Amazon FY 2013 CFROI Template
CFROI: 12.0%
4,539
9,480
Gross cash flow
5.4-year asset life
Inflation-
adjusted
gross investment
38,581
=
34,042 Depreciating assets
+
4,539 Non-depreciating assets
Non-depreciating
asset release
66

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Gross investment is comprised of two key elements: depreciating assets
and non-depreciating assets.
Depreciating assets are principally plant and equipment which wear out
over time and have diﬀerent economic lives associated with each type of
ﬁxed asset. For Amazon, buildings are assumed to have a useful life of 40
years while networking equipment and software have a useful life ranging
between two and ﬁve years. We assume depreciating assets fully depreci-
ate and have no salvage value. Gains and losses from the disposal of ﬁxed
assets are accounted for on the income statement. Depreciating assets also
include capitalized R&D, capitalized operating leases, and intangible oper-
ating assets with an identiﬁable useful life. Treatment of depreciating assets
should reﬂect the economics of the ﬁrm that is being analyzed.7
Non-depreciating assets are comprised of working capital, land, and
ﬁnancial assets:
• Monetary assets such as cash, accounts receivable, and accounts
payable;
• Inventory, which is a required factor of production and sales;
• Land, which does not depreciate and needs to be separated from
the property, plant, and equipment account;
• Long-term ﬁnancial investments which are relevant to the com-
pany’s operations
These assets do not depreciate and can be converted to cash when a
project or business winds down. Gains or losses associated with appre-
ciation or spoilage ﬂow through the income statement as operating or
extraordinary items. Beware of ﬁrms that repeatedly mark down inventory
and other assets, and record those adjustments as extraordinary losses.
7The sale of used cars is an integral part of a rental car business, and gains from selling used rental
cars should be included in the operating income. Rental cars present an intriguing asset classiﬁcation
dilemma. Although rental cars are in essence depreciating assets, because their trade is integral to a rental
car’s business, we recommend treating rental cars as inventory marked to their net value. Depreciation
would be treated as an operating expense as would the gains or losses from selling the cars well before
their useful lives have expired. This approach can be applied to other asset rental businesses such as
Atlas Copco.
67

Beyond Earnings
If it’s a regular occurrence, then it’s probably due to operating ineﬃciency
and should be included in the proﬁtability assessment. Just because
non-depreciating assets are recoverable does not mean that they are free.
There is an opportunity cost and time value of holding them to sustain
operations.
Depreciating Assets
The ﬁrst step when calculating gross investment is to separate depreciating
and non-depreciating assets.
The basic adjustments are as follows:
Depreciating Assets:
Inﬂation-adjusted gross plant
+ Construction in progress
+ Capitalized operating leases
+ Capitalized research and development
+ Capitalized exploration expense
+ Operating intangibles with identiﬁable lives
= Inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets (IADA)
We will outline the general adjustments for each component of the
inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets (IADA) before presenting the spe-
ciﬁc adjustments for Amazon. We then present the general components
and Amazon adjustments for non-depreciating assets before showing the
calculation of gross investment and moving systematically through each of
the other CFROI inputs.
Inﬂation-Adjusted Gross Plant. Gross plant and equipment can be
found in the ﬁxed assets account, which typically resides in the notes of a
company’s annual report (we will refer to plant and equipment as plant).
When calculating the inﬂation-adjusted gross plant, the ﬁrst step is to
remove any non-depreciating items such as land. Construction-in-progress
(CIP) should also be removed since it is not yet being utilized and its
68

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
inclusion will aﬀect the asset life estimate and CFROI calculation. The
reason for removing these items is twofold. First, gross plant and the
depreciation expense are used to calculate asset life. Including CIP and
non-depreciating assets in gross plant would distort the asset life calcula-
tion. Second, our goal is to separate depreciating from non-depreciating
assets because non-depreciating assets are treated as an asset release, or
salvage value, in the CFROI calculation.
We begin with gross plant, which is net ﬁxed assets plus accumulated
depreciation. Net ﬁxed assets are typically referred to as net property, plant
and equipment (PP&E) on the balance sheet. HOLT’s adjustments to gross
plant are:
Inﬂation-adjusted gross plant:
Gross plant (net ﬁxed assets + accumulated depreciation)
−Land and improvements
−Construction in progress
+ Cumulative gross plant recaptured
+ Asset impairments
+ Inﬂation adjustment
−Revaluations of plant
= Inﬂation-adjusted gross plant
Let’s begin with Amazon’s reported gross property and equipment,
which can be found on page 48 of the 2013 annual report under note 3
(Exhibit 3.4).
The total adjusted gross plant needs to be calculated before carrying
out the asset life and inﬂation-adjustment calculations (Exhibit 3.5).
Construction-in-progress is clearly identiﬁed under note 3. Unfortunately,
land and buildings are not separated from each other. We will assume that
most of the cost is in buildings and set the cost value of land to zero (from
note 3 on page 48).
“In December 2012, we acquired our corporate headquarters for
$1.2 billion consisting of land and 11 buildings that were previously
69

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.4 Amazon’s reported gross property and equipment in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Gross Property & Equipment
Amount ($m)
Source
Land & buildings
4,584
Note 3
+ Equipment & internal-use software
9,274
′′ ′′
+ Other corporate assets
231
′′ ′′
+ Construction in progress
720
′′ ′′
= Gross Property & Equipment
14,809
′′ ′′
EXHIBIT 3.5 Adjusted gross plant for Amazon in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Adjusted Gross Plant
Amount ($m)
Source
Gross Property & Equipment
14,809
Note 3
−Land & improvements
0
′′ ′′
−Construction in progress
720
′′ ′′
= Adjusted Gross Plant
14,089
Calculated
accounted for as ﬁnancing leases. The acquired building assets will
be depreciated over their estimated useful lives of 40 years. We also
acquired three city blocks of land for the expansion of our corporate
headquarters for approximately $210 million.”
The average gross plant asset life can be calculated by dividing adjusted
gross plant by the annual depreciation charge, which was $2.5bn in 2013.
From page 48, note 3:
“Depreciation expense on property and equipment was $2.5 billion,
$1.7 billion, and $1.0 billion, which includes amortization of prop-
erty and equipment acquired under capital lease obligations of $826
million, $510 million, and $335 million in 2013, 2012, and 2011.”
Gross plant asset life = $14.089bn
$2.460bn = 5.7 years
The gross plant asset lives were 5.6 years in 2011 and 5.7 years in 2012.
HOLT uses a three-year median asset life to smooth distortions that might
occur. The three-year median asset life is 5.7 years.
70

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Inﬂation Adjustment. CFROI is an inﬂation-adjusted measure of
ﬁnancial performance. The inﬂation adjustment restates historical asset
costs on the balance sheet to current purchasing units, that is, yesterday’s
dollars are restated in today’s dollars.
Critics might argue that the inﬂation adjustment does not reﬂect the
true cost of the asset today and insist that assets should be stated at “fair
value.”8 For example, computers have declined in price over the years
and are more powerful. Thus, a critic might point out that the inﬂation-
adjusted cost of the computer reﬂects neither its fair value nor its replace-
ment value. The CFROI calculation is not trying to estimate the fair value
investment necessary to replace the assets as of today. It is attempting
to estimate the investment made in past periods in terms of current
purchasing units. For example, assume the ﬁrm purchased a computer
for $2,000 in 2010. In 2013, a computer of equivalent functionality
might cost $1,500 and be more powerful. However, the ﬁrm invested
$2,000 of investors’ funds in 2010. If the computer is still serving its
function, the ﬁrm is not going to dispose of the 2010 computer and
invest $1,500 of 2013 dollars for a new computer. The CFROI calcula-
tion simply reﬂects the current dollar value of the 2010 investment in
2013 dollars.
With respect to ﬁnancial assets or equity investments held by industrial
companies, these are not generally operating assets and there is often a
market for these assets or an objective way to value them. In the HOLT
CFROI framework, ﬁnancial assets are stated at their fair value and
removed from gross investment for the CFROI calculation. They are
added back as non-operating investments when valuing the ﬁrm.
Calculation of the Inﬂation Adjustment. Because assets are acquired at
diﬀerent points in time and at diﬀerent units of purchasing power, an
adjustment is necessary to restate these assets in current dollar value. To
achieve this goal, it is necessary to “de-layer” the asset base (Exhibit 3.6).
8The discussion of fair value relates solely to tangible ﬁxed assets in this context and does not include
ﬁnancial assets.
71

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.6 Asset de-layering example.
Year-4
Year-3
Year-2
Year-1
Year-0
Sum
Nominal growth rate
22.4%
22.4%
22.4%
22.4%
22.4%
Asset layers (capex)
320
392
480
588
719
2,500
Inﬂation
2%
2%
2%
2%
2%
Inﬂation adjustment
26
24
19
12
0
82
Inﬂation-adjusted gross plant
347
416
500
599
719
2,582
Inﬂation adjustment factor
1.033
There are four inputs in the de-layering calculation: asset life, historical
cost, historical growth rate, and a GDP deﬂator time series. A company
with long-lived assets that is growing slowly will have a larger inﬂation
adjustment since its assets are older. A brand-new manufacturing plant
requires no inﬂation adjustment while a thirty-year-old power station
requires a signiﬁcant adjustment.
We can approximate the annual capex and total subsequent inﬂation
adjustment using our old friend from Chapter 1, the growing annuity
equation:
Gross PlantN = Capex1
gnom
[(1 + gnom)N −1]
Imagine a ﬁrm that reports gross plant of $2,500 with a ﬁve-year life. To
estimate the current dollar value of those ﬁve layers of investments, each
investment layer must receive a distinct inﬂation adjustment. Assume the
ﬁrm has grown its gross plant at a nominal average rate of 22.4% over the
past ﬁve years and that annual inﬂation averaged 2% over this period. This
translates into an average real annual growth rate of 20%. For simplicity,
we assume all investment occurs at the end of the year (as opposed to the
beginning of year or an average of beginning and ending values).
The ﬁrst asset layer from four years ago equals $320, and is calculated
by delayering the reported gross plant of $2,500 into an initial capex.9
9The $320 capex can be thought of as replacement capex for the oldest asset layer still being used in
operation. The next year’s capex will be one year newer, and so on. The oldest asset layer will have the
largest inﬂation adjustment (the opposite will occur during periods of deﬂation).
72

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Capex1 = Gross PlantN × gnom
[(1 + gnom)N −1] =
$2,500 × 0.224
[(1 + 0.224)N −1] = $320
Now that we know the initial asset layer, we simply grow it by 22.4% for
each of the next four years to arrive at a gross plant of $2,500, for example,
Capex2 = $320 × (1 + 0.224) = $392 in historical cost. You can check the
result by adding the ﬁve capex values, which total to $2,500.
To bring the asset layers into current purchasing units, we need to
inﬂation adjust for the number of years the asset has been in use. For
example, the nominal capex of $320 made four years ago equals $347 in
inﬂation-adjusted terms, leaving $26 as the inﬂation adjustment.
Capex1(inﬂation adjusted) = $320 × (1 + 0.02)4 = $347
The inﬂation adjustments are depicted in Exhibit 3.7.
Calculation details are shown in Exhibit 3.6. Because we assumed that
capex is made at the end of the year, there is no inﬂation adjustment for
the most recent ﬁnancial year.
A reported gross plant of $2,500 with 20% annual historical real
growth and 2% yearly inﬂation results in the ﬁve asset layers represented
EXHIBIT 3.7 Estimated capital expenditure and the corresponding inﬂation
adjustments to restate cumulative investment in current dollars.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Yr-4
Yr-3
Yr-2
Yr-1
Yr-0
Inflation adjustment
Asset layers (capex)
73

Beyond Earnings
in Exhibit 3.6. The inﬂation adjustment factor shows that the reported
gross plant receives the equivalent of a 3.3% inﬂation adjustment, which
highlights the cumulative eﬀect of inﬂation on aging assets. Finally, since
growth rates for most companies are volatile from year-to-year, due to both
organic and acquisitive growth, an average organic growth rate is used.
Because of acquisitions and disposals, it is easier to de-layer the assets
than to try and track them through changes in the reported balance sheet,
particularly since many acquisitions are of non-publicly traded companies
so there is no disclosure of the gross assets acquired. We will further discuss
acquisitions under gross plant recaptured.
Asset-light or short asset life ﬁrms may have relatively small inﬂation
adjustments. If you don’t have access to the HOLT software, which auto-
matically inﬂation-adjusts the assets, you may decide to ignore the inﬂation
adjustment. However, be aware that unless all the cash ﬂows and assets used
in the CFROI calculation are restated into equivalent units of purchasing
power, CFROI is no longer reliably comparable across regions or time.
In ﬁrms with long-lived assets, the inﬂation adjustment can reﬂect a large
percentage of the gross investment base.
Exhibit 3.8 shows the impact of inﬂation on assets aged from 5 to
20 years and with inﬂation rates of 1%, 3%, and 5%. While an inﬂation rate
EXHIBIT 3.8 Impact of inﬂation on the oldest asset layer.
Years
Inﬂation Rate
Inﬂation Factor
5
1.0%
5.1%
3.0%
15.9%
5.0%
27.6%
10
1.0%
10.5%
3.0%
34.4%
5.0%
62.9%
15
1.0%
16.1%
3.0%
55.8%
5.0%
107.9%
20
1.0%
22.0%
3.0%
80.6%
5.0%
165.3%
74

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.9 Amazon’s inﬂation-adjusted gross plant in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Inﬂation-Adjusted Gross Plant
Amount
Source
Gross plant life
5.73
Calculated
Historical growth rate of gross plant
28%
HOLT
Inﬂation-adjustment ($m)
424
HOLT
+ Adjusted gross plant ($m)
14,089
Calculated
= Inﬂation-adjusted Gross Plant ($m)
14,513
Calculated
of 3% on a ﬁve-year old asset generates a 16% inﬂation adjustment, that
same 3% inﬂation rate on a 20-year old asset is over 80%! Firms with long
asset lives and low growth rates receive signiﬁcant inﬂation adjustments.
Amazon has been undergoing tremendous growth and its assets depre-
ciate rapidly, which limits the inﬂation adjustment (Exhibit 3.9).
The inﬂation adjustment of $424m for Amazon reﬂects the impact of
estimated capex and individual GDP deﬂators over 5.7 years. You should
employ an historical growth rate that is appropriate for the ﬁrm in question.
Unusual growth rates such as those caused by acquisitions or asset disposals
should be removed so they do not distort the re-layering process.
Capitalized Operating Leases. Whether it is planes, trains, or automo-
biles, leasing assets is big business and continues to grow (Exhibit 3.10).
Approximately 90% of U.S. companies lease equipment. Of the more than
$2 trillion spent by U.S. companies in 2016 on productive assets, 10% of
these assets were procured through operating lease contracts.10
A lease is a contract between a lessee, who makes payments for the right
to use an asset, and a lessor, who owns the asset and receives payments for
lending an asset. Leases come in a wide assortment of sizes and colors. In
a perfect market, the cost of leasing an asset is equivalent to the cost of
borrowing to purchase the asset, and creates no value, that is, the NPV
is zero.
10Credit Suisse HOLT. This amount includes aggregate expenditures on capital equipment, mainte-
nance, and replacement of existing equipment, other investment in depreciating and non-depreciating
assets, operating leases, and investment in R&D.
75

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.10 Asset type as a percentage of total inﬂation-adjusted
corporate assets for U.S. industrial/service ﬁrms.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Assets as percentage of Gross Investment
Gross Plant
Work Cap
Cap Op Ls
Cap R&D
So why do companies lease assets? It must be due to market imper-
fections with accounting, tax, and legal consequences. For accounting
purposes, there are two types of leases:
• An operating lease in which the rental expense is treated as a peri-
odic operating expense
• A capital or ﬁnance lease in which the asset is treated as a purchase
For accounting purposes, operating leases do not infer ownership and
therefore neither the asset nor the liability for the leased asset appears on
the balance sheet. Operating lease details are disclosed in the footnotes.
Capital leases must be included on the balance sheet and have depreciation
and interest expenses associated with them that run through the income
statement. Firms often use operating leases to keep liabilities oﬀthe balance
sheet and maintain a lower debt leverage, which is sometimes an explicit
requirement of existing covenants.
This is yet another example where ﬁrms can engage in accounting
obfuscation. If the lease classiﬁcation has no direct impact on cash
ﬂow, then it should not aﬀect the ﬁrm’s value (remember the Law of
76

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Conservation of Value from Chapter 1). Sophisticated investors see
through this sleight-of-hand. Other suspect reasons for leasing include
avoiding capital expenditure controls and preserving capital. On the
ﬂipside, leases can have value as options when ﬂexibility is essential or tax
advantages beneﬁt shareholders.
Regardless of whether a company accounts for a lease as a capital or an
operating item, the use of a lease is fundamentally a ﬁnancing decision and
a liability for the company. If the ﬁrm did not need the asset, it would not
expend funds whether through cash, debt, or leasing. All operating leases
are capitalized onto the balance sheet and treated as operating assets and
liabilities for the CFROI calculation and equity valuation.
The inputs for capitalizing leases are: lease expense, asset life, and nom-
inal cost of debt for the lease. The cost of ﬁnancing is often available in the
footnotes. If a company has secured, publicly traded debt, the rate on that
debt is a good proxy for the lease debt rate. For companies that do not have
publicly traded debt, information on secured bank loans, or an estimate of
the approximate rating of the company if it has traded debt, will work. For
example, if you believe a company would be A-rated, use an A-rated cor-
porate bond debt rate. Because we are interested in the gross amount of the
capitalized lease, the life used should not be the life of the lease contract
but rather the total useful life of the asset being leased. A good proxy is to
assume that leased assets mimic purchased plant and equipment, and to
use the gross plant life if details about the lease are unavailable.
Exhibit 3.11 presents an example of a capitalized lease calculation given
a nominal cost of debt of 5%, an asset life of 10 years, and an annual lease
EXHIBIT 3.11 Capitalizing operating leases using the Excel PV function.
Stylized example of how HOLT capitalizes operating leases
Capitalizing Operating Leases
Amount
Nominal cost of debt, % (i)
5.0%
Asset life, years (n)
10
Rental expense, $m (pmt)
100
Capitalized operating leases, $m (pv)
772
77

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.12 Amazon’s capitalized operating leases in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Capitalized Leases
Amount
Source
Asset life
6.0
Calculated
Nominal cost of debt
4.63%
HOLT
Rental expense ($m)
759
Note 8
Capitalized operating leases ($m)
3,899
Calculated
expense of $100m. The letters in parentheses reﬂect Microsoft Excel inputs
for the PV function. In this example, a capitalized operating lease asset of
$772m is added to the gross asset base. It is important to bear in mind that
CFROI is based on gross investment, thus this calculation estimates the
gross value of operating leases and may look unfamiliar.
The HOLT framework employs the average yield on a 5-year, A-rated
corporate bond when capitalizing operating leases, which was 4.63% in
the United States at the end of 2013.11 HOLT assumes the asset life for
operating leases equals the gross plant life, and rounds the number up to
the closest integer, which is 6 years for Amazon. From page 55 of the annual
report under note 8, Amazon’s rental expense in 2013 was $759m:
“We have entered into non-cancellable operating, capital, and ﬁnanc-
ing leases for equipment and oﬃce, fulﬁllment center, and data center
facilities. Rental expense under operating lease agreements was $759
million, $561 million, and $381 million in 2013, 2012, and 2011.”
We can call upon the Excel PV function (Exhibit 3.12) or apply the
growing annuity equation to calculate the gross value of capitalized oper-
ating leases. We will include this amount in the gross investment and add
back the rental expense to net income:
Capitalized Operating Leases = Rental expense
rd
×
[
1 −
1
(1 + rd)N
]
Capitalized Operating Leases = $759m
0.0463 ×
[
1 −
1
(1.0463)6
]
= $3.899bn
11To limit year-to-year distortions, the average yield on a ﬁve-year note is averaged over three years.
78

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Capitalized Research and Development. Research and development
(R&D) is an investment by a ﬁrm to generate future cash ﬂows. Regardless
of the accounting rules that vary by region to expense or capitalize R&D,
like capex, it should be capitalized to capture the full economic impact
on operating returns and valuation. If R&D expenditure is not valuable,
the ﬁrm will experience a growing asset base with no concurrent increase
in proﬁtability from the R&D investment, resulting in declining CFROI.
A primary issue for capitalizing R&D is deciding how many years of
R&D expenditure to capitalize. In concept, you should capitalize the asset
for as many years as the investment is projected to generate future cash
ﬂows. Consistent with this view, companies with long-lived investments or
long patent protection periods such as pharmaceutical companies should
capitalize longer periods of R&D expense. Technology companies should
use shorter R&D lives since technological innovation typically results in
accelerated obsolescence. The HOLT software automatically capitalizes
R&D based on the ﬁrm’s industry, but when material, you should select
appropriate R&D lives based on your analysis.
The capitalization procedure is straightforward. Simply take the R&D
expense for each period for which R&D is capitalized, multiply it by the
inﬂation factor for that period, and sum the inﬂation-adjusted R&D lay-
ers. Exhibit 3.13 presents an example for capitalizing R&D expense with
a ﬁve-year R&D life. In this example, a capitalized R&D asset of $610
is added to the balance sheet. Please note that because CFROI requires
gross investment, the aim of this calculation is to estimate the gross capi-
talized R&D.
EXHIBIT 3.13 Capitalized R&D calculation.
Year
R&D Expense
Inﬂation Rate
Inﬂation Factor
Inﬂation Adj R&D
−4
100
2.70%
1.11
111
−3
110
2.70%
1.08
119
−2
115
2.70%
1.05
121
−1
125
2.70%
1.03
128
−0
130
2.70%
1.00
130
Inﬂadj
580
610
79

Beyond Earnings
Determining Amazon’s R&D investment is not as simple as it is for most
companies. Amazon does not disclose a speciﬁc line-item called “research
and development expense.” Instead, Amazon reports an operating expense
called “technology and content” (T&C). This item is essentially research
and development primarily related to Amazon’s on-going investment in
web-based services (AWS).
Regarding this particular expense, Amazon’s 2013 Annual Report states,
“We seek to eﬃciently invest in several areas of technology and content
such as web services, expansion of new and existing product categories and
oﬀerings, and initiatives to expand our ecosystem of digital products and
services, as well as in technology infrastructure to enhance the customer
experience and improve our process eﬃciencies.”12 This expense meets
HOLT’s threshold for being considered R&D: It is an investment in criti-
cal assets and IP having an expected life beyond the current year and from
which future earnings are expected to be derived.
Amazon’s speciﬁc lack of disclosure on research and development means
that HOLT has to carefully estimate this expense. Instead of assuming that
the entire T&C expenditure is R&D, HOLT recognizes a portion of T&C
as depreciation. This amount is determined as follows:
$4,584m of Land and buildings
+ $231m of Other corporate assets
= $4,815m of Total T&C depreciable assets / 5-year asset life
= $963m of T&C related depreciation
Subtracting $963 from T&C results in an estimated research and devel-
opment expense of $5,602 for FY2013.
R&D expense = $6,565m −$963m = $5,602m
As Exhibit 3.14 shows, a total of $14.910bn in capitalized R&D is
added to Amazon’s depreciating assets.
12Source: Amazon 2013 Annual Report, 18.
80

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.14 Amazon’s capitalized R&D in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Capitalized R&D
Amount
Inﬂation Factor
Adjusted Amount
Asset life (years)
5
R&D expense 2009 ($m)
1,086
1.0690
1,161
R&D expense 2010 ($m)
1,513
1.0562
1,598
R&D expense 2011 ($m)
2,495
1.0349
2,582
R&D expense 2012 ($m)
3,903
1.0161
3,966
R&D expense 2013 ($m)
5,602
1.0000
5,602
Capitalized R&D ($m)
14,910
Gross Plant Recaptured
Gross plant recaptured represents gross plant that was written oﬀas
impaired after an acquisition. Because Amazon did not have any gross
plant recaptured, we will skip this topic here and provide an exploration
of the adjustment in the appendix.
Total Depreciating Assets
After completing all the adjustments to gross plant, then construction-in-
progress, capitalized leases, capitalized R&D, and gross plant recaptured
are added back to arrive at total inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets, the
ﬁrst input for gross investment (Exhibits 3.15 and 3.16).
EXHIBIT 3.15 Amazon’s inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Inﬂation-Adjusted Depreciating Assets
Amount ($m)
Source
Inﬂation-adjusted gross plant
14,513
Calculated
+ Construction-in-progress
720
Note 5
+ Capitalized operating leases
3,899
Calculated
+ Capitalized research & development
14,910
Calculated
+ Capitalized exploration expense
0
N/A
+ Intangibles included in depreciating assets
0
N/A
= Inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets
34,042
Calculated
81

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.16 Amazon’s CFROI calculation template: depreciating assets.
NDA
GCF
year asset life
=
34,042 Depreciating assets
IAGI
+
Non-depreciating assets (NDA)
CFROI    =
?
Non-Depreciating Assets
Non-depreciatingassetsincludeworkingcapitalandothernon-depreciating
items such as land. They can be converted to cash and represent the salvage
value at the end of a project. Working capital, which includes operating
cash, accounts receivable (AR) and accounts payable (AP), is the capital that
is needed to run a business on a day-to-day basis. Any reduction in working
capital generates positive free cash ﬂow that the ﬁrm can distribute to share-
holders. There is a value trade-oﬀbetween too little and too much working
capital. Most companies can’t aﬀord to lose business due to stock-outs or
highly restrictive trade credit policies. Each industry has its own nuances,
which need to be assessed.
A common approach is to calculate and track a ﬁrm’s cash cycle (CC),
which is the time from when the company pays cash to purchase inventory
to when it receives cash from the sale of that inventory. Note the emphasis
on cash paid and received.
CC (days) = AR (days) + Inventory (days) −AP (days)
The operating cycle (OC) is the time from ordering inventory to col-
lecting the cash from the sale of the inventory.
OC (days) = AR (days) + Inventory (days)
82

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Inventory management is a crucial driver for many industries. There
is a beneﬁt to reducing the carrying costs of inventory and eliminating
spoilage and ineﬃcient processes. Because excessive inventory consumes
cash and eﬀort, the introduction of eﬀective inventory management can
immediately increase ﬁrm value. Just-in-time (JIT) and Lean Management
are two popular and related approaches to eliminating non-value-adding
processes and acquiring inventory just-in-time for use. Eﬃcient fulﬁllment
is crucial to Amazon’s success:13
“Through our Kaizen program, named for the Japanese term ‘change
for the better,’ employees work in small teams to streamline processes
and reduce defects and waste.”
Conceptually, non-depreciating assets include:
Non-depreciating assets:
Current monetary assets
−Current non-debt monetary liabilities
+ Inﬂation-adjusted inventories
+ Inﬂation-adjusted land
+ Other non-depreciating assets
+ Non-depreciating intangible assets
= Non-depreciating assets
Current Monetary Assets (Current Assets Less Inventory). The CFROI
calculation does not net cash and cash-equivalents against debt. While
management can certainly use cash to pay down debt, increase dividends,
or buy back shares, there is no guarantee that they will do so. Thus, the
CFROI calculation holds management responsible for this low return asset
they keep on the balance sheet. We assume that all cash is operating cash.
Holding cash has a tax disadvantage due to the double taxation of cor-
porate interest income on cash and marketable securities. Cash is simply
13JeﬀBezos, “2013 Letter to Shareholders,” Amazon.com 2013 Annual Report.
83

Beyond Earnings
negative debt, and the tax shield is negative for cash. What is the present
value of a constant pile of cash held forever? It is the value of the after-tax
interest income discounted at its interest rate. The NPV represents the net
loss in value of holding the cash.
NPV = −Cash0 + Cash0 × ri × (1 −𝜏c)
ri
= −Cash0 × 𝜏c
If the ﬁrm pays no taxes, then there is no value loss. A corporate tax rate
of 35% means that excess cash held into perpetuity has a market value equal
to 65% of the cash’s balance sheet value. It’s no wonder activist shareholders
put pressure on companies to “give ’em back” their money.
Companies hold cash for operational, strategic, and survival reasons.
There is a clear cost to holding cash, so a ﬁrm’s reasons need to be assessed.
All excess cash should be distributed to shareholders via dividends or share
repurchases, so shareholders can invest that cash elsewhere.
Many analysts adjust forecast cash levels to those necessary for maintain-
ing operations. The remaining cash is considered “excess” and is forecast to
be distributed to capital providers or netted against debt. For analytical
purposes, it may be useful to adjust historical periods by removing excess
cash from CFROI to better assess the true operating returns of the com-
pany, that is, not inﬂuenced by the low return on cash. Firms with lofty
growth opportunities tend to hold a high level of cash, which might be
treated as excess cash by an analyst. Risky ﬁrms may also hold a high level
of cash, but this should not be regarded as excess cash in most cases.
Accounts receivable is eﬀectively a loan from the ﬁrm to its customers
and generally taken at book value unless the analyst has a contrary opinion
regarding the amount that will ultimately be collected.
Most of Amazon’s current assets can be observed directly on the balance
sheet. Accounts receivable totaling $3.0bn can be found in note 1 on page
44 of the 2013 annual report. The balance sheet indicates “Accounts receiv-
able, net and other” of $4.767bn, thus “Other current assets” must total
$1.767bn:
84

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
“Included in ‘Accounts receivable, net and other’ on our consolidated
balance sheets are amounts primarily related to vendor and customer
receivables. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, vendor receivables,
net, were $1.3 billion and $1.1 billion, and customer receivables, net,
were $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion.”
Current Non-Debt Liabilities. Non-debt monetary liabilities are current
liabilities excluding items that carry an interest rate such as the current por-
tion due on long-term debt, which is commonly listed as on the balance
sheet as “short-term debt.” Although accounts payable are often viewed
as interest-free loans to the ﬁrm, this does not mean they are free. Dis-
counts are often oﬀered if a ﬁrm pays before an agreed number of days
after invoicing, which implies that the funding is not free. The greater the
relative discount, the greater the loss in not taking advantage of it. A ﬁrm
should choose to fund itself with accounts payable only if it is the cheapest
source of funding. For valuation purposes, all interest-bearing liabilities are
treated as debt and subtracted from the ﬁrm value to arrive at the equity
value.
Amazon has lumped short-term debt obligations into its “Accrued
expenses and other” line shown in “Current Liabilities” on the balance
sheet (Exhibit 3.17). Interest-bearing current liabilities must be removed
from the operating current liabilities and added to debt. The current
portions of the three debt obligations can be found in notes 6 (“Long-term
debt”) and 7 (“Other long-term liabilities”) on pages 53 and 54 of the
2013 annual report.
Inventory Inﬂation Adjustment. If inventory is accounted for using the
Last In, First Out (LIFO) method, the LIFO reserve will be added to the
inventory to reﬂect more accurately the cost in current dollars of the items
in inventory. We will further discuss the LIFO reserve under the gross cash
ﬂow section. If inventory is treated as First In, First Out (FIFO), then no
adjustment to inventory on the balance sheet is necessary. The economic
and book values of inventory should be similar. Amazon uses the FIFO
method according to page 43 of their 2013 annual report:
85

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.17 Amazon’s adjusted current liabilities in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
−Current Liabilities
Amount ($m)
Source
Accounts payable
15,133
Balance sheet
+ Accrued expenses and other
7,671
′′ ′′
−Current portion of long-term debt
(1,736)
Note 6
−Current portion of capital leases
(955)
Note 7
−Current portion of ﬁnancing leases
(28)
Note 7
+ Unearned revenue
1,159
Balance sheet
= Current liabilities
21,244
Calculated
“Inventories, consisting of products available for sale, are primarily
accounted for using the FIFO method, and are valued at the lower of
cost or market value. This valuation requires us to make judgments,
based on currently-available information, about the likely method of
disposition, such as through sales to individual customers, returns to
product vendors, or liquidations, and expected recoverable values of
each disposition category.”
These three items make up the adjusted net working capital, which
totaled $3.381bn at the end of 2013 (Exhibit 3.18). Net working capital
is simply current assets minus current liabilities.
Inﬂation-Adjusted Land. Since land is a non-depreciating asset, it is
removed from gross plant and added to non-depreciating assets. However,
like gross plant, land should also be inﬂation-adjusted as its value typically
appreciates over time. Unfortunately, land is often only disclosed as part
of “land and buildings.” In such cases, the “land and buildings” account
remains in depreciating assets, unless an estimate can be made of the
percentage land represents in the account.
Other Tangible and Intangible Assets. Since no information is generally
available regarding the age or depreciability of these assets, they are treated
as non-depreciating assets. If such information is available, these assets
should be placed in the categories where they belong. Other tangible assets
include “other assets,” which should exclude any deferred charges, and
operating “long-term investments” at their cost value. If the investments
86

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.18 Amazon’s adjusted net working capital in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Current Assets
Amount ($m)
Source
Cash and cash equivalents
8,658
Balance sheet
+ Marketable securities
3,789
′′ ′′
+ Accounts receivable
3,000
Note 1
−Financial subsidiary receivable
0
N/A
+ Inventories
7,411
Balance sheet
+ LIFO adjustment
0
N/A
+ Other current assets
1,767
Calculated
= Adj. Current assets
24,625
Calculated
−Current Liabilities
Amount ($m)
Source
Accounts payable
15,133
Balance sheet
+ Accrued expenses and other
7,671
′′ ′′
−Current portion of long-term debt
(1,736)
Note 6
−Current portion of capital leases
(955)
Note 7
−Current portion of ﬁnancing leases
(28)
Note 7
+ Unearned revenue
1,159
Balance sheet
= Adj. Current liabilities
21,244
Calculated
= Net Working Capital
3,381
Calculated
are non-operating, then they should be removed from the non-depreciating
assets and the market value of the investments should be added to the value
of the operating assets at the end of the valuation process. Pension assets
and post-retirement assets should be excluded from non-depreciating assets
and accounted for at the end of the valuation process.
With more and more companies in possession of intellectual property
and assets such as patents, brands, databases, and electronic spectrum, addi-
tional research is needed into the costs, returns, and asset lives of these
intangible assets, which function as operating assets. Some of these assets,
such as patents or trademarks, have legal protection for a ﬁnite period.
The period of protection is akin to a depreciation or amortization life and
such assets should be treated as depreciating. However, other intangible
assets are in a true sense non-depreciating. An obvious example is radio
spectrum. Radio spectrum does not wear out and although governments
generally grant spectrum for a limited period, it is rare that a company has
its spectrum license revoked. Acquisition goodwill and acquired intangibles
are excluded from operating assets in the HOLT framework. Acquisition
87

Beyond Earnings
goodwill is treated as a sunk cost. Acquired intangibles, unless speciﬁcally
identiﬁable as operating assets, are also treated as non-operating.
Another example of a non-depreciating asset might be classic ﬁlms or
songs. The cost of producing a James Dean movie or a Beatles album bears
no relation to the value of such assets today. Even if the original cost had
been capitalized, it would have been fully depreciated long ago. Thus, if a
reliable value (usually related to a sale) can be placed on these assets, one
might consider them non-depreciating. The digitization of music and ﬁlm
makes this non-depreciating argument ring even louder. Songs that were
popular generations ago are readily available at the click of a mouse on sites
such as iTunes, and it costs next to nothing to store them.
In Amazon’s case, it lumps these items into “Other assets” located in
note 1 on page 45 of the 2013 annual report:
“Included in ‘Other assets’ on our consolidated balance sheets are
amounts primarily related to acquired intangible assets, net of amorti-
zation; digital video content, net of amortization; long-term deferred
tax assets; certain equity investments; marketable securities restricted
for longer than one year, the majority of which are attributable to col-
lateralization of bank guarantees and debt related to our international
operations; and intellectual property rights, net of amortization.”
Item 7A on page 32 states that “Other assets” includes $127m of equity
investments, which are equity investments in private companies. This item
should be excluded from Amazon’s operating assets. The “Other assets”
line also includes “Acquired intangibles” of $645m which are described
in note 4 on page 51 of the 2013 annual report. There are lives listed for
each item, so they could be treated as depreciating intangibles. Because
they were acquired, we will follow the HOLT framework and treat them
as non-operating assets (Exhibit 3.19).
Non-depreciating assets are the second input of the gross investment
calculation and an input for the CFROI calculation (Exhibit 3.20).
The inﬂation-adjusted gross investment is simply the sum of the depre-
ciating assets and non-depreciating assets (Exhibits 3.21 and 3.22).
88

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.19 Amazon’s non-depreciating assets in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Non-Depreciating Assets
Amount ($m)
Source
Net working capital
3,381
Calculated
+ Long-term investments at cost
0
N/A
+ Other assets
1,930
Balance sheet
−Acquired intangibles, net
(645)
Note 4
−Equity investments
(127)
Item 7A
−Pension & post-retirement assets
0
N/A
+ Non-depreciating intangible assets
0
N/A
= Non-depreciating assets
4,539
Calculated
EXHIBIT 3.20 CFROI calculation template: non-depreciating assets.
NDA
4,539
GCF
year asset life
=
34,042 Depreciating assets
IAGI
+
4,539
Non-depreciating assets (NDA)
CFROI    =
?
EXHIBIT 3.21 Amazon’s gross investment in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Inﬂation-Adjusted Gross Investment
Amount ($m)
Source
Inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets
34,042
Calculated
Non-depreciating assets
4,539
Calculated
Inﬂation-adjusted gross investment
38,581
Calculated
Asset Life
Since CFROI is equivalent to the weighted-average return on all of a ﬁrm’s
projects, an essential part of the CFROI calculation is asset life. There are up
to ﬁve inputs into the overall asset life calculation: adjusted gross plant life,
89

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.22 CFROI calculation template: inﬂation-adjusted gross
investment.
NDA
4,539
GCF
year asset life
38,581
=
34,042 Depreciating assets
IAGI
+
4,539 Non-depreciating assets (NDA)
CFROI    =
?
capitalized lease life, capitalized R&D life, capitalized exploration expense
life for resource companies, and operating intangible assets life. The ﬁrst
three are generally the most important.
Gross Plant Asset Life
The asset life for gross plant is simply:
Asset Life = (Adjusted Gross Plant + Gross Plant Recaptured)
Depreciation
For companies that have made acquisitions, the depreciation expense
represents a blend of gross plant purchased to support operations and
acquired gross plant. Thus, it is necessary to include both adjusted gross
plant and gross plant recaptured in the numerator. As discussed earlier,
land is excluded from this calculation because it is a non-depreciating asset
and construction-in-process is excluded because it is not yet a working
asset and therefore does not have an associated depreciation charge.
Finally, to avoid unusual asset lives since the depreciation expense may
reﬂect a partial year, a three-year median life is used.
We showed earlier that the gross plant life for Amazon is 5.7 years.
This might seem short in the face of a 40-year useful life for buildings,
90

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
but the asset base is dominated by short-life items that require constant
replacement such as internal-use software (2 years), servers (3 years), and
networking equipment (5 years) which are spelled out in note 1 on page 44
of the 2013 annual report. The overall asset life is a harmonic average which
weights it toward short-life assets, that is, networking equipment with a
5-year life needs to be replaced 8 times in a building with a 40-year life:
“Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreci-
ation. Property includes buildings and land that we own, along with
property we have acquired under build-to-suit, ﬁnancing, and cap-
ital lease arrangements. Equipment includes assets such as furniture
and ﬁxtures, heavy equipment, servers and networking equipment,
and internal-use software and website development. Depreciation is
recorded on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the
assets (generally the lesser of 40 years or the remaining life of the
underlying building, two years for assets such as internal-use software,
three years for our servers, ﬁve years for networking equipment, ﬁve
years for furniture and ﬁxtures, and ten years for heavy equipment).
Depreciation expense is classiﬁed within the corresponding operating
expense categories on our consolidated statements of operations.”
Life of Capitalized Operating Leases
Leased assets generally consist of a similar asset mix as capital assets. If the
leased assets have a diﬀerent known asset life than that of gross plant, it
should be used.
Capitalized R&D Life
The capitalized R&D project life is the same as the number of years R&D
is capitalized. In a world of full disclosure, the project life for each R&D
investment would be known, and a harmonic average R&D life for each
ﬁrm could be estimated. The HOLT framework capitalizes R&D based on
the ﬁrm’s industry, but you should select appropriate R&D lives based on
your analysis (Exhibit 3.23).
Calculating the Life of Depreciating Assets
When calculating a ﬁrm’s asset life, a harmonic mean of the ﬁve asset classes
(depreciating plant & equipment, capitalized operating leases, capitalized
91

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.23 Estimated R&D life by Industry used by HOLT to capitalize R&D
expenses.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Biotechnology
Pharmaceuticals
Aerospace & Defense
Chemicals
Computers & Peripherals
Health Care Technology
Internet Software
IT Services
Software
All Other Industries
Semi & Semi Equipment
EXHIBIT 3.24 Calculating asset life.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Asset
Life
Historical
Cost
Implied
Depreciation
Asset
Life
Asset
Life-Cycle
Investment Weighting
Harmonic
Mean
Fixed assets
12
5,000
417
1.0
5,000
32%
3.9
Capitalized leases
8
3,000
375
1.5
4,500
29%
2.3
Capitalized R&D
4
2,000
500
3.0
6,000
39%
1.5
Total
10,000
1,292
15,500
7.7
Harmonic mean
7.7
R&D, operating intangibles, and other depreciating assets having variable
life) is used. A weighted-average life does not properly account for the life
of each asset class. Exhibit 3.24 demonstrates two methods for calculating
asset life. For the purposes of this example, we have assumed that capitalized
leases have a diﬀerent life than ﬁxed assets.
Method 1 (for Physicists and Engineers). Implied depreciation (col-
umn c): Calculate the implied depreciation based on asset life and
historical cost (column b/column a).
92

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Asset life-cycle (column d): Calculate the asset life-cycle. To understand
the concept of the asset life-cycle, consider two assets, one with a six-year
life and one with a three-year life. During the six-year life of the ﬁrst asset,
there will be two three-year life assets used. Conceptually, the three-year
asset will cycle through twice during a single cycle of the six-year asset.
To calculate the asset life-cycle, take the maximum life of all the assets in
column a, and divide that by the life of the speciﬁc asset in question. For
example, the maximum life is 12 years for ﬁxed assets. The asset life-cycle
for capitalized leases is 1.5 given their eight-year life. One-and-a-half cap-
italized lease assets are used during the life of the ﬁxed asset.
Asset life-cycle investment (column e): Calculate the asset life-cycle
investment (column d * column b). For example, for every 12 years of
$5,000 investment in ﬁxed assets; three cycles of capitalized R&D at
$2,000 are invested for a total capitalized R&D investment of $6,000.
Weighting (column f): Calculate the weighted-average of column e, the
average asset life-cycle investment for each asset.
Harmonic mean (column g): Calculate the mean. The weighting (col-
umn f) multiplied by life (column a).
Total: Sum column g to arrive at the asset life.
Method 2 (Quick and Easy). Alternatively, it is possible to skip the cal-
culations in columns d through g and calculate project life via implied
depreciation. Simply take the sum of the historical costs (column b) and
divide by the implied depreciation (column c) to arrive at the same answer.
Columns d through g provide an alternate means to explain the concept of
asset life-cycles (Exhibit 3.24).
When calculating asset lives for companies that report using an acceler-
ated depreciation method, you should refer to the footnotes for the asset
lives of the various asset categories. From the footnote information, an
implied depreciation and project life can be calculated. Relying on accel-
erated depreciation to calculate project life will result in an artiﬁcially low
life and an overestimated CFROI in early years and a high life and under-
estimated CFROI in later years. For Japanese industrial companies, where
93

Beyond Earnings
accelerated depreciation is the norm, the HOLT framework assigns lives
based on industry-speciﬁc global medians.
The life for Amazon’s gross plant and equipment is 5.7 years. We’ve
assumed the same life for capitalizing Amazon’s operating leases. Amazon
is assumed to have a ﬁve-year life for R&D in the HOLT framework. The
asset life for Amazon’s 2013 CFROI calculation is 5.4 years (Exhibit 3.25).
Based on the harmonic mean of the asset lives, we can input a project
life of 5.4 years into Amazon’s CFROI template (Exhibit 3.26).
Gross Cash Flow
Gross cash ﬂow (GCF) estimates the gross after-tax cash ﬂow generated
from the ﬁrm’s operating assets and represents the ﬁnal input of the CFROI
EXHIBIT 3.25 Amazon’s asset life in 2013 based on the implied depreciation
method.
Amazon FY2013
Asset Life
Amount ($m)
Life (years)
Implied Depr $m
Adjusted gross plant
14,089
5.7
2,460
Capitalized operating leases
3,899
6.0
650
Capitalized R&D
14,910
5.0
2,982
Total
32,898
5.40
6,092
EXHIBIT 3.26 CFROI calculation template: project life.
NDA
4,539
GCF
5.4 year asset life
38,581
=
34,042 Depreciating assets
IAGI
+
4,539 Non-depreciating assets (NDA)
CFROI    =
?
94

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
calculation. GCF can be calculated top-down from the revenue line or
bottom-up from the net income line. All items that have been capitalized
and included in the investment base must have their associated expense
added back to net income. This makes it possible to compare the return on
capital of ﬁrms that lease assets to peers who purchase assets.
Let’s step through the key adjustments for Amazon and calculate its
2013 gross cash ﬂow.
Gross cash ﬂow:
Net Income
+ Depreciation & amortization
+ Interest expense
+ Rental expense
+ R&D expense
+ Total exploration expense
+ Monetary holding gain (loss)
+ FIFO proﬁts
+ Net pension cash ﬂow adjustment
+ Stock compensation expense (after-tax)
+ Minority interest expense
−Equity investment income
−Special items (after-tax)
= Inﬂation-adjusted gross cash ﬂow
Net Income after Tax
Amazon reported a net income of $274m in 2013 on its consolidated state-
ments of operations, that is, P&L statement. Amazon’s return on average
equity was a paltry 3.1%! How can a company trade at such a signiﬁcant
premium to its book value since its public listing when it only reports an
ROE of 3.1% almost 20 years after its founding?! Accounting doesn’t sup-
ply a plausible measure of Amazon’s success. Let’s see what happens when
we ﬁnish with the economic adjustments.
ROE =
$274m
0.5 × ($8,192m + $9,746m) = 3.1%
95

Beyond Earnings
Unlike general textbook approaches where an adjustment for taxes is
undertaken to reﬂect the operating return on the unlevered ﬁrm, CFROI
makes no such adjustment in arriving at gross cash ﬂow. Instead of hid-
ing the interest tax shield for debt in a nebulous weighted-average cost of
capital (WACC), it is forecast and valued as a cash ﬂow.14
When using a WACC, the cash savings from the interest tax shield are
reﬂected in a tax-advantaged cost of debt, which is part of the discount
rate. This approach, though popular and technically feasible, shrouds the
cash savings and its sustainability. CFROI recognizes the tax advantage of
debt in the gross cash ﬂow and calculates a pre-tax weighted-average cost of
capital that tends to rise (rather than fall) as debt rises. In other words, the
tax savings from debt are recognized in the gross cash ﬂow (the numerator
of the CFROI equation) while the riskiness of debt is recognized through a
rising cost of capital (the denominator) when performing the DCF analysis.
A word needs to be said about the use of book versus cash taxes. While
many practitioners advocate the use of cash taxes when calculating perfor-
mance metrics, HOLT uses book taxes to calculate CFROI. Most impor-
tant and often overlooked is the fact that book taxes equal cash taxes over
the long run. Diﬀerences are temporary and owed to timing. A key bene-
ﬁt of using book taxes is better tracking of a ﬁrm’s economics: Book taxes
are dependent on the activities and earnings reported within the income
statement for each ﬁscal period. Cash taxes paid often contain the reversals
and eﬀects from transactions that are several years old, for example, use
of net operating losses and tax incentives. Book taxes within the CFROI
framework provide investors with the following advantages:
• Today’s performance measurement isn’t impacted by yesterday’s
tax games.
• CFROI variability is minimized by removing timing diﬀerences
in taxes paid.
14The HOLT framework is an adjusted present value (APV) technique. In an APV model, unlevered
cash ﬂows and interest tax shields are discounted at a constant unlevered cost of capital if market
leverage is assumed to remain stable.
96

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
• The starting point for forecasted returns can be more accurately
assessed as an extension of past performance.
When calculating free cash ﬂows as part of a valuation exercise, HOLT
takes into account cash taxes paid since there is value to deferring the pay-
ment of taxes.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization are added back to net income since they are
simply bookkeeping entries and non-cash items. Depreciation and amorti-
zation represent the periodic expensing (under the matching principle) of
an asset that has already been paid for. We disclosed earlier that Amazon’s
depreciation charge was $2.5bn in 2013. Note 4 on page 52 of the annual
report indicates that amortization was $168m in 2013:
“Amortization expense for acquired intangibles was $168 million,
$163 million, and $149 million in 2013, 2012, and 2011.”
Interest Expense
Interest expense is added back to net income since this amount represents
the required return to debt investors and we are interested in measuring the
return to all capital providers. The interest tax shield from debt remains in
net income to reﬂect the tax advantage to cash ﬂow from debt ﬁnancing.
As debt increases, the ﬁrm’s risk increases, and this is recognized in part
through a leverage risk factor in the company’s discount rate. If ﬁnancial
distress is a distinct possibility, then the present value of the expected ﬁnan-
cial distress costs should be included in the valuation. This can be accom-
plished via scenario analysis and probabilistic modeling. The worst-case
scenario will be the ﬁrm going bankrupt, and the best case will be survival
as a proﬁtable going concern. Trade-oﬀtheory suggests a balance between
the tax shield beneﬁt of debt and the cost of ﬁnancial distress, for example,
having to drop prices to retain customers and pay cash for inventory.
Firm value = Unlevered value + PV (Tax shield)
−PV (Financial distress costs)
97

Beyond Earnings
Amazon reported an interest expense of $141m in 2013 on its income
statement. Because cash is treated as an operating asset, we do not subtract
interest income from net income. If cash is netted oﬀagainst debt, then
the interest income should be subtracted from net income.
Rental Expense
Whether they appear on the balance sheet or not, leases are liabilities and
the leased assets are necessary for operations. Since rental expense is an
asset ﬁnancing expense and an integral component of the ﬁrm’s operations,
HOLT adds it back to net income and capitalizes it on the balance sheet as
described in detail in the gross investment section. For valuation purposes,
the debt value of capitalized leases is added to debt as a debt-equivalent and
subtracted from the ﬁrm value to arrive at the equity value. This approach
neatly treats the operating lease as though it had been purchased with debt.
The tax advantage of expensing operating leases is treated similarly to inter-
est expenses. It remains in the numerator as a cash ﬂow beneﬁt.
Research and Development Expense
The R&D expense is added back to net income since it is an investment that
is expected to generate future cash ﬂow. Whether a company succeeds or
fails in an R&D endeavor is irrelevant for the purpose of evaluation. R&D
represents capital invested in a project with an uncertain payoﬀ. Firms with
highly successful R&D initiatives will demonstrate higher “batting aver-
ages” compared to ﬁrms with less successful R&D eﬀorts.
Companies should not be penalized for committing R&D funding to
projects with positive expected NPVs. Amazon invests billions in improv-
ing its technology so that it can enhance its competitive moat and cap-
ture new and adjacent markets. Drug development is an excellent example
since R&D investment occurs years before positive commercial cash ﬂow
is produced. A successful pharmaceutical company that chopped its R&D
budget to increase this year’s earnings would take a massive hit to its share
price. This is an instance where short-term earnings and long-term value
creation are at odds. Economics beats accounting every time the expense is
98

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
perceived to be value enhancing. This helps to explain why Amazon with its
pitiful ROE track record continues to trade at a premium to its accounting
book value.
R&D is capitalized on the balance sheet as described in the gross invest-
ment section of this chapter. Amazon spent $5.602bn on R&D in 2013.
This value is almost 20× greater than net income! Amazon has invested and
continues to invest in its future.
Net Monetary Asset Holding Gain
The net monetary asset holding gain or loss simply reﬂects the impact of
inﬂation on monetary assets during the year. If monetary assets exceed lia-
bilities, then there will be a charge for the loss of value due to inﬂation.
The beginning-of-year net monetary assets need to be calculated and mul-
tiplied by the GDP deﬂator. Inventory and short-term debt should not be
included in the monetary assets and liabilities. Low inﬂation in many of
today’s industrialized countries results in a minor monetary holding adjust-
ment.
Monetary holding gain = −(Monetary assets −Monetary liabilities)
× GDP deﬂator
In Amazon’s case, monetary liabilities exceed assets, and there is a
gain since the ﬁrm is being funded in part by its short-term creditors
(Exhibit 3.27).
FIFO Proﬁts
In a period of rising inﬂation, ﬁrms using the FIFO method to quantify
inventory report more accurate balance sheet accounts but less accurate cost
of goods sold. HOLT’s FIFO proﬁt adjustment reduces the gross cash ﬂow
by the estimated increase in COGS not captured by the FIFO inventory
method.
The beneﬁt of FIFO inventory accounting is that it more accurately
captures the replacement cost of inventory on the balance sheet in an inﬂa-
tionary environment. The newest assets remain on the balance sheet while
99

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.27 Amazon’s net monetary holding gain in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Net Monetary Asset Holding Gain
Amount ($m)
Source
Cash and cash equivalents
8,084
Balance sheet
+ Marketable securities
3,364
′′ ′′
+ Accounts receivable, net and other
3,817
′′ ′′
−Accounts payable
(13,318)
′′ ′′
−Other current liabilities ex debt
(4,550)
′′ ′′
= Net monetary assets for FY2012
(2,603)
Calculated
x −Percent change in GDP deﬂator
−1.61%
HOLT
= Monetary holding gain
42
Calculated
the oldest assets (ﬁrst in) are sold (ﬁrst out) and expensed as cost of goods
sold on the income statement. The LIFO method more accurately captures
the economic cost of inventory sold since the (last in) inventory is marked
to the most recent market value. The mismatch in revenue and cost for
FIFO inventory requires an economic adjustment to the gross cash ﬂow
calculation. The FIFO proﬁts calculation is:
FIFO Proﬁts = Inventory × % Change in PPI
The beginning-of-year inventory balance should be used. HOLT utilizes
the Producer Price Index to broadly quantify the change in inventory pur-
chasing power, but analysts with a more accurate assessment of inventory
price changes should use their estimates.
This example assumes that all inventory is FIFO but can be adjusted pro-
portionally. If all inventory is accounted for using LIFO, there are no FIFO
proﬁts and no adjustment is necessary to the gross cash ﬂow. Most ﬁrms
follow the FIFO method, thus overstating their operating proﬁt. Amazon’s
inventory at the beginning of 2013 was $6.031bn (Exhibit 3.28).
Stock Compensation Expense
Stock compensation comes in a variety of forms including stock options,
restricted shares, and stock appreciation rights. For ﬁrms that use stock
compensation to reward employees, stock comp is treated as an ordinary
expense in the determination of a ﬁrm’s periodic net income.
100

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.28 Amazon’s FIFO proﬁts in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
FIFO Proﬁts
Amount ($m)
Source
FIFO Inventory for FY2012
6,031
Balance sheet
x % Change in PPI
0.62%
HOLT
= FIFO proﬁts
−37
Calculated
Stock compensation related to R&D investment is treated by HOLT
as an R&D expenditure. This incentivized compensation is still aimed at
developing future technologies, products, or services useful in deriving
future cash ﬂows. Therefore, it is also capitalized onto the balance
sheet in the same manner as non-stock-based R&D. In contrast, vested
stock options (that are in the money and exercisable) are treated as a
debt-equivalent which reduces the equity value of shareholders.
The note underneath Amazon’s 2013 income statement on page 36
indicates stock-based compensation for Fulﬁllment ($294m), Marketing
($88m), Technology and content ($603m), and General and administra-
tive ($149m). The grand total is $1.134bn. The Technology and content
portion is attributable to R&D investment, and this amount is added to
R&D expense. R&D-related stock based compensation is treated the same
as R&D in the determination of gross cash ﬂow and capitalized R&D (see
the technique described under “Capitalized research and development”
found on page 79). The remaining stock-based compensation items (Ful-
ﬁllment, Marketing, and G&A) sum to $531m and will have already been
deducted from the ﬁrm’s revenues, and thus require no further treatment.
Pension Expense
Net income includes an ethereal accounting pension gain or loss that is
the combination of pension service costs (e.g., the pension wage), pension
interest costs, expected return on pension plan assets, and pension actuarial
gains and losses. HOLT’s pension adjustment removes these charges except
for the service cost, which is the true periodic economic cost of a pension
plan. Pension expense can be found in the footnotes and is net of service
101

Beyond Earnings
cost and pension cost. Pension debt is added to debt-equivalents for valua-
tion purposes. However, in the case of a pension surplus, this is not added to
the value of the company, since these funds belong to the pension holders.
Minority Interest
Minority interest represents the portion of earnings in a non–wholly
owned, consolidated subsidiary attributable to the minority owners.
Minority interest is added back to net income since we are interested in
the return to all capital providers. Minority interest for Amazon was zero.
Special Items
Special items are added back to net income (reversed) since CFROI
is attempting to capture the normalized cash return on invested
assets. Examples of special items include goodwill impairments, asset
write-downs, large gains from the sale of a business, material FX or
hedging gains/losses, restructuring charges, and tax settlements. The
special item must ﬁrst be tax adjusted to account for the impact on cash
ﬂow before it is added back. No material special items were reported for
Amazon (Exhibit 3.29).
EXHIBIT 3.29 Amazon’s gross cash ﬂow in 2013.
Amazon FY2013
Gross Cash Flow
Amount ($m)
Source
Net income
274
P&L
+ Depreciation
2,460
Note 3
+ Amortization
168
Note 4
+ Interest expense
141
P&L
+ R&D expense
5,602
Calculated
+ Rental expense
759
Note 8
+ Stock-compensation expense
0
Calculated
+ Net pension adjustment
0
N/A
+ Minority interest expense
0
P&L
+ Monetary holding gain
42
Calculated
−Special items (after tax)
0
N/A
−Equity investment income
71
P&L
−FIFO proﬁts
(37)
Calculated
Gross cash ﬂow
9,480
Calculated
102

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
EXHIBIT 3.30 Amazon’s gross cash ﬂow in 2013 based on a top-down
approach.
Amazon FY2013
Gross Cash Flow
Amount ($m)
Source
Total net sales
74,452
P&L
−Total operating expenses
(73,593)
′′ ′′
Income from operations
859
′′ ′′
+ Depreciation
2,460
Note 3
+ Amortization
168
Note 4
EBITDA
3,487
Calculated
+ R&D
4,999
Calculated
+ Stock compensation expense
603
Calculated
+ Rental expense
759
Note 8
HOLT operating proﬁt
9,848
Calculated
+ Interest income
38
P&L
+ Other income
(250)
P&L
−Taxes paid
(161)
P&L
+ Monetary holding gain
42
Calculated
−FIFO proﬁts
(37)
Calculated
Gross cash ﬂow
9,480
Calculated
EXHIBIT 3.31 Amazon’s CFROI inputs and calculation.
Amazon FY2013
CFROI Calculation
Amount
Units
Asset life (nper)
5.4
Years
GCF (pmt)
9,480
$m
IAGI (pv)
38,581
$m
NDA (fv)
4,539
$m
CFROI = RATE (nper, pmt, −pv, fv)
12.0%
Percent
We took a bottom-up approach beginning with net income to calculate
Amazon’s gross cash ﬂow. If you prefer a top-down approach, you can begin
with revenue, work through to EBITDA and then make the same economic
adjustments. The values for gross cash ﬂow are the same (Exhibit 3.30).
CFROI Calculation for Amazon
Well done, we now have all the inputs for the CFROI calculation
(Exhibit 3.31).
103

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.32 Amazon’s Relative Wealth Chart as of April 30, 2014, indicates
a prolonged period of value creation and growth. Shareholders
have been handsomely rewarded.
Relative Wealth Chart
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Warranted Price: 345.06 USD (13%)
(10)
0
10
20
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
0
10
20
30
40
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
Asset Growth (%)
CFROI
Market
Implied
CFROI
CFROI Used
in Valuation
Growth Used
in Valuation
Real Asset
Growth Rate
Market
Implied
Growth Rate
Discount
Rate
Normalized
Growth Rate
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
Rel. to the S&P 500 Index
Amazon earned a CFROI of 12% in 2013. Is this result good or bad?
Comparing Amazon’s CFROI against its December 2013 real discount
rate of 3.5% (as calculated by HOLT and discussed in further detail
below), we see that Amazon has a positive spread of 8.5% above its cost
of capital. This return would place Amazon well within the top quintile of
global industrial returns.15 Amazon has been creating positive shareholder
value since 2003 and is expected to continue generating a CFROI that
exceeds its cost of capital (Exhibit 3.32).
The HOLT Relative Wealth Chart is the ﬁrst port of call for fund
managers who wish to quickly assess a ﬁrm in HOLT Lens. We will
return to reading Relative Wealth Charts later in the book but provide an
overview now.
15Analysis based on the HOLT database of over 20,000 company returns.
104

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
UNDERSTANDING THE RELATIVE WEALTH CHART
The Relative Wealth Chart is composed of three panels. The top panel
shows Amazon’s historical CFROI and its real market-implied cost of capi-
tal. Amazon has been beating its cost of capital since 2003. CFROI has been
fading since 2007. Consensus IBES earnings estimates are translated into
expected CFROI for the next two years and provide investors with a strong
link to near-term proﬁt expectations. “Market-implied CFROI” (the
Green Dot) and the “CFROI used in valuation” forecast in Exhibit 3.32
are similar for Amazon.16
The middle panel shows Amazon’s real (inﬂation-adjusted) asset growth.
The “Normalized growth rate” is an estimate of the ﬁrm’s potential for
organic growth. It is based on the cash generated by the company less the
cash distributed back to capital providers. The normalized growth rate
is likewise a measure of real growth. Amazon has aggressively grown
its business.
The bottom panel shows the total shareholder performance of Amazon
stock relative to the S&P 500 index. Amazon has created impressive wealth
for its long-term shareholders and demonstrates a remarkable record of
beating market expectations.17
In the HOLT framework, CFROI represents the weighted-average
internal rate of return (IRR) on the investments that comprise the ﬁrm.
In a sense, we are viewing the ﬁrm as a single project, however, the ﬁrm is
assumed to be ongoing. We are simply measuring management’s ability to
generate returns on the assets currently in place. We’ve succeeded in ﬁlling
the boxes for Amazon’s 2013 CFROI calculation template (Exhibit 3.33).
Are you ready to give it a try?
16HOLT’s CFROI forecast is often referred to as the “default” forecast, or “default” CFROI. The impli-
cation here is not that the ﬁrm is nearing bankruptcy, but rather that the HOLT forecast CFROI is
the expected value of ﬁrm proﬁtability in HOLT Lens, i.e., the default. The “Green Dot” is the circled
dot for “Market-implied CFROI” in the printed version. It is a green dot in HOLT Lens.
17HOLT often uses the terms “market-implied” or “market expectations.” In this case, the term “mar-
ket” refers to the average or consensus expectation of investors.
105

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 3.33 Amazon’s 2013 CFROI calculation.
NDA
4,539
GCF
9,480
5.4 year asset life
38,581
=
34,042 Depreciating assets
IAGI
+
4,539 Non-depreciating assets (NDA)
CFROI    =
12.0%
A COMMENT ON GOODWILL
Goodwill is the amount in excess of book value paid for an acquisition.
The goodwill may reﬂect the value of a brand or a sustainable competitive
advantage. It could also reﬂect an anticipation of future synergies or the
hubris of the acquirer. You may have noticed that there is no place in the
CFROI calculation for goodwill, yet it is on the books and it does reﬂect
an expenditure of shareholder funds. How does CFROI hold management
accountable for goodwill?
CFROI is designed to measure the economic proﬁtability of the operat-
ing business: the cash generated against the cash invested. While goodwill
is certainly an expenditure of shareholder funds, it is not recognized as an
operating asset. Management can improve the return on operating assets.
Managers can improve margins by cutting costs, or improve asset eﬃciency
by generating more revenue from operating assets. However, management
can do nothing to make goodwill more eﬃcient. It is a sunk cost and has
no bearing on future operations. Because it represents a premium over the
book value of the assets, it can only be a drag on the operating returns of the
business. This does not mean that senior executives and corporate boards
should not be held responsible for acquisition goodwill.
106

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
Senior management should be answerable for the goodwill they acquire.
However, though they cannot change the “eﬃciency” of goodwill, they can
change the eﬃciency or proﬁtability of the operating business. CFROI as
a measure of the operating return of the business is a performance mea-
sure that operating managers can inﬂuence. To judge senior management’s
ability to acquire businesses and hold them accountable for the cumulative
goodwill from acquisitions, a transaction CFROI can be calculated.
Transaction CFROI = CFROI ×
IAGI
IAGI + Cumulative goodwill
The transaction CFROI represents the dilution of operating returns due
to goodwill. The greater the amount of goodwill, the greater the dilution
and the lower the transaction CFROI. Investors should be worried when
the transaction CFROI is at or below a ﬁrm’s cost of capital. A strict rule
that Bob Hendricks followed was to avoid investing in companies where
the transaction CFROI was below the cost of capital.18
This is not the case with Roper Technologies and management’s extraor-
dinary ability to acquire and integrate the companies they purchase. The
HOLT Relative Wealth Chart indicates that Roper has a panache for grow-
ing by acquisition, a feat that most ﬁrms are unable to replicate as success-
fully. When goodwill is taken into account, Roper’s transaction CFROI has
maintained a steady 11% over the past decade. Roper squeezes exceptional
performance out of its operating assets. Its CFROI has been improving
since 2004 and its 2014 CFROI was 41%, which places it in the top 1
percentile of global industrials! Relative shareholder performance has also
been excellent (Exhibit 3.34).
In Chapter 6, we’ll show how the transaction CFROI and transaction
HOLT Economic Proﬁt can be used to dissect changes in shareholder value
due to acquisitions.
18Bob Hendricks was one of the founders of HOLT, the “H” in HOLT, and a mentor to countless
investors.
107

Beyond Earnings
108
EXHIBIT 3.34 Roper Technologies Relative Wealth Chart as of June 16, 2015, indicates that it grows by acquisition. Although
goodwill dilutes Roper’s performance, its transaction CFROI has remained above its cost of capital. Shareholders
have been handsomely rewarded.
Relative Wealth Chart
Industrial Conglomerates
Market Cap: 17.499 USD
Price: 174.08 (Jun 16, 2015)
Warranted Price: 146.41 USD (–16%)
0
–5
1994
1997
73 49
48
133109
47
86 54
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
FY:
2018
2021
2024
CFROI
Transaction CFROI
Forecast CFROI
Discount Rate
Market Implied CFROI
CFROI Used in Valuation
Asset Growth with Intangibles
Market Implied Growth
Asset Growth
YTD Growth
Growth Used in Valuation
Normalized Growth
Forecast Transaction CFROI
5
10
15
20
25
30
Economic Return
(CFROI %)
Discount Rate (%)
Normalized Growth Rate
35
40
45
0
–5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1994
1997
Relative to S&P 500 Index
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
2021
2024
Asset Growth (%)
TSR Rel. To Index
0
–5
–10
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
–5
–10
518
262
134
70
38
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
2021
2024
12/2014
Q1

Accounting to Cash Flow Return on Investment
CHAPTER APPENDIX: GROSS PLANT RECAPTURED
Companies make acquisitions which leave room to distort asset registers.
Under purchase accounting rules, net assets of the acquired ﬁrm are booked
at fair value, which diﬀers from the historical cost of the acquired assets.
Since the CFROI calculation relies on historical cost gross investment (the
capital providers’ funds originally invested), an estimate of that historical
cost is needed. Unfortunately, the original gross investment of the acquired
company is rarely available if it was a private transaction, or is buried in the
transaction disclosure documents.
When information is disclosed about the assets acquired, a good esti-
mate of the historical cost can be made and the diﬀerence between fair
value and the historical cost can be added back to the gross plant and
inﬂation adjusted. However, lacking such information, we must make a
gross plant recaptured estimate. Gross plant recaptured is the diﬀerence
between the ﬁxed assets reported after the acquisition and the value of the
ﬁxed assets prior to the acquisition. Gross plant recaptured relies on the net
plant to gross plant ratio of the acquiring company. Exhibit 3.35 presents
an example of the gross plant recaptured estimate when data relating to the
historical cost of the acquired assets is not disclosed.
In this example, Company A acquires Company B. Company B was pri-
vately held so the true balance sheet has not been disclosed. We do know
that pre-acquisition, publicly traded Company A had $1,000 in gross plant
and $500 in net assets resulting in a net plant to gross plant ratio of 50%.
Company A, as reported post acquisition, has $1,200 in gross plant and
$700 in net assets for a net plant to gross plant ratio of 58%. To restore
the ratio to 50% (the best guess we have), requires a gross plant recap-
tured of $200. While we have correctly estimated gross plant, we have
underestimated accumulated depreciation and overestimated the ratio. The
ﬁnal column in Exhibit 3.35 reﬂects the true undisclosed gross investment.
Finally, the gross plant recaptured is inﬂation adjusted based on the asset
life of the acquiring company. No gross plant recaptured was reported in
Amazon’s annual report.
109

Beyond Earnings
110
EXHIBIT 3.35
Estimating gross plant recaptured.
Gross plant
Company A
1,000
500
50%
700
50%
=
divided by
500
buys
Company B
(not disclosed)
As reported
post acquisition
Company A
The true
post acquisition
balance sheet
Accumulated depr
Fair value adjustment (assume = net assets)
Net plant/Gross plant ratio
[Net plant]/[NP/GP ratio] =
Less: reported gross plant
Gross plant as reported post acquisition
Plus: Gross plant recaptured
Equal: Adj GP recaptured
Divided by net plant as reported post acquisition
Net plant
Equal: gross plant recaptured
Equal: Adj NP/GP ratio
Adjusted post acquisition Company A
400
300
200
25%
58%
43%
100
1,200
500
1,400
1,200
700
200
50%
1,200
200
700
1,400
1,400
800
600

Section II
Discounted Cash Flow and
Economic Proﬁt Valuation
111
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

4
WHAT’S IT WORTH?
VALUING THE FIRM
“The value of any stock, bond, or business today is determined by the cash
inﬂows and outﬂows—discounted at an appropriate interest rate—that
can be expected to occur during the remaining life of the asset.”
—The Theory of Investment Value, John Burr Williams
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• We outline how to calculate and forecast free cash ﬂow to the
ﬁrm (FCFF), which is central to performing a discounted cash
ﬂow valuation.
• We show how to value the terminal period of a forecast. A fade
factor can be easily incorporated, making it possible to test the
sensitivity of a valuation to changes in the rate at which prof-
itability decays.
• The calculation and utility of economic proﬁt (EP) in assessing
economic performance and valuing a ﬁrm is described. For a
113
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
given forecast, discounted FCFF and EP valuations yield the
same result. We value Air Liquide and demonstrate its sensitivity
to proﬁtability fade.
• We step through the calculation of FCFF in the HOLT frame-
work, and show how it can be estimated from a CFROI and asset
growth forecast.
• Diﬀerent proﬁtability and growth scenarios are valued for Ama-
zon, indicating that it is expected to maintain high proﬁtability
and fast growth.
• Air Liquide is analyzed through the lens of the HOLT framework.
We have outlined how to calculate a ﬁrm’s CFROI and analyze its histor-
ical operating performance. The next step is to calculate its intrinsic value
based on proﬁtability, growth, and cash ﬂow forecasts. We will explore dif-
ferent discounted cash ﬂow (DCF) approaches in this chapter and then
apply our knowledge and estimate the value of companies using both the
HOLT and conventional DCF frameworks.
The goal of a DCF forecast is to estimate the intrinsic value of a company
and its sensitivity to changes in key drivers. By intrinsic value, we mean
the present value of the ﬁrm’s expected cash ﬂows. Given the same fore-
cast, we should obtain equivalent estimates of ﬁrm value from the various
frameworks. But, as Yogi Berra quipped, “In theory, there is no diﬀerence
between theory and practice. In practice, there is.” Diﬀerences most often
arise in assumptions about a ﬁrm’s terminal value.
Let’s begin by reviewing the conventional discounted cash ﬂow valua-
tion approaches.
A REVIEW OF CONVENTIONAL VALUATION
APPROACHES
The Entity Free Cash Flow Approach
The most popular method for valuing companies is to determine the
present value of future free cash ﬂows to the ﬁrm (FCFF). FCFF is the
free cash ﬂow to all capital providers. It does not distinguish between debt
114

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
and equity. Projected free cash ﬂows are discounted at the ﬁrm’s cost of
capital r:
Firm value = PV (FCFF) =
N
∑
n=1
FCFFn
(1 + r)n
Although the formula assumes the discount rate is constant, it will vary
over time just as bond spot rates vary. The riskiness of future cash ﬂows rel-
ative to the market might change too, causing the discount rate to change.
For example, a biotech start-up will probably have a higher beta (system-
atic risk exposure) when it begins life and have a lower beta if it becomes
a mature, successful pharmaceutical company.1 The tools of decision anal-
ysis, such as decision trees, can help when confronted by these types of
potential discontinuities.2 Let’s keep it simple for now and assume a con-
stant discount rate. Because we are valuing long-term cash ﬂows, the dis-
count rate should reﬂect a long duration. Commonly, ten years is assumed
to represent the long term.
Free cash ﬂow to the ﬁrm is the total cash ﬂow that remains after taxes
are paid and investment requirements have been met. The term “free cash
ﬂow to the ﬁrm” is equivalent to the cash that would be available to share-
holders if the company had no debt. This is a crucial point. When valuing
a company or project (or even when measuring a ﬁrm’s operational per-
formance), it is best to keep operations and ﬁnancing eﬀects separate. Tax
savings from debt or other ﬁnancial subsidies can be accounted for in the
cost of capital or valued separately. Disentangling ﬁnancial choices from
operations yields a clearer understanding of a ﬁrm’s value.
1For those new to ﬁnance, beta is the covariance between a stock and the overall market. See William
Sharpe’s seminal introduction of CAPM to develop a solid understanding of this concept. William F.
Sharpe, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk,” The Journal
of Finance 19(3) (1964): 425–442.
2In this case, it would be best to use a decision tree for assessing the biotech start-up. The riskiest part
is likely to be R&D followed by clinical testing. If R&D proves unfruitful, then you shut down the
project. If development and clinical tests are successful, then the beta of the future commercial cash
ﬂows will likely be much lower; that is, if the drug is successful and unique, then doctors’ and patients’
decision to use the drug will not be very inﬂuenced by the stock market’s gyrations and its beta will
be lower. Diﬀerent discount rates can be used for each branch of the probability tree. See Clemen and
Reilly (2014) for more on decision analysis.
115

Beyond Earnings
It is the potential value of the operating assets that is most important to
operating managers. Their decisions on which projects to invest in, which
assets to purchase, how the assets are deployed and maintained, and which
products and services they support have the greatest impact on a company’s
value. Financial engineering is a secondary consideration and one where
adding value is tenuous. We showed in Chapter 2 that when the eﬀects of
ﬁnancing are eliminated from the measurement of operating performance,
comparability across ﬁrms is greatly enhanced. When ﬁnancing eﬀects are
likewise eliminated from the measurement of free cash ﬂow, internal con-
sistency is obtained between the performance metric and its related cash
ﬂow. For instance, it would make little sense to talk about a ﬁrm’s ROE and
then refer to its cost of capital or enterprise value in the same discussion.
Instead, if ROE were the metric of choice, it would make sense to discuss
the cost of equity and the ﬁrm’s free cash ﬂow to equity. For this reason,
we will focus on free cash ﬂow to all the ﬁrm’s capital providers and return
on capital. We need to deﬁne a few key terms to facilitate the discussion.
NOPAT = Net operating proﬁt after tax
Capex = Capital expenditure (which might be either gross or net)
Gross Capex = net Capex + depreciation.
Δ Working capital = change in working capital.
Invested capital = net ﬁxed assets + working capital.
Δ Invested capital = change in invested capital = net Capex + Δ
working capital.
Tc = corporate tax rate (a ﬁrm’s eﬀective tax rate is often used, but
it should be normalized so that it reﬂects the average tax rate
expected over the long-term).
NOPAT equals the unlevered after-tax operating proﬁt and can
be derived from either a top-down approach (starting with sales) or
bottom-up approach (starting with net income).3
NOPAT = EBIT × (1 −Tc) = Net income + Interest paid × (1 −Tc)
3This formulation is simpliﬁed. There are usually numerous adjustments that are necessary to equate
top-down and bottom-up calculations of NOPAT, e.g., associate income and extraordinary items.
116

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EBIT is earnings before interest and tax, or operating proﬁt, and interest
paid × Tc is the interest tax shield that corporations gain by deducting inter-
est payments on debt from their taxable earnings. The interest tax shield is
zero in a given year for each of these three situations: The corporate tax rate
(Tc) is zero, interest payments are not tax-deductible, or the ﬁrm isn’t gen-
erating enough operating proﬁt to pay interest on its debts. The ﬁrst two
points can be related to Modigliani’s and Miller’s famous Propositions I
and II where capital structure is irrelevant in perfect markets with no taxes,
frictions, or market ineﬃciencies (this is not the world that lies outside
university gates, but the conclusions remain highly instructive).4
In its simplest form, invested capital is the sum of net ﬁxed assets and
operating working capital (Exhibit 4.1). The distinction between operat-
ing and non-operating assets, for example, holdings in associates and their
resulting income and costs on the Proﬁt & Loss Statement (P&L), must
be consistent. Because short-term debt is just the current amount due on
the long-term interest-bearing debt, it is removed from working capital
EXHIBIT 4.1 Invested capital is the sum of operating working capital and net
ﬁxed assets.
Working
Capital
Net Fixed
Assets
Invested
Capital
Determining Invested Capital
Determining NOPAT & ROIC
Net Income
+ after-tax interest expense
− after-tax non-operating income
= NOPAT
NOPAT
Invested Capital
ROIC = 
remove from the
measurement of
operating
performance and
value separately
Excess Cash
Equity Investments
Loans Receivable
Vacant Land
etc.
Non-Operating
Assets
4F. Modigliani and M. Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
Investment,” American Economic Review 48(3): 261–297. Corporate ﬁnance textbooks cover the topic
in detail. See, for example, the textbook Principles of Corporate Finance by Brealey, Myers, and Allen.
117

Beyond Earnings
and added back to total long-term debt. Excess cash is often removed from
working capital and subtracted from debt. That means that any interest
earned and taxes paid on that excess cash should be excluded from NOPAT.
Consistency is paramount.
This is the tip of the iceberg. If you wish to explore the adjustments
and nuances of NOPAT and invested capital, please consult the textbooks
written by Damodaran (2012) and Koller et al. (2010). Many of the adjust-
ments they use are similar to those of HOLT with the caveat that HOLT
measures the economic return on gross investment while the accounting in
those textbooks measures the return on net assets.
Valuing the End of the Line
Most valuations start with the assumption that the ﬁrm will last forever. It
would be unproductive to create forecasts that stretch to inﬁnity. The most
eﬃcient approach is to split the forecast into a given number of years—ten,
for example—and a terminal period that begins at the end of the tenth year.
The detailed forecast is known as the forecast horizon, or the explicit period.
The value of the terminal period is also known as continuing, horizon,
residual, or ongoing value.
Firm value =
N
∑
n=1
FCFFn
(1 + r)n + PV (Terminal period)
The easy way out is to forecast earnings in the eleventh year and multiply
it by an EV/EBITDA or P/E ratio. We would advise against this slothful-
ness for all the reasons cited in Chapter 2. We recommend the following
guidelines:
• The forecast horizon should be for as long as the ﬁrm is expected
to maintain a competitive advantage with excess proﬁtability or
until its return on marginal investments is expected to occur at
the cost of capital.
• Bullet one also holds true for the situation where a ﬁrm is generat-
ing returns below its cost of capital. This situation is unsustainable
118

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
and usually leads to industry consolidation, or bankruptcy for the
worst performers. If liquidating a ﬁrm is worth more than allow-
ing it to remain a going concern, then the ﬁrm should be wound
down. Don’t forget the NPV rule!
• Start-ups and turnarounds should be forecast until the ﬁrm hits a
sustainable rate of proﬁtability and asset growth cools to that of
inﬂation or the general economy.
Exhibit 4.2 will help you decide how long an explicit forecast should be
and what approach to take for estimating the terminal value.
The ﬁrst thing we need is an equation relating FCFF, NOPAT,
growth g in invested capital (IC), and return on invested capital (ROIC)
(Exhibit 4.3).5
FCFF = NOPAT −ΔIC = NOPAT(1 −g∕ROIC)
(4.1)
where g/ROIC is the reinvestment rate, or plowback.
The lower ROIC is for a given growth rate, the lower the resulting FCFF.
NOPAT only equals FCFF when growth is zero or ROIC is inﬁnite. As in
our earlier discussion about P/E and ROE in Chapter 2, ROIC is a measure
of the quality of earnings to all capital providers. This equation tells us about
the sign of FCFF. If g > ROIC, then FCFF is negative irrespective of how
well or poorly managed the ﬁrm is. If g < ROIC, then FCFF is positive.
The quickest way to boost cash ﬂow is to stop growing. A key takeaway is
that the sign of FCFF tells us nothing about the quality of the company
and its investments.
A general expression can be written for the case where growth in the
terminal period and the ﬁrm’s ROIC remain constant. This equation arises
from the growing perpetuity equation.
Terminal valueN = FCFFN+1
(r −g∞) = NOPATN+1(1 −g∞∕ROIC∞)
(r −g∞)
(4.2)
5This derivation requires nothing more than a bit of algebra: ΔICi = gi × ICi−1 = NOPATi ×
gi
ROICi
where ROICi = NOPATi
ICi−1
119

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 4.2 Flowchart to determine how long an explicit forecast period
should last and how best to estimate the terminal value. ROIIC
is the return on incremental invested capital.
Start with a 1-year financial
forecast and add years per
the flowchart
Is the firm ex-growth?
Choose terminal asset
growth rate
Has ROIC stabilized?
Does ROIC fade to
WACC?
Use fundamental pricing
model to value the terminal
period
Add an additional forecast
year
Does ROIIC equal
WACC?
Does ROIIC equal
ROIC?
Set f=0 in the fundamental
pricing model
Set f=0 and g=0 in the
fundamental pricing model
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
To remind you that the terminal period and its assumptions are forever,
we use the subscript ∞. We have seen a mistaken form of this equation
appear in more than a handful of actual valuation models.
Terminal valueN ≠NOPATN+1
(r −g∞)
120

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EXHIBIT 4.3 Relationship between FCFF, NOPAT, and investment.
NOPAT Approach
Gross Cash Flow Approach
NOPAT
FCFF
Change in
Invested Capital
NOPAT
FCFF
Change in Working
Capital
Gross Capex
Depreciation
This is a fatal error unless the perpetual ROIC is approaching inﬁnity. In
other words, growth is not free unless a company can generate an inﬁnite
return on its investment. If you are auditing a valuation model that gen-
erates highly optimistic values, this is a mistake to check for immediately.
The key point to remember is that NOPAT is not free cash ﬂow except
when growth is zero or ROIC is inﬁnite; FCFF = NOPAT −ΔIC.
The perpetuity equation NOPATN+1/r can be applied when the return
on invested capital equals the cost of capital in year N+1 and is expected
to remain at the cost of capital. The perpetuity relationship also holds true
if the incremental return on future investments (ROIIC) equals the cost
of capital, and the existing business at the end of year N maintains a con-
stant NOPAT into perpetuity. The value of a ﬁrm does not change with
growth if ROIC equals the cost of capital. You can prove this to yourself
by substituting ROIC = r into equation 4.2.
For the case where existing assets will earn a perpetual ROIC that is
expected to remain above the cost of capital but incremental investments
are at the cost of capital, the terminal value can be written as a simple
perpetuity:
Terminal valueN = NOPATN+1
r
Let’s take a journey to France and value Air Liquide, which specializes in
industrial gases. The ﬁrm has had stable margins and asset utilization over
121

Beyond Earnings
the past ﬁve years, so we’ll assume that the forward drivers of ﬁrm value will
be the past 5-year averages. The growth of sales is set to 5% in the explicit
period and 2% in the terminal period; EBITDA margin is assumed to be
24.4%; the eﬀective tax rate is 26%; operating working capital is set to
3.5% of sales; and net ﬁxed asset turns are held constant at 1.16. A bare
bone forecast and FCFF valuation is shown in Exhibit 4.4.
The weighted-average cost of capital (WACC) was set to 6%, which
results in a DCF enterprise value of €47.4bn.6 Air Liquide was trading at
€100 per share at the ends of 2014 and 2015, which resulted in a market
enterprise value of circa €44bn, in line with this valuation scenario.
A good check is to see whether a perpetual spread has been embedded
in the terminal period. Air Liquide has averaged ROIC of 15% over the
past ﬁve years (see ROIC in Exhibit 4.6), and is forecast to remain at 14.6%
during the forecast period. It drops to 13.9% in the terminal period, which
is an impressive 7.9% above WACC. The valuation will thus be sensitive
to the terminal growth assumption, so let’s set the terminal growth to zero
and see what happens:
PV (Terminal period) = NOPAT6
r(1 + r)5 =
2.451
0.06(1.06)5 = €30.5bn
Terminal value falls from €40.1bn to €30.5bn, and the intrinsic enter-
prise value drops to €37.7bn from €47.4bn for a decrease of almost €10bn
from our base case simply by forecasting zero growth in the terminal period.
Recall that the terminal value is insensitive to growth when ROIC equals
the cost of capital. This underscores that not only is Air Liquide forecast to
sustain a perpetual spread (ROIC > r), but also to grow. Maintaining the
present ROIC and investing in new projects that create value are crucial to
Air Liquide’s meeting the market’s expectations.
Another approach to valuing Air Liquide might be to wind the ROIC
down to the cost of capital during the explicit period by ramping down
the EBITDA margin to reﬂect competitive pressures. Because Air Liquide
is priced to earn operating returns above its cost of capital, this approach
6We discuss the cost of capital in Chapter 7. When valuing FCFF, the appropriate discount rate is the
weighted average cost of capital (WACC).
122

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EXHIBIT 4.4 Financial forecast and FCFF valuation of Air Liquide. The market enterprise value was circa €44bn as of December
31, 2014, and December 31, 2015.
Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Income statement
History
Explicit forecast
Terminal
Sales
11,976
13,488
14,457
15,326
15,225
15,358
16,126
16,932
17,779
18,668
19,601
19,993
Cash costs
−9,047
−10,178
−10,949
−11,584
−11,468
−11,639
−12,191
−12,801
−13,441
−14,113
−14,818
−15,115
EBITDA
2,929
3,310
3,508
3,742
3,757
3,719
3,935
4,131
4,338
4,555
4,783
4,878
Depreciation
−959
−1,056
−1,086
−1,160
−1,145
−1,148
−1,209
−1,270
−1,333
−1,400
−1,470
−1,499
EBITA
1,970
2,254
2,422
2,582
2,612
2,571
2,725
2,862
3,005
3,155
3,313
3,379
Cash taxes
−484
−587
−643
−652
−690
−725
−709
−744
−781
−820
−861
−878
NOPAT
1,486
1,667
1,779
1,930
1,922
1,846
2,017
2,118
2,223
2,335
2,451
2,500
Balance sheet
Working capital
198
387
432
1,100
322
357
564
593
622
653
686
700
Net ﬁxed assets
9,921
11,037
12,097
12,785
13,226
14,554
13,902
14,597
15,327
16,093
16,898
17,235
Invested capital
10,119
11,424
12,529
13,885
13,548
14,911
14,466
15,189
15,949
16,746
17,584
17,935
Operating cash ﬂow
NOPAT
1,667
1,779
1,930
1,922
1,846
2,017
2,118
2,223
2,335
2,451
2,500
Δ Invested Capital
−1,305
−1,105
−1,356
337
−1,363
445
−723
−759
−797
−837
−352
Free cash ﬂow
362
674
574
2,259
483
2,462
1,394
1,464
1,537
1,614
2,149
PV of explicit FCF
7,216
2,322
1,241
1,229
1,218
1,206
PV of terminal value
40,140
Enterprise value
47,356
123

Beyond Earnings
would have to occur over a period that corresponds to the sustainability of
their competitive advantages. If that period is inﬁnity, then you can use the
growing perpetuity equation.
Economic Proﬁt Approach
Economic proﬁt represents the proﬁt of the ﬁrm less the opportunity cost of
capital that investors require as compensation for funding the ﬁrm’s assets
and placing their wealth at risk.
The economic proﬁt (EP) valuation approach should result in the same
estimate of ﬁrm value for a given forecast, but it has the beneﬁt of showing
the economic proﬁt created or lost each period.
Economic proﬁt can be expressed either as NOPAT less a capital charge
(the opportunity cost) or as the spread (ROIC −r) multiplied by the
invested capital:
EP = NOPAT −Capital charge
Capital charge = r × IC
EP = (ROIC −r) × IC
(4.3)
If a ﬁrm’s return on invested capital exceeds its cost of capital, then it
is creating economic value. The more it can grow by investing in projects
that exceed their cost of capital, the more value the ﬁrm will create for its
shareholders. Firms that aren’t meeting their cost of capital are destroying
economic value. A ﬁrm that is meeting its cost of capital should trade at its
book value, since economic proﬁts will be zero. In this case, net assets will
equal the present value of all future free cash ﬂows. Exhibit 4.5 shows the
value drivers and calculation of economic proﬁt.
Economic proﬁt is easier to comprehend and communicate than free
cash ﬂow. Economic proﬁt combines size and return on invested capital
and its opportunity cost into a single result. Too much focus on the size
of earnings or earnings growth can lead to decisions that destroy value if
124

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EXHIBIT 4.5 Flowchart showing the calculation of economic proﬁt and how
its value drivers feed into it. Invested capital turns equal sales
divided by invested capital. The DuPont relationship is ROIC =
EBIT% × (1 – Tc) × Invested capital turns.
EP
Capital Charge
EBIT x (1 - T)
Sales
Invested Capital
Turns
Invested Capital
Cost of Capital
x
x
x
–
EBIT%
ROIC is less than the cost of capital. Conversely, an obsessive focus on
earning a high ROIC on a low capital base may lead to missed opportuni-
ties if managers are rewarded for maintaining a high ROIC. Don’t allow a
myopic view to fool you; the NPV rule still prevails!
As before, we’ll split the valuation into explicit and terminal periods:
Firm value = IC0 +
N
∑
n=1
EPn
(1 + r)n + PV (Terminal period)
The general expression for constant growth and ROIC in the terminal
period is:
Terminal valueN = EPN+1
(r −g∞) = NOPATN+1 −r × ICN
(r −g∞)
= (ROIC∞−r) × ICN
(r −g∞)
(4.4)
This equation has some interesting properties. When ROIC equals the
cost of capital, the terminal value is zero. No fuss or extra work required.
125

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 4.6 Financial forecast and EP valuation of Air Liquide. The market enterprise value was circa €44bn as of December 31,
2014, and December 31, 2015.
Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Income statement
History
Explicit forecast
Terminal
Sales
11,976****
13,488
14,457
15,326
15,225
15,358
16,126
16,932
17,779
18,668
19,601
19,993
Cash costs
−9,047
−10,178
−10,949
−11,584
−11,468
−11,639
−12,191
−12,801
−13,441
−14,113
−14,818
−15,115
EBITDA
2,929
3,310
3,508
3,742
3,757
3,719
3,935
4,131
4,338
4,555
4,783
4,878
Depreciation
−959
−1,056
−1,086
−1,160
−1,145
−1,148
−1,209
−1,270
−1,333
−1,400
−1,470
−1,499
EBITA
1,970
2,254
2,422
2,582
2,612
2,571
2,725
2,862
3,005
3,155
3,313
3,379
Cash taxes
−484
−587
−643
−652
−690
−725
−709
−744
−781
−820
−861
−878
NOPAT
1,486
1,667
1,779
1,930
1,922
1,846
2,017
2,118
2,223
2,335
2,451
2,500
Balance sheet
Working capital
198
387
432
1,100
322
357
564
593
622
653
686
700
Net ﬁxed assets
9,921
11,037
12,097
12,785
13,226
14,554
13,902
14,597
15,327
16,093
16,898
17,235
Invested capital
10,119
11,424
12,529
13,885
13,548
14,911
14,466
15,189
15,949
16,746
17,584
17,935
Economic proﬁt calculation
ROIC
16.5%
15.6%
15.4%
13.8%
13.6%
13.5%
14.6%
14.6%
14.6%
14.6%
14.2%
NOPAT
1,667
1,779
1,930
1,922
1,846
2,017
2,118
2,223
2,335
2,451
2,500
Capital charge
−607
−685
−752
−833
−813
−895
−868
−911
−957
−1,005
−1,055
Economic proﬁt
1,060
1,094
1,178
1,089
1,033
1,122
1,250
1,312
1,378
1,447
1,445
PV of EP
5,444
1,059
1,112
1,102
1,091
1,081
Invested capital
14,911
PV of terminal period
27,001
Enterprise value
47,356
126

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EXHIBIT 4.7 Forecast scenarios and their valuations for Air Liquide. The
market enterprise value was circa €44bn as of December 31,
2014, and December 31, 2015.
Scenario
Enterprise Value
Comment
1
€47.4 bn
Value creation continues and grows in the terminal
period.
2
€37.7 bn
Growth is set to zero in the terminal period, but the
core business sustains its proﬁtability into
perpetuity.
3
€20.4 bn
Value creation is limited to the explicit forecast period.
EP is set to zero in the terminal period.
4
€14.9 bn
Book value of the ﬁrm; EP is set to zero in the explicit
and terminal periods.
It’s relatively easy to back into how much value must be created in the
terminal period to match the market value of the ﬁrm. The economic proﬁt
valuation for Air Liquide is shown in Exhibit 4.6.
Whew, we calculated the same enterprise value as for our FCFF base
case, €47.4bn. If the terminal growth is set to zero, the present value of the
terminal period drops from €27bn to €17.4bn, resulting in an enterprise
value of €37.7bn, which matches the FCFF valuation result. Here’s where
the advantages of the EP approach shine. If we assumed zero value cre-
ation in the terminal period, the enterprise value would bottom to €20.4bn
(€14.91bn + €5.44bn). And if Air Liquide ceased creating value from 2015
onwards, its enterprise value would drop to its invested capital of €14.9bn.
The results are summarized in Exhibit 4.7.
What Is Fade?
Fade is a concept with which HOLT clients are quite familiar. Fade is the
rate at which proﬁtability converges toward the long-term average level of
proﬁtability, which we assume is a ﬁrm’s cost of capital. We discuss fade in
proﬁtability extensively in Chapter 9, and oﬀer empirical evidence for its
existence. For now, let’s assume a general understanding of fade and show
how it can be employed in valuing a ﬁrm.
127

Beyond Earnings
An elegant manner of making the transition from a proﬁtable or unprof-
itable state to a cost of capital (or normal) state is to utilize a fade factor f
which is the rate at which ROIC converges to the cost of capital. In other
words, it is the rate at which the economic proﬁt spread decays to zero. A
general expression can be derived where ROIC fades to r while the invested
capital grows at g.
Terminal valueN
=
∞
∑
i=1
(1 −f )i−1 × (ROICN+1 −r) × ICN × (1 + g∞)i−1
(1 + r)i
This might look like a dog’s breakfast, but it is highly useful and has
an interesting feature: Fade is compound decay, which has the opposite
sign of growth.
The closed-form solution is simply that of a growing perpetuity. While
the asset base grows ad inﬁnitum, the economic spread fades into the sunset
as ROIC converges toward the cost of capital:7
Terminal valueN = (ROICN+1 −r) × InvCapN
r −[(1 −f ) × (1 + g∞) −1] ≈
EPN+1
r −g∞+ f
(4.5)
This is a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation and allows you to test how sensitive
the valuation is to changes in the rate of decay in corporate proﬁtability.
The fade rate f can range from 0% (no fade) to 100% (immediate fade).
This equation has a fascinating property: It is equivalent to calculating the
terminal value of a growing EP stream that suddenly drops to zero after
1/f years. A fade rate of 10% would correspond to an expected competitive
advantage period of 10 years, since 1/0.10 = 10. Please see Chapter 5 for
more detail on fade and CAP (competitive advantage period).
7The secret is to see that the spread (ROIC – r) is fading to zero at an exponential rate of f. By setting
(1 – f )(1 + g) = (1 + x), the equation reduces to the form of a growing perpetuity and Bob’s your
uncle. Please see our report: Holland and Matthews, Don’t Suﬀer from a Terminal Flaw, Add Fade to
your DCF, Credit Suisse HOLT, June 2016. The term [(1 −f )(1 + g) −1] is approximately equal to
(g −f ) when the cross-term ( f × g) is assumed to be negligible. This simpliﬁcation makes the equation
and its interpretation far more tractable.
128

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
Fade in Economic Proﬁt Equation
If we put the pieces together, we can write the ﬁrm value as:
Firm value = IC0 +
N
∑
n=1
EPn
(1 + r)n +
EPN+1
(r −g∞+ f )(1 + r)N
(4.6)
A valuation matrix for diﬀerent combinations of fade and terminal
growth is shown using this equation and the earlier Air Liquide forecast
(Exhibits 4.8 and 4.9).
Growth and fade of 0% equate to the case of a simple perpetuity and
generate the same enterprise value of €37.7bn (upper left corner of the
table). The base case of 2% terminal growth results in the same value of
€47.4bn. The beneﬁt of including fade in the economic proﬁt approach is
that we can test how sensitive the valuation is to changes in proﬁt persis-
tence. Notice how quickly the value drops as fade increases! Just changing
the fade from 0% to 5% causes the value to drop by a third. If the fade rate
is increased to 10%, the average rate of proﬁt decay for the average ﬁrm,
total ﬁrm value drops by more than 40%.
EXHIBIT 4.8 Air Liquide’s enterprise value (€m) for different combinations of
terminal growth and fade. The market enterprise value was
circa €44bn as of December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2015.
Fade Rate
0%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0%
37,745
29,841
26,877
24,369
22,219
21,340
Growth rate
1%
41,590
30,973
27,434
24,602
22,286
21,367
2%
47,356
32,356
28,070
24,856
22,356
21,394
EXHIBIT 4.9 Air Liquide’s enterprise value to book value for different
combinations of terminal growth and fade.
Fade Rate
0%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0%
2.5
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
Growth rate
1%
2.8
2.1
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
2%
3.2
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.4
129

Beyond Earnings
Can Air Liquide sustain its present proﬁtability for so far into the future?
Are its competitive advantages this strong? Fade is an empirical reality and a
crucial component of value; it is a feature that a fundamental analyst must
think long and hard about. You are allowed to turn oﬀyour Bloomberg
terminal and turn on your mind for this one. If you’re wondering about
Warren Buﬀett, he likes ﬁrms that he expects will experience little or no fade
in their core business: Dairy Queen, See’s Chocolate, Coca Cola, Gillette,
Heinz, and Kraft. The value of these ﬁrms is about far more than next
quarter’s or next year’s earnings.
Exhibit 4.10 summarizes the EP and FCFF valuation techniques. You
should obtain equal valuations for a given forecast.
HOLT APPROACH TO FCFF VALUATION
The HOLT framework accommodates both the FCFF and the EP
approaches to estimating ﬁrm value. We will use Amazon to demonstrate
the HOLT FCFF adjustments and valuation. Let’s begin by deﬁning
operating free cash ﬂow and step through the adjustments.
Nominal Gross Cash Flow
The nominal gross cash ﬂow (GCF) is the gross cash ﬂow produced by the
ﬁrm less tax due on current proﬁts. Gross cash ﬂow reverses the non-cash
depreciation expense. In our conventional example, gross cash ﬂow equals
NOPAT plus depreciation. Because the gross cash ﬂow in the CFROI cal-
culation is inﬂation-adjusted and based on book taxes, we need to reverse
the inﬂation adjustment and take into account the actual cash tax that is
paid.
Nominal GCF = GCF −Monetary holding gain
+Δ Deferred tax + Special items (after tax)
130

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
131
EXHIBIT 4.10 Flowchart for the EP and FCFF valuation approaches: EP is on the left-hand side and FCFF is on the right-hand
side. The valuations should be equivalent for a given forecast.
Firm Value
Invested Capital
Present Value of
Economic Profits
NOPAT
(1 - Tax Rate)
Cost of Capital
EBIT
Income
Statement
Opening and
Closing Balance
Sheets
Capital Charge
Economic Profit
=
=
=
x
x
–
=
+
Invested Capital
Firm Value
Present Value of Free Cash Flows
NOPAT
(1 - Tax Rate)
Opening Invested
Capital
EBIT
Income
Statement
Opening and
Closing Balance
Sheets
ΔInvested
Capital
Free Cash Flow
=
=
=
–
x
–
=
Closing Invested
Capital

Beyond Earnings
We calculated the ﬁrst two items for Amazon in Chapter 3. No spe-
cial items were reported in 2013. The change in deferred tax accounts for
timing diﬀerences in taxes paid can usually be found on the balance sheet.
Long-term deferred tax liabilities can be found in Note 7 on page 54 of
Amazon’s 2013 annual report.
Δ Deferred tax (2013) = $571m −$476m = $95m
Nominal GCF(2013) = $9,480m −$42m + $95m = $9,533m
Total Investment
Total investment consists of four components:
• Change in working capital
• Change in long-term assets
• R&D investment
• Change in capitalized operating leases
The changes in speciﬁc working capital items are presented in
Exhibit 4.11. Most of these items can be pulled directly from Amazon’s
2013 balance sheet.
Since cash is used to purchase assets, an increase in assets results in a
decrease in cash. Accounts receivable and other current assets were split in
EXHIBIT 4.11 Change in working capital calculation for Amazon in 2013.
Amazon.com ($m)
Balance Sheet Items
Change in Working Capital ($m)
2012
2013
Change
Accounts receivable
2,600
3,000
400
Other current assets
1,217
1,767
550
Operating cash
11,448
12,447
999
Inventories
6,031
7,411
1,380
- Accounts payable
(13,318)
(15,133)
(1,815)
- Other current liabilities
(4,550)
(6,111)
(1,561)
- Income taxes payable
0
0
0
= Working capital
3,428
3,381
(47)
132

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
Amazon’s ﬁnancial report. Note 1 on page 44 of the 2013 annual report
indicates that vendor and customer receivables were $3.0bn in 2013
and $2.6bn in 2012. Because HOLT assumes that cash and marketable
securities are operating assets, they are included as working capital items.
Most analysts subtract excess cash and marketable securities from debt
and exclude them from working capital. Management is held responsible
for all cash it retains under the HOLT approach. However you decide to
treat cash, make sure it remains consistent. If you decide to keep cash as
part of working capital, interest earned on cash should remain in the free
cash ﬂow forecast and cash should not be deducted from total debt when
estimating the intrinsic price per share (this would be double-counting).
An increase in current liabilities is equivalent to an increase in cash
from operating activities. Creditors are providing funding for the busi-
ness. Because interest-bearing short-term debt is the current portion due
on long-term debt, it should be excluded from current liabilities, that is, it
is not working capital; it is debt ﬁnancing.8 In Amazon’s case, short-term
debts of $1.736bn in 2013 and $1.134bn in 2012 were excluded from
other current liabilities (see notes 6 and 7 on pages 53 to 54 of the 2013
annual report). The change in working capital was −$47m. Working cap-
ital decreased. This is the same as saying that net cash due to changes in
working capital was a positive $47m, since creditors have increased their
funding of Amazon’s operations.
The investment in long-term assets is essentially the change in long-term
net assets plus depreciation and amortization. The items for Amazon are in
Exhibit 4.12.
Adjustments for the ﬁrst three items were explored in Chapter 3. The
net capex in property plant and equipment (PP&E) is simply the diﬀerence
between the net PP&E values for ﬁscal years 2013 and 2012. To obtain
gross capex, the depreciation charge of $2.46bn must be added to the
$3.889bn change in net PP&E for a total of $6.349bn. Other long-term
assets had to be adjusted for equity investments and intangible assets (see
Chapter 3 for details). We also must account for cash spent on acquisitions.
8Interest-bearing current debt is the portion of long-term debt that is currently due.
133

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 4.12 Change in long-term assets calculation for Amazon in 2013.
Amazon.com ($m)
Balance Sheet items
Change in Long-Term Assets ($m)
2013
2012
2013
Change
Net PP&E
3,889
7,060
10,949
3,889
Depreciation
2,460
Other long-term assets
376
782
1,158
376
Goodwill
103
2,552
2,655
103
Non-goodwill intangibles
(80)
725
645
(80)
Amortization of intangibles
168
Change in long-term assets
6,916
Amazon reported its acquisition goodwill and acquired intangible assets in
note 4 of the 2013 annual report (see pages 51–52 for the speciﬁc items of
interest). The net change in goodwill and intangible assets was $23m, that
is, $103m + (−$80m). The gross expenditure on goodwill and intangible
assets is the net change plus amortization, which equaled $191m in 2013.
Amazon spent a grand total of $6.916bn on long-term assets in 2013.
Because HOLT capitalizes the research and development expense, for
the purposes of calculating cash ﬂow we need to treat any money spent
on research as an investment. Amazon reported an expense of $6.565bn
under “Technology and content” on its 2013 income statement. In
Chapter 3, we showed that a portion of this reported R&D expense was
already included in Amazon’s depreciation. Amazon’s net R&D expense
summed to $5.602bn.
We also showed how to capitalize operating leases in Chapter 3 and esti-
mated a total of $3.899bn for Amazon at the end of 2013. For the purposes
of calculating cash ﬂow, we need to determine the total investment (gross
change) in capitalized operating leases. Since we are mimicking the eﬀect of
having bought the assets, similar to measuring the change in net ﬁxed assets,
we need to determine the related depreciation charge in order to arrive at
an estimated gross investment for operating leases. In this case, deprecia-
tion will exactly equal the replacement charge, since we are imputing these
values.
Investment in capitalized operating leases
= ΔCapitalized operating leases + Retirement
134

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
Calculation of retirement requires an estimate of the past growth rate of
the ﬁrm’s depreciating assets and the economic life of the leased assets. We
showed how the delayering of assets works in Chapter 3, and once again
employ the growing annuity equation.
Retirement = Capitalized operating leases × gHistorical
(1 + gHistorical)((1 + gHistorical)N −1)
The historical real asset growth of depreciating assets for Amazon was
27.6% according to HOLT, and the economic asset life is 5.7 years, which
we round up to 6 years.9 The retirement of capitalized operating leases that
needs to be replaced is $254m.
Retirement(2013) =
$3.899bn × 0.276
(1 + 0.276)((1 + 0.276)6 −1) = $254m
Amazon spent $561m in 2012 on operating leases, which amounts to
an equivalent $2.760bn in capitalized operating lease assets. The change in
capitalized operating lease assets is thus $1.139bn, and the total equivalent
investment in capitalized operating leases in 2013 is $1.393bn.
Investment in capitalized operating leases
= (3.899 −2.760) + 0.254 = $1.393bn
On the funding side, this amount results in an increase in
debt-equivalents since we assume that the operating leases are funded
entirely by debt.
The total investment in operating assets can now be tallied
(Exhibit 4.13).
We have all the inputs to calculate Amazon’s free cash ﬂow in 2013:
FCFF = Nominal GCF −Total Investment
= $9.533bn −$13.864bn = −$4.331bn
Amazon invested over $13bn to grow its business, which resulted in a
net cash ﬂow of minus $4.331 billion. Amazon is not afraid of investing
9Because gross investment is in current dollars and inﬂation-adjusted, real rates need to be employed
for delayering calculations.
135

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 4.13 Total investment tally for Amazon in 2013.
Amazon.com ($m)
Total Investment ($m)
2013
Change in working capital
(47)
Change in long-term assets
6,916
R&D investment
5,602
Change in capitalized operating leases
1,393
Total investment
13,864
EXHIBIT 4.14 Amazon has a long history of investing more cash than it
generates from its operations.
(12,000)
(10,000)
(8,000)
(6,000)
(4,000)
(2,000)
0
2,000
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
Free cash flow ($m)
FCFF
FCFF (excl Cash)
more cash than it generates from its operations, which it achieves by
issuing equity or debt or selling non-operating assets (Exhibit 4.14).
Shareholders don’t seem to mind judging from Amazon’s share price
performance over the years.
Debt and Equivalents
After calculating the ﬁrm’s enterprise value, we need to determine the total
liabilities of the ﬁrm and subtract it from the enterprise value to compute
the equity value and stock price. The fundamental accounting rule states:
Assets = Liabilities + Equity
136

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
And, therefore:
Equity = Assets −Liabilities
It is tempting to use Amazon’s book debt as our estimate of total lia-
bilities, but remember, we capitalized operating leases since we determined
these were long-term investments and not short-term expenses. Since leases
are a ﬁnancing option, we assume that operating leases are funded with
100% debt. We now need an estimate of the value of the debt related to
capitalized operating leases. Recall the features of the operating lease, which
in 2013 were:
• Asset life = 6
• Lease expense = $759m
• Nominal cost of debt = 4.63%
• 7-year average growth rate = 28%
• Capitalized operating lease = $3,899m
Given these values, we can de-layer the lease capital expenditure through
time and estimate accumulated depreciation. Our estimate of capitalized
operating lease debt is the net of gross operating leases and estimated accu-
mulated depreciation.10
From Exhibit 4.15, Amazon’s capitalized operating lease debt is
$2,401m, which is equal to the capitalized operating lease asset of
$3,899m less the accumulated depreciation of $1,498m. This technique
assumes that the life and wear of the leased assets are like that of gross
plant.
The ﬁnal component of Amazon’s long-term debt is found on the
balance sheet. Other long-term liabilities amount to $1,681m and can be
found on page 54 of the 2013 Annual 10-K. This amount includes $385m
in construction liabilities, $457m in tax contingencies, and $839m in
other.
10See HOLT NOTES: Capitalized Operating Leases for a succinct description.
137

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 4.15 Calculation of Amazon’s 2013 net value of capitalized
operating leases and its corresponding debt-equivalent. All
values are in $m.
Lease Calculator
Lease expense
759
Lease life
6.0
Cost of debt
4.6%
Historical growth rate
28.0%
Capitalized operating lease
3,899
−Accumulated depreciation
(1,498)
= Capitalized op. lease debt
2,401
Lease
Cap. Lease
Capex
Accum.
Year
Pmt
Value
Equiv.
Deprec.
1
759
3,899
1,105
164
2
593
3,045
863
256
3
463
2,378
674
300
4
362
1,857
526
312
5
282
1,451
411
305
6
221
1,133
321
160
Total
2,679
13,763
3,899
1,498
Tally up total long-term debt results by adding interest-bearing debt,
capitalized operating lease debt, and other long-term debt:
Total debt = $6,917 + $2,401 + $1,681 = $10,999m
We are ready to estimate Amazon’s share price for diﬀerent forecast sce-
narios.
Valuing Different Forecast Scenarios for Amazon in the
HOLT Framework
What if we wish to approximate free cash ﬂow by simply changing
CFROI and asset growth? This is useful for projecting cash ﬂows without
the need for detailed future income statements and balance sheets, and
particularly beneﬁcial for valuing the terminal period. The key is to work
in inﬂation-adjusted current dollars throughout the forecast.
FCFF = GCF −ΔIAGI −Retirement
138

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EXHIBIT 4.16 Illustration of how CFROI and asset growth drive the
estimation of future free cash ﬂows for Amazon.com.
Year
CFROI Growth
IAGI
IADA
NDA
Retirement
GCF
Investment
FCFF
2013
38,581
34,042
4,539
3,093
2014
12.0%
40.0%
54,013
47,659
6,355
3,946
13,272
19,378
(6,107)
2015
11.5%
31.3%
70,893
62,552
8,340
5,034
17,158
21,913
(4,755)
2016
11.0%
22.5%
86,843
76,626 10,217
6,421
20,701
22,372
(1,672)
2017
10.5%
13.8%
98,784
87,162 11,622
8,191
23,187
20,132
3,054
2018
10.0%
5.0%
103,724
91,521 12,203
10,450
23,969
15,389
8,580
Gross cash ﬂow can be determined from CFROI, that is, GCF = PMT
(CFROI, n, −pv, fv, 0), and this amount is adjusted for inﬂation. Total
investment is approximated by taking the change in gross investment, also
adjusted for inﬂation, and adding the cost of replacing worn-out assets.
Beginning from the 2013 results, let’s estimate the forward FCFF assum-
ing a CFROI of 12% in FY2014 fading to 10% in FY2018 (Exhibit 4.16).
Asset growth is forecast to decline from 40% to 5% over this period.
Total investment is the sum of the change in IAGI and Retirement.11
The estimated FCFF for FY2014 is −$6.107bn, which swings to $8.58bn
in FY2018.
FCFF(2014) = GCF −ΔIAGI −Retirement
= 13.3 −(54.0 −38.6) −3.9 = −$6.1bn
As asset growth cools, the free cash ﬂow switches from negative to
strongly positive. The key for Amazon is to cut capex once marginal
investments only earn their cost of capital, and to maintain proﬁtability
on its core assets. This is easier said than done. Firms like Amazon that
manage this transition successfully evolve from Stars (high proﬁtability
and fast growth) to Cash Cows (high proﬁtability and slow growth).
Over-investment, poor management or disruption leads to Stars crashing
to Dogs (low proﬁtability and slow growth), and low valuation multiples.
11The PMT function in Excel can be employed for this calculation. Retirement = PMT (rate = his-
torical real asset growth rate; nper = economic life; pv = 0; fv = capitalized operating leases) ÷ (1 +
gHistorical).
139

Beyond Earnings
Investors must be conﬁdent that a company can handle the transition
from Star to Cash Cow, since it has a major inﬂuence on the value of
the ﬁrm. When the focus changes from growth to tightly managing
operations, management will need a new set of skills (and, quite possibly,
the ﬁrm will need a new set of managers).
Amazon’s assets grew by 50% in FY2014 net of inﬂation, while its
CFROI dropped to 7.6%. Much of that growth was due to increasing
the cash the company held from $12.4bn to $17.4bn, which diluted the
CFROI.12 Let’s run the forecast for asset growth and CFROI beginning
from FY2014. The assumptions about fade start in the terminal period:
CFROI fades to 6% at a geometric rate of 10% while asset growth fades
to 2.5%, also at a decay rate of 10%. The real discount rate was set to its
FY2012 and FY2013 average level of 4.0% (Exhibit 4.17).13
This forecast and subsequent fade in CFROI and growth suggest that
a price of $228 a share is justiﬁed. The actual price on April 30, 2014
was $304. The market was expecting Amazon to remain proﬁtable and
grow! Take note how the impressive CFROI results tell us a diﬀerent tale
from the depressing ROE history. The market wants Amazon to grow and
invest, and doesn’t view ROE as a plausible measure of Amazon’s economic
performance.
What if investments sour and CFROI fades from the FY2014 value of
7.6% to 6% while the other inputs remain the same (Exhibit 4.18)?
The sharp drop in proﬁtability has a powerful impact on Amazon’s
intrinsic value suggesting that the shares are worth $155 rather than $304.
Note that we haven’t altered our forecast for growth, only CFROI, so it is
imperative that Amazon maintain its proﬁtability as it transitions to lower
growth to sustain the current share price.
12Amazon increased its long-term debt from $5.2bn to $12.5bn in 2014. This resulted in a signiﬁcant
increase in Amazon’s cash balance, which diluted the CFROI in 2014. This is an instance where excess
cash should be removed from the operating asset base.
13We showed how to calculate retirement earlier in this chapter. An historical asset growth of 28%
was assumed along with an asset life of 6 years. Note that only depreciating assets are retired, thus the
calculation is based on IADA not IAGI.
140

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
141
EXHIBIT 4.17 This forecast assumes Amazon’s CFROI fades from 12% to 10% while growth fades from 40% to 5%. The
warranted share price of $228 is 25% below the April 30, 2014 share price of $304.
Sensitivity
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
Warranted Price: 228.09 USD (−25%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2011
2012
2013
t + 1
t + 5
Economic Return (CFROI %)
13.2
12.0
12.0
12.0
10.0
Real Asset Growth %
32.2
44.4
40.9
40.0
5.0
Discount Rate
4.94
4.59
3.47
4.00
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
Total Economic Value
115,268
250.6
-Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
10,347
22.49
-Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
104,922
228.09
Shares Outstanding
460
downside
−25%
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
20
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
21
32
41
0
10
20
30
40
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Asset Growth
(%)

Beyond Earnings
142
EXHIBIT 4.18 This forecast assumes Amazon’s CFROI fades from 7.6% to 6% while growth fades from 40% to 5%. The
warranted share price drops to $155 for this pessimistic scenario.
Sensitivity
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
Warranted Price: 155.08 USD (−49%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2011
2012
2013
t + 1
t + 5
Economic Return (CFROI %)
13.2
12.0
12.0
7.6
6.0
Real Asset Growth %
32.2
44.4
40.9
40.0
5.0
Discount Rate
4.94
4.59
3.47
4.00
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
Total Economic Value
81,684
177.6
-Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
10,347
22.49
-Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
71,338
155.08
Shares Outstanding
460
downside
−49%
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
20
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
21 
32 
41
0
10
20
30
40
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Asset Growth
(%)

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
143
EXHIBIT 4.19 This forecast assumes Amazon’s CFROI fades from 12% to 10% while growth fades from 20% to 5%. The
warranted share price of $169 is 45% lower than the April 30, 2014, share price of $304.
Sensitivity
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
Warranted Price: 168.67 USD (−45%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2011
2012
2013
t + 1
t + 5
Economic Return (CFROI %)
13.2
12.0
12.0
12.0
10.0
Real Asset Growth %
32.2
44.4
40.9
20.0
5.0
Discount Rate
4.94
4.59
3.47
4.00
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
Total Economic Value
87,936
191.2
-Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
10,347
22.49
-Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
77,589
168.67
Shares Outstanding
460
downside
−45%
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
20
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
21 
32 
41
0
10
20
30
40
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Asset Growth
(%)

Beyond Earnings
144
EXHIBIT 4.20 This forecast assumes Amazon’s CFROI fades from 10% to 6% while growth fades from 20% to 5%. The
warranted share price drops to $122 for this pessimistic scenario.
Sensitivity
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
Warranted Price: 121.81 USD (−60%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2011
2012
2013
t + 1
t + 5
Economic Return (CFROI %)
13.2
12.0
12.0
10.0
6.0
Real Asset Growth %
32.2
44.4
40.9
20.0
5.0
Discount Rate
4.94
4.59
3.47
4.00
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
Total Economic Value
66,378
144.3
-Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
10,347
22.49
-Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
56,031
121.81
Shares Outstanding
460
downside
−60%
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
20
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
21
32
41
0
10
20
30
40
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Asset Growth
(%)

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
Amazon grew its assets by 41% in 2013 and by 50% in 2014. That
growth hasn’t been matched by sales, which grew only 21.8% and 19.6%,
respectively. Asset turns have dropped sharply since 2011. What if Amazon
can grow at only 20% (similar to sales) fading to 5% (in real terms) over
the next four years? For our next scenario, let’s also assume that CFROI
recovers to 12% and fades to 10% (Exhibit 4.19).
Chopping the growth leads to a signiﬁcant drop in value. All things
being equal, a cut in initial growth from 40% to 20% results in the
warranted share price dropping from $228 to $169! Investors are clearly
optimistic about Amazon’s prospects since historically, less than 20%
of companies sustain this level of growth for ﬁve years. What if the
pessimistic growth scenario occurs and is accompanied by CFROI falling
to 6% over ﬁve years (Exhibit 4.20)? The warranted share price will drop
to $122 if the market views this scenario as likely.
Successful investment in research and development is crucial to building
value for Amazon. An investor should study this in detail before betting on
Amazon.
Valuing Air Liquide in HOLT Lens
Let’s close the chapter by returning to France and Air Liquide. If we load
the previous forecast into Lens and then allow the HOLT default fade set-
tings to begin after the explicit period, the warranted value for Air Liquide
equals €80 versus its price of €116 on June 2, 2015 (Exhibit 4.21). Air
Liquide’s historical CFROI has bobbed around the global average of 6%.
Our forecast indicates that CFROI should remain at 6%.
The individual components of the valuation can be seen in Exhibit 4.22.
The warranted enterprise value equals €39bn, which is close to our NOPAT
perpetuity valuation of €38bn. To calculate the equity value, debt and
debt-equivalents and minority interests must be subtracted from the
enterprise value. The valuation is as of the end of the ﬁnancial year,
December 31, 2014. This value can be adjusted for the passage of time.
145

Beyond Earnings
146
EXHIBIT 4.21 The explicit forecast for Air Liquide was loaded into the HOLT model to calculate its future CFROI, asset growth,
and warranted value. A real of discount rate of 4.8% was assumed to be consistent with the earlier analysis. The
warranted share price is €80 versus the June 2, 2015 share price of €116.
Relative Wealth Chart
Valuation
Economic PE Ratio
Price EUR
Risk
Probability of Default
Momentum
CFROI Revisions
Price Change %
0.08
6m
15.91
0.10
3m
–0.68
–0.03
1m
0.43
Average Credit Rating
Accounting Quality
0%
A
Below Average
Warranted Price
Dividend Yield
116.05
downside
Current 29.2
High
Median
Low
19.5
22.6
29.7
Chemicals, Europe
Regional Industry 24
5 year observed range
–31%
2.4%
80.16
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
Economic Return
(CFROI %)
Discount Rate (%)
–4
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
FY:
12/2014
2015
2018
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
Asset Growth (%)
Normalized Growth Rate
–10
262
134
70
TSR Rel. To Index
38
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
Relative to France CAC All-Tradable Index
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
EXHIBIT 4.22 Valuation of Air Liquide based on a ﬁve-year forecast run
through the HOLT model. The real discount rate was set
to 4.8%.
Valuation Results
2015
02-Jun-15
PV of Existing Assets
38,265
NPV of Future Investments
626
+ Market Value of Investments
100
Total Economic Value
38,991
+ Share issuance
0
- Debt & Equivalents
11,230
- Minority Interests
676
Warranted Market Cap.
27,085
Shares Outstanding
345
Warranted Share Price (EUR)
78.51
80.15
Closing Price
117.45
% Upside
−33.2%
−31.8%
EXHIBIT 4.23 Valuation of Air Liquide based on a ﬁve-year forecast run
through the HOLT model. The discount rate was set to the
June 2015 market-implied discount rate of 3.3%.
Valuation Results
2015
03-Jun-15
PV of Existing Assets
46,099
NPV of Future Investments
4,697
+ Market Value of Investments
100
Total Economic Value
50,896
+ Share issuance
0
−Debt & Equivalents
11,230
−Minority Interests
966
Warranted Market Cap.
38,700
Shares Outstanding
345
Warranted Share Price (EUR)
112.17
113.33
Closing Price
116.05
% Upside
−3.3%
−2.3%
Why is the intrinsic share price so much less than the actual price?
Despite the apparent plausibility of our forecast, it could be that it is
too pessimistic and that future CFROI will exceed past levels. Another
explanation is that risk appetite for equities is greater than our discount
147

Beyond Earnings
rate assumes. As we wrote this chapter, discount rates in the United States,
Europe, and many other regions hadn’t been this low since the dot.com
bubble, which makes this line of reasoning less likely. Although a real
discount rate of 4.8% is in line with Air Liquide’s average discount rate
over the past three years, the discount rate implied by the market today
is 3.3%. At this low cost of capital, the warranted share price and actual
price are nearly equivalent (Exhibit 4.23).
Market neutral investors should use discount rates set by the market
when estimating share prices. Air Liquide’s economic PE is currently at
an all-time high of 29 relative to its 15-year median of 23 (Exhibit 4.24).
EXHIBIT 4.24 The historical default valuation for Air Liquide versus its actual
price is shown in the top panel. The economic PE and VCR time
series are in the second and third panel, respectively.
0
May
2000
May
2001
May
2002
May
2003
May
2004
May
2005
May
2006
May
2007
May
2008
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2000
May
2001
May
2002
May
2003
May
2004
May
2005
May
2006
May
2007
May
2008
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2000
May
2001
May
2002
May
2003
May
2004
May
2005
May
2006
May
2007
May
2008
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
2.0
29.
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
0
60
0
30
60
Price in EUR
90
120
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.1
Valuation
Industrial Gases
Market Cap: 40.022 EUR
Price: 116.05 (Jun 2, 2015)
Warranted Price: 113.33EUR (–2%)
HOLT Warranted Upside/Downside
Economic PE
HOLT Price to Book (Value Cost Ratio)
HOLT Warranted Price
Price
AIR LIQUIDE
Chemicals
Chemicals
AIR LIQUIDE
median–
1.63
median–
23.31
148

What’s It Worth? Valuing the Firm
Interestingly, this equates to an economic yield of 3.4%, which is close
to the equilibrating discount rate of 3.3% implied by the market.14 Its
value-to-cost ratio (VCR) is 2.0 versus an all-time high of 2.1 in March
2015 and a 15-year median of 1.6. Drawing from these important pieces
of information, it doesn’t appear that it is a case of Air Liquide looking
relatively expensive but rather the market’s appetite for risk is currently
relatively greedy.
14Economic PE is deﬁned as VCR/CFROI. Economic yield is simply the inverse of economic PE,
CFROI/VCR. VCR equals market enterprise value divided by inﬂation-adjusted net assets.
149

5
QUANTIFYING THE VALUE
AND RISK OF A
COMPANY’S CAP
“In order to attain the impossible, one must attempt the absurd.”
—Cervantes
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• A company’s ability to create economic value for its stakeholders
is intimately linked to building a sustainable competitive advan-
tage for its products and services. When determining whether a
company with superior proﬁtability is a good investment, it is
beneﬁcial to know the length of the competitive advantage period
(CAP) priced into the stock.
• A company’s competitive advantage has two dimensions: the
magnitude of the competitive advantage, which is represented
by the spread between the return on capital and cost of capital;
151
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
and the sustainability of the competitive advantage or how long
it is expected to last in years. The value driver corresponding
to sustainability is the rate at which a company’s proﬁtability is
expected to fade. A remarkably elegant insight is that its inverse
is the competitive advantage period (CAP).
• We show that a fade rate can be incorporated into a Fundamen-
tal Pricing Model for performing back-of-the-envelope valuations
and estimating terminal value in DCF analyses. The sensitivity of
a company’s valuation to changes in the competitive advantage
period can be readily quantiﬁed by valuing the company at dif-
ferent fade rates.
• The material risk in owning a high quality ﬁrm isn’t represented
by how it co-varies with the market, that is, the stock’s beta, but
rather by any real or perceived changes to its competitive advan-
tage. The recent cliﬀdrop in the U.S. department store index is
yet another example of this sustainability risk. We demonstrate
how this risk can be quantiﬁed.
INTRODUCTION
A company’s ability to create lasting economic value for its stakeholders is
intimately linked to building a sustainable competitive advantage for its
products and services.1 A competitive advantage is exactly what it says on
the tin: an advantage held by a ﬁrm that confers competitive beneﬁt. A
modern paragon is Apple with its iconic iPhone, which garnered legions
of fans and spawned a cottage industry of related mobile apps and games.
Apple holds a handful of competitive advantages, but two important ones
are brand loyalty, which still might not have reached its zenith, and switch-
ing costs, which are non-trivial. Over the past decade, Apple’s competitive
advantage has been enormous and exceedingly valuable as reﬂected by the
premium at which Apple’s shares trade. As of August 2017, Apple is the
1According to Professor Jay Barney: “A ﬁrm is said to have a sustained competitive advantage when it
is implementing a value creating strategy not simultaneously being implemented by any current or
potential competitors and when these other ﬁrms are unable to duplicate the beneﬁts of this strategy.”
152

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
largest ﬁrm in the world and another 25% increase in its stock price will
make it the ﬁrst company in the world to attain a trillion dollar market cap.
A competitive advantage acts as a barrier that insulates the ﬁrm’s prof-
itability from the attacks of competitors. As Warren Buﬀett famously said,
“In business, I look for economic castles protected by unbreachable moats.”
In Buﬀett’s metaphor, the wider the moat, the greater the competitive
advantage of the business. Excess proﬁts on new products that are easy to
reproduce and market do not last long since competitors will mimic them
and drive proﬁtability down to the industry average.
Investors pay handsomely for companies sporting attractive returns
on capital and competitive advantages, which can come in the form
of superior products, customer loyalty, brand value, ﬁrst-rate business
processes, patents, exceptional management, innovative R&D, network
eﬀects, switching costs, and proprietary know-how. This topic remains
a major area of research in strategic management and organizational
economics.
When assessing whether a company with superior proﬁtability is also an
attractive investment, it is beneﬁcial to gauge the length of the competitive
advantage period (CAP) priced into the stock.2 The price-to-book multiple
P/B is highly sensitive to changes in CAP for companies whose proﬁtabil-
ity exceeds the cost of capital. Unfortunately, most valuation models are
ill-equipped to deal with competitive advantage and its decay as a value
driver.
Two quantitative aspects of competitive advantage need to be deﬁned:3
• The magnitude of competitive advantage, indicated by the per-
centage points of excess proﬁtability or the spread between a com-
pany’s return on capital and its cost of capital
2Warren Buﬀett wrote, “The key to investing is not assessing how much an industry is going to aﬀect
society, or how much it will grow, but rather determining the competitive advantage of any given
company and, above all, the durability of that advantage.” We will show how it can be quantiﬁed and
how changes in CAP impact intrinsic value.
3M. J. Mauboussin and D. Callahan. “Measuring the Moat: Assessing the Magnitude and Sustainability
of Value Creation.” Credit Suisse Global Financial Strategies, July 22, 2013.
153

Beyond Earnings
• The sustainability of competitive advantage, which is the number
of years the competitive advantage and excess proﬁtability can be
maintained
We will show that a ﬁrm’s intrinsic value can be linked to its CAP by
introducing a proﬁtability fade driver. The fade driver, which acts as a
proﬁtability attenuator, elegantly connects the magnitude of a ﬁrm’s
proﬁtability to its anticipated sustainability. Our technique is particularly
worthwhile for gauging the value of highly proﬁtable companies that have
stable growth. A major advantage of this approach is that you can quickly
test the sensitivity of a ﬁrm’s stock price to changes in its perceived CAP.
THE WORST INVESTMENT I EVER MADE
“Blockbuster turned out to be the worst investment I ever made. To
this day I don’t know what would have happened if we’d avoided
the big blowup over Antioco’s bonus and he’d continued growing
Total Access. Things might have turned out diﬀerently.”
—Carl Icahn4
The global movie and entertainment industry is worth about US$100
billion annually, making it an attractive hunting ground for companies
that can build sustainable competitive advantages. Until the 1980s, movies
were primarily shown in ﬁlm theaters. The distribution of movies came
under siege with the introduction of video cassettes and players. In 1986,
home video sales outstripped revenues from theaters, forever changing the
fundamental structure of the industry.
Blockbuster Video sat at the pinnacle of this revolution, dominating the
movie rental industry throughout the 1990s and early 2000s with 9,000
retail locations around the world at its peak. Early investors in Block-
buster’s stock were abundantly rewarded as its price increased 98× from
4John Antioco, “How I Did It: Blockbuster’s Former CEO on Sparring with an Activist Shareholder,”
Harvard Business Review, April 2011.
154

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
1988 through 1993. A strategic merger between Viacom and Blockbuster
with the intent to purchase Paramount Pictures all but guaranteed Block-
buster’s fortunes as an inﬂuential actor in the movie and entertainment
industry.
Prior to being acquired by Viacom in 1994 for $8.4 billion and de-listed,
Blockbuster had an impressive cash ﬂow return on investment (CFROI) of
14.8%, ranking it in the top 10% of proﬁtability worldwide.5 Investors
were enthusiastic about the company’s prospects. How long was Block-
buster’s competitive advantage and this CFROI priced to last? We estimate
Blockbuster was priced for a competitive advantage period (CAP) of more
than 50 years. But before casually accepting this comment, stop and ask
yourself: How many ﬁrms have continuously earned a return on invest-
ment above their cost of capital for 50 years? Few ﬁrms spring to mind.6
The price Viacom paid for Blockbuster suggested they were betting on a
long and lucrative life for their investment.
To nourish its prospects, Viacom appointed John Antioco, who had
a successful history in retail, as the CEO of Blockbuster in June 1997.
During the heat of the dot-com bubble, Viacom decided to part with
most of its ownership. After Blockbuster’s public oﬀering in November
1999, it peaked at a market cap of $2.7 billion. Blockbuster’s CFROI of
9.5% in 1999 was much lower than in the early 1990s but still above its
inﬂation-adjusted cost of capital of 6.5%; that is, its magnitude of com-
petitive advantage had signiﬁcantly declined, but its sustainability was still
expected to persist. Despite this downturn in proﬁtability, we estimate
that by the end of 1999, Blockbuster was priced for a 38-year competitive
5Credit Suisse HOLT. CFROI deciles for global non-ﬁnancials from 1950-1994 were:
Percentile
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
CFROI
-4.8
0.6
2.7
4.1
5.3
6.6
8.0
10.0
13.3
6In the HOLT database, which contains almost 90,000 unique ﬁrms since 1950, only 94 companies
have earned a CFROI above their cost of capital for 50 or more years.
155

Beyond Earnings
advantage period, signaling investors’ continued conﬁdence in the ﬁrm’s
business model (Exhibit 5.1).7
In 2004, revenue peaked at $6 billion, but the share price had already
begun sliding. CFROI slipped further to 8.8%, and the implied CAP
plummeted to 5 years. Legendary activist investor Carl Icahn sniﬀed value
and began building a stake in the company. It seemed like a favorable
bet for Icahn, but he underestimated the speed at which Blockbuster’s
business model would be disrupted by Netﬂix and Redbox. CFROI fell to
EXHIBIT 5.1 Blockbuster’s timeline:8 The ﬁgures for 1994 are as of December
31, 1993, and those for 2010 are as of December 31, 2009.
Year
Event
Market Cap
(US $mil)
Sales
(US $mil)
CFROI
(percent)
CAP
(years)
1985
David Cook opens
the ﬁrst
Blockbuster store
in Dallas, Texas.
1987
Blockbuster is sold
for $18.5 million.
78
43
10.1%
1992
Blockbuster owns
the video rental
market with over
2,800 stores
worldwide.
3,576
1,200
17.6%
58
1994
Viacom buys
Blockbuster for
$8.4 billion.
7,576
2,227
14.8%
51
1999
Viacom takes
Blockbuster public.
2,341
4,464
9.5%
38
2004
Blockbuster peaks
in sales. Carl Icahn
begins building a
stake in the
company.
1,752
6,053
8.8%
5
2007
CEO John Antioco
leaves Blockbuster.
753
5,517
3.0%
2010
Blockbuster ﬁles
for bankruptcy.
130
4,062
4.2%
7Investors were still paying for a long and prosperous future even though CFROI peaked at 18% in
1991 and had been evidently fading since the early nineties. There was a track record of overestimating
Blockbuster’s competitive advantage.
8Matt Phillips and Roberto A., “A Brief, Illustrated History of Blockbuster, Which Is Closing the
Last of its U.S. Stores,” Quartz, November 6, 2013. The ﬁnancial ﬁgures were sourced from Credit
Suisse HOLT.
156

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
3.5% in 2005, spelling the end of Blockbuster’s competitive advantage.
In fact, 2004 turned out to be the last year for Blockbuster that CFROI
exceeded its cost of capital.
A ﬁrm that had once dominated investors’ A-list had become a ﬂop.
Where Did It Go Wrong?
A famous tale about Blockbuster’s downfall is the meeting in 2000
between Reed Hastings, the founder of start-up Netﬂix, and Antioco at
Blockbuster’s headquarters in Dallas, Texas.9 Hastings conﬁdently walked
into Blockbuster’s boardroom and proposed that Netﬂix run Blockbuster’s
online business. After all, he argued, it’s what Netﬂix was good at. His
proposal was met with disbelief, and he was ushered out the door. In a
cosmic twist of fate, Netﬂix went on and achieved extraordinary success
and is now worth $61 billion.10
Why were Viacom, IPO investors, and then Carl Icahn so wrong about
the magnitude and sustainability of Blockbuster’s competitive advantage?
Disruption typically springs from technological innovation. This
was true for Blockbuster, as Netﬂix capitalized on ever-improving data
streaming technology, and Redbox neatly exploited the size and storage
advantages of DVD over video, a seemingly small but consequential
technological innovation that rendered Blockbuster’s physical warehouses
unnecessary. Disruption can also arise from deep-seated customer dissat-
isfaction. And, in this particular case, Blockbuster sowed the seeds of its
own demise.
A component of Blockbuster’s revenue was charging late fees on videos.
These charges were despised by customers and proved to be its Achilles’
heel. Netﬂix oﬀered subscriptions to its customers, obviating the need for
late fees, and did away with physical stores and their costly overhead and
9Greg Satell, “A Look Back at Why Blockbuster Really Failed and Why It Didn’t Have To,” Forbes,
September 5, 2014.
10Another twist to the tale is that John Antioco bought Netﬂix’s shares after he left in 2007 believing
that a return of the old business model at Blockbuster would not be able to compete with the new
business model of Netﬂix. Unfortunately, he sold his Netﬂix shares far too soon and missed superlative
gains.
157

Beyond Earnings
maintenance.11 These innovations paved the way for disrupting Block-
buster. But it was the late fees that helped incentivize many customers to
switch to Netﬂix or simply away from Blockbuster.
Although Netﬂix had become a threat by 2003, there was still time to
turn around Blockbuster’s fortunes. Antioco proposed that Blockbuster
discontinue its late fees and launch Blockbuster Online, both strategically
sound ideas. But after a proﬁt-sapping start (CFROI dropped sharply to
3.5% in 2005), Carl Icahn and the board decided this strategy was too
risky and Antioco was forced out in 2007. By 2010, Blockbuster crawled
into bankruptcy.
Antioco contends that had the Blockbuster online strategy “not been
essentially abandoned, Blockbuster Online would have 10 million sub-
scribers today” and would be rivalling Netﬂix for the leadership position
in the Internet downloading business.11 Whether this would have played
out or not, we’ll never know. What is clear is this: Despite Icahn’s history
of successful activism, he failed to respond quickly enough to changes in
the video rental industry and lost a ton of money on his worst investment
ever.12
QUANTIFYING THE MAGNITUDE
AND SUSTAINABILITY OF CAP
To have a competitive advantage, a company must sustainably generate a
return on capital that exceeds its cost of capital, and the company must
create more value than its average competitor.13
11John Antico, “How I Did It: Blockbuster’s Former CEO on Sparring with an Activist Shareholder,”
Harvard Business Review, April 2011.
12Icahn reveals an uncanny ability to analyze his decisions in a dispassionate manner. “Maybe the
board did make a mistake in picking Jim Keyes as Antioco’s successor—Keyes knows retailing and
did an excellent job with the stores, but he isn’t a digital guy. I also think Antioco did a good job in
executing on Blockbuster’s Total Access program, which allowed customers to rent unlimited movies
online and in stores. Over time it might have helped Blockbuster fend oﬀNetﬂix. But Keyes felt the
company couldn’t aﬀord to keep losing so much money, so we pulled the plug. To this day I don’t know
what would have happened if we’d avoided the big blowup over Antioco’s bonus and he’d continued
growing Total Access. Things might have turned out diﬀerently.”
13Michael Mauboussin and Paul Johnson, “Competitive Advantage Period (CAP): The Neglected Value
Driver,” Credit Suisse First Boston, January 14, 1997.
158

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.2 The relationship between excess proﬁts and CAP. Firms that
earn a return above the cost of capital possess a competitive
advantage. Colgate-Palmolive’s excess proﬁtability (CFROI
above the cost of capital, shown in light ﬁller) is large. For how
long might this magnitude of proﬁtability persist?
Relative Wealth Chart
COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO
Household Products
Market Cap: 64.781 USD
Price: 73.34 (Aug 14, 2017)
Warranted Price: 58.25 USD (–21%)
0
10
20
30
40
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
magnitude of
excess profits 
sustainability of excess profits
A company is not creating economic value when its return on capital
is equal to its cost of capital, and it is destroying value when the return
on capital is below its cost of capital. Importantly, a competitive advantage
that doesn’t endure beyond a single year is hardly a competitive advantage
at all. Sustainability is an essential component.
Colgate-Palmolive is a world leader in the production and distribution
of household products, with popular brands including its namesake tooth-
paste, Irish Spring soap, Palmolive dishwashing detergent, Murphy Oil
furniture soap, and its Mennen deodorant. The ﬁrm is highly proﬁtable,
earning CFROI well above its cost of capital. Exhibit 5.2 shows the key ele-
ments of a ﬁrm with indisputable competitive advantages: proﬁtable and
stable return on investment. Colgate’s Green Dot highlights the conﬁdence
that investors have in the ability of the ﬁrm to sustain proﬁts.14
Like Colgate, Blockbuster was beating its cost of capital in 2000 and
had a substantial CAP embedded in its share price when Reed Hastings
of nascent Netﬂix paid a visit. In hindsight, investors were too optimistic
about Blockbuster’s ability to protect its proﬁtability and successfully
14See Chapter 11, Evaluating Market Expectations, for a full discussion of HOLT’s Green Dot.
The Green Dot in the printed book is the light gray dot with a circle outlining it.
159

Beyond Earnings
adjust its business model to accommodate changing consumer preferences.
Icahn’s rejection of Antioco’s plan to end late fees and invest heavily in
online technology was the nail in the coﬃn that sealed Blockbuster’s fate.
Michael Mauboussin and Paul Johnson wrote about CAP as the
neglected value driver in 1997, and we continue to believe that the
concept is important and remains the most overlooked component of
valuation. The authors cited two main factors. “First, the vast majority
of market participants attempt to understand valuation and subsequent
stock price changes using an accounting-based formula, which generally
deﬁnes value as a price/earnings multiple times earnings.”15
Professor Damodaran of New York University found that 85% of the
valuations in 550 equity research reports he perused were based on relative
multiples.16 Less than 10% of the research reports utilized a full discounted
cash ﬂow (DCF) valuation. And in a twist of irony, many of the DCF
models used a relative multiple to estimate terminal value, thereby rein-
troducing a weakness that DCF valuations are intended to negate. This
error is as alive today as it was in 1997, and we would agree with Professor
Damodaran in calling this 2-stage approach just another form of relative
valuation.
A fundamental issue with relative valuations is that all the value driver
assumptions embedded in the multiple are hidden. Value drivers are
explicit inputs in a DCF valuation and open to debate. This hidden
aspect of relative valuation is particularly problematic for successful ﬁrms
with high returns on capital. We can demonstrate this eﬀect by testing
the sensitivity of the price-to-book ratio P/B to changes in the number
of years a ﬁrm maintains a constant return on equity above its cost of
equity, that is, the sustainability of the competitive advantage. CAP clearly
matters, particularly for ﬁrms earning high returns, that is, those with a
high magnitude of competitive advantage!
15See Mauboussin and Johnson (1997).
16Aswath Damodaran, “Valuation Approaches and Metrics: A Survey of the Theory and Evidence,”
Foundations and Trends® in Finance 1(8) (2005): 693–784.
160

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.3 Price/Book versus forward spread for different CAPs (in years).
A spread of 0% results in a P/B of 1 no matter what the CAP or
growth in book equity is. The impact of CAP on P/B increases
signiﬁcantly as the spread increases, e.g., for a forward spread
of 20%, P/B increases 67% from 1.8 to 3.0 if CAP is extended
from 5 to 20 years. In this example, the cost of equity is 10%,
constant growth in book equity is 5%, and forward spread
equals (ROE1 – re).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
–5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
Price/Book
Spread (ROE1 – re)
P/B vs Spread
1000
20
10
5
2
1
Price-to-book multiples are comprised of implicit assumptions about
growth, spread, and CAP. These value drivers require thoughtful consid-
eration and are better modelled as explicit inputs. As we demonstrate in
Exhibit 5.3, the greater the magnitude of the economic spread and the
greater its sustainability (CAP), the greater the P/B is. The risk of owning a
high quality stock trading at a stretched P/B is that the competitive advan-
tage period implied in its price might be overly optimistic. A fall in the
expected CAP results in a steep drop in share price.17
The second explanation for a lack of focus on CAP given by Mauboussin
and Johnson is that “most companies use a forecast period for strategic
planning purposes (usually three to ﬁve years) that is substantially diﬀerent
17Note that when P/B < 1.0, a ﬁrm is expected to earn a return on equity below its cost of equity, and
destroy shareholder value. The amount of value destroyed decreases as the time to recover decreases.
Intuitively, CAP is the expected recovery time when a ﬁrm’s economic spread is negative. Our focus is
on pricing the degree and sustainability of competitive advantage in this paper, but the mathematics
work just as well for value destroyers.
161

Beyond Earnings
from their CAP. As a result, investor communication is geared more toward
internal company-based expectations rather than external market-based
expectations.”
Professors Baruch Lev and Feng Gu provide evidence in their book The
End of Accounting that accounting ﬁgures have lost relevance in explain-
ing value due in large part to the increasing importance of intangible
assets.18 For example, R&D is expensed on an income statement and
lowers earnings. If R&D is an investment that helps create a sustainable
competitive advantage and increases a ﬁrm’s long-term value, then share-
holders shouldn’t mind receiving lower short-term earnings today if R&D
investments are being made in positive net present value (NPV) projects
for tomorrow. Lev and Gu argue that it is intangible assets that create
sustainable competitive advantage, not physical assets. They build a strong
case that corporations should provide investors a Strategic Resources &
Consequences Report whose focus is on the creation, preservation, and
deployment of a company’s strategic assets to create value (Exhibit 5.4).19
Until reporting improves, we are left with ﬁnancial statements, short-term
forecasts, and key performance indicators (KPIs) that are often not aligned
with long-term value creation.
A ﬁnal explanation for the inadequate focus on CAP as a value driver
may be the lack of a simple method for expressing it in a valuation. We
will show an intuitive way to understand CAP and to elegantly quantify
changes in valuation for diﬀerent levels of CAP. This application is crucial
when valuing successful businesses with attractive returns on capital, and
for quantifying the risk to those valuations for changes in CAP.
Why should you care about CAP? The key to successful investing in
the stock market is to anticipate revisions in a company’s expectations. If
you understand the competitive advantage period implied in a company’s
share price, you can quantify the impact on the stock price and its price
18Baruch Lev and Feng Gu, The End of Accounting and the Path Forward for Investors and Managers,
John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
19Lev and Gu state that “included in the preservation of strategic assets are eﬀorts to slow down the
obsolescence of these assets.” We would model this slowing of obsolescence as a reduction in the rate of
proﬁtability’s fade, which is synonymous with an extension of the ﬁrm’s competitive advantage period.
162

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
163
EXHIBIT 5.4 Strategic Resources and Consequences Report proposed by Professors Lev and Gu. The information in squares is
quantitative ($ denotes monetary value), and in circles is qualitative (narrative). Used with permission by the
authors.
THE STRATEGIC RESOURCES & CONSEQUENCES REPORT
DEVELOPING
RESOURCES
R&D ($)
Customer Acquisition
Costs ($)
Oil & Gas Exploration ($)
TV & Movie Content ($)
Spectrum
Brands
Proven Oil & Gas
Reserves ($)
Customers
Internal
Quantity
Detection
programs
Mitigation
programs
Decay
prevention
•   No. of employees
    participating
•   In-house and
    external training ($)
•   Employee
    turnover
Acquired technology
Patent attributes
(quality)
•   Research
•   Development
•   Successful
•   Unsuccessful
•   New
•   Sequels
•   Number
•   Market share
•   Brand value ($)
•   Exploration rights
•   No. of rigs
•   Additions
•   Terminations
•   Total
•   Churn
•   Acquisition ($)
•   Broadband
Rights acquisition
•   Applied
•   Approved
•   Stock
•   Developed
•   Sold/licensed
•   Donated
•   Expired
Cash flows from
operation
•   % explored
•    % producing
•    % abandoned
•   Investment in
    alliances ($)
•   No. of alliance
  –   R&D
  –   Manufacturing
Plus:
Plus:
Minus:
Minus:
•   No. streams to
    customers
•   Serialization
•   International
•   Lifetime value of
    customers
•   Value of oil & gas
    reserves
•   Brand value   
•   Expensed
    investments
•   Capital
    expenditure
•   Cost of equity
    capital
Patents & Trademarks
Infringement
Disruption
Resources
Knowledge
Management
Maintaining
Workforce Quality
Patents
Oil & Gas Rights
Alliances & Joint Ventures
Movie / TV Content
Resources Value
Changes ($)
Value Created in 
Period ($)
RESOURCE
STOCKS
RESOURCE
PRESERVATION
RESOURCE
DEPLOYMENT
VALUE
CREATED

Beyond Earnings
multiples if investors’ expectations about the ﬁrm’s competitive advantage
period change.
THOUGHT EXPERIMENT: THE VALUATION OF CORE
UNLIMITED
The conventional view on incorporating competitive advantage into a dis-
counted cash ﬂow valuation dates to Miller and Modigliani’s 1961 classic
paper, which was casually laid out in a footnote.20 The authors broke the
ﬁrm into an existing business and its future investments.
Firm Value = Value of Existing Business
+ Net Present Value of Future Investments
The existing business was valued as a stable perpetuity and the economic
prospects of all future investments were placed in the second term. One of
MM’s brilliant insights was to note that the value of the second term is
zero if future incremental returns equal the ﬁrm’s cost of capital.21 The net
present value (NPV) of all future investments is zero under this condition.
The premium investors should be willing to pay for a company is related
to:
• The magnitude of the ﬁrm’s economic spread (the diﬀerence in
percentage points between the return on invested capital ROIC
and the cost of capital r)
20M.H. Miller and F. Modigliani. ”Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of Shares,” The Jour-
nal of Business 34(4) (October 1961): 411–433. MM didn’t use the phrase “competitive advantage”
in their description. They referred to the ﬁnite period available for “special investment opportunities.”
Their equation in our notation is Value ≅NOPAT1
r
+ (ROIC1−r)×ΔInvested Capital1×CAP
r(1+r)
where the ﬁrst term
is the value of the existing ﬁrm and the second term is the value of “special investment opportuni-
ties.” This equation is only valid for short CAP. Amazingly, the description and derivation feature in a
footnote of the paper.
21It is worthwhile quoting Miller and Modigliani, “ … a corporation does not become a “growth stock”
with a high price-earnings ratio merely because its assets and earnings are growing over time. To enter
the glamor category, it is also necessary that p*(t) > p (authors’ note ROICt > r in our formulation).
For if p*(t) = p, then however large the growth in assets may be, the second term will be zero and the
ﬁrm’s price-earnings ratio would not rise above a humdrum 1/p (author’s note 1/r in our formulation).
“The essence of ‘growth,’ in short, is not expansion, but the existence of opportunities to invest
signiﬁcant quantities of funds at higher than ‘normal’ rates of return.”
164

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
• The ﬁrm’s growth rate
• The number of years T (sustainability) that investments can earn
returns in excess of the cost of capital
The competitive advantage period under these conditions is generally
deﬁned as T years despite the hidden assumption that the existing business
might have a constant ROIC above its cost of capital that is implicitly
assumed to last forever.
As the case of Blockbuster illustrates, the operating returns on its core
business decreased and became worthless to equity investors after its busi-
ness model was disrupted by Netﬂix and Redbox. Today, Amazon is dis-
rupting retail but so too did Sears and then JC Penney once upon a time.
No ﬁrm’s proﬁts are immune from disruption. We are reminded of the Yogi
Berra quote, “Even Napoleon had his Watergate.”
Although MM’s concept of splitting existing assets from future invest-
ments is elegant, its mathematical formulation is based on the absurd
assumption that the existing assets will maintain a perpetual return on
capital. The existing business is not immune to competitive pressures and
if it has a high return on capital, it is far more likely that its margins and
return on capital will decay over time than remain high and stable forever.
When it comes to corporate proﬁtability, reversion to the mean is a fact of
life and it should be included as a value driver.22 We have a neat solution.
Let’s take the hypothetical case of Core Unlimited. Core is a mature,
highly successful ﬁrm that has run out of investment opportunities. All
strategies and incremental investments proposed to the CFO are deter-
mined to have an NPV of zero or less, so she behaves rationally and rejects
them. Core’s existing business has zero growth and pays out all the cash it
generates to its capital providers. If Core can maintain its impressive return
on capital, then its intrinsic value is a simple perpetuity, which also equals
22M. Mauboussin, D. Callahan, B. Matthews, and D. Holland, “How to Model Reversion to the Mean:
Determining How Fast, and to What Mean, Results Revert,” Credit Suisse Global Financial Strategies,
September 2013.
165

Beyond Earnings
the value of the existing business from MM’s formulation.
Value = NOPAT1
r
The forward price-to-earnings ratio equals the inverse of the cost of cap-
ital.23 The value can be reformulated as a price-to-book ratio:
Value
Invested Capital0
= ROIC∞
r
If the perpetual return on invested capital ROIC∞is greater than the
cost of capital r, the ﬁrm will trade at a premium to book. The CAP of
incremental investments might be zero, but the CAP of Core Unlimited’s
existing business is inﬁnite.
Let’s now assume that the spread over the cost of capital decays at a
constant rate f towards zero, that is, economic equilibrium. In a previous
report, we showed how to incorporate fade in proﬁtability into a DCF
valuation.24 The intrinsic value of Core Unlimited can be written as:
Value =
NOPAT1
(
1 +
f
ROIC1
)
(r + f )
NOPAT1: Forward net operating proﬁt after tax. It will converge
toward the capital charge r x Invested Capital0 over time.
ROIC1: Forward return on invested capital. It will decrease toward
the cost of capital r over time.
r: Cost of capital which pulls ROIC toward it with a gravitational
force of f, that is, 0% represents zero gravity and 100% rep-
resents a competitive black hole which instantly eliminates all
excess returns.
23ROIC = NOPAT / Invested Capital. When performing valuations, ROIC should be based on the
beginning-of-year invested capital.
24D. Holland and B. Matthews, “Don’t Suﬀer from a Terminal Flaw, Add Fade to your DCF: An
Improved Method for Valuing Mature Companies and Estimating Terminal Value,” Credit Suisse
HOLT, June 2016.
166

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.5 A forward spread of 15% decays at different rates. A fade rate
of 0% signiﬁes no fade and a constant spread that lasts forever.
A fade rate of 100% means instantaneous fade like a light being
switched off.
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Spread
Year
0%
5%
10%
20%
50%
f: The exponential decay rate of (ROICt – r) toward zero. It varies
from 0%, where the spread remains constant forever and there is
no decay in proﬁtability, to 100%, where fade is instantaneous
and the competitive advantage period is limited to the forward
year (Exhibit 5.5).
We also showed in the same report that the expected competitive advan-
tage period equals 1/f. Does our formulation pass the sniﬀtest?
• If there is no decay in proﬁtability, f equals 0% and we arrive at
MM’s famous formulation. The CAP for Core Unlimited would
be inﬁnite, that is, 1/f = ∞if the return on invested capital exceeds
the cost of capital.
• If ROIC1 = r, then we also arrive at MM’s simple perpetuity.
Under this condition, fade has no meaning since the forward
spread is already zero. The greater the spread, the more fade
matters. It is an inconsequential value driver when operating
returns are at or near the cost of capital.
167

Beyond Earnings
• If the fade rate is 100%, then the equation simpliﬁes to the open-
ing invested capital plus the present value of one year of economic
proﬁt.25 This is precisely the result we expect for one year of com-
petitive advantage, that is, 1/f = 1 year!
THE PROBABILITY OF PERMANENT DISRUPTION
The fade rate can also be interpreted as the probability of the economic
spread (ROIC – r) irreversibly jumping to zero in any given year. In other
words, fade is also the probability of a successful ﬁrm’s economic moat
being permanently disrupted. The expected CAP is simply the inverse of
the fade rate (or the probability of permanent disruption):
Expected CAP = 1
f
You might be surprised to discover that it is mathematically equivalent to
think of excess proﬁtability as exponentially decaying or as being abruptly
and permanently disrupted. In the latter case, we would describe it as a
sudden and irreversible loss of a ﬁrm’s economic moat—in today’s business
parlance, we would deﬁne it as permanent economic disruption. If an explicit
period of value creation is forecast followed by fade in the terminal value,
then the total expected CAP is the length of the explicit forecast in years
(that is, the forecast horizon H) plus 1/f (Exhibit 5.6).
Total E[CAP] = H + 1
f
25After a bit of algebraic juggling and substitution of the equation for forward economic proﬁt,
EP1 = NOPAT1 −r × Invested Capital0, we obtain the expression Value = Invested Capital0 + EP1
(1+r).
If ROIC1 equals r, then EP1 is zero and there is no competitive advantage. Under this condition,
the ﬁrm should trade at book, which is economically sensible. No value is being created when
the return on capital equals the cost of capital. Note that economic proﬁt can also be written as
EP1 = (ROIC1 −r) × Invested Capital0 where the ﬁrst term on the equation’s right-hand side is the
forward spread. If the spread is zero, EP is zero. If the spread is positive, the ﬁrm is creating value. If
the spread is negative, which it can be for commodity industries with too much capacity, e.g., steel,
airlines, and paper, then the ﬁrm is destroying value.
168

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.6 A forward spread of 15% fades toward 0% at a decay rate of
5%, that is, 5% of the spread is whittled away each year. This is
equivalent to a constant spread of 15% collapsing to 0% in 20
years, that is, 1/f years.
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Spread
Year
CAP = 20 years
Fade = 5%
The competitive advantage period (CAP) is the number of years a ﬁrm’s return
on capital is expected to exceed its cost of capital due to the ﬁrm’s sustainable
competitive advantages. For a DCF model utilizing a fade rate, the total com-
petitive advantage period in years is the explicit forecast period plus the inverse of
the fade rate.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE
From a value driver perspective, decay in proﬁtability can be due to a
decrease in asset turns: obtaining less revenue per unit of capital, or a
decrease in proﬁt margin, that is, a drop in operating margin (Exhibit 5.7).
Competitive advantage has two general aspects. Firms with economies
of scale and superior operating eﬃciency often have a production advan-
tage, which results in higher asset turns. Firms with strong brand names
and loyal customers have pricing power and thus higher operating mar-
gins than their competitors. They have a consumer advantage. The most
successful companies have both and generate attractive returns on capital
(Exhibit 5.8).26
26For more on this topic, see M.J. Mauboussin and D. Callahan, “Measuring the Moat: Assessing
the Magnitude and Sustainability of Value Creation,” Credit Suisse Global Financial Strategies, July 22,
2013.
169

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 5.7 There are various proﬁtability metrics which feature similar
traits. Three popular measures of proﬁtability are return on
equity (ROE), return on invested capital (ROIC), and cash ﬂow
return on investment (CFROI). All measures of proﬁtability can
be split into two drivers whereby Proﬁtability = Proﬁt Margin x
Asset Turns. Net proﬁt margin is net income divided by sales.
CFROI can also be expressed as a ratio, which we demonstrate
in Chapter 6. The proﬁtability margin for CFROI is net cash ﬂow
margin (NCF%) which equals gross cash ﬂow (GCF) minus an
economic depreciation divided by sales. Gross investment and
gross cash ﬂow are adjusted for inﬂation in the HOLT CFROI
framework, which makes CFROI and its drivers comparable over
time and across borders.
Profitability:
ROE
ROIC
CFROI
Profit Margin:
Net Profit Margin
EBIT% x (1 - Tc) 
Net Cash Flow Margin
Profit Margin:
After-tax profit per
unit of sales
Asset Turns:
Sales/Equity
Sales/Invested Capital
Sales/Gross Investment
Asset Turns:
Sales per unit of capital
EXHIBIT 5.8 Proﬁtability drivers and types of competitive advantage.
Best-in-class ﬁrms possess a rare mix of above-average margins
and asset efﬁciency. These ﬁrms enjoy both a consumer and
production advantage.
Production 
Advantage
Consumer and 
Production 
Advantage
Consumer 
Advantage
No
Advantage
Profitability Margin
Asset Turnover
When contemplating the competitive advantage period (CAP) for a
value-creating company, it is critical to consider which advantages the ﬁrm
has and how secure they are. It can be diﬃcult to protect high operating
margins when barriers to entry are low. Plotting asset turns versus proﬁt
170

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.9 CFROI can be expressed as net cash margin multiplied by asset
turns. In this example, we show the margins and turns for
companies in the global auto parts industry along with CFROI
isocurves of 3%, 6%, and 12%.27 One of the star performers is
Continental AG (CONG).
AISIN
ALV
BWA
BOSH
BRIDGE
MICP
CONG
DLPH
DENSO
GKN
GT
HALLA
HANKOOK
HYUNDAI
JCI
LEA
MG.
MOSS
NGK
PECI
TOYOTA
TRW
VLOF
CFROI=3%
CFROI=6%
CFROI=12%
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2%
7%
12%
17%
Asset Utilization
Net Cash Flow Margin
margin for competitors in an industry helps visualize relative strengths.
Because these two terms are multiplicative, proﬁtability isocurves can be
drawn (Exhibit 5.9).
HOLT research has much to say about reversion to the mean. For
instance, fade in corporate proﬁtability is greater for higher growth ﬁrms
than it is for lower growth businesses. This is true for both proﬁtable and
unproﬁtable companies. Proﬁtable, higher-growth ﬁrms tend to reside
in nascent industries, and the high proﬁts quickly attract yield-hungry
27D.A. Holland and B. Matthews, “CFROI as a Ratio and DuPont Identity,” Credit Suisse HOLT,
August 2014. The data are from the CS HOLT database as of August 1, 2014. “Continental (CONG)
sported an impressive CFROI of 13.2% in 2013, which was driven by one of the higher NCF margins
in the industry, 13.6%. R&D is not an expense for Continental; it is a driver of value. Tire manufactur-
ers Goodyear (GT) and Michelin (MICP) have lower margins and turns than Continental. Laggards
on the 3% CFROI isoline include Aisin Seiki and Toyota Industries while stars above the 12% CFROI
isoline include Borg Warner (BWA), Halla Visteon Climate Control (HALLA), Delphi Automotive
(DLPH), and Continental.”
171

Beyond Earnings
competitors and capital. Unproﬁtable ﬁrms with high growth can generally
be split into two groups: early lifecycle ﬁrms for whom quickly attaining
proﬁtability is essential for survival, and restructuring stage companies
that often seek to work their way out of trouble through acquisitions
or unhealthy expenditures. A clear consequence of high growth for all
business models is ampliﬁed volatility.
On the other hand, HOLT research shows that stable proﬁtability is a
powerful predictor of future operating returns. In fact, last year’s CFROI
level is the single best predictor of next year’s CFROI level. The decay in
proﬁtability will be largely driven by the ﬁrm’s industry, its growth rate,
and its size. Large ﬁrms tend to exhibit less fade than smaller ones. Large
cap ﬁrms (with market capitalization in excess of 10 billion USD) typically
lose just 5% of their excess return each year (the diﬀerence between CFROI
and the long-term cost of capital of 6%), whereas ﬁrms below $250m fade
at an average of 20% a year. Fade happens.
FADE IS A VALUE DRIVER
Firms can be valued by discounting future free cash ﬂows to the ﬁrm
(FCFF) or by discounting future economic proﬁts (EP). The valua-
tions will be the same for a given forecast when performed correctly
(Exhibit 5.10).
THE FUNDAMENTAL PRICING MODEL
In our Core Unlimited example, we set future growth in assets to zero. We
can relax that assumption and write a generalized pricing equation that
includes growth in invested capital. Because this equation includes all the
key drivers of corporate value used to eﬀectively gauge a ﬁrm’s intrinsic
value, we term it the Fundamental Pricing Model.
The value of a ﬁrm with constant growth g and proﬁtability spread
declining to zero at a constant fade rate f equals:
172

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
173
EXHIBIT 5.10 Discounting future economic proﬁts or free cash ﬂows to the ﬁrm will yield equivalent valuations for a given
forecast. The amount of future value creation is easier to track and discuss using the EP method. The key to value
creation is a relentless focus on generating a positive change in EP. Growth in operating proﬁt is destructive if it
leads to a decline in EP. Many ﬁrms don’t understand this crucial point and focus on earnings growth at all cost.
x
=
=
=
=
=
+
=
=
=
x
x
–
–
–
Income
Statement
EBIT
EBIT
(1 – Tax Rate)
NOPAT
Firm Value
Invested Capital
Present Value of
Economic Profits
Firm Value
Present Value of Free Cash Flows
NOPAT
(1 – Tax Rate)
Income
Statement
Closing Invested
Capital
Opening Invested
Capital
ΔInvested Capital
Free Cash Flow
Capital Charge
Economic Profit
Cost of Capital
Invested Capital
Opening and
Closing Balance
Sheets
Opening and
Closing Balance
Sheets

Beyond Earnings
Fundamental Pricing Model (EP Method):
Value = Invested Capital0 +
EP1
(r −g + f )
(5.1)
Fundamental Pricing Model (FCFF Method):
Value =
NOPAT1
[
1 −(g−f )
ROIC1
]
(r −g + f )
(5.2)
Depending on your preference, you can use the equation of either
method to value stable, mature ﬁrms as of today on the back of an
envelope, or as a means of estimating the ex-growth terminal value in
a DCF model after an explicit forecast period.28 These are the only
equations you need to know to value these types of companies.
The equations reduce to the well-known simple perpetuity if growth and
fade are zero. The equations simplify to the widely-used growing perpetuity
if only fade is zero. Remember that the expected CAP equals 1/f. Thus, we
can test the sensitivity of a valuation to changes in proﬁtability fade rate
and CAP. The impact will become more pronounced the wider the spread
in proﬁtability.
THE VALUE DRIVER TREE
The value drivers in the Fundamental Pricing Model can be represented in a
value driver tree, which is useful when analyzing a company’s levers and its
opportunities for increasing its value. The four drivers are ROIC, invested
capital growth, proﬁtability fade rate, and the cost of capital (Exhibit 5.11).
ROIC
We described the relationship between ROIC and its main drivers, which
are operating margin and asset turns. All things being equal, the greater
ROIC, the greater a ﬁrm’s intrinsic value.
28Please see the appendix for the mathematical relationships.
174

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.11 Value driver tree showing the key variables in our Fundamental
Pricing Model.
Intrinsic Value
Invested Capital
Net Working Capital
Non-Current Assets
ROIC
Operating Margin
Asset Turns
Growth
Investment 
Opportunities
Fade
Competitive 
Advantage
Cost of Capital
Cost of Equity
Cost of Debt
Leverage
Investment Growth
Although many corporate executives think of all growth as beneﬁcial, its
suitability is contingent on the quality of investment opportunities avail-
able. Investment in strategies with positive expected NPVs should be pur-
sued. Companies that cite revenue and earnings growth as KPIs are liable
to grow at any cost and potentially guilty of destroying value.
Fade
For companies whose ROIC exceeds the cost of capital, the sustainability
of the competitive advantage is a crucial consideration. The correspond-
ing value driver is the fade rate, which is the speed at which proﬁtability
175

Beyond Earnings
mean-reverts to the cost of capital, and which also equals the probability
of permanent economic disruption. All things being equal, a slower rate of
decay in proﬁtability leads to higher future economic proﬁts and a greater
intrinsic value.
By rearranging the equation and solving for f, we can calculate the
market-implied fade rate. The market-implied CAP is the number of years
a company is priced to maintain its return on capital above its cost of
capital. The inverse of fade is the market-implied CAP:
Market implied fade rate
=
EP1
(Market Enterprise Value −Invested Capital0) + g −r
(5.3)
The diﬀerence between the market enterprise value and invested capital
is the market premium, which is the NPV of all present and future projects.
This is what investors pay for, not short-term earnings as the media might
have you believe.
Let’s calculate the market-implied fade rate and CAP for Blockbuster at
the end of 1993 before it was acquired by Viacom. On December 31, 1993,
the market enterprise value and inﬂation-adjusted invested capital were
$8.96bn and $2.616bn, respectively; the economic proﬁt was $0.261bn;
and Blockbuster’s real cost of capital was 4.76%. For the sake of illustration
and simplicity, we’ll assume the company was expected to grow its assets at
a constant real growth rate of 2.5%; that is, we’re assuming the company
was ex-growth.
Market implied fade rate = 0.261 × 1.025
(8.960 −2.616) + 0.025 −0.0476 = 2.0%
Blockbuster had a market-implied fade rate of 2.0%, which is equiva-
lent to an expected CAP of 50 years. Its CFROI averaged a healthy 17%
over the previous 5 years. Viacom paid a rich premium for Blockbuster and
was expecting many decades of sustainable value creation. To illustrate the
risk associated with a change in sustainable competitive advantage, we cal-
culated the intrinsic enterprise value assuming a typical fade of 10%. The
176

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
intrinsic value drops from $9bn to $4.8bn under this assumption, which
is approximately equal to the enterprise value when Blockbuster reissued
shares in 1999. Fades happens, and it happened to Blockbuster well before
it went bust.
Cost of Capital
The ﬁnal value driver in the fundamental pricing model is the cost of cap-
ital, which is the expected return or opportunity cost required by capital
providers. It is driven by the systematic risk of the company relative to the
market, leverage, and the market’s appetite for risk per the equity risk pre-
mium and risk-free rate. It is the hurdle rate that the return on capital has
to clear to create value.
INVESTMENT GROWTH IS A VALUE DRIVER
Revenue or earnings growth is the growth driver in most valuation
models. Revenue is not a control variable and input but rather the output
resulting from investments. The proper control variable and driver should
be investment growth (Exhibit 5.12). This is a subtle and important
diﬀerence between our Fundamental Pricing Model and other pricing
models.
Our growth driver is the growth in invested capital whether the assets
are tangible or intangible; for example, R&D and training expenses can
be capitalized and shifted to the balance sheet as intangible assets. Because
investment growth is our value driver, it is unnecessary for us to split the
EXHIBIT 5.12 Investment growth is the control variable and input while
revenue and earnings are outputs.
Investing in 
tangible and 
intangible assets
Generates 
revenue
Resulting in 
earnings
177

Beyond Earnings
ﬁrm into separate existing and growth components.29 We believe it is rea-
sonable to assume that a mature ﬁrm manufacturing widgets can’t grow at
a rate greater than the risk-free rate in the terminal period. The real growth
in widgets and investment won’t exceed the real growth of the economy
over the long run. However, the marginal proﬁtability would be expected
to drop. This reasoning is consistent with our Fundamental Pricing Model
and investment growth as a value driver.
There is a great deal of confusion about earnings growth and its sources.
The number all too often drives headlines. Earnings growth can result
from growth due to investment or growth due to eﬃciency (Exhibit 5.13).
Growth from eﬃciency gains is unsustainable. When these gains approach
their limit, the related earnings growth will fall to zero. Growth from eﬃ-
ciency should be a central element in an explicit forecast. The return on
incremental investment growth most likely decays for maturing ﬁrms since
marginal customers ﬁnd the products and services less valuable, which is
in line with our pricing model.
APPLYING THE FUNDAMENTAL PRICING MODEL
We showed how the Fundamental Pricing Model could be used to esti-
mate Blockbuster’s CAP and intrinsic value at an average fade rate. We’ll
walk through another example to show the utility of our model and the
sensitivity of value to changes in CAP.
On May 13, 2017, the Financial Times reported that “investors wiped
$4.6bn from the market value of the U.S. department store sector in the
space of two days, as concern mounted about sliding sales and the eﬀects of
29In our formulation, investment growth exceeds operating proﬁt growth when ROIC is greater than
the cost of capital and fading toward it. In other words, the operating margin is being compressed,
which is a realistic expectation. In closed-form equations utilizing a return on incremental invested
capital ROIIC, the ﬁrm has to be split into an existing component where NOPAT and ROIC are
constant into perpetuity, and all future investments occur at a constant perpetual ROIIC. The con-
stant growth in this formulation, e.g., see McKinsey’s Valuation, assumes NOPAT grows at a constant
rate into perpetuity, which means that the growth in invested capital might be substantially more
when ROIC > ROIIC. The growth in invested capital could be substantially more than the growth
in NOPAT, which hardly seems realistic in a terminal period assumption. Also, if ROIIC > r, then
the existing business and all future investments have CAPs of inﬁnity, which strikes us as an absurd
assumption.
178

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.13 Earnings growth, whether net income, NOPAT, or net cash
ﬂow, results from two sources: investment growth and
efﬁciency growth. The latter results from improvements to
operating margin and asset turns and is not sustainable
growth. Investment growth in the terminal period should not
exceed the risk-free rate. As the return on capital fades, the
retention ratio will have to increase to fund sustainable
steady-state growth.
NOPAT
Growth
Efficiency
Growth
Δ ROIC/ROIC
Δ EBIT% x (1 – T)
Δ Invested
Capital
Turns
Investment
Growth
ROIC
Retention
Ratio
NOPAT/Invested
Capital
1 – Payout
Ratio
+
x
online competition.” U.S. department stores suﬀered an astonishing fall in
market value of over 16% in two days.30 Who is responsible for this vapor-
ization of equity value? Amazon is disrupting the industry. It is now the
biggest online retailer in the world, and accounts for 5% of retail spending
in the United States. It is presently the world’s ﬁfth most valuable com-
pany.31
One of the department stores aﬀected by this plunge in valuation
was Macy’s. Let’s calculate Macy’s market-implied competitive advantage
period before and after this industry disruption (Exhibit 5.14).
30Adam Samson, Mamta Badkar, and Nicole Bullock, “U.S. Retail Sector’s Misery—In Charts,” Finan-
cial Times, May 13, 2017.
31Reported in The Economist on March 25, 2017, in “Primed” on pp 24–26.
179

Beyond Earnings
180
EXHIBIT 5.14 The HOLT relative wealth and economic proﬁt charts for Macy’s, a U.S. department store. Real asset growth has
been less than zero for the past decade. The change in economic proﬁt has been negative for the past two years
due to a fall in CFROI. The stock has underperformed the S&P 500 since 2014.
MACY’S INC (M)
Department Stores
Market Cap: 6.842 USD
–5
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
400
200
100
80
20
40
60
1996
Economic Return (CFROI %)
Economic Profit  (USD mil)
Asset Growth (%)
TSR Rel. To Index
CFROI
Economic Profit
Change in Economic Profit
Asset Growth
Total Shareholder Return
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
0
5
10
15
Price: 22.47 (26-Jun-2017)
Warranted Price: 37.62 USD (+67%)
1996
Economic Profit
Transaction Economic Profit
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Q1
1500
1000
500
0
–500
–1000
1000
500
0
–500
–1000
Change in Transaction EP
THIS REPORT IS MARKET COMMENTARY AND NOT A RESEARCH DOCUMENT
Change Economic Profit  (USD mil)

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.15 Share price sensitivity matrices on two different dates for
Macy’s. The fundamental pricing model was used to generate
warranted (intrinsic) share prices for different combinations of
the fade rate and the real asset growth rate. On June 26, 2017,
Macy’s stock price was $22.47, and on July 1, 2015, it was
$63.48.
Macy’s Intrinsic Stock Price versus Actual Stock Price of $22.47 (June 26, 2017):
Warranted Share Price Sensitivity Analysis
Fade Rate
0%
5%
10%
20%
−1%
46.77
30.72
24.74
19.70
Growth rate
0%
54.31
32.84
25.76
20.11
1%
65.69
35.45
26.92
20.55
Macy’s Intrinsic Stock Price versus Actual Stock Price of $63.48 (July 1, 2015):
Warranted Share Price Sensitivity Analysis
Fade Rate
0%
5%
10%
20%
−1%
76.64
47.39
36,67
27.71
Growth rate
0%
90.60
51.22
38.48
28.43
1%
111.95
55.93
40.56
29.21
Macy’s real asset growth has been ﬂat or negative for the past decade,
so we can consider it ex-growth. CFROI and economic proﬁt have been
trending south for the past two years. Let’s use the Fundamental Pricing
Model to calculate the intrinsic stock price for Macy’s as of June 2017 and
2015 for diﬀerent combinations of growth and CAP (Exhibit 5.15).32 The
inputs are shown in the Appendix.
Macy’s economic proﬁt has halved over the past two years from
$1.254bn in January 2015 to $0.639bn in January 2017 while its share
price has dropped 64%. Assuming a perpetual real growth of zero, Macy’s
market-implied fade rate increased from 2.6% to 14.5%; that is, the
market-implied CAP dropped from 38 years to 7 years. Investors were
highly optimistic about the sustainability of Macy’s competitive advantage
32In the HOLT framework, the fundamental pricing model using HOLT EP is:
Enterprise Value = Economic Net Assets0 + HOLT EP1
(DR−g+f ) .
The economic net assets equal the inﬂation-adjusted gross investment minus the accumulated economic
depreciation. The HOLT discount rate DR and economic proﬁt EP were taken from HOLT Lens. We
ﬂexed the real growth rate g and fade rate f. The inputs are shown in the Appendix.
181

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 5.16 Percentage of ﬁrms with starting CFROI of 6% or higher that
maintain or improve CFROI over time. Note that less than 5%
of ﬁrms can sustain a level CFROI for more than 20 years.
1
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
time in years
% firms that do not fade
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT. Global industrial/service ﬁrms, market capitalization +USD250m,
1950–2016.
and proﬁtability two years ago. They are pessimistic about its sustainability
today.
The matrices indicate how you can use the Fundamental Pricing Model
to generate a highly insightful analysis of a stock’s price sensitivity to
changes in its fade and investment growth rates. Observe how sharply the
intrinsic value falls as the fade rate increases. Also note how insensitive
valuation is to growth when proﬁtability fades quickly. On July 1, 2015,
you had to believe that Macy’s CFROI of 12% would not fade to consider
it a value stock; that is, its share price of $63 implied a fade rate of
between 0% and 5%, which suggests an almost impenetrable economic
moat. Exhibit 5.16 shows that an assumption of zero fade is unrealistic.
The chart even allows for intervening years of proﬁt decline followed by
CFROI improvement. But even under this relaxed assumption, few ﬁrms
can maintain proﬁtable CFROI.
As we like to say, “Fade happens!” By June 2017, investors realized
that Macy’s was not impervious to competitive threats and reassessed its
long-term proﬁt potential. Macy’s share price of $23 now implied a much
quicker fade rate of 10% to 20% in proﬁtability.
182

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
If you had used the usual growing perpetuity assumption to value the
terminal period for Blockbuster or Macy’s, you might have overestimated
the intrinsic value due to implicitly assuming the competitive advantage
and CFROI would continue ad inﬁnitum. Exhibit 5.15 shows an esti-
mated price for Macy’s of $90.60 from June 2015 assuming 0% growth
and 0% fade, indicating more than 40% upside. How many investors
were led astray by applying the classic growing perpetuity assumption to
Macy’s valuation and purchased the stock assuming it was trading at a dis-
count?
This is a never-ending issue when using a growing perpetuity model to
value successful companies beating their cost of capital. Our Fundamen-
tal Pricing Model with its fade value driver oﬀers an elegant solution to
this dilemma. The material risk in owing a high quality ﬁrm isn’t repre-
sented by how it co-varies with the market, that is, the stock’s beta, but
rather by changes in its competitive advantage. The recent cliﬀdrop in
the U.S. department store index is yet another example of the risk associ-
ated with the sustainability of proﬁts.
FINAL THOUGHTS FOR THE MOMENT
Although there is plenty of academic and HOLT research to suggest that
corporate proﬁtability reverts to the mean, it is impossible to prove that
the mean is always the cost of capital. The assumption of mean-reversion
to the cost of capital is grounded in neoclassical economic theory and rea-
sonable over the long run. However, this assumption can be troublesome
for entrenched and highly successful companies in defensive industries
that possess valuable intangible assets. In these cases, we recommend
using a sensitivity matrix to estimate the ﬁrm’s intrinsic value at diﬀerent
proﬁtability fade rates. Remember, a fade rate of zero is equivalent to the
classic growing perpetuity assumption of conventional terminal period
valuations. We oﬀer you the opportunity to quickly ﬂex that assumption
and quantify the risk associated with it by using our pricing model. In the
183

Beyond Earnings
HOLT framework, we recommend setting the ﬁnal fade rate to 5% for
ﬁrms judged to have signiﬁcant and sustainable competitive advantage.
Exhibit 5.17 can help you determine how long the explicit forecast
period should be and how to think about the valuation of the terminal
period in your DCF analysis. The Fundamental Pricing Model can be used
to perform back-of-the envelope valuations for stable companies that are
ex-growth similar to our Macy’s example.
CHAPTER APPENDIX
Valuation Mathematics
Valuations from the FCFF and EP methods are equal for a given forecast
and inputs:
Enterprise Value =
∞
∑
n=1
FCFFn
(1 + r)n = Invested Capital0 +
∞
∑
n=1
EPn
(1 + r)n
If we break the valuation into an explicit period of N years and a terminal
period that begins in year N+1, the expressions can be written as:
FCFF Method
Enterprise Value =
N
∑
n=1
FCFFn
(1 + r)n +
NOPATN+1
[
1 −(g−f −gf )
ROICN+1
]
(r −g + f + gf )(1 + r)N
For low rates of growth and fade, the cross-term of g × f is negligible,
and can be dropped to simplify the equation:
Enterprise Value =
N
∑
n=1
FCFFn
(1 + r)n +
NOPATN+1
[
1 −
(g−f )
ROICN+1
]
(r −g + f )(1 + r)N
(5.4)
184

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.17 Flowchart to help determine how long the explicit forecast
period should be for valuing a company. The ﬂowchart also
helps establish assumptions for estimating the terminal value.
The Fundamental Pricing Model can be used to value relatively
stable ex-growth ﬁrms on the back-of-an-envelope.
Start with a 1-year financial
forecast and add years per
 the flowchart
Is the firm ex-growth?
Add an additional forecast
year
Choose terminal asset
growth rate
Has ROIC stabilized?
Yes
Yes
Set f=0 in the fundamental
pricing model
Use fundamental pricing
model to value the terminal
period
Set f=0 and g=0 in the
fundamental pricing model
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Does ROIC fade to
WACC?
Does ROIIC equal
ROIC?
Does ROIIC equal
WACC?
No
Yes
No
185

Beyond Earnings
EP Method
Enterprise Value = Invested Capital0
+
N
∑
n=1
EPn
(1 + r)n +
EPN+1
(r −g + f + gf )(1 + r)N
Again, for low rates of growth and fade, the cross-term of g × f is negli-
gible, and can be dropped to simplify the equation:
Enterprise Value = Invested Capital0
+
N
∑
n=1
EPn
(1 + r)n +
EPN+1
(r −g + f )(1 + r)N
(5.5)
We prefer the latter expression, which is intuitive and easy to remember.
Inputs for Valuing Macy’s and Assessing Its Competitive
Advantage Period
The inputs for performing the back-of-the-envelope valuation of Macy’s
and calculating the sensitivity table shown in Exhibit 5.15 are shown in
Exhibit 5.18. We applied the EP form of our pricing model using HOLT
inputs. In HOLT terms, the invested capital is the inﬂation-adjusted net
assets, the economic proﬁt is the HOLT EP, the cost of capital is the HOLT
real discount rate, and asset growth is in real terms. Consistency is imper-
ative.
Enterprise Value = Economic Net Assets0 +
EP1
(r −g + f )
Debt must be subtracted from the enterprise value to calculate the
intrinsic share price.
Macy’s economic proﬁt has halved over the past two years from
$1.254bn in January 2015 to $0.639bn in January 2017 while its share
price has dropped 64%. Assuming a perpetual real growth of zero, Macy’s
186

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
EXHIBIT 5.18 The HOLT inputs for the back-of-the-envelope valuation of
Macy’s as of June 2015 (left-hand side) and June 2017
(right-hand side).
Macy’s Back-of-the-Envelope Valuation
Macy’s Back-of-the-Envelope Valuation
Real growth rate
0.0%
Real growth rate
0.0%
Fade rate
2.6%
Fade rate
14.5%
Discount rate
4.8%
Discount rate
4.9%
Today’s share price (USD)
63.48
Today’s share price (USD)
22.47
Item
2014
2015
Item
2016
2017
EP ($mil)
1,254
1,254
EP ($’mil)
639
639
IAGI ($mil)
22,592
IAGI ($’mil)
19,221
NDA ($mil)
5,939
NDA ($’mil)
4,878
Investments ($mil)
−
Investments ($’mil)
−
Debt ($mil)
11,309
Debt ($’mil)
9,932
Minority Interests ($mil)
−
Minority Interests ($’mil)
−
Valuation ($mil)
Valuation ($’mil)
Economic Net Assets
15,931
Economic Net Assets
13,484
PV of EP
16,997
PV of EP
3,280
Operating Enterprise Value
32,928
Operating Enterprise Value
16,764
Investments
−
Investments
−
Debt
(11,309)
Debt
(9,932)
Minority Interests
−
Minority Interests
−
Equity Value
21,619
Equity Value
6,832
Shares (mil)
340.57
Shares (mil)
304.06
Share Price ($)
63.48
Share Price ($)
22.47
market-implied fade rate increased from 2.6% to 14.5%; that is, the
market-implied CAP dropped from 38 years to 7 years. Investors were
highly optimistic about the sustainability of Macy’s competitive advantage
and proﬁtability two years ago. They are pessimistic about its sustainability
today.
A Detour Through the Twilight Zone: Making Sense of P/E
The Fundamental Pricing Model was used to generate Exhibit 5.3, and can
be used to illustrate how meaningless P/E ratios can be:
P
B0
= [ROE1 −g + f ]
(re −g + f )
187

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 5.19 The unbearable lightness and absurdity of P/E ratios.
This example illustrates how confusing and unhelpful P/E ratios
can be.
–5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
Spread
P/E vs Spread
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1000
50
20
10
5
2
Price / Earning
P
E1
=
[
1 −(g−f )
ROE1
]
(re −g + f )
All things being equal, an increase in forward ROE results in an increase
in P/B and P/E. Growth in book equity only adds value and increases P/B
if the forward ROE exceeds the cost of equity. A slower rate of fade for
a value creating ﬁrm also results in an increase in the P/B. These results
make intuitive sense. Now look at the behavior of P/E in Exhibit 5.19 and
witness how it does your head in!
We don’t know whether up is down or right is left when we calculate
a fundamental P/E ratio as a function of forward spread and CAP. In this
example, a company with a 5% spread and CAP of 5 years would trade at
the same P/E of 8 as a company with a higher spread of 15% and a CAP
of 10 years. Comparing these P/E ratios makes little sense. If the fade rate
exceeds the growth in book equity, then the forward P/E ratio decreases as
the spread increases. This result is unintuitive. It happens because the return
on incremental investments is less than the cost of equity, but you would
never know it unless you calculated the change in economic proﬁt. The
intuitive result of the P/E multiple expanding as forward spread increases
188

Quantifying the Value and Risk of a Company’s CAP
only happens when the fade rate is less than the growth in book equity,
e.g., the top two curves when CAP is 1,000 years (fade rate of 0.1%) and
50 years (fade rate of 2%). Note that the P/E remains constant when the
spread is zero. Growth and fade are irrelevant for cost of capital businesses.
In this example, the cost of equity is 10%, the perpetual growth in book
equity is 5%, and forward spread equals (ROE1 – re).
If you assume P/E ratios are a sensible and intuitive valuation met-
ric, think again. Use equations with explicit assumptions when estimating
value, not P/E ratios.
189

6
HOLT ECONOMIC PROFIT
“Businesses logically are worth far more than net tangible assets when they
can be expected to produce earnings on such assets considerably in excess of
market rates of return. The capitalized value of this excess return is eco-
nomic Goodwill.”
—Warren Buﬀett, 1983
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Unlike debt, which has an interest charge associated with it, there
is no charge recorded on an income statement for shareholders’
equity. Accounting earnings are not economic earnings.
• Economic proﬁt represents the economic earnings of a ﬁrm. It
equals the spread between return on capital and the cost of capital
multiplied by the invested capital. Companies able to beat their
cost of capital are value creators while those that fall short are value
destroyers.
191
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• The value of an asset equals the invested capital plus the present
value of future economic proﬁts. For a given forecast, the EP val-
uation and FCFF will be equal.
• HOLT economic proﬁt improves upon the conventional EP since
it accounts for asset life, asset mix, and inﬂation. We show how
to calculate HOLT EP and use it to perform a valuation.
• EP can be split into operating and acquisition components. Total
EP should preferably be greater than zero, but it is more important
that the change in EP is positive.
• Change in EP can be split into margin, growth, goodwill, and
market risk components. You can identify how EP is evolving,
and study trade-oﬀs such as growth versus margin compression.
• Amazon and Danaher are used as examples to illustrate the calcu-
lations and application of HOLT EP.
The usual approach to valuing a ﬁrm is to calculate the present value
(PV) of its future free cash ﬂows. An alternative approach is to calculate
the PV of its economic proﬁts (EP). We have already introduced the con-
ventional deﬁnition of EP. We will focus on the HOLT Economic Proﬁt
(HOLT EP) framework in this chapter.
Economic proﬁt represents the economic earnings of a ﬁrm. EP is pro-
portional to the spread between a company’s return on capital and cost of
capital. If a ﬁrm earns its cost of capital, EP is zero. Growth based on invest-
ments that are below their cost of capital destroys economic value, and these
strategies should be rejected. Investment into positive spread strategies cre-
ates economic value and should be encouraged.
We will demonstrate how HOLT EP is calculated and can be used to
analyze company performance and value the ﬁrm. This approach applies all
the advantages of the HOLT framework to the measurement of economic
proﬁt: asset mix, asset life, inﬂation, and accounting distortions are handled
identically, making HOLT EP a ﬁrst-class economic measure.
By splitting EP into operating and acquisition goodwill components,
absolute value creation can be assessed. Insights can be gained from ana-
lyzing change in EP, which can be decomposed into three parts: change in
192

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
economic spread, growth, and change in goodwill. Amazon is an excellent
example of a ﬁrm whose increase in EP due to growth has more than com-
pensated the loss in EP due to declining CFROI. Amazon is used as an
example throughout this chapter.
Corporate boards and investors should insist on positive change in EP.
A brief case study at the end of this chapter using Danaher Corporation
illustrates how EP and change in EP can be used to analyze an acquisitive
company.
INTRODUCTION
The usual approach to valuing a ﬁrm is to calculate the present value of its
future free cash ﬂows to the ﬁrm’s capital providers (FCFF). A highly infor-
mative alternative is to calculate the present value of the ﬁrm’s economic
proﬁts and add it to the ﬁrm’s invested capital.
Although technically correct, the FCFF method has nothing to say
about the quality of the cash ﬂow. Is a high level of free cash ﬂow a good or
bad thing? The answer depends on whether the company is forsaking value-
creating opportunities to report higher cash ﬂow. Rational investors prefer
reinvestment in positive NPV projects rather than receiving dividends
given a choice.
A company should invest its capital and available cash ﬂow into strate-
gies that exceed their cost of capital. If value-creating opportunities are
unavailable, the ﬁrm should maximize cash ﬂow and return it to share-
holders via dividends or share buybacks. As a rule of thumb, free cash ﬂow
will be negative when asset growth, g, is greater than the return on capital:
Cash ﬂow rules: if g > CFROI, then FCFF < 0
Value-destroying ﬁrms often make the mistake of expanding their
operations to report earnings growth. They think Wall Street wants
earnings growth at any cost. This misunderstanding can lead to expensive
corporate mistakes. Earnings are an accounting value, and cash ﬂow
is an economic one. These proﬁt measures are frequently conﬂated.
193

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.1 Assessing growth options.
Cash from Operations
Growth Option
Decision
If CFROI > g, then
FCFF > 0
Are projects available that
exceed their cost of capital?
Yes – invest cash ﬂow and raise
additional capital if necessary.
No – return the cash ﬂow to capital
providers.
If CFROI < g, then
FCFF < 0
Are projects available that
exceed their cost of capital?
Yes – raise additional capital
No – don’t grow and consider
downsizing if the ﬁrm is destroying
value.
It is the quality of earnings that should inform a ﬁrm’s growth strategy
(Exhibit 6.1).
The quickest way to generate cash ﬂow is to stop growing. Exhibit 6.1
indicates that this is suboptimal if a ﬁrm has strategies available which
exceed their cost of capital. This choke-growth turnaround rule is only war-
ranted for value destroyers whose return on capital isn’t meeting the cost of
capital (typically, subpar companies in mature industries that might ben-
eﬁt from consolidation). For them, it is wise to remember humorist Will
Rogers’ adage on the ﬁrst law of holes: If you ﬁnd yourself in a hole, stop
digging.
On the ﬂip side, potential value creation is squandered when CFOs
don’t do their job of investing available cash ﬂow and raising capital to
ﬁnance strategies expected to beat their cost of capital. Negative cash ﬂow
is acceptable if project returns are expected to exceed their cost of capital
and generate positive net present value (NPV) for the ﬁrm. To do otherwise
is to leave money on the table. Rational shareholders prefer more value to
less and the aim of the ﬁrm is to create the greatest possible NPV from its
portfolio of present and future investments. Accounting earnings should
never be confused with economic value.
Can the concept of value creation be communicated more comprehen-
sively? All capital providers expect compensation. There is a charge on
debt which appears on the income statement as interest expense. Oper-
ating proﬁt must cover interest charges and debt-equivalent charges such
as operating lease expenses. If not, net income will be negative.
194

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
But what about equity? There is no charge for equity on the income
statement, so it appears to have no cost to the untrained eye. Economists
know that there is an opportunity cost for providing equity, which should
reﬂect the investment’s riskiness. A residual income would subtract a charge
on the equity at the opportunity cost of equity from net income. The resid-
ual income is an economic proﬁt, which diﬀers profoundly in concept and
absolute value from accounting proﬁt. The equity charge is simply the cost
of equity multiplied by the equity. The more equity required to support
earnings, the greater the economic charge and lower the residual income.
When analyzing the operating performance and value of industrial
and service companies, it is beneﬁcial to separate the ﬁrm’s operating
and ﬁnancing decisions, and to value the ﬁrm with respect to all capital
providers. Financial structure is a secondary consideration in the capital
budgeting process. Of primary concern is the intelligent allocation of
capital and resources with the aim that all capital provided will create
positive NPV. As Weingartner notes, “Capital budgeting represents in
some respects the central problem of the ﬁrm. The complexity of the
problem derives from the fact that any set of actions taken today has
consequences at later times, and the opportunities available at later dates
are related to decisions being implemented currently.”
The opportunity cost for the ﬁrm’s capital, which is a weighted-average
of its cost of equity and debt, is the cost of capital. Value creation can
be communicated by calculating economic proﬁt and discounting future
economic proﬁts to their present value. Valuations from the FCFF and EP
methods should yield equivalent results for an identical forecast.
Another beneﬁt of economic proﬁt is that it connects project economics
and corporate valuation. The present value of a ﬁrm’s economic proﬁts is
equal to the total NPV of its existing and future investments!
Firm value −Invested capital =
∞
∑
n=1
EPn
(1 + r)n =
P
∑
p=1
NPVp
The invested capital is the net asset value of the ﬁrm, and the starting
point for a ﬁrm’s existing projects and value creation. Distant economic
195

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.2 The value drivers for change in economic proﬁt are diagrammed
in the ﬂowchart. Investment growth comes from investing in
positive NPV projects, and efﬁciency growth comes from
improving operating margins and asset turns. Key performance
indicators and incentives should be aligned with increasing
economic proﬁt.
Δ EP
Δ EBIT × (1 – T)
–
+
Δ Capital Charge
Δ EBIT% × Sales
Δ Invested Capital
× r
Δ Invested Capital
Turns
Δ Sales × EBIT%
Margin Expansion
Investment
Growth
proﬁts are generated from projects that have yet to be imagined. A relent-
less focus on building a sustainable competitive advantage and investing
in positive NPV projects results in increasing economic proﬁt and the
ﬁrm’s valuation. A ﬁrm’s key performance indicators (KPIs) and incentives
should be based on increasing economic proﬁt, whether by investment in
positive NPV strategies or eﬃciency improvements (Exhibit 6.2).
CALCULATING CFROI AS A RATIO
CFROI is a single period measure of a ﬁrm’s weighted-average IRR on its
existing businesses and projects. CFROI can be expressed as a ratio, which
equals the result from the familiar RATE function in Microsoft Excel.1
CFROI = RATE (Life, GCF, −IAGI, NDA) = (GCF −ARC)
IAGI
(6.1)
1We show the full proof and outline the advantages of CFROI as a ratio in the report: D.A. Holland
and B.A. Matthews, “CFROI as a Ratio and Du Pont Identity,” Credit Suisse HOLT, August 2014.
196

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
The HOLT variables were covered in Chapter 3: Life is the
weighted-average useful life of the depreciating assets, GCF is gross
cash ﬂow, IAGI is inﬂation-adjusted gross investment, and NDA repre-
sents non-depreciating assets. Calculating CFROI as a ratio requires the
introduction of an economic depreciation variable, the asset recovery
charge (ARC).
ARC = PMT (RATE, Life, 0, −IADA) =
RATE × IADA
[(1 + RATE)Life −1]
(6.2)
ARC is a depreciation annuity that represents the sinking fund charge of
recovering the inﬂation-adjusted depreciating assets (IADA) over the asset
life. A lower recovery rate translates into a higher asset recovery charge.
A can of worms has now been opened. What is the rate at which the
depreciating assets are recovered? In a CFROI ratio calculation, there is an
implicit assumption that ARC is recovered at a rate equal to the CFROI.
Economists would argue that the sinking fund depreciation should be
calculated at the ﬁrm’s cost of capital (or discount rate DR) since by deﬁni-
tion it represents the risk-adjusted opportunity cost of the capital provided.
ARC@DR = PMT (DR, Life, 0, −IADA) =
DR × IADA
[(1 + DR)Life −1]
We have maintained that a project’s NPV and the present value of its
economic proﬁts are equal. The calculation of HOLT economic proﬁt is
greatly simpliﬁed if an adjusted CFROI is deﬁned where ARC is calculated
at the ﬁrm’s cost of capital. To distinguish between traditional IRR, where
the asset recovery charge is imputed at the IRR, and economic return on
investment (EROI), we introduce economic depreciation.
Economic depreciation (ED) equals:
ED = PMT (DR, Life, 0, −IADA) =
DR × IADA
[(1 + DR)Life −1]
(6.3)
ED is simply ARC calculated at the discount rate.
197

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.3 Comparison of two mutually exclusive projects with the same
IRR but different asset compositions. Which would you choose?
Project A
Project B
1,000
0
100
100
100
100
100
264
264
264
264
264
IRR = 10%
IRR = 10%
(1,000)
(1,000)
Economic ROI Calculation
EROI = (GCF −ED)
IAGI
(6.4)
CFROI and economic return on investment (EROI) are equivalent
when CFROI equals the discount rate. They are always equivalent if the
asset base is comprised entirely of non-depreciating assets, for example, net
working capital and land. EROI will be less than CFROI when CFROI
is greater than the discount rate; that is, the sinking fund depreciation
decreases as CFROI increases. EROI will be greater than CFROI when
CFROI is less than the discount rate; that is, the sinking fund depreciation
increases as CFROI decreases.
Why is EROI important? Because it is an economic measure aligned
with the calculation of EP and NPV. We illustrate its signiﬁcance by
contrasting two mutually exclusive projects (Exhibit 6.3). Investment in
Project A consists only of non-depreciating assets; for example, production
is outsourced, while the investment in Project B is solely in depreciating
assets; for example, in-house production.
Both projects have an IRR and CFROI of 10%, and would appear
equally attractive to investment decision makers. NPV tells another tale
(Exhibit 6.4)! If a 6% cost of capital is assumed, the NPV of Project A is
50% higher than that of Project B, making it the clear winner in a capital
budgeting exercise. In fact, Project B’s cash ﬂow would have to increase to
277 and its IRR to 12% for the NPV of the projects to be equivalent at
168. IRR is not aligned with the NPV rule in this example.
198

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
EXHIBIT 6.4 Calculation of the NPV for the two mutually exclusive projects.
Project A is the clear winner when NPV is considered. Never
forget the golden rule.
Year:
0
1
2
3
4
5
Project A
(1,000)
100
100
100
100
1,100
Project B
(1,000)
264
264
264
264
264
IRRA
10%
NPVA, where DR = 6%
$168
IRRB
10%
NPVB, where DR = 6%
$111
Internal rate of return is a popular and treasured metric since it does not
require an external cost of capital and all the squabbling that accompanies
its quantiﬁcation. NPV is a superior metric for assessing value but requires
an explicit risk-adjusted discount rate.
Calculation of EROI is perfectly aligned with NPV in this example.
Project A has an EROI of 10% while Project B has an EROI of 8.6%.
Project A is preferable using NPV or EROI.
We can further illustrate diﬀerences between CFROI and EROI by vary-
ing the ratio of GCF to gross investment (IAGI) and NDA% for a typical
company. The straight lines represent CFROI and the dashed lines repre-
sent EROI for GCF/IAGI ratios of 5%, 10%, and 20%. (GCF/IAGI is
sometimes used as an ROA proxy, but it is a poor return on assets substi-
tute.)
First, note how CFROI and EROI equal the return GCF/IAGI when
all the assets are non-depreciating. The discrepancy between CFROI and
EROI grows as the relative amount of depreciating assets increases. The
asset replacement charge causes this discrepancy. Investors must recover
the cost of the depreciating assets whereas non-depreciating assets are fully
recovered at the project’s conclusion. This is the basic distinction between
earning a return on investment and recovering the principal invested,
that is, return of investment. In the CFROI calculation, when CFROI is
greater than the discount rate, the replacement charge decreases as CFROI
increases. This is not the case for the EROI, where depreciating assets are
funded at the discount rate (Exhibit 6.5).
199

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.5 EROI and CFROI are compared as a function of
non-depreciating asset intensity.
–10%
–5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
CFROI %
Non-Depreciating Assets % 
CFROI vs  EROI
CFROI
EROI
GCF/IAGI=5%
GCF/IAGI=20%
GCF/IAGI=15%
A beneﬁt of EROI is that it compresses returns toward the discount
rate and has lower overall variance than CFROI for companies with a
high percentage of ﬁxed assets. Note how there is very little diﬀerence
between CFROI and EROI when they are near the discount rate, which
was assumed to be 6%. This example also illustrates why it is vital to con-
sider asset composition when measuring corporate proﬁtability.
Let’s conclude this section by calculating EROI for Amazon. ED is cal-
culated at Amazon’s 2013 average real discount rate of 4.0%, which results
in a charge of $5.768bn and an EROI of 9.6% versus a CFROI of 12%:
ED (2013) = PMT (4.0%, 5.4 years, 0, −$34.042bn) = $5.768bn
EROI(2013) = ($9.480bn −$5.768bn)
$38.581bn
= 9.6%
HOLT ECONOMIC PROFIT
Economic proﬁt (EP) is the amount of value a ﬁrm creates over a speciﬁed
period, typically annual. It is proportional to the spread between a com-
pany’s return on capital and cost of capital. If a ﬁrm is meeting its cost
200

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
EXHIBIT 6.6 The equivalence of NPV and the present value of EP is
demonstrated for two projects.
Equivalence of NPV and the PV of EP
DCF Analysis—Projects A & B
0
1
2
3
4
5
IRR
DR NPV
Project A—cash ﬂows
(1,000)
100
100
100
100
1,100 10.0% 6.0% 168
Project B—cash ﬂows
(1,000)
264
264
264
264
264
10.0% 6.0% 111
Economic Proﬁt Analysis— Project A
GCF
100
100
100
100
100
−ED@DR
0
0
0
0
0
Economic Cash Flow
100
100
100
100
100
/ IAGI
1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000
= EROI
10.0% 10.0% 10.0% 10.0% 10.0%
Economic Spread (EROI −DR)
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
PV
Economic Proﬁt (Spread × IAGI)
40
40
40
40
40
168
Economic Proﬁt Analysis—Project B
GCF
264
264
264
264
264
−ED@DR
177
177
177
177
177
Economic Cash Flow
86
86
86
86
86
/ IAGI
1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000
= EROI
8.6%
8.6%
8.6%
8.6%
8.6%
Economic Spread (EROI −DR)
2.6%
2.6%
2.6%
2.6%
2.6%
PV
Economic Proﬁt (Spread × IAGI)
26
26
26
26
26
111
of capital, its EP is zero. Growth into strategies below the cost of capital
destroys shareholder value, and these strategies should be rejected. Growth
at the cost of capital is value neutral. For every dollar invested, a dollar is
returned for a NPV of zero. The HOLT EP is simply the economic spread
multiplied by assets if EROI is speciﬁed as the return on capital:
EP = (EROI −DR) × IAGI
(6.5)
Use of EROI leads to equivalent valuations for the FCFF and EP
approaches. We demonstrate that the NPV and present value of eco-
nomic proﬁts are equivalent for the previous Project A and B example
(Exhibit 6.6).
201

Beyond Earnings
This simple example demonstrates several key points. First, the present
value of future EP streams equals the NPV of each project’s cash ﬂows. The
EROI for Project A is equivalent to IRR and CFROI since the assets are
100% non-depreciating. The NPV of 168 is equivalent to the present value
of Project A’s economic proﬁt stream, assuming a discount rate of 6%. The
EROI for Project B is lower than the IRR and CFROI, indicating that this
project is not as attractive as Project A. Another key point is that EROI is
rank-order aligned with the lower NPV of 111, which is equivalent to the
present value of Project B’s economic proﬁts.
Another way of stating EP is economic cash ﬂow (ECF) minus a capital
charge (DR × IAGI). ECF is an after-tax operating proﬁt less an economic
depreciation charge.
EP = GCF −ED −DR × IAGI = ECF −Capital Charge
The inﬂation-adjusted capital charge is the opportunity cost of using
the assets, equal to the assets multiplied by the discount rate. This charge is
analogous to the capital charge of invested capital multiplied by WACC in
conventional approaches. A ﬁrm can increase its economic proﬁt by attain-
ing greater productivity out of its assets; for example, improved working
capital management leads to a decrease in assets and the capital charge.
It can improve proﬁtability by improving ECF margin and/or asset turns
(Exhibit 6.7).
Amazon’s EP in 2013 was $2.154bn, which is the amount by which
ECF exceeded the capital charge:
EP(2013) = (9.6% −4.0%) × $38.581bn = $2.154bn
What Is the Connection Between EP and Value?
The level of economic proﬁt and its sustainability are integral to a com-
pany’s intrinsic value. We established that the present value of a project’s
EP and its NPV are equivalent. The value of a ﬁrm equals the present value
202

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
EXHIBIT 6.7 Diagram outlining the calculation of HOLT EP.
Income
Statement
Balance
Sheet
Gross Cash
Flow
Inflation-
Adjusted Gross
Investment
Economic
Depreciation
Discount
Rate
Economic
Cash Flow
Capital
Charge
HOLT Economic Profit calculation:
Economic
Profit
HOLT EP = (ECF – Capital Charge) or (EROI – DR) × IAGI 
of its future EP streams and its inﬂation-adjusted economic net asset value
(ENA) (Exhibit 6.8).2 ENA equals IAGI minus the accumulated economic
depreciation, and is a measure of a ﬁrm’s inﬂation-adjusted book value:
Value = ENA0 +
N
∑
i=1
EPi
(1 + DR)i
If a ﬁrm is forecast to generate cost of capital returns, its EP will be zero,
and the ﬁrm should trade at its book value. The enterprise book value is
the current-dollar net assets. Firms unable to meet their cost of capital will
trade at a discount to their book value, and those able to beat their cost of
capital will trade at a premium.
2In practice, economic proﬁt is often based on average assets. The HOLT framework uses the
end-of-year assets. In a valuation, the beginning-of-year asset base must be used.
203

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.8 Diagram outlining the calculation of HOLT EP and FCFF.
Income
Statement
Income
Statement
Balance
Sheet
Balance
Sheet T–1 
Balance
Sheet T
Gross
Cash Flow
Total
Investment
Discount
Rate
Inflation-
Adjusted Gross
Investment
Free Cash
Flow
Economic
Cash Flow
Capital
Charge
Economic
Profit
Free Cash Flow valuation:
HOLT Economic Profit calculation:
Growth and sustainability as value drivers are crystal clear in the EP
framework. Firms able to grow EP via investment, margin expansion,
and/or asset productivity will increase shareholder value. Firms able to
sustain value-creating returns longer into the future and withstand the
gravitational pull of fade will generate more shareholder value. A crucial
performance measure, which we will investigate shortly, is the change in
economic proﬁt (ΔEP).
THE POWER OF SIMPLICITY: SPREAD, FADE,
AND GROWTH IN AN EP FRAMEWORK
The importance of economic spread and fade can be readily shown. Con-
sider a ﬁrm whose assets are growing at a rate g but whose proﬁtability is
fading at a rate f towards the cost of capital DR. An analytical solution
exists for ﬁrm value:3
Firm value ≅ENA0 ×
(EROI1 −g + f
DR −g + f
)
The impact of proﬁtability and fade can now be evaluated. Quicker fade
accelerates value depletion! The table below, which assumes a real discount
3The exact equation is Firm value = IAGI0 ×
( EROI1−g+f
DR−g+f
)
−Accumulated Economic Depreciation
204

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
EXHIBIT 6.9 The HOLT price-to-book ratio for different combinations of fade
and EROI.
Estimated HOLT Price-to-Book
EROI (1)
0%
3%
6%
12%
24%
Fade Rate %
1%
−0.20
0.40
1.00
2.20
4.60
5%
0.33
0.67
1.00
1.67
3.00
10%
0.57
0.79
1.00
1.43
2.29
25%
0.79
0.90
1.00
1.21
1.62
50%
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.11
1.33
100%
0.94
0.97
1.00
1.06
1.17
rate of 6% and real growth of 2%, shows the multiple of intrinsic enterprise
value to ENA0, which is the HOLT price-to-book ratio (HOLT P/B). It
is analogous to Tobin’s Q ratio. When the forward CFROI is equal to the
discount rate, the P/B remains constant at 1.0. Fade doesn’t matter, growth
doesn’t create value, and the ﬁrm is worth its inﬂation-adjusted net asset
value.
The inverse of the fade rate is a measure of the expected competitive
advantage period (CAP). A value-destroying ﬁrm with an EROI of 3%
should trade at a P/B of 0.67 if it expects 20 years (5% fade rate) to recover
to its cost of capital, and a signiﬁcantly higher P/B of 0.94 if it only expects
2 years (50% fade rate) to recover. A stellar value-creating ﬁrm with an
EROI of 24% should trade at a P/B of 3.0 if its expected CAP is 20 years
versus a signiﬁcantly lower P/B of 1.3 for an expected CAP of 2 years. Fade
happens, and its impact can be enormous (Exhibit 6.9).
USING ECONOMIC PROFIT TO MEASURE THE VALUE
OF ACQUISITIONS
Thus far, we have focused on understanding the economics of operating
assets. Economic proﬁt analysis is also helpful in understanding the value
of acquisitions.
Acquisition goodwill, which HOLT treats as a non-operating intangible
asset, can be factored into the analysis of economic proﬁt and change in
205

Beyond Earnings
economic proﬁt. The cumulative goodwill should be used since any pre-
mium paid represents a wealth transfer from the acquiring ﬁrm to target
shareholders and is an unrecoverable cost, or penalty, to the acquiring ﬁrm’s
equity investors. The penalty for control, however, isn’t indeﬁnite if change
in EP becomes the focus, since ΔEP negates sunk costs such as goodwill.
Let’s begin with EP.
Capital Charge on Goodwill = DR × Cumulative Goodwill
Transaction EP = Operations EP + Goodwill EP
= (EROI −DR) × IAGI −DR × GW
(6.6)
The transaction EP includes operating EP and goodwill EP.4 The trans-
action EP for Amazon in 2013 was $2.018bn after a relatively small good-
will charge of $137m on a cumulative goodwill total of $3.384bn.
Transaction EP(2013) = (9.6% −4.0%) × $38.581bn −4.0%
× $3.384bn = $2.018bn
Amazon’s EP performance over the past decade is speciﬁed in
Exhibit 6.10. Operating EP swamps any charges due to goodwill. The
exponential increase in Total EP from $59m at the end of 2003 to
$2.0bn in 2013 is extraordinary, highlighting 10 years of double-digit
EXHIBIT 6.10 A table and chart showing Amazon’s operating EP and
transaction EP from 2004 to 2013.
EP Outputs
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
EP (Operations)
69
210
400
468
644
617
957
1,272
1,171
1,397
2,154
EP (Goodwill)
−10
−8
−10
−13
−16
−36
−97
−79
−120
−161
−137
Total EP
59
202
390
455
628
581
860
1,193
1,050
1,237
2,018
4Acquired intangibles are treated as a goodwill equivalent in HOLT.
206

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
–500
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
$Mil
Economic Profit
Operations
Goodwill
Total EP
compounding value (CAGR = 42%). What is the market expecting now
and will this trajectory continue?
A transaction EROI that incorporates acquisition goodwill can be
deﬁned, which allows another way of stating the transaction EP:
Transaction EROI =
ECF
IAGI + GW
(6.7)
and, rearranging
Transaction EP = (Transaction EROI −DR) × (IAGI + GW )
Amazon’s transaction EROI in 2013 was 8.8%, indicating that Ama-
zon remains a value-creating business if acquisition goodwill is taken into
account:
Transaction EROI(2013) = ($9.480 −$5.768bn)
($38.581 + $3.384bn) = 8.8%
The higher the premium paid for an acquisition, the greater the capital
charge. Economic proﬁt can help judge whether the charge on goodwill
is being oﬀset by growth in operating EP. This can be achieved by split-
ting the change in economic proﬁt into its spread, growth, and goodwill
components.
207

Beyond Earnings
DECOMPOSING VALUE CREATION INTO DELTA EP
COMPONENTS
A ﬁrm can increase its intrinsic value by generating a positive change in
economic proﬁt. ΔEP is a crucial measure of corporate performance and
value creation. Annual changes in EP should be calculated and cumulative
totals tallied. Bonuses of executives, division managers, project leaders, and
employees can be based on cumulative ΔEP over a 3- to 5-year period if
shareholders want each level of the ﬁrm to be focused on value creation.
Operationally, increases in spread and growth in value-creating businesses
are the two major routes to achieving this goal. If acquisitions are the
strategy guiding growth, then the charge on additional goodwill can be
compared to the ΔEP generated from the acquired assets. If the premium
paid is too high, then the economic charge on that premium will surpass
the additional economic proﬁt generated from the larger asset base.
The change in EP can be calculated for any two periods but is generally
calculated on an annual basis:
ΔEPi+1 = (EROIi+1 −DRi+1) × IAGIi+1 −(EROIi −DRi) × IAGIi
For Amazon, the operating ΔEP in 2013 was $757m:
ΔEP(2013) = (9.6% −4.0%) × $38,581m −(10.0% −4.8%)
× $26,950m = $757m
Amazon created $757m more in economic proﬁt in 2013 than in 2012
despite its EROI dropping from 10% to 9.6%. Some of this increase was
due to the higher risk appetite of markets; that is, the average discount
rate dropped from 4.8% to 4.0%, but most of it was due to the enormous
growth in assets, which was an astonishing 43% in nominal terms. Tremen-
dous insight comes from decomposing the sources of value creation. Let’s
see how to separate change in EP due to economic spread expansion from
that due to growth.
208

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
The ΔEP equation can be rewritten as the expression:
ΔEPi+1 =
(ΔEROIi+1 −ΔDRi+1) × IAGIi
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Value creation from expansion in economic spread
+ (EROIi+1 −DRi+1) × ΔIAGIi+1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Value creation from growth and reinvestment
There are two terms that comprise the change in operating EP. The ﬁrst is
the improvement in EP due to economic spread expansion. The expansion
comes from improvement in EROI and change in the discount rate.5 The
second term is change in EP due to growth and re-investment. If growth
is zero, then this term is zero. If the spread is positive, then growth creates
value.
The beginning-of-year asset growth rate, g, can be used to restate the
equation in an explicit manner.
ΔEPi+1 = [(ΔEROIi+1 −ΔDRi+1) + (EROIi+1 −DRi+1) × g] × IAGIi
It is worthwhile dwelling on the economic spread component for a
moment. The change in EROI is related to the operating performance of
the ﬁrm. Change in EROI has a directly proportional impact on change
in EP. Because HOLT employs a forward-looking, market-implied dis-
count rate, the change in discount rate is related to market risk appetite
and the ﬁrm’s non-diversiﬁable risk. The ﬁrm has some say over the latter,
for example, via its leverage and credit risk, but cannot control the former.
This can prove unsettling since change in value is a function of the ﬁrm’s
operating performance and market whims. The HOLT Lens product splits
these eﬀects. Corporate managers and executive remuneration committees
might ﬁnd it preferable to settle on an absolute discount rate that remains
constant to reduce the eﬀect of market vagaries.
5In the HOLT Lens product, the change in EP due to change in the discount rate is separated from
the change in EP due to change in EROI. The former is termed the “change in EP due to market risk”
and equals ΔDR × IAGI.
209

Beyond Earnings
Change in EP due to EROI and discount rate changes (change in economic
spread):
ΔEP1(spread) = (EROI1 −EROI0 −DR1 + DR0) × IAGI1
1 + g
(6.8)
The change in EP due to spread compression was $108m in 2013 for
Amazon:
ΔEP2013(spread) = (9.6% −10.0% −4.0% + 4.8%)
× $38,581m
1 + 43.2% = $108m
Amazon increased its economic proﬁt in 2013 due to an improvement
in spread—even though EROI declined. The overall increase was due to a
decline in the discount rate.
What did growth contribute?
Change in EP due to growth:
ΔEP1(growth) = (EROI1 −DR1) × g × IAGI1
1 + g
(6.9)
Note that the measures can be normalized by dividing by IAGI, ENA, or
sales. Normalization by sales results in economic proﬁt and ΔEP margins,
which are particularly insightful for asset-light companies.
How much additional value did Amazon’s growth in 2013 generate?
ΔEP2013(growth) = (9.6% −4.0%) × 0.432 × $38,581m
1 + 0.432
= $649m
Amazon created tremendous value by growing its business rather than
maintaining a higher level of overall proﬁtability. The operating ΔEP was
$757m in 2013, that is, $108m + 649m. How much of the growth came
from acquiring assets?
WHAT ABOUT GOODWILL?
The previous analysis is based on operating returns and does not account
for goodwill that may have been paid to acquire assets. Fortunately, the
210

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
mathematics remains the same if we substitute Transaction EROI for EROI
and IAGI plus Goodwill for Invested Capital in the equations:
Tr EPi = (Tr EROIi −DRi) × (IAGIi + GWi)
A highly insightful adjustment is to separate the eﬀect of goodwill from
operations:
Tr EPi = (EROIi −DRi) × IAGIi −DRi × GWi
The contribution of operations and goodwill to EP can now be easily
calculated. The change in EP can also include an acquisition component.
ΔTr EPi+1 = [(ΔEROIi+1 −ΔDRi+1) + (EROIi+1 −DRi+1) × g]
× IAGIi −DRi+1 × ΔGWi+1
The goodwill term assumes that the discount rate remains constant at
times i and i+1 to simplify the math. Goodwill is a sunk cost. If there is no
change in the cumulative goodwill, then there is no change in value due to
past acquisitions. Thus we avoid penalizing future value creation for past
acquisitions. This is not the case when looking at absolute EP, which has
sunk costs anchored to it.
Change in EP due to M&A goodwill:
ΔTr EP1(M&A) = −DR1 × ΔGW1
(6.10)
There was no material change in goodwill for Amazon in 2013, thus the
charge due to change in goodwill is zero.
Amazon is not averse to acquisitions. The years 2009, 2011, and 2012
are noteworthy. But the charges in these years due to increases in goodwill
were drowned by increases in operating EP. Despite Amazon’s EROI falling
since 2007, it has been generating impressive improvements in economic
proﬁt (Exhibit 6.11). Investors want more economic proﬁt, even if it means
lower proﬁtability. The aim is maximizing the present value of all future
economic proﬁt streams.
211

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.11 Amazon’s economic proﬁt and change in economic proﬁt
components.
Change in EP Outputs
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Due to change in EP spread
90
148
−17
10 −145
47
−2 −404 −220
107
Due to growth
51
42
84
166
119
293
317
303
447
649
Operating change in EP
141
190
68
176
−26
340
314 −101
227 756
Due to Goodwill
−1
−1
−2
−2
−16 −61
−4
−31
−32
−1
Total Change in EP
140
190
66
174
−42
229
310 −132
195
756
–600
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
$Mil
Change in Economic Profit
Spread
Growth
Goodwill
Total Change
Change in EP (ΔEP) is the metric of choice in judging how well
managers are performing as stewards of invested capital. It should be
a key metric in value-based incentive programs. It has the advantage that
value lost from sunk costs is negated; that is, if the sunk cost doesn’t change,
then change in its capital charge is zero. Investors prefer a positive change
in value creation, irrespective of whether the ﬁrm is a value destroyer
or value creator. The principle of value additivity informs us that any
improvement in economic proﬁt is an improvement in the ﬁrm’s NPV and
intrinsic value. Multi-year ΔEP accounts that get amortized on a rolling
basis are highly suitable for incentivizing company managers.
Case Study: Danaher Corporation
Danaher is an American industrial company with a long track record of
acquiring ﬁrms and successfully integrating them. Danaher has created
212

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
EXHIBIT 6.12 Danaher’s EROI and value driver performance from 2003 to
2013.
-
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Asset Turns
EROI% and ECF%
Danaher's ROI Drivers: EROI% = ECF% × Asset Turns
EROI%
Trans
EROI %
ECF%
Asset
Turns
EXHIBIT 6.13 Danaher’s EROI and transaction EROI from 2003 to 2013.
CFROI Outputs
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007 2008
2009
2010 2011
2012
2013
EROI
13.8% 15.9% 17.6% 22.5% 199% 19.2% 15.2% 180% 19.0% 18.7% 17.3%
Transaction EROI
7.7%
8.1%
9.0% 10.0% 9.0%
8.8%
7.4% 8.5%
8.9%
8.7%
8.1%
tremendous value for its shareholders and sports an impressive CFROI
(Exhibit 6.12).
We begin by looking at Danaher’s operating EROI and its DuPont
drivers.
Danaher has maintained a remarkable operating return of greater than
15% for the past decade. Asset turns declined from their peak in 2006
and have been relatively steady at 1.0 for the past ﬁve years ($1 of sales is
generated from every $1 of inﬂation-adjusted gross assets). The lower asset
utilization has been compensated for by improving proﬁtability, ECF%.
Exhibit 6.13 indicates that Danaher knows how to manage operating
assets. However, nothing can be said about its ability to make value additive
acquisitions. We can get a clue from the transaction EROI.
213

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 6.14 Danaher’s economic proﬁt from 2003 to 2013.
EP Outputs
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
2011
2012
2013
EP (Operations)
476
684
844 1,295 1,547 1,387 1,155 1,716
2,504
2,552
2,526
EP (Goodwill)
−161 −186 −219 −363 −548 −689 −725 −650 −1,046 −1,212 −1,044
Total EP
315
498
625
932
999
699
430 1,066
1,458
1,339
1,483
EXHIBIT 6.15 Danaher’s economic proﬁt from operations and after
acquisition goodwill has been accounted for from 2003 to
2013.
–1,500
–1,000
–500
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
$Mil
Economic Profit
Operations
Goodwill
Total EP
The transaction EROI, which has remained above Danaher’s cost of cap-
ital for the past decade, is about half of the operating EROI due to acqui-
sition goodwill. Danaher is creating value through its acquisition strategy,
but unfortunately, we have no feel for the magnitude and timing of value
creation. The next step is to calculate the absolute economic proﬁt for each
year and to split it into operating EP and goodwill EP (Exhibit 6.14).
Cumulative goodwill grew from $3.9bn at the end of 2003 to $22.5bn
in 2013, a 474% increase! Danaher is not averse to paying a premium for
control of other ﬁrms. The increasing charge on goodwill can be seen. But
once it gains control, does Danaher convert its capital paid into shareholder
value? Danaher was able to generate more economic proﬁt from the operat-
ing assets than what it paid. Total EP grew from $315m at the end of 2003
to nearly $1.5bn in 2013. Of most interest is the change in economic proﬁt
and where it is coming from.
214

HOLT Economic Proﬁt
EXHIBIT 6.16 Danaher’s annual change in EP split into its components.
Change in EP Outputs
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Due to change in EP spread
132
84
270 −207 −193 −401 475
55 −137 −98
Due to growth
76
76
180
458
34
169
86
733
185
73
Operating change in EP
208
10
451
251 −159 −232 561
787
48 −25
Due to Goodwill
−48
−20 −122 −156
0
−40 −71 −315
−81 −21
Total Change in EP
161
140
329
96 −159 −272 490
472
−33 −47
–600
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
$Mil
Change in Economic Profit
Spread: Margin
Spread: DR
Growth
Goodwill
Value Creation
Components
The eﬀects of spread, growth, and goodwill are calculated. Danaher was
increasing economic proﬁt and intrinsic value until the global ﬁnancial
crisis of 2008/9. Signiﬁcant acquisitions were made in 2006, 2007, and
2008; look at the change in EP due to goodwill line (Exhibit 6.16). The
increase in EP due to growth more than compensated for the loss due to
goodwill. It is interesting to note that the increase in EP due to growth in
2007 compensated for an increase in the goodwill charge and a drop in
spread.
EROI dropped to 15.2% in 2009 because of the global slowdown. The
2009 change in EP due to spread compression was a loss of $403m.
Signiﬁcant acquisitions were again made in 2011 and 2012. The change
in EP due to growth in 2011 far exceeded the loss due to goodwill.
Except for 2009, the 5-year cumulative change in EP has been positive.
215

Beyond Earnings
Danaher’s managers can take a bow for generating excellent operating
returns and consistently creating value through acquisitions. Few ﬁrms can
so eﬀectively integrate acquisitions and expand shareholder value.
216

7
RISK, REWARD, AND THE
HOLT DISCOUNT RATE
“Assets are bundles of factors, each of which deﬁnes a set of bad times for
the average investor. Over the long run, investors exposed to factors earn
high returns. But there is risk. There are superior returns to factors, on
average, because during bad times they can underperform—sometimes dra-
matically. Factor premiums also result from the behavior of investors that
is not arbitraged away.”
—Andrew Ang1
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Risk is the potential for loss and has two sources: systematic and
unsystematic. Systematic risk is market risk and cannot be diversi-
ﬁed away. Unsystematic risk is idiosyncratic and can be diversiﬁed
away by owning a portfolio of assets. Investors should not expect
to be rewarded for unsystematic risk.
1Andrew Ang, Asset Management: A Systematic Approach to Factor Investing, Oxford University Press,
2014.
217
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• The long-run inﬂation-adjusted return on U.S. equities has been
circa 6% versus 2% for U.S. Treasury bonds. Equity investors
expect a greater return due to more risk. The equity risk premium
(ERP) is the diﬀerence between equities and government bonds,
and varies with risk appetite. The long-run geometric and average
ERPs for the world are 3.2% and 4.4%, respectively. The valu-
ation of future cash ﬂows should use an arithmetic ERP when
estimating the cost of equity.
• HOLT calculates a forward-looking cost of capital and adjusts
it with ﬁrm-speciﬁc risk factors. It is a total system approach
to valuation because the discount rate is tuned to future
cash ﬂow assumptions. The discount rate level indicates the
market’s appetite for risk. Bearish markets result in higher
market-implied discount rates while bullish markets result in
lower market-implied discount rates.
• HOLT’s discount rate is a cost of capital, not a cost of equity. It
is a measure of total ﬁrm risk. HOLT’s discount rate is equivalent
to an unlevered cost of equity (as though the ﬁrm had no debt).
HOLT’s discount rate is a weighted-average cost of capital, but it
does not embed the tax savings from debt into the cost of debt.
Savings from the tax deductibility of interest are embedded in
the forecast net cash receipts. The HOLT valuation model is an
adjusted present value (APV) model.
• The market-implied discount rate is a random walk process. Any
sign of mean-reversion is drowned in volatility.
RISK, RETURN, AND DIVERSIFICATION
Periods of braking economic growth, racing inﬂation, and exploding
volatility spell bad times for most investors. These occasions are made
worse by psychological suﬀering. Most asset owners feel the pain of
bad times more acutely than they do the elation of good times—the
ampliﬁcation is over 2× according to Daniel Kahneman, who was
218

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize for his groundbreaking work with
Amos Tversky on the psychology of judgment and decision-making.
This asymmetric reaction helps explain why investors are risk averse.2
Losses are more painful than gains are pleasurable, and investors expect
a premium for bearing risk. How should that risk premium be assessed
and applied in valuing assets? Can risk be moderated and returns
enhanced?
Holding a diversiﬁed portfolio lessens the severity of hard times because
some assets perform better than others, and company-speciﬁc risks tend to
cancel—one company is successful in its pre-clinical R&D tests to develop
a new drug while another fails in an unrelated eﬀort. A perpetual challenge
for asset and risk managers is to identify speciﬁc risk factors and relate them
to the risk premiums they can earn or the potential losses they can avoid. If
you cannot associate a speciﬁc risk with a speciﬁc risk premium, it is most
likely diversiﬁable within a broad portfolio. If you accept that the intrinsic
value of an asset is the present value of its future cash ﬂows, then we can
identify where and how risks should be considered:
Value =
N
∑
n=1
E(FCFFn)
(1 + r)n
Cash ﬂow risks should be modeled and captured in the expected free
cash ﬂow forecast, E(FCFFn), where E( … ) signiﬁes expected. Systematic
risks are captured in the expected return or discount rate r used to calculate
the present value of those expected cash ﬂows.
Let’s take a simple example to illustrate the key points. You have an
opportunity to win $1,000, which is payable in one year, or nothing. The
odds are favorable: If a random number generator yields a value greater than
the golden mean, 0.618, then you lose; if less, you win.3 The expected cash
2Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, Penguin Books, 2011.
3The golden ratio (1.618 … ) is considered the most aesthetic of irrational numbers and appears every-
where, including technical analysis. It was known to the ancient Greeks and called de divina proportione
by Renaissance Italians. Amongst its properties, is x = 1 / (1 + x) where x is the golden ratio conjugate
(0.618 … ). Technical analysts should be aware that the ratio of two consecutive numbers from the
Fibonacci sequence converges towards the golden ratio.
219

Beyond Earnings
ﬂow one year forward is simply:
E(FCFF1) = 0.618 × 1,000 + (1 −0.618) × 0 = $618
What is its present value? The outcome from a random number genera-
tor is unrelated to macroeconomic variables such as inﬂation, GDP growth,
or unemployment. Importantly, the outcome is unrelated to changes in
stock market indices (unless you believe both are controlled by the stars).
Because of this bet’s random outcome, the appropriate discount rate would
be the risk-free rate, which represents the pure interest rate, or the price of
time.4 If the one-year Treasury bill is 2%, the present value would be:
Value =
N
∑
n=1
E(FCFFn)
(1 + r)n
=
$618
(1 + 0.02) = $605.88
How much would you pay for this bet today? The answer is dependent
on your risk tolerance. A risk-neutral investor would be willing to pay up
to $605.88, at which point the NPV is zero.
Does this mean that casinos should be valued at the risk-free discount
rate? The probability distributions for games of chance are known, but the
number of people visiting the casino and the size of their bets is related to
the state of the overall economy. The expected cash ﬂows and their riski-
ness for a casino require an expected return greater than the risk-free rate,
and more in line with the stock market returns of consumer discretionary
companies. Stock market investors are more likely to spin roulette wheels
in Baden Baden when markets are up, and sink into its Roman baths when
they are down.
The discount rate is an integral part of any discounted cash ﬂow (DCF)
valuation. In this chapter, we introduce the HOLT fundamental risk factor
approach to estimating discount rates for valuing equities, and show how
the HOLT risk model corresponds to modern ﬁnancial theory.
4Sharpe referred to this as the “price of time.” William F. Sharpe, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory
of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk,” The Journal of Finance 19(3) (September 1964):
425–442.
220

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
What Is Risk?
A simple deﬁnition of risk is “probable loss.” Lack of certainty implies an
expectation about diﬀerent possible outcomes. The probability of loss can
be high or low. When the possibility of loss is high, risk is high, and vice
versa. The probability of loss (as opposed to certainty) suggests that gains
are also possible. Potential gains are the reward for taking risk.
In ﬁnance, a chief concern is how investment returns deviate from the
expected return. If you purchase a U.S. Treasury bill and hold it to maturity,
you’ll obtain the yield at which you purchased it with risk-free certainty.
The same cannot be said for stocks. Investors demand an expected return
appropriate for the magnitude and probability of loss. Common estimates
of risk include standard deviation (volatility), correlation, and beta. Asym-
metric properties can be described by skewness and kurtosis (colloquially
known as “fat tails” when large).
In Exhibit 7.1, the average rate of return on equities after inﬂation over
time is close to 6%, 2% for bonds, and 1% for U.S. Treasury bills. There are
signiﬁcant deviations in these real rates of return over the last 100 years,
indicating that investors do not always get what they expect. The y-axis
is plotted on a logarithmic scale, so that vertical changes represent equal
percentage changes, regardless of the starting base value.
Treasury bills show the least volatility and equities the highest. In accor-
dance with our deﬁnition of risk as “probable loss,” equities have deliv-
ered the highest real return over time and Treasuries the lowest. Based
on a long-term view, we might anticipate that the inﬂation-adjusted (real)
return on equities over the next 100 years will continue to be 6%, and 2%
for Treasury bonds. If long-term inﬂation averages 2%, equity investors
can anticipate an average nominal rate of 8% if the future mirrors the past.
The risk premium for equities relative to bonds is circa 4%.
A popular misunderstanding is that a relationship exists between
stock price volatility and return for individual stocks, but this mis-
takenly assumes all risk should be factored into the expected return.
Risk can be divided into two components: systematic and unsystematic.
221

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.1 Annual returns to Treasuries, Bonds, and Equities, 1900–2016.
1,402
9.8
2.6
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
1900
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2000
10
Equities  6.4% p.a.
Bonds 2.0% p.a.
Bills 0.8% p.a.
0.1
Index values (start-1900=1; log scale)
Source: Copyright © 2017 Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton, 2017 Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Yearbook.
Systematic risk is a common risk inherent to the entire stock market and
is non-diversiﬁable. Systematic risk can be mitigated by investing across
diﬀerent asset classes. An incoming tide lifts all boats (or sinks them if it
happens to be a tsunami). Systematic risk is also known as market risk.
Unsystematic risk, also referred to as unique, residual, company-speciﬁc,
or idiosyncratic risk, is diversiﬁable. Investors can eliminate it by owning
a portfolio of imperfectly correlated stocks and should not expect to
be compensated for holding company-speciﬁc risk. Idiosyncratic risks
are diversiﬁed in a large portfolio while common risks are not. Thus,
stock price volatility is not an appropriate measure of risk and expected
return for a security. Around 50% of the typical stock’s volatility is
diversiﬁable!5
The notion that some risks are diversiﬁable is so important that it bears
mentioning again: Within the context of a diversiﬁed portfolio, investors
should not expect to be compensated for bearing diversiﬁable risk.
5This can be mathematically demonstrated. Given any measure of stock volatility, 𝜎, a diversiﬁed
portfolio with n companies and assumed correlation, r, across stocks within the portfolio will have
a portfolio volatility: 𝑣p =
√
1
n 𝜎2 +
(
1 −1
n
)
r𝜎2. Thus, a diversiﬁed portfolio of 30 stocks having
company volatility of 50% and correlation of 25% has portfolio volatility of 26%.
222

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
Corporations making acquisitions with the aim of diversifying risk on
behalf of their shareholders are not doing them a favor. The corporation
should return any excess capital to shareholders via dividends or share
repurchases, and let them diversify their risk according to their needs.
How Do Corporate Managers Discount Cash Flows
to Present Value?
Calculation of the present value of a ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows requires an
appropriate discount rate, also known as the cost of capital. Modern ﬁnance
splits the discount rate into time and risk components. The time value of
money is discounted at a risk-free rate, which is assumed to be the appro-
priate term U.S. Treasury when the U.S. dollar is the currency of interest.
It should be borne in mind that riskier countries carry a sovereign risk
premium in their “risk-free” rates; for example, the diﬀerence between Ger-
man and Italian euro bonds represents the risk premium investors expect
for buying bonds issued by Italy instead of Germany.
The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) is the simplest and best-known
approach for discounting risk. Surveys indicate that it is used by almost
75% of ﬁnancial managers in U.S. corporations.6
re = rf + 𝛽× ERP
(7.1)
The cost of equity re equals the risk-free rate rf (time-component) plus a
stock-speciﬁc risk premium where 𝛽is a measure of how a stock co-varies
with the market, and ERP is the equity risk premium.
How Should Investors Think about Risk When Discounting
Cash Flows?
The equity risk premium acts as a reward to counter the losses that
occur when economic or geopolitical disaster strikes. Because equi-
ties are perpetual securities, they are highly sensitive to long-run risk
6J.R. Graham and C.R. Harvey, “The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from the
Field,” Journal of Financial Economics 60 (2001): 187–243.
223

Beyond Earnings
and the ERP rewards investors for their exposure to risk over the
long-run.
Portfolio theory and general investment experience indicate a wonderful
property of idiosyncratic risk: It can be diversiﬁed away! Individual stocks
typically have annual share price volatilities of 25% to 50%, yet the S&P
500 index has only averaged a volatility of 20% per annum over the last
century. How can this be when the overwhelming majority of stocks have
annual volatility above 20%? Why are individual stocks more volatile than
stock markets?
A key insight from portfolio theory is that uncorrelated company-speciﬁc
risk cancels when an investor holds a large collection of stocks, such as the
S&P 500. The remaining risk is systematic and varies with the market.
If a company’s stock is as risky as the market, then its beta 𝛽is one,
which means that, on average, a 1% increase or drop in the market leads
to a 1% increase or drop in the stock price. Companies that are highly
sensitive to macroeconomic developments such as energy stocks or capital
equipment manufacturers have betas greater than one while those that are
less sensitive to market movements, such as food retailers, have betas less
than one. The riskiness of a diversiﬁed portfolio of stocks is a function of
the market capitalization weighted-average beta of the individual betas and
independent of idiosyncratic risks. Fully diversiﬁed portfolios maximize
return for a given level of risk. This is an extraordinary result and explains
why it is foolish not to diversify one’s holdings.
To demonstrate this eﬀect, let’s assume that we can invest in equal
weights of individual stocks, each with a volatility of 40%. If the price
movements of all the stocks are perfectly correlated, then the portfolio will
always have a volatility of 40% (see Corr=1 in Exhibit 7.2). This would be
tantamount to owning a portfolio of oil drillers and calling it a diversiﬁed
portfolio. Their fortunes will be highly correlated to energy prices, and
you would be exposed to a single risk factor.
The volatility of a portfolio of stocks that move independently of each
other would drop dramatically as stocks were added to the portfolio. The
volatility is halved from 40% to 18% by simply increasing the portfolio
224

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
EXHIBIT 7.2 The beneﬁt of diversifying risk by adding stocks to a portfolio.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Volatility
Number of stocks
Corr = 1
Market
Corr = 0
from one to ﬁve bets (see Corr=0 in Exhibit 7.2). If it were increased
to 10 and then 50 stocks, the volatility would drop to 13% and then
6%. Eventually, the volatility will converge toward zero for a portfolio
of uncorrelated bets, thus investors should only expect a risk-free return
on investments that are uncorrelated to the market. It would be incor-
rect for corporate managers to include a premium for idiosyncratic risk in
the discount rate when evaluating such an investment.7 If the diversiﬁable
risk of an investment were compensated with an additional risk premium,
then the corporate manager (or investor) could buy the investment, earn
the additional premium, and simultaneously diversify with other projects
and eliminate the risk. By doing so, he could earn an additional premium
without taking on additional risk. This opportunity to earn something for
nothing would quickly be exploited and eliminated by investors. The “no
arbitrage” principle at work in competitive markets virtually guarantees
that such opportunities will not arise, or are short-lived.
The price movements of individual large cap stocks tend to move with
the market and co-vary with a correlation of around 25%. The market
7Within a portfolio, diversiﬁcation reduces volatility, but only up to a point (and not zero). That is
because all stocks share some amount of risk—systematic risk—related to the market as a whole, and
this risk cannot be eliminated through diversiﬁcation.
225

Beyond Earnings
scenario in Exhibit 7.2 indicates that the volatility of this portfolio
converges towards 20% as more stocks are added. Unsurprisingly, the
volatility of the S&P 500 has averaged 20% over the long run. Volatility
drops from 40% to 21% by holding a portfolio of 30 stocks. Skeptics
should heed Mark Twain’s advice, “Put all your eggs in one basket—and
watch that basket!”
The key takeaway is that the risk premium for diversiﬁable risk is zero.
Investors should not expect to be compensated for holding project—or
company-speciﬁc risk. This point is too often forgotten when evaluating
investments. The addition of arbitrary risk premiums by corporate
managers or investors to augment hurdle rates might turn value-creating
projects into value-destroying projects that get rejected. It can also lead to
fallacious forecasts meant to counter unjustiﬁably high hurdle rates, thus
subverting the entire capital allocation exercise. Money is often left on the
table in these situations.
HOW LARGE IS THE EQUITY RISK PREMIUM (ERP)?
This is one of the huge questions that keep ﬁnancial researchers busy.
Unfortunately, there is no single number or simple answer. Berk and
DeMarzo (2014) reference several sources that indicate an expected
range of 3% to 5% over long-term government bonds based on recent
historical numbers. They cite the same future equity risk premium range
based on fundamental forward-looking approaches using the dividend
discount model. In markets experiencing ﬁnancial repression, it might
be safer to assume an ERP towards the 5% end of this range. McKinsey
presents arguments and evidence for an ERP of 4.5% to 5.5%.8 The
global authorities on long-run market performance are Professors Dimson,
Marsh, and Staunton (DMS) of the London Business School who publish
an annual yearbook of global investment returns.9 Equity risk premiums
8See Koller, Goedhart, and Wessels (2010).
9Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook
2017, Credit Suisse Research Institute, 2017. The original work can be found in Elroy Dimson, Paul
Marsh, and Mike Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment Returns, Princeton
University Press, 2002.
226

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
EXHIBIT 7.3 The worldwide geometric and arithmetic premiums relative to
bonds since 1900. Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton.
4.4
21.4
0
2
4
6
8
10
Switzerland
Denmark
Spain
World ex-USA
Belgium
Europe
World
Ireland
United Kingdom
Canada
France
Norway
Sweden
Netherlands
New Zealand
Italy
United States
Australia
South Africa
Portugal
Germany
Finland
Japan
Austria
Arithmetric
Geometric
Source: 2017 Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook.
relative to bonds since 1900 for numerous countries and the world are
shown in Exhibit 7.3.
The geometric (compound) and arithmetic risk premiums for the
United States from 1900 to 2016 are 4.3% and 6.4% relative to bonds.
The United States has been an economic success, and reliance on its
historical performance suﬀers from success bias. For example, Argentina
and the United States had similar size economies at the turn of the
twentieth century, but have diverged signiﬁcantly since then. There is
also survivor bias. What if we considered Russian shares purchased before
the Russian revolution or Chinese stocks owned before 1949? Will the
United States be as successful in the next century as in the previous one
and surprise on the upside? A better estimate of ERP might be the DMS
world risk premiums of 3.2% and 4.4% relative to bonds.10
10Our ﬁrst puzzle should have been whether to measure the ERP versus Treasury bills or bonds. The
cleaner method would be the spread over bills since bonds include a duration premium. Because we
are interested in discounting cash ﬂows many years forward, we will focus on spread over bonds. Most
corporate valuation textbooks follow this convention.
227

Beyond Earnings
SHOULD I USE THE ARITHMETIC OR GEOMETRIC
AVERAGE?
The next riddle to solve is whether the arithmetic or geometric mean should
be used in discounting future cash ﬂows. Corporate ﬁnance books argue
for the use of an arithmetic average for discounting future expected cash
ﬂows.11 The compound return is a better description of historical perfor-
mance. Damodaran (2013) argues for the use of geometric returns but
suggests that a forward-looking estimate of the ERP is best.
In our experience, which only dates to the 1990s, the use of an ERP of
6% or more when discounting future cash ﬂows leads to disappointment.
Most stocks would have looked—and still look—too expensive if an ERP
of 6% or more is assumed. Before the ﬁnancial meltdown began in 2008,
we recommended an ERP of 4% to those who calculated the cost of capital
by the CAPM method. In today’s world of quantitative easing and low real
bond yields, we would err toward an ERP of 5%. We’ll have more to say
when we show the forward-looking ERP calculated for U.S. stocks based
on the HOLT approach.
OTHER RISK FACTORS TO CONSIDER
There is no controversy about the beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation in modern
ﬁnance. However, the CAPM model has been pilloried by ﬁnancial
researchers who have uncovered numerous anomalies:12
• Small caps have historically outperformed large caps. This size
anomaly has diminished and many researchers now consider it
to be nonexistent.
11See Berk and DeMarzo (2014) or Brealey, Myers, and Allen (2014). Assume that an asset with a value
of 100 has an equal probability of increasing 20% to a value of 120 or decreasing 20% to a value of
80. The most likely result is 100, i.e., 0.5 × 120 + 0.5 × 80 = 100, for an expected return of 0%. The
geometric return over many observations would be 100 × 0.8 × 1.2 = 96 for an annual compound
return of −2%, i.e., 0.9600.5 – 1 = −2%. The compound average will always be less than arithmetic
average, on the order of 0.5 × variance of returns. In our example, compound return = 0% −0.5 ×
0.202 = −2%.
12See Andrew Ang’s excellent book Asset Management (2014) for more on these anomalies and the
subject of factor risks.
228

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
• Value stocks with low price-to-book (P/B) ratios have outper-
formed growth stocks with high P/B ratios. This value anomaly
suggests a value-growth premium.
• Although today’s stock price should be independent of past
price movements, there is evidence of a momentum eﬀect where
stocks that have exhibited relative price outperformance over
the past 6 to 12 months tend to do better than those that
have underperformed. This momentum anomaly suggests a
momentum premium.
• Companies with low beta and low volatility have done relatively
better vis-à-vis CAPM predictions than riskier high beta and high
volatility stocks. This is called the “low risk anomaly.”
The ﬁrst two eﬀects are factors captured in the Fama-French three-factor
model:13
E(ri) = rf + 𝛽i,MKT × E(rm −rf ) + 𝛽i,SMB × E(SMB)
+ 𝛽i,HML × E(HML)
A company’s expected return is related to its sensitivity to market
movements (MKT); its sensitivity to the performance spread between
small caps and big caps (SMB); and its sensitivity to the spread between
value and growth stocks (HML).14 More recent variations are the
Fama-French-Carhart (FFC) factor model, which includes a one-year
price momentum factor, and most recently a ﬁve-factor model from Fama
and French that includes a quality factor.
13E. F. Fama and K. R. French, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal
of Financial Economics 33(3).
14The three-factor model is a special case of the more general arbitrage pricing theory (APT) intro-
duced by Stephen Ross. APT does not specify what the factors are but simply that a stock’s return
depends on a set of macroeconomic factors and idiosyncratic noise. The expected risk premium for
a stock is related to the expected risk premium for each factor multiplied by the stock’s sensitivity to
each of the factors. For more on the three-factor model, see E. F. Fama and K. R. French, “Size and
Book-to-Market in Earnings and Returns,” Journal of Finance 50 (1995): 131–155. Note that SMB
means small minus big stocks and HML means high minus low book-to-market, which is the inverse
of P/B.
229

Beyond Earnings
The low-risk anomaly is one that Warren Buﬀett has intuitively preached
over the years:
“We simply attempt to be fearful when others are greedy and to be
greedy only when others are fearful.”
When market indices are dropping, volatility is rising. Risk increases
as measured by higher volatility, for example, leaps in the VIX, otherwise
known as the “fear index.” When risk is high, risk premiums are high and
prices are low. In terms of fundamental valuation, these are times of low
risk and opportunities to buy! Stated another way, as share prices drop,
leverage increases, which necessitates a higher cost of equity and greater
expected return.
Surveys have indicated that most corporations rely on CAPM to calcu-
late the cost of capital, and this approach is still recommended by many
modern books on ﬁnance and corporate valuation. It is simple and rel-
atively reliable if industry betas are used as guides, and future risks are
expected to be like recent history. Logic dictates that errors in estimat-
ing future cash ﬂows are likely to have a greater impact on valuation than
discrepancies in the cost of capital.
Investors require a risk premium for taking on risk, but their concern
should be with the risks that they cannot eliminate by diversiﬁcation. Only
systematic risk is rewarded. The key takeaway for corporate managers is that
they should not be overly concerned about diversiﬁable risk, which their
shareholders can eliminate in their portfolios. Brealey, Myers, and Allen
(2014) put it very well:
“Don’t be fooled by diversiﬁable risk. Diversiﬁable risks do not aﬀect
asset betas or the cost of capital, but the possibility of bad outcomes
should be incorporated in the cash ﬂow forecasts. Also be careful not
to oﬀset worries about a project’s future performance by adding a
fudge factor to the discount rate. Fudge factors don’t work, and they
may seriously undervalue long-lived projects.”
Fudge factors manifest themselves in hurdle rates that are often signif-
icantly higher than a market-related cost of capital. Brealey et al. make
230

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
clear that idiosyncratic risk should be incorporated in cash ﬂow forecasts.
Corporate managers should not avoid market risk due to higher perceived
idiosyncratic risk; this is a common mistake.
INTRODUCTION TO THE HOLT APPROACH
OF ESTIMATING A FIRM’S DISCOUNT RATE
“The development of a forward-looking, or market-derived dis-
count rate, was rooted in a total system approach to valuation.
The approach emphasizes the connections among the components of
the valuation model. Changes in one component necessarily impact
other components.”
—Bartley J. Madden15
HOLT employs a “total system approach” to measuring and forecasting
corporate returns, growth rates, risk, and valuation. Within this system,
CFROI is measured as a real rate of return, adjusted for inﬂation and
other distortive eﬀects. This increases comparability across time, countries,
industries, and peers, which makes CFROI a more useful performance met-
ric than nominal accounting return ﬁgures. Because CFROI is persistent,
historical CFROI levels serve as a benchmark against which current and
expected operating returns can be compared. Since CFROI is a real rate of
return, it is directly comparable to a real cost of capital.
HOLT’s total system approach is agnostic: Near-term estimates of con-
sensus earnings are converted to CFROI and linked to empirically derived
medium- and long-term CFROI and growth outcomes. The extensive his-
tory of HOLT-adjusted data oﬀers an unsurpassed source for measuring
the long-term expected yield and growth rate, and for providing meaning-
ful empirical benchmarks. Within this total system approach, the discount
rate acts as the calibrating mechanism, tuning current price to empirical
CFROI and growth trends. This method results in a self-consistent discov-
ery of the prevailing risk appetite.
15David Holland and Tom Larsen, Beyond Earnings: A User’s Guide to Excess Return Models and the
HOLT CFROI® Framework, John Wiley & Sons 2008.
231

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.4 The HOLT Pricing Puzzle. Solving for the discount rate that
equates future free cash ﬂows to current enterprise value
results in a ﬁrm-speciﬁc clearing rate, or a market-implied cost
of capital.
Market 
Enterprise 
Value
Free Cash 
Flow
solve this!
forecast
known
N
n =1
=
(1 + DR)n
The HOLT discount rate is a practical measure of asset risk. It captures
key elements of the capital providers’ required return on capital, which
are inﬂuenced by investors’ tax rates, inﬂation expectations, business risk,
and competing yields from alternative securities. It is an after-tax, real,
forward-looking, or expected rate of return.16
HOLT’s measure of risk is determined in a three-step process.
First, a clearing rate is determined that equates the present value of
company-speciﬁc future cash ﬂows to current market enterprise value,
as shown in the Pricing Puzzle in Exhibit 7.4. A ﬁrm’s forecast free cash
ﬂows are based on HOLT’s empirically derived fade algorithms, which are
tuned to a company’s competitive life cycle position.17 The discount rate
estimation is analogous to a bond’s yield-to-maturity calculation where
future cash ﬂows are interest and principal payments, and the present
value is the bond’s price.
Next, a base market rate is derived. The base rate is applicable to all
ﬁrms for a given period and equals the average clearing rate for the sample.
Because the sample for most markets is based on a country or region, the
base rate represents the country or region average unlevered cost of capital
16The HOLT discount rate is after corporate but before investor taxes. However, investors seek a target
real return net of personal taxes. The market-implied discount rate is aﬀected by expected inﬂation
and personal tax rates, which can change and impact the discount rate. Taxes matter. Personal tax rates
qualify as a long-run risk for investors, e.g., what would the eﬀect on share prices be if capital gains tax
rates were raised to the level of income tax rates?
17See chapter 8 on the Competitive Life-Cycle and chapter 9 on CFROI fade.
232

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
prior to adjustments for size and leverage.18 The base rate is determined
by regressing the company clearing rates for each region against the chief
explanatory variables.
The ﬁnal step is to adjust a ﬁrm’s cost of capital per the prevailing market
sentiment toward leverage and size, which act as risk factors. In concert
with the base rate (a), size (S) and leverage (L) characterize a ﬁrm’s expected
asset return:19
Discount rate = a + b1L + b2ln(S)
These steps can be summarized:
• Determine a ﬁrm’s company-speciﬁc clearing rate, i.e., its implied
cost of capital.
• Measure the average required cost of capital across all ﬁrms in a
region, i.e., base systematic risk.
• Measure a ﬁrm’s additional systematic risk exposure to size and
credit-worthiness, i.e., leverage.
Leverage is the ﬁrm’s market leverage and includes oﬀbalance sheet
items such as capitalized operating leases and net pension liabilities in the
total debt tally, which increase a ﬁrm’s riskiness. A simple application of
the Merton model is used to estimate the market value of the debt. Size is
the ﬁrm’s market capitalization. Average coeﬃcients are calculated for each
region from the regression.20
The HOLT discount rate (DR) is a measure of relative risk, not absolute.
It is an agnostic, market-neutral gauge of contemporaneous risk appetite.
Within HOLT’s total system approach, the HOLT discount rate ensures
that 50% of stocks appear attractive and 50% expensive at any time.
Company-speciﬁc discount rates are updated weekly.
18HOLT adjusts the base rate so that it reﬂects the risk associated with the global standard ﬁrm (GSF)
which has $5 billion in market capitalization as of December 31, 2000, and 25% market leverage. The
GSF DR is comparable across all countries.
19Firms with no debt (leverage=0) and size $1 billion inherit the intercept term only, which is the basis
for the market base rate. It can be readily shifted.
20Factor models generally use historical risk factor premiums and historical beta coeﬃcients speciﬁc
to the company of interest. The HOLT discount rate is forward looking and uses contemporaneous
variables.
233

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.5 The global standard ﬁrm (GSF) discount rate for U.S. Industrial
and Service companies.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Jan-76
Jan-81
Jan-86
Jan-91
Jan-96
Jan-01
Jan-06
Jan-11
Discount Rate (%)
The discount rate time-series for a U.S. ﬁrm of standard size and
leverage is shown in Exhibit 7.5. We describe its dynamic behavior later
in the chapter. Suﬃce to say it is persistent over short intervals but
highly volatile, which is also consistent with other contemporaneous
equity risk signals. Risk averse, highly volatile periods are marked by
leaps in the discount rate. Note the peak after the Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy in September 2008. At the time of writing (April 2015),
the U.S. discount is at a level that was only lower during the dot.com
bubble.
HOLT routinely tests diﬀerent risk factors for statistical importance.
Most factors can be attributed to one of four groups, including: credit
quality, relative price level, asset size level, and price volatility. None of
these variables as either stand-alone or in combination have been as parsi-
monious and eﬀective as the present two-factor model. What are possible
explanations for these two factors?
When interest payments are tax deductible, a company can increase
its value by taking on debt. Firm risk and the possibility of default
increases with leverage, placing equity holders at greater risk. Too
much of a good thing can be bad. Market leverage is associated
with credit quality and the possibility of ﬁnancial distress. As market
234

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
EXHIBIT 7.6 Market leverage differential for U.S. Industrial/Service ﬁrms.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Jan-76
Jan-81
Jan-86
Jan-91
Jan-96
Jan-01
Jan-06
Jan-11
Discount Rate (%)
High Lev
Low Lev
Lev Diff
U.S. Leverage Differential
capitalization shrinks, leverage increases. Although we would ideally
model ﬁnancial distress in the expected cash ﬂows, this is diﬃcult to
accomplish on a systematic basis. The measurement of the market-implied
discount rate for a highly risky ﬁrm would increase to compensate
for the negative value of ﬁnancial distress that we are unable to
capture.
Market leverage is also relevant to quality and growth, which undoubt-
edly feed into this factor as hidden variables. Firms experiencing strong
growth tend to have lower leverage. Stars that are growing with attrac-
tive CFROI trade at large price-to-book ratios, which lowers the market
leverage relative to book leverage. Value stocks trade at lower price-to-book
multiples and are associated with higher leverage, which results in a higher
discount rate.21 The discount rates for low and high leverage U.S. ﬁrms are
shown in Exhibit 7.6.
Note the striking spread that occurred during the dot-com bubble. Low
leverage stocks (growth) traded at a signiﬁcantly lower market-implied dis-
count rate than high leverage stocks (value). Value investors felt severe pain
21We are investigating fundamental factors to uncover what might be hidden variables. See our report
for theoretical support: D.A. Holland and B.A. Matthews, An Economic Foundation for Proﬁtability
and Its Fade as Quality Risk Factors. Credit Suisse HOLT, April 2016.
235

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.7 Size differential for U.S. Industrial/Service ﬁrms.
(4)
(2)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Jan-76
Jan-81
Jan-86
Jan-91
Jan-96
Jan-01
Jan-06
Jan-11
Discount Rate (%)
Small Cap
Large Cap
Size Diff
U.S. Size Differential
relative to day traders in the run-up to the bubble popping but were then
rewarded for their fortitude.
Firm size tends to be inversely related to risk. Larger ﬁrms typically dis-
play less risk than smaller ones, due partially to higher liquidity and quality.
We would ﬁnd a higher representation of high-quality ﬁrms and companies
trading at premium multiples amongst the large cap universe. These can act
as hidden variables in this factor. Results for the United States are shown
in Exhibit 7.7 and indicate that the spread has oscillated around zero since
2004. Although the size factor appears diminished for the United States,
this is not the case for many of the emerging markets we follow.
Investor preference for large or small cap ﬁrms, or for higher or lower
levered stocks, waxes and wanes, at times creating periods where the factors
are statistically insigniﬁcant. Even when these explanatory factors are not
signiﬁcant, insight is gained by comparing the prevailing signal against its
historical levels and the levels of other regions.
The dominant historical trend is that the expected risk of larger ﬁrms is
less than smaller ﬁrms, and lower levered ﬁrms have generally been less risky
than higher levered ones. HOLT’s discount rate charts are updated weekly
in HOLT Lens for all regions. Routine monitoring can help quantify and
track potential risk anomalies.
236

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
RELATING THE HOLT DISCOUNT RATE
AND FRAMEWORK TO CAPM AND APV
“In practice, users of DCF valuation models often import a
CAPM/beta discount rate which is independent of the method
used to forecast NCRs. Biases are unrecognized, and the notion
of a total valuation system is ignored. In contrast, HOLT’s total
system approach derives ﬁrm-speciﬁc discount rates consistent with
speciﬁed procedures for assigning fade rates for future CFROIs
and sustainable growth rates that drive the NCR stream.”
—Bartley J. Madden22
HOLT’s discount rate is a forward-looking, expected return on assets,
which sidesteps a signiﬁcant weakness of CAPM. Beta estimates the his-
torical covariance between a company and the market index, and uses this
measure as a proxy of future covariance. However, as shown in ﬁnancial
studies, historical covariance is not necessarily representative of a stock’s
future performance relative to its market index.23 Our experience shows
that diﬀerences between a stock’s historical beta and its market-implied
beta underscore that investors often anticipate meaningful changes in how
a stock is likely to behave relative to its past. Our research on competi-
tive life-cycle transitions reinforces this view. When investor expectations
in these cases are borne out, the value of CAPM is further tarnished.
For many ﬁrms, beta is a reasonable predictor of a stock’s relative risk-
iness, but more broadly, beta may expose investors to meaningful error in
the determination of current risk since a ﬁrm’s prospects may have altered
considerably or are likely to alter, or statistical noise may have aﬀected the
historical estimate of beta. HOLT’s method of risk measurement identiﬁes
the market’s consensus perception of anticipated asset risk as opposed to
historical asset risk. Instead of using historical beta to predict a stock’s (for-
ward) relative risk, HOLT imputes an expected return by measuring the
22Bartley J. Madden, CFROI Valuation: A Total System Approach to Valuing the Firm, Butterworth
Heinemann (1999).
23See Andrew Ang (2014).
237

Beyond Earnings
average return anticipated across all stocks. Firm-speciﬁc adjustments for
exposure to the size and leverage factors serve to further reﬁne this estimate.
Another weakness of CAPM is the reliance on a historical average of
the ERP. Mr. Market’s risk appetite can change suddenly from euphoria
to panic. Changes in risk appetite feed directly into the equity risk pre-
mium that the market demands. Skittish markets associated with scared
investors and greater market volatility demand a higher risk premium.
Overheated markets associated with high multiples, potential bubbles, and
low volatility revel with a lower risk premium. The HOLT discount rate
is forward-looking and market neutral. It “tells it like it is” and acts as a
highly useful meter of the market’s prevailing risk appetite.
What Type of Discount Rate Is the HOLT Cost of Capital?
The HOLT framework is a self-consistent system. The discount rate is
tuned to market prices and cash ﬂow projections, and there is no need
to parachute in an exogenous cost of capital which is disconnected from
these elements. The HOLT discount rate is relative to the market’s present
risk state and not absolute. The more accurate the predictions of future
expected cash ﬂows, the better the estimate of average expected returns.
Because HOLT includes tax savings from interest paid in gross cash ﬂow,
HOLT’s discount rate is equivalent to an asset’s pre-tax weighted-average
cost of capital. HOLT’s discount rate represents the required return to all
capital providers. If the risk of the tax shield is the same as the risk of the
ﬁrm, then the cost of capital is equivalent to the unlevered cost of equity.24
Please don’t get confused. The asset cost of capital is not equal to conven-
tional after-tax WACC, which buries the tax shield in the discount rate.25
HOLT’s discount rate is a weighted-average cost of capital that excludes the
24This condition holds if the ﬁrm maintains a target leverage ratio. In other words, the level of debt
ﬂuctuates with the ﬁrm’s market value. In this case, the ﬁrm’s tax savings would vary with its free cash
ﬂows and should be discounted at the same discount rate. Asset beta would be used to calculate the
cost of capital from CAPM.
25WACC reduces the cost of debt by a factor of (1 −Tax rate) so that the value of the tax shield,
whose associated cash ﬂows have been removed from NOPAT, can be estimated. This is achieved via
the discount rate.
238

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
tax shield term from the cost of debt (the tax shield is valued in the cash
ﬂows). Note below that the (1 −Tc) term is missing in HOLT’s discount
rate:
WACC = D
EV (1 −TC)rd + E
EV re
(7.2)
DR = ru = D
EV rd + E
EV re
(7.3)
To keep matters straight, we will denote the HOLT discount rate as DR.
When leverage is present and corporate tax exceeds zero, WACC < DR.
Valuation Method Equivalence
To demonstrate that HOLT’s discount rate can be related to traditional
measures of risk, let’s take a simple example where a ﬁrm generates a per-
petual EBIT of $100m and net income of $70m.26 Earnings are paid out
as a dividend, and leverage is constant (Exhibit 7.8).
We can value the constant free cash ﬂow to equity holders of the ﬁrm
by simply dividing net income by the cost of equity of 10%.
Equity value = Net income
re
= $63m
0.10 = $630m
When using WACC, the appropriate cash ﬂow is the cash to equity
and debt holders (FCFF). FCFF is equivalent to the free cash ﬂow for the
unlevered ﬁrm. However, FCFF excludes the tax savings associated with
debt. To capture the value of this beneﬁt, the discount rate is reduced by
(1 −Tc), where Tc is the corporate tax rate. This allows the tax beneﬁt to be
valued via the discounting mechanism since tax beneﬁts are not included
in cash ﬂow.
WACC = D
EV (1 −TC)rd + E
EV re
= 200
830(1 −0.30) × 5% + 630
830 × 10% = 8.43%
26For simplicity, we will assume inﬂation is zero in this example. Thus traditional WACC becomes a
real rate of return comparable to HOLT’s real discount rate.
239

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.8 The equivalence of valuation for different cost of capital perspectives is demonstrated.
Key Inputs
WACC Valuation
HOLT Method
EQUITY Method
Cost of debt
5.0%
DR USED = WACC
8.43%
DR USED = rU
8.80%
DR USED = re
10.0%
Cost of equity
10.0%
Tax rate
30.0%
EBIT
100
EBIT
100
EBIT
100
Debt
200
Interest Expense
10
Interest Expense
10
Interest Expense
10
Market Cap
630
Taxes
27
Tax on EBIT
27
Taxes
27
Market EV
830
Net Income
63
Net Income
63
Net Income
63
Free Cash Flow to the Firm
Capital Cash Flows
Free Cash Flow to the Firm
Net Income
63
Net Income
63
Net Income
63
+ Interest Expense
10
+ Interest Expense
10
−Tax Shield
3
FCFF
70
CCF
73
FCFE
63
WACC
8.43%
Unlevered Cost of Equity
8.80%
Cost of Equity
10.00%
Enterprise Value
830
Enterprise Value
830
Enterprise Value
830
240

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
If the ﬁrm were unlevered, its net income would be $70m. This is equiv-
alent to the net operating proﬁt after tax (NOPAT) to all capital providers.
Enterprise value = $70m
0.0843 = $830m
The equity value is simply enterprise value minus debt, which is the same
result as valuing the free cash ﬂow to equity providers.
Equity value = $830m −$200m = $630m
The adjusted present value (APV) approach also values the ﬁrm to all
capital providers based on the unlevered free cash ﬂows. Instead of includ-
ing the tax shield in the discount rate, tax savings are valued separately as
a stream of tax shields. The value of the unlevered operating business (VU)
and the value of the tax shields are separate items.
Enterprise value = APV = VU + PV (Interest tax shields)
(7.4)
ru = D
EV rd + E
EV re = 200
830 × 5% + 630
830 × 10% = 8.80%
If the ﬁrm were all-equity ﬁnanced, its cost of equity would be 8.8% and
its net income would be $70m. The unlevered value is $796m. The annual
tax shield is $3m, which is discounted at the unlevered cost of capital and
has a value of $34m.
Enterprise value = $70m
0.0880 +
$3m
0.0880 = $830m
The APV approach yields the same result as the ﬁrst two methods. It has
several advantages:
• The value of the unlevered ﬁrm and its tax shields are separate
and identiﬁable items. Operating managers can focus on creating
more economic value from their assets while ﬁnancial managers
can identify benign and value-enhancing levels of debt.
241

Beyond Earnings
• The asset cost of capital is constant. All cash ﬂows are identiﬁed
and valued on their own merit. If a ﬁrm is expected to experience
ﬁnancial distress, it can be modeled in the numerator. Also, if a
ﬁrm is changing its capital structure, it is easier to use the APV
approach. Private equity investments and highly leveraged acqui-
sitions should utilize the APV approach.
It would be incorrect to use the levered cost of equity as the discount
rate in the APV approach. It needs to be unlevered since cash ﬂows are
unlevered. The risk to equity holders manifests itself as a greater sensitivity
in the intrinsic equity value to changes in cash ﬂow or their riskiness. If
debt is increased, any variance in the enterprise value will be magniﬁed
after subtracting the higher debt level to calculate the equity value. In other
words, the equity cash ﬂows are levered.
The asset or unlevered cost of capital is the expected return all investors
will earn holding the ﬁrm’s assets, and is related to the costs of equity and
debt, and their weighted averages.
rU =
E
E + DrE +
D
E + DrD
The beta of an asset is the weighted-average of the betas of its compo-
nents.
𝛽A = 𝛽U =
E
E + D𝛽E +
D
E + D𝛽D
Industry asset betas can be used to estimate the levered cost of equity
for ﬁrms and their projects.27
𝛽E = 𝛽U −D
E (𝛽U −𝛽D)
(7.5)
The HOLT discount rate most closely resembles the discount rate used
in an APV approach. It is equivalent to the asset cost of capital. HOLT
includes the tax shield in its estimate of total free cash ﬂow since it is a
27For investment grade companies, the beta for debt is very low and generally assumed to be zero. This
is not the case for risky ﬁrms with sub-investment grade status. An APV approach is more sensible than
the traditional FCF/WACC approach for such risky ﬁrms. Industry betas can be found on Professor
Damodaran’s website, http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/∼adamodar/.
242

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
real cash beneﬁt that accrues to the ﬁrm (the government is subsidizing
the use of debt, after all). HOLT’s DCF approach is thus an APV method
that includes the tax shield in the free cash ﬂow to capital providers. In
this example, the free cash ﬂow would include the net income of $63m
plus the interest paid of $10m for a total of $73m. The discount rate is the
unlevered cost of capital of 8.8% for an enterprise value of $830m. All the
valuation approaches yield the same result.
Enterprise value = $73m
0.088 = $830m
Capital Cash Flows
We need to get highly technical for a moment. The combination of unlev-
ered cash ﬂows and interest tax shields is referred to as capital cash ﬂows
(CCF):
CCFi = FCFFi + Interest tax shieldi
This valuation approach is called the CCF or compressed APV method,28
and is the correct technical description for the HOLT valuation approach,
which implicitly assumes that tax shields and cash ﬂows have similar risk;
that is, if the value of the ﬁrm drops, it will reduce its debt level and the
interest tax shield will be lower. If a ﬁrm maintains constant debt, or has
a ﬁxed debt plan, then the tax shields should be discounted at the cost of
debt since they have lower risk than the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows; that is, they don’t
ﬂuctuate since they are ﬁxed.
Cost of Capital and Its Relationship to Debt
The theoretical relationship between the various costs of capital and lever-
age is shown in Exhibit 7.9.29 Note that the unlevered cost of equity (rU) is
28S. Kaplan and R. Ruback, “The Valuation of Cash Flow Forecasts: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of
Finance 50 (1995): 1059−1093; and R. Ruback, “Capital Cash Flows: A Simple Approach to Valuing
Risky Cash Flows,” Financial Management 31 (2002): 85−103.
29We are assuming that the riskiness of the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows does not change by increasing leverage. In
other words, the ﬁrm is generating suﬃcient cash ﬂow to meet all of its obligations. Reality might be
243

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.9 The relationship between the various costs of capital. The asset
or unlevered cost of capital is constant and equals the expected
cost of debt when leverage approaches 100%. WACC is the
after-tax cost of capital and equals the after-tax expected cost
of debt when leverage approaches 100%.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cost of capital
Leverage
re
ru
WACC
rd
rd(1–T)
constant for a ﬁrm of given asset volatility. The expected cost of debt increases
until it equals the unlevered cost of equity at 100% leverage. The riskiness
of the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows hasn’t changed, just its owners. The levered cost of
equity increases rapidly with increasing leverage. WACC falls since it con-
tains the beneﬁt of the interest tax shield and equals the after-tax expected
cost of debt at 100% leverage.
We can hear the echo of shaking heads. A common mistake is to assume
a ﬁrm’s marginal cost of debt or yield-to-maturity (YTM) on its debt is the
expected cost of debt. This assumption is valid for investment grade debt
but fails when debt gets riskier. If you buy a junk bond with a 25% yield,
do you expect a 25% return? The answer is clearly “nein” since there is a
high probability of default.
rD = (1 −Probability of default %) × YTM
+ (Probability of default %) × Recovery yield
diﬀerent particularly if suppliers and customers were scared by the higher leverage and played hardball
with prices, contracts, and payment schedules. Financial distress increases the sensitivity of the ﬁrm’s
value to market risk, thus necessitating a higher cost of capital.
244

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
The expected return on debt depends on the probability of default and
value that can be recovered in the event of default. If the probability of
default is negligible, then rD equals YTM. The cost of capital relationships
meets the requirements of Modigliani and Miller.
CHAPTER APPENDIX: DO EQUITY DISCOUNT RATES
MEAN REVERT?30
“The future ain’t what it used to be.”
—Yogi Berra
Mean reversion is a natural phenomenon that provides contrarian
investors with a powerful rationale for making and justifying their invest-
ment choices. Well-behaved macro signals are highly prized but elusive.
Investors often ask us if changes in the cost of capital for equity markets
can be predicted, and if the likelihood and magnitude of those changes
can be quantiﬁed. They would like to know if there is an equilibrium or
mean-reverting level for the cost of capital and, if so, how quickly does it
revert?
Exhibit 7.10 reveals multi-year trends that can be associated with eco-
nomic developments in the United States and spikes that can be associated
with speciﬁc market and macroeconomic events. Spikes indicate bouts of
market panic and risk aversion. The large spike in late 2008 highlights
the widespread panic of the credit crisis. Conversely, the extraordinary risk
appetite preceding the dotcom bubble which peaked in 2000, and accom-
panying the commodity cycle during the mid-2000s, is associated with very
low discount rates during these periods.
As a general rule of thumb for developed economies, a discount rate
below 5% indicates that investors might be too euphoric and above 7%
that investors might be too pessimistic. It is clear from Exhibit 7.10 that
the market can remain relatively cheap or expensive for many years at a
30This section, which was originally published in the Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook
2015, was written by David Holland, Bryant Matthews, and Pratyasha Rath.
245

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.10 Monthly time-series of the weighted-average real discount rate
for U.S. Industrial and Service companies (1976 to present).
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Jan 76
Jan 78
Jan 80
Jan 82
Jan 84
Jan 86
Jan 88
Jan 90
Jan 92
Jan 94
Jan 96
Jan 98
Jan 00
Jan 02
Jan 04
Jan 06
Jan 08
Jan 10
Jan 12
Jan 14
U.S. discount rate (%)
U.S. discount rate
January 1976 – December 2014
U.S. Discount Rate
90%ile
75%ile
Median
25%ile
10%ile
Current DR: 4.2
90th %ile: 7.6
75th %ile: 6.8
Median: 5.6
25th %ile: 4.6
10th %ile: 4.0
0%
5%
Cur
9
75
25
25
1
DR
%ile
%ile
ia
%ile
%ile
%ile
Disc
n
. D
dia
European
Debt Crisis
Credit Crisis
9/11 attacks
Tech bubble
burst
Russian default,
LTCM fails
Kuwait invasion
Black Monday
1981 recession
ou
ece
Mexico defaults
1980 recession
attac
Mexican peso
crisis
Enron, WorldCom
U
M
198
Energy crisis
time. As John Maynard Keynes is credited saying, “Markets can remain
irrational a lot longer than you and I can remain solvent.”
What are the latest discount rates for key equity markets?
The market-implied discount rates for key equity markets are calculated
on a weekly basis and used by our clients to obtain a relative sense of value
and risk appetite in each market. As a general rule, when the discount rate
exceeds or falls below its 75th or 25th percentile, the market has entered
either pessimistic or optimistic territory. This can help fund managers
decide which markets to gain exposure to, and which to avoid.
Market-implied discount rates as of January 2015 are graphed as trian-
gles from lowest to highest in Exhibit 7.11. Indonesia, China, and Switzer-
land have the lowest discount rates (risk on), while Russia, Argentina, and
Italy have the highest (risk oﬀ). The blue vertical bars indicate the interquar-
tile range for each country over the past decade. The black line is the 10-year
median. These are useful for relative observations. Ten countries are trad-
ing in their bottom quartile (risk on), while only Russia is trading in its
top quartile (risk oﬀ). Fifteen countries out of 23 are at or below their
246

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
EXHIBIT 7.11 Market-implied discount rates for Industrial and Service ﬁrms
in key equity markets.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Indonesia
China
Switzerland
United States
India
Mexico
Japan
South Africa
Turkey
UK
France
Australia
Canada
Hong Kong
Germany
Saudi Arabia
Brazil
Korea
Italy
Argentina
Russia
Discount rate (%)
Discount rates by country
10-yr
Median
Discount
Rate
Last Year
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT as of 10 January 2015.
10-year medians. While this chart gives us an excellent bird’s eye view of
regional risk appetite, it does not indicate if and how quickly mean rever-
sion occurs.
General Observations about Annual Changes in the U.S.
Discount Rate
Let us assume the discount rate is mean-reverting. This suggests a rounded
discount rate of 6% for U.S. industrial and service companies. Using
this rate today in a discounted cash ﬂow model would show that most
U.S. stocks are expensive. Due to the highly auto-correlated nature
of the discount rate, the best guess for next month’s discount rate is
not the mean-reverting level, but rather the most recent observation.
Fund managers are paid to be in the market, so using the most recent
market-implied discount rate is rational, but care should be taken.
Because of the importance of the discount rate in determining value, it
is beneﬁcial to understand whether it is mean-reverting or random walk.
If it is mean-reverting, what is the level and rate of mean reversion? (There
is no need to pick stocks when you know which way the discount rate
is heading.) A great place to start is to understand how the discount rate
247

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.12 Behavior of U.S. discount rate and 12-month changes in DR
since 1976.
Percentile
p(10%)
p(25%)
p(50%)
p(75%)
p(90%)
U.S. Discount Rate
4.0%
4.6%
5.7%
6.9%
7.6%
12-m change in DR (all)
−1.1%
−0.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
12-m change in DR if DR < 5%
−0.9%
−0.4%
0.2%
0.7%
1.3%
12-m change in DR if DR > 7%
−1.7%
−1.0%
−0.1%
0.3%
1.0%
has changed over 12-month periods. This information can be used to con-
struct probability trees comprised of worst, base, and best-case scenarios.
Summary statistics since 1976 are shown in Exhibit 7.12.
Since 1976, the median U.S. discount rate has been 5.6% with dramatic
swings. The discount rate was below 4.0% for 10% of the time and over
7.6% for 10% of the time. These outer values could be used to quantify
best and worst cases, but that would ignore the fact that the best indicator
of next month’s discount rate is this month’s discount rate.
To take advantage of this property, we calculated the 12-month change
in discount rate since 1976. The median change is minus ten basis points.
This suggests that in one year the discount rate will essentially be the same
as today. The discount rate dropped by 110 basis points or more 10% of
the time and increased by 100 basis points or more 10% of the time. A
general rule of thumb is to use the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles for
the worst, base, and best cases when constructing probability trees. Thus a
change of ±100 basis points in the discount rate over the next 12 months
is a perfectly sensible assumption for worst (+100 basis points) and best
(−100 basis points) cases.
Is the likely change in the discount rate diﬀerent when the market
is euphoric or highly pessimistic? Exhibit 7.13 shows the 12-month
percentage point change when the starting discount rate is less than 5%
(euphoric market) and when it is greater than 7% (pessimistic market).
Note the asymmetry in changes, particularly for pessimistic markets.
Signiﬁcant drops in discount rate have been more likely for pessimistic
markets. This asymmetry suggests that mean reversion might be at work
when the discount rate wags its tail.
248

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
How Does the Monthly Change in the U.S. Discount Rate
Behave?
To better understand the discount rate’s behavior, it is helpful to look at
the distribution of monthly changes, shown in the Exhibit 7.13 overleaf.
The median monthly change is a negligible –1 basis point with a 10th
percentile change of –26 basis points or less, and a 90th percentile change
of 26 basis points or more. The standard deviation is 24.6 basis points,
which annualizes to 85 basis points.
As is so often the case for ﬁnancial data, the observations indicate more
bunching in the center and fatter tails (leptokurtosis) than that predicted
by a normal distribution (red line).
In summary, the best guess for next month’s discount rate is this month’s
value with a 10% chance it could drop by 26 basis points or more (best-case
scenario for those anticipating an increase in risk appetite) and a 10%
chance it could increase by 26 basis points or more (worst-case scenario
for those anticipating an increase in risk appetite).
EXHIBIT 7.13 Distribution of one-month changes in the U.S. discount rate
since 1976.
10,0%
–0,265
0,264
Distribution for Monthly-Change in Discount Rate
RiskNormal(–0,0030337;0,24625)
14,4%
80,0%
71,7%
10,0%
13,9%
Input
Normal
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std Dev
Values
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std Dev
–1,1678
1,4012
–0,00303
0,2463
459
–∞
+∞
–0,00303
0,2463
–1,5
–1,0
–0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT data and analysis.
249

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.14 A plot of the U.S. discount rate versus its value in the
preceding month since 1976.
y = 0.984x + 0.0857
R2= 0.9679
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Discount rate (t) vs. discount rate (t –1)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT data and analysis.
Does the Discount Rate Mean-Revert?
We tested for this by plotting the discount rate versus its value one
month earlier. Random walk behavior is indicated by a slope of one and
mean reversion results in a slope less than one. The results are shown in
Exhibit 7.14.
The slope of 0.986 and correlation coeﬃcient of 0.985 give a weak indi-
cation of mean reversion (and a strong display of the auto-correlation). The
mean-reverting point for this sample is 5.6%, which means that 98.5%
of the spread between today’s discount rate and the mean-reverting level
is expected to remain in one month’s time with a standard deviation of
0.25%. If today’s discount rate were 4.20%, then next month’s most likely
value would be 4.22% plus or minus 0.25%. The volatility and noise of
0.25% swamps any possible mean reversion and signal of 0.02%. If any-
thing is clear, it is that noise dominates signal! This makes the discount
rate behavior appear random and muddies the identiﬁcation of a clear
mean-reverting level. For all intents and purposes, the monthly change
in discount rate is a random walk process.
250

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
EXHIBIT 7.15 Probabilistic evolution of the April 21, 2014, U.S. discount rate
of 4.3% as a function of months forward.
Months forward
1
3
6
12
24
36
60
Cumulative
10%
4.0%
3.8%
3.7%
3.5%
3.3%
3.1%
2.9%
Probability
25%
4.2%
4.1%
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
50%
4.3%
4.4%
4.4%
4.6%
4.8%
5.0%
5.3%
75%
4.5%
4.7%
4.9%
5.2%
5.6%
6.0%
6.6%
90%
4.6%
4.9%
5.2%
5.7%
6.4%
6.9%
7.7%
Since HOLT’s discount rate is a measure of aggregate risk appetite, and
stock price changes are characterized as random walk, it makes sense that
HOLT’s discount rate approximates a random walk process. The apparent
nonexistence of mean reversion should not be dismissed by those whose
investment horizons are secular; that is, just because the discount rate seems
far too high or low does not mean it will not persist at stretched values.
Forward estimates of the discount rate can be generated by incorporating
an error term in a simple predictive model. The probability of a given level
can be determined, where t is in months, DR(0) is today’s discount rate,
and LTDR is the long-term discount rate.
DRt = DRLT + 0.985t x [DR0 −DRLT] + et
The U.S. discount rate on January 10, 2015, was 4.2%, which places it
ﬁrmly in the lower quartile of historical observations. The above equation
can be used to generate a probability table for the evolution of today’s dis-
count rate. The top row in Exhibit 7.15 indicates the number of months
forward and the left-hand column indicates the cumulative probability of
achieving a discount rate at or below the value indicated. Note how the
median slowly drifts toward an assumed mean-reverting point of 6% as
time rolls on. Looking one month ahead, the most likely U.S. discount
rate is 4.2% with a 10% chance of being 3.9% or lower, and a 10% chance
of being 4.5% or higher. Looking 12 months ahead, the expected discount
rate is 4.5% with a 10% probability of being 3.4% or less (which is deep
bull territory), and a 10% probability of being 5.6% or higher (which is
tantamount to full mean reversion). The market is a noisy system!
251

Beyond Earnings
How Do Changes in the Discount Rate Manifest in the Equity
Risk Premium?
The market-implied equity risk premium (ERP) can be estimated from the
weighted-average discount rate. The results for U.S. industrial and service
ﬁrms are charted in Exhibit 7.16. Investors are risk averse and demand a
premium for the riskiness of equity yields relative to safe “risk-free” yields
on government bonds. The median market-implied ERP since 1976 is
4.5%, which is in line with the historical ERP of 4.2% from 1928 to 2012
that Mauboussin and Callahan report, and the 4.5% reported by Dimson,
Marsh, and Staunton from 1963 to 2012 (all values are relative to U.S.
Treasury bonds).
The market-implied ERP is highly volatile, reﬂecting the vicissitudes of
the market’s risk appetite for equities. An ERP of 0% suggests risk-neutral
behavior and a value less than 0%, which accompanied the dotcom bubble,
implies aggressive risk-seeking behavior. The high level of ERP since the
credit crisis has been ampliﬁed by depressed yields on risk-free treasuries
due to quantitative easing and fears of slower growth. Today’s ERP of 4.8%
is in line with the median. An increase in the risk-free rate due to an ending
of quantitative easing would likely reduce the ERP.
EXHIBIT 7.16 Time series of the market-implied ERP for U.S. Industrial and
Service companies.
–4.0
–2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
Jan-76
Jan-78
Jan-80
Jan-82
Jan-84
Jan-86
Jan-88
Jan-90
Jan-92
Jan-94
Jan-96
Jan-98
Jan-00
Jan-02
Jan-04
Jan-06
Jan-08
Jan-10
Jan-12
Jan-14
Equity risk premium–USA 
January 1976–December 2014 
Equity Risk Premium
90%ile
75%ile
Median
25%ile
10%ile
Equity Risk Premium %
Current ERP: 4.8
90th %ile: 6.4
75th %ile: 5.7
Median: 4.5
25th %ile: 2.7
10th %ile: 0.4
252

Risk, Reward, and the HOLT Discount Rate
The Bitter Truth about Mean Reversion
“Predictions are hazardous, especially about the future.”
—Danish proverb
Expectations of reversion to the mean drive many investments.
Well-behaved macro signals are highly prized but elusive. By assuming the
stock market is in aggregate fairly priced, Credit Suisse HOLT determines
a market-implied discount rate and then uses this to value individual
stocks. For investors who have to be invested in equities, or believe the
market is approximately right in the aggregate, it is sensible to take
a market-neutral approach and use the most current market-implied
discount rate when valuing stocks.
Asset allocators and strategists, however, need to take a view on
the attractiveness of markets, and can use market-implied discount
rates as a signal. Their job is diﬃcult. Any hints of mean reversion in
the market-implied discount rate and ERP are swamped by volatility,
suggesting that macro predictions based on imminent mean reversion
are precarious at best. For all intents and purposes, monthly changes in
the discount rate and ERP are random walk. The market can remain
seemingly irrational for long periods, debunking naïve arguments for
near-term mean reversion.
We’ll end this chapter with advice from Andrew Ang (2014):
“Active investors spend a lot of eﬀort trying to forecast equity returns.
But the consensus view in ﬁnancial theory is that, while equity risk
premiums vary over time, movements are hard to predict. Thus, I
advise most investors not to time the market, and this is behind my
advice to rebalance back to constant weights or exposures.”
Stock-pickers should use a forward-looking, market-neutral discount
rate when valuing stocks.
253

Section III
Value Driver Forecasting
255
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

8
THE COMPETITIVE
LIFE-CYCLE OF
CORPORATE EVOLUTION
“One general law, leading to the advancement of all organic beings, namely,
multiply, vary, let the strongest live and the weakest die.”
—Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species
Elwood: It’s 106 miles to Chicago, we got a full tank of gas, half a pack of
cigarettes, it’s dark, and we’re wearing sunglasses.
Jake: Hit it!
—The Blues Brothers
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• A competitive life-cycle framework can help investors think crit-
ically about the challenges a ﬁrm will confront as it develops and
quantify its probability of success.
257
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• Four states of development can be described by proﬁtability and
expected growth:
• Question Mark (low proﬁtability and high growth)
• Star (high proﬁtability and high growth)
• Cash Cow (high proﬁtability and low growth)
• Dog (low proﬁtability and low growth)
• New ﬁrms typically start as Question Marks; less than 13%
become Stars.
• Cash Cows exhibit the highest proﬁt persistence and lowest
CFROI volatility. An elite subgroup of Cash Cows and Stars are
unusually persistent. HOLT calls these stocks eCAPs, which is a
badge of honor that signiﬁes impressive competitive advantage.
• Dogs have the largest variability in future CFROI. Most Dogs fail
to ﬁx their business.
• Companies “exit” at all points. By exit, we mean the corporate
entity ceases to exist as a stand-alone enterprise. Only 50% of
companies survive as a listed entity for 10 years. Most companies
are acquired or merge as they age; about 2% go bankrupt every
year. Other ﬁrms de-list from their exchange, are privatized, and
a few simply cease operations.
INTRODUCTION
In 1886, an illicit scheme was underway in the United States that involved
a handful of wholesalers shipping ﬁnished goods to merchants who had not
ordered them. The wholesalers oﬀered to discount the goods below the cost
to the merchant to send them back. Retailers typically bought the goods
instead of dealing with the hassle of shipping them back, and then tried to
sell them for a proﬁt.
One retailer refused to take possession of a shipment of pocket watches,
and so it sat at the local railroad station. Richard Warren Sears, a railway
station agent for the Minneapolis & St. Louis Railroad, saw an oppor-
tunity to sell the watches to railroad passengers, colleagues, and nearby
258

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
farmers. Sales were surprisingly vigorous, and he was soon hawking other
items. Within six months, he moved to Minneapolis and started the R.W.
Sears Watch Company. One year later, he established new headquarters
in Chicago. To further enhance sales, he developed a mail-order catalogue
to showcase his expanding product list. Sales exploded and the catalogue
grew to 500 pages. Within just a few years, Sears had a customer base that
exceeded 300,000 people, an enviable number even by today’s standards.
At ﬁrst blush, it might be easy to dismiss the innovation of Sears’s early
twentieth-century business model. Bear in mind that Sears was perhaps the
ﬁrst businessman to see the full potential of the mail-order catalogue as an
appealing medium for consumption. From the comfort of one’s home, after
a hard day’s work, customers could relax and browse the Sears catalogue
and discover new items that excited the imagination or search for basic
household staples. Items could be price-compared to substitutes without
pressure from an aggressive salesman. A little research and the quality of
one item could be distinguished from a close substitute.
This revolution in shopping was facilitated by an advanced interconti-
nental shipping network. Goods previously restricted to a region, or that
might have taken a year to deliver, were increasingly accessible. In the
United States, the rail system had by then fully spanned the U.S. continent,
connecting rural America to major shipping ports. The ﬁnal component in
this shopping revolution was a postal service that conveniently placed pur-
chased goods on one’s doorstep.1 Richard Sears understood the power of
this network and shrewdly connected the dots.
Although it is challenging to gather clear insight into the economics
of the early Sears business model, we highlight return on equity as
indicated by the Moody’s Manual of Investments for the years 1912–1920
(Exhibit 8.1). ROE hovers close to 17%. This is a high rate of return
during this period.
1The story of Sears is well catalogued (pun intended). A few interesting books include: Sears Homes of
Illinois by Rosemary Thornton (2010), Richard Warren Sears, Icon of Inspiration: Fable and Fact about
the Founder and Spiritual Genius of Sears, Roebuck & Company by Frederick Asher (1997), Catalogues
and Counters: A History of Sears, Roebuck and Company by John E. Jeuck (1950). The Sears website
oﬀers a brief history of the ﬁrm: http://www.searsarchives.com/history/history1886.htm.
259

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 8.1 Sears’s ROE and prevailing cost of equity, 1912–1920.
0
5
10
15
20
1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920
ROE
COE
Source: Moody’s Investment Manual.
The story of Sears is no less innovative than that of Apple or Tesla. Like
Apple with its iPhone and iPad, Sears tapped into a previously unidentiﬁed
need that brought about a transformation in consumer preference. Sears
became a retail juggernaut and the largest ﬁrm of its kind in the world.
In 1916, the company generated more than $137 million in annual rev-
enue. When adjusted for inﬂation to 2017 dollar value, this translates into
approximately $3 billion. The bulk of sales were through mail-order!
Is there a modern ﬁrm that ﬁts this proﬁle? Amazon springs to mind.
Like Richard Sears in the century before, JeﬀBezos perceived how recent
technological advances could beneﬁt consumers. The explosion in home
computer sales oﬀered a gateway to the Internet, and the Internet, in
Bezos’s mind, was the ultimate portal for shopping.
Amazon sells a vast array of products online. It is not encumbered by
brick and mortar. It harnesses the postal service, FedEx, UPS, trucking
companies, airlines, railroads, and shipping companies—every viable
means of moving goods from one location to customers. Customer orders
soar at ever-increasing speed from their ﬁngertips to Amazon’s computer
servers. The ﬁrm has cobbled together a network of merchants and suppli-
ers to rival the number of rivets on railcars used to ship its goods. Amazon’s
260

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
catalogue isn’t printed; it is painted by pixels on a monitor. And if printed,
it would surely exceed thousands of pages. Amazon is the Sears of today!
Sears is the storyline of start-ups that beat the odds to become a Star
and then waltz into old age.2 High growth and impressive proﬁtability are
followed by maturity and decline. Beginning on day one, there is no guar-
antee of success or survival. Even for ﬁrms that become wildly successful,
disruption is always just around the corner. The basic theme of innova-
tion/disruption has been played out since the ﬁrst company was invented,
and it is as true of the plucky East India Company and Sears as it will be
for Amazon, Google, or Facebook.
No matter how successful or innovative a ﬁrm is, competitors will
emerge and chip away at proﬁts. It might have seemed incomprehensible
in 1915 that a competitor could upend the Sears success story. It would
take a bit of time, but by 1950, JC Penney had ousted Sears from its perch
as the most proﬁtable large retailer in the United States.
For investors who can’t imagine Apple or Amazon losing their place
as two of the most proﬁtable ﬁrms in the modern era, bear in mind that
after topping Sears, JC Penney was itself toppled. The era of massive
brick-and-mortar department stores serving as anchors to malls where
legions of consumers ﬂocked throughout the week came to a close, but
Sears and JC Penney plodded forward with their outmoded business
strategy.
Sears paints a vivid picture of a company transitioning through all the
key phases of the competitive life-cycle. The pursuit of proﬁt requires
continual adaptation and innovation to prosper. Few ﬁrms become
Stars, and those that survive for any length of time will decline. The
best-managed ﬁrms (or the luckiest) may prosper for decades, but most
will become average. A handful will undergo renewal, experiencing
corporate rebirth. Regardless of a ﬁrm’s current advantages, the cycle
of innovation/disruption endures. Competition makes earning proﬁts
diﬃcult. Competition spells fade.
2Sears warned investors in March 2017 that “substantial doubt exists related to the company’s ability
to continue as a going concern.”
261

Beyond Earnings
WHAT IS FADE?
Corporate proﬁtability does not persist indeﬁnitely. Instead, empirical evi-
dence shows that proﬁtability converges toward the average as a company
matures. This tendency is called “reversion to the mean,” and it is visible
over time, across industries and countries (see Chapter 9).
Fade is the speed at which proﬁtability reverts to the mean. There are
some impediments to fade. Size matters, for instance. Often, large ﬁrms
sustain proﬁtability longer than smaller ones. This is certainly due to com-
petitive advantages, of which some result from signiﬁcant size and scale.
Still, the end result appears to be inescapable. There are exceptions, ﬁrms
that defy gravity and earn outsized proﬁts for long stretches of time, but
such events are rare and never permanent.3 As a general rule for competitive
markets, reversion to the mean in proﬁtability is inevitable.
HOLT calls the process of reversion to the mean “fade,” and a large body
of academic research is available on the topic under its academic heading
of “proﬁt persistence.” A crucial point is that although fade can happen
suddenly (comprehensive disruption) or take decades, proﬁtability tends
to decay at a reliable rate. Investors can use knowledge of fade to improve
their forecasts and estimates of corporate value.
To begin incorporating fade into forecasts, we need to understand
how a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability is likely to change in future periods. The
competitive life-cycle is a useful tool that can help us think more critically
about fade.
THE COMPETITIVE LIFE-CYCLE
The hallmark of a well-functioning competitive market is that excess prof-
its are diﬃcult to earn and sustain. When competition is unfettered, there
is a strong incentive to maximize proﬁts through innovation. Innovation
brings about disruption, and disruption ﬂushes obsolescence and waste
from the system. In a nutshell, competition brings about change.
3Rare events should be modeled as low-probability occurrences. Forecast optimism is a well-known
cognitive bias and should be restrained.
262

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
EXHIBIT 8.2 A stylized view of the competitive life-cycle.
CFROI
(Return on Investment)
Reinvestment
Rate
Discount Rate
(Cost of Capital)
Question Marks
Stars
eCAPs:
Cash Cows
Dogs
CFROI<DR
High growth
CFROI>DR
High Growth
CFROI>DR
Persistent CFROI
Low Growth
CFROI>DR
Low Growth
CFROI<DR
Low Growth
Because competition challenges the status quo, forecasting the level
of and the changes in corporate proﬁtability is diﬃcult. The com-
petitive life-cycle is an intuitive framework for thinking about the
connection between a ﬁrm’s track-record of success and its stock price
(Exhibit 8.2). It is also helpful for considering where a ﬁrm will likely
transition next.
The framework describes the pattern of economic return on capital
and the rate at which a ﬁrm reinvests as it successfully transitions
from startup to star. For the most successful ﬁrms, the combination of
high return on investment and continued growth telegraphs a sizeable
opportunity for proﬁt. As rivals enter the market, proﬁtability erodes and
declines toward the cost of capital and growth falters, trending toward the
average growth rate of the economy. This process can be sudden or take
decades.
The competitive life-cycle framework can be divided into four appealing
states that describe corporate evolution: early development, star, maturity,
and decline.4 Firms with buoyant growth expectations but low proﬁtability
4Note that we use the word “state” instead of “stage” to describe life-cycle evolution. Our motivation is
to steer clear of any implication that ﬁrms evolve linearly and—assuming survival—without fail from
one development state to another.
263

Beyond Earnings
are known as Question Marks. Their aim is to become Stars, which are
companies with high growth expectations and attractive proﬁtability. The
cash generative Cash Cow phase of the life-cycle occurs when growth
diminishes but proﬁtability remains high. Businesses with low growth and
poor proﬁtability are Dogs.
For readers interested in gaining a high-level perspective on the phases
of the life-cycle, we oﬀer a brief overview below. Readers familiar with the
competitive life-cycle may wish to jump straight to the next chapter, which
focuses on proﬁt persistence, or fade.
Determining a Firm’s Life-Cycle Position
A ﬁrm’s position in the life-cycle is easily discovered by its CFROI level
and expected growth rate (Exhibit 8.3). The life-cycle can also be mapped
to a matrix with its quadrants being: Question Marks, Stars, Cash Cows,
and Dogs. Stocks with above-average expected growth are Question Marks
and Stars, and stocks with below-average growth are Dogs and Cash Cows.
Highly proﬁtable ﬁrms are either Stars or Cash Cows.
Note importantly, that we do not assume ﬁrms evolve chronologically
through the life-cycle. There is no evidence to support such a claim. Instead,
corporations transition from one state to any other. Transition depends
upon competitive success or failure, not age.
EXHIBIT 8.3 An adaptation of the Boston Consulting Group product matrix
to identify ﬁrms by their position in the competitive life-cycle.
profitability
expected growth
Stars
Question
Marks
Dogs
Cash
Cows
low
high
low
high
264

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
QUESTION MARKS (EARLY LIFE-CYCLE)
An early life-cycle ﬁrm is characterized by high innovation. As the ﬁrm
successfully commercializes its service or product, its incremental return on
capital improves. High growth rates and elevated price multiples coupled
with low proﬁts are the distinctive plumage that sets these ﬁrms apart from
those occupying later states. These ﬁrms are “Question Marks” because
expectations for proﬁtability are high but actual proﬁtability is low. Will
these ﬁrms succeed and become Stars?
For highly innovative ﬁrms, growth commonly exceeds the return on
capital (CFROI). When g > CFROI, external ﬁnancing is necessary to
fund expansion and meet demand for products and services.5 Start-ups
typically use little if any debt, rarely pay dividends, and issue equity to fund
growth.
Two examples of early life-cycle companies are Q2 Holdings (QTWO),
a U.S. provider of secure cloud-based virtual banking solutions and Applied
Genetic Technologies (AGTC), a clinical-stage biotechnology ﬁrm that
develops gene therapy products to treat patients with eye disorders. Both
ﬁrms are relative newcomers, have grown rapidly, and—as of December
2016—are still unproﬁtable. Investor expectations are sky high.
QTWO has a market capitalization of nearly $1 billion. Though annual
sales have expanded at a brisk clip, averaging over 30%, revenue only
recently passed $100 million. QTWO trades at a price-to-sales (P/S) ratio
of 10, an extraordinarily high valuation multiple considering that the
average P/S ratio of Star is 2.0! CFROI has been below 0% for the four
years ending in 2015, and its HOLT price-to-book ratio exceeds 6 (the
average HOLT P/B in the USA is close to 1.5). Investors are ebullient
about this ﬁrm’s prospects.
AGTC has a market capitalization of $296 million versus sales of $2.4
million. Its price-to-sales ratio exceeds 10. CFROI was below 0% each year
from 2012 to 2015. Sales doubled in 2015, and the prior three year’s sales
5Sustainable growth rate (SGR) is the rate at which a company can grow without external ﬁnancing,
or rather, from cash from operations. A useful rule of thumb for gauging a ﬁrm’s growth potential is
that CFROI = SGR when a ﬁrm is at or near steady state.
265

Beyond Earnings
growth averaged nearly 70%, so the ﬁrm is experiencing an encouraging
upswing. Despite this, investors have become increasingly skeptical about
AGTC’s prospects, and its HOLT P/B ratio has withered from a high of
nearly 5.0 June 2014 to a low of 1.5 by December 2016.
A fascinating example of an early life-cycle ﬁrm is Sage Therapeutics. As
of ﬁnancial year 2015, Sage had not yet produced a single dollar in revenue
but trades at a market capitalization in excess of $1 billion! From its own
annual ﬁling, the ﬁrm conﬁrms its early life-cycle status: “Given our stage
of development, we have not yet established a commercial organization
or distribution capabilities, nor have we entered into any partnership or
co-promotion arrangements with an established pharmaceutical company.
We are concentrating our internal eﬀorts on CNS [central nervous system]
disorders where we believe we can eﬃciently commercialize our products,
if approved, on our own.” Without having earned a single dollar in sales,
Sage is the ultimate expression of a start-up ﬁrm trading at a lofty multiple.
We wish Sage and her investors luck!
These examples underscore our point that investors price stocks based
on perceptions of future proﬁt. Expected cash ﬂow, not earnings, is the
essential ingredient. But investors in Question Marks are exposed to con-
siderable risk. What happens if sales and proﬁts fail to materialize?
This begs an important question about ﬁrm evolution: How often do
early life-cycle ﬁrms succeed? What percentage of start-ups transition to
Stars? More broadly, how often do ﬁrms transition between life-cycle states?
Statistically, just one in eight Question Marks becomes a Star.6 When
it happens, shareholder gains can be enormous (one of our colleagues likes
to say “the positive convexity on success is massive”). We are pointing out
this potential for massive gain to be fair-minded, but the reality is that most
early life-cycle companies do not become Stars, and so the odds of winning
as an investor in this segment of the life-cycle are low.
But don’t think that seven out of eight early life-cycle companies fail;
instead, most remain in the early life-cycle phase or bypass the quadrant of
Stars to land face ﬁrst on planet Earth.
6Authors’ research ﬁndings at Credit Suisse HOLT.
266

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
Competition is relentless. For Sage Therapeutics, the odds of being
bought at a discount or folding up shop are high unless the ﬁrm
demonstrates clinical success and commercializes its R&D.
In nascent markets, a ﬁrm with early sales leadership can forego current
proﬁts in exchange for greater market penetration. The aim is to gain a
long-term leadership advantage. Tesla is a prime example. With a market
capitalization greater than $34 billion as of December 2016, sales growth
has averaged over 100% a year since 2011. Despite this, Tesla has earned a
CFROI above its cost of capital just once, in 2013. Reported proﬁt is low,
but expectations for proﬁts are high, and so the ﬁrm trades at a HOLT P/B
multiple above 5.0 (remember, the average is close to 1.5).
But rest assured, Tesla is no longer just a ﬂedgling start-up. With more
than $4 billion in revenue in 2015, it has demonstrated that is a viable car
maker. Tesla is an interesting case study of a ﬁrm choosing not to maxi-
mize its current proﬁts so that it can more deeply penetrate and redeﬁne
its industry. Tesla is disrupting the status quo.
Examples of early life-cycle ﬁrms that became Stars are Google and Face-
book. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals—a biotechnology ﬁrm that languished
for as many as 15 years with subpar operating returns—is a good example
that age isn’t what determines a company’s life-cycle position. NXP Semi-
conductors, founded in 2006 and which now trades at +$32b in market
capitalization, has also made the transition from start-up to Star. LinkedIn
is a ﬁne example of a start-up leaping to stardom by joining together its
business and social nexus.
Stars
Stars are headline stocks. CFROI is above the cost of capital, and growth
is high. Flip on any ﬁnancial news channel, and chances are that the bulk
of discussion will center on these celebrity corporations.
A Star sets the price at which its product or service sells. (Stars are
price-setters.) They typically possess budding or bulked-up competitive
advantages that help to insulate proﬁtability. Facebook’s vast network
advantage springs to mind. This network links together over a billion
267

Beyond Earnings
people with shared access to real-time information and idea exchange.
Microsoft Oﬃce is another example and has reigned supreme in its market
segment for nearly two decades.
The allure of healthy proﬁts and stratospheric growth rates motivates
ﬁrms to enter and compete against the Star. Over time, intense rivalry
and marginal customers will cause proﬁtability to drop. Stars may become
price takers or surrender pricing power to fuel growth. Amazon is a clas-
sic example of a stock with rock-star status that has sacriﬁced proﬁtability
to attain greater market penetration: From 2010 through 2014, EBITDA
margins were squeezed by nearly 1.5 percentage points. At the same time,
sales grew at a torrid rate of 30% each year. Amazon’s high growth rate
more than oﬀset the decline in its margins and resulted in record economic
proﬁts.
As an industry matures, excess incremental proﬁts from a Star’s core
oﬀering become increasingly diﬃcult to earn. After all, there are only
so many consumers. At some point, proﬁtability peaks and incremental
proﬁts decline. The process of decay can be sudden or might take
decades. Recall how Netﬂix and Redbox upended Blockbuster over a
relatively short time. In 2000, Blockbuster dominated the video rental
industry. It controlled a staggering 75% of U.S. home video rental
revenue. CFROI was a hefty 10% and Blockbuster was the envy of
its peers. Netﬂix founder Reed Hastings ﬂew to Dallas, Texas, to see
Blockbuster CEO John Antioco to propose a partnership. The pitch
was that Blockbuster would promote Netﬂix within its stores, and
Netﬂix would manage Blockbuster’s online strategy. Antioco laughed
Hastings out of the room. Blockbuster was the heavyweight champ;
there was no way Antioco was going to share the crown with a wannabe
start-up.
But here’s where things can go wrong for an incumbent ﬁrm: When
it stops innovating, stops thinking about how it might be disrupted
by technologies that will make its customers’ lives better, or when it
starts harvesting proﬁts at the expense of customer satisfaction and
loyalty ($5.00 late fees?!), proﬁts will fall. Within 10 years of the
268

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
Hastings/Antioco meeting, Blockbuster went bankrupt while sales soared
for Netﬂix, eventually surpassing Blockbuster’s peak revenue and using
just half the capital! In time, Netﬂix would be worth 10× Blockbuster’s
highest market cap, and little red boxes would become as common as
gas stations and ATMs while Blockbuster video stores vanished into
memory.
Motorola oﬀers another striking lesson. It dominated mobile phone sales
from the ﬁrst commercially available mobile phone in 1983 (which sold for
over $3,000) up to 1997. Motorola’s R&D and technology were unrivaled.
By the mid-nineties, Motorola appeared unassailable.
Investing heavily in its Iridium network (a secure, private communica-
tions satellite system), it failed to anticipate the shift to digital technology.
At the same time, its greed for proﬁts exceeded its common sense, and
Motorola alienated its client base by refusing to sell its StarTAC phone to
carriers who did not source at least three-fourths of their mobile phones
from Motorola.
In contrast, Nokia, a relative newcomer in the mobile phone industry,
introduced the largest number of new product innovations between 1995
and 1997, aggressively challenging Motorola’s market position. There were
no strings attached, no ploys to manipulate retailers to oﬀer Nokia phones
at the expense of competitive products. In 1998, the seemingly impossible
happened: Nokia surpassed Motorola in mobile phone unit sales and by
2002 controlled one-third of the global handset market. This is one call
that ended badly for Motorola.
As a ﬁnal example, consider Eastman Kodak. Kodak’s demise took
decades to play out. In the early part of the twentieth century, Kodak
introduced a commercial camera that revolutionized the photographic
industry. Prior to this, photography was an art limited to professionals.
The cost of photographic equipment had previously been beyond the
reach of the common man. With the introduction of its Brownie camera,
however, taking pictures soon became a treasured opportunity to capture
rare moments with family and friends. Some experts consider this the
most important camera ever manufactured, because it was produced so
269

Beyond Earnings
cheaply that even non-professionals could aﬀord it.7 Kodak’s innovation
altered society.
But, where is Kodak today? As early as 1974, Kodak had a rare oppor-
tunity to invest in digital technology. An internal engineer named Mark
Sasson developed the ﬁrst digital camera. It was bulky and unwieldy, hardly
the camera to replace existing products. Still, the technology oﬀered stag-
gering potential. Sasson had a glimpse of this potential and presented his
ideas to Kodak’s board. He was told that Kodak would not sell the digital
camera, because doing so would eat away at existing Kodak proﬁts derived
from its highly proﬁtable ﬁlm and ﬂash cubes.8 Kodak failed to focus on
how its core business could be disrupted.
Summarizing this Kodak moment, we see that the ﬁrm suppressed
a wonderful innovation. It did eventually resurface the digital idea,
but by then, it was too late, and Kodak lost a valuable opportunity for
ﬁrst-mover advantage and a chance to rejuvenate its business model.
What do we see now? Barely twenty years ago (1996), Kodak’s market
capitalization exceeded $26 billion, but today, Kodak’s value has withered
below $700 million and the ﬁrm is merely a ghost of its former self.9
It’s a picture-perfect example of disruption and the unyielding eﬀect of
competition.
Cash Cows
A Cash Cow earns CFROI above or near its cost of capital but typ-
ically grows below its sustainable growth rate. Growth rates for sales,
assets, earnings, and dividends are approximately the same and gen-
erally consistent with the rate of growth in GDP or less. Cash Cows
are mature companies that pay dividends and aggressively use debt
to minimize taxes and maximize returns to shareholders. Examples
of mature Cash Cows include Walmart, Pﬁzer, Comcast, Intel, Bayer
AG, Safran, Tata Motors, and Foot Locker to name a few. These
7www.brownie-camera.com/5.shtml.
8lens.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/08/12/kodaks-ﬁrst-digital-moment/.
9Kodak ﬁled for bankruptcy protection in January of 2012 and emerged out of bankruptcy in 2013
after selling assets and patents, and reorganizing its business.
270

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
companies typify maturity: They are large, eﬃciently scaled, and generally
proﬁtable businesses.
A wonderful subgroup of companies can be found within the Star and
Cash Cow phases. These ﬁrms are known as “eCAPs” within HOLT, and
they are best treated as a distinct group. Here’s why: These businesses are
highly proﬁtable, have low expectations for future growth, and tend to
earn durable excess proﬁts. The trait that most distinguishes eCAPs is the
persistence of their excess proﬁts. In fact, eCAP is an acronym that stands
for Empirical Competitive Advantage Period. eCAPs are ﬁrms that have
demonstrated above-average and enduring proﬁtability.
eCAP ﬁrms typically own top-shelf brands for which consumers pay a
premium. A successful brand can act as a moat that protects a ﬁrm’s proﬁts.
eCAPs are (or were) Stars that adeptly cultivated brand value. eCAPs, like
Stars, are price setters.10
Competitive advantages are valuable. According to Professor Bruce
Greenwald, the types of competitive advantage are demand, supply, and/or
economies of scale.11 If a ﬁrm’s market share is stable and proﬁtability
is high, it is no doubt enjoying those advantages. When measured
by potency, production advantages are the weakest barrier to entry.
(A production advantage means a ﬁrm can produce its goods or services
more eﬃciently and eﬀectively than its competitors.) The strongest barrier
against competitors is when economies of scale are coupled with customer
captivity. Enduring examples of eCAPs with scale and strong customer
loyalty include the tobacco companies Altria and RJ Reynolds (tobacco
users are very reluctant to switch brands, and even when they do, they
tend to use another brand from the same company) and Coca-Cola.
In contrast to these examples, the only sustainable competitive
advantage in a commodity-based industry is eﬃciency. The steel industry
has been savaged since the credit crisis of 2008. On average, stock
prices have fallen 50% from 2007 highs. The average eﬃciency ratio
10Due to the uniqueness of their oﬀering, price setters can establish the price at which their product
or service sells and maximize expected proﬁts at a lower output level than price takers.
11Bruce C. Greenwald and Judd Kahn, Competition Demystiﬁed: A Radically Simpliﬁed Approach to
Business Strategy. Penguin Group, 2005.
271

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 8.4 Asset efﬁciency.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
Asset Efficiency Ratio
Worthington
Industry Median
Nippon Steel
(sales/gross investment) for steel companies is just slightly over 0.60.
In contrast, Worthington Industries, a value-added steel processing and
metals products ﬁrm, demonstrates better asset utilization than peers, and
has even managed to lift eﬃciency a bit higher over the past few years
(Exhibit 8.4). In the Steel Works, Blast Furnaces (including Coke Ovens),
and Rolling Mills segment, Nippon Steel has seen its market capitalization
fall by 60% since the end of 2007, even as asset eﬃciency degraded and
CFROI dropped from 4% to negative 1.5% (Exhibit 8.5). Nucor, a U.S.
peer, and the Dutch company Arcelormittal also saw CFROI plummet
from above 15% to close to zero by 2009. Worthington management has
worked hard to lift CFROI back toward 6%. Nucor’s market cap is ﬂat
since 2007, and up 25% from the 2009 CFROI low.
EXHIBIT 8.5 Stock price performance.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
Cumulative Shareholder
Return
Worthington
Nippon Steel
272

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
EXHIBIT 8.6 CFROI drivers and competitive advantage. Image shows that
best-in-class ﬁrms possess a rare mix of above-average margins
and asset efﬁciency. These ﬁrms enjoy both a consumer and
production advantage.
Profitability Margin
Asset Turnover
Production
Advantage
Consumer and
Production
Advantage
No
Advantage
Consumer
Advantage
Exhibit 8.6 summarizes the types of advantages ﬁrms with superior asset
utilization and proﬁtability have.12 Few ﬁrms possess both a consumer and
a production advantage, and nearly all of them are eCAPs.
As a ﬁrm matures, it may earn a great deal of cash but lack opportunities
to grow organically. In modern times, ﬁrms have repurchased shares to
distribute proﬁts back to shareholders. (Historically, dividends have been
treated like ordinary income and taxed at a higher rate than capital gains;
stock buybacks have been a tax-eﬃcient form of capital distribution and,
more cynically, of boosting EPS and executive bonuses.) Since 2005,
for instance, Microsoft has repurchased more than $140 billion in stock
versus issuance of $25 billion and taken its debt/equity ratio from 0% to
above 50%.
Mature ﬁrms are generally price takers. The rate of decay in proﬁtability
is twice as high as it is for eCAPs. In industries that lack competitive
advantages, the key to survival is eﬃciency. Only the very best operators
can prosper in such industries. Examples include Exxon, the world’s most
successful integrated oil & gas energy ﬁrm, and BHP Billiton, a skilled
operator in the highly volatile mining industry. Both ﬁrms have seen
operating proﬁtability rise from below cost of capital to lofty peaks and
fall again as underlying commodity prices tanked.
12Michael J. Mauboussin and Dan Callahan, “Calculating Return on Invested Capital: How to Deter-
mine ROIC and Address Common Issues,” 15. Published by Credit Suisse.
273

Beyond Earnings
Dogs (Turnarounds or Restructuring)
The ﬁnal phase of the life-cycle describes unproﬁtable mature ﬁrms. As a
company evolves, the organization can become increasingly complex, chal-
lenging management and its organizational structure in novel ways. Previ-
ously innovative ﬁrms can become bureaucratic where marginal choices
are dictated by subcommittee. These ﬁrms have likely lost the plot that
meeting customer needs with novel or cost-eﬀective solutions is the key
to longevity and prosperity. Such ﬁrms reside in the Dogs quadrant where
CFROI is below the cost of capital and growth is sputtering. Dividends are
a larger portion of capital payments, and can become diﬃcult to sustain as
proﬁtability erodes. In many cases, management is reluctant to cut the div-
idend since that would signal the trouble that the company is in. High debt
coupled with a year of poor proﬁtability can ruin the ﬁrm if appropriate
steps are not taken.
In 2000, Castle A.M., a specialty metals and plastics distributor, vigor-
ously debated cutting its dividend. A decline in proﬁtability brought on
by a fall in steel prices placed the ﬁrm in a precarious position. It began
borrowing debt to fund its common dividend so that management could
hoard what remained of its small cash pile to support the ﬁrm’s daily oper-
ating activities. This is not a good position in which to be. An existential
crisis loomed and many ﬁrms have come to a premature end by failing to
adhere to the principles of value creation.
Castle made the brave choice. On May 2, 2001, the board announced
a signiﬁcant cut in the quarterly dividend from 19.5 cents to 12.5 cents.
Another cut would soon be necessary, and the fourth quarter dividend was
slashed even further to six cents per share. Before the year was over, the
dividend was suspended. The 2001 annual report notes the decision of the
board as follows:
“In order to build a stronger equity base, the Company has made
signiﬁcant and sustainable reductions in its operating expense base.
These structural changes will increase proﬁtability once the economy
begins to recover … Finally, dividends have been suspended in order
274

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
to maintain working capital compliance and minimize any further
reduction in stockholder’s equity.”
The language of the report shows Castle was dangerously close to
defaulting on its debt, in which case the ﬁrm would likely no longer
exist. Management was wrong to allow the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial condition to
deteriorate so egregiously, but at the eleventh hour they made the hard,
but correct, choice to ﬁx the business and slash the dividend.
Conventional ﬁnance theory states that the market reacts poorly to
dividend cuts and favorably to its increase. This is termed the “signaling
eﬀect,” and the implication from a cut is that the ﬁrm no longer has
favorable growth opportunities. For Castle, the conventional view was
wrong. Investors were not hoodwinked by the machinations of corporate
managers to fund common dividends with an increasingly onerous
debt obligation. Nor were they fooled by the grim outlook for U.S.
steel companies in the face of improving international competition and
guttering commodity prices.
On the day that the dividend cut was announced, the share price leapt
3.3%. Eliminating the dividend freed the company from an unnecessary
and burdensome obligation it could not aﬀord, and signaled that the ﬁrm
was serious about getting its house in order. Shareholders applauded the
changes. Management must never forget that ultimately, rational investors
prefer more wealth to less and that destructive policies that focus on win-
dow dressing will be penalized by investors. Smart choices will be rewarded.
In this phase, it is vital for managers to stop trying to grow out of trouble.
Tough decisions are required. Unsustainable dividends must be cut or elim-
inated. As cash ﬂow declines, oppressive debt obligations need to be cor-
rected, perhaps by selling assets. Management must jettison unproﬁtable
projects and renew focus on operational excellence. Industry consolidation
may be necessary to purge excess capacity and restore proﬁtability.
It is no exaggeration that successfully navigating this phase is a matter of
corporate life and death. Few managers succeed in turning an unproﬁtable
Dog around. We found that 30% of turnaround eﬀorts lead to improved
275

Beyond Earnings
CFROI, but less than 10% of ﬁrms are capable of sustaining the improvement.
These are grim odds. Dogs that fail to compete eﬀectively are ultimately
ground into the dust of history.
Final Remarks on the Competitive Life-Cycle
“The value of a company selling a trendy product, such as television
shopping, depends on the proﬁtability of the product, the product
lifecycle, competitive barriers, and the ability of the company to
replicate its current success.”
—Seth Klarman of Baupost
Corporations evolve in myriad ways. Common traits characterize a
ﬁrm’s position in the competitive life-cycle. These traits can be helpful in
understanding many of the key challenges a ﬁrm will face in its pursuit of
proﬁts.
The working assumption of analysts should be that a ﬁrm is more likely
to become average than stellar. Some ﬁrms are extraordinary and will
become Stars, but they are rare. Competition is relentless. Most are already
fading toward average. Understanding the pace at which a ﬁrm will tend
toward average should be the principle focus of consideration. Fade diﬀers
by life-cycle position, as we will see in the next chapter. Firms that survive
long enough will eventually earn little better than average proﬁtability.
Honeywell is an interesting contrast to the story of Sears. Exhibit 8.7
displays the CFROI for Honeywell since 1950. Markers circles show the
life-cycle position of Honeywell over time. In the early 1960s, Honeywell
had high growth expectations embedded in its stock price and CFROI
accelerated oﬀthe 1958 low. Honeywell entered a Question Mark phase
as investor excitement gained momentum. Would the ﬁrm become a Star
with CFROI climbing well-above average coupled with several years of
bountiful growth?
Many investors priced the stock with this expectation, but Honeywell
disappointed. CFROI peaked in 1964, but by then investors had already
276

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
EXHIBIT 8.7 Honeywell International and its different life-cycle states.
0
5
10
15
CFROI
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
CFROI
Dog
?
Cash Cow
eCAP
Star
lost conﬁdence and re-priced the stock to remain a Dog for years to come.
Dogs typically do not quickly reverse their fortunes. Honeywell ﬂoun-
dered until the 1980s, twenty years of lackluster performance. Improving
CFROI throughout the seventies and eighties slowly lifted its status from
Dog toward Cash Cow. Investors started to wonder: Could management
stabilize operational performance above the cost of capital and remain prof-
itable? Were better prospects on the horizon? Was Honeywell destined for
the stars? The stock price inched higher.
Honeywell is a wonderful example of a mature company (HON traces
its roots back to 1885) that reinvigorated itself.
Regardless of a ﬁrm’s current life-cycle position, it can transition to any
other state. Exhibit 8.8 provides the empirical evidence. The vertical axis
represents a ﬁrm’s starting life-cycle position, and the horizontal axis is its
position ﬁve years later.
Note how few Question Marks become a Star or eCAP over any ﬁve-year
horizon (but it does happen). The odds of becoming a Star are roughly
1-in-8. Stars disperse and scatter to every group. eCAPs are resilient, and
nearly 80% remain in position or move favorably to Star. Dogs are similarly
277

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 8.8 Life-cycle transition probabilities. The y-axis is a ﬁrm’s starting
position; the x-axis is its ending position ﬁve years later.
?
Star
eCAP
Cow
Dog
Exit%
?
32%
13%
3%
21%
31%
40%
Star
12%
29%
26%
17%
16%
32%
eCAP
4%
16%
63%
11%
6%
30%
Cash Cow
10%
13%
12%
30%
35%
38%
Dog
13%
7%
2%
18%
59%
39%
Source: Credit Suisse, HOLT. 1990–2015, minimum market capitalization $250m.
EXHIBIT 8.9 Life-cycle transition annualized shareholder return. The y-axis is
the ﬁrm’s starting position, the x-axis is its ending position ﬁve
years later.
?
Star
eCAP
Cow
Dog
?
−5%
10%
−7%
−6%
−15%
Star
−9%
6%
55
−10%
−21%
eCAP
−8%
2%
3%
−11%
−19%
Cash Cow
−2%
14%
10%
0%
−10%
Dog
3%
21%
7%
5%
−10%
Source: Credit Suisse, HOLT. 1990–2015, minimum market capitalization $250m.
persistent but with a negative consequence, and few Dogs sustain lasting
improvement.
Transitioning from a Dog or Cash Cow to an eCAP or Star is infrequent,
but possible. Over any ﬁve-year interval, about 7% of Dogs transition to
Stars and 2% to eCAPs, giving investors odds of about 1-in-10 of hitting
a long ball with such an investment.
But the payoﬀfor correctly anticipating a transition can be enormous
(Exhibit 8.9). Stocks that went from Dog to Cash Cow, eCAP, or Star out-
performed their benchmark index by an average 9% each year! Using the
life-cycle framework to think about a ﬁrm’s transition possibilities can reap
big dividends when investors get it right.
ESSENTIAL FACTS ABOUT THE COMPETITIVE
LIFE-CYCLE
The competitive life-cycle framework is a useful tool for thinking in a
principled and probabilistic way about a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability and growth
278

The Competitive Life-Cycle of Corporate Evolution
challenges. Key traits describe a ﬁrm’s life-cycle position and help quantify
the odds of its next transition.
• Corporate persistence and its variation diﬀer by life-cycle state.
• Only 1-in-8 (13%) of Question Marks become a Star. eCAPs
and Cash Cows (eCAPs are primarily a subgroup of Cash Cows)
exhibit the highest persistence and lowest volatility in CFROI
compared to other life-cycle states.
• Dogs demonstrate the largest variability in future CFROI. This is
intuitive as many of these ﬁrms are grappling for survival. Even
though future CFROI ranges widely, most Dogs are ultimately
unable to ﬁx their businesses.
• Question Marks have the next highest average fade and volatil-
ity in future proﬁtability. Cash Cows are in a state of slow proﬁt
decline whereas Question Marks are often priced for big success.
Still, transitioning to Star is rare.
• Companies “exit” at all points. By exit, we mean the corporate
entity ceases to exist as a stand-alone enterprise. Just half of com-
panies survive as a listed entity for 10 years. Most companies are
acquired or merge as they age; about 2% go bankrupt every year.
Other ﬁrms de-list from their exchange or are privatized, and a
few simply cease operations.
Exhibit 8.10 summarizes key traits of corporations at diﬀerent life-cycle
states.
By count, mature ﬁrms make up the largest group of traded stocks, mak-
ing up roughly 50%. This group includes Dogs (14%), Cash Cows (32%),
and close to one-half of eCAPs. Question Marks comprise 26% of traded
stocks, followed by Stars at 19% (Exhibit 8.11).
Based on market capitalization, Stars make up an impressive 42% of
aggregate size even though they represent 19% of stocks by count. eCAPs
represent less than 10% of all ﬁrms but make up a sizeable 20% of aggre-
gate market capitalization, more than double their inﬂuence by count.
279

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 8.10 General features of competitive life-cycle states.
State 1
State 2
State 3
State 4
State 5
Start-up / Question Marks
Star
eCAPs
Cash Cow
Dogs
CFROI < r
CFROI > r
CFROI > r
CFROI ∼r
CFROI < r
g > CFROI
g ∼CFROI
g < CFROI
g < CFROI
g < CFROI
P/B high
P/B high
P/B high
P/B high
P/B low
Low
low
no debt
no or low debt
low - med debt
med-high debt
high debt
no dividend
no or low dividend
high dividend
high dividend
dividend
EXHIBIT 8.11 Percent of publicly traded ﬁrms by life-cycle state.
Cash Cows
32%
eCAPs
9%
Dogs
14%
Qs
26%
Stars
19%
by Count
Cash Cows
22%
eCAPs
20%
Dogs
3%
Qs
13%
Stars
42%
by Size
Not surprisingly, Dogs represent a withering 3% of aggregate size. Total
market capitalization for all mature ﬁrms sums to roughly 45% (eCAPs,
Cash Cows, and Dogs). The remaining 13% of aggregate market capital-
ization are Question Marks.
280

9
THE PERSISTENCE OF
CORPORATE
PROFITABILITY
There is no more important proposition in economic theory than that,
under competition, the rate of return on investment tends toward equality
in all industries.
—George Stigler
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Fade is the rate at which corporate proﬁtability trends towards the
mean.
• Fade is the complement of persistence (f = 1 – 𝜌).
• On average, ﬁrms lose 10% of their excess return per year.
• Highly persistent ﬁrms fade at half the rate of an average ﬁrm.
Many of these ﬁrms are classiﬁed as eCAPs (a subgroup of Stars
and Cash Cows).
281
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• Firms in highly cyclical industries often fade at a rate of more than
10% per year.
• By competitive life-cycle state, Cash Cows are the most persis-
tently proﬁtable, while Dogs are the most persistently unprof-
itable.
LONG-TERM REAL RETURN ON INVESTMENT
We have laid the groundwork for measuring corporate performance and
recognizing that metrics have their strengths and weaknesses. Return on
equity (ROE) is simple to calculate but susceptible to misrepresentation
and manipulation. Return on invested capital (ROIC) is a better measure
of proﬁtability but still vulnerable to accounting distortions. CFROI
takes more eﬀort to calculate but better reﬂects a ﬁrm’s true economic
performance.
Superior metrics require considerable attention to maintain because
accounting standards are not intended to mirror economic reality; are
not globally aligned; are vulnerable to corporate inﬂuence; and standards
change over time.1 Professors Lev and Gu demonstrate that accounting
measures now have a far lower statistical relationship to market prices than
before the information age rocketed to dominance. They state that, “The
1980s saw the emergence and steep rise in the economic role of intangible
(intellectual) assets.”2
We have shown the steps that HOLT takes to ensure that CFROI
remains an unrivaled measure of corporate performance. A signiﬁcant
amount of energy is expended each year so that CFROI is measured in
an economically consistent manner across companies, sectors, regions,
1We recall well the rancorous debates over accounting issues such as whether to eliminate
pooling-of-interests, treatment of operating leases, executive compensation and stock option expense,
and how best to account for pension obligations, among others (remember when options could be
back-dated?). An interesting book on this topic is Called to Account: Financial Frauds that Shaped the
Accounting Profession by Paul M. Clikeman, Professor of Accounting at University of Richmond, pub-
lished by Rutledge, 2013.
2Baruch Lev and Feng Gu, The End of Accounting and the Path Forward for Investors and Managers.
John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
282

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
and time. Given a reliable metric, we now turn to the topic of fade, or
reversion to the mean, in corporate proﬁtability.
THE LONG-TERM REAL REQUIRED RATE OF RETURN
Exhibit 9.1 shows the median and size-weighted annual CFROI for global
industrial and service ﬁrms from 1950 to 2015. Firms outside the United
States are generally not available in the HOLT database before 1985 (aside
from ADRs), so the history of CFROI from 1950 to 1985 is predominantly
that of corporate United States, but increasingly global thereafter.
The median CFROI across all years is 6%. This is considered by HOLT
to be the long-term mean-reverting CFROI level. Unsurprisingly, this
level coincides with the long-term real rate of return earned by equities as
indicated by Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton in their exhaustive study (see
Exhibit 7.1 in Chapter 7) on long-run rates of return.
Global aggregate CFROI, shown as bars, is asset-weighted and
represents the average return to the largest ﬁrms. Note the lower
EXHIBIT 9.1 Size-weighted CFROI for Global & USA Industrial / Service
Firms, $250 million minimum market cap 1950–2015.
CFROI© - cash flow return on investment
0
2
4
6
8
10
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Global
Median
U.S.
LT CFROI = 6%
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
283

Beyond Earnings
return to large global ﬁrms during the years 1965 to 1995. This
pattern reverses thereafter, and over the most recent twenty years,
size is associated with earning and sustaining proﬁts. The shift away
from asset-intensive manufacturing in many developed economies
and the attractive proﬁtability of asset-light ﬁrms (companies with
signiﬁcant intangibles), such as Microsoft, Oracle, Apple, Google,
Johnson & Johnson, Pﬁzer, and Amgen, help to explain the boost in
CFROI.
Beginning in 2003, CFROI signiﬁcantly improved above its long-term
level, peaking at 8.2% in 2007 for global equities and 10% for the United
States. This spike in CFROI captures the feverish pace of economic activity
and animal spirits that pushed the global economy to its frothy peak right
before the credit crisis of 2008. Since then, global CFROI has declined,
supporting the tendency to revert to the mean. CFROI for U.S. companies
remains elevated.
Hidden behind the data plot in Exhibit 9.1 is an interesting dynamic:
Every year, there is a constant reshuﬄing of winners and losers within each
industry as veterans and new entrants compete for proﬁts. This shuﬄing
makes it unclear how the average rate of return evolves for aging ﬁrms
since we only see the average. This distinction is important because we now
wish to understand how CFROI tends to behave as a company matures.
Is it random walk, improving, or deteriorating in an unpredictable fashion
depending on the fortunes of the company? Or, is there a general pattern
that lends itself to prediction?
In Exhibit 9.2, we created two portfolios based on a company’s CFROI
rank and placed the top 20% of ﬁrms in the highest CFROI portfolio
and the bottom 20% in the lowest CFROI portfolio. Beginning in 1980,
we tracked the median CFROI of each portfolio over time. These port-
folios represent aging ﬁrms. For both proﬁtable and unproﬁtable groups,
CFROI converges toward 6%. This process is known as “reversion to the
mean.”
This phenomenon isn’t limited to just 1980. We could pick any year,
and the results would be similar: Firms with high CFROI tend to earn
284

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
EXHIBIT 9.2 Median CFROI of High and Low CFROI portfolios over time.
–5
0
5
10
15
CFROI %
0
5
10
15
years after portfolio formation
Highest CFROI performers
Lowest CFROI performers
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT. Global non-ﬁnancials, $250 million minimum market capitalization.
CFROI ranked and grouped in 1980, subsequent performance is median CFROI by group.
lower future CFROI, and ﬁrms with low CFROI tend to earn higher future
CFROI. Regardless of starting proﬁtability, CFROI tends to converge
toward 6% over time.
It is true that there are always exceptions. These exceptions are what
make predicting corporate performance exciting. Some companies like
LVMH, the luxury goods powerhouse, display unusual proﬁt persistence.
But enduring proﬁt makers make up less than 5% of all publicly traded
ﬁrms. Most ﬁrms revert to the mean.
Is mean-reversion in CFROI a result of random behavior (in any given
year, a few ﬁrms win and then next year’s winners are shuﬄed again), or is
this process explained by something other than chance? Exhibit 9.2 does
not provide proof of mean-reversion; it only hints at its possible existence
in the data. In the chapter on the competitive life-cycle, we stressed that
companies can transition from their current state to any life-cycle state over
time. Is there a detectable pattern that can help us make better predictions?
We require convincing evidence.
285

Beyond Earnings
MEASURING PERSISTENCE
Transition Matrices as a Means of Quantifying Fade
An intuitive approach for testing persistence in corporate proﬁtability is to
examine the transition rates of ﬁrms moving from one performance cate-
gory to another over some time interval. Let’s develop a simple test and
place companies into quartiles (four rank-based groups) based on their
starting CFROI level. In which quartile are ﬁrms after four years?
If ﬁrms do not move between quartiles, then persistence is high: Com-
panies that make money will continue to make money. Conversely, if ﬁrms
frequently change quartiles, then persistence is low: Companies that make
money, as well as companies that don’t, will become average performers
with age.3
In Exhibit 9.3, CFROI quartiles are determined by a ﬁrm’s
sector-relative rank. The vertical axis (y-axis) shows the starting CFROI
quartile, and a ﬁrm’s ending quartile (after four years) is located by moving
horizontally. The highest CFROI companies are in Q4, which represents
the top 25% of CFROI earners from each sector. If corporate performance
is random, then regardless of a ﬁrm’s CFROI rank at the start, it will
wander into any of the four quartiles with a probability of 25%.
What is the relative rank after four years for the lowest quartile (Q1)?
56% of Q1 ﬁrms remained in the bottom quartile after four years, more
EXHIBIT 9.3 Transition Probability % Global Industrial/Service Firms,
1985–2013.
Q1: −−
Q2: −
Q3: +
Q4: ++
quartile, t+0
Q1: −−
56
27
11
6
Q2: −
28
40
23
8
Q3: +
13
28
39
20
Q4: ++
9
12
28
51
-------------- quartile, t+4 --------------
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT. Global non-ﬁnancials, $250 million minimum market capitalization.
3This does not necessarily imply mean-reversion, where return on investment tends to converge toward
an average level. Instead, in the case where return on investment is random, a ﬁrm’s performance
over time equals the average. The property of mean-reversion is met under certain conditions, deﬁned
hereafter.
286

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
than twice the amount expected if CFROI was random. On the other hand,
44% (100% −56%) of these ﬁrms transitioned into higher quartiles. We
would have expected 75% of these ﬁrms to have transitioned into higher
performance quartiles if CFROI was random. Only 17% of bottom quar-
tile ﬁrms transition to being above average performers over four years.
Firms with high CFROI behaved similarly, though transitions occurred
with slightly greater frequency: 51% remained in the highest CFROI quar-
tile after four years; 49% fell in relative rank. This higher probability of
transition may hint that competition between proﬁtable businesses is more
aggressive than it is for unproﬁtable ﬁrms. In the previous chapter, we saw
that Dogs (ﬁrms with CFROI and growth below average) remain stuck in
the mud. Note that 21% of top quartile performers fall to below average
over four years.
The transition matrix oﬀers further evidence that CFROI is persistent
and not random.
Industry Persistence: Does Industry Matter?
“A truly great business must have an enduring ‘moat’ that pro-
tects excellent returns on invested capital. The dynamics of capital-
ism guarantee that competitors will repeatedly assault any business
‘castle’ that is earning high returns … Our criterion of ‘endur-
ing’ causes us to rule out companies in industries prone to rapid
and continuous change. Though capitalism’s ‘creative destruction’
is highly beneﬁcial for society, it precludes investment certainty. A
moat that must be continuously rebuilt will eventually be no moat
at all.” 4
—Warren Buﬀett
Return on capital and its persistence vary by industry. For example, the
median CFROI for Food, Beverage, and Tobacco (FBT) from 1985 to
2015 was 7.6% compared with a median CFROI of 4.2% for Energy. The
4www.businessinsider.com/warren-buﬀetts-4-investing-principles-2016-1.
287

Beyond Earnings
average ﬁrm in FBT earns a CFROI equal to that of a top-tier Energy
company. Although return on capital for FBT is stable, CFROI for Energy
is cyclical. FBT is a defensive industry and its companies have consider-
able competitive advantages and economic moats. The time-series charts
in Exhibits 9.4 and 9.5 show that meaningful diﬀerences can exist in both
the level and variation of CFROI at the industry level.
How often do ﬁrms within an industry transition between perfor-
mance quartiles? Exhibit 9.6 shows that there is a 70% probability of
a top-performing FBT ﬁrm remaining in the top quartile after four
years, and only a 9% chance (3% + 6% = 9%) of it transitioning to a
below-average company. In contrast, Energy ﬁrms, which have signiﬁ-
cantly higher variation in CFROI, show lower persistence (Exhibit 9.6).
Only 41% of top-performing Energy ﬁrms remain in the top quartile of
industry performance after four years.
The high rate of persistence for FBT companies hints at strong barriers
to entry that keep new competitors out and existing competitors locked
in place. Energy’s lower persistence suggests greater dynamism, intense
EXHIBIT 9.4 Time-series of CFROI for global Food, Beverage, and Tobacco,
$250 million minimum market capitalization, 1985–2015.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
CFROI %
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
75%ile
median
25%ile
median CFROI since 1985 = 7.6%
Food, Beverage & Tobacco
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
288

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
EXHIBIT 9.5 Time-series of CFROI for global Energy, $250 million minimum
market capitalization, 1985–2015.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
CFROI %
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
75%ile
median
25%ile
median CFROI since 1985 = 4.2%
Energy
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
EXHIBIT 9.6 CFROI transition matrix for Food, Beverage, and Tobacco.
Q1: −−
Q2: −
Q3: +
Q4: ++
quartile, t+0
Q1: −−
73
20
6
2
Q2: −
23
47
24
5
Q3: +
8
24
45
23
Q4: ++
3
6
21
70
-------------- quartile, t+4 --------------
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT, min size $250m, 1985–2015.
EXHIBIT 9.7 CFROI transition matrix for energy.
Q1: −−
Q2: −
Q3: +
Q4: ++
quartile, t+0
Q1: −−
43
29
17
11
Q2: −
22
36
30
12
Q3: +
12
29
37
22
Q4: ++
11
20
28
41
-------------- quartile, t+4 --------------
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT, min size $250m, 1985–2015.
competition, and signiﬁcantly lower switching costs to customers for
choosing a diﬀerent brand. In commodity sectors, it is crucial to be the
best operator and to possess production advantages. For most people,
289

Beyond Earnings
the nearest gas station will do just ﬁne, but switching between consumer
brands is rare, for example, Coca Cola versus Pepsi, and even when it
happens, consumers tend to quickly revert to their preferred brand.
Did you notice that all the transition matrices indicate that companies
with above-average CFROI are more likely to earn lower future CFROI? In
Exhibit 9.3, ﬁrms with above-average CFROI in Q3 had a 41% probability
of transitioning to a lower quartile after four years versus a 20% probability
of becoming a top quartile performer. Even highly persistent Q3 ﬁrms in
the FBT sector show a 32% probability of declining to a lower quartile
after four years as compared to a 23% probability of improving relative
performance. What you are seeing is reversion to the mean in corporate
proﬁtability, not random chance. Corporate proﬁtability is sticky (persis-
tent) but tends to deteriorate for above-average companies.
Reversion to the Mean
The empirical evidence is mounting that corporate proﬁtability reverts to
the mean. High levels of proﬁtability are more likely to fall toward the
mean than increase and vice versa. Reversion to the mean does not require
a cause for investors to put it to work as a predictive tool. It is a statistical
fact of life and can be utilized to make better forecasts.
In econometrics, the workhorse empirical model of mean reversion anal-
ysis is the ﬁrst-order autoregressive model, denoted AR(1). An autoregres-
sive process is one in which the current value of a variable, x, depends upon
the values that the variable took in previous periods, plus an error term:
xt = 𝛼+ 𝛽xt−1 + et
where et is a random error term with an expected value of zero, and 𝛼is a
constant equal to the intercept. An AR(1) model relies on serial correlation.
Correlation measures the strength of the relationship between two vari-
ables. It is a scaled measure bounded between −1 and +1, which makes
it easy to interpret. When association is perfect and positive, correlation is
+1.0. When the association is perfect and negative, correlation is −1.0. An
290

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
example of a perfect positive relationship is if students retained their same
relative rank over two consecutive terms. A negative correlation would see
the rank reverse with the best students becoming the worst. If the best
students retain top positions over many terms, then the ranking is highly
persistent. Reversion to the mean occurs for any linear process where cor-
relation is between 0 and 1.5 We want to stress that correlation does not
imply causation.
Substituting CFROI into equation (9.1) produces:
CFROIi,t = 𝛼i + 𝛽× CFROIi,t−1 + et
(9.1)
Equation (9.1) states that the CFROI of company i at time t is a function
of its most recent CFROI at time t −1 plus a random error term, e, with
expected value of zero. The intercept is related to the mean, which is the
level of mean reversion.6
Exhibit 9.8 shows the correlation (rho or 𝜌) between 2011 and 2012
CFROI for Industrial and Service ﬁrms in the United States (we could
have picked any year; the results will be similar). The correlation equals
0.90, suggesting a very strong and positive relationship, but also indicating
reversion to the mean. Notice that the slope 𝛽from Equation 9.1 is 0.88.
This value is derived from linear regression and is almost identical to the
correlation because annual CFROI variance is stable.
Hereafter, we refer to beta as the CFROI persistence factor, and denote
it as 𝜌.
For CFROI, the persistence factor should be interpreted in the same way
as correlation. A value of 1.0 indicates perfect persistence, 𝜌=0 describes
randomness, and 𝜌between 0 and 1 indicates reversion to the mean.7 Note
that 𝜌should not exceed +1 or fall below −1. A persistence factor of −1 is
generally unrealistic, and would indicate a situation where CFROI cycles
above and below its mean.
5It will also occur when correlation is between -1.0 and 0, but every other time period will oscillate
between positive and negative values. We will exclude this possibility for simplicity.
6For the AR(1) equation, the mean equals x = 𝛼∕(1 −𝛽).
7To be precise, a slope of 1.0 would be an indication of a random walk process where your best guess
is the last observation and then it wanders with a random error term.
291

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 9.8 Scatter plot of CFROI persistence for U.S. Industrial and Service
Firms.
–20
0
20
40
60
CFROI(t)
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
CFROI(t–1)
U.S. Industrial / Service firms, year = 2012
correl, rho  = 0.90
slope, beta = 0.88
Correlation in CFROI
1-year time lag
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
An interesting property of an AR(1) model is that the rate of decay, or
(1 −𝜌), is geometric and compounds over time.8 Thus, a ﬁrm with a one
year persistence factor of 0.9 will likely retain 90% of its previous excess
return. After two years, 81% of the excess return remains (0.92 = 0.81).
The complement of persistence, (1 −𝜌), is the fade rate, f, or the speed
of reversion to the mean.
Competitive Advantage and Its Effect on Fade
How does fade aﬀect corporate proﬁtability? A stylized example of a ﬁrm
with a starting CFROI of 20% and diﬀerent levels of proﬁt persistence is
shown in Exhibit 9.9. The average CFROI is assumed to be the long-term
global average of 6%. A high fade rate indicates faster reversion to the mean;
a low fade rate indicates slower reversion.
As persistence rises, the fade rate decreases, which extends a ﬁrm’s
period of competitive advantage. A 90% persistence rate means that a
8In discrete space, decay is geometric; in continuous space, it is exponential.
292

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
EXHIBIT 9.9 Stylized example of excess return half-life.
13.5 yrs
6.6 yrs
3.1 yrs
1.4 yrs
0
5
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
CFROI %
95% p
90% p
80% p
60% p
half-life CFROI
ﬁrm will likely lose 10% (1 −𝜌) of its excess proﬁtability each year as
CFROI converges toward the long-term average. After 10 years, a ﬁrm
enjoying 90% persistence will still earn excess proﬁts. On the other hand,
a ﬁrm with proﬁt persistence of 60% will shed 40% of excess proﬁt
each year, and will earn little more than a CFROI of 6% after just four
years.
Fade is a powerful and intuitive way to understand if a ﬁrm possesses
a competitive advantage and for how long it is likely to persist. Scien-
tists refer to half-life to describe exponentially decaying phenomena. For
instance, a piece of uranium 238 will be only half uranium after 4.5 bil-
lion years of radioactive decay, the approximate age of the earth. During
that time, the uranium atoms turn into atoms of other materials, such as
thorium. If you wish to know how long it will take for a highly proﬁtable
ﬁrm to lose half of its excess return when its fade rate is 10%, then use this
formula:
T0.5 = −0.693
ln(𝜌)
293

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 9.10 Empirical fade in CFROI.
–5
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
Years after formation
highest
high
average
low
lowest
Median CFROI through Time
based on starting CFROI
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
where T0.5 is the half-life in years, and 𝜌is the persistence rate.9 For the
proﬁtable ﬁrm with a 90% persistence factor, it will take 6.6 years to lose
half of its excess proﬁtability.
Highly persistent companies with strong competitive advantages tend
to fade at or below 5% per year, while a typical ﬁrm fades at approximately
10%. Firms in cyclical industries like Energy and Materials might fade at
20% or more per year.
Exhibit 9.10 helps to visualize the tendency of corporate performance
to revert to the mean. The data are not restricted to a single starting year,
as in the scatter plot of Exhibit 9.8 but rather represent the average rate
of decay in CFROI for portfolios of high, medium, and low CFROI ﬁrms
over time.
The transition matrices show that CFROI migration is not a random
process. Our autoregressive test conﬁrms this point. While chance plays
9Exponential decay is a continuous process which can be described by the equation (x(t) −x) =
(x(0) −x)e−ft. The ﬁrst term is the spread at time t and the second is the beginning spread. The natural
log of 0.5 is −0.693. We will compound in discrete space. In exponential space, T0.5 = −ln(0.5)
f
294

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
an undeniable role, the steady march of corporate proﬁtability toward 6%
over the long haul highlights the challenge of maintaining excess proﬁts
and stresses how urgent it is that poor performers improve.
Industry CFROI Persistence
Exhibit 9.11 shows median annual CFROI persistence rates by industry
group and provides further evidence that proﬁtability mean-reverts, and
that the rate of persistence can vary signiﬁcantly by industry.
Firms in the industry groups, Household & Personal Products, Food
Beverage & Tobacco, and Consumer Services show the strongest aver-
age annual persistence, whereas ﬁrms in the industry groups Semiconduc-
tors, Energy, and Diversiﬁed Financial Services reveal the least persistence.
Lower persistence (higher fade) is an indication of a lack of pricing power
and competitive barriers.
EXHIBIT 9.11 Median annual CFROI persistence by U.S. Industry Groups.
Global Industrial/Service ﬁrms, $250 million minimum market
capitalization, 1985–2015.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
House & Personal Prods
Food, Bev & Tobacco
Food & Staples Retail
Consumer Services
Comm & Prof Srvcs
Pharma, Biotech & Life
Health Care Equip & Srvcs
Capital Goods
Media
Durables & Apparel
Retailing
Transportation
Telecom Services
Software & Services
Autos & Components
Reg. Utilities
Utilities
Insurance
Tech Hardware & Equip
Real Estate
Materials
Banks
Energy
Semis & Equipment
Diversified Financials
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
295

Beyond Earnings
Does CFROI Persistence Vary over Time?
As a ﬁnal consideration, let’s explore whether CFROI persistence varies
over time. Our research indicates that highly persistent industries will likely
remain highly persistent despite economic ups and downs.
For instance, global ﬁrms selling Food, Beverage, and Tobacco prod-
ucts show strong correlation between annual CFROI. Except during a few
periods, average correlation since 1985 has been 0.94 (Exhibit 9.12).
On the other hand, the returns from Energy companies are vulnerable
to many diﬀerent forces, such as volatile commodity prices, abrupt changes
in what people want to buy, how the industry is regulated, geopolitical and
resource luck, government policy in diﬀerent countries, and even envi-
ronmental disaster (BP’s Gulf oil spill). Firms subject to these forces are
price takers, not price setters, and CFROI persistence will be low. The only
way such a company can enjoy a competitive advantage is to be more eﬃ-
cient than the rest of the industry. Look for the most eﬃcient operators
in commodity industries and where competitors have limited consumer
advantages.
EXHIBIT 9.12 Annual CFROI correlation for Food, Beverage, & Tobacco
versus Energy, $250 million minimum market capitalization,
1985–2015.
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
FB&T
Energy
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
296

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
The waxing and waning of annual CFROI persistence indicates that
companies are subject to exogenous (external) forces, the most notable
being the overall economic cycle. The HOLT framework treats such shocks
as temporary. By ignoring the temporary boosts and declines in annual
CFROI persistence, HOLT eﬀectively “looks through” the transient shock.
The implication is that the shock is unpredictable. Can the shock be antic-
ipated? Probably not. On the other hand, if you have a strong view, and
expect—for instance for the Energy sector—that CFROI will be severely
depressed for an extended period, the speed of proﬁt mean-reversion can
be dampened (that is, unproﬁtable CFROI can be forecast to persist for a
longer period). This type of thoughtful deliberation is superior to one that
slaps a multiple on a terminal forecast.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: DEVELOPING A
MEAN-REVERTING FORECAST MODEL
HOLT measures persistence as the rate of decay in excess proﬁtability (or
the diﬀerence between current proﬁtability and the long-term mean of
6%). We assume that all ﬁrms converge over a forecast horizon toward
6% at a pace that depends on their speciﬁc rate of persistence.
By subtracting the mean CFROI from both sides, we rewrite
equation 9.1 as:
xt+1 = 𝜌(xt −x) +
x + 𝜀t+1
(9.2)
where:
xt
=
current CFROI
x
=
mean-reverting level or long-run industry average CFROI
𝜌
=
persistence factor
𝜀t+1
=
random shock to CFROI at t+1
The term 𝜌equals the persistence factor and x equals the mean-reverting
or average value of x.
297

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 9.13 Annual CFROI persistence and the long-term CFROI by
Industry Group. Global industrial/service ﬁrms, $250 million
minimum market capitalization, 1985–2015.
Industry Group
𝜌
LT CFROI %
CFROI (t+0) %
E[CFROI (t+4)] %
House & Personal Prods
0.95
11.6
20
18.5
Food, Bev & Tobacco
0.94
7.9
20
17.5
Food & Staples Retail
0.92
8.0
20
16.8
Consumer Services
0.91
7.6
20
16.1
Comm & Prof Srvcs
0.90
10.5
20
16.9
Pharma, Biotech & Life
0.89
6.4
20
14.9
Health Care Equip & Srvc
0.88
10.1
20
16.0
Capital Goods
0.88
6.3
20
14.4
Media
0.88
9.8
20
15.8
Durables & Apparel
0.87
7.7
20
14.7
Retailing
0.87
8.5
20
15.0
Transportation
0.86
5.0
20
13.3
Telecom Services
0.85
5.6
20
13.2
Software & Services
0.84
10.6
20
15.3
Autos & Components
0.83
5.1
20
12.3
Reg. Utilities
0.83
2.9
20
11.0
Utilities
0.82
4.0
20
11.3
Insurance
0.82
7.7
20
13.3
Tech Hardware & Equip
0.81
6.6
20
12.3
Real Estate
0.79
4.7
20
10.8
Materials
0.78
4.6
20
10.2
Banks
0.77
9.0
20
12.8
Energy
0.77
4.9
20
10.1
Semis & Equipment
0.72
5.9
20
9.8
Diversiﬁed Financials
0.71
8.8
20
11.6
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
CFROI persistence factors are shown in Exhibit 9.13 by industry group
for global equities. We added an additional category for regulated Utilities.
Industries are sorted by their persistence from strongest to weakest. Persis-
tence is measured over a four-year period, which allows us to forecast for
ﬁve years given a forward t+1 estimate. The long-term historical median
CFROI for each industry is shown.
Given the industry persistence rates and mean-reverting CFROI levels
shown in Exhibit 9.13, we are now ready to apply the concept of mean
reversion to forecasts of corporate proﬁtability. We will assume that the
expected CFROI for each industry will equal the historical average.10
10In the HOLT framework, it is conservatively assumed that all companies fade to 6% in the long run
and not to their industry averages.
298

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
First, let’s consider the case of a Household & Personal Products (HPP)
ﬁrm. The median CFROI in this industry is 11.6%. Annual CFROI per-
sistence is quite strong at 0.95, which translates into an annual fade rate of
5%. A ﬁrm in HPP that earns a CFROI of 20% is expected to fade over
the next four years in the following manner:
CFROIt+n = 𝜌n(CFROIt −CFROI) + CFROI + 𝜀t+n
CFROI4 = 0.954 × (20 −11.6) + 11.6 = 18.5%
A highly proﬁtable Energy ﬁrm is expected to fade like this:
CFROI4 = 0.774 × (20 −4.9) + 4.9 = 10.1%
The HPP ﬁrm is expected to fade from 20% to 18.5% whereas the
Energy ﬁrm is expected to fade from 20% to 10.1%. The Energy ﬁrm
reverts to average proﬁtability much faster than the HPP ﬁrm. Energy
ﬁrms’ proﬁts are inﬂuenced by commodity prices and macroeconomic ﬂuc-
tuations, suggesting that randomness and luck play a more inﬂuential role
in this industry. HPP ﬁrms are more defensive and many possess excep-
tional and durable brands that insulate sales and proﬁts during economic
downturns. Warren Buﬀett put it best:11
“A business that constantly encounters major change also encounters
many chances for major error. Furthermore, economic terrain that is
forever shifting violently is ground on which it is diﬃcult to build a
fortress-like business franchise. Such a franchise is usually the key to
sustained high returns.”
Because HOLT forecasts CFROI over a ﬁve-year period, an adjustment
is necessary to forecast over longer horizons. This can be accomplished by
bootstrapping annual persistence, as follows:
CFROIt = 𝜌t(CFROI0 −CFROI) + CFROI
(9.3)
11James O’Loughlin, The Real Warren Buﬀett: Managing Capital, Leading People, Nicholas Brealey,
2004.
299

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 9.14 Example of fading CFROI using industry inputs.
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20
CFROI (t+0)
HPP
Energy
Global CFROI Avg
For a 20-year forecast, we would expect CFROI to fade as follows for a
HPP ﬁrm:
CFROI20 = 0.9520(20 −11.5) + 11.5 = 14.8%
compared with the Energy ﬁrm:
CFROI20 = 0.7720(20 −4.9) + 4.9 = 4.9%
It is likely that a highly proﬁtable HPP ﬁrm will maintain much of its
proﬁtability, while an Energy ﬁrm starting at the same CFROI will quickly
revert to its industry mean. The HPP ﬁrm requires a longer forecast horizon
to eliminate excess proﬁts. Exhibit 9.14 highlights the expected fade in
CFROI for these two examples.
CONCLUSION
Persistence in corporate proﬁtability is an empirical fact. A trove of aca-
demic research reinforces this view. Largely overlooked by academia is the
practical application of persistence research to forecasts of corporate prof-
itability, an endeavor that HOLT has been actively leading for over forty
300

The Persistence of Corporate Proﬁtability
years. The concept of persistence is intuitively grasped by HOLT clients as
“fade.”
Fade is the mathematical complement of persistence. The average ﬁrm’s
proﬁtability decays toward its mean-reverting level at about 10% per year.
This decay rate, or fade, is the speed at which excess proﬁtability declines.
Companies with exceptional brands in defensive industries reveal
stronger persistence in CFROI and often fade at half the speed of the
average company. Some of these ﬁrms maintain high levels of proﬁtability
for decades and are priced to maintain it for many more decades. Highly
stable and proﬁtable companies comprise less than 5% of all equities,
and are heavily concentrated amongst the largest companies in the world.
When it comes to persistence, size matters. If you are convinced that a
ﬁrm has built and can maintain a sustainable competitive advantage, then
a fade rate of 5% is appropriate.
On the other hand, highly cyclical ﬁrms like those in the Energy and
Materials industries, are generally quite volatile and fade faster than most
other ﬁrms. Fade for these companies can exceed 20% a year, which means
that proﬁtability should not be expected to persist beyond a handful of
years.
Given the empirical evidence of fade, a simple but major improvement
to forecasting is to tamp down potential bias by adopting the logic (and
evidence) of reversion to the mean. Adopting fade is using an outside view
to make a better prediction.12 Unbiased forecasts of corporate proﬁtability
can be developed with conﬁdence using the information provided in this
chapter. Short and long-term forecasts can be developed by bootstrapping.
Let’s not forget the wry, but astute, observation of Professor Bruce Green-
wald speaking on the topic of competitive dynamics to help guide us all in
making better predictions: “In the long run, everything is a toaster.”
12Michael J. Mauboussin, Think Twice: Harnessing the Power of Counterintuition, Harvard Business
Press, 2009.
301

10
FORECASTING GROWTH
“Insuﬃcient facts always invite danger.”
—Spock, Star Trek, season 1, episode 24 (“Space Seed,” 1968)
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• High growth rates for sales, assets, and earnings are short-lived
and rarely persist.
• On average, few ﬁrms sustain exceptional growth beyond ﬁve
years.
• Lacking any other information, the most reasonable estimate of
asset growth net of inﬂation is 5%.
• The long-term asset growth rate after inﬂation has been approxi-
mately 2.5%.
• The probability of maintaining a given growth rate or higher for
diﬀerent lengths of time is shown and available to check growth
rate assumptions.
303
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
High growth rates are the holy grail of zealous investors. That’s because
extraordinary growth can vastly improve a company’s (and investor’s) for-
tunes. Backtests with perfect knowledge demonstrate that companies with
the highest growth had better total shareholder performance than lower
growth ﬁrms. This potential persuades many investors to pay large premi-
ums for high-growth stocks, but few ﬁrms actually deliver on these expec-
tations.1 The brutal reality is that, whereas CFROI is persistent over a ﬁve-
to ten-year window, growth is not.
Let’s consider the attraction of a growth stock by looking at Apple in
late 2007, a few months before the global credit crisis rocked the world.
Stock prices were ﬂying high, and investors were optimistic about global
growth. Apple was undergoing a mesmerizing transformation. With Steve
Jobs back at the helm, the ﬁrm had heaved its corporate body out of the
trenches. From a low of −6% in 2001, CFROI had risen to 15% by the
end of 2006. The degree of CFROI improvement was unanticipated, and
investors reaped huge rewards. Market capitalization rose from $7.7 billion
at the end of 2001 to $172 billion in just six years, a 68% annual compound
rate of return. Investors were ecstatic, and they had every right to be. Apple’s
turnaround was nearly unprecedented.2
Given this virtuoso performance by Apple, by the end of 2007 it might
have seemed almost reasonable if investors had priced in sustained growth
rates above 30% for years to come. But that wasn’t the case at all.
Let’s recreate the pricing dynamics embedded in Apple’s stock price as
of December 2007. If we credit investors with nearly perfect foresight in
anticipating Apple’s CFROI over the ensuing ﬁve years (we will show that
CFROI is easier to predict than growth), what growth rate was necessary to
equate the prevailing stock price of December 2007 with the present value
of the forecast cash ﬂows?
The answer is shown in the middle panel of Exhibit 10.1, which reveals a
dashed line forecast growth rate of 31% falling to 8% by 2012. The hashed
1Bryant Matthews and David A. Holland, Quantifying Growth Expectations (2014); Prepared for
Chance: Forecasting Corporate Growth (2015). Both articles published by Credit Suisse HOLT.
2Bryant Matthews and David A. Holland, Terminal Success: Lessons from History’s Titans, Credit Suisse
HOLT, 2012.
304

Forecasting Growth
EXHIBIT 10.1 Apple‘s Relative Wealth Chart from 2006 through 2015.
Assuming investors accurately anticipated Apple’s CFROI
would improve to 24% over the next ﬁve years (forecast date
December 2007), then growth was clearly under estimated.
Sustained hyper-growth is highly unusual and hugely rewarding
for positive spread businesses. Attributing the rise in share
price over this period to unexpected growth, then growth
multiplied Apple’s value by 2.5×.
0
10
20
30
40
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
CFROI-
actual
CFROI-
implied
0
20
40
60
80
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Asset Growth (%) 
Growth
-actual
Growth
-implied
0
100
200
300
400
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Rel TSR (%)
Cum.
TSR
Rel.
Cum.
TSR
bars represent Apple’s achieved growth rate, and the area of the dashed bars
above the hashed line (circled) can be thought of as the unanticipated growth
rate that Apple achieved, thereby besting market expectations. But investors
are quick to absorb new information, and as early as 2009 were re-ratcheting
their anticipation of what Apple could achieve and pushing its share price
higher. It should be evident that the strong price gains in Apple’s stock over
the next few years far exceeded the performance of a ﬁrm whose future
CFROI and growth rates had been correctly anticipated.
305

Beyond Earnings
The lesson from this bite-sized Apple example is that sizzling growth
is not only exciting, but that for proﬁtable ﬁrms and greedy investors, it
can be transformative. In Apple’s case, investors did not price in sky-high
growth rates. Nevertheless, the extraordinary achievement of Apple and
similar ﬁrms persuades some investors, perhaps, that high growth is more
attainable than it really is. Behavioralists might attribute it to the availabil-
ity bias. (The probabilities of airline accidents, shark attacks, and spectac-
ular share price appreciation are overestimated after corresponding news is
reported.)
The empirical evidence has a lot to say about the persistence (or lack
thereof) of corporate growth. Rather than being a drawback, this informa-
tion can be used to make better predictions. Let’s use the skills acquired
from the last chapter to understand the persistence of corporate growth.
MEDIAN REAL ASSET GROWTH RATE
Since 1950, corporations listed on major exchanges have grown their asset
base each year by an average of 5% net of inﬂation. This level is not rep-
resentative of the average organic growth rate of older, mature companies.
The data on corporate growth is riddled with acquisitions which skews the
measurement of organic growth. Also, new ﬁrms enter the data set each year
having higher average growth. The eﬀect of these two inﬂuences makes it
diﬃcult to gain clear insight into the distribution of organic growth. This
is a critical point because a ﬁrm’s forecast cash ﬂows should be based on
organic growth unless the cost of acquisitions is deducted.3 We have wit-
nessed many forecasts that assume an acquisitive ﬁrm can continue to grow
at the same rate but without any recognition of the cost of future acquisi-
tions. As we’ve pointed out throughout the book, growth is not free.
3It is generally foolhardy to model an acquisitive future by mixing potential acquisitions with an exist-
ing business. In an eﬃcient market, we would expect the NPV of an acquisition to be zero. The reality
is that the NPV is usually negative for acquirers. The best way to model an acquisitive ﬁrm is value
its existing business with organic growth and to add the NPV of future potential acquisitions. Never
forget the NPV rule.
306

Forecasting Growth
EXHIBIT 10.2 Median real asset growth rate (RAGR). Global non-ﬁnancials,
no size restriction.
0
2
4
6
8
10
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
Median
U.S. size-weighted RAGR
Real Asset Growth Rate
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
Adjusting for acquisition eﬀects to better measure organic growth is
challenging but not impossible.4 We estimate that organic growth tends
to average around 4% to 5%, real, for ﬁrms having a market cap of $250
million or more. (Firms below this size displayed lower average growth.)
Our ﬁrst key insight is that, lacking any other information, the most
reasonable estimate of asset growth net of inﬂation is 5%, which coincides
well with Exhibit 10.2.
THE AVERAGE GROWTH RATE AS COMPANIES
MATURE
What happens to corporate growth as ﬁrms mature? Do they “tend” toward
a real asset growth rate of 5%?
4The authors have conducted two studies that attempt to measure organic growth. In the ﬁrst study,
conducted in 2004, all ﬁrms with unusual spikes in sales growth, goodwill, or assets (or, alternatively,
debt or equity) were examined for acquisitive eﬀects and removed from the sample. In another study
conducted in 2007, ﬁrms were linked by acquisition from data supplied by MergerStat and removed
from the sample. In both cases, average “organic” growth was 5% after inﬂation (real).
307

Beyond Earnings
To answer this, we collected new entrants and examined the median
growth rate for this group over time. Firms just entering the public record
tend to grow at high rates: the average freshman experienced real asset
growth averaging 16% in its ﬁrst public year, but this level quickly con-
verges toward 5%. Beyond 10 years, the average growth rate reverts toward
2.5%, and this process is generally complete within the next 10 years.5
Exhibit 10.3 motivates several observations. First, twenty years is a long
time for any company to survive as a stand-alone entity. Most ﬁrms survive
for less than ten years before being privatized or merged with another ﬁrm.
Second, to remain alive for twenty years is likely due to the fact that the
ﬁrm has competent managers and is a capable competitor. It is reasonable to
expect that the growth rate of these ﬁrms is biased upward, reﬂecting both
survivorship and success biases. Third, it is unreasonable to assume that sales
and assets will grow at diﬀerent rates over any long forecast horizon. To do so
impliessteadilyincreasingordecreasingasseteﬃciency,whereasourresearch
on asset utilization shows that assets and sales tend to co-vary together; and
over long time horizons, asset utilization approximates the average of the
EXHIBIT 10.3 Five-Year Median Forward Real Growth Rate by Firm Age.
13.3
6.9
3.8
3.1
2.5
14.1
9.4
4.6
3.6
2.8
100%
85%
54%
29%
16%
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1 – 5
6 – 10
11 – 15
16 – 20
Growth
Age of firm (from first date in database)
Asset
Growth
(real)
Sales
Growth
(real)
year:
survival:
5The cross-sectional average is 5% and the longitudinal average is 2.5%. In the HOLT model, asset
growth fades to 2.5% after the explicit forecast ends. Bear in mind that we cannot rid the data of a
possible success bias.
308

Forecasting Growth
ﬁrm’s industry.6 For this reason, we are comforted to see both assets and
sales converging toward a similar rate of growth. Finally, note that growth
rates do not immediately converge toward the long-term level of 2.5%. By
year ten, the average ﬁrm is growing close to 4% to 5%. A two-stage process
is evident for most companies in which growth ﬁrst converges toward 5%,
and then toward 2.5% for veterans. A diﬀerence of 2% to 3% in growth for
a proﬁtable company over a ten or twenty-year forecast horizon can lead to a
material diﬀerence in estimated value. If you do not have an informed view,
we recommend using a medium-term real growth rate of 5%, and 2.5% as
the terminal growth rate.7 Stable Cash Cows and eCAPs, for whom growth
has tapered, can be forecast using 2.5% throughout the forecast horizon.
IS CORPORATE GROWTH MEAN-REVERTING?
We’ve now come to the meat of the chapter. Is corporate growth a
mean-reverting process, or is growth simply a random outcome? The
tendency of maturing companies to grow closer to 2.5% over time is
an interesting observation but does not in any way empirically validate
reversion to the mean in corporate growth.
To test for mean-reversion, we ﬁrst examine our helpful transition matri-
ces to get a sense of how growth behaves (Exhibit 10.4).
Recall that for any random process in which values are rank-ordered and
grouped by quartile, there will be a 25% probability of shifting into any
other quartile over time. In Exhibit 10.4, we do not see a random process.
Instead, both sales and asset growth reveal that they are “sticky” or persis-
tent over a one year gap but nearly random after four years. Persistence is
not nearly as high as it is for CFROI.
In the top left transition matrix of Exhibit 10.4, a ﬁrm in the highest
quartile of asset growth (Q4) has a 40% probability of remaining in the top
quartile after one year and a 66% probability of maintaining above average
6Bryant Matthews and David A. Holland, The Anatomy of CFROI Fade: The Persistence of Proﬁtability
Margin and Asset Turns, November 2015, Credit Suisse HOLT.
7The assumptions regarding cost of capital and terminal growth should be consistent. In a conventional
DCF model using CAPM, the terminal growth rate should not exceed the long-term risk-free rate.
Also, the rates must be consistently stated in real or nominal space.
309

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 10.4 Inﬂation-adjusted asset growth and sales growth transition
matrices.
Q1: – – Q2: –
Q3: + Q4: ++
Q1: – – Q2: –
Q3: + Q4: ++
row
Q1: – – Q2: –
Q3: + Q4: ++ row
Q1: – –
42
27
18
13
1
44
27
16
13
1
Q2: –
26
35
26
13
2
27
38
24
11
2
Q3: +
18
28
34
21
3
17
27
36
20
3
Q4: ++
Q1: – –
Q2: –
Q3: +
Q4: ++
18
17
26
40
4
15
15
25
45
4
1
2
3
4
col
1
2
3
4
col
row
Q1: – – Q2: –
Q3: + Q4: ++ row
36
30
21
14
1
35
29
21
15
1
29
32
25
14
2
28
33
26
13
2
24
30
29
17
3
25
29
29
17
3
23
23
28
26
4
24
23
27
27
4
1
2
3
4
col
1
2
3
4
col
Ending real asset growth quartile, t+4
Ending real sales growth quartile, t+4
Starting Quartile
Ending real asset growth quartile, t+1
Ending real sales growth quartile, t+1
Starting Quartile
Q1: – –
Q2: –
Q3: +
Q4: ++
Q1: – –
Q2: –
Q3: +
Q4: ++
Starting Quartile
Starting Quartile
Source: Credit Suisse HOLT.
growth. Similar persistence is observed for the lowest growth ﬁrms. Clearly,
growth rates are not random, and persist for at least one year.
The bottom transition matrix shows that, however strong or weak a
company’s growth is, it is unlikely to sustain such growth over a four-year
horizon. Instead, growth rates devolve into a random process after only
a few years. This means that estimating above or below average growth
beyond ﬁve years is empirically diﬃcult to justify. Amazon’s phenomenal
growth is an exception to the rule.
The growth transition matrices indicate that growth is not random, but
rather weakly persistent. What does our empirical workhorse model of
mean-reversion show?
Recall that the AR(1) model measures the autocorrelation between a
variable with lags of itself. Assuming growth is best modeled as a linear
process, a correlation signal of 1.0 reveals perfect persistence, correlation of
−1.0 perfect negative persistence, and correlation of 0.0 represents random
association. Correlation between zero and 1.0 indicates reversion to the
mean. We once again chose 2012 to visualize the strength of association
for our measure of interest, in this case asset growth (Exhibit 10.5).
Autocorrelation of 0.31 indicates weak association and fast reversion to
the mean. 69% of excess growth was lost over a period of one year. The low
310

Forecasting Growth
EXHIBIT 10.5 One-year correlation in Real Asset Growth.
–50
0
50
100
RAGR(t)
–50
0
50
100
RAGR(t –1)
Global Industrial / Service firms, year = 2012
 correl, rho  = 0.31
Correlation in Real Asset Growth
1-year time lag
Source: Credit Suisse, HOLT. Global Industrial/Service companies, $250 million minimum market
capitalization.
correlation reveals that growth rates are diﬃcult to predict. This observation
is just as applicable for sales growth as it is for asset growth. Also note the
circle on the scatter plot is not centered as it was for CFROI. That’s because
growth rates are positively skewed.
In Chapter 9, we introduced half-life to describe exponentially decaying
phenomena. A company with a persistence factor of 90% (fade =10%)
reveals a half-life of 6.6 years, the time it takes on average to lose 50% of
excess proﬁtability. Growth rates are nowhere near as persistent as proﬁts.
A typical ﬁrm will lose half of its excess growth in just one year,
T0.5 = −0.693
ln(0.31) = 0.60 years,
and 99% of excess growth is eliminated within four years. This is con-
sistent with the insights gained from the transition matrices showing the
relationship between growth at time t and four years later.
311

Beyond Earnings
THE SUSTAINABILITY OF GROWTH
Because growth rates show little persistence, and a ﬁve-year forecast horizon
is a common feature of most DCF models, we examine the sustainability of
growth over ﬁve-year planning horizons. Do any detectable signals emerge?
Exhibit 10.6 shows the percentage of ﬁrms that sustained growth above a
given level for 1, 3, 5, and 10 years. You can use this cumulative probability
table as a guide to gauge a company’s likelihood of exceeding a target rate
of growth.
Column 1 shows a level of growth, g. The “≥50%” row shows the per-
centage of ﬁrms that sustained growth at or above 50% for the indicated
time, t, in years.
Columns 2, 3, and 4 show the compound eﬀect of growth g. For
example, 50% growth compounded ﬁve years equals 7.6 (1.55 = 7.6).
Sales of 1,000 compounded at this rate will have grown to 7,600.
Columns 5 to 12 show the percentage of ﬁrms that sustained growth g
for the indicated interval. Less than 1% of ﬁrms sustain annual growth of
50% or more for ﬁve years.
Let’s examine the 15% growth row. Some investors like to look for stocks
that can double over the next ﬁve years. The table shows that 24% of global
EXHIBIT 10.6 Global Industrial/Service ﬁrms, $250 million minimum market
cap, 1980–2015.
Compound Size
Increase
Median Real Asset
Growth > g
Median Real Sales
Growth > g
g
t = 3
t = 5
t = 10
1 yr
3 yr
5 yr
10 yr
1 yr
3 yr
5 yr
10 yr
≥50
3.4x
7.6x
57.7x
4
2
1
0
5
2
1
0
≥45
3.0x
6.4x
41.1x
5
2
1
0
6
3
2
1
≥40
2.7x
5.4x
28.9x
6
3
1
1
7
4
2
1
≥35
2.5x
4.5x
20.1x
8
4
2
1
9
5
3
1
≥30
2.2x
3.7x
13.8x
10
5
3
1
12
7
4
1
≥25
2.0x
3.1x
9.3x
13
8
5
2
15
9
6
2
≥20
1.7x
2.5x
6.2x
18
11
8
3
19
13
9
4
≥15
1.5x
2.0x
4.0x
24
18
13
7
26
20
15
9
≥10
1.3x
1.6x
2.6x
35
29
25
17
36
31
26
19
≥5
1.2x
1.3x
1.6x
52
50
47
40
51
48
46
42
≥0
1.0x
1.0x
1.0x
73
76
77
79
68
70
72
76
Median
5.4
4.8
4.3
3.7
5.1
4.8
4.3
3.7
312

Forecasting Growth
ﬁrms generate real asset growth of 15% or higher in any given year; 18%
sustain this level or more for three years, and only 13% can grow at this
level or more for ﬁve years. One-in-eight ﬁrms doubles its size over any
ﬁve-year horizon. Dare we say it again: Growth is diﬃcult to sustain.
The probabilities shown in Exhibit 10.6 are based on ﬁrms that survive
for the number of years indicated. Since most ﬁrms survive in some form
(only about 1%–1.5% of ﬁrms go bankrupt each year), the probabilities are
valid for all ﬁrms for which an analyst is making a forecast and for which
there is an expectation of corporate survival.
The empirical evidence on growth is clear: Growth rates are noisy,
quickly revert to the mean, and are, at best, weakly persistent.
FORECASTING GROWTH
Measuring a Firm’s Sustainable Growth Rate
A ﬁrm’s sustainable growth rate (SGR) is the maximum rate at which a
company can grow organically with the cash it generates from operations.8
This rate is typically equal to ROE or ROIC after required distributions
to debt and equity capital providers (interest and dividend payments). In a
dividend discount model (DDM), SGRequity = Plowback ratio × ROE where
the plowback or retention ratio is the amount of earnings retained to fund
growth.9 If 100% of earnings are retained, then growth equal to ROE can
be funded internally. The payout ratio equals one minus the plowback ratio,
or (1 – g/ROE) in the case of the DDM. Because the HOLT model uses
free cash ﬂow to the ﬁrm (FCFF), we need a measure of sustainable growth
for the enterprise.
A ﬁrm’s maximum sustainable growth rate equals its NOPAT as a per-
centage of its opening invested capital (NOPAT/ICBOY). FCFF is the cash
available to distribute to equity and debt providers after growth has been
funded.
8R. C. Higgins, “Sustainable Growth under Inﬂation,” Financial Management 10 (1981): 36–40.
9Richard A. Brealey, Stewart C. Myers, and Alan J. Marcus, Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, 3rd
edition, McGraw-Hill, 2000. See page 99 for a proof. We also showed this relationship to be true in
Chapter 2.
313

Beyond Earnings
Like the equity-based formula, the sustainable growth rate of the ﬁrm
equals:
SGRﬁrm = Plowback ratio × ROIC
In HOLT, enterprise plowback equals total gross cash ﬂow less an asset
replacement charge, which represents the amount of depreciating assets
that must be replenished each year due to obsolescence. If we imagine a
company with no dividend or debt payments, then plowback is simply
gross cash ﬂow less retirement (Plowback = GCF – R).
Because many ﬁrms pay dividends and borrow debt, the actual calcula-
tion of plowback is necessarily more complex:
Gross cash ﬂow
– Interest expense
– Dividends
– Rent expense
– Retirement (maintenance capex)
= Plowback
The ﬁrst two items below gross cash ﬂow are payments to capital
providers. Capital providers are entitled to these disbursements before
cash can be reinvested in the ﬁrm. Interest must be paid to debt providers.
Dividend payments are to common, preferred, and minority shareholders.
Rental expense is a contractual obligation for the use of leased assets used
to generate operating proﬁts. The total rental expense includes both a
depreciation charge on the assets and a ﬁnancing charge for the use of
someone else’s capital, like interest expense on debt. Consequently, the
full rental expense must be deducted, not just the depreciation portion. As
discussed previously, retirements are the estimated value of depreciating
assets that must be replaced. A typical DCF model assumes that deprecia-
tion is a useful proxy of the asset replacement charge each period. HOLT
does not make this assumption, but instead adds depreciation back to
gross cash ﬂow and imputes a retirement charge based on a ﬁrm’s asset age
and its historical growth rate.
314

Forecasting Growth
EXHIBIT 10.7 Amazon’s sustainable growth rate.
Amazon.com Inc
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Inﬂation Adjusted Gross Cash Flow
2,761
3,426
4,457
6,475
9,480
−Interest Expense
34
39
65
92
141
−Rental Expense
171
225
362
541
759
−Common & Preferred Dividends
0
0
0
0
0
+ Stock Option Expense not incl in R&D
159
201
265
399
531
Simple Plowback
2,715
3,363
4,295
6,241
9,111
−Retirements
581
879
1,152
1,461
1,900
Sustainable Cash Flow
2,133
2,484
3,143
4,780
7,211
BOY Inﬂation Adjusted Gross Inv.
8,404
10,577
14,524
19,903
28,475
Sustainable Real Growth Rate
25.4
23.5
21.6
24.0
25.3
Real Asset Growth Rate
43.1
31.6
32.2
44.4
40.9
Using the formula for SGR, Amazon’s sustainable growth rate is shown
in Exhibit 10.7.
Amazon’s sustainable growth rate in 2013 was 25.3%, but it has been
growing far faster than its sustainable rate. Is there a better way to estimate
forward growth?
Why HOLT Uses a Normalized Growth Rate
HOLT research on growth shows that the sustainable growth rate is an
excellent proxy for estimating a ﬁrm’s likely growth rate in assets. It works
remarkably well over time for mature, stable companies. However, for com-
panies experiencing high growth or meaningful changes in capital struc-
ture, a modiﬁcation is necessary to better predict their growth. For this
reason, HOLT uses a normalized growth rate (NGR) to estimate a ﬁrm’s
asset growth. Here is the formula for NGR:
NGR = Plowback + Δ Net Capital Events
BOY Assets
Capital Events include equity and debt issuances and repurchases. These
amounts must be material (greater than 2.5% of gross investment) and
occur with regularity. The “net” in net capital events (NCE) is capital inﬂow
315

Beyond Earnings
less capital outﬂow. The inclusion of a materiality requirement restricts
the application of this portion of the SGR to less than 50% of ﬁrms in
any given year, which are typically early life-cycle businesses (higher share
issuance) and cash cows that frequently repurchase shares. Intuitively, ﬁrms
that spend large amounts of discretionary cash on stock buybacks will have
less to reinvest in growth opportunities. The normalized growth rate is an
adaptive formulation that elegantly describes the growth of companies at
all phases of the competitive life-cycle.10
Let’s compute the normalized growth rate for Amazon (Exhibit 10.8).
In 2013, Amazon’s normalized growth rate exceeded its SGR. This is an
immediate ﬂag that the ﬁrm is issuing equity or debt to fund expansion.
The details of Exhibit 10.8 show that AMZN borrowed $1.9bn, $3bn, and
$1bn in debt in 2013, 2012, and 2011. Funds from debt issuance exceeded
share repurchases across all three years, pumping up the ﬁrm’s ability to
grow. To smooth distortions in growth, HOLT uses a three-year median
NGR when forecasting.
EXHIBIT 10.8 The calculation of Amazon’s normalized growth rate.
Amazon.Com Inc
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Sustainable Cash Flow
2,133
2,484
3,143
4,780
7,211
Conditional Net Capital Events
Net Equity Issue (Repurchase)
0
0
(277)
(960)
0
Net Debt Increase (Buyback)
863
472
1,074
3,025
1,953
Change in Leased Assets
54
270
692
913
1,120
Acquisition Adj. for Goodwill
1,251
216
839
838
191
+ Net Capital Events
(334)
526
650
2,140
2,882
= Dynamic Cash Flow
1,800
3,010
3,793
6,920
10,092
BOY Inﬂation Adjusted Gross Inv.
8,404
10,577
14,524
19,903
28,475
Normalized Growth Rate
21.4
28.5
26.1
34.8
35.4
3-year median NGR
20.1
21.4
26.1
28.5
34.8
Normalized Real Growth Rate (BOY)
20.1
21.4
26.1
28.5
34.8
10For a brief, but more technical description of the normalized growth rate, see HOLT Notes: The
Normalized Growth Rate.
316

Forecasting Growth
Forecasting Growth: Near-Term and Long-Term Dynamics
Because earning excess proﬁts over a long period of time is diﬃcult, a care-
fully designed DCF model will forecast cash ﬂows over a reasonable horizon
and squeeze out excess proﬁtability by the terminal period.11 A similar
principle can be applied to corporate growth. Our research suggests that
most ﬁrms quickly revert toward 5% growth over any ﬁve-year horizon
and toward 2.5% thereafter.
Let’s consider Tesla, which has averaged annual growth of over 100%
for the last ﬁve years, driven primarily by sales of electric automobiles. Elon
Musk, the billionaire CEO and savvy entrepreneur thinks sales can sustain
50% annual growth for the next decade.12 Let’s assume an 8% sales growth
thereafter for our terminal growth rate.
Assuming Musk is correct (a grand assumption), Tesla will become 8%
of global auto industry sales in just 10 years. That would be a spectacular
achievement if he can pull it oﬀ. But what does the more modest 8% com-
pound growth rate mean over time? It’s hard to decipher how this translates
into economic reality when one uses a growing perpetuity equation at the
end of a forecast. Even a 40-year forecast may not reveal the problem if
pencil isn’t put to paper. Let’s apply some logic.
The global automobile industry had sales of more than $2 trillion in
2015. Tesla earned a fraction of this potential revenue, about 0.2% with
sales of $4 billion. Assuming Tesla can sustain growth of 50% for the next
decade, Tesla’s sales will balloon to $233 billion and it would be the third
largest automobile manufacturer in the world, only slightly behind global
giants, Toyota and VW (we’re assuming everyone else grows at 2%).
Given this spectacular growth, which is based on Musk’s own projec-
tions, but restricted to a ten-year window, what does the much lower 8%
11This could require forecasts of well over 20 years for companies with extraordinary economic moats
and competitive advantages. The inclusion of an adjustable proﬁtability fade rate for valuing the ter-
minal period means that the forecast only needs to be until the ﬁrm is ex-growth.
12Tesla Motors, Inc. Q4 2014 Earnings Call, February 11, 2015. See FactSet: callstreet Transcript,
page 7. According to Michael J. Mauboussin, the conference call transcript actually says “30 percent”
but if you work out Musk’s math, the only way to get to a market capitalization basically “the same as
Apple’s is today” is to assume a 50 percent growth rate.
317

Beyond Earnings
growth rate translate into over time? Assuming the rest of the auto industry
continues to grow at 2% annually, in how many years will it take Tesla to
become 33% of total auto sales?
We can solve the equation easily:
first 10 years
terminal growth
Tesla
Industry
4.05(1 + 0.50)10 × (1 + 0.08)n
2134 × (1 + 0.02)n+10
y = 
We will assume that Tesla isn’t growing the overall market, only stealing
market share from its competitors. We can solve for n after setting y to
0.33:
n =
ln
(
0.33 ×
2,134(1.02)10
4.05(1.50)10
)
ln 1.08
1.02
In just 23 years after its hyper-growth, Tesla would represent 33% of the
entire global automobile manufacturing market! This is obviously absurd,
and no rational analyst would intentionally forecast this outcome. Yet we
have experienced similar egregious forecasts because the economic conse-
quences of growth in a DCF model are often shrouded in the mathematics
of compounding (Exhibit 10.9).
Ratcheting the sustainable growth rate down to 5% might seem like the
solution. But even 5% is too high: In 45 years post hyper-growth, Tesla
would represent 33% of global auto sales (or perhaps ﬂying saucers by that
date).
Instead, it makes sense to employ a sustainable growth rate that mir-
rors economic reality. In the United States, GDP averaged 3.2% growth
net of inﬂation from 1950 until 2016.13 HOLT’s research shows that as
companies mature, growth tends toward 2% to 3%, a level consistent with
economic reality. Judging from real government bond yields in 2017 for
developed economics, future growth might be more like 0% to 1%.
13Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/A191RL1A225NBEA.
318

Forecasting Growth
EXHIBIT 10.9 2015 automobile manufacturer sales as a percentage of total.
2025 assumes 2% annual sales growth versus 50% for Tesla.
2048 shows the effect of 8% compound annual growth for
Tesla in the terminal period: Tesla has grown to become 33% of
global auto manufacturer sales.
Toyota,
11.1%
VW, 10.9%
Benz, 7.6%
GM, 7.1%
Ford, 7.0%
Honda,
5.7%
Fiat, 5.6%
SAIC, 4.8%
Nissan, 4.8%
BMW, 4.7%
Tesla, 0.2%
Other,
30.5% 
2015
Toyota,
10.1%
VW,
9.9%
Benz, 6.9%
GM, 6.5%
Ford, 6.4%
Honda,
5.2%
Fiat, 5.1%
SAIC,
4.4%
Nissan,
4.3%
BMW, 4.3%
Tesla,
9.0%
Other,
27.8%
2025
Toyota,
7.4%
VW, 7.3%
Benz, 5.1%
GM, 4.8%
Ford, 4.7%
Honda, 3.8%
Fiat, 3.8%
SAIC, 3.2%
Nissan,
3.2%
BMW, 3.2%
Tesla,
32.9%
Other,
20.5%
2048
CONCLUSIONS
Forecasting growth is a serious challenge. Corporate capex patterns reveal
idiosyncratic behavior. Economic cycles can result in a wait-and-see atti-
tude as corporate executives look for signs of a cyclical upswing before
committing capital reserves to fund projects. Even when times are good,
growth can be outsized or miniscule.
Correctly anticipating a company’s future growth can signiﬁcantly
enhance one’s view of its intrinsic worth. As we saw in the chapter on
competitive life-cycle dynamics, accurately gauging a growth stock’s future
319

Beyond Earnings
pace of development is exceptionally hard. Investors tend to bid up growth
stocks, anticipating that growth will be sustained for longer than actual
outcomes tend to dictate. The worst thing you can do when forecasting
growth is to extrapolate it. Growth stocks trade at large price multiples,
but future share price performance is typically lackluster. Finding the
next growth star probably involves more luck than skill. Our research on
growth suggests caution: Like Spock, be logical—make a conservative
growth forecast and consider the probability of it being attained.
320

11
EVALUATING MARKET
EXPECTATIONS
“Stock prices are the clearest and most reliable signal of the market’s expec-
tations about a company’s future performance.”
—Alfred Rappaport and Michael J. Mauboussin, Expectations
Investing
“It’s a fun game. It never goes away.”
—Bob Hendricks
KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The goal of value investors is to ﬁnd stocks that can beat market
expectations.
• Stocks with high expectations where proﬁtability and growth are
priced to increase dramatically tend to underperform.
• Stocks with low expectations where proﬁtability is priced to crater
tend to outperform, and might be good trades.
321
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
• Stocks that derive more than 40% of total value from expected
growth opportunities are frequently lackluster investments.
• Before building a complex ﬁnancial forecasting and valuation
model for a company, try to back into its market-implied
expectations. This is easy to do with HOLT Lens. The
back-of-the-envelope pricing equations we derived in earlier
chapters will prove useful.
• We provide tips on what to be aware of when considering HOLT’s
default valuations.
THE RELATIVE WEALTH CHART AS A DECISION AID
FOR EFFICIENTLY ASSESSING STOCK OPPORTUNITIES
The rewards for anticipating the next Apple, Tesla, or Facebook will
undoubtedly be large. Investors are motivated to ﬁnd these winners, but
how can they accomplish this aim? Is there a better way to ﬁnd potential
winners than by listening to the gossip about equity markets at the nearest
watering hole or reading investment blogs?
To be eﬀective, active investors cannot assess every available stock. They
need to quickly and eﬃciently discard stocks with little chance of beat-
ing market expectations. They have to spot opportunities that others have
missed.
Like grandmasters of chess, active investors beneﬁt from “selective atten-
tion,” skillfully tuning out unimportant details and focusing on what really
matters. Experts use selective attention to rapidly evaluate options and
make superior choices. Experts do not evaluate all possible options, just
the better ones. Through practice, experts hone their decision-making skill.
More thinking isn’t better; better thinking is better.1
HOLT’s Relative Wealth Chart gives portfolio managers a birds-eye view
of the ﬁeld. It provides high-level insight of what has happened (the com-
pany’s historical track record of success), what is likely to happen (HOLT’s
default forecast, which is based on shared experiences of similar ﬁrms), and
1Bryant Matthews and David A. Holland, Grandmasters: Lessons from Chess, Credit Suisse HOLT,
February 2017.
322

Evaluating Market Expectations
what others expect to happen (market-implied expectations indicated by
HOLT’s Green Dot).
We described the incredible loss of value experienced by U.S. depart-
ment stores in 2016 in the Introduction to this book. The Relative Wealth
Chart for legendary retailer Macy’s is shown in Exhibit 11.1. Let’s step
through how it can help you assess our three key points: (1) how has the
stock performed historically? (2) how is it priced to perform prospectively?
and (3) how is it likely to perform empirically?
• Macy’s has a history of successfully generating CFROI above its
cost of capital, but assets have been shrinking. Over the past three
years, CFROI has been fading, which has been matched by a sharp
underperformance relative to the S&P 500.
• The default valuation indicates upside for the share price if Macy’s
can maintain its present CFROI and avoid further shrinkage.
Unfortunately, HOLT’s probabilistic forecast has no knowledge
about the 800-pound gorilla called Amazon.
• The Green Dot indicates that CFROI will continue to fade
sharply and real growth will remain negative. U.S. department
stores are under tremendous pressure and must ﬁnd new ways of
creating sustainable competitive advantages.
The Green Dot allows you to read the opposing defense. How do other
investors expect the future for a stock to unfold? If your competitors
are reading the play wrong, you have an opportunity to score. As John
Maynard Keynes observed, the heart of “successful investing is anticipating
the anticipations of others.”
DISTILLING EXPECTATIONS FROM A STOCK PRICE
Stock prices are a signal of expectations about a ﬁrm’s prospects. The level
of a stock’s price tells us nothing about its investment merit or the expecta-
tions that are baked in. A $10 share price is a meaningless piece of informa-
tion by itself. Each share of Apple currently trades at approximately $100
323

Beyond Earnings
324
EXHIBIT 11.1
Macy’s Relative Wealth Chart.
MACY'S INC
Sensitivity
Department Store
Market Cap: 7.058 B. USD
Price: 23.18 (Jun 28, 2017)
Warranted Price: 37.49 USD (62%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 10
11.6
11.5
12.0
11.0
9.4
10.2
10.2
Real Asset Growth %
(6.4)
0.1
(5.7)
(7.9)
(9.8)
(0.0)
1.1
Discount Rate
5.84
4.91
4.78
4.98
4.93
5.65
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
16,473
54.10
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
4,550
14.94
+Market Value Investments
0
0.00
Total Economic Value
21,023
69.0
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
9,607
31.55
–Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
11,416
37.5
Shares Outstanding
305
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Economic Return
CFROI (%)  
95 
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Asset Growth
(%) 
0
50
100
150
200
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%) 
upside
62%
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Evaluating Market Expectations
versus $200,000 for one class A share of Berkshire Hathaway. Which is the
better investment?
A simple technique that oﬀers a crude sense of a stock’s relative value is
to scale its price by book value or earnings. This results in a price-to-book
(P/B) or price-to-earnings (P/E) multiple. Stocks with above-average mul-
tiples have above-average expectations, and vice versa. Stocks with the high-
est multiples have the highest expectations. Of course, we are assuming that
the multiple is useful; for instance, earnings aren’t negative. As we demon-
strated in Chapter 2, even under the best conditions, a multiple is only a
rough guide. Multiples should only be used as sanity checks, not as reliable
valuation signals. For non-believers, Professors Lev and Gu provide plenty
of evidence that the relevance of accounting ﬁgures has diminished.2
What expectations are we talking about? A P/E multiple does not pro-
vide any clarity into this question. Is there a better way to extract a stock’s
performance expectations from its price?
Let’s re-examine the fundamental drivers of value creation expressed in
the Gordon Growth Model, which we derived in Chapter 2:
P =
D1
re −g = B0
(ROE1 −g)
re −g
where D1 = forward dividend, re = cost of equity, g = earnings growth,
ROE1 = forward return on equity, and B is book value. All drivers must
be constant for the equation to hold.
This model suggests that the key drivers of equity value creation are a
stock’s return on equity and its earnings growth rate. Companies able to
earn a return on equity above the cost of equity create economic value and
should trade at higher multiples. There is strong empirical evidence that
P/B is positively correlated to ROE.
We showed how to extend this model in the Introduction to valuing the
ﬁrm, and introduced the fade rate as an adjustable value driver:
Enterprise Value = IC0
(ROIC1 −g + f )
(r −g + f )
2Baruch Lev, and Feng Gu, The End of Accounting and the Path Forward for Investors and Managers,
John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
325

Beyond Earnings
We term this equation the Fundamental Pricing Model.3 We highly
recommend that you memorize it. This equation oﬀers superior insight
into the drivers of value creation, and shrewd investors can put it to use to
quickly gauge market expectations and test the sensitivity of ﬁrm value to
changes in these value drivers.
A value driver’s expected value can be backed out by setting it on the
left-hand side and solving for it. For instance, the market-implied cost of
capital r, which is equivalent to the expected return, can be derived given a
mature ﬁrm’s enterprise value-to-book ratio, proﬁtability fade, long-term
asset growth, and the forward return on invested capital ROIC1:
Expected Return = IC0
EV (ROIC1 −g + f ) + g −f
We could solve for each driver to judge market-implied expectations. For
a mature ﬁrm with impressive proﬁtability, it is highly informative to calcu-
late the market-implied rate of fade and thus the company’s market-implied
competitive advantage period.4 Understanding the level of operational per-
formance required to justify today’s price oﬀers powerful insight into stock
prices, and is an eﬃcient method to analyze stocks. Investors can shift their
focus from discussions of “what it’s worth” to “what’s priced in.” When
we look at equity prices this way, we can ask: “Can the stock beat market
expectations?” Stocks from every phase of the life-cycle that have favorable
odds of beating market expectations are sound fundamental investments.5
CAN IT BEAT THE FADE?
Anticipating whether a ﬁrm is likely to beat or miss expectations embedded
in its price requires considerable skill. Bob Hendricks (the “H” in HOLT),
a veritable wizard in the art of investing, ceaselessly drilled this point into
3This formula was developed by David Holland. A proof is available in Chapter 5 and fully derived
in the report: “Don’t Suﬀer from a Terminal Flaw, Add Fade to Your DCF” by David A. Holland and
Bryant Matthews, Credit Suisse HOLT, June 2016.
4We showed that the expected competitive advantage period equals 1/f, thus the market-implied rate
of fade is the inverse of the market-implied competitive advantage period MICAP.
5Alfred Rappaport and Michael J. Mauboussin. Expectations Investing: Reading Stock Prices for Better
Returns. Harvard Business School, 2001; Bartley J. Madden (1999), CFROI Valuation: A Total System
Approach to Valuing the Firm, Butterworth–Heinemann.
326

Evaluating Market Expectations
HOLT employees and his clients every chance he could. He understood
Keynes’ insight.
As young acolytes at HOLT, we were required to analyze companies and
present our views to peers. This setting could be simultaneously wonderful
and terrifying. It mostly depended on whether you were on the giving or
receiving end of the feedback.
Bob liked to say that HOLT employees needed to have “broad
shoulders.” You needed to be able to take criticism to grow. These were
formative years during which we learned our craft from seasoned veterans.
After carefully listening to a HOLT analyst expound on some company’s
fundamentals, Bob would laser in to the core of the investment thesis:
“Okay, here’s the big question,” he’d drawl in his warm and encouraging
way, and throw a zinger straight at you: “Can the stock beat the fade?”
This is a brilliant question. It cuts right to the heart of the matter. Even
if a stock’s intrinsic worth isn’t that high, if other investors think its value
is much lower, then companies that can beat those low expectations can
turn out to be great investments. At HOLT, we heard the phrases “Can it
beat the fade?” and “Fade happens!” thousands of times.
Whatever stock you are looking at adding to or removing from your
portfolio, this is one of the most important questions you can ask. If the
answer is “yes,” even if the company seems about as exciting as mud, it’s
probably a good fundamental investment.
A great company is not always a great investment, and a bad company
isn’t always a bad investment. These points are as distinct as night and day,
but too often confused by investors and linked as inseparable. Bob’s focus
on “Can it beat the fade?” slices through the confusion.6
How can we keep this idea of “beating the fade” front and center? That’s
what HOLT’s Green Dot is for!
6We are of the view that it is best to invest in companies with proven records of excellent capital
allocation decisions, especially if they can be bought at a reasonable price. These stocks tend to do
well over the long term. Companies with records of poor operating returns that look cheap should
be viewed as trades, and not as long-term holds. As Buﬀett said and we demonstrated in Chapter 8,
“Turnarounds seldom turn.”
327

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 11.2 Amazon’s Relative Wealth Chart as of April 30, 2014, indicates
a prolonged period of value creation and growth. Shareholders
have been handsomely rewarded.
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Warranted Price: 345.06 USD
(13%)
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
20
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Economic Return
CFROI (%)  
18 
31 
21 
43 
32 32 
41 
0
10
20
30
40
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Asset Growth
(%)
0
100
200
300
400
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%) 
THE GREEN DOT
HOLT’s Green Dot is prominently visible on the Relative Wealth Chart
(RWC). Exhibit 11.2 is the RWC for Amazon that we ﬁrst encountered in
Chapter 3 (Exhibit 3.32).
The top panel shows Amazon’s historical track record of success as dark
bars (CFROI). The ﬁrst two light bars at the far right are forecast CFROI
328

Evaluating Market Expectations
derived from consensus EPS estimates.7 The Green Dot circle at the end is
a “market-implied” CFROI, or the economic rate of return that is neces-
sary by year ﬁve of the forecast to equate the present value of future cash
ﬂows to the ﬁrm’s current price. Because this is the CFROI (at t + 5) that
links together the future free cash ﬂows to current price, it is “implied” by
investors’ expectations. We call it “market-implied CFROI” or the Green
Dot. Remember, CFROI above 6% is generally indicative of a prosperous
company. At a CFROI of 12% fading to 9%, Amazon is creating share-
holder value.
What does Amazon’s Green Dot tell us? We can see immediately that
proﬁtability is expected to decline over the next ﬁve years since the Green
Dot is below the ﬁrst forecast CFROI. We also see that the expected
CFROI at t + 5 is below the level of proﬁtability that Amazon has enjoyed
over the past decade, suggesting a trough of sorts. The t + 5 CFROI is
near 10% but not below 6%, which means that the ﬁrm is still expected to
earn above-average proﬁts. Some fade in proﬁtability is being “priced in,”
but it is not extreme. Does this fade strike us as unrealistic? Will Amazon’s
proﬁtability fall to a ten-year low?
Just by glancing at the Relative Wealth Chart, we have discovered
three useful insights. First, the market is expecting proﬁt erosion. This
isn’t unsettling since Amazon has been growing rapidly for an extended
period (which isn’t sustainable in the long term) and such high growth
rates typically invite competition. (High proﬁtability coupled with high
growth is indicative of a nascent market; companies thirsty for proﬁts
will seek entry.) Second, Amazon is priced to remain proﬁtable over the
next ﬁve years, and is expected to enjoy more years of hearty growth.
This also makes sense, as there is no obvious reason to anticipate that
Amazon will be unproﬁtable or a cost of capital business in the next ﬁve
years. Third, we have benchmarked Amazon’s forecast CFROI against its
historical track record. It’s obvious that CFROI has been declining for the
last ten years, so further decay appears reasonable. Amazon’s growth more
7We also need the asset base in both years, which is grown out from LFY using HOLT’s forecast
normalized growth rate.
329

Beyond Earnings
than oﬀset the decline in proﬁtability for the ﬁrm to continue growing
economic proﬁt.
In mere seconds, we have covered a lot of ground. Of course, the real
work of deciding whether Amazon is a solid investment or not remains
to be done, but as a start, we have gained some important insights quickly
and eﬃciently. The Relative Wealth Chart is an exercise in selective
attention. The Green Dot acts as a barometer, helping us to quickly
gauge the expectations embedded in a stock’s price. Stocks with high
expectations should be avoided, and stocks with low expectations should
be researched.
The Relative Wealth Chart is a remarkable picture that shows a ﬁrm’s
recent operational success, its likely near-term prospects, and its embed-
ded price expectations all in one visual. It empowers an investor so that he
or she can eﬃciently assess whether a stock’s price expectations appear to
be reasonable or excessive. Skilled users accomplish all of this in a blink.
Is the Green Dot in line with the ﬁrm’s history of CFROI? Is it unrealis-
tically high or low? Is the ﬁrm’s track record of operational success stable
enough to develop a conﬁdent forecast, or is it volatile? What is driving
the change in CFROI? Is the business model tuned to creating value or
growing earnings at all cost? After becoming well-accustomed to the Rela-
tive Wealth Chart, and assuming some knowledge of the companies under
analysis, the answers to these questions are intuited in a ﬂash. The Relative
Wealth Chart is a powerful tool in the hands of skilled users.
Until recently, the Relative Wealth Chart needed one more critical fea-
ture: It lacked the ability to benchmark a stock’s expectations against the
historical performance record of similar ﬁrms. This has been remedied and
represents a major advancement. The beneﬁt of seeing how ﬁrms with sim-
ilar operating performance and growth subsequently performed is unparal-
leled. We can now understand the empirical likelihood of a ﬁrm achieving
diﬀerent scenarios. We can see its probability of success.
The adjusted Relative Wealth Chart looks like Exhibit 11.3.
For Amazon, there is a 51% probability that it will meet or exceed
current price expectations. This probability is based on a sample of how
330

Evaluating Market Expectations
EXHIBIT 11.3 Factoring probability into Amazon’s Relative Wealth Chart.
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
20
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Economic Return
CFROI (%)  
18 
31 
21 
43 
32 32 
41 
0
10
20
30
40
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Asset Growth
(%) 
0
100
200
300
400
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
The probability
of achieving the
Market Implied
CFROI (green dot)
of 9.1% or higher
is 51%.
Price: 304.13 (Apr 30, 2014)
Warranted Price: 345.06 USD 
(13%)
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Market Cap: 139.9 USD
similar ﬁrms from history behaved over subsequent ﬁve-year periods.
Similar ﬁrms had CFROI levels, growth rates, and operational stability
like Amazon.
The 51% probability of earning a CFROI equal to or higher than 9%
also reinforces the reasonableness of HOLT’s default forecast, represented
by the black line. In this example, HOLT’s forecast CFROI mirrors what
investors anticipate will happen with Amazon’s proﬁtability over the next
ﬁve years. Investors expect an average outcome. Note that the probability
model says nothing about how the ﬁrm will grow over the next ﬁve
331

Beyond Earnings
years. For now, it is a comment only about the probability of attaining
forecast CFROI.
Most ﬁrms demonstrate mean-reverting CFROI. Investors expect the
same from Amazon: While proﬁtability is priced to decline only modestly,
growth rates are assumed to have peaked. CFROI is expected to fall from
12% to 9%, which superﬁcially (given a “blink”) appears to be reasonable
for a Star with a highly capable management team and a long track record
of success.
How can investors act on this information? A shrewd portfolio
manager, who anticipates Amazon can beat the fade and hold CFROI
steady at 13% coupled with growth above 15%, will buy Amazon’s stock,
as more than 45% upside to fair value would be indicated. Her thesis that
investors underappreciate Amazon’s ability to maintain proﬁts will likely
be supported when Amazon reports stronger-than-expected earnings, and
the stock price leaps. On the other hand, an investor who thinks CFROI
will decline to 6% will sell or short the stock, believing that investors
are overly optimistic about Amazon’s future proﬁts. In a ﬂash, you have
“anticipated what others are anticipating” about Amazon, and put this
information to work.8
THINKING ABOUT EXPECTATIONS AT DIFFERENT
LIFE-CYCLE STATES
“It is not just high CFROI that delivers great shareholder returns;
it is all across the CFROI spectrum.”
—Bob Hendricks
The HOLT framework is a wonderful tool for determining market
expectations at any phase of the life-cycle. HOLT’s default forecast
and Green Dot estimates are particularly helpful for Stars, eCAPs, and
Cash Cows. Each of these phases is expected to mean-revert, and most
8From the vantage of August 2017 before we go to press, Amazon has beaten the growth expectations
of April 2014, and thus outperformed the market.
332

Evaluating Market Expectations
ﬁrms comply. In fact, about 70% of companies from each state fade
toward the cost of capital over any ﬁve- to ten-year interval. eCAPs
have unusual proﬁt persistence, and HOLT recognizes this by ﬂagging
companies with stable proﬁtability and extending the forecast horizon
from ﬁve to ten years.
Early life-cycle ﬁrms and companies in a restructuring phase may
require user intervention to better reﬂect their potential outcomes. For
early life-cycle companies, possible outcomes may be wide-ranging and
many will be priced to become Stars. HOLT’s default expectation of
mean-reversion may not be helpful for some of these ﬁrms. The Green
Dot is only useful when its starting inputs are relevant. Tesla is an excellent
case study.
In Exhibit 11.4, we re-created the default view of Tesla in HOLT Lens
shortly after its IPO on June 30, 2010. Note that the HOLT forecast (the
black line) assumes mean-reversion in CFROI (fading toward 6%) and
growth (fading toward 2.5%). In contrast, the Green Dots for CFROI
and Growth suggested that investors were expecting CFROI to climb from
−30% to +25% and growth to follow suit. But, note critically, that these
Green Dots are based on the starting estimates for CFROI and Growth
in t + 1, which were both 0%. These starting values are almost certainly
not what investors had in mind, given that growth in 2009 was 38% and
growth in 2010 was expected to more than double. Can a more realistic
view of the performance expectations that investors were embedding into
the stock’s price be determined?
A reasonable scenario is easily obtained by ﬂexing forecast CFROI and
growth. If we assume that Tesla focuses exclusively on its growth poten-
tial over the next ﬁve years, maximizing sales instead of proﬁts, we can
sensibly assume Tesla may become a cost-of-capital business over this inter-
val. What growth rate is needed to equate the present value of forecast
cash ﬂows to the prevailing price of $23? Growth fading from 75% to
25% nicely ﬁts the bill (Exhibit 11.5). This growth forecast reveals an
aggressive ﬁrm and underscores investors’ high expectations for success.
It anticipates that Tesla’s asset base will grow from $333 million to $2.4
333

Beyond Earnings
334
EXHIBIT 11.4
Tesla’s Relative Wealth Chart in HOLT Lens as of June 30, 2010.
TESLA INC
Sensitivity
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Market Cap: 2.219 USD
Price: 23.83 (Jun 30, 2010)
Warranted Price: 1.59 USD (–93%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
t + 1
t + 5
0.0
(35.1)
(0.0)
6.1
Real Asset Growth %
0.0
38.4
(0.0)
1.8
Discount Rate
6.99
4.12
4.86
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
Total Economic Value
245
2.6
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
97
1.04
–Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
148
1.59
Shares Outstanding
93
downside
–93%
(10)
0
10
20
30
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
Economic Return
CFROI (%)  
0
10
20
30
40
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
Asset Growth
(%) 
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Evaluating Market Expectations
335
EXHIBIT 11.5 Tesla’s Relative Wealth Chart in HOLT Lens as of June 30, 2010, adjusted for CFROI fading to 6% from 0% and
growth fading from 75% to 25%.
TESLA INC
Sensitivity
Restaurants
Price: 23.83 (Jun 30, 2010)
Warranted Price: 24.02 USD (0%)
Market Cap: 2.219 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
t + 1
t + 5
0.0
(35.1)
0.0
6.0
Real Asset Growth %
0.0
38.4
75.0
25.0
Discount Rate
6.99
4.12
4.86
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
Total Economic Value
2,333
25.1
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
97
1.04
–Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
2,237
24.0
Shares Outstanding
93
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
Economic Return
CFROI (%)  
0
20
40
60
80
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
Asset Growth
(%) 
upside
0%
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Beyond Earnings
billion by 2015. This is probably a better reﬂection of what investors were
expecting from Tesla. And yet, as aggressive as that sounds, Tesla bested
these expectations and reached assets of nearly $9 billion by 2015. Investors
who thought that Tesla could beat the fade and bought the stock were richly
rewarded.
Clearly, the default HOLT forecast and Green Dots were not represen-
tative of Tesla’s potential. Why is that? At the risk of being redundant,
we want to stress that seven out of eight companies in the early life-cycle
phase bypass stardom altogether. The odds of a ﬁrm succeeding like Tesla
are small, and HOLT’s default forecast assumes a prototypical outcome.
Investors are encouraged to build their own scenarios, especially for early
life-cycle ﬁrms and companies that can beat the fade.
Firms in a restructuring phase are also expected to mean-revert because
HOLT treats these companies as going concerns. Under the going-concern
principle, there is compelling economic rationale to assert that an unprof-
itable ﬁrm will eventually climb back to its cost of capital to remain com-
petitive (and alive). In reality, many troubled ﬁrms fail to fully recover.
HOLT research indicates that less than 10% of all ﬁrms in a restructuring
phase successfully return to their cost of capital and sustain proﬁtability at
this level. Investors are similarly encouraged to develop scenarios for trou-
bled ﬁrms, paying particular attention to the likelihood of full recovery or
future proﬁtability.
WHY THE GREEN DOT IS SO HELPFUL
Picking tomorrow’s Apple today isn’t the only path toward the coveted goal
of shareholder gains. Whether a company is a growth star or an out-of-favor
value veteran, a key to outperformance is detecting equities with unrealistic
price expectations and using this information advantageously.
Exhibit 11.6 oﬀers compelling evidence in support of this claim. We
split stocks into ﬁve groups based on the CFROI expected ﬁve years
from today that equates the present value of forecast future cash ﬂows to
336

Evaluating Market Expectations
EXHIBIT 11.6 Annualized excess shareholder return by CFROI relative
achievement. Largest 1,000 stocks by market capitalization,
U.S. equities. January 1976–March 2013.
highest
Expected
CFROI (t + 5)
−20%
−9%
−2%
2%
8%
−17%
−7%
0%
4%
10%
−14%
−6%
−0%
4%
11%
−12%
−2%
1%
5%
12%
−7%
0%
2%
6%
13%
+
+
+
−
−
−
lowest
lowest
Relative Achievement
highest
current price.9 Expectation is ranked from high to low (top to bottom)
along the vertical axis. Moving left to right, we separated stocks by their
achieved CFROI less what was anticipated. The diﬀerence (achieved
CFROIt+5 – expected CFROIt+5) represents relative achievement.
Exhibit 11.6 shows the annualized shareholder return to stocks based
on whether they exceeded, met, or fell short of expectations. The center of
the table represents the excess shareholder returns to stocks that perfectly
met expectations. These shareholders netted zero excess gain. Many great
companies fell into this middle bucket.
Companies that earned the lowest CFROI relative to expectations (neg-
ative relative achievement) are in the ﬁrst column and show dismal stock
performance. Companies that outpunched CFROI expectations are at the
far right, which is where the juicy shareholder returns are located. The cen-
ter column shows the average excess return to ﬁrms that met expectations.
If you focus on the center column only, notice that whether expecta-
tions were high or low, performance was hardly better than average for
companies that met expectations. This is a key point: There is no excess
reward to investors who buy stocks with high expectations of future per-
formance when those stocks (subsequently) only meet expectations. This is
9We arrive at this market-implied CFROI by iterating until the resulting t + 5 CFROI is located that
causes the present value of future cash ﬂows to equal today’s price. The t + 5 implied CFROI is used
in combination with HOLT’s forecast CFROI at t + 1. Linear fade is assumed between t + 1 and t + 5
and a 10% mean-reverting fade rate is used thereafter. When combined with a growth rate forecast, a
stream of future cash ﬂows can be determined which are then discounted to present.
337

Beyond Earnings
one reason growth stocks often underperform. Growth stocks are priced
with high expectations (high P/B multiples), but most growth companies
are unable to exceed their price expectations.
Firms that beat expectations, especially when expectations are low, are
the ones most handsomely rewarded. Keynes’ quote captures this insight:
“Successful investing is anticipating the anticipations of others.” HOLT
helps you quantify those expectations.
Gauging what investors expect to be delivered from what ﬁrms actually
deliver is the essential task of the fundamental equity investor. Investors
cannot hope to outperform over the long haul by gingerly selecting com-
panies with high return on capital (quality) or naively picking value stocks
in the hope of mean-reversion.
Look at the top two rows in the center. These are stocks that had high
CFROI expectations. They delivered what was expected. Looking at the
types of companies that make up this group over time shows that many of
these stocks would be characterized as “high quality.” And yet, even though
they met demanding expectations of earning high economic returns, they
yielded only benchmark gains. Quality stocks are excellent investments,
especially when purchased at a fair price or on the cheap, but stocks that
meet expectations do not generate excess gain.
Value stocks are located along the bottom row. Value stocks have low
expectations of future performance (that is why their P/B multiples are
below-average). Note that when value stocks beat expectations, they deliver
superior shareholder performance.
Exhibit 11.6 shows the importance of understanding a stock’s price
expectations. Investors can win by picking stocks from any category (high
expectations = growth, low expectations = value). The key is picking com-
panies that can exceed expectations and “beat the fade.”
HOLT Lens makes it easier to gauge expectations using the Relative
Wealth Chart for individual company analysis. For bulk analysis, clients
can use the Screening Tool. For instance, if we are interested in identifying
stocks with high growth expectations, we can quickly and eﬃciently search
for them. In Exhibit 11.7, we screened for ﬁrms with market capitalization
338

Evaluating Market Expectations
339
EXHIBIT 11.7
Screening for stocks with high growth expectations.
Source: Credit Suisse, HOLT Lens, April 2017.

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 11.8 Key phases of the competitive life-cycle.
CFROI
(Return on Investment)
Reinvestment
Rate
Nestlé
BP
Amazon
Tesla
DuPont
Discount Rate
(Cost of Capital)
Question Marks
Stars
eCAPs:
Cash Cows
Dogs
CFROI<DR
High growth
CFROI>DR
High Growth
CFROI>DR
Persistent CFROI
Low Growth
CFROI>DR
Low Growth
CFROI<DR
Low Growth
greater than $100bn and PVGO% above 40%. Ten ﬁrms passed muster.
Are expectations too rich?
PICKING STOCKS ACROSS THE LIFE-CYCLE
Let’s consider four stocks, one from each phase of the competitive life-cycle.
How is the ﬁrm likely to proﬁt and grow in future periods? What are the
market’s expectations regarding the company? What does HOLT predict
will happen to future CFROI and growth over the next ﬁve years? Which
scenario seems more likely: the market’s or HOLT’s?
Conveniently, HOLT Lens oﬀers a probability assessment for both
HOLT and market fair value scenarios. This fruitful exercise will under-
score the power and strengths of the HOLT framework, but it will also
expose areas where the default HOLT model may need to be ﬁne-tuned in
order to achieve a reasonable estimate of ﬁrm value. Exhibit 11.8 depicts
the key phases, or states, of the competitive life-cycle.
Question Mark (Tesla)
Tesla is a fascinating example of a Question Mark.
340

Evaluating Market Expectations
With a market capitalization greater than $34 billion as of December
2016, sales growth has averaged over 100% a year since 2011. Despite
this, Tesla has earned a CFROI above its cost of capital just once, in 2013.
Reported proﬁt is low, but expectations for proﬁts are high, and so the
ﬁrm trades at a HOLT P/B multiple above 5.0 (remember, the average is
close to 1.5).
Tesla is no longer just a ﬂedgling start-up. With more than $4 billion in
revenue in 2015, it has demonstrated that it is a viable car manufacturer.
Tesla is disrupting the status quo, but it earns only a sliver of the global
auto sales. Tesla is a company with signiﬁcant potential.
Exhibit 11.9 reveals Tesla’s economic returns over time and its extraor-
dinary growth. Shareholders have been vastly rewarded, and the stock has
outperformed the S&P 500 by 531% over the most recent seven years.
Market expectations remain high as indicated by the Green Dots on the
Relative Wealth Chart at right, which show CFROI is expected to rise
from 0% to above 10%, coupled with growth of 8.3% rising to 12.6%.
Does HOLT’s market scenario make sense? In contrast, HOLT is forecast-
ing CFROI to rise from 0% to 2.5% over the next ﬁve years coupled with
growth falling from 8% to 2.6%.
Tesla has been a winning investment for intrepid investors. Why is
HOLT’s forecast so dismal for a ﬁrm that has been beating expectations
for several years?
The answer is rooted in HOLT’s empirical research on corporate
performance. The brutal reality is that few Question Marks ever become
Stars. To remind you of the odds, only 1-in-8 Question Marks ever
become a Star. 63% remain in place or transition to Dog, leaving only
a handful that earns proﬁts above the cost of capital. HOLT takes
the outside view and forecasts Question Marks to become average.
This is a winning proposition: 76% of Question Marks remain subpar
performers.
When Question Marks win and become Stars, the payoﬀcan be
immense. HOLT’s default forecast for Question Marks takes a dim
view of their prospects based on overwhelming evidence. Investors
341

Beyond Earnings
342
EXHIBIT 11.9
Tesla Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of May 22, 2017.
TESLA INC
Sensitivity
Automobile Manufacturers
Price: 310.35 (May 22, 2017)
Warranted Price: 48.36 USD (–84%)
Market Cap: 50.14 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 5
(26.7)
1.7
(1.0)
(7.2)
(3.5)
(0.0)
2.5
Real Asset Growth %
34.8
102.9
114.3
40.9
147.9
8.3
2.6
Discount Rate
4.81
3.31
3.53
3.43
3.65
3.25
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
22,874
141.58
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
3,574
22.12
+Market Value Investments
0
0.00
Total Economic Value
26,448
163.70
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
16,744
103.64
–Market Value of Minority Interest
1,890
11.70
Warranted Equity Value
7,813
48.36
Shares Outstanding
162
downside
–84%
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Economic Return
CFROI (%)
83 
64 103 
114 148 
0
10
20
30
40
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Asset Growth (%)
0
200
400
600
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Evaluating Market Expectations
that see a Star in the making need to alter the HOLT default forecast
to better assess the likely expectations embedded in the stock’s price.
A scenario that is probably closer to broad investor expectations has
CFROI climbing from 0% to 6% over the next ﬁve years combined
with growth falling from 50% to 10% (shown as dotted lines). The
scenario results in a fair value warranted price. Elon Musk’s bold pre-
diction of 30% annual growth for the next decade results in 640%
upside.
Question Marks Summary
HOLT’s research indicates that Question Marks are likely to become
average performers, not Stars. This is the default projection in CFROI
and growth. Investors who are optimistic should override the CFROI
and growth forecast. HOLT provides an empirical probability assess-
ment in Flex Valuation of the user’s CFROI forecast, which is a highly
useful gauge for benchmarking and tapering undue optimism or
pessimism.
Star (Amazon)
We’ve highlighted Amazon throughout the book as an extraordinary com-
pany with a strong commitment to shareholder value principles. It makes
perfect sense to complete the circle and discuss this company’s investment
thesis, given its Star status.
Amazon’s success has been otherworldly, driven in large part by its excep-
tional growth. CEO JeﬀBezos is not afraid to take calculated risks and has
been successfully investing in R&D initiatives like Amazon Web Services
(AWS) that are bearing much fruit. The decline in CFROI since 2010 has
been more than oﬀset by the ﬁrm’s explosive growth, and economic proﬁts
have steadily increased.
HOLT loves Star companies. The default forecast does a remarkable
job of anticipating the typical decline in CFROI and reinvestment from
peak levels. For Amazon, HOLT’s May 2017 default forecast predicts
343

Beyond Earnings
CFROI will fall from 10.7% LFY to 8.5% over the next ﬁve years with
growth declining from 34% to 9%. This is the trajectory of most ﬁrms,
like Amazon, that have proﬁtable CFROI well above the cost of capital
coupled with attractive growth. Empirical evidence shows that most of
these Stars are unable to sustain their high growth rates, and that over
the next ﬁve years, revert toward 5% growth. HOLT kicks in a few extra
basis points of growth for Amazon, given its slightly lower-than-average
CFROI volatility and its exceptional size, which can work to stave oﬀ
competition for a while longer (Exhibit 11.10).
The consensus CFROI and growth anticipated by investors are quite
close to the default HOLT forecast. Market expectations have CFROI
holding steady at 10% coupled with growth declining from 25% to 11%.
This seemingly small diﬀerence in forecast proﬁtability and growth versus
the default HOLT estimate lifts the warranted price by 12% to a fair value
price of $995 a share. Optimistically, if Amazon can sustain CFROI of
10% and maintain growth of 20%, +90% upside would be indicated.
This might seem like a stretch, but Amazon has a solid history of beating
the fade.
Star Summary
HOLT’s base forecast of CFROI and reinvestment rate for Stars antici-
pates declining proﬁtability and rapidly decaying growth rates. This default
treatment is based on empirical evidence. The vast majority of Stars are
unable to maintain both high CFROI and growth over any ﬁve-year hori-
zon: More than 70% of Stars experience a decline in either CFROI or
growth.
Given their proﬁtability, Stars are often highly sensitive to growth rate
adjustments. Even small increases in estimated growth can sometimes lead
to meaningful improvement in intrinsic value. Growth stocks require care-
ful deliberation about the level of proﬁtability and growth that can be
realistically sustained. Investors who are optimistic about a Star’s ability to
maintain or increase proﬁtability or growth must alter the default forecast
to capture these valuable beneﬁts.
344

Evaluating Market Expectations
345
EXHIBIT 11.10
Amazon‘s Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of May 30, 2017.
AMAZON.COM INC
Sensitivity
Internet & Direct Marketing Retail
Price: 994.62 (May 30, 2017)
Warranted Price: 870.58 USD (–12%)
Market Cap: 475.428 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 5
12.0
12.0
7.6
10.1
10.7
11.3
8.5
Real Asset Growth %
44.4
40.9
49.6
26.3
34.2
26.5
9.3
Discount Rate
4.61
3.47
3.60
2.90
2.73
1.94
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
132,459
277.11
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
312,880
654.56
+Market Value Investments
477
1.00
Total Economic Value
445,816
932.7
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
29,678
62.09
–Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
416,138
870.58
Wind-down Value/Share
Wind-down Ratio
Shares Outstanding
478
downside
–12%
(10)
0
10
20
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
43 
32 32 
44 41 50 34 
0
10
20
30
40
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Asset Growth
(%)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Beyond Earnings
eCAP (Nestlé)
It’s not just the Swiss or Nespresso lovers like George Clooney that appre-
ciate Nestlé. The ﬁrm has outperformed the MSCI Europe Index by 150%
since 2002. Over the past 32 years, Nestlé has earned CFROI above 6%,
never once faltering. Its proﬁtability is enviable, with the ﬁrm ranking in
the highest 10% of companies having durable proﬁts. Nestlé has built a
formidable moat to insulate proﬁts with its numerous high-quality brands.
The ﬁrm has ranked #1 in global food sales since 2014. Nestlé’s motto,
“Good Food, Good Life,” oﬀers lessons in simplicity, sincerity, and cus-
tomer commitment. Nestlé is an admirable ﬁrm.
HOLT research on proﬁt persistence ﬂags companies like Nestlé
because they exhibit unusually persistent proﬁtability coupled with
sustainable growth. This is a powerhouse combination that can lead to
large shareholder gains over time for long-horizon investors. This is the
type of company in which Warren Buﬀet likes to invest. Less than 5% of
all publicly traded ﬁrms exhibit proﬁt persistence like Nestlé, making this
an elite investing category. HOLT calls these stocks “eCAPs” because they
have empirically demonstrated that they possess competitive advantages.
eCAP stands for “empirical Competitive Advantage Period.” HOLT gives
these ﬁrms a longer forecast horizon to acknowledge their greater proﬁt
persistence. Despite making up less than 5% of all traded companies,
it should be noted that upwards of 40% to 50% of most size-weighted
indices are comprised of eCAPs, which are concentrated amongst the
largest ﬁrms.
The default HOLT forecast for Nestlé anticipates a minimal decline
in CFROI over the next ten years from 14.8% to 14% (Exhibit 11.11).
Growth is expected to be approximately 0%, or equal to the rate of inﬂation
in nominal terms. This forecast leads to a warranted price of $66 compared
to Nestlé’s current stock price of $85, suggesting 22% downside.
Ongoing research at HOLT shows that superior ﬁrms like Nestlé tend to
fade at close to 5% a year after the forecast horizon, not 10%. In this case,
adjusting the fade rate from 10% to 5% ratchets up the warranted price
346

Evaluating Market Expectations
347
EXHIBIT 11.11
Nestlé’s Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of May 22, 2017.
NESTLÉ S.A.
Sensitivity
Packaged Foods and Meats
Price: 84.92 (May 22, 2017)
Warranted Price: 66.16 USD (–22%)
Market Cap: 263.089 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 10
14.0
16.0
13.9
16.0
14.1
14.8
14.0
Real Asset Growth %
4.9
(6.9)
6.9
(9.1)
10.5
(0.0)
1.0
Discount Rate
4.76
4.25
3.61
2.98
3.06
2.74
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
153,044
49.40
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
75,898
24.50
+Market Value Investments
24,157
7.80
Total Economic Value
253,100
81.7
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
44,500
14.36
–Market Value of Minority Interest
3,623
1.17
Warranted Equity Value
204,977
66.2
Shares Outstanding
3,098
downside
–22%
(10)
0
10
20
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Economic Return
CFROI (%)
(15)
(10)
(5)
0
5
10
15
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Asset Growth
(%)
0
50
100
150
200
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Beyond Earnings
to $74, still 13% below current price. It is challenging to validate a fade
rate below this level for any ﬁrm. As the story of Sears reveals, shocks and
disruptions occur all the time and ﬁrms that fail to innovate and maintain
peak eﬃciency will be quickly overtaken by competitors.
eCAP Summary
eCAPs are Stars and Cash Cows that also exhibit durable proﬁtability. These
are enviable ﬁrms and can be excellent investments when purchased at a
reasonable price.
The HOLT model works marvelously on eCAPs. eCAPs are awarded a
10-year forecast horizon, typically coupled with low growth and minimal
fade in CFROI.
Investors should focus critically on the terminal fade rate. Will Nestlé
suddenly become a riskier ﬁrm in year 11 of the forecast? The 10% fade
rate implies a remaining CAP of just 10 years (CAP = 1/f ). Investors exam-
ining ﬁrms like Nestlé or Kraft are wise to bear in mind the story of Sears
or to recall Sara Lee’s troubled years before altering the residual fade rate.
Nonetheless, assessing the terminal fade rate is typically the chief consider-
ation for eCAPs since growth is usually negligible. The fundamental pricing
model can be used to assess the market-implied fade rate and CAP.10
Cash Cow (DuPont)
DuPont is a venerable Cash Cow. The ﬁrm ﬂings oﬀ60% of earnings each
year and hands it back to shareholders as a dividend. It earns CFROI above
its cost of capital. Although DuPont has struggled to grow, it has managed
to keep pace with the S&P 500 since 2005. DuPont is nowhere near Star
status and lacks the proﬁt persistence and stability of eCAPs, but not by
much. DuPont is an exciting investment idea precisely because it is pos-
sible for the ﬁrm to reinvigorate itself like Honeywell and generate large
shareholder gains, or to stumble into oblivion.
10David A. Holland, “An Improved Method for Valuing Mature Companies and Estimating Terminal
Value: Adding Fade to Your DCF Model,” Credit Suisse Quant Conference, New York City, December
2016.
348

Evaluating Market Expectations
HOLT does an excellent job forecasting CFROI and growth rates for
Cash Cows. Most Cash Cows tend to ﬂuctuate around the long-term
cost of capital of 6%, distribute dividends, and grow close to the rate of
inﬂation. Cash Cow businesses need to dislodge entrenched bureaucratic
tendencies, focus on increasing the eﬃciency of operations, motivate
employees, and seek out innovations that can bring new life to the ﬁrm.
This is a critical juncture.
DuPont earned a CFROI of 7.5% in 2016. HOLT anticipates a small
decline in CFROI in 2017, fading back up to 7.8% by 2021. Growth is
expected to remain at the level of inﬂation for the next ﬁve years. Beyond
year 5 of the forecast, CFROI is expected to fade back toward 6%. The
default HOLT forecast indicates 11% downside.
The big question for Cash Cows is: How much longer? For how many
more years can the ﬁrm sustain above-average proﬁts? This is easily tested
in HOLT Lens using Flex Valuation (Exhibit 11.12). Interestingly, extend-
ing the forecast from 5 to 10 years leads to no improvement in valuation.
It’s hard to imagine that investors are anticipating growth above inﬂation
for DuPont. More likely, investors are overly optimistic about the ﬁrm’s
penchant for proﬁts. A 5% residual fade rate results in a fair value scenario,
but this fade rate should be reserved for only the very best ﬁrms globally
with exceptional records of proﬁt stability.
Cash Cow Summary
The big question for Cash Cows is: How much longer can the ﬁrm
earn excess returns? Flex Valuation in HOLT Lens provides immediate
feedback on sensitivities that explore the terminal fade rate or increase or
decreases in the cost of capital. Questions around capital structure changes
can be directed to a HOLT Sector Specialist for bespoke and interactive
simulations.
Dog (BP)
A dog may be a man’s best friend, but Dog stocks are usually not much of
a pal.
349

Beyond Earnings
350
EXHIBIT 11.12
DuPont’s Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of May 22, 2017.
DUPONT 
Sensitivity
Diversified Chemicals
Price: 77.34 (May 22, 2017)
Warranted Price: 68.46 USD (–11%)
Market Cap: 67.046 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 5
Economic Return (CFROI %) 9.0
8.4
7.9
8.2
7.5
7.1
7.8
Real Asset Growth %
(0.6)
2.3
(0.3)
(19.4)
0.5
(0.0)
0.0
Discount Rate
5.34
4.40
4.08
3.65
3.30
2.91
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
63,863
73.67
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
20,766
23.95
+Market Value Investments
650
0.75
Total Economic Value
85,280
98.4
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
25,104
28.96
–Market Value of Minority Interest
825
0.95
Warranted Equity Value
59,350
68.5
Shares Outstanding
867
0
2
4
6
8
10
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
(20)
(10)
0
10
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Asset Growth
(%)
0
50
100
150
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
downside
–11%

Evaluating Market Expectations
Companies in the Dog category have experienced a material decline in
CFROI, which is below the cost of capital. Many ﬁrms in this position
attempt to grow their way out of trouble. This is a losing prospect. Instead,
Dogs need to shed unproﬁtable businesses and revitalize their operations.
Empirical evidence suggests that about 30% of Dogs recover back to the
cost of capital. However, only about 5% of Dogs maintain improvements.
The rest slip backwards into oblivion, merge, or eventually de-list from
their exchange.
Many Dogs are cyclical ﬁrms that have fallen on hard times. BP is a
good example, up to a point. Oil prices are far below record highs, and
BP is smarting. However, the ﬁrm is also a laggard compared to peers in
terms of operational eﬀectiveness. Of late, BPs R&D eﬀorts have not been
as rewarding as peers.
HOLT’s default forecast for Dogs is that CFROI will revert back toward
the cost of capital. This is a reasonable assumption if the ﬁrm continues to
be priced as a going concern. For BP, HOLT forecasts CFROI to climb
from 0% to 3.5% over the next ﬁve years combined with 0% real growth
(Exhibit 11.13). This forecast is close to market expectations, which antic-
ipates that CFROI will climb back to 2%. The signiﬁcant valuation swing
from +25% to 0% based on a one percentage point decline in CFROI
from 3% to 2% highlights the onerous debt burden of the ﬁrm and its
eﬀect on small changes in proﬁtability.
Dog Summary
If a ﬁrm is expected to survive, it makes sense that CFROI will climb
back toward the cost of capital when it is far below it. HOLT anticipates
mean-reversion in proﬁtability for Dogs. At times, the HOLT forecast for
Dogs is too generous. Dogs can get stuck in the mud for long stretches of
time, and there is never any guarantee that they will re-emerge as a prof-
itable ﬁrm. Most Dogs fail to fully ﬁx their businesses.
A concern for investors in Dogs is whether or not HOLT’s replacement
charge is appropriate. HOLT imputes a retirement charge based on the
ﬁrm’s historical growth rate. The very low growth rate of most of these
351

Beyond Earnings
352
EXHIBIT 11.13
BP’s Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of May 22, 2017.
BP PLC
Sensitivity
Integrated Oil & Gas
Price: 6.18 (May 22, 2017)
Market Cap: 121.62 USD
Warranted Price: 7.71 USD (25%)
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 5
4.0
5.1
3.3
0.1
(0.7)
0.5
3.4
Real Asset Growth %
1.7
11.1
1.7
(2.2)
(7.4)
(0.0)
0.2
Discount Rate
5.98
5.42
5.26
5.15
5.41
4.85
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
275,949
14.02
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
(4,780)
(0.24)
+Market Value Investments
26,180
1.33
Total Economic Value
297,350
15.1
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
143,291
7.28
–Market Value of Minority Interest
2,420
0.12
Warranted Equity Value
151,639
7.7
Shares Outstanding
19,676
(5)
0
5
10
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
(20)
(10)
0
10
20
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Asset Growth
(%)
0
50
100
150
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
upside
25%
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Evaluating Market Expectations
ﬁrms ensures the maximum retirement amount is being charged against
the ﬁrm’s typically meager cash ﬂows, often resulting in a negative net cash
receipt. This is probably a reasonable expectation, but investors will want to
dig into this area when necessary, particularly for asset-intensive companies
with long-lived projects and low corporate growth.
FINAL REMARKS
We should never forget market prices are transient. What is expensive today
can be cheap tomorrow and vice-versa. McDonald’s is a great example. In
January 2003 the stock was trading at a HOLT P/B ratio of 1.0. Investors
had priced the stock to earn only its cost of capital into the hereafter. We’ve
recreated the pricing dynamics as exhibited in HOLT in Exhibit 11.14.
The hashed bars in the top panel show McDonald’s subsequent CFROI
performance. The Green Dot shows low market expectations. McDonald’s
trounced investors’ expectations and the share price rocketed upwards.
How does McDonald’s look today? Investors are excited about CEO
Steve Easterbrook’s renewed focus on operational excellence and his expan-
sive vision that includes bringing back fresh (unfrozen) hamburger. The
stock is priced for CFROI to climb from historically high levels up to 14%
coupled with continued real growth of 2.5%. In contrast to 2003, MCD
is now trading at a HOLT P/B multiple of 3.6.
HOLT shows that about 25% of historical observations like McDon-
ald’s met or exceeded the high expectations embedded in MCD’s stock
price. This can be determined by noting that the CFROI Green Dot is
near the upper boundary of the blue triangle (Exhibit 11.15). The trian-
gle represents the upper and lower 25th percentile of CFROI outcomes
for ﬁrms with the same starting proﬁtability and growth as McDonald’s.
These very high expectations warrant caution. More often than not, stocks
with high expectations fail to meet or exceed what’s priced in, and the stock
price suﬀers as a result.
The McDonald’s examples capture Bob Hendricks assertion: “It is not
just high CFROI that delivers great shareholder returns; great investments
353

Beyond Earnings
354
EXHIBIT 11.14
McDonald‘s Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of January 31, 2003.
MCDONALD'S CORP
Sensitivity
Restaurants
Price: 14.24 (Jan 31, 2003)
Warranted Price: 20.52 USD (44%)
Market Cap: 18.075 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
t + 1
t + 5
8.7
8.8
9.1
8.9
8.1
7.5
7.7
Real Asset Growth %
5.8
6.4
2.0
2.8
3.5
3.6
2.6
Discount Rate
4.39
3.36
2.05
3.21
3.63
5.62
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
38,627
30.43
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
3,209
2.53
+Market Value Investments
990
0.78
Total Economic Value
42,826
33.7
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
16,776
13.22
–Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
26,050
20.5
Shares Outstanding
1,269
0
2
4
6
8
10
1987
1991
1995
1999
2003
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
(20)
(10)
0
10
20
1987
1991
1995
1999
2003
Asset Growth
(%)
0
50
100
150
200
1987
1991
1995
1999
2003
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
upside
44%
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Evaluating Market Expectations
355
EXHIBIT 11.15
McDonald‘s Flex Valuation and Relative Wealth Chart as of May 22, 2017.
MCDONALD'S CORP
Sensitivity
Restaurants
Price: 147.82 (May 22, 2017)
Warranted Price: 108.36 USD (–27%)
Market Cap: 120.473 USD
CFROI & Asset Growth Inputs
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
t + 1
t + 5
11.0
10.8
10.4
9.8
11.3
11.2
10.9
Real Asset Growth %
3.9
3.8
(2.1)
1.3
(12.3)
2.4
2.4
Discount Rate
5.23
4.39
4.44
4.35
4.00
3.66
Warranted Valuation
Amount (MM)
Per Share
+PV Cash Flow Existing Assets
92,605
113.63
+NPV Cash Flow Future Investments
38,475
47.21
+Market Value Investments
726
0.89
Total Economic Value
131,805
161.72
–Market Value of Debt & Equivalents
43,491
53.36
–Market Value of Minority Interest
0
0.00
Warranted Equity Value
88,315
108.36
Wind-down Value/Share
Wind-down Ratio
Shares Outstanding
815
0
5
10
15
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Economic Return
CFROI (%) 
(12)
(5)
0
5
10
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Asset Growth
(%)
0
100
200
300
400
500
2002
2006
2010
2014
2018
2022
2026
Cumulative Rel.
TSR (%)
downside
–27%
Economic Return (CFROI %)

Beyond Earnings
are found across the CFROI spectrum.” In a recent interview, Hendricks
stressed to both authors his fundamental belief that “there is no single
magic pattern [for winning at investing]. There are multiple patterns for
the multiple business models out there. Part of the challenge of investing
is framing.” Bob spent time considering and looking for changes in a com-
pany’s operating drivers. If a new CEO was hired, he would ask if the CEO
was an asset turns or margin guy. If the company had poor turns and the
CEO had a track record of focusing on turns, then Bob would get excited,
particularly if the Green Dot was low. Once you connect with the Relative
Wealth Chart and its relationship to value drivers, as Bob pointed out, “the
examples jump oﬀthe page. It’s a fun game, it never goes away.”
CHAPTER APPENDIX: GAUGING EXPECTATIONS
USING PVGO
The present value of growth opportunities (PVGO) is the percentage of
total value expected to be earned from future investments. Exhibit 11.16
shows that a ﬁrm can be deconstructed into two components: an exist-
ing business that is maintained into perpetuity and all new projects. The
proﬁtability of the existing business is expected to fade. These components
can be valued separately, which creates an exciting opportunity to assess
the value of diﬀerent proﬁt streams. Imagine, for instance, that Starbuck’s
expands into gourmet burgers. We would be wise to value its existing coﬀee
franchise separately from its burger business.
HOLT’s measure of PVGO is determined by ﬁrst estimating a valua-
tion for the core business that assumes continual replenishment of assets
necessary to operate, zero growth, and reversion to the mean for proﬁtabil-
ity. This estimate is conservative, suggesting average performance for the
existing business over time. We subtract this value (the present value of the
existing business) from the ﬁrm’s market value to arrive at an estimate of
the value investors are anticipating from future growth opportunities.
356

Evaluating Market Expectations
EXHIBIT 11.16 PVGO = Market Enterprise Value less the present value of the
existing business (wind-down + replacement value).
Wind-
down
Value
(A)
Asset Life
Time
Enterprise Value
PV Replacement
(B)
PV Growth
Opportunities
(C)
HOLT’s measure of PVGO is reliable, and investors are smart to take
notice. Here’s why. Because of a growth stock’s potential for outsized share-
holder gains, the allure of growth is often irresistible, and many investors
overpay for these stocks. HOLT research shows that there is a well-heeled
limit to what investors should typically pay for growth: Stocks with more
than 40% of total value attributable to growth (PVGO) should be avoided.
Instead of chasing sexy growth stories, investors beneﬁt from a dispas-
sionate approach that evaluates a ﬁrm’s growth expectations and exposes
this to the cleansing light of historical benchmarks. What emerges from
the empirical evidence is compelling: Betting on growth can be costly.
Investors should remember that growth is elusive and stocks with high
growth expectations often fail to deliver. Eliminating stocks with PVGO
greater than 40% of total value might save you from losses.
357

12
CLOSING THOUGHTS
We opened by recalling the words of Albert Einstein: “Everything should
be as simple as it can be but not simpler.” We will summarize some of the
lessons from this book we would like to leave you.
Don’t forget the golden rule of corporate ﬁnance.
A vital responsibility for corporate executives and their boards is capi-
tal allocation. Managers who focus relentlessly on building and maintain-
ing a sustainable competitive advantage are more likely to allocate capital
successfully into positive NPV strategies and maximize the ﬁrm’s value
(Exhibit 12.1). Decision analysis can help objectify the process. Corpo-
rate executives must go beyond earnings and manipulating earnings for the
beneﬁt of the media and their bonuses. Managers must focus on joining
strategy and valuation at the hip, and invest in positive NPV strategies.1
Corporate boards would be wise to remunerate executives on economic
value creation, not earnings. Investors will excitedly queue to fund compa-
nies that allocate capital eﬀectively.
1Michael Mauboussin likes to remind his audience that strategy and valuation are not two separate
tasks but rather, they should be joined at the hip. We agree wholeheartedly.
359
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Beyond Earnings
EXHIBIT 12.1 We believe that the purpose of a ﬁrm is to build and maintain a
sustainable competitive advantage. These are the elements
that will help it succeed.
Build a
sustainable
competitive
advantage
Strategy
Decision
analysis
Capital
allocation
Maximize
NPV
Maximize
firm value
Choose ﬁnancial performance metrics that best reﬂect a ﬁrm’s eco-
nomics.
A ﬁrm’s economics should guide the selection of its ﬁnancial perfor-
mance metrics and the adjustments necessary to calculate those metrics.
ROE is poor measure of a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability since it focuses only on equity
investors and not the quality of the ﬁrm’s operations. Earnings can be
gamed by accounting shenanigans and are also dependent on a ﬁrm’s lever-
age. In short, earnings and ROE are not to be trusted. ROIC is a better
measure of proﬁtability but liable to accounting distortions. Although it
takes more eﬀort to calculate CFROI, it is a comprehensive measure of
a company’s proﬁtability. Because CFROI reverses accounting distortions
and adjusts for inﬂation, it is comparable across borders and industries, and
over time. This is highly advantageous to corporate and fund managers
when assessing proﬁtability and the plausibility of forecast proﬁtability.
What’s the upside? A better measure of proﬁtability results in improved
capital allocation decisions and fundamental valuation. Keep metrics as
simple as possible, but not simpler.
360

Closing Thoughts
Shareholders’ equity is not free.
The biggest issue with an income statement is that it contains no charge
for shareholders’ equity, implying that equity is free. Economic proﬁt
corrects for this oversight by subtracting a capital charge from the after-tax
operating proﬁt. The capital charge is an opportunity cost on the funding
provided by all capital providers. We prefer the economic proﬁt approach
when discussing valuations since the present value of future economic
proﬁts equals the total NPV of all present and future investments. We
showed the connection between IRR and CFROI, and project NPV and
HOLT EP. These relationships connect project economics to corporate
valuation. For companies with long-lived assets, it is advantageous to use
inﬂation-adjusted gross investment instead of net assets (invested capital)
in the assessment of economic proﬁt. Signiﬁcant intangible expenses such
as R&D should be capitalized and placed on the balance sheet. Again,
keep it as simple as possible, but not simpler. You must go beyond earnings
and never forget that earnings have an opportunity cost.
Fade happens.
We provide empirical evidence throughout the book that fade happens.
Asset growth fades quickly, so beware of extrapolating high growth in fore-
casts. Proﬁtability is stickier but it does fade, and its fade dynamics diﬀer
by industry. Although fade happens, it is rarely an explicit driver in a DCF
model. We introduced our Fundamental Pricing Model and showed how
fade can be added as a value driver to perform back-of-the-envelope val-
uations of mature ﬁrms, or used to estimate the terminal value in a DCF
valuation. The sensitivity of a ﬁrm’s valuation to changes in its competi-
tive advantage period can be assessed. An improved understanding of fade
results in more accurate fundamental valuations and better insights into the
probability of forecasts being realized. We remain active on this research
front.
361

Beyond Earnings
Market-implied expectations provide free and valuable information.
It is highly beneﬁcial to reverse engineer a valuation into determining a
stock’s market-implied expectations. This provides a betting line and free
information into how the market is pricing the company’s future. HOLT
Lens makes this quick and easy, and allows you to assess the combination
of CFROI and asset growth implied by a share price. We recommend that
you take two perspectives:
• Assume the market is correct and analyze what the expectations
mean for a company and its industry. How plausible are they and
what is the market signaling?
• Assume the market can be ineﬃcient and identify how a com-
pany might outperform or underperform the market’s expecta-
tions. How plausible are your reasons, and what’s the probability
of your forecast proﬁtability?
For high-quality companies with exceptional returns on capital, don’t
forget the neglected value driver: the rate at which proﬁtability fades to the
cost of capital. We showed that the inverse of fade equals the competitive
advantage period, and that changes in CAP can have a dramatic impact on
valuation.
Although we prefer companies with proven records of eﬀective capital
allocation and value creation, they tend to be priced at a premium. The
basic objective of a value investor is to “buy low and sell high.” Improved
forecasting and an understanding of market-implied expectations can help
fundamental investors improve their odds of outperformance. Don’t waste
time if you can buy a high-quality stock at an attractive price. Our studies
indicate that companies with poor proﬁtability tend to remain stuck in the
mud. When investing in low-quality stocks, remember Buﬀett’s warning
that “turnarounds seldom turn” and don’t fall in love with the stock.
Lastly, please remember that a valuation is an opinion at a given point
in time. As information changes, so could your forecast and valuation.
362

INDEX
A
Accountant, balance sheet
equation, 11e
Accounting-based performance
metrics, gaming, 5
Accounting distortions (reversal),
CFROI (impact), 51
Accounting, ﬁnancial economics
(diﬀerence), 9–10
Accounts payable (AP), 82
Accounts receivable (AR), 82, 84
Acquired intangibles, 88
Acquisitions, 74
cost, 310–311
eﬀects, adjustment, 311
targets, 54–55
value measurement, economic
proﬁt (usage), 209–211
Actions, examination, 28–30
Adjusted current liabilities
(Amazon), 86e
Adjusted gross plant (Amazon),
70e
Adjusted net working capital
(Amazon), 87e
Adjusted present value (APV), 246
compressed APV method, 247
HOLT discount rate,
relationship, 241–249
model, 222
After-tax interest income,
discounting, 84
Airlines industry, competitiveness,
36
Air Liquide
analysis, 114, 121, 126
default valuation, actual price
(contrast), 152e
enterprise value, 133e
ﬁnancial forecast/EP valuation,
129e–131e
ﬁnancial forecast/
FCFFvaluation, 123e–125e
forecast scenarios/valuations,
132e, 150e
proﬁtability, presentation,
134
valuation, 114, 121, 126,
147–153, 151e
Altria (eCAPs), 175
Amazon
adjusted current liabilities,
86e
adjusted gross plant, 70e
363
Beyond Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI® and Economic Profit Framework, First Edition. David A.
Holland and Bryant A. Matthews.
© 2018 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Index
Amazon (continued)
adjusted net working capital,
87e
adjusted ROA, 39
Annual Report (2013), usage,
65, 80
asset life, implied depreciation
method basis, 94e
assets, growth, 144
buildings, useful life, 67
capitalized operating lease debt,
141, 142e
capitalized operating leases,
78e
capitalized R&D, 81e
CFROI calculation, 66e, 82e,
103–104, 103e, 106e
CFROI fade, assumption, 145e,
146e, 148e, 149e
current assets, 84
economic proﬁt components,
change, 216e
FIFO proﬁts, 101e
Flex Valuation, 349e
forecast scenarios, valuation,
142–147
future free cash ﬂows
(estimation), CFROI/asset
growth (impact), 143e
Green Dot, 333
gross cash ﬂow, 102e, 103e
gross investment, 89e
gross property and equipment,
70e
inﬂation-adjusted depreciating
assets, 81e
inﬂation-adjusted gross plant,
75e
invested capital (IC), 42, 43e
investment, 139–140, 140e
long-term assets calculation,
change, 138e
long-term debt, 141
marketing/technology spending,
increase, 32e
net monetary holding gain,
100e
non-depreciating assets, 89e
NOPAT, 42, 43e
normalized growth rate,
calculation, 320e
operating/transaction EP, 210e
power, 264–265
price expectations, 334–335
price-to-book ratio, 10, 12, 32,
33e
price-to-earnings ratio (P/E), 32
proﬁtability, sacriﬁce, 272
R&D investment,
determination, 80
Relative Wealth Chart (RWC),
104e, 332e, 335e, 349e
reported gross property &
equipment, 69
return on assets, calculation, 40e
return on equity (ROE), 33e
ROE, 34, 34e
ROIC, 42, 43e
Star, 347–348
sustainable growth rate, 319e
total investment tally, 140e
valuation, 32–34
value creation, 214
working capital calculation,
change, 136e
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 80,
347
Amgen, 288
Amortization, 97
Ang, Andrew, 221, 257
364

Index
Anglo American
bets, 29–30
survival, 30
Annual CFROI persistence, 300,
301e, 302e
Annualized excess shareholder
return, 341e
Antioco, John, 159, 162, 272
Hastings, meeting, 273
Apple, 288
earnings forecast, 24
Relative Wealth Chart (RWC),
309e
share price, decrease, 25
Apple, growth stock attraction,
308
Applied Genetic Technologies
(AGTC), 269
market capitalization, 269–270
Arbitrage, absence, 14
Arcelormittal, CFROI decline,
276
Arithmetic average, usage, 232
Arithmetic ERP, usage, 222
Asset recovery charge (ARC), 201
Asset
aging, 48
allocators, perspective, 257
asset life estimate, 69
asset-light ﬁrms, proﬁtability,
288
base, de-layering, 71–72, 72e
beta, 246
capture, absence, 10
eﬃciency, 276e
equation, 140
growth, 314
intangible assets, 86–88
layers, 73–74, 74e
leasing, 48
liabilities, diﬀerence, 10
life, 77, 89–94, 90, 92e, 141
life-cycle, 93
risk, perception, 241–242
splitting, 169
tangible assets, 86–88
utilization, increase, 47
value, 196
Autocorrelation, 315
Automobile manufacturer sales,
323e
Average growth rate, 311–313
B
Back-of-the-envelope
basics, 15–20
pricing equations, 326
Backtests, 308
Balance sheet (statement of
ﬁnancial position), 8
capitalization, 35
consistency, 61–62
equation, 11e
net PP&E, 69
Base market rate, derivation,
236–237
Bayer AG (Cash Cow), 274
Beta, 225, 233
Bezos, Jeﬀ, 12, 24, 35,
264, 347
BHP Billiton, 29–30, 277
Blockbuster Video, 158–161,
272
downfall, 161–162
market-implied fade rate,
180–181
peak revenue, 263
proﬁtability, protection,
163–164
revenue, late fees, 161–162
timeline, 160e
365

Index
Bonds
annual returns, 226e
geometric/arithmetic premiums,
231e
Book taxes, impact, 96–97
Bootstrapping annual persistence,
303–304
Boston Consulting Group product
matrix, adaptation, 268e
Brands, value, 10
British Petroleum
Dogs, 353–357
Flex Valuation/Relative Wealth
Chart, 356e
Gulf oil spill, 300
Buﬀett, Warren, 47, 134, 195,
234, 291, 303
investments, 350
Business health, reporting, 6
C
Capital
asset cost, 246
charge, equation, 126
expenditure, estimation, 73e
invested capital, equation, 40
lease, 76
providers, entitlement, 318
short-term sources, 39
Capital asset pricing model
(CAPM), 227, 232
corporation reliance, 234
HOLT DR, relevance, 241–249
Capital cash ﬂow (CCF), 247
Capital cost, 170, 181
debt, relationship, 247–249
forward-looking capital cost,
222
measurement, 237
relationship, 248e
valuation equivalence, 244e
Capital expense (capex), 72–73,
116
calculation, 73
cutting, 61, 143
estimation, impact, 75
net capex, 137
Capitalized lease, calculation,
77–78
Capitalized operating leases,
75–78, 141
Amazon, 78e
change, 136
equation, 78
investment, 138, 139
life, 91
usage, 67
Capitalized research and
development (R&D),
79–80
calculation, 79e
life, 91
usage, 67
Cash Cows, 18, 44, 143–144,
336
development state, 262, 268,
274–277
Du Pont, 352–353
Cash cycle (CC), calculation/
tracking, 82
Cash excess, impact, 29
Cash ﬂow return on investment
(CFROI), 174e, 362
accounting, 57
adjustments, 42, 65
annualized excess shareholder
return, 341e
basis, 63–64
behavior, 291
consensus earnings, near-term
estimates, 235
366

Index
drivers/competitive advantage,
277e
earning, probability, 335–336
empirical fade, 298e
EROI, equivalence/comparison,
202, 204e
evolution, 59e
expectations, 341–342
expression, 175e
fading CFROI, 304e
impact, 51
inﬂation-adjusted measure, 52
IRR, equivalence, 65e
median CFROI, 287
metric, usage, 5
overestimation, 93–94
persistence, 295, 296e,
300–301
portfolio, 288, 289e
ratio calculation, 200–204
size-weighted CFROI, 287e
volatility, 348
Cash ﬂow return on investment
(CFROI) calculation, 35, 58,
60, 71
inputs, requirement/usage, 64,
66e
liabilities, 77
management responsibility, 83
restatement, 74
template, 89e, 90e, 94e
Cash ﬂows
change, 28
corporate manager discounting,
227
discounting, risk (investor
perspective), 227–230
occurrence/movement, 16
riskiness, change, 28
risks, 223
rules, 197
statement. See Statement of cash
ﬂows.
Cash raising, NPV (zero value), 54
Cash return on gross assets
(CROGA), 60
impact, 63
Cash tax rate, 41
Castle A.M., dividend reduction
(debate), 278–279
Chipotle, share price loss, 27
Choke-growth turnaround, 198
Coca-Cola, 134
consumer brand switching, 294
eCAPs, 275
Colgate-Palmolive, 163–164
Comcast (Cash Cow), 274
Commission, payment, 9
Company
CAP, value/risk (quantiﬁcation),
155
company-speciﬁc clearing rate,
237
company-speciﬁc risk, 226
competitive advantage,
155–156
maturation, average growth rate,
311–313
stand-alone entity, 312
value, government policy
(impact), 30
Competitive advantage
barrier, 157
characteristic, 173–176
impact, 296–299
magnitude, 157
sustainability, 156, 158
types, 174e
Competitive advantage period
(CAP), 132, 155, 173–175
367

Index
Competitive advantage period
(CAP), (continued)
changes, 363
excess proﬁts, relationship, 163e
length, measurement, 157
magnitude/sustainability,
quantiﬁcation, 162–168
measure, 209
price/book, forward spread
(contrast), 165e
Competitive forces, impact, 52
Competitive life-cycle, 266–268,
280–282
examination, 282–284
framework, 261, 267
phases, 344e
states, features, 284e
stylized view, 267e
Compound annual growth rate
(CAGR), 211
Compressed APV method, 247
Constant dividend, payment,
16–17
Constant growth, combinations,
46e
Construction-in-progress (CIP)
identiﬁcation, 69–70
removal, 68–69
Consumer advantage, 173
Core unlimited, valuation
(thought experiment),
168–172
Corporate culture, quality, 10
Corporate evolution, competitive
life-cycle, 261
Corporate ﬁnance, rule, 360
Corporate ﬁnancial managers,
role, 6–8
Corporate growth, mean
reversion, 313–315
Corporate performance, measures,
32–33
Corporate proﬁtability,
persistence, 285
Corporate tax rate, 116
Corporation
cash needs, management, 6
ﬁnancing decisions, 6
Correlation, 225, 294–295
Cost of goods sold (COGS), 99
Country (wealth), government
policy (impact), 30
Credit-worthiness, systematic risk
exposure (measurement), 237
Cross-sectional weighted-average
IRR measure, 51
Current liabilities, 85, 137
Current monetary assets, 83–85
Current non-debt liabilities, 85
Customers, suppliers
(relationship), 10
D
Dairy Queen, 134
Damodaran, Aswath, 118, 164
Danaher Corporation
case study, 216–220
economic proﬁt, 218e
economic proﬁt (EP), annual
change, 219e
EROI, 217e
transaction EROI, 217e
value driver performance, 217e
Dangereux, Franck, 25–27
Darwin, Charles, 261
Debt, 36–38
absence, 36
capital cost, relationship,
247–249
debt-equivalents, increase, 139
368

Index
equivalents, relationship,
140–142
expected cost, 248
expected return, 249
investors, interest rate demand,
38
nominal cost, 77, 141
obligations, 30, 85
Debt-to-equity ratio (D/E), 37
Decays, forward spread, 171e
Decision points, 20e
De-layering calculation, 72
Delta EP
components, value creation
(decomposition), 212–214
metric, usage, 216
Depreciating assets, 58, 67
cost, 203
gross investment, separation,
63–64
life, calculation, 91–94
non-depreciating assets,
contrast, 68–70
Depreciation, 97
charge, 48, 138
policy, 48
rates, 60
Development, states, 262
Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton
(DMS)
report, 256
world risk premiums, 231
Discounted cash ﬂow (DCF),
224, 362
analysis, usage, 6
methods, 50–51
model, 32, 316, 322
valuation approach, 44–51, 164
Discount rate (DR), 201,
206, 221
achievement, cumulative
probability, 255
changes, impact, 256
estimation, HOLT approach
(usage), 235–240
market-implied discount rates,
250–251, 251e
mean-revert, 254–255
solving, 236e
type, 242–243
Discount rate (DR), U.S. discount
rate
annual changes, 251–252
behavior, 252e, 253
one-month changes,
distribution, 253e
plot/value, contrast, 254e
probabilistic evolution, 255e
Discretionary future-oriented
activities, spending
(reduction), 23
Disposals, 74
Distortions, correction, 51
Distribution capabilities, 270
Diversiﬁable risk, 230
Diversiﬁcation, 222–230
Diversiﬁed portfolio, holding, 223
Dividend discount model
(DDM), 317
Dividends, 278–280
elimination, 279
increase, 18e
Dogs
British Petroleum, 353–357
cyclical ﬁrms, 355
development state, 262, 268,
278–280
Du Pont
Cash Cow, 352–353
CFROI, 353
369

Index
Du Pont (continued)
Flex Valuation/Relative Wealth
Chart, 354e
E
Early life-cycle (Question Marks),
269–282
Earnings
accretive/dilutive characteristic,
29
dilution, 53–54
gaming, 5
growth, components/sources,
50e, 183e
quality, 45, 48, 119, 198
Earnings before interest and tax
(EBIT), 36, 243
Earnings per share (EPS)
decrease, 55
post-merger EPS, 55
post-raise diluted EPS, 55
reward, 5
East India Company, 265
Eastman Kodak, 273–274
EasyJet, jet capitalizations, 62
EBITDA margin, 122
Economic depreciation
(ED), 201
Economic performance, 32,
51–53
Economic proﬁt (EP), 195
approach, 126–128
calculations, 61, 127e, 207e,
208e
calculation/utility, 113–114
change, 196, 200e
components, 196
delta EP components, value
creation (decomposition),
212–214
equation, fade (usage),
133–134
ﬂowchart, 135e
framework, 62, 208–209
HOLT economic proﬁt, 195,
204–208
method, 190
present value, NPV
(equivalence), 205e
usage, 209–211
value, connection, 206–208
Economic return on investment
(EROI), 201
calculation, 202–204
CFROI, equivalence/
comparison, 202, 204e
change, 213
usage, 205–206
Economic spread, magnitude, 168
Economic value, creation, 155
Eﬃciency growth, earnings
growth component, 50e
Einstein, Albert, 360
Empirical Competitive Advantage
Periods (eCAPs), 262,
275–277, 282, 336
classiﬁcation, 285
Nestle, 350–352
proﬁt persistence/stability,
352
Employees, expertise, 10
End of Accounting, The (Lev/Gu),
166
Energy, transition matrix,
293e
Enterprise value, calculation/
equation, 128, 188, 190, 245,
247, 329
Entity free cash ﬂow approach,
114–118
370

Index
Equity, 199
amount, alteration, 48
annual returns, 226e
discount rates, mean reversion,
249–257
equation, 141
market value, calculation, 14
valuation, 77
value, 243, 329
Equity risk premium (ERP), 222
discount rate, changes (impact),
256
historical average, 242
market-implied ERP,
256, 256e
size, 230–231
Equivalent risk, 49–50
Equivalents, debt (relationship),
140–142
EV/EBITDA ratio, 118
Excel PV function, usage, 77e, 78
Excess cash, 29, 40
Excess growth, elimination, 315
Excess proﬁts, CAP (relationship),
163e
Excess return half-life, example,
297e
Ex-growth terminal value,
estimation, 178
Expectations (gauging), PVGO
(usage), 364–365
Expected CAP, 172
Expected cash ﬂows (increase),
action (impact), 28
Expected return, equation, 330
Expenses, timing, 48
Explicit forecast period
(determination), ﬂowchart
(usage), 189e
Exponential decay rate, 171
External cost of capital, 203
Exxon (eCAP), 277
F
Fade, 128, 132, 144, 179–181,
285
competitive advantage, impact,
296–299
compound decay, 132
deﬁnition, 266
empirical fade, 298e
forward spread, 173e
life-cycle position, diﬀerences,
280
occurrence, 362–363
outperformance, 330–331
quantiﬁcation, 290–291
rate, 172, 176, 180, 187
usage, 133–134, 208–209
value driver, 176
Fama-French three-factor model,
233
Film, digitization, 88
Finance lease, 76
Financial assets, 67
Financial decisions
decision making, Golden Rule,
12–15
service, 43–44
Financial distress, risk, 42–43
Financial economics, accounting
(diﬀerence), 9–10
Financial economist, balance sheet
equation, 11e
Financial performance metrics,
59e
selection, 361–362
Financial statements, types, 7–8
Financing
cost, 77
eﬀects, elimination, 41
371

Index
Firms
capital, opportunity cost, 199
company-speciﬁc clearing rate,
237
discount rate, 235–240
economic earnings,
representation, 195
investor preference, 240
life-cycle position, 268, 283
performance, comparison, 39
proﬁtability, measurement,
361
purpose, 361e
reputation, 10
ROE, 116
starting CFROI, 186e
valuation, 113
value, equations, 97, 115, 118,
127, 168, 208
First In, First Out (FIFO) proﬁts,
99–100
equation, 100
First-order autoregressive model,
294
Fixed assets, disposal
(gains/losses), 67
Flex Valuation, 347, 351
usage, 353
Foodbarn, 25–27
Food, Beverage, and Tobacco
(FBT)
annual CFROI correlation,
300e
median CFROI, 291–293
persistence rate, 292–293
products, 300
transition matrix, 293e
Foot Locker (Cash Cow), 274
Forecast, 122
horizon, 118
period, ﬂowchart, 120e
terminal period, valuation, 113
Forward CFROI, price-to-book
ratio (contrast), 53e
Forward earnings, forward P/E
(contrast), 49
Forward net operating proﬁt after
tax, 170
Forward P/E, 45
forward earnings growth,
contrast, 49e
Forward return on invested
capital, 170
Forward spread, price/book
(contrast), 165e
Free cash ﬂows, future economic
proﬁts (discounting), 177e
Free cash ﬂow to equity (FCFE),
45
Free cash ﬂow to ﬁrm (FCFF),
113–115, 197, 243
calculation, 208e
equation, 119, 139, 142
ﬂowchart, 135e
method, 188
NOPAT/investment,
relationship, 121e
valuation, 122, 134
Fudge factors, 234–235
Fundamental Pricing Model, 156,
176–178, 191, 329–330,
362
application, 182–187
equations, 178
Future cash ﬂows, estimating, 234
Future investments, net present
value, 168
Future projects, value, 10
Future value (FV), 64
calculation, 16
372

Index
G
Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles (GAAP)
accounting, 12
Geometric average, usage,
232
Gillette, 134
Global automobile industry sales,
321
Global Energy, CFROI
time-series, 293e
Global Food, Beverage and
Tobacco, CFROI time-series,
292e
Global industrial/service ﬁrms
market cap, 316e
real asset growth, correlation,
315e
size-weighted CFROI, 287e
transition probability
persistence, 290e
Global non-ﬁnancials, 311e
Global standard ﬁrm (GSF)
discount rate, 238e
Gobain, Saint, 61–62
Golden Rule, 3
ﬁnancial decision making,
12–15
Goodwill, 106–107, 214–220
amortization policy, 48
capital charge, 210
contribution, 215
Google, 288
Gordon Growth Model, 329
Government policy, impact, 30
Green Dot (HOLT), 326, 327,
331, 332–337
helpfulness, 340–344
indication, 345
Gross capex, 116
Gross capitalized R&D,
estimation, 79
Gross cash ﬂow (GCF), 94–95,
174e, 201, 318
inﬂation adjustment, 64
nominal GCF, 134, 136
Gross domestic product (GDP)
deﬂators, 75
time series, 72
Gross investment
basis, 78
elements, 67
Gross plant, 109
asset life, 70, 90–91
calculation, 72
recaptured, estimation, 110e
Gross plant recaptured, 81
Gross proﬁt, calculation, 9
Growth
expectations, 228
forecasting, 307, 317–323
impact, 214
investor anticipation, 348
irrelevance, 47
near-term/long-term dynamics,
321–322
options, assessment, 198e
rate, 74, 141, 169, 315
reduction, 147
sustainability, 316–317
usage, 208–209
zero value, 46
Growth stock, attraction, 308
Gu, Feng, 166, 329
H
Half-life, 297, 315
Hastings, Reed, 272
Antioco, meeting, 273
Heinz, 134
373

Index
Hendricks, Bob, 330–331, 336,
357, 360
Historical acquisitions, 48
Historical corporate performance,
comparison, 52
Historical cost, 63, 72
Historical growth rate, 72
Holding cash, tax disadvantage,
83–84
HOLT
Air Liquide, valuation,
147–153
book taxes, usage, 96
capital cost, discount rate type,
242–243
CFROI framework, 52, 71
CFROI metric, impact, 5
CFROI valuation model, 52
discount rate (DR), 221–222,
237–238, 240–249, 255
economic proﬁt, 195, 204–208,
207e, 208e
EP valuation model, 51
forward-looking capital cost,
222
framework, 66, 78, 87, 91
Green Dot, 326, 327, 331,
332–337
Lens, 104, 213, 240, 326, 337,
342, 363
median asset life, usage, 70
pension adjustment, 101–102
price-to-book ratio, 53e, 209e
pricing puzzle, 236e
Relative Wealth Chart (RWC),
104, 107, 326
Sector Specialist, 353
software, access, 74, 79
Honeywell International
CFROI peak, 280–281
life-cycle states, 281e
Question Mark phase, 280–281
Household & Personal Products
(HPP) ﬁrm, examination, 303
I
Icahn, Carl, 158, 162
Idiosyncratic risks, 226
Income statement (statement of
comprehensive income),
8, 37
consistency, 61–62
operating expenses,
increase, 48
Industries
CFROI persistence, 299
persistence, 291–294
purchase decision, 54e
value, 199
Industry-speciﬁc modiﬁcations,
66
Inﬂation-adjusted asset growth
matrices, 314e
Inﬂation-adjusted depreciating
assets (Amazon), 81e
Inﬂation-adjusted depreciating
investment (IADI), 201
calculation, 68
Inﬂation-adjusted gross
investment (IAGI), 64,
66–70, 143, 201
CFROI calculation template,
90e
sums, 88
Inﬂation-adjusted gross plant,
68–70
calculation, 69
Inﬂation-adjusted growth
investment (IAGI), 201
Inﬂation-adjusted land, 86
Inﬂation-adjusted measure, 52
374

Index
Inﬂation adjustment, 71
calculation, 71–75
factors, 74
limitation, 75
usage, 73e
Inﬂationary eﬀects
importance, 58
removal, 51–52
Inﬂation impact, 74e
Innovation/disruption cycle, 265
Intangible assets, 86–88
Intangible operating assets, usage,
67
Intel (Cash Cow), 274
Interest
expense, 97–98
interest-bearing short-term
debt, 137
Interest payments, 318
tax deductibility, 117, 238–239
Internal rate of return (IRR), 51,
203, 362
calculation, 60
capital investment analysis,
63–64
CFROI, equivalence, 65e
comparison, 202e
inputs, 62
single-period IRR, calculation,
60
Intrinsic value
improvement, 348
reduction, 29
Inventory
impact, 67
inﬂation adjustment, 85–86
management, 83
Invested capital, 42, 116,
199–200
equation, 40, 43e
operating working capital/net
ﬁxed assets, sum, 117e
Investment
anticipation, rewards, 326
earnings growth component,
50e
experience, 228
FCFF/NOPAT, relationship,
121e
making, decisions, 6
problems, 158–162
Investment growth, 179
control variable/input, 181e
value driver, 181–182
Investor communication, value,
17
Iridium network, Motorola
investment, 273
J
Jack-in-the-Box, market value
(decrease), 27
JC Penney, 169, 265
Jobs, Steve, 308
Johnson & Johnson, 27, 288
Johnson, Paul, 164–166
Just-in-time (JIT), 83
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 222–223
Keynes, John Maynard, 249–250,
330
Key performance indicators
(KPIs), 166, 179
Klarman, Seth, 280
Kraft, 134
Kurtosis, 225
L
Land and buildings, 86
Land assets, 67
375

Index
Larcker, David, 22
Large cap stocks, price
movements, 229–230
Last In, First Out (LIFO), 85–86,
100
Law of One Price, 14
Lean Management, 83
Leases
capitalization, inputs, 77
classiﬁcation, direct impact
(absence), 76
contract, 75
expense, 141
types, 76
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy,
238
Letter to Shareholders (Bezos), 12
Lev, Baruch, 166, 329
Leverage, 36–38, 237
Liabilities
assets, diﬀerence, 10
current non-debt liabilities, 85
Life-cycle states
expectations, 336–340
publicly traded ﬁrm
percentages, 284e
Life-cycle stocks, selection,
344–357
Life-cycle transitions, 241
annualized shareholder return,
282e
probabilities, 282e
Long Look at Short-Termism, A
(Mauboussin/Callahan), 24
Long-run market performance,
230–231
Long-term assets, 136, 137
Long-term CFROI, 302e
Long-term discount rate (LTDR),
255
Long-term ﬁnancial investments,
67
Long-term interest-bearing debt,
42
Long-term investments, 22–23,
86–87
Long-term investors, focus, 35
Long-term liabilities, 141
Long-term market leadership,
considerations, 35
Long-term proﬁtability,
expectations, 28
Long-term real required rate of
return, 287–289
Long-term real return on
investment, 286–287
Long-term shareholders, company
search, 22–23
Loss potential/probability, 221,
225
LVMH, proﬁt persistence, 289
M
Macroeconomic developments,
228
Macroeconomic signals, 257
Macroeconomic variables, 224
Macy’s
back-of-the-envelope valuation,
HOLT inputs, 191e
CFROI, 186
competitive advantage period,
assessment inputs, 190–191
economic proﬁt, reduction,
185–186
market implied competitive
advantage, 183, 184e
real asset growth, 185
Relative Wealth Chart (RWC),
327, 328e
376

Index
share price sensitivity matrices,
185e
valuation, inputs, 190–191
Madden, Bartley J., 31, 57, 235,
241
Management
accountability, 63
quality, 10
Market assumptions, 363
Market expectations, evaluation,
325
Market-implied CFROI,
333
Market-implied discount rates,
250–251, 251e
Market-implied ERP, 256
time series, 256e
Market-implied expectations,
363–364
Market implied fade rate, 180
Market leverage
diﬀerential, 239e
quality/growth, relevance,
239
Market movements (MKT), 233
Materiality requirement,
inclusion, 320
Material risk, 156, 187
Mauboussin, Michael, 164–166,
256, 325
McDonald’s
Flex Valuation/Relative Wealth
Chart, 358e–359e
stock, trading level, 357
Mean reversion, 249–257, 289,
294–296
process, 266
test, 313
Mean-reverting CFROI,
demonstration, 336
Mean-reverting forecast model,
development, 301–304
Measurement, consistency
(importance), 42
Median forward real growth rate,
ﬁrm age determination, 312e
Median real asset growth rate
(RAGR), 310–311, 311e
Mergers and acquisition goodwill,
EP change (impact), 215
Metrics, 286
gaming, 61
intent, consistency, 39
Microsoft, 277, 288
Miller, M.H., 168
Minority interest, 102
Modigliani, F., 168
Monetary assets, 67
Monetary holding gain, equation,
99
Moody’s Manual of Investments,
263
Motorola, R&D/technology, 273
MSCI Europe Index, 350
Music, digitization, 88
Musk, Elon, 321–322
N
Nestle
eCAP, 350–352
Flex Valuation/Relative Wealth
Chart, 351e
Net capex, 137
Net cash ﬂow, 183e
Net cash margin, asset turns
(multiplication), 175e
Netﬂix, 161–162, 272–273
Net income after tax, 95–97
Net monetary asset holding gain,
99
377

Index
Net operating proﬁt after tax
(NOPAT), 41, 42, 116, 317
adjustments, 118
calculation, 43e
FCFF/investment, relationship,
121e
measurement, 62
Net PP&E, 69
Net present value (NPV), 4
calculation/equation, 13,
16–17, 21, 84, 203e
decision rule, 14
EP present value, equivalence,
205e
maximization, 15
positive NPV, usage, 3
projects, acceptance, 15
rule, 20–22
tree, 20e, 22e
Net working capital, equation, 39
Nippon Steel, market
capitalization (decline), 276
Nokia, product innovations, 273
Nominal gross cash ﬂow,
134, 136
Non-depreciating assets (NDAs),
58, 67, 82–89, 201
Amazon, 89e
CFROI calculation template,
89e
depreciating assets, contrast,
68–70
elements, 83
gross investment, separation,
63–64
intensity, function, 204e
Non-interest-bearing current
liabilities, 39
Non-operating investments/assets,
exclusion, 42
Normalized cash returns on
invested assets, capture, 102
Normalized growth rate (NGR),
HOLT usage, 319–320
Nucor, CFROI decline, 276
NXP Semiconductors, market
capitalization, 271
O
One-year Treasury bill, present
value, 224
Operating business, economic
proﬁtability (measurement),
106
Operating cycle (OC), 82
Operating decisions, impact, 44
Operating expenses, increase, 48
Operating lease, 76
capitalization, 77e, 138e
gross value, estimates, 78
Operating performance
analysis, 199
measure, 57–58
Operations, contribution, 215
Opportunity cost, 199
Options, value, 21, 22e
Oracle, 288
P
Paramount Pictures, purchase, 159
Patents, 87
Payment (pmt), 64
Pension adjustment, 101–102
Pension expense, 101–102
Pepsi, consumer brand switching,
294
Performance measure, CFROI
(usage), 58–65
Performance metrics, 8, 31
Permanent disruption, probability,
172–173
378

Index
Perpetual growth, combinations,
46e
Perpetual return on equity, 45
Perpetual ROIC, 121–122, 170
Perpetual spread, sustaining, 122
Perpetuity, 16, 19
equation, 16, 44, 121
simple perpetuity, 171
Persistence
factor, 295
HOLT measures, 301
measurement, 290–301
median annual persistence rates,
299e
variation, 300–301
Pﬁzer (Cash Cow), 274, 288
Plant, 68
Plowback ratio, 317–319
Portfolio theory, 228
Positive expected NPV, 98–99
Positive NPV, 166
generation, 198
projects, 34–35, 61
strategies, 49, 360
usage, 3
Post-merger EPS, 55
Post-raise diluted EPS, 55
Present value (PV), 64, 224
calculation/equation, 16,
18–19, 122, 196
cash ﬂows, corporate manager
discounting, 227
gross proﬁt, calculation, 26
Present value of growth
opportunities (PVGO), usage,
364–365, 365e
Price expectations, 334
Price-to-book (P/B)
forward spread, contrast, 165e
metric, 32
multiples, 24, 165, 328–329,
342
sensitivity, testing, 164
Price-to-book (P/B) ratio
Amazon example, 33e
combinations, 46e
comparison, 10, 12
forward CFROI, contrast, 53e
Price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio, 24,
118, 192e
combinations, 46e
DCF model, relationship, 32
decrease, 47
increase, 47
multiples, 329
problem, 44–51
ROE importance, 48–49
understanding, 191–193
valuation metric, 44–51
Price-to-sales (P/S) ratio, 269
Probabilistic modelling, 97
Probabilities, representation, 20e
Probable loss, 225
Production advantage, 173
Proﬁtability
decay, absence, 171
drivers, 174e
durability, 352
expectations, 269
increase, 32
metrics, 174e
problem, 47
stability, 176
Proﬁtability index (PI), 15
Project life, CFROI calculation
template, 94e
Property plant and equipment
(PP&E), 63
net capex, 137
net PP&E, 69
379

Index
Publicly traded debt, 77
Purchasing units, asset layers
(usage), 73
Q
Q2 Holdings (QTWO), 269
Quality stocks, investments, 342
Question Marks
development state, 262, 268,
269–282
Tesla, 344–347
R
Random walk behavior, 254
Rappaport, Alfred, 50–51, 325
Reactions, examination, 28–30
Real Asset Growth, one-year
correlation, 315e
Real options, value, 22e
Reclassiﬁcation, 35
Redbox, 160–161, 169, 272
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals,
life-cycle position, 271
Reinvestment rates, 60
Relative risk, measurement,
237–238
Relative value, 52
Relative Wealth Chart (RWC)
understanding, 105
usage, 333–334
Rental expense, 98
Reported gross property/
equipment (Amazon), 70e
Research and development (R&D)
budget, reduction, 23, 29
capitalized research and
development, 79–80
expense, 98–99
funding, committing (penalty),
98–99
investments, 58, 101, 136
life, estimation, 92e
Residual risk, 226
Restructuring, 278–280, 340
Retail, disruption, 169
Retirement, calculation/equation,
139
Return, 222–230
increase, 59
Return on assets (ROA), 39
calculation (Amazon), 40e
Return on capital, 291–292
Return on equity (ROE), 31–36,
174e, 317
combinations, 46e
decrease, 38, 46
eﬀect, 38e
equation, 33, 95
improvement, 47
ROIC, contrast, 41
Return on incremental invested
capital (ROIIC), 120e, 121
Return on invested capital
(ROIC), 31, 39–44, 62,
174e, 178–181
forward estimates, 59
improvement, CROGA
(impact), 63
inﬂuence, 57
measurement, 286
relationship, 41
ROE, contrast, 41
Revenue, timing, 48
Reward, 221
Rio Tinto, bets, 29–30
Risk, 221, 222–230
aversion, 249
components, 225–226
deﬁnition, 225–227
diversiﬁcation, beneﬁt,
229e
380

Index
factors, consideration, 232–235
HOLT measure, 236
investor perspective, 227–230
premium, 230
risk-free proﬁt, 14
systematic component,
225–226
unsystematic component,
225–226
Risk-free rates, 227
RJ Reynolds (eCAPs), 275
Roper Technologies, Relative
Wealth Chart (RWC), 107,
108e
R.W. Sears Watch Company, 263
S
Safran (Cash Cow), 274
Sage Therapeutics, life-cycle ﬁrm,
270–271
Sales growth transition matrices,
314e
Sara Lee, residual fade rate
(alteration), 352
Sasson, Mark, 274
Savings, opportunity, 18e
Scenario analysis, 97
Screening Tool, usage, 342–343
Sears
business model, 263
ROE/equity cost, 264e
Star phase, 265
Sears, Richard Warren, 262–264
See’s Chocolate, 134
Selective attention, 326
Separation Principle, 44
Service companies, analysis, 199
Shareholders
debt, impact, 37
equity, cost, 362
returns, 30
Short-term capital sources, 39
Short-term debt
obligations, 85
removal, 40
Short-term earnings, 166
targets, meeting, 35
Short-termism
concerns, 24
impact, 25
price, 22–28
Short-term operating expense,
reclassiﬁcation, 35
Signaling eﬀect, 279
Simple perpetuity, 171
Single-period IRR, calculation, 60
Skewness, 225
Special items, 102–103
Spending, reduction, 23
Spread
compression, 214
usage, 208–209
Standard deviation, 225
Standard & Poor’s 500 ETF (S&P
500 ETF), purchase, 5
Standard & Poor’s 500 (S&P
500), pace, 352
Stars, 345, 347
Amazon, 347–348
development state, 262, 265,
268, 271–274, 336
proﬁtability, 348
Start-ups, forecast, 119
Statement of cash ﬂows (cash ﬂow
statement), 8
Statement of changes in
shareholders’ equity, 8
Statement of comprehensive
income. See Income statement
Statement of ﬁnancial position.
See Balance sheet
381

Index
Stein, Herbert, 18
Stigler, George, 285
Stockholders, business health
reporting, 6
Stock market allocation eﬃciency,
50–51
Stock prices
expectations, 327, 329–330
independence, 233
performance, 276e
Stocks
compensation expense, 100
expectations, 325, 334
life-cycle selection, 344–357
portfolio volatility, 228–229
screening, 343e
value stocks, 233, 239, 342
Strategic Resources &
Consequences Report, 166,
167e
Strategies (pursuit), positive NPV
(usage), 3
Striking spread, 239–240
Success bias, 312
Sunk cost, 29–30, 88
Survivorship bias, 312
Sustainable growth rate (SGR),
317, 320, 322
Systematic risk, 225–226, 237
T
Tangible assets, 86–88
Tata Motors (Cash Cow), 274
Technology and content (T&C),
80
Technology, investment, 65
Terminal period (valuation),
perpetuity assumption
(usage), 187
Terminal value
equation, 119, 121, 127
ex-growth terminal value,
estimation, 178
Tesla
annual growth, 321–322
asset base, 337, 340
Flex Valuation, 346e
market capitalization, 264, 271
Question Mark, 344–347
Relative Wealth Chart, 337,
338e, 339e, 347e
Time, value (connection), 26e
Tobin’s Q ratio, 209
Total debt, equation, 142
Total depreciating assets, 81
Total inﬂation-adjusted corporate
assets, asset type percentage,
76e
Total investment, 64, 136–140
Total system approach, 235
Trademarks, 87
Transaction CFROI, equation,
107
Transaction EP, 210, 211
Transaction EROI, 211
Transition matrices, usage,
290–291, 298–299
Treasuries, annual returns, 226e
Turnarounds, 119, 278–280, 331
Tversky, Amos, 223
U
Uncertainties
increase, 37
representation, 20e
Uneconomic behavior,
promotion, 61
Unilever, maxim, 12
Unique risk, 226
Unlevered ﬁrm, value, 245
Unsystematic risk, 226
Unsystematic risk, reward, 221
382

Index
U.S. discount rate
annual changes, 251–252
behavior, 252e, 253
one-month changes,
distribution, 253e
plot/value, contrast, 254e
probabilistic evolution, 255e
U.S. equities, long-run
inﬂation-adjusted return, 222
U.S. ﬁrms, forward P/E (earnings
growth contrast), 49e
U.S. industrial/service ﬁrms
CFROI persistence, scatter plot,
296e
size diﬀerential, 240e
size-weighted CFROI, 287e
total inﬂation-adjusted
corporate assets, 76e
weighted-average real discount
rate, monthly time-series,
250e
U.S. industry groups, median
annual persistence rates, 299e
U.S. service/industrial ﬁrms,
market leverage diﬀerential,
239e
V
Valuation
approaches, review, 114
equivalence, 244e
framework, 32
mathematics, 188–191
method equivalence, 243,
245–247
metric, 44–51
model, 51–53
Value
additivity principle, 14
calculation/equation, 28, 170,
207, 223
conservation, 77
creation, 13, 198, 212–214
deﬁning, 8–12
destruction, excess cash
(impact), 29
EP, connection, 206–208
examination, 28–30
government policy, impact, 30
intrinsic value, reduction, 29
relative value, 52
stocks, 233, 239, 342
time, connection, 26e
value-destroying ﬁrms, mistakes,
197–198
Value driver, 169, 178, 179e
Value-to-cost ratio (VCR), 153
Viacom, 159, 180
W
Walgreens, investor funds
stewards, 61–62
Wal-Mart
Cash Cows, 274
investor funds stewards, 61–62
Weighted-average cost of capital
(WACC), 96, 122, 242–243
decline, 248
Weighted-average IRR, 200
CFROI representation, 105
Weighted-average one-year IRR,
64
Weighted-average real discount
rate, monthly time-series,
250e
Winsorized sample, 49
Working capital, 67, 116
assets, 63
change, 136
Worthington Industries,
value-added company, 176
Y
Yield-to-maturity (YTM), 248
383

