Blackhat Method
Fast Cash!
New Method 
Imran Naseem

Hello and thankyou for purchasing this report on a brand new Blackhat 
Method that has worked really well for me. Now I know you probably 
have heard of lots of Blackhat methods and read a dozen reports but this 
method that I am about to share is in fact very creative and involves just 
15 minutes of your time.
Now I recently launched my controversial product BLACKHATCODE.COM 
and that was a 95 paged guide on the most dangerous Blackhat methods 
that I personally use to make up to $400-$500 a day. However, the 
following methods that I am about to share with you has never been 
really discussed in that guide. I left these methods out on purpose 
because I wanted to keep them for myself...but because I am a fair person 
I always end up selling my methods as I think there are lots of ways to 
make money..
Anyway, let me get into this method.
Like all Blackhat methods the first thing you should understand is that this 
method involves CPA Affiliate marketing.
(CPA stands for Cost Per Action, and it usually means huge companies pay 
you lead if you can direct people to fill an offer).
CPA is one of the most easiest ways to make money on the Internet and 
more and more people are easily making up to $100 a day with CPA. It 

just involves a bit of creative thinking..
Anyway, now you know what CPA means you will now need to be a 
member of some Affiliate Networks. The one's I recommend are..
Neverblue Ads
Incenta Click
http://www.maxbounty.com/
Clickbooth
There are lots other ones out there. Just join a few companies and once 
you are approved you are ready to carry out this method. It is not really 
difficult to get approved. If you have any problems just let me know or 
contact me at naseem.igo@gmail.com 
The only investment this method involves is that you buy a domain name 
and have your own host. Other then that there is no real cost.
Anyway, assuming you have signed up and have been approved or are a 
member of an Affiliate Network let me now go into the method.

The Method
I recently tried this method and made $200 in a single day with just 15-20 
minutes of work. It is really easy. The method basically involves posting 
something at a popular forum (in the freebie section) and then directing 
people to fill out your CPA offers using my method.
Before you scratch your head and start worrying – do not worry. This 
method does NOT involve spamming. In fact on this forum people are 
giving away free stuff everyday on a daily basis. So let me know take you 
to this forum.
The forum is called SlickDeals and has a PR of 5.
In fact let me take you to the Alexa ranking of this website.
As you can see this as an Alexa ranking of just over 800 which means this 
website is getting thousands and thousands of visitors on a daily basis and 
it is the 800th most popular website on the entire Internet..

This forum is a place where people are either looking for bargains or want 
to buy something on a good deal.  This forum also has just over 429,000 
members and at at the time of writing this report the forum has just over 
100,000 active members!!!!
That means over 100,000 people are looking for a bargain or something to 
buy on this forum....now that's potential!
The first thing you need to do on this forum is REGISTER and create a free 
account which will let you post on the relevant section. Once you have 
registered then just head over to the FREEBIE section as shown.
Once you click on the FREEBIE Section you should notice that there are 

several other different categories – Surveys and Free Magazines.
Let me first take you to the Surveys category to see what people are 
actually doing or giving away.
As you can see there are different kinds of survey offers. Some people are 
actually giving away money, i.e. as low as $1.00 or an incentive for a 
simple survey submission. Therefore, what you can do is log on to your 
affiliate network account and look for any survey companies that are 
paying good money. Once you have found one then you can put up an ad 
or create a thread on this section like the one shown.
Here is an example of someone paying someone $5.00 to fill in a survey. 
Now you do not have to pay as much as $5.00. Sometimes people can be 
happy to fill offers for as low as $1.00 ( as I will show you later on).
http://forums.slickdeals.net/showthread.php?sduid=0&t=944642

Here is an example of a thread where a person is paying $5.00 for 
someone who fills a simple survey. Imagine if you had a CPA survey offer 
that paid $20.00 and you could pay people as low as $2.00 to someone to 
fill the offer.
Now you have to be careful with “incentive” traffic as you are not really 
allowed to give incentives to people but the best way to avoid this is to 
buy a generic domain name for example, surveyoffer4u.info and just 
redirect your affiliate link to the domain name. 
However, with this method there is another way you can make money and 
this is not through survey offers. Sometimes, you can bribe or “excite” 
people with incentives and ask them to fill short offers for you. 
For example, under the Slickdeals forum there is also a FREEBIE section 
and it is this section where you can easily make $100-$400 a day!

Let me take you to a thread where a guy has an affiliate link and is actually 
getting people to fill the offers for him!
Here is the thread
As you can see in this example this guy is giving a “Free Game”. Well he is 
not actually giving away a free game since what he is doing is simply 
directing people to his CPA offer (affiliate link) and getting them to 
download the game when they receive the email after activating their 
account.
People love FREE stuff on the Internet and therefore, things like this will 
excite them because there is a market for everything. 
Let me show you another example of what someone else is doing. This is 
an example of someone being creative and its so exciting that when I tried 
it myself I had to kick myself and I had lots of juicy ideas spinning inside 
my head.

First of all here is the link for the thread.
As you can see the title of this thread is FREE $100 Facebook Advertising 
Credit
The thread was created on 20th December 2008 and already it has had 
over 2343 views. 
What this guy is saying is simply telling people to go to their Facebook 
profile and refresh their browser until they see a VISA Credit information 
ad. He is telling people to fill in the “CPA Offer” and then they get their 
reward. However, this guy is leaving a lot of money on the table. 
Instead of telling people to go to the link he could have simply bought a 
generic domain name such as freeadwordscredit.info and then direct 
people to the affiliate CPA offer. I tried something similar myself and made 
a cool $200 in just less than an hour!
What I simply did was offer people something free. For example, my 

supermarket in ASDA sells small teddy toys for 50 cents. I offered to give 
20 of these to 20 people who would in turn help complete a CPA offer for 
me. Now let's do the maths here.
My CPA offer would pay $18.00 for anyone who signs up to receive a free 
credit report.
So if I had 20 people sign up then that is $360!
And those little 50 cent teddys that I buy from my supermarket would 
cost me in total $10.00 – yep just 10 bucks!
On top of that postage costs would come to about $8.00 so in turn I am 
spending just less than $20 and I am still making $360!
If you give people of something tangible then they would sign up and be 
more motivated and willing to complete your CPA offer. 
There are lots of other threads you can create. Here are some popular 
CPA offers you can use for the threads.

Thread Title – FREE Unique Fun Screensavers
CPA Offers you can promote
(Neverblueads have CPA offers for “PopularScreensavers” aimed at UK, 
AUS + NZ, Canada, US and International users)
For US people the CPA offer pays $2.20 and if you get UK sign ups you 
earn
$2.10.
Numbers like these add up very quickly. 
Here is an example of the landing page for this type of offer.

As you can see all the user has to do is download the tool bar for their 
free screen saver and then your account gets credited.
FREE TRIAL – PRINT YOUR OWN POSTAGE FROM YOUR HOME (For US 
Customers)
CPA OFFER (Neverblue ads)
Here is an example of this landing page

As you can see here this is a CPA offer from Neverblue ads. And this is the 
perfect offer for people who browser SLICKDEALS forum because people 
on that forum love free trails and offers like this. This offer pays a 
whopping $11.25. 
If you manage to direct 10 people to this offer you can make just over 
$112 in a day.
An example of a thread for this type of offer would be like the one 
shown below.

Print Your Own Postage – FREE TRIAL 30 DAYS!
Hi guys. This is a great offer which gives you free 30 day trial to print your 
own postage. There are no hidden commitments and the sign up process 
is really easy. Here is the [[ Your domain redirect affiliate link]].
Now for an offer like this I would buy a domain such as 
“FREETRIALPOSTAGE.com or .info if it is available. To save money I usually 
buy .info domain names since they cost around 99 cents these days..
Do you see how powerful this forum is? People are literally creating 
threads on almost anything...
For example, free water bottles, free xmas card samples, free perfume 
samples etc.
There are lots of ways to work your way around this. One of the best ways 
is that if you are targeting UK or US users then you can have an offer such 
as …
FREE Downloadable recipe e book (give away a free PLR rights e book) 
and get them to fill a simple CPA offer.
Then you can have something like...
UK Users (CLICK HERE)

USA Users (CLICK HERE)
The offer would direct the relevant audience to the offer.  
Other free offers that would work well with this method would be...
FREE E-books
FREE Recipes (people on this site love all kinds of things and women 
would love things like this)
FREE Cell Phone Sim cards
Free Shopping Codes to save money
FREE water bottle
FREE Sample of perfume
I think you can use your own creativity here. Remember think about your 
audience and ask yourself “what kind of free product you can give to your 
audience that will entice them to complete your CPA offer”?
As you can see on Slickdeals there are all kinds of free offers for the 
FREEBIE SEEKER marketplace. From heading aids to Free Email alerts! The 
market will never be saturated with your offer. This is why you need to 
keep your offer realistic and avoid things like “Free MP3 Player music” 
unless you own the copyrights to it...

You should understand that the great thing about the SLICKDEALS Freebie 
marketplace is that there are people from all walks of life who are 
browsing the marketplace and different people like different things. 
People have different interests. 
For example, if young women are browsing the marketplace then they are 
most likely to be interested in make up products. Now there are a ton of 
make up CPA offers which require just an email address! 
Sometimes people love FREE trials and therefore, SLICKDEALS is a great 
marketplace for such offers. Sometimes people will be happy to pay 
postage and packing for a free trial.
Take this example.
CX Digital Media (Incenta Click) have a CPA offer for US traffic only that 
pays just over
$26.00 for a simple 1 page form that a person fills in for a : -
Acai Berry Power 500 Red - Free Trial! 
This product helps people lose weight as outlined in its description. 
Campaign Description: The hottest new cleanse diet to hit the market is the Acai 
Berry cleanse! The Acai Berry is considered a "super food" for its nutritional content 
and its ability to help flush unwanted toxins and pounds. Make money promoting 
Pure Acai Berry; this offer is for a free trial sale (free bottle, just pay $4.95 S&H). 

Now all the user has to do is to order this free trial and only pay for the 
postage.
Here is the landing page for this offer. Please note this is for US customers 
only. If you are based in the UK like me and wish to see this offer then use 
a proxy site called HIDE MY ASS – http://www.hidemyass.com to view the 
US offer.

Now as you can see above on the landing page the user has to enter their 
mailing address and then their credit card information for their RISK FREE 
TRIAL. Many people who are on the SLICKDEALS website are normal 
FREEBIE seekers and therefore, will not be aware of affiliate offers like this 
so therefore it is up to you to direct their eyeballs to this offer. So let's do 
the maths here.
If 5 people signed up to this offer then you would make $130..
If you had 10 people signed up to this you would making a cool $260..
Now do you see how powerful this method is? 
There is always a market for everything on the Internet and people who 
need a solution to their problem will be happy to pay for postage for a 
RISK FREE TRIAL product If it can help them eliminate their problem.
Or you can use this strategy yourself by giving away something intangible. 
For example, a free cheap keyring in exchange for a person's email 
address. This way you can create a huge list of freebie seekers who would 
be willing to complete ANY CPA offers of yours in future.
For example, if you take a look at this thread
you will see a Watch company used a similar strategy where they were 
giving away a FREE keyring in exchange for people signing up to their 
newsletter. 

Use your own creative idea here. You can either take this method one 
step further and buy cheap tangible items from Ebay for as little as 10 
cents or 50 cents and then agree to give them away on this website..
Buying a generic Domain name for your CPA Offer
Now I am going to be honest here. Affiliate companies do not really 
condone the use of incentive traffic and therefore are always looking at 
ways to crack down on those who do. However, this is where you have to 
be careful. Instead you can protect yourself by buying a generic domain 
for your CPA offer.
For example, going back to our FREE TRIAL example then I would have 
bought a domain name such as FREEHEALTHTRIAL.info (which is available) 
at the time of writing this report.
.info domain names are cheap and you can buy them as low as 99 cents 
from Godaddy.
Once you have bought a generic domain name then just redirect your 
affiliate link to your domain name. So rather than sending people to your 
long-tailed affiliate link just send them to your domain name.
It is that easy – you can create a thread on almost anything and people 

“rep” you if they like the offer. These people are ready to fill in your CPA 
offer if you can give them something for free of VALUE and that is what 
you need to always think when creating the thread.
The Forward Email Method
The last method that I want to talk about is simply might be considered 
“spamming” by some but it has worked and has worked with good results.
Do you remember those quirky, funny emails that you often receive in 
your email inbox? You know those “forwarded emails”. Let me show you 
can example. The other day I was checking my “personal MSN account” 
for friends and family when I received this email.

Now this is part of the email I received. Anyway, these emails are forward 
emails that ask you to either take action or pass something on to the next 
person on your contact list.
When I received this email I noticed some ads at the bottom of the email.

What if my CPA ads were on there? 
Take a look below.

As you can see I have changed the ads to CPA ads. For example, want to 
receive a FREE Iphone? Etc.
What I usually do is take the existing email and edit it, with my own little 
funny email or whatever it is. You might even start a bit of controversy.
For example, 
Here is an email to show your support for our troops in Iraq. Please if you 
have 5 minutes of your time then fill this short survey to show your 
support. You can use your own creativity here.  The possibilities are 
endless.

I hope you enjoyed reading this report and I hope you try out the 
methods for yourself to see how powerful they are.
My favourite method is the Slick Deals one because you have potentially 
thousands of people who are willing to fill your CPA offer for you for some 
sort of incentive. 
I love CPA and it is the easiest way to make fash cash.
Good Luck!
Imran Naseem

