Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Big Data,  
Big Innovation
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Wiley & SAS  
Business Series
The Wiley & SAS Business Series presents books that help senior-level 
managers with their critical management decisions.
Titles in the Wiley & SAS Business Series include:
Activity-Based Management for Financial Institutions: Driving Bottom-
Line Results by Brent Bahnub
Analytics in a Big Data World: The Essential Guide to Data Science and 
Its Applications by Bart Baesens
Bank Fraud: Using Technology to Combat Losses by Revathi Subramanian
Big Data Analytics: Turning Big Data into Big Money by Frank 
Ohlhorst
Branded! How Retailers Engage Consumers with Social Media and 
Mobility by Bernie Brennan and Lori Schafer
Business Analytics for Customer Intelligence by Gert Laursen
Business Analytics for Managers: Taking Business Intelligence beyond 
Reporting by Gert Laursen and Jesper Thorlund
The Business Forecasting Deal: Exposing Bad Practices and Providing 
Practical Solutions by Michael Gilliland
Business Intelligence Applied: Implementing an Effective Information and 
Communications Technology Infrastructure by Michael S. Gendron
Business Intelligence and the Cloud: Strategic Implementation Guide  
by Michael S. Gendron
Business Intelligence Success Factors: Tools for Aligning Your Business in 
the Global Economy by Olivia Parr Rud
Business Transformation: A Roadmap for Maximizing Organizational 
Insights by Aiman Zeid
CIO Best Practices: Enabling Strategic Value with Information Technology, 
Second Edition by Joe Stenzel
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Connecting Organizational Silos: Taking Knowledge Flow Management 
to the Next Level with Social Media by Frank Leistner
Credit Risk Assessment: The New Lending System for Borrowers, Lenders, 
and Investors by Clark Abrahams and Mingyuan Zhang
Credit Risk Scorecards: Developing and Implementing Intelligent Credit 
Scoring by Naeem Siddiqi
The Data Asset: How Smart Companies Govern Their Data for Business 
Success by Tony Fisher
Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice 
by Evan Stubbs
Demand-Driven Forecasting: A Structured Approach to Forecasting, 
Second Edition by Charles Chase
Demand-Driven Inventory Optimization and Replenishment: Creating a 
More Efficient Supply Chain by Robert A. Davis
Developing Human Capital: Using Analytics to Plan and Optimize Your 
Learning and Development Investments by Gene Pease, Barbara 
Beresford, and Lew Walker
The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media Strategy: How Social 
Networks Are Radically Transforming Your Business by David Thomas 
and Mike Barlow
Economic and Business Forecasting: Analyzing and Interpreting Econometric 
Results by John Silvia, Azhar Iqbal, Kaylyn Swankoski, Sarah Watt, 
and Sam Bullard
Executive’s Guide to Solvency II by David Buckham, Jason Wahl, and 
Stuart Rose
Fair Lending Compliance: Intelligence and Implications for Credit Risk 
Management by Clark R. Abrahams and Mingyuan Zhang
Foreign Currency Financial Reporting from Euros to Yen to Yuan: A Guide 
to Fundamental Concepts and Practical Applications by Robert Rowan
Harness Oil and Gas Big Data with Analytics: Optimize Exploration and 
Production with Data-Driven Models by Keith Holdaway
Health Analytics: Gaining the Insights to Transform Health Care  
by Jason Burke
Heuristics in Analytics: A Practical Perspective of What Influences Our 
Analytical World by Carlos Andre Reis Pinheiro and Fiona McNeill
Human Capital Analytics: How to Harness the Potential of Your Organization’s 
Greatest Asset by Gene Pease, Boyce Byerly, and Jac Fitz-enz
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Implement, Improve and Expand Your Statewide Longitudinal Data 
System: Creating a Culture of Data in Education by Jamie McQuiggan 
and Armistead Sapp
Information Revolution: Using the Information Evolution Model to Grow 
Your Business by Jim Davis, Gloria J. Miller, and Allan Russell
Killer Analytics: Top 20 Metrics Missing from your Balance Sheet by Mark 
Brown
Manufacturing Best Practices: Optimizing Productivity and Product 
Quality by Bobby Hull
Marketing Automation: Practical Steps to More Effective Direct Marketing 
by Jeff LeSueur
Mastering Organizational Knowledge Flow: How to Make Knowledge 
Sharing Work by Frank Leistner
The New Know: Innovation Powered by Analytics by Thornton May
Performance Management: Integrating Strategy Execution, Methodologies, 
Risk, and Analytics by Gary Cokins
Predictive Business Analytics: Forward-Looking Capabilities to Improve 
Business Performance by Lawrence Maisel and Gary Cokins
Retail Analytics: The Secret Weapon by Emmett Cox
Social Network Analysis in Telecommunications by Carlos Andre Reis 
Pinheiro
Statistical Thinking: Improving Business Performance, Second Edition by 
Roger W. Hoerl and Ronald D. Snee
Taming the Big Data Tidal Wave: Finding Opportunities in Huge Data 
Streams with Advanced Analytics by Bill Franks
Too Big to Ignore: The Business Case for Big Data by Phil Simon
The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Profitability by 
Evan Stubbs
The Visual Organization: Data Visualization, Big Data, and the Quest for 
Better Decisions by Phil Simon
Using Big Data Analytics: Turning Big Data into Big Money by Jared Dean
Visual Six Sigma: Making Data Analysis Lean by Ian Cox, Marie A. 
Gaudard, Philip J. Ramsey, Mia L. Stephens, and Leo Wright
Win with Advanced Business Analytics: Creating Business Value from 
Your Data by Jean Paul Isson and Jesse Harriott
For more information on any of the above titles, please visit  
www.wiley.com.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Big Data,  
Big Innovation
Enabling Competitive Differentiation 
through Business Analytics
Evan Stubbs
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Cover image: ©iStockphoto.com/nadla
Cover design: Wiley
Copyright © 2014 by SAS Institute Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108  
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written 
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate 
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the  
Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be 
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River 
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at 
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have 
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or  
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of 
this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability 
or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended 
by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies 
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with 
a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable 
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited 
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, 
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at  
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-
demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book may 
not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media 
such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may 
download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information 
about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Stubbs, Evan.
    Big data, big innovation : enabling competitive differentiation through business  
  analytics / Evan Stubbs.
      pages  cm. — (Wiley & SAS business series)
  ISBN 978-1-118-72464-4 (hardback) — ISBN 978-1-118-92553-9 (epdf) —  
  ISBN 978-1-118-92552-2 (epub) — ISBN 978-1-118-91498-4 (obook)
    1.  Business planning.  2.  Strategic planning.  3.  Big data. 
  4.  Decision making—Statistical methods.  5.  Industrial management— 
  Statistical methods.  I.  Title.
  HD30.28.S784  2014
  658.4'013—dc23

2014007690
Printed in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
vii
Contents
Preface    xi
Acknowledgments    xvii
Part One  May You Live in Interesting Times........................ 1
Chapter 1	 Lead or Get Out of the Way
3
The Future Is Now
3
The Secret Is Leadership
5
Notes
7
Chapter 2	 Disruption as a Way of Life
9
The Age of Uncertainty
10
The Emergence of Big Data
15
Rise of the Ro¯nin
21
The Knowledge Rush
26
Systematized Chaos
31
Notes
36
Part Two  Understanding Culture and Capability............... 41
Chapter 3	 The Cultural Imperative
47
Intuitive Action
48
Truth Seeking
55
Value Creation
62
Functional Innovation
69
Revolutionary Disruption
75
Notes
78
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
viii 
▸  C O N T E N T S
Chapter 4	 The Intelligent Enterprise
79
Level 1: Unstructured Chaos
80
Level 2: Structured Chaos
84
Levels 3–5: The Intelligent Enterprise
89
Notes
93
Part Three  Making It Real.................................................. 95
Chapter 5	 Organizational Design
101
What Should It Look Like?
102
What Should It Focus On?
107
What Services Can It Offer?
111
What Data Does It Need?
116
Note
124
Chapter 6	 Operating Models
125
What’s the Goal?
127
What’s the Enabler?
135
How Does It Create Value?
140
Notes
148
Chapter 7	 Human Capital
149
What Capabilities Do I Need?
150
How Do I Get the Right People?
157
How Do I Keep Them?
162
Notes
164
Part Four  Making It Happen............................................. 167
Chapter 8	 Innovating with Dynamic Value
169
The Innovation Cycle
170
The Innovation Paradox
172
The Secret to Success: Dynamic Value
176
The Innovation Engine
181
Reinventing the Ro¯nin
185
Notes
189
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C O N T E N T S  ◂  ix
Chapter 9	 Creating a Plan
191
Starting the Conversation
191
Defining the Vision
193
Identifying Opportunities
196
Mapping Responsibilities
198
Taking It to the Next Level
201
Note
201
Conclusion: The Final Chapter Is Up to You    203
Glossary    205
About the Author    219
Index    221
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xi
Preface
Writing is an interesting pursuit; where you start is rarely where you 
end up. This is my third book and while not originally intended to be 
a trilogy, things seemed to have panned out that way.
My first book, The Value of Business Analytics, was written for the 
“doers,” the people responsible for making things happen. It tried to 
answer the fundamental question people kept asking me: “Why don’t 
people get this?”
My second book, Delivering Business Analytics, was written for the 
“designers,” the people responsible for working out how things should 
happen. It opened the kimono, provided solutions to 24 common 
organizational problems, and laid the framework to identify and rep-
licate best practices. It tried to answer the next question people kept 
asking me: “I know what I need to do, but how do I do it?”
This book is written for the “decision makers” and aims to answer 
the final question: “How do I innovate?”
There are countless models out there. Many are useful, includ-
ing the ones presented in this book. Most try to make everyone fol-
low the same approach. However, business analytics works best when 
it’s unique to the organization that leverages it. Differentiation means 
being different, something that’s all too often overlooked. Rather than 
just trying to copy, I hope you use the models in this book to create 
your own source of innovation.
I hope you find as much enjoyment reading this book as I had 
writing it.
Things move quickly. There’s always more case studies, more 
­disruption, and more examples of how business analytics is ­fueling 
innovation. For the latest, keep the conversation going at http://
evanstubbs.com/go/blog.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xii 
▸  P R E F A C E
HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
This book introduces eight models:
	
1.	The Cultural Imperative: Covered in Chapter 3, this outlines 
the five perspectives that support a high-functioning culture.
	
2.	The Intelligent Enterprise: Covered in Chapter 4, this explains 
how organizations build the capability they need to innovate.
	
3.	The Value of Business Analytics: Covered in Chapter 6, this 
explains the value that business analytics creates.
	
4.	The Wheel of Value: Covered in Chapter 6, this explains how 
to get organizations to create value from big data.
	
5.	The Path to Profitability: Covered in Chapter 7, this explains 
how to blend data science with value creation.
	
6.	The SMART Model: Covered in Chapter 7, this explains how 
to hire and develop the right people.
	
7.	The Value Architect: Covered in Chapter 7, this explains how 
to make sure data scientists create value.
	
8.	The Innovation Engine: Covered in Chapter 8, this explains 
how to support innovation through dynamic value.
Everything else in this book outlines, justifies, and explains the 
steps necessary to make innovation from big data real. Chapter 8 is 
written for leaders interested in enabling ability and innovation and  
is arguably the most important chapter to read.
Due to the nature of the subject matter, this book covers a great 
deal of ground. To keep the content digestible, much of the detail 
has been summarized; for those interested in more, I’d strongly rec-
ommend reading my prior books, The Value of Business Analytics and 
Delivering Business Analytics. Where relevant, specific references are 
provided within the text. Endnotes to further reading are also pro-
vided throughout. Rather than a definitive list of reading material, 
readers should view these as a launching pad from which they can 
further explore whatever they’re interested in.
This book is divided into four parts. The first highlights a num-
ber of current and emerging trends that will continue to dramatically 
change the face of business. It’s true that things always change; in the  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P R E F A C E  ◂  xiii
famous words of Benjamin Franklin (among others), “In this world 
nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.” It’s also 
true, however, that we become so accustomed to change that we  
run the risk of underestimating the enormous disruption caused by 
continuous gradual change. If big data is the question, business analyt-
ics is the solution. Unfortunately for some, the answer it implies will 
eventually see entire industries disrupted.
The second part provides a framework through which leaders can 
understand the challenges they’re likely to face in changing their orga-
nization’s culture. It outlines the different perspectives organizations 
exhibit in moving from unstructured chaos to becoming an intelligent 
enterprise.
The third part focuses on how to leverage big data to support inno-
vation. This isn’t easy. Innovation is amorphous. Business analytics is 
complex. Big data is daunting. Together, they can seem insurmount-
able. Within this part, we review the fundamentals behind success. 
It spans culture, human capital, organizational structure, technology 
design, and operating models.
Finally, the fourth part links them all into an integrated operat-
ing model that covers ideation, innovation, and commercialization; it 
gives a starting framework to develop a plan. It highlights the major 
considerations that need to be made and provides some recommenda-
tions to ensure that you “stay the course.”
As with my other books, this one relies heavily on practical exam-
ples throughout. Theory is good but where practice and theory con-
tradict, practice grabs theory by the ears and smashes its head into the 
canvas. While anyone interested in the topic will hopefully find value 
in the entire book, readers interested in specific topics will benefit from 
going to specific sections.
Readers interested in understanding the broader impacts of big 
data along with how organizations tend to cope with disruption are 
encouraged to read Parts One and Two.
Readers responsible for restructuring organizations to take advan-
tage of business analytics along with hiring and developing the right 
people are encouraged to read Parts Two and Three.
Finally, readers interested in integrating these building blocks into 
an operating model that supports innovation will find Part Four espe-
cially valuable.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xiv 
▸  P R E F A C E
CORE CONCEPTS
This section presents the core vocabulary for everything discussed in 
this book. It is provided to ensure consistency with my prior two books 
as well as to provide a quick primer to newcomers. Readers comfort-
able with the field are encouraged to skip this section.
This book refers repeatedly to a variety of concepts. While the 
terms and concepts defined in this chapter serve as a useful taxonomy, 
they should not be read as a comprehensive list of strict definitions. 
Depending on context and industry, they may go by other names. One 
of the challenges of a relatively young discipline such as business ana-
lytics is that while there’s tremendous potential for innovation, it has 
yet to develop a standard vocabulary.
Their intent is simply to provide consistency. Terms vary from 
person to person and while readers may not always agree with the 
semantics presented here given their own background and context, 
it’s essential that they understand what is meant within this book by a 
particular word. Key terms are italicized to try to aid readability.
Business analytics is the use of data-driven insight to generate value. 
It does so by requiring business relevancy, the use of actionable insight, 
and performance measurement and value measurement.
This can be contrasted against analytics, the process of generat-
ing insight from data. Analytics without business analytics creates no 
return—it simply answers questions. Within this book, analytics rep-
resents a wide spectrum that covers all forms of data-driven insight, 
including:
◼
◼Data manipulation
◼
◼Reporting and business intelligence
◼
◼Advanced analytics (including data mining, optimization, and 
forecasting)
Broadly speaking, analytics divides relatively neatly into techniques 
that help understand what happened and those that help understand:
◼
◼What will happen
◼
◼Why it happened
◼
◼What is the best one could possibly do
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P R E F A C E  ◂  xv
Forms of analytics that help provide this greater level of insight are 
often referred to as advanced analytics.
The final output of business analytics is value of some form, either 
internal or external. Additionally, this book introduces the concept of 
dynamic value, the potential of multiple competing points of view to fuel 
innovation. Internal value is value as seen from the perspective of a 
team within the organization. Among other things, returns are usually 
associated with cost reductions, resource efficiencies, or other internally 
related financial aspects. External value is value as seen from outside 
the organization. Returns are usually associated with revenue growth, 
positive outcomes, or other market- and client-related measures.
This value is created through leveraging people, process, data, and 
technology. Encompassing all of these is culture, the shared values and 
priorities of an organization. People are the individuals and their skills 
involved in applying business analytics. Processes are a series of activi-
ties linked to achieve an outcome and can be either strongly defined or 
weakly defined. A strongly defined process has a series of specific steps 
that is repeatable and can be automated. A weakly defined process, by 
contrast, is undefined and relies on the ingenuity and skill of the per-
son executing the process to complete it successfully.
Data are quantifiable measures stored and available for analysis. 
They often include transactional records, customer records, and free-
text information such as case notes or reports. Assets are produced as 
an intermediary step to achieving value. Assets are a general class of 
items that can be defined, are measurable, and have implicit tangible 
or intangible value. Among other things, they include documented 
processes, reports, models, and datamarts. Critically, they are only an 
asset within this book if they can be automated and can be repeatedly 
used by individuals other than those who created it.
Assets are developed through having a team apply various compe-
tencies. A competency is a particular set of skills that can be applied to 
solve a variety of different business problems. Examples include the 
ability to develop predictive models, the ability to create insightful 
reports, and the ability to operationalize insight through effective use 
of technology.
Competencies are applied using various tools (often referred to as 
technology) to generate new assets. Often, tools are consolidated into 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xvi 
▸  P R E F A C E
a common analytical platform, a technology environment that ranges 
from being spread across multiple desktop PCs right through to a truly 
enterprise platform.
Analytical platforms, when properly implemented, make a distinc-
tion between a discovery environment and an operational environment. The 
role of the discovery environment is to generate insight. The role of 
the operational environment, by contrast, is to allow this insight to 
be applied automatically with strict requirements around reliability, 
performance, availability, and scalability.
The core concepts of people, process, data, technology, and culture 
feature heavily in this book; while they are a heavily used and abused 
framework, they represent the core of systems design. Business ana-
lytics is primarily about facilitating change; business analytics is noth-
ing without driving towards better outcomes. And, when it comes to 
driving change, every roadmap involves having an impact across these 
four dimensions. While this book isn’t explicitly written to fit with this 
framework, it relies heavily on it.
Readers interested in knowing more are heavily encouraged to 
read The Value of Business Analytics and Delivering Business Analytics.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xvii
Acknowledgments
There were many who provided valuable input and feedback through-
out my writing, far too many to acknowledge exhaustively. Their 
advice was excellent and any mistakes contained inside these pages 
are solely mine. I would especially like to thank Philip Reschke, Chami 
Akmeemana, Vicki Batten, Lynette Clunies-Ross, Dorothy Adams, 
Greg Wood, and Renée Nocker.
Most important of all, I’d like to thank my family. Without their 
patience, support, and constant caring this would have been impos-
sible. I promise this is the last one—for now.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1
PA R T
ONE
May You Live in 
Interesting Times
T
he Chinese have an idiom. Loosely translated, it says that it’s  
better to be a dog in a peaceful time than a man in a chaotic time. 
There’s also a related curse, also often attributed to the Chinese: 
“May you live in interesting times.”
This, in a snapshot, is our world. Our time is one where drones  
can assassinate someone half-way around the globe, controlled by 
people on a TV screen from the safety of their own suburb. This is a 
time where a tiny failed bank in Greece can potentially bring the entire 
global financial system to a screeching halt, bankrupting nations. It is 
a time where one can carry the entire Library of Congress on a chip 
smaller than one’s fingernail and still have storage to spare. And it is  
a time where cars drive themselves, glasses contain computers, and  
3D printers can create duplicates of themselves.
We live in interesting times. And, interesting times call for interesting 
leaders.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3
C H A P T E R  1
Lead or Get Out 
of the Way
T
he greatest leaders are as much a product of their time as they are 
a reflection of their skill. Without Hitler, what would we remem-
ber of Churchill? Without Xerxes, the legend of the 300 Spartans 
led by Leonidas would never have happened. Without the right con-
text, even those with the greatest potential remain part of the peanut 
gallery, shouting epitaphs at those who wear the limelight.
It’s in times of crisis that leaders emerge—times of change, times 
like the present.
THE FUTURE IS NOW
Our world is a fascinating one; we’re at an inflection point, one defined 
by big data and business analytics. What was once science fiction is 
becoming reality. Let’s be frank though—that sounds pretty hack-
neyed. After all, hasn’t everything been science fiction once?
This is true. It’s also true, however, that science fiction is a deep 
well to draw from. A well where some ideas are so fantastical that it 
seems impossible that they’ll ever become reality. Asimov, a science fic-
tion writer, for example, wrote speculatively of “psychohistory” in his 
Foundation series.1 A form of mathematical sociology, scientists would 
use massive amounts of behavioral information to predict the future. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Through doing so, they were able to foresee the rise and fall of empires 
thousands of years in advance.
As with all good stories, power always comes with constraints. 
Accurate predictions were only possible given two conditions. First, 
the population whose behaviors were to be modeled needed to be suf-
ficiently large—too small, and the predictions would become error-
prone. Second, the population being modeled could not know it was 
being modeled. After all, people might change what they were doing if 
they knew they were being watched.
It seems fantastical, doesn’t it? Still, this is fundamentally the 
promise of big data. We know more about the world than ever before. 
Many of those being watched are still unaware of how much things 
have changed. Between national intelligence, security leaks, and the 
potential of metadata, most of us are only just realizing how much infor-
mation is out there. And, by analyzing that data, we have the power to 
predict the future in ways that people still can’t believe. Amazon, for 
example, took out a patent in late 2013 on a process to ship your goods 
before you’ve ordered them.2 Big data offers unparalleled insights and 
predictive abilities, but only to those who know how to leverage it. For 
most, getting value from big data is a challenge. However, the reflec-
tion of every challenge is opportunity.
Things have changed. And, it’s a rare leader who isn’t aware he or 
she needs a plan to realize this opportunity. However, there’s a twist. 
It’s not just a good idea. It’s not something that’s going to happen. It’s 
happening now.
Catalyzed by books such as Thinking, Fast and Slow3 and Nudge,4 
behavioral economics is already blending data with heuristics and 
psychology to create new models to describe and influence consumer 
behavior. Recognizing the power of a scientific approach to analyzing 
information, the U.K. government established a dedicated Behavioral 
Insights team to take advantage of these ideas. Formed in 2010 and 
nicknamed the “nudge unit,” their goal was to blend quantitative and 
qualitative techniques to improve policy design and delivery.5
The model has proved to be a popular one. In late 2012, the Behavioral 
Insights Team went global through partnership with the government of 
New South Wales in Australia. In mid-2013, the Obama administration 
appointed Yale graduate Maya Shankar to create a similar task force.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
L e a d  o r  G e t  O u t  o f  t h e  W a y  ◂  5
Paul Krugman, winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize for Economic 
Sciences, credits Asimov’s vision of a mathematical sociology as inspir-
ing him to enter economics.6 This vision of a future shaped by our abil-
ity to analyze information is becoming real. And, it’s changing the face 
of medicine, policy, and business. Thanks to constantly increasing ana-
lytical horsepower and falling storage costs, the cost of sequencing the 
genome has dropped from US$100 million in 2001 to just over US$8,000 
in 2013.7 More than just being cheaper, every decline in sequencing 
costs puts us that much closer to truly personalized medicine.
Even the social web is sparking innovation. Facebook’s acquisition 
of Oculus, Instagram, and Whatsapp wasn’t just an attempt to diver-
sify. It was a deliberate attempt to stay engaged across all channels all 
the time. With over a billion people now on Facebook, it’s amazing what 
one can find by scanning personal interactions. Organizations like the 
United Nations (UN) are tracking disease and unemployment in real 
time through the large-scale analysis of social media.8 The Advanced 
Computing Center at the University of Vermont is using tens of mil-
lions of geolocated tweets in its Hedonometer project to map happi-
ness levels in cities across the United States.9
The future is closer than it’s ever been. Taking the leap to Asimov’s 
psychohistory isn’t as far-fetched as it once might have seemed.
THE SECRET IS LEADERSHIP
It’s hard to ignore the potential of big data. Realizing it, though, that’s 
tricky. For every successful project there’s a mountain of failed proj-
ects. Few in the field have escaped completely unscathed. Anyone 
who says she has probably hasn’t been trying hard enough.
If you’re reading this book, it’s a fair assumption that you’re inter-
ested in linking big data to innovation. The cornerstone to this is busi-
ness analytics. Big data and business analytics go together hand in glove. 
Without data, there can be no analysis. And without business analytics, 
big data is just noise. Together, they offer the potential for innovation. 
Innovation, however, requires change, and change is impossible with-
out leadership.
Without value, all of this is meaningless. Big data has the potential 
to make things more efficient. It can generate returns. It might simply 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
answer “the hard questions” that no one knows the solution to. Some 
of these benefits lead to internal value, such as productivity. Others 
lead to external value, such as revenue. Still others can lead to total 
reinvention through dynamic change. Not all of these are complemen-
tary. Because of this, harnessing the full potential of big data involves 
walking the tightrope between the dynamism of change and the stabil-
ity of continuous improvement.
The secret behind success is leadership. Without it, it’s impossible 
to balance the opportunity for reinvention with the benefits of contin-
ual improvement. A strong leader can do more with access to limited 
capability than the best team can without a leader.
We don’t yet know the final impact of big data and business analyt-
ics. We do know, however, that it will change things. Change in itself 
isn’t new; we already live in a world where change has become so 
normal that it’s almost invisible. However, for reasons that are covered 
in the next chapter, big data is “bigger” than this. It’s likely to cause 
large-scale industrial and social disruption not seen since the industrial 
revolution, not because of what it is but because of what it represents.
Our future may be one where the economy only requires a tenth 
of the current workforce. Guided by the use of operational analytics 
and intelligent algorithms, it might lead to large-scale social unrest due 
to chronic unemployment and wealth centralization. It may be one 
where privacy becomes meaningless and the most personal aspects of 
our lives become public property. It may be one where precrime, the 
ability to predict crimes before they occur, becomes a reality.10
These may seem absurd, but, they’re already happening. Through 
automating analytics, some organizations are able to achieve orders of 
magnitude of higher levels of productivity than their peers. The impact 
this will have on the labor market is unclear. Katz, a Harvard econo-
mist, suggests that even though there’s no precedent for a structural 
change in the demand for jobs, today’s digital technologies present 
many unanswered questions.11 Historically, technological innovation 
has almost always led to greater long-run employment. Thanks to the 
potential of intelligent systems, the biggest question is this: Will the 
future reflect the past? It’s possible, as far-fetched as it might sound, 
that the entire middle-skilled strata of the labor market may simply 
become unemployable.12
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
L e a d  o r  G e t  O u t  o f  t h e  W a y  ◂  7
The division between the “haves” and “have-nots” continues to 
grow. Sharing selfies and personal details has become the norm on 
SnapChat, Facebook, and a multitude of other social media sites. 
Through analyzing interests, social networks, and behavioral patterns, 
organizations such as Google, LinkedIn, and Facebook have become 
experts in guessing who you might know. And, some justice depart-
ments are already experimenting with predictive analytics to better 
understand the likelihood of recidivism for offenses such as driving 
under the influence or domestic violence.
The world doesn’t need custodians to navigate this period of rapid 
change. It needs leaders—people with the confidence, vision, and abil-
ity to redefine their world. Whether it’s for profit or for the common 
good, the future is business analytics.
NOTES
	1.	 Isaac Asimov, Foundation (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1951).
	2.	 U.S. Patent #8,615,473 B2.
	3.	 Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 
2011).
	4.	 Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, 
Wealth, and Happiness (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008).
	5.	 Cabinet Office, “Behavioural Insights Team,” www.gov.uk/government/organisations/
behavioural-insights-team (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
	6.	 Paul Krugman, “Paul Krugman: Asimov’s Foundation Novels Grounded My 
Economics,” Guardian News and Media, Dec. 4, 2012, www.theguardian.com/books/ 
2012/dec/04/paul-krugman-asimov-economics (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
	7.	 National Human Genome Research Institute, “DNA Sequencing Costs,” www 
.genome.gov/sequencingcosts (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
	8.	 United Nations Global Pulse, www.unglobalpulse.org (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
	9.	 Hedonometer, “Daily Happiness Averages for Twitter, September 2008 to Present,”  
www.hedonometer.org/index.html (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
	10.	Philip K. Dick, The Minority Report (New York: Pantheon, 2002).
	11.	David Rotman, “How Technology Is Destroying Jobs,” MIT Technology Review, Jun. 
12, 2013, www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/515926/how-technology-is-
destroying-jobs (accessed Mar. 27, 2014).
	12.	“The Onrushing Wave,” Economist (Jan. 18, 2014), www.economist.com/news/
briefing/21594264-previous-technological-innovation-has-always-delivered-more-
long-run-employment-not-less (accessed Mar. 27, 2014).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9
C H A P T E R  2
Disruption as a 
Way of Life
T
alk of psychohistory and precrime might seem better suited to a 
science fiction convention than an executive briefing. However, 
the more our world changes, the more we need to question our 
assumptions. And, therein lies the trap—we’ve become so accustomed 
to change that we don’t even realize that it’s happening any more.
There’s an apocryphal parable about a frog in boiling water. While 
not true, it suggests that a frog’s nervous system is sufficiently under-
developed and that when it’s put in cold water and the water is slowly 
heated, the frog won’t know it’s in danger until it’s boiled alive. Apart 
from being pretty cruel to the frog, it carries another message. We, col-
lectively, are that frog.
Our world has changed. It’s changing at such an accelerating rate 
that we’ve lost track of the speed. Perception is relative; at walking 
speed, someone running past us seems swift. On a highway, someone 
overtaking us seems fairly lethargic. To the runner, though, the two 
cars are terrifyingly fast.
Alvin Toffler, one of the world’s most famous futurologists, coined 
the term “future shock” in 1970.1 In his book Future Shock he argued that 
too much change in too short a period of time would lead to shattering 
stress and disorientation. This would create a society characterized by 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
social paralysis and personal disconnection. The rate of change he pre-
dicted has come to pass. However, he got the impact backward.
We, as a society, have looked change in the face and laughed. 
What’s fantastical one year is commonplace the next. In some cases, 
even within months; how many times in the last year have you found 
a device or application you couldn’t live without only to have it 
become such a central part of your life that you don’t even realize it’s 
there anymore?
There’s danger in this complacency. Just because we’re used to the 
water getting warmer, it doesn’t mean that we’re out of danger. The 
rest of this chapter will review five key trends that will fundamentally 
change the way we view the world over the next decade. These are:
	
1.	The Age of Uncertainty
	
2.	The Emergence of Big Data
	
3.	The Rise of the Ro¯nin
	
4.	The Knowledge Rush
	
5.	Systematized Chaos
Again, this isn’t futurism; they are all already happening. Thus 
far, their impacts are still relatively small. With advance knowledge, a 
competent leader still has time to take advantage of them.
THE AGE OF UNCERTAINTY
Ours is a magical time. Every day, we do things that would have been 
in realms of science fiction not even three decades ago. Twenty years 
ago, an international telephone call from New York to London cost 
Change will continue to accelerate and the resulting social complexity and 
economic interconnectedness will increase the frequency of unintended 
consequences and unexpected events. Dynamic management focused on 
emphasizing robustness rather than pure efficiency will become common. 
Leaders will need to become comfortable with uncertainty, planning for 
“unknown unknowns,” and trust sophisticated monitoring engines that 
leverage big data.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  11
approximately a dollar a minute.2 Today, we can videoconference 
for free on a device that fits in our pocket. The iPhone 5s, a high-­
specification mobile phone released in 2013, is faster than the MacBook 
Pro released in 2008, a high-end laptop. In less than five years, we’ve 
created a device that’s smaller, faster, has greater fidelity, offers mobile 
connectivity, and has over double the battery life.3
Over 23 years ago, Star Trek fantasized about the Personal Access 
Display Device, a hand-held computer with a touch-screen interface. 
In 2010, Apple launched the iPad, making Star Trek’s PADDs real and 
affordable. In isolation, that’s mind-blowing. However, the most fas-
cinating thing about them is that in less than three years from when 
they were launched, the tablet as a personal computing device was 
taken for granted and largely commonplace.
The examples are endless. Toys can be shipped and delivered 
almost overnight from China that quite literally have millions of times 
more processing power than Apollo 11. Three-dimensional printers 
are commercially available and consumer friendly. Not only are electric 
cars such as the Tesla commercially available but Google is road-testing 
driverless cars. Facebook and Sony are developing commercially viable 
virtual reality systems. While we’re still waiting for our flying cars, the 
world’s closer to the future than ever before.
Communication and information is instantaneous, pervasive, and 
always-on; no matter where we are, we’re plugged in. To a kid, the 
idea of being involuntarily unplugged is almost inconceivable. With 
fourth-generation mobile connectivity and portable solar rechargers, 
even camping no longer offers an escape! The scale of this change 
is subtle; it sneaks up on you. Given enough exposure, even magic 
becomes mundane. Therein lies the danger.
The world is changing around us at an accelerating rate. As it does 
so, it changes us, for good or bad. Much like the industrial revolu-
tion, it’s not clear yet how this technology will impact society. Thus 
far, we know that it offers social and professional advantages to those 
who have it and know how to use it. And, quantitative analysis has 
shown that access and use of information technology is dependent on 
income and access to education.4 This carries with it a stark implica-
tion: access (or lack thereof) to information runs the risk of creating an 
entire social strata of “haves” and “have-nots.”
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
We live in a world where social, cultural and economic capital 
is dependent on one’s ability to connect, communicate, and create 
through technology. In this world, lacking these skills can create a 
true digital divide, one that has intergenerational implications. As 
change ­accelerates, it becomes that much harder for the disadvan-
taged to keep up.
While this is clearly a global concern, its implications also fall 
closer to home. The 2011 U.S. Census showed that only 71.7 percent 
of households accessed the Internet. While not terribly concerning in 
isolation, what is concerning is the lowest usage rates clustered around 
the less educated and those with low incomes.5 It’s a measure of the 
role that technology plays in our lives that some argue that this digital 
divide is a threat not only to economic mobility and social stability but 
even democratic representation.6
At the micro-level, information is power, both for the individ-
ual and the collective. It gives us the ability to network and connect 
with lost friends. However, it’s more than that. The ability to con-
nect and communicate has already supported revolutions in Egypt, 
Tunisia, and Libya.7 What affects the individual has also had an effect 
on the organization. Globalization is easier than it’s ever been and 
location is rarely a barrier to business. At the macro-level, that same 
decline in communication costs has affected global trading patterns 
and competitive price advantage, especially in the case of differenti-
ated products.8
Digitization has and is fueling disruption. Despite this, the funda-
mentals of business have not changed. Success still requires innovation, 
differentiation, and a relentless focus on efficient execution. What has 
changed is the dynamic that information plays in this mix. While infor-
mation has always conferred advantage, the sheer volume of informa-
tion available has changed its relative contribution to success.
The greatest irony of our age is that despite having access to more 
information than ever before, we remain more in the dark than ever. 
It’s true that we generate tremendous amounts of data. In any given 
day, the digital footprint we leave dwarfs the data we have of entire 
civilizations. We know more about what the world bought for lunch 
yesterday than we do about the entirety of ancient Egypt.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  13
It’s also true that rather than making it easier to understand our 
world, all this information instead makes it more confusing. Connectivity 
comes with a price; the more tightly coupled our industries and lives 
become, the harder it becomes to predict unintentional outcomes. 
What could once be said around the watercooler with relative impu-
nity carries different implications when said on Facebook or Twitter. 
Complexity and interconnectedness bring with them uncertainty, both 
personally and professionally.
The financial crisis of 2007 was a poignant example of how severe 
this uncertainty has become. The market at the time was character-
ized by easy credit. It also saw significant growth of subprime loans 
from under 10 percent of the total mortgage market to over 20 percent  
at their peak. The use of complex financial instruments such as 
­mortgage-backed securities, credit default swaps, and synthetic collat-
eralized debt obligations (CDOs) was commonplace.
Together, these established a highly complex financial system that 
not only increased the distance between the physical asset and the 
final purchaser but also multiplied the number of actors involved with 
any particular product. While this theoretically offered the advantage 
of diversification through blended assets, it also reduced overall trans-
parency and risk lineage. It got to the point where the products became 
so complicated that some, George Soros included, felt that the authori-
ties and regulators could no longer calculate the risk and instead were 
forced to simply “take the word” of the banks issuing the products.9 
Eventually, the catastrophe happened; the outcomes of the liquidity 
crisis are well-known, and in many countries, are still being felt.
The unexpected twist in the story was the level of uncertainty 
around who would be affected by the progressive fallout and, if so, 
how badly they would be affected. Our financial markets had become 
so interconnected and tightly coupled that by the time of the Great 
Recession, banks in far corners of the world had unknowingly 
acquired overleveraged or even negative-value U.S. assets. Unpicking 
this Gordian knot and accurately determining true exposures was dif-
ficult and, in some cases, arguably impossible. Systemic risk, financial 
innovation, regulatory evasion, and complexity may have caused the 
crisis. Uncertainty, however, characterized the aftermath.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Despite all our scientific, technical, and intellectual advancements, 
this will be the defining characteristic of our time. We’ve entered 
the era of uncertainty, a post–information age period of sustained dis-
ruption and change. The digital revolution is no longer a revolu-
tion; it’s simply the new normal. We spend large amounts of time 
trying to manage our “known knowns” and “known unknowns.” 
Unfortunately, in a world where economic, social, and professional 
connections are growing exponentially, so do the opportunities for 
“unknown unknowns.”
Incumbents find it increasingly difficult to predict who their next 
big competitor will be. Facebook came from nowhere and disrupted 
MySpace in less than two years. BlackBerry and Nokia went from 
being market leaders to shadows of their former selves, not by the 
hand of another telecommunications company but by an almost-failed 
computer company (Apple) and a search company (Google). Financial 
institutions find themselves under threat not only from hackers and 
organized crime in specific countries but from disenfranchised teenag-
ers and young adults wearing Guy Fawkes masks.
Systemic complexity creates uncertainty. Nassim Taleb, author and 
statistician, talks of Black Swans, highly improbably events that have 
an extreme impact should they occur.10 By definition, these are outli-
ers and the odds of any of these individually happening remains low. 
However, the frequency with which we experience these events through 
the age of uncertainty will increase as our world becomes more complex.
Every action has the potential for intentional and unintentional 
consequences. As we scale our interactions, so do we scale our poten-
tial for Black Swans. Most dangerously of all, adapting to this accel-
erating rate of change requires us to acknowledge that which we 
know is dwarfed by that which we don’t. This isn’t the first time we’ve 
gone through such a massive shift. However, history has shown that 
times of rapid disruption usually lead to drastically changed social and 
­economic structures.
Rather than planning for the known, the era of uncertainty will 
require organizations and individuals to manage and live based on 
adaptability, flexibility, and robustness. In an environment character-
ized by rapid and volatile change, the concept of a static business model 
will eventually seem as archaic and quaint as the horse and wagon.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  15
THE EMERGENCE OF BIG DATA
The information contained in big data will reduce experience-based barriers 
to entry in many industry sectors. The traditional separation between many 
industry verticals will start to collapse and for these industries, differentia-
tion purely based on experience and sector knowledge will progressively 
evaporate. Leaders will need to become comfortable with the constant 
threat of disruption from nontraditional competitors.
The sudden focus on big data is more than just a technical fad. It’s a 
manifestation of a broader zeitgeist.
“Big data” has become one of the most used and overused catch-
phrases. It’s getting to the point where if something doesn’t have the 
term somewhere in the brief, someone’s not doing their job. Just 
because it’s popular, however, doesn’t mean it’s overstated. We’ve been 
through the information revolution. We’ve seen knowledge workers 
come and go. We’ve even got our head around Web 2.0 as we rocket 
through Web 3.0 on our way to Web 4.0.
Big data dwarfs all of these, not only for the decade but for the 
rest of our natural lives as well. Rather than just being hype, our sheer 
volume of discussion reflects the impact people suspect it will have. It’s 
an idea whose time has come.
Ideas are fascinating. They don’t exist in any real sense; they’re 
a shared delusion, carrying us beyond our physicality. Abstraction is 
powerful and in some ways, it’s what distinguishes us as a species. Jean 
Piaget, acclaimed developmental psychologist, theorized that it’s only in 
our final stage of cognitive development, the formal operational stage, 
that we make the transition from concrete thinking to abstract logic.11
As babies, we are phenomenists. We define our world based on 
our personal experience, not on the physicality of the objects around 
us. When we hide behind a sheet, it’s arguable that from the baby’s 
perspective, we’re not just hiding. We’ve literally temporarily ceased 
to exist. As we develop, we progressively make the leap from naturalist 
interpretation of physical objects to symbolic representation, abstract 
thought, and metacognition.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
The significance of this step is enormous and yet it’s often 
­overlooked. While nowhere near a primary measure of self-worth or 
community value, some have suggested that as many as two-thirds 
of adults never reach the formal operational stage.12 We refer to the 
“economy” or “market” and yet, what is it? To a child, it’s a physical 
place where one can go to buy carrots. It’s down the street and to the 
left, somewhere that smells of earth and spices.
In the abstract, it’s a synthetic aggregation of all possible markets 
in all possible spaces at any point in time. In a multidimensional sense, 
it’s a superposition of everything we can’t measure or observe, all 
at once. It includes even stranger things like derivatives, collateral-
ized debt obligations, and currency created through fractional reserve 
banking. These exist not even as numbers on a piece of paper but as 
magnetic fields on hard drives scattered across the globe.
Despite being unreal in a very literal sense, they have the power to 
change our world. Ideas aren’t real. And yet, they replicate, mutate, and 
at some stage, terminate. They hold a mirror up to our cultural gestalt, 
reflecting that which is most important to us at a point in time. Richard 
Dawkins, author and evolutionary biologist, coined the term meme to 
describe this almost evolutionary process of cultural transmission.13 
Successful memes replicate and mutate. Unsuccessful memes stagnate 
and eventually die. Thanks to the Internet, popular and culturally rele-
vant concepts propagate at the speed of light, ignoring national and social 
barriers. Resonant concepts grow in strength while irrelevant concepts 
decline. One only needs to look at doge—so impressive; much sharing.14
Memes survive through cultural relevance. And, not all do. Our 
linguistic landscape is scattered with “lost words,” terms that for some 
reason fell out of favor. The archaic term, California widow, seems 
strange without the background context of a gold rush. Tyromancy, the 
process of divining by the coagulation of cheese, is not as common as 
it once was. Our language, culture, and ideas represent a snapshot of 
what we care about and are interested in.
Big data is one of these concepts. We talk about it because it’s here and 
it’s affecting us. Like most big ideas, though, it’s not just what it means 
now. It’s also what it means for our future. But first, what is “big data”?
It’s more than just lots of data. Most people have heard of Moore’s 
law,15 the trend for the number of transistors on a microprocessor to 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  17
double roughly every 18 months. In less technical terms, computers 
tend to double in speed about every two years. It’s one of the reasons 
why the iPhone 5s (released in late 2013) slightly beats the original 
MacBook Air (released in early 2008) in processing benchmarks.
Fewer people have heard of Kryder’s law, the trend for storage 
density to outstrip processing capacity improvements.16 Our ability to 
store information has been consistently growing at a rate faster than a 
chip’s ability to process information.
We’re generating more data than ever before. We’ve been through 
the structured era, where we’ve needed to capture billing information, 
personal information, financial information, and transaction informa-
tion.* Without an address, there’s nowhere to send a bill. Without a 
name, there’s no-one to address a bill to. Without an account or a credit 
card, there’s no way of processing payment. And without a transaction, 
there’s no way of knowing how much to bill.
Capturing, integrating, and exposing this information was hard 
enough. Organizations have spent hundreds of millions of dollars 
building warehouses and developing strategies simply to cope with 
this data. But, we’ve managed.
As daunting as this was, we’re now deep in the middle of the social 
era. While structured data is useful for computers, we prefer text and 
pictures, often called unstructured data. It’s estimated that every year, 
the average worker writes about a book’s worth of email.17 By that 
measure, any given office is producing as much content as a small-
scale publisher, event taking into account the time people spend talk-
ing on Twitter, blogging, or catching up on Facebook.
We’re not only generating more data than ever before, we’re cre-
ating new types of data. Every photo has within it people, places, and 
even events. Every status update has mood, location, and often intent. 
Not only are we having to deal with format changes from structured to 
*Structured data in its simplest sense is data that can be organized in a predefined man-
ner. For example, telephone numbers follow a fixed structure as do postcodes. The pri-
mary advantage of structured data is ease of analysis. When one knows what the data 
will always look like, it’s relatively easy to analyze. The primary disadvantage is the 
constraints it implies. Anything that doesn’t fit into the predefined structure must be 
discarded.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
unstructured data; we’re having to deal with how best to extract latent 
information from raw data.
However, this pales in comparison to the next wave. e-Commerce 
gave us visibility over how we spend and save our money. Social gave 
us visibility over what we’re interested in, what we’re doing, and who 
we know. However, there’s more. Increasingly, it’s no longer about 
what we’re choosing to say or do. Our devices are doing it for us.
We’re just at the start of the sensor era. Smart devices are “chatty.” 
They’re smart because they have the ability to be chatty. Sensor data 
has always been around; it’s just that historically it hasn’t been terribly 
interesting outside of systems monitoring and maintenance. OBD-II, 
a real-time onboard diagnostics bus, was made mandatory for all cars 
sold in the United States as far back as 1996. Intended to support emis-
sions testing, the protocol also gave real-time access to an exhaustive 
set of statistics on (among other things) vehicle speed, accelerator posi-
tions, fuel type being used, and vehicle identification numbers.
This data served an important purpose; detailed data made preven-
tative maintenance easier. Given the right programming, embedded 
systems can give advance warning of their potential failure. Rather 
than being the exception, the model used by OBD-II has become the 
norm. Anyone who’s saved their data from a failing hard drive prob-
ably has the S.M.A.R.T. (Self-Monitoring, Analysis, and Reporting 
Technology) monitoring system to thank for it. In making our devices 
smarter, rather than reducing the data our devices are generating, 
we’ve increased it. The Boeing 787 Dreamliner, a prime example of 
modern aviation engineering, generates approximately half a terabyte 
of sensor data every flight.18
Lest one think that this is exclusively the domain of transportation 
or heavy machinery, our personal devices are doing exactly the same 
thing. The iPhone 5s launched with the energy-efficient M7 chip, a 
device specifically designed to track motion and movement. Pair that 
with a GPS and a global database that geolocates wireless networks 
and any given phone can easily capture and track the most minute of 
our movements throughout the day.
Every time we make a call, the communication network needs  
to know where we are, whom we’re calling, and how long we spoke to  
them. Without that metadata, it’s impossible to close the circuit and  
have a conversation. Smart meters track electricity use on a near-real-
time basis, giving energy companies direct visibility over intraday 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  19
energy consumption patterns. Relative to historical standards, the sheer 
volume of this data is staggering. A typical telecommunications carrier 
will generate a few terabytes of call detail data every month. A typi-
cal energy company that has access to smart meters now has access to 
more data in a single day than it has had over the last hundred years.
This, fundamentally, is the challenge and opportunity of big data. 
We’re generating more data than ever before. We’re generating more 
types of data than ever before. And, we’re generating it faster than ever 
before. Big data represents an inflection point in what we consider 
“normal” relative to historical volumes, variety, and velocity of data.*
The challenges that go with this are obvious. To be useful, all this 
data needs to be stored, accessed, interrogated, analyzed, and used. 
Unfortunately, the “new normal” of big data gels poorly with how 
most organizations have made their technology investments. Platforms 
designed for terabytes of data rarely work well when asked to scale to 
petabytes or even exabytes. Ask a mechanic to reverse-engineer the 
family station-wagon into a Formula-1 car and see what happens.
The opportunities are a bit more subtle. It’s easy to argue that 
big data is just the latest version of “data.” Simplistically, this is true. 
However, it’s more than this. At the turn of the century, when society 
looks back and takes stock, the emergence of the term will coincide with 
the turning point at which the nature of industry, government, and 
society started to change. As did those who lived through the industrial 
revolution or heard Gutenberg first speak of his miraculous machine, 
we have only started to feel the disruption big data will bring with it.
That’s a big statement, but it’s a valid one. Information asymme-
tries are well known in economics.19 In an ideal world, every trans-
action involves a perfect match between desire and need. Prices are 
perfect, transactions are frictionless, and barriers to entry are almost 
nonexistent. However, efficient markets require perfect information, 
an unrealistic ideal. Where some know more than others, the market 
operates imperfectly, sometimes outright failing. Prices become dis-
torted and significant barriers to entry emerge, typically controlled by 
the incumbents who have the advantage of better knowledge.
*The 3 Vs of Big Data were originally coined by Doug Laney as early as 2001 in his 
report, “3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity, and Variety.” For 
more information, see http://blogs.gartner.com/doug-laney/files/2012/01/ad949-3D-
Data-­Management-Controlling-Data-Volume-Velocity-and-Variety.pdf.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Perfect information is a fantasy. But, what happens when the 
­fantasy keeps getting closer to reality?
If every single action we make can be captured and shared, where 
does imperfect information then sit? Our understanding of econom-
ics changes fundamentally, as does our understanding of what society 
looks like. What does privacy mean in a world where every personal 
and professional relationship is captured as a matter of course? What 
does energy conservation policy look like where it’s possible to under-
stand not only how every single person around the world is consum-
ing electricity in real-time but what the immediate measurable effects 
of policy changes are? What does drug development look like where 
you not only have access to the entire world’s gene profile but can 
monitor unknown side effects and unintentional but potentially lethal 
drug cocktails, not through hypothetical testing but through continu-
ous population monitoring?
The true potential of big data is not better customer engagement. It’s 
not better economic management. It’s not even better public safety. These 
are all byproducts, mere side-effects of information efficiency. What big 
data implies is a different world, one where many aspects of society and 
the broader economy become characterized by the potential of near-
perfect information, one that is fundamentally disrupted, regardless of 
industry sector.
These are lofty statements, hyperbolic even. What they are not, 
however, is unprecedented. The invention of the combustion engine 
during the industrial revolution disrupted industries, economies, social 
structures, and even our definition of time.20 The sudden shift of capi-
tal and political influence toward the Vanderbilts, the Rockefellers, and 
the Carnegies wasn’t a coincidence of history; it was a clear demon-
stration of how disruptive events and technologies change the world 
as we know it.
Information has always equated to power. Entire sectors have 
been built on this power inequality, whether it’s at the micro-level 
of selling used goods through to the macro-level of financial markets. 
Knowing how the market operates and what signals to rely on has 
been a strong barrier to entry for centuries. In the absence of quantita-
tive information, one has to rely on experience, and without experi-
ence, one is powerless.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  21
Big data cracks this edifice; when data becomes plentiful and 
accessible, the need for experience declines. There’s still an argument 
for monopoly in this—own the data, own the market. Unfortunately, 
there’s almost always a back door. Whether it’s through investment, 
acquisition, collection, or partnering, most data is up for grabs in some 
form. And, with this data comes the ability to understand the market 
as well as or better than the incumbents.
This isn’t an abstract fantasy. This is already happening. Super­
markets like the Australian brand Coles are getting banking licenses 
and presenting real competition to the traditional Australian banks, 
protected as they are by the four pillars policy. The same is true for 
telecommunications companies such as Rogers in Canada. Nonbank­
ing institutions like PayPal are inserting themselves into the payment 
chain and actively dis-intermediating the banks. Media streamers like 
Netflix and Amazon are generating their own content and diverting 
subscribers away from cable providers.
If all you have is experience, it’s only a matter of time until some-
one smarter than you works out how to use the data to disrupt you. Big 
data is more than just more information; it represents the beginning of 
the end of industry experience as a core competitive advantage. If your 
differentiation is based purely on sector knowledge, replication is sim-
ply a case of getting access to enough data to come to similar conclu-
sions. Thirty years of experience counts for nothing if a graduate can 
develop an algorithm that comes to the same conclusion as an expert.
RISE OF THE RO–NIN
Our future is one of uncertainty caused by disruption. However, in 
disruption there is opportunity. Big data may be the key to unlocking 
this opportunity, but without an operator, every key is useless.
A structural tightening of the labor market for skilled professionals will 
increase the competitive advantage offered by human capital. Salaries will 
rise and signals that indicate competency will become increasingly inaccurate. 
Leaders will need to become experts in human capital identification, develop-
ment, and retention, not just experts in their preferred areas of competency.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Business analytics is the catalyst that unlocks value from data.21 
Some have even gone so far as to say it may become a dominant force 
of competitive differentiation.22 It is, however a complex discipline. It 
requires a mélange of skills including mathematics, pragmatism, change 
management, project management, software development, systems 
architecture, data management, programming, and business knowledge. 
Given this highly unrealistic capability set, it shouldn’t come as any sur-
prise that skilled practitioners are in high demand. What may come as a 
surprise is how significant the demand is for these people.
A survey of forum members conducted in 2013 by KDNuggets, a 
data-mining community, found that average salaries had increased by 
13 percent between 2012 and 2013 in the United States and Canada 
and 12 percent globally.23 Lest one think this was a one-off data point, 
a similar survey conducted in the United Kingdom by Harnham, a 
recruiter, found that 55 percent of respondents saw their salary increase 
at double the rate of inflation between 2012 and 2013.24 The Institute of 
Analytics Professionals of Australia, a professional association for ana-
lytics practitioners, found similar results. In their 2013 annual skills and 
salary survey, over 70 percent of respondents had seen their salaries 
increase moderately or significantly in the three years prior.25
This isn’t a cyclical shift. This increase in demand represents a 
structural shift in the labor market driven by a fundamental change in 
the nature of business. With data comes the opportunity to do things 
better, and doing so requires people.
To monetize their data, organizations need access to people with the 
right skills, mindset, and experience. This isn’t easy. Relatively speak-
ing, technology is fairly straightforward. Human capital, however, is 
hard. While structural shifts like this are not totally unprecedented, the 
speed at which this transformation is happening is somewhat staggering. 
Gartner estimated in late 2012 that by 2015, the rise of big data would 
create over 4 million IT jobs globally, of which 1.9 million would be in the 
United States. This number grows even larger when second- and third-
order effects are taken into account. If each big data–related role creates 
another three downstream roles, the need to analyze and leverage big 
data will create demand for another 6 million jobs in the United States.26
This speed of transition is creating ripples in the labor market. Of 
these potential jobs, Gartner estimates that only a third will end up 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  23
being filled. Again, lest one think that this is an anomaly, McKinsey, 
a consultancy, came to similar conclusions.27 Looking further into  
the future, by 2018 McKinsey estimates that the United States alone 
would experience a shortfall of as many as 190,000 skilled data sci-
entists and over 1.5 million managers and analysts capable of taking 
advantage of these insights. In percentage terms, this represents a 50 
to 60 percent gap between supply and demand.
Estimates of the shortfall vary between analysts. What’s consistent, 
however, is the trend toward a significant labor market imbalance. 
The root cause behind this imbalance is not education. Were it so, the 
rapid rise in skilled postgraduates from China and India might offer a 
solution. Sadly, as will be covered in Chapter 7, getting the most out of 
big data requires experience, business knowledge, as well as technical 
capabilities. These develop best through practical experience.
In his book Outliers, Gladwell suggested that it takes approximately 
10,000 hours to become the best in any particular domain.28 This is espe-
cially true in business analytics where cross-functional coordination and 
experience is the norm rather than the exception. Even the best postgrad-
uate is only operating at half-potential without this critical experience.
Some of the impacts of this imbalance are obvious. Salaries will 
continue to increase, especially for those who meet the profile of value 
creators rather than statisticians or pure analysts. The limiting factor 
for many organizations will become their ability to find and keep the 
right people, regardless of how well funded projects are. And, labor 
mobility for those with the right skills will remain high with the most 
skilled people crossing roles, industries, and even borders to wherever 
the offering’s the most attractive.
The age of uncertainty will correspond with the rise of the ro¯nin, a new 
class of worker that is highly mobile, highly skilled, and yet motivated 
by factors more complex than money alone. Most are familiar with the 
samurai, the middle and upper echelons of the warrior class in feudal 
Japan. Following a complex set of rules known as bushido¯, the samurai 
attempted to embody a moral code grounded in loyalty, frugality, and 
honor. Comparatively well-educated in Japanese society, they swore 
fealty to a single master. Moral transgressions carried severe penalties; 
for a truly disgraced samurai, the only option was seppuku, a ritualized 
form of suicide.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
While many know of the samurai, fewer know of the ro¯nin. On 
losing their master, not all samurai decided to strictly follow bushido¯. 
Whether it was through desertion or death, some disgraced samurai 
would become mobile and seek alternative employment. Still car-
rying their dual swords, they walked a fine line. Those who sought 
regular, respectable work became mercenaries or enforcers, defending 
caravans and being bodyguards. Those who sought more opportunistic 
employment often gravitated toward the gangs, becoming petty crimi-
nals or bandits. Their relative lack of responsibilities compared to their 
loyal brethren often led to a more festive reputation, doing whatever 
they wanted without any respect to their “betters.”
To be a ro¯nin was to be forced to reinvent oneself, a not insignifi-
cant challenge under the Tokugawa shogunate. Equally though, dur-
ing the Edo period’s constrained social order and formalized classist 
society, the ro¯nin experienced a level of social mobility and freedom 
that was unavailable to most, even if that freedom came at a price. 
Educated, skilled, and experienced, their abilities opened doors that 
remained closed to many. The lack of predefined direction forced the 
ro¯nin to chase that which they were most comfortable or interested in. 
For some, it was simply survival. For many, it was profit. For others, it 
was the opportunity to regain honor.
Disruption may not have created the ro¯nin. It did, however, help 
them grow. Economic growth, forced land confiscation and concentra-
tion under the 300 regional Daiymo, and regulatory change saw the 
ro¯nin grow substantially during the Edo period. While the current dis-
ruption has different causes, we are seeing the creation of a new class 
of worker, one that is highly skilled, in significant global demand, and 
yet motivated by factors far more complex than money alone. These 
modern-day ro¯nin are equally as mobile as their namesakes. Thanks to 
a continually tightening labor market, they have unparalleled profes-
sional mobility. Rather than being constrained by industry sector, their 
skills are highly portable between industries.
While not as experienced or effective as a pure specialist, their 
ability to use mathematical or computational methods to solve com-
plex problems breaks down many of the barriers between industry 
sectors. Their raw mathematical talent opens doors and opportunities 
unavailable to most. Inevitably, their skills lead to significant salaries. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  25
According to the Institute of Analytics Professionals, the median salary 
of a person employed in the field in Australia is over twice the national 
median salary!
For these individuals, money is always a consideration. Being 
largely scientific and numerical in mindset, they usually well under-
stand the opportunity cost of staying in a comparatively low-paid posi-
tion. However, the leverage they carry creates an interesting dynamic. 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs provides an excellent lens through which 
their thinking patterns can be explained.29 They have no true fear of 
unemployment; a rising tide lifts all boats. Even in a recessionary mar-
ket, the demand for their skills continues to rise. With their physiologi-
cal and safety needs easily catered for, they look for more.
For many, being part of a strong team with a good fit becomes 
a major consideration. Belonging, therefore, becomes more than an 
afterthought; if they don’t enjoy working with their managers and 
peers, they can usually easily enough find another team to be a part 
of. Whether it’s through forming personal bonds or being exposed to 
new ideas, social anxiety or being understimulated/underchallenged 
can easily be a trigger to look for something else. Without a strong cul-
tural fit, any role they take will inevitably be a transitory one.
Beyond this, many look for esteem and achievement. Sometimes, 
this takes the form of internal and external recognition and reputa-
tion. Other times, it takes the form of applying their skills to solve real 
problems. These types of people look for more than a nine-to-five job; 
they want their skills to have an impact on something. Without a sense 
of personal growth or achievement, they will look elsewhere. Others 
seek self-actualization. They look to advance knowledge, solve social 
ills, or otherwise demonstrate mastery of their skills on a daily basis.
Like the ro¯nin of old, their existence will create both challenge 
and opportunity. Without them, many organizations will be unable to 
compete. They will see their data assets go to waste as their competi-
tors take leaps ahead. Like these modern-day ro¯nin or loathe them, 
they will become a critical part of every operation.
Most will be comparatively expensive but largely substitutable; a 
warrior is a warrior. However, some will be truly transformative, blend-
ing analytical, domain, and value-creating abilities into an enabler for 
competitive advantage. Ranging from maladjusted prima donnas to 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
transformative visionaries, the leverage they will carry will create no 
end of headaches. The power they bring will be enviable, as long as it 
can be effectively channeled.
THE KNOWLEDGE RUSH
The age of uncertainty will lead to new opportunities, many of them 
centered around the use of big data and reliant on the rise of the ro¯nin. 
These new assets carry with them significant implications.
Few things have the ability to redistribute power or wealth as sig-
nificantly as the discovery of a new class of asset. The impact can be 
highly variable. Sometimes, it can lead to the creation of a new empire. 
Other times, it can lead to improved income mobility and personal 
independence. One thing, however, is constant—in times of economic 
disruption, whoever controls the asset controls the future.
The degree to which this can change the world shouldn’t be under-
estimated. In June 1870, John D. Rockefeller founded Standard Oil as 
his entry-point into the rapidly growing oil market. The earliest records 
on file show 1,200 barrels being skimmed from Pennsylvania in 1858. 
Only 12 years later, when Standard Oil was launched, Pennsylvania 
was producing an estimated 5.2 million barrels.30 By the end of the 
1870s, Standard Oil was in control of over 90 percent of oil refinery in 
the United States.31 To put this in perspective, Pennsylvania alone in 
1880 was producing 26 million barrels with the price per barrel having 
roughly doubled since 1861.32
Controlling this new asset was highly profitable; it helped build 
Rockefeller’s empire and contributed significantly to making him 
arguably the wealthiest man in American history. It’s estimated that 
in today’s (inflation-adjusted) dollars, Rockefeller would have been 
worth almost US$1.5 billion, 1/65 of total U.S. GDP at the time.33 
In a digital world, absolute control of unique information assets is a  
source of competitive differentiation. Leaders will need to be aware that  
by ­missing out on capturing, acquiring, or augmenting unique sources, they 
may well be unwittingly permanently locking themselves out of developing 
markets.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  27
Vanderbilt, another magnate, followed a similar model through pro-
gressively controlling the railroads.
Controlling a unique asset confers power. The ongoing digitization 
of our world is subtly yet surely seeding the latest disruption; big data is 
the new oil. Everything we do leaves a data footprint and the future will 
be like today, only more so. Every time our kids play a game on their 
latest console, they’ll be watched. Whom they play with, how long they 
play, what they do, even how quickly they play through their games 
will be registered. Every time we watch cable, our viewing patterns will 
be captured. People will analyze how many times we’ve changed the  
channel, what shows we’ve watched, even whether we’ve muted  
the TV during particular advertisements. Every time we leave the 
house, our telephone providers will be monitoring where we go, whom  
we communicate with, and even what information we’re looking up 
while we’re mobile.
To most, this might sound like a rather dystopian future. However, 
it’s already here.
Microsoft and Sony both included various online infrastructure as 
part of their game console offerings in 2006. Through tracking activity, 
interaction, and effectiveness of play, these platforms allowed players 
to connect with other players and receive achievements or trophies 
for finishing particular tasks in games. By necessity, their actions and 
friends had to be centrally tracked and managed, complete with time-
stamps for historical purposes.
Termed “in-game telemetry,” this data proved tremendously valu-
able in understanding how players interact with their games and other 
people. It gave developers the ability to see where gamers are and aren’t 
succeeding within the game. It gave marketers the ability to see which 
aspects of the game gamers are most interested in. And, it gave publish-
ers the ability to make objective decisions about where they should be 
investing. This is a bigger deal than one might initially suppose.
Grand Theft Auto V, a part of a well-known gaming franchise, was 
estimated to cost over $250 million to develop and market.34 The sheer 
scale of investment in games surprises many. What’s even more sur-
prising, however, is that most players never even see everything they 
paid for. A common industry rule of thumb is that less than 10 percent 
of players will ever play through to the end of a game.35
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
28 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Cutting back the total investment is a no-brainer. The problem is 
in working out what to cut. It’s true that every gamer may only expe-
rience a small proportion of the total game content in a free-roaming 
game. Unfortunately, because they have the freedom to explore, the 
content they see will often be different from the content other gamers 
see. Given that every second of content costs money to design, code, 
create the assets, and bug-test, being able to see what gamers are and 
aren’t interested in offers significant insight into where investments 
should occur.
In a talk given at GDC 2010, a game development conference, 
BioWare (a developer owned by Electronic Arts) outlined the sophis-
tication this analysis can go to.36 Dragon Age: Origins was a large game. 
With over 800,000 lines of dialog, more than 180 areas to explore, 
greater than 300,000 lines of scripted code, 18 different character 
design options, and more than 300 abilities, the game was simply too 
large to exhaustively test and analyze. Rather than guess, they decided 
to track player usage patterns during the development cycle, using 
those insights to better inform game design.
To aid design, they tracked over 1.1 million play sessions across 
1,141 machines, generating over 250GB of data across approximately 
38 million data points. When analyzed, this helped them to identify 
movement patterns, boring points, and even pacing issues, helping 
them to design a game that was eventually a critical success.
This isn’t a one-off example; similar techniques are used at organi-
zations such as Bungie (the creator of Halo, another blockbuster fran-
chise), Microsoft, and Sony.37 The value of this data is immeasurable; 
in some cases, it can make the difference between a game that makes 
a profit and a game that bankrupts the company.
A similar story is playing out elsewhere. LG was embroiled in a PR 
disaster in late 2013 when it emerged that regardless of consumer pref-
erences their smart TVs would upload viewing patterns back to LG for 
analysis within their “LG Smart Ad” offering.38 Designed to enable more 
relevant advertising, this data included what channels people watched, 
the name of the channel, and even the names of any media files watched. 
The public backlash to this involuntary data sharing was understandable.
Regardless of industry, having access to low-level behavioral data is 
invaluable. By necessity, telecommunications carriers need to be able 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  29
to triangulate and communicate with every phone on their network. 
Without this information, they can’t get a signal to the phone. This meta-
data can be similarly captured and stored, along with whom one com-
municates with and for how long. It can be used to identify influence, 
understand preferences, and allow real-time location-based advertising. 
Relevancy becomes more than just the right product at the right time; it 
extends to include the right place and even the right mindset.
Access to this information can make or break companies. Being denied 
access to data can shift the balance of power between partners so signifi-
cantly that failure can become a very real threat. In the high-risk market 
of game development, a single failed game can be enough to bankrupt a 
studio. Control access to data and the barriers to entry can become insur-
mountable. Gain access to data and barriers to entry may even evaporate.
There’s a hidden battle taking place right now, one that involves 
aspirational magnates jockeying for position. Exclusive control over 
unique data can generate differentiation in its own right. They’re even 
enough to break otherwise strong partnerships.
Much was made about Apple’s poor-performing Apple Maps appli-
cation when it launched. Previously, Apple had included Google’s Map 
product as a bundled application, broadly perceived by the market as the 
better application. Despite this, Apple decided to part ways with Google 
when it launched iOS6, setting its own application as standard and forc-
ing Google to resubmit its application through the Apple App store.
The decision had repercussions. Apple weathered a great deal of 
negative publicity over the change, largely due to the poor-quality 
data within its internally developed application. One of the most glar-
ing omissions was the lack of a Statue of Liberty on Liberty Island! 
Given that Apple must have known that there would backlash, why 
would the company do it?
The decision to part ways was made for many reasons, Google’s 
interest in having more branding visibility within the app being a 
particular sticking point, according to insiders. However, it was more 
than that. Without access to high-quality geospatial data, it’s impos-
sible to even think about offering geographically targeted services to 
customers or suppliers. Being locked out of such a significant channel 
becomes a real threat to customer engagement. And, the only way to 
gain entry is to source and improve the data somehow.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
30 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Even though they still had a year left on their contract with Google, 
Apple recognized that it had no choice in the battle between the two 
titans. Mapping is hard. It requires tremendous amounts of accurate 
data, continually updated. And, Google had a head start. In 2004, the 
company acquired ZipDash, Where2, and Keyhole Inc., all compa-
nies focused on geospatial data collection, analysis, and distribution. 
In 2006, Google acquired Endoxon; in 2007, ImageAmerica; in 2010, 
Quiksee. Google “got” the need for data early in the picture and Apple 
was caught out.
The only answer was to take the punch. Apple’s lack of foresight 
cost them a great deal of customer loyalty. The damage was so great 
that Tim Cook, the CEO, ended up publicly apologizing for the lack 
of quality in their homegrown application. Building equivalent data 
takes years and Apple was caught on the back foot.
Even today, the battle continues. As of mid-2013, Google had 
just acquired Waze for US$1.1 billion, an Israeli mapping company 
focused on crowd-sourced traffic analysis based on social data. This 
was Google’s single largest acquisition after Motorola, DoubleClick, 
and YouTube. Google’s latest acquisition of Nest in early 2014 for  
$3 billion is seen as a gambit by many to start collecting data from 
inside our homes, using smoke alarms and thermostats to understand 
how we live and behave when we’re alone.
On their side, Apple quickly acquired Locationary, a crowd-
sourced local data company, and HopStop, a city-navigation app. In 
late 2013, Apple also acquired Embark and Broadmap for undisclosed 
sums. Without the ability to generate, analyze, and deliver geospatial 
information to their customers, each would be left with a significant 
chink in their armor. In this arms race, the best weapon is data.
Like a gold rush, this knowledge rush is seeing organizations try to  
get a head start over their competitors by buying exclusive access  
to data. Like spice, gold, or oil, information is the latest disruptive 
asset. Given enough effort, technology can be replicated. Data, how-
ever, cannot—it requires a rich set of historical activity and behaviors. 
By gaining exclusive rights to data, either through express owner-
ship or negotiated licensing arrangements, organizations can lock out 
their competitors, sometimes indefinitely. These titans move glob-
ally, setting up sites and acquiring data in the same way Standard Oil 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  31
once gained horizontal and vertical control over their industry seg-
ment. Information is power and influence, and those who don’t move 
quickly will rapidly find that they have neither.
SYSTEMATIZED CHAOS
One of the biggest drivers behind the age of uncertainty is complexity. 
Simple rules can lead to surprisingly complex systems. Somewhat 
counterintuitively, they can also sometimes be the solution.
Consider, for example, an insect. Individually, an ant has a brain 
smaller than the head of a pin. This size comes with a significant cost: 
processing power. On average, an ant has approximately 250,000 
neurons, a rather unimpressive statistic. The average honey bee is  
an intellectual giant in comparison with approximately a million 
­neurons.39 For comparison, a typical human has between 19 and 23 
billion neurons.40
Despite having .001 percent of the cognitive processing power of a 
human, ants don’t get an easy ride. They lead a challenging life. They 
need to forage. They need to communicate with the colony. They need 
to feed themselves as well as the queen. And, they need to survive. 
Nature is cruel; there are no freebies for the weak.
Adversity, however, breeds innovation—in the face of overwhelm-
ing challenges, life finds a way. What the individual can’t overcome, the 
collective can sometimes solve. Ants, bees, and other hive-based crea-
tures have evolved a tremendously innovative and efficient solution: 
crowdsourcing.41 Energy isn’t cheap for a creature as small as an ant. 
Brainpower is costly. However, reproduction is cheap; while it’s expen-
sive to develop a brain and survive, it’s cheap to replicate. Rather than 
try to develop the intelligence to handle complex solutions, in some situ-
ations it’s more efficient to act locally and rely on the wisdom of crowds.
The emergence of increasingly complex systems will create management 
structures and operational systems that are inherently brittle and prone to 
failure. Leaders will need to become comfortable with managing ­systems 
that are inherently unmanageable through the use of crowdsourcing, 
­back-ended operational analytics, and complex adaptive systems.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
32 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
From an ant’s perspective, the world is infinite. In the three to 
six months most ants live, an ant running full speed all day every 
day might potentially cover over 600 kilometers. Allowing time to 
rest, breed, and eat, seeing the world would take hundreds of genera-
tions. Memory and intelligence, in that context, is worth little; when 
life is short, passing on one’s experience does little to help the next 
generation.
And yet, hives are tremendously complex and efficient systems. 
Anyone who disagrees needs only to leave out a cup of sugar-water for 
a day or two. Despite having limited intelligence, negligible communi-
cation abilities, a short lifespan, and minimal opportunity to develop 
experience, ants somehow coordinate a system involving thousands of 
actors in dynamic conditions to sustain the entire colony. They do it 
through systematized chaos.
Ants face a variety of threats. One particular species, Temnothorax 
rugatulus, live in crevices across the United States and Europe. Red 
and approximately a quarter of a centimeter long, their colonies are 
relatively small with between 50 to 150 ants. At some stage, whether 
it’s through overpopulation or the clumsy interactions of an overly 
interested animal, the colony needs to move. Emigration is fraught 
with danger—colonize the wrong place and the colony is sure to be 
short-lived. The risk is tremendous.
In picking a new site, the ants face two major challenges. First,  
they are totally decentralized. With no controller to make decisions, 
there’s no clear hierarchy nor coordination. Yet somehow, the colony 
needs to build consensus before it moves. That leads immediately to 
the second problem: ants are, sad to say, not very smart. They can 
communicate, but their vocabulary isn’t big enough to have a mea-
sured debate.
Despite these limitations, these ants have evolved a tremendously 
efficient solution. Through a process called quorum sensing and the use 
of a few simple local rules, they coordinate what is otherwise a highly 
a complex and chaotic system to a new stable and relatively optimal 
equilibrium.
As soon as their nest cracks open, a small proportion of ants are 
sent out as scouts to hunt for a new nesting site. These scouts follow 
a few simple rules. They each set off in a direction different from their 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  33
peers. As soon as they find a potential nest, they evaluate it based on 
a few criteria. They search for other dead ants, evaluate the size of the 
interior, and consider the number of openings as gauged by available 
light. After their evaluation is complete, they return to the now-unsafe 
nest and wait. If their potential nest was high quality, they wait a rela-
tively short time. If they judged it to be of poor quality, they wait a 
relatively long time.
After waiting, they engage in “tandem running.” They grab a part-
ner and lead them to the potential site. This new scout also evaluates 
the site and makes up its own mind on whether it is high or low quality. 
They both then return to the original nest and, if the second ant con-
siders the new site to be of a high enough quality, the process repeats 
with both ants waiting before recruiting new scouts. Otherwise, the 
second ant waits to be grabbed by a new partner or, failing that, sets 
off exploring on its own.
In a relatively short period of time, these scouts will probably inspect 
and compare multiple locations. More important, though, no single ant 
will likely see every location; comparisons are made on local experi-
ence, not global knowledge. Eventually, the best sites will see the great-
est back-and-forth traffic. Because the ants that inspect that site wait the 
shortest period of time before recruiting other followers, the number of 
ants visiting the best available site will tend to increase the fastest.
At some stage, the proportion of ants visiting the best site exceeds 
an arbitrary threshold. At that point, they make a collective decision 
to move the entirety of the colony. Once a quorum has been achieved, 
they rapidly carry the brood, queen, and even other workers to the 
new nest. Scouts still searching are recruited through tandem running 
and merged into the collective.
Despite never making a global comparison of all potential sites, 
the colony makes a collective evaluation through local comparisons. 
By trusting the imperfect wisdom of crowds and a complex adaptive 
system governed by local rules, the colony rapidly makes the best deci-
sion it can in an efficient and relatively parsimonious manner. And, it 
does so despite lacking intelligence, communication skills, or even a 
central decision maker.
Coordinating the mass emigration of hundreds (or even thousands) 
of people without being able to speak, write, vote, or even make an 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
34 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
official decision might seem impossible. And yet, through six simple 
rules, these ants do it effortlessly. To see how simple such a system can 
be, consider the following rules:
	
1.	If the nest is destroyed, randomly nominate 20 percent of 
workers to be scouts.
	
2.	Each scout should set off in a different direction for a maximum 
of five minutes.
	
3.	On finding a potential site, give it a score between 1 and 10, 
taking into account security and size.
	
4.	If maximum time has expired and no site has been found, return 
to the nest.
	
5.	On returning to the nest, if a potential site has been found with 
a score of 9 or 10, immediately recruit a follower and return 
to the nest. If it had a score of 6 to 8, wait 30 seconds before 
recruiting a follower. If it had a score of 3 to 5, wait 2 minutes 
before recruiting a follower. If it had a score of less than 3, wait 
up to 5 minutes to be recruited. If, after those 5 minutes you 
have not been recruited, return to step 2 and repeat process.
	
6.	If, on returning to the nest, you encounter more than 20 
percent of the nominated scouts during your waiting period, 
follow them to the nominated site.
In classically hierarchical decision-making systems, processes become 
dependent on specific individuals. Broken links can derail everything. 
And yet, quorum sensing is entirely ant-independent; even if specific 
ants are eaten or otherwise lost, the colony will seamlessly adapt and 
find a way. It’s a measure of how powerful this bottom-up approach 
to managing complexity and uncertainty is that it’s evolved not only 
in ants but also bacteria, honeybees, and other social insects. In some 
ways, this distributed approach toward intelligence may even reflect the 
higher processing powers of more advanced evolutionary systems.42
Simple steps can give rise to surprisingly complex and robust 
­systems.43 The theory behind these systems has been around for 
decades. Often called cellular automata or agent-based models, they’ve 
been a solution looking for a problem.44 In the era of uncertainty with its 
resulting complexity, their time has come.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  35
This systematized chaos is a perfect example of how local rules and 
crowdsourcing can help manage the increasingly complex systems we 
are developing. And, lest one think that this is futurism at its finest, 
Amazon is already doing so to manage its highly complex supply chains.
In 1998, Amazon faced a crisis in its supply chain.45 During an 
­otherwise-ordinary Thanksgiving, Amazon faced one of the worst 
things a successful retailer can experience: more orders being placed 
than being shipped. In an “all-hands-on-deck” mandate, employees 
were required to work graveyard shifts across multiple warehouses, 
executives included.
One particularly bad backlog happened in Amazon’s distribu-
tion center in Georgia. As unfulfilled orders continued to mount, the 
SWAT team finally identified the culprit: a missing pallet of Jigglypuffs, 
a toy from the Pokémon franchise. Amazon immediately mobilized 
a scouting team to find the missing pallet and they set off on their 
expedition. Hyperbole aside, this was no small task; it involved search-
ing a 74,000-square-meter warehouse, an area roughly equivalent 
to almost 400 houses! It took three days to find but the lesson was 
invaluable: even the most complex and intelligent systems are useless 
when they’re fragile.
Today, Amazon uses a system it’s branded chaotic storage.46 Classic 
warehousing systems involve having a fixed space for every product. 
Storage is managed through checking in and checking out products via 
barcodes or radio-frequency identifiers (RFID). Volumes are dynamic 
but position is static; the same products will always be located in the 
same place in the warehouse.
In relatively simple situations, this approach is easy to manage. 
Consider going shopping at the supermarket. While there’s an entry 
cost in learning where everything is, once you know your way around 
it’s easy and efficient to shop. The unfortunate trade-off is that to be 
efficient, every shopper needs to have the intelligence and experience 
to know the unique layout of the shop they’re browsing. Otherwise, 
they lose products and need to go into a manual search, much like 
how Amazon’s search teams needed to track down Jigglypuff.
As designed, this system offloads the complexity onto the indi-
vidual. Without adequate training and experience, the system is only 
as strong as its weakest link. It also can’t scale; what works well for a 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
36 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
few hundred products on shelves in an area as large as a few houses 
becomes almost totally unmanageable when used in one of Amazon’s 
gargantuan distribution center. If one can’t find a tin of baked beans in 
the supermarket, it’s simply a five-minute search. When it came to the 
missing pallet of Jigglypuffs, it was a three-day expedition.
Much like the ants, Amazon turned the model on its head. Rather 
than holding location static, Amazon made it dynamic. Both the product 
and the location would be scanned on receipt and fulfillment. Rather 
than place similar items together, packers would be free to place anything 
anywhere as long as they registered where they’d put it. By taking this 
approach, Amazon preserved the benefits of chaos but systematized it.
At any given point of time, an outside observer would have no hope 
of knowing where any given product would be at any point of time. For 
those inside the system though, the system works efficiently. Products 
held can be placed in the first available holding bay, giving the workers the 
opportunity to self-optimize. Finding any given package is easy through 
having access to the system that keeps track of what product was placed 
where. Rather than having to learn the system, new employees simply 
need to learn to follow simple instructions. The geography and landmarks 
are irrelevant; all that’s important is learning the navigation system.
The system works. In 2010, Amazon picked and shipped 13 million 
items in 24 hours. In 2011, Amazon picked and shipped 17 million items, 
and this is across more than 80 different fulfillment centers globally.47
Complex and chaotic systems are inherently unmanageable. Top-
down management approaches rarely work well; they are brittle and 
tend to collapse. Today and tomorrow’s world is unlikely to become 
simpler. Instead, complexity will be the norm. Not only will organiza-
tions need to come to terms with uncertainty, but they’ll also need to 
understand how best to leverage crowdsourcing and complex adaptive 
systems to systematize chaos.
NOTES
	1.	 Alvin Toffler, Future Shock (New York: Random House, 1970).
	2.	 Joseph S. Nye and John D. Donahue, Governance in a Globalizing World (Washington, 
DC: Visions of Governance for the 21st Century, 2000), 46.
	3.	 John Gruber, “The iPhone 5S and 5C,” Daring Fireball, September 17, 2013, http://
daringfireball.net/2013/09/the_iphone_5s_and_5c (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  37
	4.	 Martin Hilbert, “When Is Cheap, Cheap Enough to Bridge the Digital Divide? 
Modeling Income Related Structural Challenges of Technology Diffusion in Latin 
America,” World Development 38, no. 5 (2010): 756–770.
	5.	 U.S. Census Bureau, “Computer and Internet Use in the United States,” May 2013, 
www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p20-569.pdf.
	6.	 Mauro F. Guillen and Sandra L. Suarez, “Explaining the Global Digital Divide: 
Economic, Political and Sociological Drivers of Cross-National Internet Use,” Social 
Forces 84, no. 2 (2005): 681–708.
	7.	 Wael Ghonim, Revolution 2.0: The Power of the People Is Greater than the People in Power: 
A Memoir (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012).
	8.	 Carsten Fink, Aaditya Mattoo, and Ileana Cristina Neagu, “Assessing the Impact of 
Communication Costs on International Trade,” Journal of International Economics 67, 
no. 2 (2005): 428–445.
	9.	 George Soros, “The Worst Market Crisis in 60 Years,” Financial Times, Jan. 22, 2008, 
www.ft.com/cms/s/0/24f73610-c91e-11dc-9807-000077b07658.html?nclick_
check=1 (accessed Jan. 11, 2014).
	10.	Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (New York: 
Random House, 2007).
	11.	Jean Piaget, The Origins of Intelligence in Children (New York: International Universities 
Press, 1952); and Jean Piaget, The Construction of Reality in the Child (New York: Basic 
Books, 1954).
	12.	P. Dasen, “Culture and Cognitive Development from a Piagetian Perspective,” in  
W. J. Lonner and R. S. Malpass (eds.), Psychology and Culture (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 
1994).
	13.	Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989).
	14.	“Doge,” Know Your Meme, http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/doge (accessed 
Jan. 11, 2014).
	15.	G. E. Moore, “Cramming More Components Onto Integrated Circuits,” Proceedings of 
the IEEE 86, no. 1 (1998): 82–85.
	16.	Chip Walter, “Kryder’s Law,” Scientific American (August 2005).
	17.	Megan Garber, “You Probably Write a Novel’s Worth of Email Every Year,” The Atlantic, 
Jan. 8, 2013, www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/01/you-probably-write- 
a-novels-worth-of-email-every-year/266942/ (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	18.	 Matthew Finnegan, “Boeing 787s to Create Half a Terabyte of Data per Flight, Says 
Virgin Atlantic,” Computerworld UK, Mar. 6, 2013, www.computerworlduk.com/news/
infrastructure/3433595/boeing-787s-create-half-terabyte-of-data-per-flight-says-
virgin-atlantic.
	19.	G. A. Akerlof, “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market 
Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, no. 3 (Aug. 1970): 488–500.
	20.	Vaclav Smil, Prime Movers of Globalization: The History and Impact of Diesel Engines and 
Gas Turbines (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010).
	21.	Evan Stubbs, Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice (Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
	22.	Thomas H. Davenport and Jeanne G. Harris, Competing on Analytics: The New Science of 
Winning (Boston: Harvard Business School, 2007).
	23.	“Salary/Income of Analytics/Data Mining/Data Science Professionals, KDnuggets, 
Feb. 
2013, 
www.kdnuggets.com/2013/02/salary-analytics-data-mining-data-
science-professionals.html (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
38 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
	24.	Simon Miller, “Majority of Data and Analytics Industry Saw Pay Rise in 2012,” 
Research-live.com, Oct. 4, 2013, www.research-live.com/news/news-headlines/
majority-of-data-and-analytics-industry-saw-pay-rise-in-2012/4010571.article 
(accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	25.	Annette Slunjski, “Results from IAPA Skills and Salary Survey,” IAPA, Dec. 11, 
2013, www.iapa.org.au/Article/ResultsFromIAPASkillsAndSalarySurvey (accessed 
Jan. 12, 2014).
	26.	Patrick Thibodeau, “Big Data to Create 1.9M IT Jobs in U.S. by 2015, Says Gartner,” 
Computerworld, Oct. 22, 2012, www.computerworld.com/s/article/9232721/Big_data_
to_create_1.9M_IT_jobs_in_U.S._by_2015_says_Gartner (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	27.	James Manyika, Michael Chui, Brad Brown, Jacques Bughin, Richard Dobbs, Charles 
Roxburgh, and Angela Hung Buyers, “Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, 
Competition, and Productivity,” McKinsey & Company, May 2011, www.mckinsey 
.com/insights/business_technology/big_data_the_next_frontier_for_innovation 
(accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	28.	Malcolm Gladwell, Outliers: The Story of Success (New York: Little, Brown, 2008).
	29.	A. H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological Review 50, no. 4 
(1943): 370–396.
	30.	The Derrick’s Hand-book of Petroleum: A Complete Chronological and Statistical Review of 
Petroleum Developments (Pittsburgh: Derrick Publishing Company, 1898).
	31.	Grant Segall, John D. Rockefeller: Anointed with Oil (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2001).
	32.	BP, “Statistical Review of World Energy 2013,” Jun. 2013, www.bp.com/en/global/
corporate/about-bp/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy-2013 
.html (accessed Jan. 9, 2014).
	33.	Almanac of American Wealth, “The Richest Americans,” CNNMoney, http://money 
.cnn.com/galleries/2007/fortune/0702/gallery.richestamericans.fortune/index.html 
(accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	34.	Martyn McLaughlin, “New GTA V Release Tipped to Rake in £1bn in Sales,” The 
Scotsman, Sept. 8, 2013, www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/technology/new-gta-v-release-
tipped-to-rake-in-1bn-in-sales-1-3081943 (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	35.	Blake Snow, “Why Most People Don’t Finish Video Games,” CNN, Aug. 17, 2011, 
http://edition.cnn.com/2011/TECH/gaming.gadgets/08/17/finishing.videogames 
.snow (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	36.	Georg Zoeller, “Development Telemetry in Video Games Projects,” GDC 2010, www 
.gdcvault.com/play/1012434/Development-Telemetry-in-Video-Games 
(accessed 
Jan. 9, 2014).
	37.	Clive Thompson, “Halo 3: How Microsoft Labs Invented a New Science of Play,” Wired 
.com, Aug. 21, 2007, www.wired.com/gaming/virtualworlds/magazine/15-09/ff_
halo?currentPage=all (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	38.	Graham Cluley, “LG Says It Will Push Out Firmware Update for Spy TVs, but Fails to 
Apologise,” Nov. 21, 2013, http://grahamcluley.com/2013/11/lg-firmware-update-
spy-tv/?utm_source=rss (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	39.	R. Menzel and Martin Giurfa, “Cognitive Architecture of a Mini-Grain: The 
Honeybee,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5, no. 2 (Feb. 2001): 62.
	40.	Steven M. Platek, Julian Paul Keenan, and Todd K. Shackelford, Evolutionary 
Cognitive Neuroscience (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D i s r u p t i o n  a s  a  W a y  o f  L i f e  ◂  39
	41.	Joel N. Shurkin, “When Ants Get Together to Make a Decision,” Inside Science, Nov. 5, 
2012,  www.insidescience.org/content/when-ants-get-together-make-decision/834 
(accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	42.	Douglas R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (New York: Basic 
Books, 1979).
	43.	Stephen Wolfram, A New Kind of Science (Wolfram Media, 2002).
	44.	Martin Gardner, “Mathematical Games: The Fantastic Combinations of John 
Conway’s New Solitaire Game ‘Life,’” Scientific American 223 (Oct. 1970): 120–123.
	45.	Gretchen Gavett, “How One Bad Thanksgiving Shaped Amazon,” Harvard Business 
Review, Nov. 27, 2013, http://blogs.hbr.org/2013/11/how-one-bad-thanksgiving-
shaped-amazon (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	46.	Rebecca Greenfield, “Inside the Method to Amazon’s Beautiful Warehouse Mad­
ness: The Wire,” Dec. 3, 2012, www.thewire.com/technology/2012/12/inside-
method-amazons-beautiful-warehouse-madness/59563 (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
	47.	The Whole Truth, “Amazon Boast Chaotic Storage System,” Dec. 19, 2012,  www 
.the-whole-truth.co.uk/chaotic-storage-system (accessed Jan. 12, 2014).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
41
PA R T
TWO
Understanding 
Culture  
and Capability
I
t’s interesting to note that many professionals talk of their business 
as “practices.” Business analytics is similar. While best practices exist, 
there’s no “end-game” as such.1 Instead, it’s all about being better. 
Innovation and differentiation come from improving in some way.
Business analytics is a discipline in every sense of the word. It’s of 
limited value when treated as a series of ad hoc activities. Instead, scale 
requires structure and definition. It rarely drives competitive advan-
tage when applied functionally and treated as a diversion. It requires 
focus and attention. And, it is rarely sustainable when it’s treated as a 
“one-off.” Real success comes from repeatability and reuse.
Getting all this right takes time. Some research suggests that estab-
lishing a new self-sustaining culture can take as long as five to seven 
years.2 Still, every journey starts with a plan. Whether you’re support-
ing or driving change, everything’s impossible without knowing not 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
42 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
only where the organization is but also where it needs to be. For most, 
building this understanding only comes with experience.
For someone with a deadline, that’s probably somewhat disheart-
ening. However, there’s a shortcut. By learning from others, it’s pos-
sible to bypass many of the dead ends that create delays. Why guess, 
when there are so many great examples out there?
Part Two describes two models to frame organizational transfor-
mation. Everything starts with culture and capability. Without the 
right capability, even the easiest things are impossible. Vision without 
the ability to execute is simply a good idea. Without the right culture, 
however, capability is meaningless. Being able to do something doesn’t 
mean much if there’s no interest in doing it.
Achieving real differentiation is impossible without both. As 
such, these models form the framework that describes how organiza-
tions harness their capabilities and use them to innovate. As shown 
in Figure P2.1, they affect how organizations create value from infor-
mation. They affect how organizations create value from business 
analytics through the value of business analytics, as covered in Chapter 
6. They affect how organizations treat their human capital through 
the SMART model, as covered in Chapter 7. And, they affect how 
organizations innovate through the innovation engine, as covered in 
Chapter 8.
The cultural imperative, covered in Chapter 3, focuses on the behav-
iors and attitudes of high-performing organizations. It outlines the five 
perspectives organizations go through on their way to differentiation 
through business analytics. At a minimum, every organization should 
aim to achieve at least the third level within this model. Anything less 
leads to inefficiencies, delays, and unacceptable risk.
The intelligent enterprise, covered in Chapter 4, focuses on the tech-
nical characteristics of organizations as they transition from chaos to 
the intelligent enterprise. It applies more to larger organizations, ones 
that are big enough to justify centralized technology infrastructure. 
For these organizations, anything less than the top level should be 
seen as underperforming.3
Together, they reflect an organization’s ability to treat information 
as an active competitive differentiator rather than just a passive driver 
for better decision making.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure P2.1  Culture and Capability
43
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
44 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
It’s best to view these models as a set of guidelines. They describe 
direction and philosophy, not specific steps. As much as we’d like it to 
be, reality isn’t black or white; it’s a muddy mix of gray. Organizations 
are highly multidimensional and, more often than not, they’re at mul-
tiple levels depending on the lens used.
For example, when viewed as a whole the dominant culture might 
be focused on insight rather than generating value. By this mea-
sure, the organization would be at the lowest level. Slice it by the IT 
group and it might look like a level-two organization due to a slightly 
higher level of warehousing maturity. Slice again by line of business 
and marketing might be sitting at the highest level due to a particu-
larly visionary chief marketing officer and significant investment into 
customer-centric systems and management approaches. Shift across 
to finance, however, and it might drop back to level one because of 
hordes of spreadsheet jockeys.
Something these models don’t comment on is technical profi-
ciency. An organization can be very mature at managing technology 
or developing models while still being totally incapable of innovation 
or value creation. Data warehousing is a case in point—many orga-
nizations have mature, efficient, and highly scalable warehouses that 
are more than capable of handling “big data.” However, many of those 
same organizations have no idea how to commercialize their data 
assets. As will become clearer in Chapter 7, technical skills are only 
one part of human capital. Equally, if not more important, are behav-
iors and a focus on value creation.
Getting better is an important goal. More important is making it 
stick. Achieving sustainable competitive advantage is a continuous 
endeavor and because of this, the goals will constantly shift. There is 
no finish line at which the team can pack up and go home.
This is good and bad. On one hand, it’s tempting to give up. With 
no completion target, teams may become discouraged. On the other, it 
also means that there’s no shortage of additional value that the team 
can generate—organizations are complex systems and their environ-
ment is constantly changing. There is always additional value that 
could be created.
Best practice doesn’t mean perfection. Being perfect is an ideal, 
not reality. As such, the best approach is not to chase a particular level 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
U N D E R S T A N D I N G  C U L T U R E  A N D  C A P A B I L I T Y  ◂  45
within either of these models. Instead, focus on what’s important: cre-
ating value. Everything else, these models included, is just a way of 
getting there.
NOTES
	1.	 See Evan Stubbs, Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013), Chapter 2.
	2.	 John P. Kotter, Leading Change (Boston: Harvard Business Review, 2012).
	3.	 This framework is a simplified version of the one presented in Chapter 3 of my pre-
vious book, The Value of Business Analytics. The top level in this book, “The Intelligent 
Enterprise,” equates to the top three levels as described in my prior book. Where 
they are presented as discrete levels in my prior book, they are described as a con-
tinuum in this book.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
47
C H A P T E R  3
The Cultural 
Imperative
T
here’s an excellent passage in Pirsig’s book, Zen and the Art of 
Motorcycle Maintenance, where he talks of the relative value of a 
screw.1 Screws are cheap. They’re so cheap that they’re practi-
cally inconspicuous. When they’re working, they’re invisible. It’s only 
when they don’t that we care.
An interest in quality can emerge anywhere, even in repairing a 
motorcycle. At some stage, everyone has stripped a screw. Normally, 
it’s just irritating. When that screw holds the engine compartment 
shut, though, its relative importance changes. It may have once been a 
10-cent screw. Now, its value is roughly equivalent to the resale value 
of your bike; if you can’t get that screw out, your bike is worthless. 
And with that epiphany, you’ve probably suddenly become very inter-
ested in screws.
Culture’s the same. When culture’s supportive, it’s invisible. It’s 
only when it’s an inhibitor that we notice it. Analytics is possible with-
out a supportive culture; every organization has largely disliked cow-
boys that it still values. Business analytics, however, is a different game. 
Value only comes from getting people to work together. That’s only 
possible when people agree on what it is they’re chasing.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
48 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
This chapter covers the cultural imperative, as shown in Figure 3.1. 
It describes the five perspectives on how information supports innova-
tion and creates value.
Every organization exhibits one or more of these to varying degrees. 
At a minimum, effective organizations are comfortable with intuitive 
action and truth seeking. The most high-functioning organizations 
manage to balance all of these competing points of view into a cohe-
sive whole, creating dynamic value (covered in Chapter 8). The most 
dysfunctional organizations tend to coalesce around one point of view, 
becoming blind to opportunity in their dogmatic pursuit of a single goal.
Not everyone need be a disruptor. Everyone, however, needs to 
understand that the best results come from being comfortable with 
multiple points of view.
INTUITIVE ACTION
Intuition is a powerful force. Our brain has greater processing power 
than the world’s largest supercomputer. Its ability to detect patterns 
is unparalleled. Because of this, experience is an essential part of suc-
cess—without it, all we do is continually rediscover known solutions, 
Figure 3.1  The Cultural Imperative
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  49
wasting time and effort. However, this doesn’t mean that we always 
come to the right conclusion on experience alone.
Copious research has demonstrated that we’re horrible when it 
comes to unexpected situations. Our brain takes shortcuts constantly, 
building patterns and hiding them from the conscious part of our 
­decision-making processes. These patterns help us make snap deci-
sions, ones that work more often than they fail. When these patterns 
are violated, however, our intuition usually leads us astray.
Organizations that build a monoculture around this perspective 
are challenging places to be. Above all else, they value experience. On 
the positive, they tend to place strong emphasis on rewarding internal 
success. Experience is recognized and promoted. Assuming the right 
person can be identified, decisions are often made quickly—­experience 
trumps all.
However, there are negatives. Rather than running on facts, the 
business operates on opinions and conjecture. Because of the link 
between experience and seniority, the highest-paid person in the 
room usually controls direction regardless of how valid or justifiable 
his or her beliefs are. “Analytics” is sometimes a dirty word, assuming 
the organization even has the capability in the first place. Even when 
people do go to the effort of sourcing valid information, it’s normally 
ignored.
Apart from the smallest of organizations, those that build a mono-
culture around this perspective only have two futures. Either they get 
better at using their information or they go bankrupt. The only excep-
tion is if they’re protected or a de-facto monopoly; any other situation 
usually ends in ruin or improvement.
The Lost Manufacturer
One of the “best” examples I’ve seen of an organization that built a 
monoculture around this perspective was a manufacturer that blended 
local assembly with global sourcing. While they had complete control 
over local assembly, they were largely at the whim of their global sup-
pliers when it came to importing foreign goods.
Admittedly, their business was not an easy one. Their internal poli-
tics meant that a shipping contract meant little in practice. While they 
might submit an order for 200 goods of a particular type, they’d often 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
50 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
open the container three months later to discover they’d been shipped 
100 goods of a different type. In other months, they’d find 500 goods. 
It’s not easy running a global business when your partners can’t hold 
up their end of the contract.
When I talked with them, they were struggling. Their supply 
chain was hurting them, but it was more than that. Sales were down. 
Customers were unhappy. Recalls were up. Their problems were 
numerous. However, one of their biggest problems was that the prod-
uct they were landing on shore didn’t match what the market wanted.
Every month, their stock on-hand kept increasing. Obviously, this 
hurt their cash-flow; the money they were spending on product was 
getting locked up in capital. However, the bigger problem was more 
insidious. Despite their best efforts, they just weren’t importing what 
the public wanted. Every month their inventory kept getting bigger.
I met with their planning team to discuss how they might fix these 
problems. In the room were the people who designed, ordered, sold, 
and marketed their products. After watching them for 20 minutes, it 
was painfully clear that their problems weren’t because of strategy or 
even execution. Quite simply, it was because they couldn’t agree on 
what they were doing.
They disagreed about how many products they’d sold over the 
last quarter. They disagreed about how large their potential market 
was. They disagreed about what they should be selling. They disagreed 
about who their customers were. They even disagreed about whether 
things were dire.
An hour later, the only thing they’d agreed on was that they 
couldn’t agree. We walked out of the room having decided nothing.
To their credit, some of the more forward-looking people 
tried to raise these fundamental issues with their leadership team. 
Unfortunately, they were resoundingly shut down; those making the 
decisions were unquestionable. With over 20 years’ experience, the 
data was quite simply irrelevant. In the battle between gut-feel and 
evidence, experience always trumped reality.
Three years later, they declared bankruptcy. Their local opera-
tions downsized by over 60 percent during the restructuring. And, 
despite a last-minute bailout from an interested party, their long-run 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  51
sustainability is still in question. Their challenges were many and their 
successes few. However, one of their biggest blind spots was simply 
a complete and total resistance to actually using their information to 
support better decision making.
Common Characteristics
Organizations that revolve around this perspective often lurch from 
bad decision to bad decision. They have little understanding of how 
to define, manage, or even use information effectively. Because  
of this, decisions are made not on weight of evidence but on force of 
personality. Sometimes, through sheer serendipity, they get it right. 
Unfortunately, that single success usually justifies years of subsequent 
failures.
Culture doesn’t magically appear. At some point, it was created 
because of its environment. Because of this, it’s hard to fault their reli-
ance on experience over evidence. More often than not, their data is 
usually fragmented, of highly variable quality, and generally not trust-
worthy. Usually, their culture was created by this very lack of informa-
tion. However, this doesn’t forgive perpetuating a dysfunctional culture. 
As this culture becomes the dominant one, they progressively ignore 
the root cause of their bad data: their own behaviors.
Analytics is seen as either being “too hard” or outright untrust-
worthy. If the data contradicts popular opinion, the default position is 
that the data is incorrect. Results are cherry-picked to support particu-
lar positions. In any given meeting, a substantial proportion of time is 
usually spent arguing what the right numbers are.
The almost total absence of data-driven decision making creates 
a vicious cycle. Decisions are made in the absence of data. When the 
organization acts on these decisions, this same lack of data makes it 
impossible to measure the effectiveness of those decisions. Because 
there’s no traceability, everyone claims credit for successes and dis-
owns failures. The successes people are happy to acknowledge justify 
the power of pure experience-based decision making. Because failures 
are ignored or outright covered up, this biased view ends up reinforc-
ing the dominant culture.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
52 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Ironically, everyone normally agrees that things should be better. 
Sadly, the dominant culture prevents anyone from actually doing any-
thing differently. And so, while things are obviously not as effective as 
they could be, the status quo remains.
Being comfortable with this perspective does have advantages:
◼
◼Egalitarianism. Success and internal experience is valued 
above all. Whether it’s through experience or intuition, those 
who succeed are frequently promoted to positions of power and 
influence.
◼
◼Clarity of ownership. Sources of power are centralized and 
either explicitly or tacitly understood. Decisions rarely rely on 
consensus—specific individuals often have sole decision-­making 
capability due to their experience. While they may or may not 
consult, they will eventually rely on their intuition taking into 
account the information presented to them.
◼
◼Trust. Those with the authority to make decisions are conferred 
a high degree of trust by the leadership team of the organization. 
This often encourages self-determination, personal responsibil-
ity, and the ability for individual units within the organization 
to operate semi-autonomously.
However, it does come with disadvantages. Some indicators of an 
organization excessively grounded in this perspective are:
◼
◼HiPPO leadership. The data people need to make their deci-
sions either doesn’t exist or isn’t trusted. Analytics is rarely 
(if ever) applied. Subjectivity and gut-feel is the standard 
operating model, usually dictated by the highest-paid person’s 
opinion.
◼
◼Unconsidered reaction. Firefighting is common and decisions 
are made without any clarity on how their effectiveness will 
be measured. Knee-jerk reactions are common and while plans 
may be made, they’re rarely held to.
◼
◼Fragmented inconsistency. Decisions are made without 
consideration of their broader impacts. Outcomes are rarely 
(if ever) measured, making it impossible to understand what’s 
working and what isn’t. Fiefdoms abound and decisions are 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  53
made on self-interest rather than based on organizational 
objectives.
◼
◼Self-delusion and outright denial. Successes are claimed by 
all. Failures, however, are ignored or outright covered up, pre-
venting valuable learning.
◼
◼Survival. The most common measure of success is treading 
water and simply maintaining the status quo. Achieving this is 
“good enough.” Change is often seen as an active threat.
◼
◼Aimless direction. Key performance indicators are undefined 
and tenure is determined by politics rather than merit. Success 
is a subjective measure doled out by management based on 
unclear criteria.
◼
◼Frantic desperation. People constantly reinvent their job 
every time they face a challenge. Inputs and outputs are unde-
fined and when employee turnover happens, business processes 
are reinvented from scratch.
◼
◼Person-centricity. Competencies are not recognized, acknowl-
edged, or even understood. Making something happen inevi-
tably involves contacting a specific individual, without which 
everything becomes impossible.
◼
◼Incapacitated and paralyzed. Good ideas are ignored because 
of fundamental gaps in capability. Rather than being seen as an 
opportunity to improve, these gaps are used as a crutch to jus-
tify stagnation and the rejection of change.
◼
◼Problem-based debate. Cross-functional and internal dis-
agreements are totally subjective in nature and focus on the 
root cause of current issues. Different parties will attribute cur-
rent challenges to different sources, and rather than look for 
solutions, they’ll argue about causes with no clear path to reso-
lution. Usually ending at loggerheads, the different groups will 
take independent (and sometimes conflicting) actions to solve 
what they feel is “the real issue.”
◼
◼Feudal artisans. Skills are hoarded by manual craftspeople 
who have developed their experience through years of practical 
application. The political enterprise guards their skills through 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
54 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
the creation of fiefdoms and leverages their unique capabilities 
for internal political gain.
◼
◼Technology is “nice to have.” Despite missing fundamen-
tal capabilities, technology is seen as a “nice-to-have” and is 
heavily neglected in favor of hiring and developing artisans. 
Spreadsheets multiply and information is a closely guarded 
power base for those who have accumulated it.
Expanding the Culture
Too much of one thing is rarely healthy. For most organizations with 
a monoculture of intuitive action, eventually things get so bad that 
something has to change. Their usual solution is very data-centric. If 
the problem is that they don’t have good data, the answer must be 
to get that data. They decide that they need to consolidate, standard-
ize, and cleanse all their information. Usually, they run out and buy 
a warehouse, appliance, or other storage platform and embark on a 
large-scale data transformation project.
Intuitively, this makes a lot of sense. This isn’t entirely wrong, 
either. It’s critical that every organization have access to high-quality 
information. It’s just that it’s not the whole picture. While it’s an essen-
tial part of a functioning business analytics platform, it also unfortu-
nately drives little value in isolation. It’s what they do with the data 
that creates value.
Culturally, this usually marks the point where organizations 
become self-aware. They realize that even though they’re highly expe-
rienced, they have an information problem and they need to fix it. 
Unfortunately, it’s also where they often make a big mistake. After 
what’s usually a very expensive and lengthy warehousing project, they  
realize that they have no idea what to do with the information they’ve 
consolidated.
On the positive side, they do normally get some productivity ben-
efits. Standard measures usually enable some degree of operational 
efficiency and better performance measurement. On the negative side, 
this sudden deluge of information usually leads to “analysis paralysis.” 
Despite knowing they have the data, they have no idea how to analyze 
it or even what to do with it.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  55
Expanding the culture often involves getting people to ­acknowledge 
that accurate information (beyond financial measures) is critical to 
business success. Unfortunately, this means going directly against the 
dominant culture. Because of this, organizations with this monocul-
ture usually only develop when faced with a “life-or-death” threat. 
Without that threat, “good enough” is good enough.
TRUTH SEEKING
Experience only ever goes so far. That which we know is dwarfed by 
that which we don’t. When dealing with the unknown, the best course 
of action is usually research. Organizations that are comfortable with 
this perspective understand that information is a key source of value 
as long as it’s effectively analyzed.
However, this isn’t to say that truth seeking is inherently better 
than intuitive action. Organizations that build too much of a mono-
culture around truth seeking are often slower than their competitors 
in action and time to market. Above all else, they value knowledge. 
Everything needs to be exhaustively justified with empirical informa-
tion before anyone is willing to act. Decisions require consensus based 
on deep validation of the evidence. Experience and intuition takes a 
back seat to analysis and because of this, conservatism usually reigns.
Balancing this with a perspective that understands intuitive 
action leads to better outcomes. Organizations that embrace both of 
these perspectives are hopeful, if often stressed. One of their defining 
characteristics is that regardless of what they say publicly, they know 
internally that they have problems. Of these, their biggest is often that 
they struggle to link big data and big data analytics to tangible returns. 
While they spend money, they’re not entirely sure what it was worth.
They’re often very advanced in many other ways. Their warehouses 
and reporting platforms may be technically excellent. Their operational 
processes may be extremely robust. They may even have very mature 
training and development programs. But, if you ask behind closed doors 
the tangible value of these, they’ll usually acknowledge that it’s hard to 
measure the returns. They’ll have no problems telling you what their 
marketing campaigns are worth, but as to their data assets or the analy-
sis they put into their data, your guess will probably be as good as theirs.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
56 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
This isn’t because they don’t understand technology. Usually, it’s 
because they place heavy emphasis on insight rather than outcomes. 
Their focus tends toward activities and tools and rather than being 
good at business analytics, they’re experts in business intelligence or 
analytics. Many of their challenges lie in the way they view analysis—
rather than seeing it as a discipline in its own right, they usually see it 
as something that can be solved by technology alone. This perspective 
actively undermines their long-term success.
Rise of the Technocrats
At one point, I was engaged by an organization to help with a tech-
nology selection process. They had unknowingly built a very strong 
monoculture around this perspective. Their main goal was to try to 
find the best technology they could to support customer matching. At 
our kickoff, 20 minutes into the conversation it was painfully obvi-
ous why they were struggling to connect with their customers in any 
meaningful way—they had absolutely no idea what their customers 
were interested in.
They had three separate sources of customer information across 
the group. One covered outbound communication, one services 
delivery, and one loyalty membership. For a variety of reasons they 
had never linked the three. In principle, they knew their customers’ 
sociodemographic information, the households their customers were 
a part of, their spending over the last few years, the types of services 
they were most interested in, as well as their preferred communica-
tion channels. In practice, they could barely create a single clean list of 
email addresses.
Starting out with a single view of customer made a good deal of 
sense. The problem was that they hadn’t thought about what should 
come next. They had no plans beyond creating a single view of 
­customer—their implicit assumption was that by linking all their data, 
they’d somehow magically drive better customer engagement. When 
probed, there was no real engagement strategy. Despite having access 
to tremendously valuable behavioral and wealth information, their 
plans stopped at having a single source of truth and finding the “right” 
action. In many ways, they had the classic “if you build it, they will 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  57
come” strategy. Unfortunately, their business case was based on a big 
revenue uplift through simply having this single view of customer.
I tried to explain that without the “what’s next,” it was unlikely 
that they’d deliver their proposed business case. There was nothing 
wrong with their desire to create a single view of customer. Nor was 
there anything wrong with the deep analysis they wanted to do. Their 
major problem was that they didn’t know what they were trying to do 
with it. Having a single view of customer was an enabler, not an out-
come. Their real challenge was working out how to leverage it once 
they had it, not how to create it in the first place.
The elephant in the room was that getting to that point would 
require a frank and objective review of how they went about acting on 
insights. Their real problem wasn’t matching information; it was how 
they’d act on insight. Solving that problem would have required them 
to go back and redefine what they were trying to achieve based on 
the outcomes they wanted to drive rather than the technologies they 
wanted to buy.
Rather unsurprisingly, this was received rather poorly. They 
soundly rejected that point of view, firmly believing that by buying the 
right technologies their problems would disappear. Rather than look-
ing into the skills, human capital, and processes they would need to 
develop, they wanted to focus on fuzzy matching routines and logical 
data architectures. They were so far down one track of thinking that 
nothing could persuade them otherwise.
At that point, I politely declined the offer to be engaged to deliver 
the project—it was painfully obvious that their project would likely fail 
and they would be looking for a scapegoat when things went badly. A 
year later, they had a great platform but still had yet to deliver any real 
outcomes. Shortly after that most of the team left for greener pastures.
Common Characteristics
Organizations with this perspective love technology and analysis.  
They’re usually exceedingly good at buying it and managing it. They 
may also be experts in managing large-scale programs of work. 
Unfortunately, they also underestimate the importance of people, pro-
cess, and data in driving change. Because of this, they’re constantly 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
58 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
surprised when their projects deliver less business value than they 
were expecting.
People often work to activities, not necessarily outcomes. They’re 
often extremely good at using data to find answers to hard problems. 
They may also be experts in using their technology assets. When it 
comes to acting on that insight, however, they’re less consistent. The 
answers they find have a tendency to either disappear or be diluted. 
Creating knowledge and answering questions is counted as success; no 
one looks to see whether that knowledge created any value.
These organizations almost always conflate analytics with busi-
ness analytics. It’s not that they’re ignorant—they’ll often “talk the 
talk” and say all the right things. In their mind, though, “business 
analytics” is about data mining, visualization, machine learning, and 
other ­functional capabilities. Because of this they’re mainly interested  
in functionality and analytical asset creation. Model accuracy is more 
often than not the primary benchmark for quality. Once they hit a suf-
ficient level of quality or find a deeper truth, their job is done.
What happens from there is less of a concern. How that knowledge 
was used to drive value is either irrelevant or overlooked. Typically, the 
teams responsible for analytics or business intelligence claim that that’s 
someone else’s job and their role is just to create insight. Virtually no 
attention is paid to change management and it’s taken as a given that the  
organization should value the insights they produce. Because of this, 
the rest of the business often gets frustrated and either complains, recruits 
their own analysts, or outright gives up and gets on with their job.
Processes are usually undefined and rarely reused. While frequently 
intelligent and highly capable, their teams are collections of individuals. 
Cottage industries abound and almost everyone in the team does what 
they prefer rather than what’s the most efficient. This lack of reuse car-
ries across to data as well; the amount of analytical data duplication 
(and corresponding effort) in these organizations can be staggering at 
times. While they may claim multiple petabytes of analytical data, peel 
back the layers and often they may have only terabytes of core data. The 
gap between the two is simply data being duplicated by different people.
Without changing their perspective, these organizations rarely 
achieve any real form of repeatable value from business analytics. They 
have deep insight but frequently deliver business-as-usual outcomes. 
Differentiation is transitory and regression to the mean is the norm.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  59
Embracing this perspective does have advantages:
◼
◼Clarity of insight. There is tremendous value in being able to 
use data to answer hard questions. Where intuition and experi-
ence end, analytics sometimes continues.
◼
◼Experimental innovation. The constant drive to extract pro-
gressive insight from information often leads to testing and 
applying radically innovative techniques.
◼
◼Analytical creativity. The breadth and depth of information 
sources under analysis usually reinforces a culture of continu-
ous creativity, encouraging analysts to always ask “what if.”
Indicators of an organization overly grounded in truth seeking at 
the expense of the other perspectives are:
◼
◼Intelligent inaction. While the organization has the capability 
to find answers from data, insights are rarely acted on and dis-
appear into the ether. Despite the capacity for intelligence, the 
organization rarely uses it to its advantage. Often, the organiza-
tion becomes trapped by “analysis paralysis,” which is struggling 
with the cognitive dissonance of having too much information.
◼
◼Considered reaction. Firefighting declines in favor of planned 
tactical execution but strategic planning still presents a challenge.
◼
◼Inward-looking. As external measures are still too hard to 
track effectively, decisions are made based on convenience, 
internal satisfaction, and political consensus, not necessarily on 
what would most benefit the customer.
◼
◼Internal value. While analytics is applied, it’s unclear how 
much economic value it adds to the bottom line. Success is 
gauged based on internal customer satisfaction, perceived pro-
ductivity improvements, and ease of decision making. Projects 
are still seen as successful in the absence of tangible value as 
long as they make it easier to run the business.
◼
◼Being the underdog. The dominant culture is one focused on 
keeping up and beating the odds. Passion is strong but there’s 
a tacit awareness that capability lags comparable organizations.
◼
◼Activity targeting. Performance management happens but is 
focused on activity. For example, marketing groups benchmark 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
60 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
based on campaign volumes, not profitability. Service centers 
focus on working to their measures, not necessarily what’s seen 
as valuable by their customers. Centralized business intelligence 
teams are often viewed with distrust or resentment by other 
areas of the business because of their lack of interest on the out-
comes their customers are trying to drive.
◼
◼Challenging delivery. Success happens, albeit through heroic 
effort. Analytically related activities take orders of magnitude 
longer than better-performing peers.
◼
◼Process-centricity. Focus shifts from the person to the pro-
cess. Ability, efficiency, and quality vary significant between 
processes but the business still develops points of understood 
engagement. Corporate memory develops to the point where 
processes and services remain consistent even if people and 
delivery approaches change over time.
◼
◼Underutilized capability. Investment into technology increases 
but gaps prevail. Technology selection is based on functional-
ity and perceived need rather than defined by outcomes and  
tangible measures. Despite this investment into technology, the 
business has little understanding how to leverage it to create 
advantage.
◼
◼Fact-based debate. Data is captured and distributed but seen 
as confusing. Decision makers actively use data but frequently 
disagree as their data is heavily duplicated and somewhat 
inconsistent. Disagreements focus on measures and often lead 
to inaction because of an inability to agree on the what. Sanity 
often prevails but at the expense of delay and political friction.
◼
◼Cottage industries. Individuals, rather than teams, are the pri-
mary engagement point for specific knowledge or skills. Fiefdoms 
and feudal empires still exist but carry less weight; skills are rec-
ognized and in demand across business units. Power migrates 
from the chief to the craftsperson. As the gatekeeper to skills, he 
or she is highly valued but creates a significant bottleneck.
◼
◼Technology is the answer. Gaps are recognized, and invest-
ment is channeled to remedy gaps. Unfortunately, little is con-
sidered outside technology; acquisition is seen as a silver bullet 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  61
and people, process, and change complexities are often ignored 
or severely underestimated. Information ceases to be a power 
base. In its stead it leaves overwhelming confusion due to an 
overabundance of undirected and unfocused capability.
Expanding the Culture
Organizations comfortable with truth seeking and intuitive action are 
usually in equilibrium. They understand the importance of data, even 
if they’re not especially good at using it. They value insight, even if 
they don’t always act on it. It may not be optimal, it may not even be 
efficient, but it’s sustainable.
Faced with a problem, the answer these organizations leap to is 
almost always technology. If they don’t have the experience and they 
can’t get any insights from their data, the answer must be better tools. 
They end up doing an exhaustive search to select best-of-breed tech-
nology. They conduct exhaustive feature or function comparisons. 
They debate the relative merits of different algorithms, architectures, 
and processing paradigms. Unfortunately, all too often they neglect to 
ask the most important question of all: How am I going to use these 
new capabilities?
In the absence of knowing where the value will come from, the 
“build it and they will come” plan is only partly effective. Capability 
without intent is usually just needless structural cost. When it comes 
to their ability to use their information to create value, they’re com-
petitive if not necessarily innovative. As long as they can demonstrate 
innovation or differentiation elsewhere in the business, this culture 
perpetuates. There’s a significant opportunity cost, but at least they 
don’t go out of business.
Many organizations never move past this point. They stay in a 
holding pattern, generally frustrated and stressed but still delivering to 
business as usual. Getting past this point involves realizing that busi-
ness analytics is about more than assets or technology. It’s about value 
creation, change management, and innovation.
Many organizations have a dominant culture that reflects charac-
teristics of both intuitive action and truth seeking. Unfortunately, these 
alone usually inhibit an organization’s ability to generate significant or 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
62 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
renewable return from big data and business analytics. Organizations 
that stop with these perspectives usually add cost to their business 
without any clearly measurable benefits.
Developing culture beyond this point rarely happens organically. 
Usually, it only happens when one of three things occurs. The first 
is total erosion of competitive differentiation. Whether it’s through 
competitive catch-up or internal failure, the organization might see 
its core source of differentiation disappear. An organization known for 
customer satisfaction might find its market growth under threat if one 
of its competitors achieves equivalent levels of satisfaction. This search 
for a new source of differentiation can act as a trigger to approach busi-
ness analytics and data-driven innovation differently.
The second is the introduction of one or more senior change 
agents. Whether it’s through a board or executive leadership change, 
“new blood” may bring with them an understanding of the value of 
business analytics. Given the right senior support, this can act as a trig-
ger to embark on cultural change.
The third is aspirational exposure. Many organizations look not 
only toward their competitors for inspiration but also outside of their 
industry sector. Whether it’s through study tours, joint leadership plan-
ning sessions, or simply a conversation over the golf course, the exist-
ing leadership team may be exposed to an approach they’d like their 
organization to aspire to. This desire for improvement can then act as 
a trigger to push the boundaries of the organization’s existing culture.
In the absence of these, there’s no sense of urgency or reason to 
change. And without a reason, the status quo remains just that.
VALUE CREATION
Organizations comfortable with this perspective start realizing tangible 
value from business analytics. By chance or choice they’ve discovered 
that success stems from following repeatable processes and helping the 
organization to change. They believe it’s about value and outcomes and, 
like a well-tuned machine, they bring together the business, IT, and 
the analysts into a coordinated team focused on value creation. Above 
all else, they look for return. While they can’t always measure the value 
they create through their use of business analytics, they know they 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  63
need to do it. And, more often than not, they do. Rather than focusing 
on insight, they try to directly link their analysis to measurable results.
They still care about sophistication of analysis and efficiency of 
algorithms. However, their primary goal is on the outcomes they’re 
trying to drive. This focus on value creation carries across into how 
they manage performance, define roles, and task people. Even more 
More important, they understand that insight without action is worth-
less. People are actively encouraged to consider impact as success, not 
just activity.
They understand that without getting the rest of the organization 
to trust their results, everything they do is wasted. Because of this, 
they place specific emphasis on assisting front-of-house staff to lever-
age insights to drive measurable outcomes. They may not yet be at a 
point where business analytics is a core differentiator. However, they’ll 
usually have a growing number of champions who see business ana-
lytics as a validated way of driving better business results.
Ironically, the biggest risk for organizations that embrace this per-
spective leads to stagnation. Despite having achieved real success, 
they’ll usually start to falter without a well-defined roadmap. There 
is the constant risk that the competencies they’ve created will end up 
being constrained by the processes they’ve built.
In the worst case, the original innovators become consumed by 
business as usual. They get frustrated because they can’t innovate, and 
eventually leave. Over time, the organization’s competitive differen-
tiation erodes and it’s eventually left carrying significant overhead for 
no real competitive advantage. Like the wolf, regression to the mean is 
always knocking at the door.
The Unfortunate Regression
Organizations that understand this perspective see real value. 
Unfortunately, many also see real losses if they lose it. Over the course 
of a few years, one organization followed this precise trajectory. They 
started with a tremendously strong culture. They were a pleasure to 
work with, even being acknowledged by the broader market as “the 
place to be.” Their enthusiasm levels were high, they had the explicit 
commitment of their chief marketing officer, and even better, they 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
64 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
were rolling off the tail-end of a successful targeted marketing project. 
The head of their analytics team was a visionary with a strong sense 
of pragmatism who, through phenomenal effort and persuasion, had 
managed to successfully change their approach to direct marketing.
Prior to his joining the organization, the product teams were 
strong believers in the spray-and-pray school of marketing. Their con-
version rates were so low that in order to hit their sales targets, they 
sent offers to everyone. With only minor exaggeration, it was so bad 
that their exclusion rules were, “If they’re a customer, don’t already  
have the product, and they’re not dead, send the offer.” This third 
requirement was only added after the campaigns had gone live (for 
obvious reasons).
This approach was tremendously inefficient, not to mention 
annoying to their customer base. For a purportedly customer-centric 
organization, they treated every single one of their customers exactly 
the same. Unsurprisingly, their churn rates at the time were among 
the highest in the market. While they didn’t measure net promoter 
score, some informal focus group testing had indicated that the single 
highest factor in a customer’s decision to churn was whether they’d 
recently spoken to the company in question. Things were bad.
Shortly after joining, this visionary analytics manager made it a 
high priority to augment their existing direct marketing activities with 
analytically based insight. To build the information base he needed, 
his first project was to create a single view of customer blended with 
behavioral information. However, he understood that this was a step, 
not the goal. By placing an emphasis on change management and 
persuasion, he also managed to convince the direct marketing team 
to change their approach. Rather than maintain the status quo, they 
would trial a champion/challenger approach and benchmark their 
existing targeting strategy against one based on customer segmenta-
tion combined with propensity models.
Getting to this point took months, but it was worth it. Where their 
existing conversion rates had been sitting at around 1 percent, the new 
approach had conversion rates of over 10 percent.* Even better, he 
*A conversion rate is the proportion of offers sent that are acted on. A conversion rate 
of 1 percent would mean that for every 100 offers sent, only one would be acted on.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  65
had managed to reduce the total number of offers going out (reducing 
marketing costs) while simultaneously beating the absolute number of 
offers accepted compared against their existing processes.
Whether through experience or luck, he had succeeded. And by 
doing so, he was able to demonstrate the value of business analytics 
in a very measurable and tangible way. Based on these results, the 
organization made a substantial investment in establishing a dedi-
cated analytical marketing platform. They gave him the authority and 
investment needed to acquire the technologies and skills needed to 
take them to the next level.
Had their story ended at this point, they could have remained a 
case study in excellence. Unfortunately, they also became a case study 
in how easily things regress without constant attention. After a num-
ber of years of progressive success, that same visionary manager was 
offered an external higher profile position. Much to the organization’s 
dismay, he accepted the offer and moved on. Even though this left a 
huge gap in their capability, it shouldn’t have been enough to derail 
their focus. Before he left, he’d defined a strong roadmap with a series 
of clearly defined deliverables supported by a manageable cadence of 
initiatives. He’d created a culture that, in isolation, should have been 
self-sustaining.
The straw that broke the proverbial camel’s back was his replace-
ment. Despite being highly competent, he lacked the same degree of 
vision and persuasion. To establish his ownership over the role, one 
of the first things he did was to cancel the existing program of work 
under the guise of defining a better vision. This vision never eventu-
ated and, over time, the team regressed to focusing only on maintain-
ing what they had already delivered. Conversion rates were still high 
but nothing new was being delivered. Eventually, his team became 
bored and started to suffer high levels of staff attrition.
Over the course of the next three years the organization’s competi-
tors progressively caught up. Eventually, they overtook the organiza-
tion. Almost on a monthly basis they saw their conversion rates decline 
back toward their original levels as their competitors became smarter 
with their marketing and their customers became more sophisticated. 
What had started out as a point of competitive differentiation was 
never converted into a source of ongoing competitive advantage. And, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
66 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
by failing to do so, their successes were short-lived. Where they should 
have created a culture of revolutionary disruptor, they instead regressed 
back to the mean by standing still.
Common Characteristics
Organizations with this perspective have a strong understanding of 
how their information is converted into insight. More importantly, 
they can quantify the value of this insight as it’s acted on. They oper-
ate with a firm belief in the importance of action. Still, they often 
struggle with efficiency—many of their processes lack standardization, 
and they often make inconsistent use of automation.
They see tools as an essential but relatively unimportant piece of 
the picture. It’s not that they don’t appreciate the need for effective 
technology. It’s just that they see it as necessary rather than sufficient.
They understand that the real challenges lie in change manage-
ment and cultural transformation. Their leaders spend the majority of 
their time driving change and ensuring good processes are followed 
and relatively little time being directly involved in insight ­generation 
or other technical activities. While they have data scientists and other 
analysts, they understand the importance of role separation and believe 
that it’s about far more than insights, data mining, or sheer sophistica-
tion. Instead, their analytics teams play a direct and involved role in 
making sure other business units apply their insights. Sometimes, this 
even goes so far as to take a supporting role in project delivery and 
field training.
While processes are often still fairly poorly defined, organizations 
demonstrating this perspective tend to be quite effective in reusing 
analytical data. Virtually all have established an analytical datamart of 
some form that promotes the centralization and reuse of data. More 
importantly, they don’t do this because of an IT drive for storage ratio-
nalization; they do it because they believe it’s the right thing to do. 
Teams act as coordinated groups and are actively interested in sharing 
their successes and efficiencies, even if there’s usually no easy way of 
replicating them without effort and time.
The biggest challenges these organization face are usually around 
improving efficiency and justifying further investment. Despite being 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  67
able to demonstrate success and measure value, they usually have a 
relatively weak grip on how any specific activities within their overall 
value chain contributed to those same successes. They still spend more 
time than they should managing data and not as much time as they 
should ensuring their existing assets are performing as well as they could 
be. Their ability to “build” is usually higher than their ability to “deploy-
and-maintain.” While they can turn around a new model fairly quickly, 
migrating it into production involves a great deal of frustration and delay.
These challenges limit the time they have for innovation. And 
because of this, they often find it difficult to drive economies of scope 
through reusing their now-mature skills to solve other problems across 
the organization. While their enthusiasm and experience is high, they 
simply don’t have the time to expand their scope of operations in any 
meaningful way. As strong as they are on creating value, they still lag 
in terms of innovation.
Some indicators of organizations comfortable with this ­perspective are:
◼
◼Intelligent action. Insights are developed and acted on in a 
consistent manner. Information is used to generate advantage 
as a matter of course.
◼
◼Considered planning. Tactical outcomes are balanced against 
strategic objectives. This dual focus becomes pervasive; shared 
services teams focus more on the outcome than the asset and, 
because of this, are often viewed favorably by the business. 
However, deployment processes are still largely undefined. 
Every automation attempt takes a great deal of effort, involves 
uncertainty, and experiences delays.
◼
◼Outward-looking. External measures are monitored and deci-
sions are made based on expected value. The customers’ opin-
ion and their resultant action is the central consideration in 
decision making.
◼
◼External value. Insights are acted on and drive measurable out-
comes within specific operational processes. There are clear and 
well-defined linkages between intellectual assets (such as data, 
models, or processes) and tangible outcomes. Business analytics 
initiatives are funded based on well-defined business cases that 
identify (and eventually deliver) specific tangible returns.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
68 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
◼
◼Being competitive. The dominant culture is one focused on 
being smarter than the market. It takes the organization sub-
stantially less time to create value from information than its 
competitors.
◼
◼Outcome targeting. Performance management happens and is 
focused on outcomes. Success measures are geared toward tangi-
ble value, even if specific measures vary across the organization.
◼
◼Meeting the benchmark. Focus shifts from capabilities and 
heroism to achieving parity with leading practices. Analytically 
related activities are comparable to intelligent peers.
◼
◼Role-centricity. Focus shifts from the process to the role. 
Capability, efficiency, and quality become consistent between 
processes and knowledge is shared between individuals. 
Requirements and activities are well defined, if not always tre-
mendously efficient. Inputs, outputs, and all stages in between 
are documented and consistent between people. Analytical 
asset creation processes are repeatable and efficient.
◼
◼Realized capability. The business has developed an under-
standing of how to leverage technology to create advantage. 
Capability ceases to be an inhibitor and instead becomes an 
enabler and opportunity.
◼
◼Action-based debate. Analytical data is centralized and there 
is a high degree of reuse, even if this data is not necessarily 
stored in the most efficient format. Decision makers spend little 
time debating data and easily isolate quality issues if they occur. 
Disagreement instead focuses on what action should be taken 
for a given problem.
◼
◼Scalable factories. Teams are seen as the primary engagement 
point for specific knowledge or skill. Employee turnover slows 
the team down but does not derail it. Competencies are held by 
the team and the loss of one person has a manageable impact 
on the group. Fiefdoms and feudal empires disappear in favor of 
shared service centers and communities of practice. Knowledge 
is freely shared and scalable efficiency becomes valued over 
personal power. Power migrates from the craftsperson to those 
capable of enabling the broader business.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  69
◼
◼Technology is an enabler. Tools have been largely standardized 
within teams and are treated as a given. Rather than being seen 
as a silver bullet, technology is seen as just another dimension in 
an overall change process. Discussion about technology focuses 
on how it will create value, not on what functions it offers.
Expanding the Culture
Organizations that have hit this point understand how they should be 
managing. It’s just that they don’t always do it as consistently as they 
could. Their focus is usually on making sure they apply their new-
found knowledge. While they don’t always have a firm grasp on the 
details, they know they need to build a better understanding of how to 
apply business analytics if they’re to see sustained return.
It’s in adopting and applying this perspective where organiza-
tions start seeing real tangible returns from their investments. The 
shift in focus from internal to external value is an inflection point in 
their ability to generate value from their data. Naturally, this assumes 
they’re successful—having the right vision is only part of the cultural 
imperative.
It is, however, just one more perspective. Expanding past this 
point is a case of change management. The people generating returns 
need to build a strong coalition of the willing, a broader group of 
interested parties who also believe in the value of business analytics. 
Transformation is key; jointly, their goal is a small (if still significant) 
change in their organization’s business model.
FUNCTIONAL INNOVATION
Organizations with this perspective have extended their focus from 
one-off benefits to continual improvement. They’ve embraced the 
journey it implies and actively chase functional innovation. They under-
stand how their business works, have the ability to measure it, and 
relentlessly search for and deliver continuous gains. Above all else, 
they value improvement.
To avoid the tightening labor market, these organizations put an 
emphasis on automation. They embed analytics within operational 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
70 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
microdecisions, improving decision quality as well as decision effi-
ciency.2 To ensure their analytical assets are effective, they’ve embraced 
formal asset management and value measurement. To drive repeat-
ability and process efficiency, they’ve standardized their processes and 
minimized transaction costs through effective use of workflows. Tying 
all this together is a series of key performance indicators that reinforce 
positive behaviors and discourage inappropriate behaviors, supported 
by a measurement framework that makes outcomes transparent.
Processes are well defined, roles and responsibilities clear, and 
objectives transparent. New hires often find this disconcerting—
rather than having to operate independently, they often find there are 
entire teams there to support them with analytical data management, 
model operationalization, or any other number of specific competen-
cies. The organization has well-defined structures to share informa-
tion and cross-pollinate innovations. Even better, these structures are 
actively used.
More than just looking for outcomes, they look for repeatability 
and reuse. Economies of scale and scope become real and provide cost 
advantages over their competitors. Quality and agility become more 
than concepts; organizations at this level deeply understand and have 
the ability to track, measure, and improve both. Embracing this per-
spective is a significant step; few organizations truly reach this point. 
Those that do, have the sophistication and management maturity to 
operate and coordinate truly complex management structures.
Moving beyond this point involves a clear executive commitment 
to deliver sustainable competitive advantage through more than just 
functionally aligned or efficient activities. Instead, the leadership team 
must decide to treat business analytics as a differentiator in its own 
right and embrace disruption. There is nothing to say that this is a 
necessary step; many organizations look for differentiation elsewhere. 
However, organizations that reach this or the next level create a form 
of differentiation that, if sustained, is hard to replicate.
The Benefits of Being Personal
It takes a great deal of work to turn this perspective into part of the 
dominant culture. Surprisingly, it can also take less time than one 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  71
might suppose. It just takes focus, an understanding of what’s possible, 
and the commitment to get there.
Different organizations start their journey for different reasons. 
GE, for example, embarked on an exhaustive Six Sigma exercise to 
establish a level of quality and cost differentiation over their competi-
tors. More than just a project, this became a major part of their culture. 
The benefits of getting to this level of focus are significant; Motorola, 
for example, credited the same approach with more than $17 billion 
of savings as of 2006.
Other organizations look to achieve success through analytical effi-
ciency. They create “model factories,” performance engines designed 
to automate the creation of analytical assets. In one case, an organiza-
tion was able to reduce the time it took to define, create, and deploy 
their analytical assets to less than three days. This innovation though 
hyper-specialization gave them a significant advantage in their market.
Still others look to innovate through constant improvement. One 
such organization started with a focus on improving customer rela-
tionships. Like most organizations, they invested far more in trying to 
make the next sale than they did in servicing the customer’s needs. To 
hit their sales targets, they rolled out an integrated marketing platform 
that allowed them to communicate across multiple channels. In less 
technical terms, they could pick up the same conversation with the 
customer across web, email, SMS, or phone.
While they’d been quite good at using analytics to refine their tar-
geting strategies, this introduced a whole extra level of complexity. 
Not only did they have to take into account what a potential customer 
might be interested in but they had to factor in whether the customer 
liked being sold to over that channel. Undaunted, they innovated. 
They developed a number of novel solutions to help them prioritize 
offers based on point of contact, channel, and customer preference.
To meet deadlines, their initial release worked on an overnight 
schedule. As such, their predictions were still somewhat hit-and-miss; 
the models had no way of accommodating customers who had already 
rejected an offer earlier in the day. In those situations, their system 
would recommend the same product over and over again, ad infinitum.
Their next project fixed this. Over the next few months they 
took another step and included real-time information in their 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
72 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
recommendations processes. It was at this point where they real-
ized they had the perfect engine to improve other business processes. 
They’d had a significant impact on sales efficiency. Over drinks one 
evening, they realized they could have a similar impact on servicing 
efficiency.
As with most organizations, sales ensure sustainability. They pro-
vide the revenue that keeps the company solvent. Servicing, however, 
is what builds loyalty. Having a good relationship with customers can’t 
guarantee they’ll buy another product. What it will do is increase the 
odds of being at the table the next time the customer has a need. The 
problem is that servicing is usually expensive. Its returns are long-
term, something that doesn’t gel well with quarterly targets.
This team realized that they had a massive opportunity. By reus-
ing the predictive real-time multichannel capabilities they’d developed 
across the sales arm of the business, they’d likely achieve a level of cus-
tomer relationship unheard of in the industry. That’s just what they did.
To explain why this was so significant, put yourself in the shoes of 
a car enthusiast. You’ve probably bought at least one expensive car, 
maybe more. For those people, insurance is a necessary evil. In making 
the decision about whom to insure with, cost is a key consideration. 
Most likely, so is ease of claim. The last thing they want is to see their 
prized asset get damaged.
What the team realized was that they had the perfect engine to 
both help the customer and reduce their own costs. First, they estab-
lished data feeds from a number of meteorological sites. Then, they 
created a number of detection routines that cross-referenced damag-
ing weather patterns against geolocated policy holders. By merging 
the combined data with policy data, they could work out in real time:
◼
◼Which customers were likely to see damaging weather such as hail
◼
◼When the weather was likely to hit
◼
◼Whether the customer had a garage or other protective location 
they used
A few hours before the weather was due to hit, they’d automati-
cally send out an SMS with a warning and, if appropriate, a personal-
ized suggestion they might want to garage their car. It was automatic, 
it was cheap, it was personal, and, more important, it was useful.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  73
Through reusing their capabilities across multiple business prob-
lems, they helped transform the organization’s overall approach to 
customer engagement. Shortly afterward they extended the same 
approach to a broad-based outbound campaign to warn people to 
bring in their washing and the like. And, they kept going.
Common Characteristics
Organizations that exhibit this perspective are driven by the constant 
need to improve. Their desire for continual efficiency and efficacy 
gains becomes a deep-rooted belief; they understand both the value of 
data as well the need to act. Through hard-won experience, they also 
know how to execute. Their challenge is no longer selling the value. 
Instead, it’s making it pervasive.
Strongly defined processes increasingly become the norm and the 
use of analytics to support microdecisions becomes the new “business 
as usual.” Entrenched silos increasingly break down, largely because 
stakeholders across the business can see the value of acting on cross-
functional information.
The biggest challenges these organizations face are usually around 
cultural change. Their leaders understand the importance of continual 
improvement; it’s simply a case of making it stick. While there are 
usually examples of best practice scattered across the organization, the 
goal is to make them constantly applied. This is about as hard as one 
would expect; usually, it involves going directly up against what peo-
ple are comfortable with.
Some indicators of an organization that’s embedded this perspec-
tive into their culture include:
◼
◼Considered execution. Action consistently takes place within 
the context of broader strategic objectives. Automation of 
microdecisions becomes the standard operating model. The 
focus of the organization moves to progressive differentiation 
rather than short-term tactical advantages.
◼
◼Integrated coordination. Business units maintain their pri-
mary focus on external measures but consistently work together 
to achieve cross-functional outcomes. Rather than focusing on 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
sales opportunities, the organization centers itself around solving 
the customer’s problems.
◼
◼Incremental value. Instead of one-off improvements, the 
dominant culture is one focused on continuous improvement. 
In parallel, funding is geared toward internal opportunities with 
higher rates of return.
◼
◼Being the leader. The dominant culture is one focused on 
being better than the market. The organization is focused on 
doing things other competitors would likely find impossible.
◼
◼Improvement targeting. Performance management is focused 
on scale of outcomes. Reward is geared toward achieving higher-
than-average rates of return or efficiency improvements.
◼
◼Beating the benchmark. Focus shifts from achieving parity to 
beating parity. Analytically related activities are more advanced 
in comparison to intelligent peers.
◼
◼Competency-centricity. Focus shifts from the role to the com-
petencies that drive the role. Teams have well-defined support 
structures that align management structures to competencies, 
not technologies or roles. Developing human capital is seen as a 
core part of the business and the organization excels in develop-
ing talent.
◼
◼Reused capability. The business is consistently reusing exist-
ing capabilities to fuel advantage and differentiation. Economies 
of scale and scope start to emerge.
◼
◼Opportunity-based debate. Accurate and trusted data has 
become so pervasive that little if any debate focuses on the prob-
lems or facts. Instead, discussion centers around which oppor-
tunities the organization should pursue. Disagreement revolves 
around which opportunities would provide the greatest strate-
gic and tactical benefits.
◼
◼Managed utilities. Internal support structures are so efficient, 
cost-effective, and responsive that leveraging and paying for them 
is no different from turning on a tap and paying the water com-
pany for the water consumed. The use of information and analytics 
is pervasive in all aspects of the business and is treated as a given.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  75
Expanding the Culture
Organizations that have hit this point truly understand the value of 
business analytics. They’ve seen the benefits, they know the potential, 
and like an addict, they crave more. Their focus moves from delivery 
to transformation; like missionaries, everyone involved in the project 
starts proselytizing the benefits to anyone who will listen. Their goal 
is not to just increase the value they’re generating. Instead, it’s to con-
vert nonbelievers and transform the entire organization.
Assuming the organizational is already heavily focused on value 
creation, it’s at this point where it becomes about more than just 
business analytics. Instead, it becomes about organizational strategy. 
Expanding the culture further involves a broad organizational com-
mitment to directly compete on data. Not every organization needs to 
go this far; realistically, most probably don’t. There are many sources 
of competitive differentiation. In the context of broader strategy, busi-
ness analytics is just another option from many.
There are, however, significant advantages to establishing it as a 
cornerstone. Digitization will continue to affect every industry sector 
over upcoming decades. And, coping with the age of uncertainty will 
require ever-increasingly complex analytical capabilities. Every organi-
zation benefits from a better ability to analyze the information it has 
access to.
Anything beyond value creation and continuous improvement 
requires clear and overt senior executive commitment. It implies a new 
business model, one centered on information. In some organizations, 
this is simply a logical step. In others, it’s a revolution fueled by an 
internal visionary. In both cases, it’s impossible without the backing of 
the board, the leadership team, and potentially even the shareholders.
REVOLUTIONARY DISRUPTION
This final perspective is relatively rare. Organizations at this point have 
established the right culture, management structure, measurement 
framework, and technology platform to drive sustainable competitive 
differentiation. For them, business analytics is a point of differentia-
tion, no different from customer-centricity or product design. Above 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
76 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
all else, they value disruption. They become revolutionaries, focused on 
reinventing their markets.
More important, this approach reflects a philosophy, not a destina-
tion. Even though the organization may have seen significant returns, 
there’s nothing to say that they have exhausted every source of busi-
ness analytics–based value. They’ve achieved a level of value measure-
ment, automation, and repeatability that allows them to start truly 
driving economies of scope.
Getting to this point is quite difficult. Globally, there are few orga-
nizations that have truly achieved this level of capability at a func-
tional level, let alone at an enterprise level. Those that have tend to 
be acknowledged as the leaders in their markets. However, because 
this perspective relies heavily on the broader culture, it’s still surpris-
ingly easy for an organization to regress. Just because an organization 
is truly mature does not mean they have to stay there. As stated ear-
lier, it can take five to seven years to enact real cultural change.3 This 
cuts both ways: just as it may take seven years to create a culture, an 
organization can regress given seven years of inattention or diverted 
attention. With a typical managerial hire holding the role for roughly 
three years, that’s as brief as two poor managerial hires.
From here, business analytics is a key part of strategic planning. 
It’s not only assumed that new business initiatives will capitalize on 
business analytics in some way, it’s outright expected. Projects that 
do not include business analytics in some way are actively depriori-
tized in favor of those that do, largely because those that don’t have 
an increased risk of failure. Optimization happens as a matter of 
course, in terms of both outbound activities as well as internal effort. 
Inefficiencies are quickly identified and actively managed with the 
results pushed out across other groups.
While many organizations are at least superficially interested in 
embracing this perspective, it’s not always realistic. Become a disrup-
tor involves reinventing the organization. For an organization that 
differentiates based on incremental improvements to existing product 
design, this may simply be a leap too far. And, there’s nothing wrong 
with that; innovation can happen anywhere. Big data and business 
analytics are simply another opportunity for differentiation, not the 
only source.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  C u l t u r a l  I m p e r a t i v e  ◂  77
Industries characterized by large amounts of data will increasingly 
see this approach as being a preferred source of competitive advan-
tage, largely because it offers so many advantages across the business. 
Whether it’s through a desire to become this type of organization or a 
need to understand one’s competitors, being aware of what this per-
spective entails is essential.
Common Characteristics
This represents a pinnacle of execution; rather than follow a single model, 
organizations that have achieved this level redefine it. Some of the big-
gest indicators of an organization that’s adopted this perspective are:
◼
◼Considered optimization. Activity is continually optimized 
to maximize return. Competing priorities and opportunities are 
prioritized automatically. The focus of the organization moves 
to holistic efficiency and sustained differentiation.
◼
◼Dynamic value. The dominant culture is one comfortable with 
cannibalization and continual change. Business units achieve a 
state of balanced dynamic tension, reinventing as well as improv-
ing. Through revolutionary innovation, the organization focuses 
on solving problems the customers didn’t know they had.
◼
◼Being the disruptor. Business analytics and the use of infor-
mation are seen as a differentiator by the leadership team. The 
organization is focused on entering new markets.
◼
◼Differentiation targeting. Performance management is focused 
on being best in class. Reward is geared toward achieving excellence.
◼
◼Ignoring the benchmark. Focus shifts from beating parity to 
ignoring parity as being meaningless. The organization sets the 
benchmark and competitors benchmark their competitiveness 
on the organization in question.
◼
◼Attractive capability. Focus shifts from competencies to 
attracting excellence. The quality of competencies and potential 
for knowledge gain become a magnet for global talent. Being 
the market leader creates its own draw within the labor market 
and hiring highly skilled resources becomes increasingly easy.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
78 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
◼
◼Market-based debate. Discussion centers on how best to 
transform and grow the business. Success through a relentless 
focus on effective execution is treated as a given. The challenge 
is seen as maintaining the level of differentiation the organiza-
tion has achieved.
◼
◼Democratized empowerment. Internal support structures 
start to shrink; rather than requiring centralized support, the 
ability to analyze, profile, and act on information has become 
the status quo.
Apart from getting there, the biggest challenge faced by organiza-
tions that embrace this perspective is simply maintaining their position 
long enough to establish a self-sustaining culture. Competitive differ-
entiation is a never-ending process and the organization’s philosophy 
needs to align to this.
NOTES
	1.	 Robert M. Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An Inquiry into Values (New 
York: William Morrow, 1974).
	2.	 James Taylor, Decision Management Systems: A Practical Guide to Using Business Rules and 
Predictive Analytics (Upper Saddle River, NJ: IBM/Pearson, 2012).
	3.	 John P. Kotter, Leading Change (Boston: Harvard Business Review, 2012).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
79
C H A P T E R  4
The Intelligent 
Enterprise
O
rganizations are, by and large, pretty dumb. Shows like The Office 
and comics like Dilbert are funny not because they’re absurd but 
because at times they hit a little too close to home. Steering an 
organization can sometimes seem like a constant fight against chaos—
there’s political intrigue, competing points of view, and sometimes 
even an active desire to subvert the system. One of the most stun-
ning cases I’ve come across involved a business that actually ran an 
entire shadow IT department. They were eventually caught when 
they migrated their customer engagement system off their (already 
deployed) isolated network onto the cloud.
Culture is essential. So is capability. Culture might enable the 
vision, but without supporting skills, processes, technology, and data 
there’s only good intentions. The goal in making it real is to try to tame 
the chaos inherent in managing highly complex systems and trans-
form into an intelligent enterprise.
Most organizations are united in a common objective. Despite 
this, people still act independently. Everyone knows their role but all 
too frequently people act in isolation. It works, but only to a degree; 
faced with instability or a changing market, the organization struggles. 
Quality suffers, cost increases, and inefficiencies abound.
A truly intelligent enterprise operates like our nervous system. It’s 
adaptive, agile, and flexible, able to respond quickly and appropriately 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
80 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
to external stimuli. Faced with a threat, it mobilizes quickly and 
takes appropriate action. Interactions are sophisticated and tailored 
to opportunities and threats. On encountering either, everything that’s 
needed is quickly deployed and engaged. Action and response is seam-
less, instantaneous, and automatic.
This chapter covers the intelligent enterprise, as shown in Figure 4.1. 
The five levels it describes are progressive; they represent the path 
usually taken by organizations that focus on building capability. Real 
value starts at level three and continues from there.
LEVEL 1: UNSTRUCTURED CHAOS
Every organization has to start somewhere. Typically, that “some-
where” is rarely where the organization actually wants to be. To para-
phrase, every beginning starts with darkness and chaos.
Organizations at the lowest level of capability are best described as 
“confusing.” They’re characterized by unstructured chaos. Everyone is 
Figure 4.1  Intelligent Enterprise
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  81
working hard; it’s just not always clear how or why they’re doing it. Like 
the proverbial sausage factory, no one really wants to think too hard about 
what’s being used to make the final decision. Because of this, quality is 
hard to measure. When decisions work, no one wants to know how they 
were made. When they don’t, no one knows why. Because of fragmented 
processes and data, unpicking the final result is almost impossible.
At this level, people get the job done. However, they also do 
­whatever it takes to get the job done, often leading to highly vari-
able quality and efficiency. Processes are almost consistently ad hoc, 
bespoke, and usually reactive. Firefighting is more than just a quick 
fix; it’s business as usual. Things succeed not through planning or 
design but usually through the heroic effort of motivated individuals.
Freedom Can Be Constraining
One of the clearest examples of an organization in this state was one 
that started with the right foundations but somehow ended up some-
where they really didn’t want to be. They started by doing everything 
right. The interest in business analytics came from the top down. They 
built the company around information and even went so far as  to 
establish a broadly defined center of excellence. They understood 
the difference between discovery and operational analytics. Whether 
through sanity or serendipity, they even managed to solve many of the 
structural issues that inhibit delivery.
Unfortunately, they got one thing wrong. They gave every data 
scientist the almost total freedom to select his or her tool of choice. 
Intuitively, this made sense; it was hoped that it would promote access 
to best-of-breed capabilities, align tools to existing skills, and make it 
easy to onboard people by giving them the ability to choose their own 
working environment. Superficially, the theory was sound.
Unfortunately, practice diverged from theory. Giving people choice 
also means having to accept that people will exercise their right to 
make choices. What started out as a handful of tools rapidly exploded 
into a veritable laundry list of every possible tool under the sun, most 
of which were invisible to their unfortunate IT department.
This was great for the analysts. They had freedom and control. 
Empowerment is empowering—what’s not to like? Strategically 
though, it led to countless integration and execution issues. Because 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
82 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
tools were dependent on the person, it became extremely difficult to 
create repeatable processes. Filling a role required not only domain 
knowledge but specific technical and tool knowledge. In the worst 
cases, some roles were so tightly coupled to individuals that when peo-
ple were sick, everything would stop. Because no one else knew how 
to use the missing person’s tools, no one else could do his or her job.
Alone, this operational risk was unacceptable. However, their real 
problems ran deeper. Because everyone was using different tools, 
modules, and coding standards, it also became extremely difficult 
to take action on insight. In one case, the discovery team had deep 
experience in using Python and R. Sadly, no one in the operational 
team knew how to turn what were largely untested processes into 
­production-grade routines. Even worse, these same data scientists 
were in high demand. When they eventually left for other opportuni-
ties, the intellectual property they had built stagnated and eventually 
died a grim death because no one else knew how to use it.
After a few years of operating like this, their leadership team knew 
they had a problem. Unfortunately, the system they had designed had 
grown so organically and chaotically that they no longer knew how it 
worked. Every time they tried to make a change their analysts almost 
revolted. And so they became stuck, trapped in the monster they’d 
unintentionally created.
Common Characteristics
Organizations do function at this level. They just carry far more cost 
and operational risk than they need to. They also rarely manage to 
coalesce their latent capabilities into any real form of differentiation.
Some indicators of an organization operating at this level are:
◼
◼Personal tools. Analysts use a wide variety of desktop-centric 
tools with choice largely defined by personal preference.
◼
◼Data-focused effort. Analysts spend significant amounts of 
time trying to source, manage, and exchange data between 
semi-compatible tools.
◼
◼Fragmented data. Data is fragmented and centered around 
product, process, or at best, organizational silos.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  83
◼
◼Perpetual reinvention. Team-members each create their own 
repository and usually start from scratch every time they have 
a new project.
◼
◼Undefined processes. Processes are largely undefined, 
extremely manual, and require substantial effort to execute.
◼
◼Unaware and overpaid. Vendor management for analytics 
tools is limited and largely ineffectual, forcing higher-than-­
necessary licensing costs.
◼
◼Selfish hoarding. Analytical data is stored on individuals’ per-
sonal computers and very little (if any) reuse occurs between 
analysts.
◼
◼Big-chief syndrome. Competencies are linked to the individ-
ual and skills are a source of job protection.
◼
◼The haystack method. Competencies are rarely applied across 
projects in a consistent way and finding value is as difficult as 
searching for a needle in a haystack.
Taking the Next Step
Getting past this point requires acknowledging that sometimes struc-
ture is necessary. Somewhat counterintuitively, it’s about limiting 
choice, reducing flexibility, and improving repeatability.
Flexibility encourages innovation and agility. However, too much 
of a good thing can hurt. Without a way to commercialize good ideas, 
all the benefits of innovation are lost. Organizations operate in a dif-
ferent context from individuals. What may work brilliantly for one 
person rarely scales to a larger system without some deliberate design 
and planning.
The starting point is usually to start profiling current activities 
across people, process, data, and technology. Are there too many tools? 
Conduct an audit and start rationalizing them. Are there undefined 
processes? Understand what people do and what outputs their cus-
tomers are expecting. Are there PC-based data structures? Consolidate 
them onto a shared environment. Is there limited reuse of skills across 
projects? Profile existing skills and start thinking about capabilities 
rather than individuals.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
84 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
The objective at this level is simply to create some structure, even 
if it’s limited in the first instance. More than anything else, it’s about 
exposing current practices and simply understanding them. Trying to 
fix things is often a step too soon and too far in these cases. Without 
knowing where the problems are, where attention is being focused, or 
even how effectively people are doing their jobs, every “fix” carries the 
risk of making things worse.
LEVEL 2: STRUCTURED CHAOS
Chaotic systems aren’t necessarily random. That might sound strange, 
but consider a Lorenz attractor. Within a truly chaotic system, it’s 
impossible to predict the position of any element at any particular 
point in time. That doesn’t mean that the system itself doesn’t follow 
higher-order patterns. When this happens, one has hit a point of struc-
tured chaos. While individual elements might still behave randomly, 
their overall behaviors might just be random around a broader pattern.
Organizations at this point have started to tame the chaos. Rather 
than try to force structure, they take a softer approach, balancing local 
choice with global requirements. They set constraints, establish an 
intended functional or divisional strategy, and try to get the entirety 
of the organization to comply with it. As is probably unsurprising, this 
is where most organizations sit. Standards are meaningless if they’re 
not complied with; the true test as to whether an organization is at this 
level or the next is real-world compliance with guidelines and strategy. 
Having a standard operating environment is one thing. Having the 
business comply with that standard operating environment is another.
The biggest barrier to success at this point is unconscious ignorance. 
These organizations are usually sophisticated enough to know that infor-
mation is valuable. They’ve taken the first steps toward turning what’s 
usually an ad hoc, undefined activity into a core, if still somewhat basic, 
competency. However, their lack of awareness of what’s possible and 
what “good” looks like inhibits their ability to scale or create tangible 
value. Often, their belief that they’ve solved the problem by defining a 
governance model is a major inhibitor. They become self-deluded and 
convince themselves that they’ve succeeded without taking the time to 
check whether their strategy and intent is actually happening.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  85
Total Agility Can Be Costly
A prime example of this type of organization discovered this almost 
unintentionally. As an outsider looking in, they appeared to be a real 
leader in their sector. They deeply understood the value of informa-
tion. Almost to the last, their analysts were extremely capable and 
intelligent. They had rationalized their analytics tools, they had an 
internal structure which made it easy to engage with data scientists, 
and their key performance indicators were cleanly aligned with tacti-
cal and strategic objectives.
Despite this, they had some rather strange quirks. For one, they 
lacked a central processing or data storage environment. To most of 
their leadership team, this wasn’t seen as a problem. They simply 
bought big PCs and lots of local storage. In practice, they even some-
times held this up as an example of their ingenuity and innovation; 
by taking the road less traveled, they felt they had created a highly 
innovative, flexible, and agile business.
Another was their apparent lack of structure. Where most of their 
competitors were struggling with overly defined governance models, 
they had highly flexible support and delivery frameworks. More than 
just “getting” agile methods, they practically lived them. This was 
again held up as a prime example of their ability to innovate. However, 
while the milestones they had to work through were always clear, 
what wasn’t was how they’d generate insight or act on it. Everyone 
did things differently.
For a long time, everything seemed to hum like a well-oiled 
machine. Unfortunately, one year they experienced a perfect storm of 
three things that shook the status quo.
The first of these was the resignation of one of their most senior 
analysts. The talent loss was bad enough. Unfortunately, he was also 
the developer of their core customer insight engine. During his hand­
over, it became frighteningly apparent that no matter how much he 
tried to bring others up to speed, no one else had any hope of under-
standing how his application worked in the time he had left. This lack 
of process suddenly created a massive operational risk.
It also led to the second event. Shortly after he left, the applica-
tion stopped working. This in itself wasn’t too surprising; despite their 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
86 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
best efforts, they hadn’t been able to maintain it. Unfortunately, they 
also found out that when the insight engine went down, so did their 
customer relationship management (CRM) system. Unknown to the 
team maintaining it, the insight engine had been feeding target lists to 
the CRM system every night. When the lists stopped coming, the CRM 
system produced an exception and halted all outbound marketing. The 
theoretical operational risk had just become actual losses.
The final blow was the complete and total loss of critical pricing 
data. A well-meaning but misguided junior analyst ran out of space on 
the network drive while doing some data mining. Knowing that the 
senior analyst was no longer employed by the organization, he thought 
it made sense to delete that analyst’s folder. Unfortunately, the directo-
ries he deleted contained both archived as well as active data—active 
data that was still a direct input to a variety of other processes. When 
those directories disappeared, a number of pricing models stopped 
updating correctly. Even worse, these errors were subtle enough that 
they weren’t identified for weeks afterward. While the final costs were 
never calculated, everyone knew they’d lost customers.
These losses in quick succession forced the executive leadership 
team to start asking questions. In a few short months, they’d lost 
money, talent, customers, and reputation. That same flexibility that 
had been such a strength had suddenly become a major liability.
Thankfully, they were self-aware enough to know not to replace 
everything wholesale. Their flexibility and agility had created a source 
of competitive advantage. Rather than getting rid of it, they rightly 
realized that they should instead augment it with structure in the right 
places. Shortly afterward they launched a transformation project to:
◼
◼Improve governance and structure for the operational use of 
analytics.
◼
◼Establish a focused model for human capital development and 
intellectual property retention.
◼
◼Identify and replicate best practices in operational processes 
through process management.
◼
◼Centralize information assets and ensure appropriate security/
privacy controls were in place.
◼
◼Establish a centralized computational platform that could sup-
port mission-critical uses of analytics.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  87
Much to their surprise, what started as an attempt to mitigate oper-
ational risk actually turned into a source of significant value. Their 
efficiency levels increased. So did their ability to embed analytics into 
decision making. Their attention to culture and talent retention became 
a draw card for talent in its own right. And, the centralization of their 
information and analytics tools helped reduce their operating costs.
Common Characteristics
Organizations at this point “don’t know what they don’t know.” They 
know analytics is important but their use is inconsistent. While it’s not 
always the case, they’re often guided by people who are familiar with 
using analytics mainly for research. They usually appreciate the need 
for a team approach.
More than anything else, they focus on insight. To their credit, they 
understand the importance of analytics. They try to encourage the use of 
common tools. And, they encourage data sharing. However, they rarely 
understand an extremely important concept: operational analytics.
Business analytics is more than just insight. Data science and 
exploratory analysis is important. Without action, however, all that 
insight is worthless. The most efficient way to act on insight is to 
embed those same analytics into operational processes. Improving one 
decision might add a little value. Improving hundreds of microdecisions 
can create tremendous value.1 Of all possible applications, the use of 
operational analytics offers one of the greatest returns on investment.2
Organizations at this level are still fundamentally person-centric 
in their technology, process, and data design. While in principle they 
encourage sharing, their architecture is such that they simply cannot 
automate their analytical processes. And because of this, they inevi-
tably constantly struggle to change their analysis from a collection of 
bespoke approaches into enterprise-grade processes.
Some indicators of an organization operating at this level are:
◼
◼Team tools. While analysts select their analytics tools from a 
predefined list or standard operating environment, these tools 
are still predominantly desktop-centric.
◼
◼Search-focused effort. Analysts spend most of their time try-
ing to find data rather than recreate it.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
88 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
◼
◼Decentralized data. Data is still centered on organizational 
silos but cross-referenced points are defined and understood.
◼
◼Avoidable reinvention. Team members share their data in 
common storage areas, even if reuse is still often low in practice.
◼
◼Weakly defined processes. Processes exist but are undefined 
outside inputs and outputs. When someone leaves, his or her 
replacement reinvents everything else from scratch.
◼
◼Aware but uncertain. Vendor management becomes aware of 
overpayment but is uncertain about what is necessary and what 
is sufficient.
◼
◼Well-intentioned chaos. Analytical data is stored on shared 
drives because of a belief in the value of information reuse. 
Unfortunately, little reuse happens in practice largely because 
of the complexity involved in trying to track down information.
◼
◼Polymath syndrome. While competencies are identified and 
applied across projects, the success of a project depends largely 
on who’s working on it.
◼
◼The cargo cult. The path to value is based on subjective experi-
ence, and competencies, tools, and processes are selected based 
on what worked last time, not necessarily what makes the 
most sense.
Taking the Next Step
Getting past this point requires the commitment to start reengineering 
the way the organization works. It involves asking fundamental ques-
tions about why things are designed the way they are across people, 
process, data, and technology. In many cases, this is linked to a broader 
“lean design” or “transformation” initiative, tasked with making things 
simpler, more agile, and more efficient.
It’s usually at this point where many organizations start to balk 
at the implications of becoming smarter in their operational decision 
making, largely because they start to appreciate the sheer scale of the 
challenge. At the extreme, it involves deconstructing every processes, 
one by one, and mercilessly hunting down and eliminating every non-
value-added activity. The goal is to decouple the analytics from the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  89
individual, thereby turning it into a team competency. This is rarely 
easy; inevitably, it involves slaughtering more than a few sacred cows.
When starting out, most organizations find it difficult to do any 
analytics. Because the starting benchmark is so low, simply getting to 
the point of using analytics within a handful of operational processes is 
often enough to drive a surprising amount of value. This pales in com-
parison to the value offered through automated and operational ana-
lytics; rather than augmenting five or six decision-making activities, it 
becomes possible to have an impact on hundreds or even thousands.
Getting to this point means things need to change. And, making 
these changes happen is challenging. Of all capability improvements, 
this is arguably the hardest. People need to work differently, and behav-
iors need to shift from being “cowboy analysts” to team players. Making 
this leap is difficult. However, the benefits of doing so are significant.
While still a step short of transformation or differentiation, the 
major benefit of making these changes is operating efficiency and cost 
management. Consolidating technology increases purchasing leverage 
with a smaller set of vendors. With focus, this reduces vendor manage-
ment and systems administration and maintenance costs.
These benefits also extend to developing people. By identifying 
and nurturing desired and valuable skills, organizations reduce the 
cost of hiring and retaining resources. Creating strongly defined pro-
cesses also allows organizations to start automating non-value-added 
activities. This improves efficiency and often creates the opportunity to 
create a leaner, more agile organization.
The core objective at this level is to make things more efficient. More 
than anything else, it’s about reengineering current practices to embody 
the basics of leading practice. The big step is moving beyond understand-
ing what’s wrong and actually fixing it. It’s at this level where change 
management becomes the single most important factor in success. 
Without actually getting people to work differently, unlimited technol-
ogy investment will nonetheless inevitably lead to “business as usual.”
LEVELS 3–5: THE INTELLIGENT ENTERPRISE
Fixing things is excellent. Unfortunately, it’s still not enough for orga-
nizations interested in repeatable innovation. The gap between “things 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
90 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
working” and “best practice” is a broad one. Closing it requires achiev-
ing a certain minimum level of capability. They’ve become the intel-
ligent enterprise.
Organizations at this level recognize that business analytics is 
a journey, not a destination. While their use might not be truly 
­enterprise-wide, their platform architecture is such that they could 
eventually replicate those same capabilities across the organization if 
they needed to.
They have achieved a level of process-centricity, moving away 
from artisanal applications to mass-production methods. While there’s 
a large gap between a single example of best practice and consistent 
use across the entire organization, they understand that there are 
benefits to replicating automated methods. Most important, they take 
constant steps toward best practice, slowly making it pervasive across 
as many business processes as they can.
Common Characteristics
Process automation and the use of operational analytics becomes, if 
not the norm, at least relatively common. Some of the biggest indica-
tors of organizations at this point are:
◼
◼Common tools. Analytical tools are standardized at least within 
teams, usually across a department, and sometimes across the 
entire organization. They are predominantly server-centric with 
desktop-based tools being used almost exclusively to support 
niche R&D applications or to fill gaps where it would be uneco-
nomical to deploy server-centric tools.
◼
◼Leverage-focused effort. Analysts spend most of their time 
trying to reuse data and assets rather than recreate existing assets.
◼
◼Centralized data. Analysts and data scientists share their ana-
lytical and value-added data in centralized repositories, whether 
they be appliances, traditional warehouses, distributed file sys-
tems like Hadoop, or NoSQL repositories like mongoDB.
◼
◼Deliberate reuse. Team members share their data in cen-
tralized marts and activity is centered around reusing what’s 
already there.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  91
◼
◼Strongly defined processes. Processes are strongly defined 
where they need to be integrated with operational activities.
◼
◼Aware and certain. Vendor management becomes aware of 
overpayment and links investment to broader capability and 
value creation.
◼
◼Optimistic sharing. Analytical data is stored in common 
server-based environments and reuse happens functionally, 
departmentally, or even on an enterprise-wide scale.
◼
◼The efficient machine. Reuse of skills decouples project suc-
cess from team participation. Projects succeed because of access 
to capability, not access to specific individuals.
◼
◼The empire. Competencies are explicitly recognized within the 
context of a formalized human capital development model.
Taking the Next Step
In many ways, there is no “moving past this point.” Organizations that 
have built a platform to guide decision making no longer look for a finite 
series of point solutions. Instead, they appreciate that there are an infi-
nite number of possible improvements that can be made. Their point of 
view shifts from one of “fix this, fix that” to one of continuous improve-
ment where best practices are identified, nurtured, and replicated across 
the entire organization. They reuse their capabilities across people, pro-
cess, data, and technology to drive maximum value. Their platform use 
progressively moves through “embedding” into “differentiating.”
Getting to this point starts only from one of two locations. The 
organic path begins when a particular group within the organization 
is placed under such severe tension that they need to actively search 
for a new approach. Without this tension, “business as usual” remains 
the norm. As they develop their capabilities, they build a microculture 
within the organization that, if sustained for long enough, is eventu-
ally recognized by parties inside and outside the organization. Other 
groups learn from their successes and, given sufficient leadership and 
motivation for change, their culture ends up being replicated by other 
groups. Over a long enough period of time, this self-replicating culture 
ends up becoming pervasive.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
92 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
This large-scale transformation through organic replication seems 
relatively rare. More frequently this cultural transformation halts 
either with the group in question or, in some cases, with the group 
they’re part of. Without a clear commitment from the leadership team 
to sustain and replicate their positive culture, their approach frequently 
only exists for as long as the people driving the cultural change keep 
working for the organization. Given the high demand both internally 
and externally for people capable of creating value from big data and 
business analytics, their employment is typically far shorter than the 
time it takes to create a self-sustaining culture.
The directed path starts from the top and flows from there. Either 
through external tension or the unique opportunity to create a culture 
from scratch during the startup phase, the executive leadership team 
acknowledges the need for a particular culture and makes an explicit 
decision to create it. Due largely to the public nature of this approach, 
there are some well-known examples that highlight the impact it can 
have. Jack “Neutron” Welch reinvented General Electric and grew its 
revenues from $26 billion to more than $130 billion between 1981 
and 2000. Despite starting as a monoline credit agency, Capital One 
pioneered a strongly data-driven decision-making culture, growing 
from a spunky startup to a Fortune 500 company.
It’s important to remember that examples like this are rare. For 
every success, there are many examples of stalled or outright failed 
attempts. Changing an organization’s culture is not for the faint of 
heart; it requires tremendous executive commitment and carries great 
risk. Change inevitably leads to discomfort and too much discomfort 
can lead to the loss of positive as well as negative patterns. At some 
stage the organic approach needs turn into a more direct approach, 
linking example with executive commitment.
From this point on, the goal is true differentiation. At the lower 
levels, organizations are usually playing catch-up with their compet-
itors, simply trying to replicate what others have already achieved. 
From this point on, the organization has achieved a sufficient level 
of capability and intelligence to become unique. Rather than copy-
ing, they invent. Rather than repurpose, they create. And rather than 
start by looking externally for inspiration, they often start by look-
ing internally; given enough competency, they recognize that their 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T h e  I n t e l l i g e n t  E n t e r p r i s e  ◂  93
abilities surpass many of the examples that others provide. Equally 
though, they are self-aware enough to know that the boundaries are 
constantly expanding. As such they need to stay across leading prac-
tices both within and outside their particular industry sector.
This journey is a never-ending one. There are more opportunities 
for reinvention than there are hours in the day. Rather than being 
seen as an aspirational goal, every organization needs to achieve this 
level of capability at some point if it is to remain sustainable. In a 
world where big data is the norm and data offers a core competitive 
advantage, achieving this level of cultural focus and technical capabil-
ity isn’t optional; it’s mandatory. This does not necessarily imply high 
investment costs. Whether it’s through leveraging low-cost, cloud-
based commodity infrastructure or through highly differentiated R&D 
development, the era of pure experience-based competition is over. 
Rejecting the power of data in a digital world and refusing to mature 
will inevitably lead to irrelevance.
NOTES
	1.	 James Taylor, Decision Management Systems: A Practical Guide to Using Business Rules and 
Predictive Analytics (Upper Saddle River, NJ: IBM/Pearson, 2012).
	2.	 Evan Stubbs, Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice (Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
95
PA R T
THREE
Making It Real
C
ulture is essential. So is capability. Creating or reinventing an  
organization is fraught with risk. Rather than guess, it’s always 
better to take advantage of other people’s mistakes and build on 
the fundamentals. While we’ll cover it in more detail in Chapter 8, 
innovation is actually conceptually easy. There’s an idea, there’s a 
plan, and there’s action. Getting the design right means making sure 
that the structure and operating model fit within that framework.
Having said that, no plan leaves the battlefield unscathed. It is pos-
sible, however, to increase the odds of success as long as you know what 
you’re trying to achieve. Few examples demonstrate the importance of 
continual self-assessment better than that of James.*
James came from a background in economics. His ability to blend 
theory with practice led to rapid advancement, quickly moving from 
driving tactical efficiencies in customer contact management to own-
ing the organization’s customer strategy.
*James represents an amalgam of a wide variety of case studies based on very real people 
and their experiences. Lest readers look for themselves, he’s a blend of a variety of 
people who took a similar journey.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
96 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Reporting directly to the chief marketing officer, James had been 
put in charge of:
◼
◼Increasing products per customer
◼
◼Improving margin
◼
◼Raising customer satisfaction (measured through Net Promoter 
Score)
Like many leaders, James looked internally and externally for 
inspiration. Internally, James found that his organization was severely 
underutilizing their data assets. While there was no shortage of people 
with great ideas, few of those ideas made it into practice. In many 
ways, James was lucky; while creativity wasn’t a core part of his orga-
nization’s culture, he still managed to find more than enough people 
who were willing to support a new way of working.
Externally, James found validation; big data and big data analytics 
were clearly the flavor of the month, if not the decade. Whether he 
talked to competitors, partners, vendors, or analysts, the importance of 
information in driving outcomes was the dominant message. The only 
question was, what was he going to do about it?
James outlined a three-point plan. First, he’d establish a pure-
play data science team to generate insights. Then, he’d use that team  
to improve business results. Finally, he’d extend the scope of his team to 
diversify his organization’s business model through ancillary services.
The plan seemed solid. His logic was strong and James quickly 
­garnered the support of the chief marketing officer and the chief finan-
cial officer. Unfortunately, James didn’t quite get the money he was 
looking for. While he had asked for a team of eight, he had been given 
authority to hire a team of four. While he had asked for a significant 
technology investment to build a new platform, he’d been given a 
small discretionary budget.
Despite this, his targets didn’t change. His leadership team agreed 
with his vision. They just didn’t feel confident enough to give him 
what he wanted. He’d asked for a mandate and money; he’d been 
given one of the two.
Things went badly from day one. As he expected, there was 
plenty of data available. As also expected, most of it was unstructured, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M A K I N G  I T  R E A L  ◂  97
incomplete, and usually inconsistent. For example, an early scan found 
eight different ways of counting customers, all of which were techni-
cally correct but totally different. Depending on whether one defined 
a customer as a billing address, an account, or a person, the variance 
could be as high as 20 percent. While James knew in advance that get-
ting the data ready was going to be a challenge, he still underestimated 
how difficult it would actually be.
Unfortunately, this proved to be the least of his worries. After 
spending a number of months simply trying to get the basics work-
ing, James hit an unexpected roadblock. After much blood, sweat, and 
tears, his team found some insights of critical value. Traditionally, the 
organization had always viewed customers within segments as sub-
stitutable. While every customer was important, one “young profes-
sional” was seen as the same as any other.
On top of this segment-based customer view, James’s team overlaid 
current and long-term profitability. As expected, some segments were 
more profitable than others. This matched stage of life and wealth; richer 
customers at the peak of their earning capacity tended to spend more.
When profitability was taken into account, some of these segments 
split cleanly into two new sub-segments. Within these groups, up to 
80 percent of customers were either breakeven or loss-making when 
servicing and retention costs were taken into account. The remainder 
was wildly profitable and contributed to almost 70 percent of the com-
pany’s operating profit.
This wasn’t new; marketing and sales had been struggling with 
this for almost a year. Even though groups of people showed common 
behaviors, their spending and products per person varied significantly 
within those groups. So, while their segmentation model was useful in 
describing their customers, it didn’t always help improve their market-
ing return on investment.
What was new was what James found when he included customer 
satisfaction. Based on current value alone, there was no obvious rela-
tionship between satisfaction and profitability. In some situations, 
strong promoters were actually unprofitable. In others, detractors 
were highly profitable.
This seemed counterintuitive. However, things made sense when 
future value was included. Even though satisfaction had little to  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
98 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
do with current profitability, it had a significant impact on future  
profitability. While not the only factor in determining customer value, 
James found that promoters in specific segments would consistently 
acquire more products per customer over a three-year period. This in 
turn led to higher profitability.
The answer was clear. Rather than just servicing already profit-
able customers, the organization needed to include supportive but 
not-yet-profitable customers from specific segments. The combina-
tion of behavioral analysis, life-stage marketing, and net promoter 
score could give them a level of relevancy that none of them in isola-
tion could match. By adjusting their servicing and retention strategy, 
they could have a significant impact on aggregate customer profit-
ability while also reducing servicing costs.
It was a great solution. Unfortunately, James struggled to get the 
rest of the organization on board with his approach. As he found out, 
simply having the backing of his leadership team wasn’t enough. 
Without it, he would have never received enough authority to even 
have a discussion about his team’s discoveries. Even with it, there was 
no guarantee that anyone would care. What should have taken weeks 
to move into production ended up taking months with most of James’s 
time spent convincing people that this was the right thing to do.
By the end of the year, James had managed to demonstrate a 
reduction in marketing spend with no impact on cancellations or cus-
tomer satisfaction. He also had the vocal backing of their vice president 
for customer engagement and experience. And, he had strong expec-
tations that the changes they’d made to their servicing strategy would 
see them generating compound returns over the next two years.
Unfortunately, his end-of-year review didn’t quite go as he’d 
expected. While the leadership team were congratulatory, they were also 
clear that he’d failed to achieve his objectives. He had demonstrated that 
business analytics would and did add value to the business. However, he 
had also fallen short of his original projections. The meeting ended on a 
rather bittersweet note. They agreed to invest more into his group over 
the upcoming year. They also flagged that he’d underperformed and 
that they expected better performance the following year.
When he looked back, he realized he’d made two simple mistakes. 
First, he’d taken on an impossible mission. In retrospect, his original 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M A K I N G  I T  R E A L  ◂  99
estimated investment was right. Rather than accepting a token invest-
ment, he should have argued for either reduced scope or his actual 
requirements. While it might have led to an uncomfortable discussion, it 
would have been better to demonstrate clear rather than clouded success.
Second, he had grossly underestimated the importance of culture 
and change management in delivering value. He’d devoted almost 
half the year to convincing people that the new approach was better 
than the old, time he hadn’t factored into his plans. While there was 
no getting around the need for persuasion, he’d initially wasted time 
thinking that the evidence alone would be enough. It was only after 
he’d realized that weeks were slowly passing with no change that he’d 
adjusted his strategy.
However, it wasn’t all bad news. He’d achieved the most impor-
tant thing of all—a measurable impact on the business. Instead of sim-
ply generating insight, he’d managed to get the organization to act on 
that insight to create value. Without this, it’s questionable whether his 
group would have lasted another year.
When he planned his next year’s strategy, he built it around three 
principles: realistic pragmatism, change management, and value creation.
The next three years were different. He consistently exceeded his 
targets and removed all doubt about the importance of customer loy-
alty in current and future profitability. He expanded his organization’s 
use of loyalty information through all inbound and outbound chan-
nels. And, he transformed the way his organization used information 
in customer interactions.
James did a lot of things right. He also discovered that it’s harder 
than one might suppose. His eventual success came from setting his 
group up correctly, making sure they were focused on the right things, 
and getting the right people. That’s what this part focuses on.
Much like building a house, it lays the foundations on which the 
final part builds a model that enables innovation. Also like building 
a house, there’s no such thing as a single “right” architecture. Some 
people like open plans; others like Californian bungalows. What’s right 
for someone comes down to what they need and what they want, not 
what other people think is best. Not everyone needs a mansion.
Every organization is different. It would be insane to suggest that 
every organization should follow exactly the same design. Exactly like 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
100 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
building a house though, there are building codes that should be fol-
lowed. Contrary to some local councils or homeowners associations, 
they’re not there to constrain or irritate. They’re there to make sure 
things don’t unexpectedly fail.
This part provides those codes. It focuses on three areas:
	
1.	Organizational design
	
2.	Operating models
	
3.	Human capital
Chapter 5 reviews how organizations can structure their teams and  
manage the associated costs. It covers various interaction models  
and describes common services these groups normally offer.
Chapter 6 defines the types of value these groups need to create. 
It provides an operating model that explains the major activities that 
need to take place. This model acts as a way of dividing responsibili-
ties between groups (such as IT and the analytics group) within an 
organization.
Finally, Chapter 7 outlines a human capital model that can be used 
to assess, develop, and retain staff. It flags one of the biggest “unknown 
unknowns” most organizations eventually discover. It also covers the 
breadth of capabilities and role types organizations need to develop. 
It highlights why it’s almost impossible to find the “right” person and 
why organizations need to develop teams.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
101
C H A P T E R  5
Organizational 
Design
I
t’s one thing to know you need something. Knowing where it should 
go is something else. Not to understate how hard it is to change 
culture, there’s obviously more to success than just setting the right 
direction. Flourishing through the age of uncertainty requires an excel-
lent ability to analyze, predict, and act.
The worst thing to do is to run out and hire people just because 
someone thinks there’s a gap. Instead, the focus should be on making 
the existing people successful by giving them the right support. They 
need the right structure, the right focus, and a management mandate 
to make things happen.
Getting the design right helps tremendously. When correct, it cre-
ates economies of scope and scale. These enable structural cost advan-
tages that in some cases can actually create differentiation in their own 
right. In reinventing an organization, there are four things that should 
be considered:
	
1.	What should it look like?
	
2.	What should it focus on?
	
3.	What services can it offer?
	
4.	What data does it need?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
102 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
This chapter will answer these questions and lay the foundation for 
effective organizational design.
WHAT SHOULD IT LOOK LIKE?
Every organization carries baggage. While there’s sometimes the unique 
opportunity to build things from scratch, more often we need to work 
with what’s already there. Getting things right means understanding 
where we are as well as working out where we should be. Because of 
this, moving from generating insight to creating value from big data 
usually requires change.
At its simplest (and least intrusive), this may involve split-
ting an existing team into two. One group might focus on change 
and transformation, the other on generating insight. At the other 
end of the spectrum lie organizations that totally reinvent them-
selves around using big data and business analytics as a competitive 
differentiator.
Sometimes, small steps make a lot of sense. Other times, realizing 
a big vision requires a big step. When resources are scattered across the 
Figure 5.1  Structural Choices
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  103
organization, structural change can be daunting. Luckily, there’s an easy 
way to consider the benefits and disadvantages of various models. Every 
group needs a manager, and every group needs to cover its costs some-
how. Through these, the major options are presented in Figure 5.1.
Group Formality
The least intrusive method is functional reporting. Analysts are embed-
ded within business units. Often, they’re not even formally recog-
nized; they’re just the person who knows how to code in Excel. There 
are advantages to this model. For one, it gives business units free-
dom to invest in the areas they think will provide the greatest value. 
Unfortunately, it also increases costs in the long run. If and when mul-
tiple business units decide that they need access to similar skills, they 
usually end up hiring similar people. Local efficiencies, while flexible, 
rarely lead to global efficiencies.
The midway point involves establishing a virtual group. Usually, 
this has people report to multiple groups through matrix manage-
ment. Moving everybody into one group is seen as a step too far, too 
soon. Instead, analysts report to two masters. Analytical resources and 
headcount continue to reside in functional lines of business (such as 
marketing or fraud). These business lines manage the analysts’ day-to-
day workload.
The organization also maintains a secondary line of reporting through 
to a centralized group, responsible for strategic direction. Rather than 
internalizing all analytical activities, this centralized group instead focuses 
its much smaller headcount on aspects usually overlooked by functional 
lines of business, often including:
◼
◼Establishing a common enterprise value measurement framework
◼
◼Defining and delivering on an enterprise analytical architecture
◼
◼Evangelizing analytics across the organization
◼
◼Supporting change management and organizational enablement
This model offers some good advantages. For one, it creates rela-
tively minimal disruption. Additionally, it fills out the organization’s 
capabilities by investing in areas functional units are unlikely to care 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
104 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
about. Enterprise transformation, if successful, is valuable. However, 
it’s a rare business unit that’s happy to pay for group benefits.
The model does come with disadvantages. The complexity of man-
aging such a model is nontrivial. Resource contention often becomes 
a major issue when group and functional demands conflict. Directing 
investment is also challenging; in practice, the centralized group often 
ends up acting as a diplomat or negotiator, trying to persuade lines of 
business to “get along” and invest in the right areas.
The most structured model involves establishing a centralized 
group. The biggest advantage of this model is that without it, it’s almost 
impossible to achieve real economies of scale or scope. This applies to 
many functions; it can include areas as diverse as:
◼
◼Data science and experimentation
◼
◼Analytical data management
◼
◼Advanced analytics and predictive modelling
◼
◼Quality control
◼
◼Optimization
◼
◼Business intelligence and dashboarding
◼
◼Insight operationalization
Of course, this comes at a cost. Scale creates bureaucracy. It also 
needs an owner, someone who’s willing to make sure the group’s cre-
ating value. An underleveraged group is just more cost and in most 
cases has a limited life.
A prime example is an analytical center of excellence, covered in 
greater detail later in this chapter. Often headed up by a chief analytics 
officer or chief data scientist, it usually exists as a separate functional 
line of business in its own right. These centers may report directly 
to the CEO or fall within another line of business with a focus on 
shared services such as IT. Usually, they’re created to pull all analyti-
cal resources into one group, tasked with supporting the business. The 
group maintains its own headcount, budget, and cost center or, more 
ideally, profit-and-loss statement (real or shadow).
Each approach offers different advantages and drawbacks; none 
of them is better than any other. For example, establishing a formal 
model often requires major organizational change and investment. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  105
This formality comes with benefits. For one, it’s easier for the rest of 
the organization to engage with the centralized group. The virtual 
model requires significantly less investment and preserves existing 
powerbases. It does, however, increase management complexity and 
can make engagement challenging. The functional model allows flex-
ibility but prevents scale.
Usually, the right model is dictated by management commitment 
to business analytics and organizational politics. For many organiza-
tions, the virtual model is simply a steppingstone to drive cultural 
change. For some, the virtual model doesn’t go far enough; nothing 
less than true centralization will do. As will be covered in Chapter 8, 
the real answer often involves multiple models.
Cost Recovery
The second consideration is how analysts cover their costs. One app­
roach is to act as a shared service. Resources are offered “free of 
charge.” In this model a board, leadership team, or other governance 
committee manages activities and investment. Ideally, this oversight 
group focuses on value. They prioritize effort based on quantitative 
and value-based considerations such as strategic objectives or the 
quantum of return expected.
This is the easiest model to adopt. Given that the teams responsible 
for generating answers rarely own the outcomes, it’s financially hard 
to measure these groups’ profitability. Unfortunately, it also frequently 
discourages long-term investment; because the group isn’t linked to 
revenue or profit, it’s seen as a cost center. Without significant cultural 
commitment the broader organization is usually reluctant to invest.
An alternative model is to operate using a shadow profit-and-loss 
statement. Usually, this is based on negotiation and is approved by 
other lines of business. While not necessarily appearing in the general 
ledger, the group has a management mandate to demonstrate return 
on investment. Costs are registered but successes are credited against 
the group through a shadow tracking system. By doing this, the group 
can still demonstrate financial outcomes and success despite not hav-
ing direct control or ownership over revenue streams. Admittedly, 
there’s a heavy emphasis on negotiation and the perpetual temptation 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
106 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
to game the system. However, this midpoint at least allows the leader-
ship to track the value of business analytics.
The most sophisticated approach is to establish a formal profit-
and-loss statement. Under this model the group is charged with 
demonstrating internal profitability. Rather than offering services for 
free, the group uses group allocations or internal resource request- 
based pricing to charge out its time to other business units. Key 
performance indicators are often defined as a blended model, bal-
ancing total return on investment against maintaining an agreed 
realization level.
Tactically, the group needs to remain solvent. Strategically, the 
group needs to be able to demonstrate how its actions have delivered 
economic returns. In many ways, this model requires the group to act 
as a chargeable internal consultancy, actively seeking out business and 
needing to demonstrate return on investment.
This model is a challenging one. The biggest advantage it offers is 
direct accountability. Unfortunately, it also drives profit-maximizing 
behaviors. Leaders of the group will naturally chase their biggest cus-
tomers, neglecting areas of the business that aren’t interesting. While 
it often ensures cost neutrality, in the absence of a broader cultural 
commitment it rarely leads to organizational transformation.
Each approach offers different advantages and disadvantages. 
The biggest advantage of the shared service center approach is ease 
of engagement. Because resources are free and activities are priori-
tized through a well-defined process, business units have fewer barri-
ers to trying to leverage business analytics. Equally, though, this often 
increases the complexity of demonstrating return on investment from 
business analytics. At its worst, demonstrating success becomes a lob-
bying process. The business analytics team spends the majority of their 
time convincing other business units to publicly support the business 
analytics group regardless of outcome.
Running a separate profit-and-loss statement limits this bad 
behavior. Return on resources is easily demonstrable based on utiliza-
tion and project success. However, this upfront cost can act as a sig-
nificant barrier to business unit experimentation, especially in climates 
of constrained budgets. When budgets are tight, most business units 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  107
will resist having to pay to do things differently. If this approach isn’t 
supported by a corresponding culture, the group runs a very real risk 
of self-optimizing and only working with those business units that are 
most willing to pay, undermining the whole point of an enterprise 
approach to business analytics.
WHAT SHOULD IT FOCUS ON?
Embedding analysts in business units is a valid option. For one, it’s 
easy—it doesn’t require any broader strategy. Just hire the person and 
set her to work.
Unfortunately, it does little to help with the trends discussed in 
Chapter 2. While it does allow a great deal of flexibility, it does little to 
encourage reuse, human capital development, or economies of scale 
and scope. Left alone without management support or a mandate to 
work otherwise, people will normally work independently.
The rise of ro¯nin will eventually force most organizations to 
think about trying to centralize and reuse their analytical capabi­lities. 
Technology is infinitely reproducible; people are not. That’s not to 
say that embedded analysts are a bad thing. As a hiring model, it’s an 
excellent augmentation to centralized approaches. There just aren’t 
enough analysts in the market to realize every opportunity through 
continually hiring new people.
The decision to set up a central group (in some form) is a logical 
conclusion. It does, however, inevitably lead to the question of what it 
should focus on. Every group needs a purpose.
It’s helpful to consider a shared group’s function along three lines: 
(1) They can help build knowledge; (2) they can help deliver; or (3) they 
can help transform the organization. Organizations that decide to cen-
tralize their capabilities often call the result Communities of Practice, 
Competency Centers, or Centers of Excellence.
It’s important to recognize that these definitions aren’t absolute; 
you say tomato, I say tomahto. Definitions vary and, as yet, standard 
names do not exist. They’re used here to highlight how structure  
and focus can vary even when there’s a defined departmental or 
­enterprise-wide capability.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
108 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Communities of Practice
The lowest-touch model is a community of practice. Communities of 
practice tend to focus on helping practitioners share and learn from 
each other. Right or wrong, they’re usually the starting point for a 
leadership team that has realized the value of business analytics but is 
concerned with making structural changes.
Their primary objective is to nurture skills. They try to cross-­
pollinate knowledge between those who would, in the absence of 
the community of practice, rarely cross paths. They do this through 
regular meetings or conferences. Their focus is to try to get people to 
­network and to share their experience.
Their main attraction is their low-impact nature; they require 
no structural change whatsoever. It’s usually more like a shared club 
where attendance is encouraged but optional. They develop social cap-
ital and promote collaboration.
At best, this is only a halfway house. Their biggest weakness is 
that they rarely drive any behavioral changes. Awareness is one thing, 
change another. More often than not, people revert to their comfort 
zone after attending the get-togethers. This isn’t because of a lack of 
enthusiasm or a resistance to change. It’s simply because it’s easier to 
keep doing what one is doing. Many change agents often overlook 
this limitation and assume that because all the right people have been 
brought together, change is inevitable.
Despite being a somewhat halfhearted approach, communities of 
practice still have their benefits. In the absence of anything else, they 
help to develop awareness of the importance of business analytics. 
While they tend to be focused on specific applications such as risk, mar-
keting analytics, or business intelligence, they help by mitigating one of 
the biggest constraints in any large organization—functional separation. 
Because of this, the function of a community of practice is often eventu-
ally blended into a more structured model such as a competency center.
Competency Centers
Competency centers go further. They change the structure of the orga-
nization, drawing similar resources into one group. Their model is usu-
ally to act as a shared service center to support the broader organization.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  109
Their main attraction is consolidation and enabling economies 
of scale. Unlike “insights teams,” these centers have a narrow focus, 
usually defined functionally. They may specialize in predictive model-
ing. They often specialize in business intelligence. They may focus on 
machine learning. Integral to this focus is a longer-term strategy that 
outlines how the group will move toward best practice. They often go 
beyond ad hoc support to include actual delivery. While they don’t 
own the outcome, they’ll usually be responsible for making sure their 
work makes it into production.
There are significant advantages to this model. By drawing common 
skills into one group, the organization starts developing ­economies of 
scale through specialization. Clarity of focus also helps other groups 
get engaged. When skills are scattered, it’s often hard for people to take 
advantage of latent capabilities. It’s far easier for other groups to get 
engaged when there’s a single team to contact.
It’s also a tangible demonstration of strategic intent. Creating a 
defined group does wonders to clarify what the enterprise sees as  
a potential competitive advantage. It gives the organization a hook to latch 
onto and experiment with. Even if others don’t necessarily understand 
the domain, they at least know it’s there for them to take advantage of.
Despite their advantages, competency centers are still limited. 
For one, they maintain a siloed delivery approach. Because of their 
functionally defined focus, their engagement tends to align with tra-
ditional business applications and ignores developing enterprise-wide 
competencies.
For example, a risk competency center has the potential to add tre-
mendous value across the business. In addition to traditional ­scoring 
and simulation activities, they could add real value through driving 
risk-based pricing and augmenting financial planning to incorporate 
boundary testing. Unfortunately, this rarely happens. In the absence 
of specific direction, the team will usually gravitate toward traditional 
risk management processes such as managing operational risk or 
­identifying behavioral or application risk. When one’s goal is being 
utilized rather than driving change, it’s easier to sell to current rather 
than potential customers. Because of this, much of the cross-functional 
potential of business analytics is lost.
Another disadvantage is that because their domain is taken as a 
given, the team usually pays little attention to evangelism. A mandate 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
110 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
is both a blessing and curse. On one hand, it establishes responsibility. 
On the other, it’s easy to assume that the rest of the organization will 
be just as interested and supportive.
In practice, this is rarely the case. By definition, any sophisticated 
area of expertise is niche. Not everyone in the organization will under-
stand it, let alone value it. Business analytics is fundamentally about 
change and driving change requires proactivity. While it’s not inevita-
ble, competency centers often overlook the importance of evangelism 
and sales. Instead, they fill the role of a pure shared service center, 
responding to work requests as they file in. They end up being great 
at supporting business as usual and “known unknowns,” but transfor-
mation and tackling the “unknown unknowns” usually just becomes 
too hard.
Centers of Excellence
The most capable model is a center of excellence. It blends the best 
of a community of practice with a competency center. It centralizes 
resources into a shared services model while also taking responsibility 
for improving the broader organization’s knowledge and capabilities in 
their targeted domain.
However, it also goes beyond this by adding:
◼
◼An explicit focus on (and a resource structure to support) com-
munication and evangelization
◼
◼Ownership over defining a common value measurement 
framework
◼
◼Responsibility for actively finding opportunities to apply busi-
ness analytics across the enterprise
At first glance they often look similar to competency centers. 
Both centralize skills and both support cross-functional business units 
within the organization. There is a difference, though. Where com-
petency centers are usually fairly reactive, centers of excellence are 
highly proactive. Where competency centers are content to respond 
to business requirements, centers of excellence will actively find and 
deliver incremental value across the business. They provide support. 
However, they see their primary role as being an agent of change.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  111
A second major difference is that they tend to have a broader focus 
than most competency centers. This is by no means guaranteed; some 
maintain a very narrow focus. When tasked correctly, though, there’s 
a key driver that discourages too much specialization—a focus on 
value creation rather than centralizing skills.
Competency centers are traditionally defined functionally. They 
draw similar skills together to capitalize on economies of scale. By con-
trast, centers of excellence are focused on value creation and return 
on investment. They drive both economies of scale and scope. Because 
of this, they tend to require access to more skills than an equivalent 
competency center.
They normally maintain the full set of competencies needed in busi-
ness analytics. They’ll maintain people knowledgeable about data man-
agement, data science, value measurement visualization, and even how 
to embed analytics into operational processes. And, these all build on 
top of specialist skills such as risk management, predictive modeling, or 
other domains. In contrast, a competency center will often specialize in 
only a small subset of those competencies, dictated largely by those most 
required by their targeted focus. When correctly designed, centers of 
excellence represent extremely skilled, powerful, and valuable groups.1
The biggest disadvantage of centers of excellence is that they 
require a certain degree of scale to be successful. As will be covered in 
Chapter 7, it’s almost impossible to find one person with all the skills 
needed to be successful in business analytics. Teams are the norm, and 
these teams need to have a certain degree of coverage across core roles 
and responsibilities if they’re to be successful. This coverage requires 
investment, and most organizations need to have achieved a certain 
level of comfort before they’re willing to take the plunge.
WHAT SERVICES CAN IT OFFER?
Having focus gives a group purpose. What it doesn’t do is explain to 
the rest of the organization how to get engaged. To take advantage of 
a capability, people need to know what it is, how to use it, and how to 
get involved.
One approach is to simply throw a bunch of smart people together 
and hope for the best. While this works surprisingly well in smaller 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
112 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
organizations, it rarely scales. The better approach is to make engage-
ment easy through well-defined services.
Services are simply defined combinations of people, processes, 
and technology offered to customers with known outcomes. To create 
value, they support some form of business process. By reducing it to an 
offer with a clear value proposition, the group makes it easy to explain 
why and how other groups can take advantage of their capabilities.
Good support services cover the full gamut of platform support right 
through to identifying and delivering initiatives. Some are concerned 
with setting direction. Others are more focused on “keeping the engine 
running.” Still others are focused on making existing things better. 
Operational excellence in business analytics brings all of these together 
in a way that drives a culture of continuous improvement and quality.
In defining these services, it’s useful to consider the service design 
model described in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2  Service Design
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  113
Every business analytics service does one of three things. It helps 
set direction, helps deliver, or helps identify opportunities for improve-
ment. These “activity” services provide support across the major 
aspects of the business—strategic planning, operational execution, and 
continuous optimization.
Every one of these services is focused on one of three things: tech-
nology, the business, or developing capability. The intersection of each 
of these helps define specific support services that help create internal 
or external value.
Not every organization has complete coverage across all of these 
areas. And, not all of these need to be offered by the same group. 
For example, technology support services are often managed by IT. 
Capability support may be managed by human resources (HR). Business 
support may be managed by a center of excellence. What’s important is 
identifying gaps and closing them.
Strategic Services
Strategic support services help organizations define their direction and 
establish an execution plan. They help by providing the organization 
with the skills and support to create a roadmap, develop new capabili-
ties, and provide governance or funding models.
Broadly, they focus on:
◼
◼Defining direction and funding execution
◼
◼Encouraging a consistent approach
◼
◼Developing skills and knowledge
At the strategic level, technology support services focus on developing a 
technology and data roadmap that map against current and future orga-
nizational requirements. Through understanding the organization’s stra-
tegic direction, they aim to align and fund the organization’s technology 
and data architecture. In addition to defining technology and data road-
maps, they also often provide a clear governance framework through 
which ongoing upgrades and feature requests can be captured, priori-
tized, and funded (often through a formal steering committee or the like).
Business support services aim to establish consistency in approach 
across initiatives. Through defining and encouraging adherence 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
114 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
to common processes, they aim to make execution more efficient, 
­consistent, transparent, and effective. Typical focus areas include defi­
ning and establishing a common value and effort measurement 
framework and helping to define the high-level milestones that every 
business analytics activity will follow. They’re often focused on helping 
the business to develop an analytics roadmap that links tactical value 
into strategic differentiation.
Finally, capability support services revolve around fostering skills 
and cross-pollinating knowledge. Through establishing the right cul-
tures and processes, they aim to shift skills from individuals to the 
organization, creating a self-sustaining culture that values business 
analytics. Common focus areas include establishing and running com-
munities of practice, helping to define skills development roadmaps, 
developing knowledge management strategies, and developing cur-
riculums that blend technical and domain training.
Operational Services
Operational support services help organizations deliver value and meet 
business outcomes. Rather than defining the “to-be” state and facili-
tating the change needed to get there, they focus on supporting cur-
rent activities and ensure the business can do its day-to-day business 
effectively. They help by providing the business with the support it 
needs to do a variety of administrative and operational activities.
Broadly, they focus on:
◼
◼Monitoring existing activities
◼
◼Supporting operational execution
◼
◼Delivering operational outcomes
In this category, technology support services focus on ensuring the orga-
nization’s technologies and data repositories perform against expecta-
tions and requirements. Through monitoring and resolving technology 
and data-related issues and requests as they’re made, they aim to ensure 
high availability and prevent platform-related delays. Common services 
include onsite support, maintaining software currency and managing 
platform upgrades, priority and trouble ticket handling, metadata and 
security administration, and critical period support.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  115
Business support services aim to clarify and assist with navigat-
ing and executing operationally related business analytics processes. 
Through providing specialist skills, they aim to help the organization 
move through each of the major phases associated with creating value 
from business analytics.* Common examples include helping to develop 
business cases, implementing value measurement and performance 
management frameworks, and defining change management and com-
munication plans.
These also extend to data science. Through providing resources 
with specific competencies, they provide “overflow” support to over-
come resource-related bottlenecks. Common services include provid-
ing data quality, model development, and analytical data management 
skills. The group might, for example, create a “model factory” to 
streamline and simplify the creation of predictive models.
Finally, capability support services help develop human capital and 
knowledge. They focus on training and enablement, support change 
management and cultural development, and link performance man-
agement to outcomes rather than activities.
Optimization Services
Optimization support services close the loop by helping to drive con-
tinuous improvement. They focus on identifying potential improve-
ment opportunities and helping to maximize leverage of existing 
resources and/or assets.
Broadly, they focus on:
◼
◼Profiling existing approaches
◼
◼Identifying opportunities for improvement
◼
◼Assisting with process and asset reengineering
Technology support services in this context focus on profiling and 
improving the use of technology and data-related assets. Through profil-
ing current usage patterns and identifying bottlenecks and inefficiencies, 
*Defining the value, communicating the value, delivering the value, and measuring  
the value.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
116 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
they aim to help the organization uncover common usage patterns 
across individuals and groups and facilitate improvements. Common 
services include helping to rationalize and streamline data manage-
ment activities, benchmarking platform performance to identify and 
resolve bottlenecks, and identifying inappropriate or inefficient uses 
of technology.
Business support services aim to rationalize and streamline busi-
ness analytics processes. Through mapping and analyzing existing pro-
cesses across multiple business units, they aim to uncover best practices 
and replicate them across the organization. Common services include 
optimizing analytical processes (including information management, 
model development, and model deployment) and driving best prac-
tices in asset management.
Finally, capability support services assist by helping an organiza-
tion to mature its abilities and become more proficient in business 
analytics. Through profiling current competencies across the organi-
zation and linking these to an agreed strategic plan, they aim to help 
the organization define specific actions to increase sophistication and 
experience in business analytics. Common services include facilitating 
mentoring plans and facilitating internal and external networking to 
promote cross-pollination of new ideas.
WHAT DATA DOES IT NEED?
Every organization needs to capture and manage the data that it cre-
ates. Regardless of whether it’s a small business, a multinational enter-
prise, or a government agency, they all create and leverage data as part 
of their day-to-day operations. Bills need to be paid, customers need to 
be billed, resources need to be managed, services and/or products need 
to be delivered, and outcomes need to be tracked.
These largely transactional activities help the business operate. 
They also contribute to big data. There’s value in the data, but think-
ing strategically requires the ability to step back from this transactional 
point of view and take a more holistic view at how the business oper-
ates. Rather than looking at whether an individual order has been ful-
filled, decision makers might be interested in reviewing whether the 
average time needed to fulfil an order is competitive.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  117
Taking this more strategic perspective requires the organization to 
view its data differently. This often involves consolidating information 
from multiple operational systems and transforming it such that the 
data is centered around the item of interest. For example, the organi-
zation might be interested in understanding overall customer experi-
ence and satisfaction levels. To determine this, they would normally 
be interested in how each customer interacted with the organization, 
how effective that interaction was, and how frequently the customer 
chose to interact in a particular way.
At the lowest level, this information is captured in systems that 
manage transactional interactions. To build this understanding, ana-
lysts might need to pull together data from its contact center, its online 
platform, as well as its order management system. These systems 
revolve around the transactions they manage. Respectively, they are 
concerned with issue tracking, content delivery, and order tracking. 
While each would capture information about the customer to differ-
ent degrees, the comprehensiveness of this information will vary sub-
stantially. Getting to a strategic point of view involves drawing out 
the information of interest across the organization as a whole (the 
customer, in this case) and placing it front and center.
Conceptually, this may seem simple. What usually makes this pro-
cess a bit complicated is that each of these systems usually has its own 
way of tracking interactions. For architectural and technical reasons, 
customer identification numbers may not match between systems. At 
a very simplistic level, one system may use the customer’s full name 
and address as an identification, one may use the customer’s identifi-
cation number, and one may use the customer’s online login details. 
Consolidating this information into a single view requires mapping 
tables that link this information together.
The rationale behind an enterprise data warehouse is usually that 
this information needs to be stored somewhere. Operational systems 
are normally designed to support a specific function rather than offer 
architectural flexibility, making them a poor landing point for the con-
solidated and aggregated data. Additionally, creating and storing these 
linkages requires processing power, capacity that existing operational 
systems may not have available. Rather than try to force an existing 
system to fit, most organizations choose to design a system that’s fit for 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
118 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
the purpose. And so, they establish a warehouse and start merging all 
the organization’s information into a single environment.
This is a nontrivial task and takes years. And, that’s assuming it 
ever really ends. Most organizations constantly generate new data as 
fast as their ability to capture information increases. Where they may 
start simply tracking which pages were viewed on their website, they 
may eventually get to a point where they track the mouse movements 
made by every customer across each page. With the amount of effort 
and expense organizations invest in creating this single, high-quality 
source of information, it’s unsurprising that they try to encourage and  
sometimes force business analytics teams to use the warehouse  
and avoid interacting with the upstream source systems.
Unfortunately, this isn’t always possible. Enterprise warehouses 
inevitably make a great starting point (and sometimes, if rarely, an 
ending point), but there are many situations where they simply do not 
contain the information the team needs to drive quality outcomes. In 
these situations, the team needs to source their own information and 
create their own information stores that go outside of the organiza-
tion’s agreed enterprise warehouse data model. Needless to say, this 
creates a great deal of tension—to the architectural team, it appears that  
the analytics team is duplicating large amounts of data. Even worse, 
data and systems architects often heavily underscope the amount of 
storage space needed by the business analytics team.
Understanding why this is the case involves understanding the 
limitations of a traditional warehouse when viewed through a business 
analytics lens. A team is only as good as the data it can source. And, 
analytical data often differs from typical warehouse data in four ways:
	
1.	Granularity
	
2.	Temporality
	
3.	Comprehensiveness
	
4.	Statistical completeness
Granularity
Advanced forms of business analytics require granular information, 
often to the degree of the original transactional measures. When this 
isn’t available, many techniques become impossible.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  119
Warehouses are expensive. They require high-performance tech-
nologies and large amounts of time to set them up and make them 
effective. This performance comes at a cost—highly available and 
redundant storage doesn’t come cheap. Because of this, the design-
ers need to compromise. The fastest (and most logical) way to reduce 
costs is to design the warehouse based on common requirements 
rather than comprehensiveness. It would be great to capture all of 
the organization’s data in one location. However, most people just 
need a subset of the data that’s theoretically available. A common 
starting point is simply moving from a product-centric point of view 
to a customer-centric point of view through creating a single view of 
customer.
To contain development, maintenance, and storage costs, the 
design team will limit source data capture to only what’s necessary to 
achieve the required aggregations. They will then discard that same 
source data once they’ve met their requirements. This approach works 
well for relatively unsophisticated applications of business analytics 
such as reporting and dashboarding.
Unfortunately, it fails to work for more advanced forms of business 
analytics like predictive modeling and optimization. These rely on the 
use of statistics to identify patterns within large amounts of data and 
identify defining characteristics and relationships between elements. 
Usually due to cost constraints, this information is rarely kept in the 
warehouse. Capturing and retaining it can make a massive difference 
in the costs borne by the business.
An average-sized telecommunications company, for example, can 
generate a few terabytes of person-to-person transactional call infor-
mation every month. All the majority of the organization usually 
needs, however, are some simpler measures such as the total number 
of calls each customer made over the last billing period. While the 
source data may be on the order of terabytes, the final derived infor-
mation for all customers could be as small as hundreds of megabytes. 
Given the cost of highly performing and redundant storage, this rep-
resents a major cost difference. Because of this, the warehouse rarely 
contains the granular transactional information the business analytics 
team needs. The trick to ensuring granular analytical data is to make 
sure the original transactional data is available in some form if and 
when it’s needed.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
120 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Temporality
One of the most powerful aspects of business analytics lies in its abil-
ity to identify dynamic characteristics rather than just static measures. 
Models can link behavioral and environmental changes to desired or 
unwanted outcomes and by doing so give the organization the ability 
to predict these outcomes ahead of time. Doing this requires having a 
record of information over time, and when this isn’t available, under-
standing dynamic relationships becomes impossible.
The high cost of enterprise storage leads many architects and design-
ers to try to contain costs in other ways. Another thing organizations often 
exclude is transactional history. Most business applications need either 
only current information or highly summarized year-on-year compari-
sons. While what happened four years ago may be of importance from 
an accounting perspective, it’s rarely important in an operational context.
Excluding this historical data from the warehouse makes a great 
deal of sense given this intended use. If an organization holds a year’s 
worth of information in the warehouse at the most granular level, 
holding five years’ worth of information would require five times the 
storage. In assessing the cost and benefits of doing so, most designers 
conclude that retaining all data simply doesn’t make financial sense.
Unfortunately, this information is tremendously valuable when it 
comes to more sophisticated applications of business analytics. Statistical 
modeling relies on identifying patterns through repetition. It’s a simplis-
tic example, but it’s impossible to uncover a trend with two data points. 
Logically, at least three data points are needed to identify whether factors 
such as seasonality play a role in driving outcomes, and ideally more.*
Most warehouses are designed without these applications in mind 
and therefore lack sufficient history to enable more sophisticated 
forms of business analytics. Those that do have sufficient history usu-
ally lack granularity. The data usually still exists in source and financial 
systems; it’s simply a case where the team is forced to go elsewhere for 
the information they need. The trick to ensuring temporal analytical 
data is to start collecting it early; once it’s gone, it’s gone.
*And, it must be said that three data points will create an extremely poor level of 
confidence!
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  121
Comprehensiveness
Another major advantage of advanced forms of analytics lies in its 
ability to incorporate vastly more information that we can mentally 
process. Models that include thousands of predictors are not unheard 
of. The best models leverage a wide variety of predictors to help 
link vastly different behavioral characteristics to target outcomes. 
Unfortunately, this breadth is rarely fully represented in the ware-
house, largely due to the cost it would imply. When this information 
isn’t available, the organization limits its ability to discover and exploit 
these relationships.
Humans are complex creatures—our behaviors surface in a vari-
ety of ways. If we’re unhappy with our telephone provider, we may 
start testing other services such as online voice-over-IP offerings. Our 
phone usage might gradually decline over time as we favor videocon-
ferencing services where possible. We may call their contact center to 
complain about our service, find out whether there are other services 
that might be a better fit, or enquire about our contractual commit-
ments. And, as our contract comes up for renewal, we might start 
browsing through plans on the company’s website, benchmarking 
plans against competitors.
Each of these actions is a leading indicator of churn—taken as a 
whole, they flag a customer at high risk of cancellation. Often, this 
panoramic data can be the difference between knowing what’s going 
to happen and just making a guess. Statistical modeling would help the 
company not only quantify the degree to which each of these actions 
increases the odds of cancellation but also create a probability of can-
cellation for every single customer. Doing so, however, requires hav-
ing the right data in the first place.
This true comprehensiveness is rarely available in the warehouse. 
Projects need constraints if they’re to be delivered and warehouses 
are no exception. Trying to boil the ocean and include all the orga-
nization’s data in the warehouse is usually uneconomical. To accom-
modate for this, the architectural team scopes their warehouse on 
current business requirements. Unfortunately, analytics is usually a 
voyage of discovery—it’s hard to know what will be useful until one 
tests one’s models with actual data. Inevitably, this means that there 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
122 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
will be data of potential value to the analytics team that isn’t included 
in the warehouse.
To be effective, the team needs to extract data from source systems, 
transform and cleanse it, and store it somewhere. This increases stor-
age requirements and, if the reasons behind this are misunderstood, 
often creates a great deal of concern among the warehousing team. 
After all, the warehouse is usually meant to be the single source of 
truth. The trick to ensuring comprehensive analytical data is to give data 
scientists an area where they can incorporate the data they need rather 
than just the data that’s available.
Completeness
Mathematical modeling can be a complex field. Many approaches are 
constrained by a variety of data requirements—some algorithms only 
work for binary (yes/no) outcomes and some need specific input data 
characteristics to work. When data isn’t formatted or stored correctly 
in the warehouse, analysts may need to duplicate much of this data 
simply to enable them to do their jobs.
Having a single source of quality data is fundamental to run-
ning a business; it’s impossible to make good decisions on bad data. 
Organizations often talk about this in terms of having accurate, com-
plete, consistent, timely, and auditable data. This, however, creates 
subtle complexities. A great example is in tracking whether or not 
customers have opted in for email. Logically, one would think that 
there are only two possible answers: yes or no. In practice, there’s 
a third option—they may not have answered the question yet. 
Representing this in data can become a rather complex question. On 
one hand, should “yes” and “no” be represented as text or as a number 
(1 and 0 respectively)? On the other, should a nonresponse be 0 or 
null (the absence of data)? Each of these is an accurate and complete 
representation of the data; it’s simply a case of changing the ­storage 
mechanism. Despite being seemingly trivial, these decisions can  
have massive impacts on how easily teams can apply sophisticated 
forms of analytics.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O r g a n i z a t i o n a l  D e s i g n  ◂  123
Statistical modeling requires having numerical measures. If the 
fields are stored as free-text (“yes” and “no”), they need to be ­converted 
into a numerical representation before they can fed into a model. 
Usually, the field needs to be converted into a binary (1/0) representa-
tion where the 1s represent the occurrence of an event (having opted 
in, in this case). This involves extra effort and a complete replication  
of the field, necessitating more storage. This becomes even worse 
when the field in question has many levels (options). A retailer that  
classifies sales by sub-category may have hundreds of discrete values 
within this field, including “Female fashion—Skirts,” “Furniture—
Bedroom,” and so on. To allow modeling, each of these is usually 
­converted into its own binary field, exploding what was one field into 
hundreds.
Making things even more complicated is that some algorithms 
carry various data restrictions. A regression, for example, requires 
every field input into the model to be populated with a value of some 
form. Any records that are missing a value in any field are excluded. 
This creates a significant dilemma—in many situations, incomplete 
data is the norm. Some records will be missing because incorrect 
information was entered or because it simply wasn’t captured at all. 
Having accurate data requires the organization to maintain these miss-
ing values—having a null field under “opted into email” may still be 
seen as being accurate and complete even if the field isn’t populated. 
Unfortunately, this prevents all those fields from being used within 
regression and logistic regression models. To apply a broad set of 
algorithms, the analytics team need to repopulate these fields with 
“best-guess” values that are representative of the rest of the data while 
(hopefully) still preserving auditability by tracking which fields were 
original and which fields were statistically populated. This process is 
called imputation, and there are a variety of techniques that minimize 
the amount of statistical bias introduced by the replacement values.
Applying them usually involves duplicating even more fields; it’s 
rare that the warehousing team will allow the analytics team to do 
wholesale field replacements in the single record of truth. This usu-
ally creates tension and substantially increases the amount of storage 
needed by the analytics team. Not doing so, however, substantially 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
124 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
limits the ability of the team to generate accurate predictions when 
using relatively sophisticated techniques. The trick to ensuring complete 
analytical data is to educate and ensure that the organization’s IT sup-
port group understands the difference as well as the reasons duplication 
is sometimes necessary.
NOTE
	1.	 For a good overview on designing centers of excellence and how this links to orga-
nizational performance, see Aiman Zeid, Business Transformation: A Roadmap for 
Maximizing Organizational Insight (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
125
C H A P T E R  6
Operating Models
I
nsight is easy; execution is hard. When it comes to big data and 
analytics, confusing the two is probably the single biggest reason 
organizations fail to see the returns they expect. At first, it seems 
counterintuitive. After all, the point of analyzing information is insight, 
isn’t it?
The problem with insight is that in isolation, it’s worthless. It’s 
what you do with it that matters, not whether you have it. Markets 
are hard and, to coin a phrase, never bring a knife to a gunfight.
Everyone has that friend, the one who has an answer to everything, 
the serial entrepreneur, the one who would be rich if only someone 
would bankroll his great ideas. We love being around these people, but 
late in the night, after more than a few drinks, they’re usually a bit of a 
bore. It’s not that they’re wrong; they’re just missing the point.
Ideas are cheap. It’s doing something with them that’s the hard 
part. Given enough information, there’s no end of interesting ideas a 
reasonably motivated person can come up with—ideas that, if fostered 
for long enough, sometimes germinate into potential innovations. 
Insight is the road that never ends; if you’re not careful, the journey 
sometimes becomes more important than the destination.
There’s always one more fact to find, one more way of slicing 
the data, one more information source, one more report, one more 
mashup. It’s addictive. Discovery can be a dangerous siren; more than 
one explorer has become wrecked upon her shores.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
126 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
The smartest group in the world is just another cost if they don’t 
add value. And, while insight or efficiency is still a form of value, it’s 
not the best type of value. The best teams excel in producing both 
internal and external value, as shown in Figure 6.1.
The true goal is external value. These are the outcomes that every-
one outside the analytics group is happy to recognize. Usually tangible, 
they’re normally closely linked to growth, improvement, or efficacy in 
some form. Common measures include revenue, profitability, or cost 
reductions. They’re normally created through using analytics or big 
data to identify and deliver quality improvements in some form. It’s 
created through sourcing information, generating insight, and acting 
on that insight to realize value.
On the way, those same teams need to create internal value. These 
are outcomes that people inside the analytics group see as valuable. 
Importantly, not everyone outside the group will always recognize these 
outcomes as being important. Sometimes intangible, they’re normally 
closely linked to new capabilities, productivity, or efficiency. It’s created 
through improving automation, managing intellectual property as assets, 
and ensuring governance processes are aligned against requirements.
While internal value does normally reduce structural cost in some 
form, the linkage between the outcome and the cost reduction is often 
unclear. For example, the use of prebuilt modeling processes might help 
teams do more work. Unfortunately, while productivity might help the  
Figure 6.1  The Value of Business Analytics
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  127
organization avoid hiring people at some indeterminate point in  
the future, it’s often hard to translate the opportunity cost savings into 
something an accountant will recognize. It’s not impossible, but when 
it does happen it becomes external value.
The real value of business analytics comes through balancing these 
two forms of value. External value provides the return from big data. 
However, it’s impossible without creating internal value on the way.1 
Doing this is impossible without having an operating model that aligns 
investment to outcomes, balances risk against reward, and gives each 
activity a “home.”
This chapter tends toward the technical; it’s intended for people 
who want to have a framework to map responsibilities between differ-
ent groups in an organization. It covers three things:
	
1.	What’s the goal?
	
2.	What’s the enabler?
	
3.	How does it create value?
The rest of this chapter will answer these questions and lay the foun-
dation for effective delivery.
Readers interested in “getting to the meat” and reviewing the 
operating model are free to skip ahead to the section titled, “What 
Does It Look Like?”
WHAT’S THE GOAL?
Business analytics teams exist to create value. Like the alchemists of 
old, they are the modern-day magicians that are tasked with trans-
forming data into value. Unlike the alchemists, though, their task is 
doable. Rather than transmuting lead into gold, it simply requires the 
ability to uncover advantageous patterns and act on them.
This is the core of external value. To create it, the team needs to get 
the right information, generate the right insights, and help the organi-
zation act on that insight to drive tangible returns.
Practical examples include:
◼
◼Using changes in calling patterns to identify people at risk of 
canceling their telephone services
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
128 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
◼
◼Mapping social-relationship information to identify and quar-
antine people at risk from known pedophiles
◼
◼Analyzing retail purchasing information to identify products 
that tend to sell well together and by doing so, change stocking 
patterns to maximize cross-selling products
◼
◼Modeling price sensitivity patterns to identify the ideal price to 
offer every customer to maximize margin while maintaining 
sales conversion rates
Despite how obvious this may be, surprisingly few organizations 
are any good at using big data to create external value. Rather than 
cultivating a forest, they focus on the trees and believe (falsely) that 
the forest is a natural outcome. Instead, to stretch the analogy, they 
usually end up with a series of disconnected hedges.
At a minimum, external value involves three activities:
	
1.	Ensuring quality information
	
2.	Generating knowledge through insight
	
3.	Realizing value through action
Quality Information
Managing analytical information is mainly concerned with transform-
ing source data into forms that are fit for other uses. There are four 
major activities that occur in this space. Of these, most organizations 
are only good at one. Developing an understanding of the other three 
activities is a key step in driving true economies of scale.
These four activities are:
	
1.	Operational data preparation and delivery
	
2.	Operational data quality
	
3.	Analytical data preparation and delivery
	
4.	Analytical data quality
The operational side of information management is usually well 
understood. Running a business requires many systems. Some provide 
transactional support—common examples include order management, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  129
case management, or customer relationship management. They pro-
vide the operational support that an organization needs to run its day-
to-day operations. There are also normally a variety of systems that 
facilitate functional, business, and organizational planning.
While these use the information contained in the transactional sys-
tems, they require the information to be aggregated and transformed; 
knowing that a small can of beans was sold last Tuesday at 2:15 p.m. 
in store 31 is less useful in planning than knowing that over the last 
three months, total sales of beans in a particular geography has been 
increasing by 2 percent compound. Getting from one view to the other 
involves having a warehouse designer aggregate transactional sales by 
category, geography, and time period.
Sitting between all these systems is usually a warehouse that 
attempts to centralize all the organization’s information in one loca-
tion. Operational data preparation and delivery involves pulling all 
this information together and delivering it in the right form to the 
right system in the right order to make sure everything gets what it 
needs at the right time. This can be surprisingly complex, especially 
when one considers that different systems update at different times 
and, if the updates are not cascaded through the right systems in the 
right order, data can quickly get out of date.
Data modelers do this using a variety of extract, transform, and 
load (ETL) or extract, load, and transform (ELT) jobs, so named because 
they describe the major activities that need to occur. These are usually 
strongly governed and relatively inflexible—once defined, they will 
usually remain as-is until their source or destination data structures 
change. Every change carries cost; in practice, this happens as infre-
quently as possible.
Even unsophisticated organizations are usually still competent at 
operational data preparation and delivery, largely by necessity. Without 
the ability to manage data, it is usually extremely hard for decision 
makers to get any visibility over how the business is performing. There 
is an important caveat that goes along with this, however: simply get-
ting the data into the right form has little relationship to whether the 
data is trustworthy or accurate. Over time, the organization starts to 
realize that despite having lots of data, most of it is relatively untrust-
worthy. This may be because of duplicate customer records (often 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
130 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
because people use different addresses or change names) or it might 
be because front-of-house staff take shortcuts when entering informa-
tion to speed up order processing (using all zeros is a common way of 
avoiding entering codes).
As organizations mature, they increasingly understand the impor-
tance of operational data quality and have usually established parallel 
processes to ensure the information used by the organization is cor-
rect. Common focus areas include data profiling and data cleansing. 
Again, these activities are ideally transformed into a variety of assets 
that have the potential to be deployed operationally.
This is a critical part of ensuring continuous data quality—when 
cleansing is treated as a one-off activity, information quality resumes 
its gradual decay over time once cleansing is finished. By operationally 
deploying these assets into ETL or ELT jobs, organizations can ensure 
that information is always correct and cleansed before it hits the ware-
house or other destination systems. Organizations that forget this criti-
cal step and assume that cleansing is a one-off activity usually find that 
their information sources regress back to their original state.
At this point, organizations have a good grasp on operational data 
management as well as a set of high-quality and trustworthy informa-
tion. However, there are still two other activities that, while similar, 
require a slightly different approach. Analytical data preparation and 
delivery shares many core requirements with its operational counter-
part but extends these to include the need for a variety of statistical 
and temporal transformations.
A common example is the creation of “RFM” data that, for each 
customer, describes their most recent transactions (on a rolling basis), 
the frequency with which they transact over a certain time period, and 
a variety of measures describing their monetary spend (including their 
mean expenditure, maximum expenditure, and so on). This represents 
a fairly simple example—because the resulting tables are designed 
to be fed into a variety of models for training or scoring purposes, 
these additional fields can end up being highly complex mathematical 
derivations.
Analytical data quality is similar in the sense that it represents a 
superset of the requirements behind operational data quality. In addi-
tion to the need for profiling, cleansing, and matching, analytical data 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  131
quality is also concerned with statistical characteristics such as com-
pleteness and importance. Because missing values can severely restrict 
one’s choice of algorithms, increasing the “completeness” of data (even 
when it doesn’t exist) is a major driver behind analytical data quality. 
Imputation is focused on generating replacement values without sta-
tistically biasing the original dataset or losing the importance of clearly 
distinguishing between “real” data and imputed data. Not all data is 
necessarily important or relevant when it comes to developing models. 
Identifying outliers and isolating the truly “important” information is 
another major source of analytical data quality.
Much like analytical data preparation and delivery, analytical data 
quality is often treated as a separate activity to operational data qual-
ity. While it may leverage a common technology platform, analytical 
data quality typically requires a higher level of statistical and math-
ematical knowledge in comparison to operational data quality.
The Knowledge of Insight
Given a rich source of data, generating insight is where most organi-
zations start. Unfortunately, it’s also where they tend to finish. This 
activity is focused on finding answers to questions or generally looking 
for interesting insights. Experience plays a massive role in this; know-
ing what to look for or how to apply the right techniques is critical. 
Because of this, it’s usually highly iterative and weakly defined.
Generating insight from big data requires four activities: explor-
atory analysis, exploratory data preparation, insight generation, and 
asset development.
Exploratory analysis usually starts without a defined endpoint in 
mind—the main objective is discovery. It can range from being as sim-
ple as browsing through data to get a feel for it, to using cross-tables 
and correlation plots to look for interesting relationships. Usually, the 
analysts doing the exploration have little idea what they’re looking 
for upfront. All they have is some data, a lot of curiosity, and possibly 
some hypotheses. Unsurprisingly, this is an area where data scientists 
add tremendous value.
Exploratory data preparation usually involves extracting and struc-
turing data to support model development or report creation when the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
132 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
used cases are ill-defined or unknown. It is a highly iterative process 
that is repeated until the end-state can be defined. A good example 
involves trying to find the right data structures to help a particular 
business unit make better decisions. They might not know what they 
need. However, they’ll almost always know it when they see it.
A common pattern might involve extracting a set of data, deriving 
a series of measures such as the average sales over a particular time 
period, and then socializing the results with them and recutting the data 
as necessary. Another common example involves developing the input 
tables needed to develop a model. While the analyst may have some 
assumptions or beliefs as to what behavioral characteristics drive par-
ticular outcomes, it’s not until they can test those assumptions with a 
statistical model that they can validate or disprove them. And so, they 
will repeatedly create and test these tables with new derived fields until 
they finalize their model.
On finding what they’re looking for, analysts will move on to devel-
oping models or reports. The tables created during exploratory data 
preparation are used as inputs to generate insights and answer ques-
tions. The major difference between this and exploratory data analysis 
is that during this activity, the analysts have a defined objective. They 
may be trying to identify the major reasons behind customer churn or 
they may be trying to identify the levers that have the greatest impact 
on getting someone back to work after a major occupational injury.
Finally, these insights are ideally transformed into assets in their 
own right. Unsophisticated organizations miss this step entirely. Instead, 
the analysts give these insights to decision makers as indirect sources 
of information. Rather than build a recommendations process that 
tracks action, they’ll just pick up the phone and give the answer or 
send through a spreadsheet. This creates two problems.
First, while the team can ensure that the information is delivered 
to the right decision makers, they have no way of ensuring that the 
information was actually used. With no tracking mechanism in place, 
they’ve no way of knowing the value of the information.
Second, the team is limited by their ability to manually commu-
nicate their findings. Every time they generate new insights, they 
need to spend more time making sure the right people get the right 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  133
information. This heavily limits their ability to capitalize on economies 
of scale and reduces business analytics into an interesting, if somewhat 
erratic source of minor value for the organization.
Transforming insights into assets involves taking insights and 
turning them into objects that can be accessed by other people or sys-
tems. Most people are familiar with the idea of automated reporting. 
However, fewer people are aware that more advanced forms of ana-
lytics such as predictive modeling or optimization can use the same 
approach.
In this situation, the models themselves can be turned into a 
series of formulas that the organization can deploy into operational 
processes. However, doing so requires analysts to convert their per-
sonal skills into automated processes, often facilitated by purpose-
built software. Getting to this point requires both automation and 
supporting systems that allow the use of analytics within operational 
processes.
The Need for Action
Realizing any real value requires one more step: taking action on 
insight to drive a specific outcome. There are two major activities that 
go along with this: presentation and decisioning. Presentation is pri-
marily concerned with getting relevant and concise information in 
front of decision makers while decisioning is primarily focused on 
automating operational and microdecisions across the enterprise.
Most organizations are fairly mature when it comes to establishing 
and managing structured presentation (or business intelligence) tech-
nologies. However, it’s also true that many organizations could benefit 
from better visualization practices—creating a report and creating an 
effective, relevant, and concise report are not necessarily the same thing. 
Regardless, presentation on its own has one fundamental flaw—it is 
impossible to directly link the insight to the outcome. The information 
contained within the report or dashboard may well have influenced 
the behaviors of the decision maker, leading to a better outcome. Or, 
it may not have—it’s possible that on that particular occasion, they 
decided to follow the advice of their hairdresser!
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
134 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
While it’s not always the case, presentation systems usually rely on 
the assumption that it’s up to the decision maker to synthesize all the 
information made available to them and from that, make an indepen-
dent decision. This decision happens independently of the presentation 
system, breaking the link between insight and outcome and making it 
extremely hard, if not impossible, to quantify the value of business ana-
lytics in a true accounting sense. Instead, the organization needs to quan-
tify value by making broad assumptions about how information is used.
This dilemma also highlights one of the reasons why it is often so 
hard to objectively quantify the value of business intelligence. Few 
will disagree that having immediate access to better information drives 
better decision making. However, it’s also true that most struggle to 
explain how much decisions have improved once the organization has 
access to better information.
Decisioning systems strengthen the link between insight and out-
come by moving away from insight and toward recommendation. 
They blend a variety of rules and models to either provide specific 
recommendations to decision makers or automatically make decisions 
on behalf of the organization. These decisions drive specific outcomes 
such as flagging potentially fraudulent transaction, identifying whom 
to contact to drive down churn, or recommending the most appropri-
ate program to an individual in need of social services. If these deci-
sions are acted on, the organization can quantitatively determine the 
value of the action. If they are ignored or overridden, the organization 
can track the value creation or destruction of the alternative decision. 
By doing so, the organization directly links insight to outcomes and 
gains the ability to quantify the value of business analytics.
It’s important to note that closing the value chain does not neces-
sarily require measuring outcomes in a comprehensive way—it sim-
ply requires actioning insight. This seems like a small distinction, but 
it’s an important one. Many organizations successfully operationalize 
their insights and drive real value without operationalizing the corre-
sponding value measurement processes. Instead, they manually deter-
mine the benefits they’ve derived as a one-off activity. Establishing a 
comprehensive and automated value measurement framework is one 
of the factors that distinguish organizations at level two from those at 
level three of the cultural imperative.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  135
WHAT’S THE ENABLER?
Big data gives organizations countless opportunities to create value. 
Unfortunately, there’s only so many hours in a day. Without becom-
ing more efficient, there’s just not enough time to solve every problem 
and realize every opportunity.
Productivity enables external value. Unfortunately, productivity 
alone does little to the bottom line unless the organization uses that 
efficiency to reduce structural cost through downsizing or otherwise 
reducing operating costs. It does, however, enable organizations to do 
more with less. This is the main benefit of internal value; it’s the orga-
nization’s ability to scale through being efficient and responsive.
Internal value comes from:
◼
◼Improving the efficiency through automation
◼
◼Reusing analytical assets
◼
◼Understanding the need for governance
The Efficiency of Automation
Automation is possibly the single biggest enabler for productivity. This 
happens in two ways:
	
1.	Automating information management assets
	
2.	Automating analytical assets
The cornerstone to this approach is moving away from manual activ-
ities. Copying and pasting data within Excel is a common example of a 
manual activity. Every time new data arrives, the analyst needs to spend 
time massaging the data into the right shape. It can’t be ­automated, it’s 
highly inefficient, and it carries extremely high support costs.
By comparison, code-based approaches (such as using SQL) create 
an asset, albeit one that still carries a fairly high support cost. This asset 
can be embedded in other systems and executed without any man-
ual interaction. They do allow automation. However, their efficiency 
depends on the skills of the person who created them.
Purpose-built tools take this to another level. They usually offer 
the best solution, albeit at the highest entry cost. They’re often built to 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
136 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
expressly facilitate automation. They are tailor-built with efficiency in 
mind and usually reduce support costs by providing prebuilt migration 
and asset management functions.
Analytical assets are no different. Exploratory data analysis tools 
can also usually be used to build models. These models are accurate but 
need to be used interactively. Some tools offer some degree of scripting 
or coding. These help transform the model into an asset, but they also 
increase support costs and, unless skills are common in the organiza-
tion, link the asset to the person who created them. They’re also not 
always compatible with existing IT assets, forcing redesign work.
More sophisticated organizations create dedicated operational 
analytics and decision orchestration platforms. These carry the high-
est upfront costs but also reduce support costs, increase efficiency, and 
enable systems-level integration and automation.2
Most organizations are well aware of the benefits of automation. 
Common examples include operational data management, reporting, 
and sometimes operational data quality. Warehousing and business 
intelligence are mature disciplines. Because of this, the benefits of auto-
mating data management and reporting processes are well understood.
Unfortunately, the same can’t be said for many of the assets that 
link into decisioning systems. Efficiency comes from establishing the 
frameworks, processes, and architectures to support automated scoring 
and decisioning. In practice, this may take the form of the following:
◼
◼Scheduled scoring processes that automatically take recent 
behavioral information and generate customer-level probabili-
ties that indicate propensity to churn.
◼
◼Automatically monitoring transactions in real time to identify 
potentially fraudulent activity based on a series of rules and pro-
pensities and, if flagged, automatically actioning the transaction 
with the fraud team and putting a hold on the credit card.
◼
◼On becoming an outpatient after an emergency ward presen-
tation, dynamically assessing medical history and prescribed 
medications to identify whether entry to a consultative care 
program would reduce the odds of a future representation at 
the emergency ward and, if so, assigning a case worker and 
scheduling the first visit.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  137
In each of these cases, a variety of analytical assets are deployed 
operationally to automatically make business decisions based on the 
most recent known and predicted behaviors. This approach not only 
links insight to outcomes but also drives significant economies of scale. 
Rather than investigating accounts based on a random sample, the 
organization can assess every single transaction individually.
Arguably more than anything else, it’s automation that transforms 
business analytics from something that augments existing processes 
into an enabler for competitive differentiator in its own right. Without 
it, scale is impossible.
Reusing Assets
Once these assets have been created, they need to be managed. This 
usually happens in two ways:
	
1.	Managing information assets
	
2.	Managing analytical assets
It’s important to remember that this activity spans the full breadth 
of analytical assets produced by the organization. Common examples 
include reports, models, information management processes, dat-
amarts, and all their associated documentation. While there is no 
reason that these couldn’t (or shouldn’t) be combined into one asset 
repository, current skills, practices, and technologies tend to make this 
harder than it needs to be.
Efficiency comes from:
◼
◼Tracking these assets in a centralized, metadata-driven system
◼
◼Understanding how well they’re performing
◼
◼Understanding how much value they’re creating
◼
◼Understanding how frequently they’re used
◼
◼Managing them through their full lifecycle
Creating any type of asset takes time and effort. It incurs real costs. 
Building a house involves a wide variety of specialist skills, including 
builders, electricians, and plumbers. It also requires significant capital 
investment for bricks, electrical equipment, and concrete. On top of 
that, it takes time.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
138 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Information assets are no different. They require specialist ware-
housing, modeling, and business skills. They require capital invest-
ment for the right information management, model development, and 
decisioning tools. And, they also take time to develop, time that carries 
an opportunity cost.
Similar to how we monitor and manage our return-generating 
real-world assets, we also need to monitor and manage our informa-
tion assets. Real-world assets depreciate. Once built, the house inevita-
bly suffers normal wear-and-tear that eventually requires maintenance 
costs. Some of the structural characteristics may not be appropriate for 
changing environmental conditions. A clay bed may contract during 
a period of dry weather, putting cracks into the walls and requiring a 
minor rebuild. Keeping on top of these and ensuring the asset is per-
forming well is an obvious good practice.
In an ideal world, information assets carry none of this deprecia-
tion. As long as things remain constant, the asset will continue to per-
form exactly as designed. We don’t, however, live in an ideal world. 
Customers change over time, rendering the assumptions that underpin 
the asset inaccurate. Business models change, rendering the rules that 
drive decisions irrelevant. And, people sometimes deliberately change 
their behaviors to avoid detection. For example, criminals change their 
patterns as soon as they know what intelligence agencies are looking 
for. Staying on top of this asset depreciation is a key component of 
achieving best practices in asset management.
While automation is a key part of being able to monitor assets 
efficiently, it’s more than that. Efficiency and productivity comes from 
not reviewing assets. When the measures are set up correctly, the orga-
nization need look only at assets that are underperforming or unde-
rused. By grounding the philosophy in value rather than effort, the 
organization can reduce maintenance costs and increase time available 
for better value-creating activities.
The Need for Governance
Coordinating all the groups involved in business analytics can be 
extremely challenging. The greater the overhead needed to coordi-
nate activities, the harder it is for organizations to leverage business 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  139
analytics as a real competitive rather than just a useful source of 
insight.
Productivity and efficiency comes from:
◼
◼Defining an engagement model that identifies the handover 
points between individuals
◼
◼Establishing standardized development and deployment processes
Getting this right helps drive process efficiencies, ensure quality con-
trol, and simplify the application of competencies across new prob-
lems. It also ensures that governance is tailored appropriately. Too 
much, and innovation suffers; too little, and operational risks increase.
It’s a key part of an effective operating model. The major focus in 
this area is on managing workflow and facilitating collaboration and, 
just like integration and asset management, this occurs at two levels:
	
1.	Coordinating the development of analytical assets
	
2.	Coordinating the deployment of analytical assets
As with asset management, there is no reason why both of these activ-
ities can’t take advantage of a common technology platform and man-
agement approach. It’s important to remember, however, that while 
the vast majority of their requirements overlap, the level of emphasis 
placed on specific requirements varies between the two.
Achieving best practice within this process requires at a minimum:
◼
◼Establishing a clear operating model that outlines roles, respon-
sibilities, and handover points
◼
◼Documenting and following standardized processes
◼
◼Having well-defined points of ownership with the power to 
make decisions
◼
◼Ensuring a high degree of quality through explicit quality con-
trol activities
Unclear processes almost always create highly variable outcomes 
and process inefficiencies. It’s hard for an organization to drive con-
tinuous improvement when everyone follows a different process. 
Some people will naturally do things more efficiently than others. 
Unfortunately, when everyone does things differently, it’s almost 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
140 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
impossible to replicate those efficiencies. Having standard processes 
not only increases agility through making sure everyone has clarity 
on how to execute but also ensures that everyone benefits when team 
members find new efficiencies.
This does not necessarily mean that activities need to be defined to 
the lowest level of detail possible—a certain degree of pragmatism and 
realism needs to be applied when working out an appropriate level 
of granularity. It’s also true that too much rigidity stifles innovation; 
when people aren’t given the freedom to experiment, improvements 
tend to be the first thing that suffers.
Underpinning these processes are roles and responsibilities. To be 
effective, everyone must be crystal clear on what they are respon-
sible for delivering as well as when they need to get involved. This 
helps provide certainty as well as reduce transaction costs. By link-
ing roles to activities, the workflow system itself can automatically 
notify stakeholders when their interaction is required. If a champion 
model has been submitted by an analyst, the next logical step would 
be for the information management team to deploy that model  
into production and validate the predictions against the original 
model. Ideally, the system itself handles all the necessary notifica-
tions based on a combination of asset registration or workflow and 
process management.
Finally, effective governance requires a high degree of quality con-
trol. When it comes to dealing with operational systems, repeatability 
and transparency are critical. Every process must be exhaustively tested 
prior to moving it into production lest it fail and cost the organiza-
tion real money. Minimizing risk involves ensuring that standard tests 
are applied, making sure that appropriate signoffs are followed, and  
ensuring that outputs and predictions are the same in production as in 
development. While the checks will vary between information assets 
and analytical assets, the need for a high degree of quality control is  
a constant.
HOW DOES IT CREATE VALUE?
The fastest way to discourage innovation is to make it hard. Everyone 
has a day job; if you’re trying to get people to go above and beyond 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  141
the call of duty, you need to make it easy. As covered in the last two 
sections, there are many moving parts in creating value. And, each of 
these parts involves multiple parties. Because of this, simply setting up 
a group isn’t enough; it needs to be accessible, responsive, and valu-
able. If it isn’t, it’ll fail.
The best answer is one that blends flexibility with rigor, aligned 
against an operating model that gradually transitions from exploration 
into execution. Rather than building the approach around the funding 
model, the funding model should be dictated by the operating model.
The Wheel of Value
In moving from insight to execution to improvement, every organiza-
tion needs to follow the wheel of value and go through six key stages, as 
shown in Figure 6.2.
Value only ever comes from the ability to execute. In cases where 
this involves coordinating multiple parties, this is only possible when 
Figure 6.2  The Wheel of Value
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
142 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
there’s a clear operating model. A well-defined operating model 
ensures that:
◼
◼Processes are aligned to support agility through prototyping, 
with “process hardening” happening only once solutions have 
been validated.
◼
◼Insight is acted on, thereby allowing the potential for better out-
comes and impact.
◼
◼Measurement supports self-awareness, improving focus in the 
right areas and allowing for pragmatic effort and investment 
prioritization.
◼
◼Institutionalized learning processes enable and support growth 
and continuous improvement.
One of the biggest advantages of big data lies in its ability to expose 
“unknown unknowns.” By mashing up novel combinations of infor-
mation, data scientists can discover insights that the organization may 
have never even considered. Experimentation usually takes place in 
the absence of a defined business problem.
Once a business problem has been defined, the organization moves 
on to exploration. The business faces a challenge that requires some 
form of analysis. Again, this is deeply within the realm of the data sci-
entists. Through blending qualitative and quantitative evidence, they 
seek to validate or disprove some hypothesis. It might be as simple as 
testing whether some customers prefer email over phone contact. It 
might be as complex as identifying the root cause for revenue leakage 
within a highly complex supply chain and manufacturing process.
This, along with experimentation, is the core of analytics as most 
think of it; it’s complex, it’s scientific, and it’s usually highly numerical. 
It’s also highly uncertain; data scientists rarely know the answer before 
they start. At best, they’ll have the experience to know what will likely 
get them to the right answer. In practice though, it’s usually a voyage 
of discovery, one where novel insights frequently abound.
Because of this, it’s characterized by weakly defined processes. 
Success usually comes down to the creativity and capability of the indi-
vidual. While some control measures can and should be put in place, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  143
at best they’re usually guidelines and milestones. While everyone  
should still be working from common technologies and data sources, 
there’s still a strong need for flexibility. The fastest way to inhibit 
­outcomes in this stage is to mandate heavyweight and standardized 
processes. Kill creativity and you kill the Golden Goose.
Eventually, this creative process generates an answer. It may not 
always be the answer people were expecting, but it’s an answer, none-
theless. What might have started out as a fraud investigation might 
eventually turn out to be a sales opportunity. Knowing the answer is 
half the battle; to make the answer worth something, it needs to be 
acted on. The best approach to doing so is to integrate the analytics 
into operational processes.
For example, unhappy customers rarely enjoy being sold to. By 
incorporating customer sentiment into the recommendations it makes, 
the organization can better decide whether to focus on sales or service 
by customer. Rather than sell to an unhappy customer, it might be 
better to tell them ways that they can better use their existing services. 
And, rather than tell happy customers about the benefits of the ser-
vices they’ve subscribed to, it might be better to take the opportunity 
to offer other services that they’ll be even happier with.
This represents a change in delivery. Insights usually come from a 
creative process, one involving weakly defined processes. To automate 
these processes, they need to be strongly defined. Without a series of 
steps that involve clearly defined inputs and outputs, it’s impossible to 
turn these manual processes into automated processes.
Unfortunately, the people with the skills to create these insights 
are often not the people who are best placed to create these auto-
mated processes. This doesn’t represent a lack of vision of understand-
ing; it’s simply the reality of an increasingly fragmented skills base 
created through hyper-specialization. Building the skills required by a 
high-performing data scientist can take a decade or more. Building the 
skills required by a high-performing enterprise architect can equally 
take a decade or more. Rather than setting the unrealistic goal of hir-
ing someone with perfect skills, it’s usually easier to split functions 
between prototyping and automation, thereby increasing the size of 
the available labor pool.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
144 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Prototyping involves building an asset that is characterized by:
◼
◼Algorithms and logic rather than guidelines and weakly defined 
processes
◼
◼A high degree of encapsulation, in that the asset is portable and 
can be handed to other people or systems for controlled use 
without breaking functionality or outputs
◼
◼A high degree of abstraction, in that the asset takes a known and 
finite set of inputs and delivers a known and finite set of outputs 
without the user needing to understand the internal complexi-
ties of the asset
Exploration and prototyping require agility and flexibility. They’re 
focused primarily on user acceptance. Requirements are rarely known 
up front and delivering to business requirements is a highly iterative 
process. Because of this, while these prototypes reflect an accurate rep-
resentation of the logic needed to deliver the outcome, they are rarely:
◼
◼Scalable
◼
◼Robust
◼
◼Ready to be integrated with operational systems
Automating these assets typically involves going through strongly 
defined development, test, and production processes that progressively:
◼
◼Optimize their underlying logic to achieve higher levels of 
performance
◼
◼Validate their results against expected results
◼
◼Integrate their logic into operational systems while ensuring 
business continuity and overall systems stability
Once automated, these assets provide regular recommendations to 
management, operations, and front-line staff through expected deliv-
ery channels. Automation is frequently the domain of IT and tends to 
focus more on unit and integration testing. The goal at this point is not 
to create something new. It’s to take what’s already been created and 
make it bulletproof.
Closing the loop involves ensuring that the impact of these recom-
mendations is understood and that actions (or inactions) are adjusted 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  145
to support continuous improvement. This involves ensuring that 
activities are measured and evaluated and, based on results, adjusted 
to support continuous improvement. These carry through the final 
stages: measurement and improvement. All parties have a role to play 
in these stages, focusing on their personal areas of expertise.
By mapping roles, responsibilities, and funding models to the six 
stages of the “wheel of value,” organizations make it clear how insights 
will eventually move into production. They make it easy for other 
business units to get engaged. And, they provide clarity on where 
the handover points exist and what’s expected at each point. A major 
point of competitive differentiation comes from reducing the time 
it takes to move through this entire cycle. The faster the wheel, the 
greater an organization’s ability to out-think, out-act, and out-learn 
its competitors.
When this operating model is broken, the business inevitably 
experiences four pains. First, insight without action destroys value. 
Having too much insight without the ability to act on it creates confu-
sion and introduces delays through “analysis paralysis.” Typically, it 
eventually leads to organizations rejecting the use of their informa-
tion assets. When it becomes too hard to leverage quantitative insight 
in any meaningful way, people will revert to gut-feel and subjective 
opinions.
Second, action without insight is guesswork. Insight can stem from 
qualitative or quantitative sources and can be intuitively or analyti-
cally based. Critically though, actions that are not based on clear link-
age to supporting evidence are no better than guesswork and, more 
often than not, lead to suboptimal outcomes.
Third, outcomes without measurement prevent improvement. 
When the effectiveness of actions in driving outcomes or impact is  
not measured, organizations have no way of knowing what is or is not 
working. This actively inhibits improvement.
Finally, measurement without learning creates stagnation. Measures 
are worthless unless they are actively used to drive better behaviors. It 
may be that particular services are known to have minimal impact on 
getting long-term beneficiaries off the welfare system. This knowledge 
does little unless it is put into practice and operational staff are discour-
aged from offering those services.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
146 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Ensuring Sustainability
To be sustainable, every group needs to cover its costs. Unfortunately, 
this sometimes acts as a major barrier to the organization getting 
engaged. It’d be nice to offer services for free. Unfortunately, every-
thing costs money and data scientists aren’t cheap. Changes to opera-
tional systems or data warehouses are even more prohibitive. It’s not 
unheard of for a single data feed to cost over a million dollars in inter-
nal resourcing costs.
Every group is established as either a cost center or a profit center. 
Cost centers are covered through a defined budget with no expecta-
tions that they’ll cover their costs. As a shared service center, they sup-
port the business and are very easy to engage with. They also struggle 
to justify ongoing investment; to an accountant, they’re still a cost. 
Profit centers need to be self-sustaining. Through negotiation, transfer 
prices, or direct cost recovery, they need to be able to demonstrate 
their contribution to the organization’s bottom line. While they’re 
often proactive, every integration they have with another unit “costs” 
money. As such, while they rarely struggle to get investment as long as 
they can demonstrate financial performance, their constant focus on 
cost recovery can act as a disincentive for other groups.
This seems to force an impossible choice. If the group tries to 
recover its costs from the start, it’ll compound cultural resistance with 
financial resistance. No one likes being asked to pay for something 
upfront where the value is not necessarily known yet. Unfortunately, 
analytics is mainly about dealing with uncertainty. However, never 
recovering anything greatly limits what the team can achieve. Making 
changes to operational systems costs real money and without this 
funding, it’s impossible to embed analytics in operational processes.
Clearly, neither model is more effective than the other; each offers 
different advantages and disadvantages. The mistake most organiza-
tions make is to assume that it needs to be one or the other. By starting 
with the funding model rather than the desired outcomes, they make 
it that much harder to succeed.
The best solution is to align the funding approach against each 
activity’s objectives. Early on, the net should be cast as wide as pos-
sible. While the expected value from any given project is usually quite 
low, some will offer significant value. These need to be identified 
and validated if a case is to be made for change. Once validated, the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O p e r a t i n g  M o d e l s  ◂  147
expected return should be significant enough to justify the investment 
that will be needed to change operational processes.
Following the trajectory of expected value creates the process 
described in Figure 6.3.
During early stages, the main objective is simply to determine 
whether a solution exists and, if so, whether it’s feasible to develop. 
Rather than create barriers to adoption or innovation at this point, 
it’s better to make it as easy as possible to engage with the group. By 
treating the people who support exploration as a cost center, other 
groups are free to engage without having to allocate budget or other-
wise reprioritize their activities. Flexibility is key during this stage and 
as such, simply defining the engagement approach is usually enough. 
Activity and focus are best managed by prioritization, often supported 
through an oversight executive committee comprised of key senior 
stakeholders from the group’s customers.
Figure 6.3  The Return Cycle
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
148 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
If there’s merit in investigating whether it’s worth converting the 
results of exploration into an operational process, that same group can 
assist with feasibility and prototyping. Agility and relevancy are key 
during this stage and, as such, methodologies such as Agile are well 
suited. Even better, the target result of this process should be a clear 
understanding of what the value of the change would be to the busi-
ness. This helps build the business case and justify more direct and 
significant funding. Activity and focus are again best managed through 
prioritization, again through the oversight management committee.
Converting the prototype into a robust operational process is 
where the real costs start to mount. It’s also where the real value of 
business analytics starts to emerge. Because of this, it also makes sense 
to treat the group responsible for automation as a profit center with 
their time accounted for either through cost recovery or direct rec-
ognition via a true or shadow profit-and-loss statement. Efficiency 
and repeatability are key during this stage and because of this, service 
design approaches such as the IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL), soft-
ware development methodologies such as the waterfall method, and 
project management methodologies such as PRINCE2 are well suited. 
Activity and focus is managed through direct investment and program 
of work management.
There’s good reason to separate exploration from execution. By 
having an investment model designed to both encourage use as well as 
support return, business analytics becomes self-funding without unin-
tentionally establishing barriers to adoption. The goal is to make it self-
sufficient and profitable, not just a cost center with no clear direction.
NOTES
	1.	 For a far more comprehensive review and explanation of these concepts along 
with how to quantify them, see Chapters 4 and 6 of Evan Stubbs, Delivering Business 
Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013) 
and Evan Stubbs, The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Profitability 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
	2.	 For more detail on the use of operational analytics and decision orchestration, see 
Chapters 6 and 9 of Evan Stubbs, Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for 
Best Practice (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
149
C H A P T E R  7
Human Capital
C
hange is inevitable and business analytics is a profession of  
change. The domain has and will continue to change—as our data 
grows exponentially, the real game is moving away from sheer 
brainpower to being able to harness and reduce complexity. Having 
the right answer is only the first step. Without the right supporting 
systems to act on that answer, it’s all wasted effort.
That doesn’t necessarily preclude sophistication or highly advanced 
analytics. What it does instead is encourage focus on developing the 
right competencies, tasking people with the right objectives, and struc-
turing the organization in a way that allows it to foster, retain, and 
develop talent. By focusing in the right areas, the leadership team can 
hire the right people, establish the right incentives, drive efficiencies, 
and nurture the right behaviors.
One of the reasons it’s so hard to find the right people is because 
of the breadth of the field. Business analytics is a spectrum that ranges 
from relatively simple information management to highly special-
ized fields such as operations research or machine learning. Assuming 
­people with different skills are substitutable just because they work in 
“analytics” is a recipe for disaster. Much like building a house requires 
more than just a carpenter, most of these skills are not interchangeable.
That in itself is a challenge—without the right domain knowledge, 
hiring someone with highly specialized experience can be a shot in the 
dark. Complicating things further is that while analytics tends to focus 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
150 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
on hard skills, business analytics requires both hard and soft skills. As a 
profession, business analytics is primarily about blending change man-
agement skills with technical domain knowledge. To help with build-
ing human capital, the rest of this chapter focuses on three things:
	
1.	What capabilities do I need?
	
2.	How do I get the right people?
	
3.	How do I keep them?
Reducing uncertainty during the hiring process is difficult. Luckily, 
though, there are a few things to be aware of that can help improve 
the odds of getting the right person. Getting off on the right foot starts 
with knowing what you’re looking for. The rest of this chapter will 
answer these questions and lay the foundation for skills acquisition 
and development.
WHAT CAPABILITIES DO I NEED?
Data scientists have been getting a lot of interest. There are many 
­reasons for this, not the least of which is the amount of chatter about 
big data. However, it’s more than just a title. There’s a very real need to 
describe in a concise way the difference between a statistician or ­analyst 
and someone who practices business analytics. In markets character-
ized by imperfect information, buyers and sellers often develop signals 
that help communicate relevant information in a concise (and often 
difficult to replicate) way. Being aware of this and taking advantage of 
it can make the difference between hiring the right or wrong person 
for the job.
Numerical analysts have been described by a variety of titles. 
Depending on the context, industry, and organization, they’ve been 
called applied statisticians, data miners, predictive modelers, risk ana-
lysts, or just simply quantitative analysts. The field is broad, but these 
roles consistently exhibited some common patterns:
◼
◼A focus on numerical analysis in some form
◼
◼Specialized in technical skills
◼
◼Strong background and focus on theoretical knowledge
◼
◼Ability to generate and communicate insight
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  151
These are critical in generating insight. Business analytics, however, 
goes beyond this—it also requires the ability to:
◼
◼Emphasize recommendations over insight and outcomes over 
analysis.
◼
◼Define processes based on an organization’s ability to execute, 
not on what’s possible.
◼
◼Create repeatable processes rather than doing independent, dis-
crete, and one-off activities.
◼
◼Understand and apply organizational psychology and influence.
For an organization hiring someone to drive business analytics, these 
differences can make or break a project. To see why, consider Figure 7.1.
As covered in the previous chapter, value comes from using infor-
mation to generate insight and take action. This value needs to be 
aligned against strategic priorities and the organization’s unique busi-
ness model. However, action is impossible without change. And, 
change requires a reason to act. The value needs to be understood and 
communicated. And once delivered, the only way to fuel more change 
Figure 7.1  The Path to Profitability
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
152 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
is to build trust through measuring that value and demonstrating that 
everything promised was delivered.
These are very different skills. Getting insight out of big data is 
impossible without access to high-powered analytical capabilities. 
However, getting an organization to change is impossible without the 
ability to communicate, sell, and build trust. This, at its most basic, is 
the difference between a data scientist and a value architect. And, organi-
zations interested in maximizing their return from big data need both.
For those hiring, advertising a role for a “data scientist” rather than 
an “applied statistician” can help communicate the different focus and 
intent. However, if they’re unaware of the importance of change in the 
overall process, they can quickly find that what they got wasn’t what 
they were looking for. These differences also need to cascade down 
to the job description and be made obvious—while it won’t stop the 
wrong people from applying, it will help improve the odds of getting 
the right person.
Data Science
Generating insights from data isn’t a new profession. Historically called 
quants, statisticians, analysts, or even the now-quaint term computers, 
organizations have been using data-crunchers to create competitive 
advantage for centuries. In fact, it sometimes comes as a surprise how 
long the profession has been around. It’s arguable that Bletchley Park 
managed to shorten World War II by years through their cryptographic 
analysis.1 Even Guinness, the well-known brewer, was using analytics 
at the turn of the twentieth century to create competitive advantage.2
Still, there are some differences. First, data science is more than 
just analytics; it blends communication skills with information man-
agement and experimental testing knowledge. While the difference 
may seem small, a key part is the scientific mindset data scientists 
bring. They emphasize testing and validating a hypothesis using big 
data rather than simple exploration or statistical reporting. Good data 
scientists excel in simplifying the complex, always striving to get to the 
core of the problem.
While they demonstrate an academic or scientific mindset, their 
goal is to solve the problem, not necessarily expand the boundaries 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  153
of knowledge. In that sense, their focus is very much applied rather 
than theoretical. Characterized by curiosity, they get excitement  
out of answering the why and working out the how. Faced with impos-
sible challenges, they’ll look for a way to overcome them rather than 
accept them.
Second, they have the ability to work with big data. At a mini-
mum, they’re completely at home with “large data.” More typically, 
they’re comfortable with big data in its purest sense. Unstructured, 
high-velocity sensor data presents an exciting challenge to them. For 
experienced data scientists, experience working with petabytes of data 
simply justifies membership to the club, not recognition.
Finally, they are highly multifunctional. They draw their knowl-
edge and experience from multiple disciplines and often, multiple 
domains. Many have experience in domains as diverse as linguistics, 
graph theory, and unsupervised machine learning. Programming is 
a given, as is knowledge of statistical methods. This forms the heart 
of one of their greatest strengths—their ability to draw from multiple 
schools of thought. They have an almost-supernatural ability to see 
the patterns among industries, cross-referencing and using their expe-
rience to solve diverse problems using common skills.
Competent data scientists are hard to find. As in every growth 
industry, many claim the titles that seem to carry the greatest remu-
neration. Unfortunately, just because someone has the title Data 
Scientist on his resume doesn’t necessarily mean he is one.
Value Architecture
Data scientists are a key part of the picture. However, they’re not the 
answer on their own. Insight without the ability to get the organiza-
tion to act on it is wasted potential. The biggest mistake organizations 
often make is to assume that their data scientist can do everything. In 
some rare cases, she can. Usually though, getting value out of big data 
and business also requires someone to focus on selling the value of 
change.
Like the opposing forces of yin and yang, data scientists need their 
counterpart if they’re to create value. Too much insight can be detri-
mental; faced with a data deluge, the worst thing one can do is to use 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
154 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
that data to generate even more data! Left alone, many data scientists 
will fly beyond their organization’s ability to comprehend the value of 
what they’re doing.
The answer isn’t to stop them from being smart or innovative. 
Instead, it’s to make sure that they’re complemented by someone 
focused on helping the organization transition and change. This is a dif-
ferent skill set, one characterized by value architects. These theotors, liter-
ally the “gods of twist,” are experts in change. Almost actipreneurs, they 
are experts in making sure insights are acted on to drive real benefits.
Unlike data scientists, they care a bit less about the insight. Instead, 
they care about the organization’s ability to realize value from that 
insight. They’re often more passionate about innovation and getting 
the business to change for the better than they are about the specifics 
of the “how.”3
Communication is obviously a key part of this. However, their 
skills go beyond those of a data scientist. Their role is that of a true 
change agent, one who understands how to define, persuade, and 
drive organizational transformation. While they may not have the 
analytical capability to mirror the best data scientists, they’re unparal-
leled in getting the organization to change the way it operates.
Change starts with a sense of urgency. Value architects help the orga-
nization understand what the change is worth. They help the organiza-
tion navigate the path to get there. Finally, they use those successes to 
fuel the next round of change. Value architects are the link that enables 
the organization to get value out of the analytical capabilities. While 
some data scientists are also value architects, most aren’t. The goal of a 
value architect is to move the insight through to action and, eventually, 
change. They’re also the key to unlocking longer-term differentiation. 
They ensure a focus on linking tactical gains into strategic benefits.
The Power of Both
Left alone, few analytics teams are good at change management. That’s 
not a criticism—if their primary objective is to generate insight, there’s 
little need for skills that don’t support that goal. Business analytics, 
however, is about driving change. And so, part of establishing an effec-
tive business analytics team involves augmenting the analytics team 
with business analytics skills.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  155
Given most data scientists are focused on data, detail, and math-
ematical creativity, it’s rare to find one person who has all the right 
skills. Unfortunately, without someone to evangelize and drive real 
change, the investment most organizations make in data scientists 
goes to waste. Establishing a strong capability means having a plan to 
acquire both types of skills, not one or the other.
Good value architects are an even-rarer breed than data scientists. 
They draw heavily from knowledge of operational analytics, change 
management, and strategic planning. As Figure 7.2 shows, they com-
plement the skills of the data scientists and together, they are the 
lynchpin to unlocking value and enabling innovation from big data.
The most effective business analytics teams structure themselves 
to support two somewhat different objectives. On one hand, they 
provide enough role coverage to span the entire analytical lifecycle 
from information management to operationalization and value mea-
surement. On the other, they also understand that delivery, while 
essential, is only part of the picture. Delivery also requires a defined 
opportunity, broad stakeholder support, and the right frameworks in 
place to ensure every initiative represents a connected steppingstone 
to true competitive differentiation.
In many ways, these represent two sides of the same coin: one is 
focused on value creation while the other is focused on value iden-
tification. These are tightly interdependent—without its counterpart, 
Figure 7.2  Data Science vs. Value Architecture
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
156 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
each is largely ineffective. Delivery without an opportunity usually 
regresses to exploration and research. An opportunity without the 
capability to deliver is simply a good idea. The best teams have a blend 
of resources and responsibilities that support both.4
Rather than simply accepting the team’s environment as a given, 
the most effective teams play an active role in transforming the orga-
nization, focusing on:
◼
◼Proactively identifying opportunities to drive value through 
business analytics
◼
◼Driving and managing change
◼
◼Ensuring consistency in execution and measurement across the 
organization
This reflects a very real move toward playing a proactive role in 
driving transformation. Instead of being fearful of change, the team 
embraces it and, by developing skills in change management, helps 
the organization move toward best practice. They each focus on dif-
ferent things, as shown in Figure 7.3. The heart of business analytics 
is change. This requires both an answer as well as a reason to change. 
Figure 7.3  Data Science Combined with Value Architecture
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  157
Data scientists concern themselves with the answer, value architects 
with the reason to change.
Together, they link insight to value. Often, they form a partner-
ship to lead a broader team. These roles do not necessarily map one-
to-one with individuals. People in smaller teams may play more than 
one role. Critically, though, an effective team has coverage across both 
these activities to some degree. When there’s insufficient coverage, the 
odds of success drop substantially.
HOW DO I GET THE RIGHT PEOPLE?
It shouldn’t be surprising that some teams are just better than ­others. 
While it’s true that technology, data, and process can all influence ­success, 
it’s also true that these pale in comparison to having the right people.
This isn’t unique to business analytics; it’s a well-documented 
phenomenon that shows up across every industry sector and dis-
cipline. Fred Brooks found that their most highly performing pro-
grammers were 10 times more productive compared to their average 
peers.5 Robert Glass set this even higher, suggesting that the most 
productive programmers were up to 28 times more productive than 
their peers.6
Great results require great talent; Steve Jobs often spoke of his need 
to hire “A” performers.7 This is equally true in business analytics. While 
performance obviously varies, the most capable firms are able to achieve 
a level of productivity (as measured by outputs or financial impact) often  
over an order-of-magnitude higher than the second. This is despite  
often having an order-of-magnitude fewer data scientists employed.
The SMART Model
There’s clearly a difference. And, it’s not surprising that given a choice, 
it everyone wants more of the first type of people and fewer of the 
second. The obvious question is, how do you identify them?
High-performing people display three different types of capability. 
At a minimum, they need to know how to do their job. Hard skills 
allow entry; applicants need to understand their tools, apply the scien-
tific method to data analytics, and be competent in interpreting their 
results. Validating these skills is fairly straightforward; because they’re 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
158 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
precise, it’s a case of testing knowledge. To this end, many interviews 
focus on case studies, artificial problems, or experiential validation. 
Unfortunately, it’s here where most interviews stop. And, these skills 
are the least important when it comes to success.
The trick to developing an effective team is in recognizing that not 
everyone needs to be expert in everything. Some people will natu-
rally develop into analytical experts. Some will become change agents. 
Others will become experts in driving business value. Having the right 
framework makes it easier to hire better people as well as develop inter-
nal talent. Luckily, there’s a simple way of identifying the right people. 
Figure 7.4 shows a technique to ensure high-quality human capital.
Art
The ideal data scientist knows everything. She can make magic hap-
pen. And, she has that “art,” the knowledge of how not just to do the 
job but to excel in it. We’d all love to hire that person. Realistically, 
though, finding the perfect person is impossible. Instead, it’s easier to 
make sure that in aggregate, the team has access to all the capabilities 
it needs. While no one person might be perfect, the whole may yet be 
greater than the sum of its parts.
On the scale of effort, the art is the easiest to develop. It simply requires 
the right training and exposure combined with the right attitude. Gaps 
can be filled by on-the-job training, courses, or higher education.
Figure 7.4  The SMART Model
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  159
The starting point is having access to generalist experience. While 
the person may have held many functional roles or responsibilities, at 
this level he has rarely encountered the same problem multiple times. 
Regardless of whether one is considering analytics, big data, or even 
managing innovation, challenges are solved from first principles and 
efficiency is relatively low. The bare minimum of competence is hav-
ing the hard skills necessary to “do the job.”
Given enough time, individuals face the same challenges repeat-
edly. Exposure causes their functional knowledge in specialist areas to 
increase, thereby increasing their efficiency through sheer experience. 
They understand best practice and hold to it.
A small set of people go beyond this. Drawing on their deep func-
tional knowledge, they transition from being a specialist into an inven-
tor. Rather than following best practice, they define it, often relying 
heavily on emerging technologies, knowledge, or networks. They ride 
on the crest of the wave, leading the industry as a whole.
Hiring an inventor is intuitively attractive. Unfortunately, in 
isolation these skills rarely correlate well with long-term success. 
Competency always has a role to play in the problems people can 
solve. However, just because someone can solve a problem with 
the skills he has does not necessarily mean that he will solve the 
problem.
This is often one of the reasons “B” performers end up hiring “C” 
resources. Without intuitively knowing how high performers are dif-
ferent from average performers, those doing the hiring need to rely 
on quantitative and objective methods to shortlist candidates. And, 
there’s nothing more explicit than stating and evaluating technical 
and nontechnical requirements for a role. Knowing how to do the job 
plays an important role in eliminating bad candidates but it helps little 
in differentiating the good from the great.
Skills are important, but without the maturity and science to go 
along with them, they don’t guarantee success.
Magic
If having the right degree and the right experience says little about a 
candidate’s ability to succeed, what else is there to go on? Beyond being 
able to know how to do their job, high performers also demonstrate 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
160 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
different behaviors. They approach their work from a perspective of “get-
ting things done,” and more often than not, understand the importance 
of quality. Their motivation is aligned with the organization’s higher 
intent, their focus is on making a difference, and they deeply under-
stand the organization’s high- and low-culture characteristics.8 This is 
the magic that turns someone from an expert into an enabler for change.
Needless to say, these skills are far harder to identify and evaluate 
without prolonged exposure. They’re also the hardest to develop in a 
structured way. Unfortunately, they’re also the most important factor 
in determining success. It’s for good reason these are often referred 
to as “soft” skills. They come with maturity, something that’s hard to 
train. To be effective, much of the effort focused on organizational 
change and human capital development needs to be focused on rein-
forcing and developing these skills. Coaching and mentoring are the 
main ways of developing these skills.
In practice, these differences span a broad spectrum of cognitive, 
behavioral, communication, and motivational factors. More than any-
thing else, it’s these characteristics that distinguish “A” performers 
from their counterparts. And, whether it be intuitive or deliberate, “A” 
performers often have an innate ability to identify people with simi-
lar behaviors. As managers or leaders, they either shape and enforce 
their culture around them or they leave; nothing frustrates a high per-
former more than being around incompetent or unmotivated people.
Getting people with the right soft skills is essential. Of course, the 
core challenge is that those same soft skills, by their very nature, are 
exceedingly hard to pin down. Consistently, though, high perform-
ers in business analytics tend to exhibit one or more of the following 
behaviors. They:
◼
◼Are effective and often passionate communicators and evangelists
◼
◼Have a deep and often diverse platform of hard skills to draw on
◼
◼Maintain a focus on value and outcomes rather than insight and 
answers
◼
◼Demonstrate a balance of creativity in problem solving with 
pragmatism in practicality of execution
◼
◼Understand the importance and role of culture and change 
management in driving outcomes
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  161
It’s useful to view this “behavioral” spectrum across three levels, 
each of which builds on the previous. The starting point is under-
standing the importance of delivery. Without activity, nothing hap-
pens. The bare minimum of competence is ensuring that the job “gets 
done.” Usually, they benchmark their professional success on whether 
they’ve met their performance metrics.
At some stage, most individuals start to question the impact their 
activities have on the broader business. When this happens, some 
make the intuitive leap to understanding the importance of outcomes 
rather than effort. Their attention often moves to demonstrating 
return, measuring outcomes, and building a culture focused on value 
creation. They benchmark their professional success on the value they 
have created.
Again, a small set of people go beyond this. Rather than being 
content with their organization as it is, they see the potential of what 
it could be. Their focus shifts toward change and evangelism and their 
effort moves toward organizational transformation. They benchmark 
their professional success on the degree to which they’ve changed the 
world around them.
Science
The need for experience and soft skills is not unique to business ana-
lytics. Whether they’re employed in consumer goods, the public sec-
tor, or any other industry, high performers everywhere demonstrate 
these characteristics. Where business analytics differs from many other 
disciplines is the need for cross-functional knowledge. Without science, 
the best skills in the world are just theoretical.
Analytics is a technical discipline based on rich theory. However, it 
can’t happen in a vacuum; to create value, it needs to be applied to a 
business problem. And, solving this problem most effectively requires 
domain knowledge. This spectrum of science is the final dimension that 
differentiates high performers from average performers.
At the lowest level is theory. This often spans a wide range of dis-
ciplines, including mathematics, computer science, machine learn-
ing, and the scientific method. The bare minimum of competence 
within this dimension is having a sufficiently deep prerequisite level 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
162 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
of knowledge to start experimentation. While individuals may have 
solved problems in academic or theoretical contexts, they lack the 
“battle experience” of solving the same problems in environments 
clouded by politics, poor data, and constantly shifting organizational 
priorities.
Over time, this theory transitions into practice. They apply their 
skills to real-world problems and, by doing so, build an understand-
ing of how abstract mathematical or computational processes can be 
applied to business problems. These individuals have the knowledge 
and ability to solve business problems using analytics.
Yet again, a small set of people go beyond this. Building on their 
raw analytical knowledge, they gain an understanding of their organi-
zation’s business model. They make the leap from practice to domain 
expertise, bridging the gap between deduction and intuition. Rather 
than having generic analytics skills, they straddle the gap between 
mathematics and business, having the ability to play the role of both 
the analyst as well as the business representative. They understand the 
constraints the business is operating under, the outcomes it is trying 
to drive, and all of the low-level intricacies that might prevent it from 
realizing the opportunity.
HOW DO I KEEP THEM?
The difference between a team that retains its high performers and 
one that lets them churn is like night and day—there’s nothing that 
undermines an organization’s ability to capitalize on business analytics 
like losing the team.
There’s good reason for this. As covered in Chapter 2, the labor 
market will continue to tighten. Still, it’s important to remain prag-
matic. The fact that skills are scarce shouldn’t be a reason to live in 
fear. The mantra for the future is, achieving excellence requires devel-
oping excellence.
Retention is critical because it takes time to understand an organi-
zation’s processes, information sources, and business models. On one 
hand, new starters face a variety of technical challenges. They need to 
understand what information is captured and available, how trustwor-
thy that information is, as well as how best to take advantage of their 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  163
technology landscape. However, this is only a small part of their over-
all learning curve. Because business analytics is fundamentally about 
driving change, they also need to understand the organization’s politi-
cal landscape, business model, and culture. This doesn’t come easily—
it takes time to absorb.
Because of this, employee turnover is the bane of every team. 
Losing the wrong people can set a team back by months. These pains 
are particularly acute in a business analytics team. It’s not uncommon 
to see new hires be almost totally unproductive for anywhere up to 
a year while they come to terms with an organization’s unique char-
acteristics. An analyst is only as good as her ability to understand the 
data she is working with.
Given that a team should ideally be creating value in under a 
12-month horizon, delays caused by employee turnover can totally 
undermine a team’s success. Retention is always difficult. However, 
there are some useful guidelines to keep in mind. Effective leaders:
◼
◼Understand their team’s worth
◼
◼Keep things interesting
◼
◼Develop first, and hire second
First, keep on top of what you’re paying. Wage inflation is likely 
to continue over the next decade. However, the equally harsh truth 
is that not everyone is worth what the market is willing to pay for 
their skills. Shortages have a tendency to raise prices equally across the 
board, not just for those who deserve them.
On one hand, being price competitive is mandatory. On the other, 
so is balancing the opportunity cost of replacing existing skills with 
new. Long-term success requires developing a very real and frank 
understanding of how effective every resource is when benchmarked 
against market averages and paying rates to suit.
Second, match interests to activities. For some people, stability and 
repeatability is attractive. They value developing deep skills in a spe-
cific area. Others value innovation and breadth of experience. They 
value constantly facing new challenges and exploring the unknown. 
Retaining a good team often comes down to understanding what peo-
ple enjoy and ensuring that the roadmap aligns with their interests.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
164 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
This isn’t to say that the tail should wag the dog. The roadmap 
should always be defined to drive value and competitive differentia-
tion. However, the breadth of what’s possible is enormous, and wher-
ever it makes sense, this roadmap should capitalize on the team’s 
interests.
Finally, don’t assume that extending capabilities requires going 
external. Many believe that good analysts can’t be trained; the subject 
matter is sufficiently complex that practitioners require higher edu-
cation simply to create the right foundations. However, this misses 
a key difference between advanced analytics and business analytics. 
Within business analytics, it’s possible to create significant value using 
anything from relatively simple techniques to the most sophisticated. 
This can be developed, especially through coaching or mentoring. 
Developing maturity is something that’s best done under the guidance 
of a leader with vision and understanding.
Of course, there’s always the attraction of bringing in “new blood.” 
Sometimes, this is a good thing. However, because business analytics 
is so heavily aligned against an organization’s business model, a cor-
nerstone of this is a strong understanding of the business. Relying on 
employee turnover to build skills is limiting; the best teams fully under-
stand their business. And, the best way to do this is to develop first and 
hire externally second. The obvious exception is when the team moves 
toward more and more sophisticated techniques. Often, these require 
heavily specialized experience that can only be found in the market. 
However, this should be the exception rather than the norm.
NOTES
	1.	 T. M. A. Lomas and Computer Security Group, “The Influence of ULTRA in  
the Second World War” (interview by Harry Hinsley), Computer Laboratory, 
University of Cambridge, Nov. 26, 1996, www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/security/
Historical/hinsley.html (accessed Apr. 21, 2013).
	2.	 Joan Fisher Box, “Guinness, Gosset, Fisher, and Small Samples,” Statistical Science 2, 
no. 1 (1987): 45–52.
	3.	 Evan Stubbs, The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Profitability (Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
	4.	 For a full list of the roles that normally fall within a business analytics team along 
with typical hiring patterns, see Chapter 3, Evan Stubbs, The Value of Business 
Analytics.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
H u m a n  C a p i t a l  ◂  165
	5.	 Frederick P. Brooks, The Mythical Man-Month: Essays of Software Engineering (Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1975).
	6.	 Robert L. Glass, Facts and Fallacies of Software Engineering (Boston, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 2003).
	7.	 Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011).
	8.	 For more detail on organizational culture and how it often affects value architects, 
see Chapter 5 in Evan Stubbs, The Value of Business Analytics.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
167
PA R T
FOUR
Making It Happen
I
n Part One we looked externally, considering how our world is 
changing. In Part Two we looked internally, considering how we  
can change ourselves. In Part Three we looked around us, consider-
ing the ways we can make things better.
In this final part we look to the future. We complete the journey 
and bring it all together into a model that enables innovation.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
169
C H A P T E R  8
Innovating with 
Dynamic Value
S
uccess is impossible without knowing what it is you’re trying to 
achieve. Ironically, one of the biggest challenges in getting value 
from big data is usually working out where to start. Given a smor-
gasbord, the worst thing to do is to try to eat everything at once.
As a rule, we’re a species that enjoys self-improvement. Faced with 
a problem and motivation, most of us would rather solve it than live 
with it. We may not all have the ability to tear down a car for servic-
ing, but given the right set of skills, the right opportunity, and the right 
motivation, anyone can innovate.
Consider James, our well-intentioned if slightly erratic innovator. 
In his journey to monetize his organization’s data assets, he recognized 
fairly early that analysis alone wasn’t enough. He sold his vision on 
the back of innovation and, one way or another, he had to deliver it. 
Unfortunately, he failed to understand what he meant by “innova-
tion.” Because of that, many of his successes in his first year were 
underappreciated or outright overlooked.
Innovation sounds sexy. It’s also pretty amorphous; if it were easy, 
there probably wouldn’t be so many books on the topic. The best start-
ing point is to remember that there’s a difference between innovation 
and invention. Invention is unique; it represents the original creation 
of something new. By contrast, not all innovations need be completely 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
170 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
novel. In fact, the opposite is normally true—most innovations are 
simply improvements to existing knowledge, processes, or products.
Invention can only happen once for a given concept. Innovation 
based on that invention, however, can happen millions of times; inno-
vators improve inventions and often re-purpose them. Dr. Martin 
Cooper may have been the father of the mobile telephone. However, 
it was HTCT, TMN, and Eircell (among others) that took that invention 
and changed the way payments were made to reinvent the compo-
sition of their industry through prepaid mobile plans. Great success 
comes from either; just because it’s not groundbreaking doesn’t mean 
it isn’t innovative. The trick is in viewing innovation not as a one-off 
activity but as a repeatable process.
This chapter brings everything together. It links big data, analytics, 
and human capital into an innovation engine, one that creates dynamic 
value. It covers:
◼
◼The innovation cycle
◼
◼The innovation paradox
◼
◼The secret to success: dynamic value
◼
◼The innovation engine
◼
◼Reinventing the ro¯nin
THE INNOVATION CYCLE
Innovation, at least conceptually, is actually surprisingly straightfor-
ward. There needs to be a good idea. There needs to be a way of trans-
lating that idea into a solution to a specific problem. There needs to be 
a way of making that idea a reality. These are simple steps, but they’re 
deceptively hard to do. Many ideas get lost because there isn’t a clear 
channel to take advantage of them. The vast majority of innovations 
go nowhere—it’s easier to think than it is to do.
This innovation cycle is shown in Figure 8.1. Big outcomes always 
start with ideation, the process of generating ideas. These ideas are 
then made real through invention or innovation, usually accompanied 
by a great deal of experimentation and effort. And finally, the success-
ful prototypes are commercialized.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  171
Business analytics isn’t any different. Generating innovation from 
big data is straightforward, if not necessarily easy. It starts with an 
operating model that:
◼
◼Encourages and rewards a culture of creativity, curiosity, and 
ownership
◼
◼Translates the innovation cycle into a practical process
◼
◼Prioritizes effort and investment based on value creation, not 
activity
Get those right and while not guaranteed, innovation and invention  
at least becomes achievable.
As with many things, innovation is rooted in culture. Anyone can 
innovate as long as they’re given the freedom, flexibility, and tools to 
do so. Big data represents a treasure-trove of fertile ground for poten-
tially innovative novel data mashups, insights, and solutions. Unsolved 
problems often lead to invention. And, coming up with interesting 
ideas or problem definitions can often be as easy as encouraging cross-
pollination of experience and knowledge through internal rotation or 
Figure 8.1  The Innovation Cycle
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
172 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
external networking. What’s standard in one industry may be ground-
breaking in another.
To come up with good ideas, people need to feel comfortable doing 
so. Ideation is impossible when people are punished for being creative 
and having curiosity. Equally, motivation is impossible without some 
degree of ownership and some form of reward, financial or otherwise. 
Organizations that refuse to acknowledge internal challenges are a 
classic example of this.
The manufacturer discussed in Chapter 3 refused to recognize 
that many of their core problems came not from external issues but 
from internal inefficiencies. A significant proportion of their business 
model revolved around importing foreign products and distributing 
them domestically. Unfortunately, their volumes were highly volatile; 
if they ordered a thousand of a particular item in any given month, in 
three months they might have received anywhere from five hundred 
to two thousand.
Among many other challenges, the organization had developed a 
self-reinforcing culture of accepting the status quo and discouraging 
curiosity. Every attempt by new hires to investigate and resolve the 
source of this uncertainty was discouraged in favor of the existing pro-
cess. In most cases, these new hires eventually left for more supportive 
cultures, further reinforcing the dominant culture. The true irony is that 
that same organization not only had the data to solve their issues but 
was already using relevant simulation and forecasting techniques else-
where in the business to solve the same problem in an unrelated area.
Eventually, this culture was a contributing factor to killing the 
organization. Constant profit erosion and customer dissatisfaction led 
to declining market share. After repeated cycles of downsizing and 
redundancies, they passed the point of no return.
THE INNOVATION PARADOX
Encouraging ideas represents the starting point. If relevant and fea-
sible, some of these ideas may generate true invention. PageRank, an 
algorithm developed by Larry Page and Sergey Brin while at Stanford, 
used large amounts of data to rank information importance based 
on link popularity. That single invention ended up spawning one of 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  173
the world’s largest companies, Google. More importantly though, not 
every innovation is the same. The best way to improve the ratio of 
effort to success is to understand that for the vast majority of organiza-
tions, certain types of innovation are inherently incompatible.
Some of us are dreamers, entranced by the world that might be. 
Others of us are doers, interested in improving our existing world. 
Some straddle the two, equally at home in both worlds. We’re inher-
ently flexible; we adapt to our social structure, our surroundings, and 
even our desires.
Organizations don’t work this way. People need to be aligned. 
There needs to be direction. They require structure to succeed; by defi-
nition, without structure there is no organization. There’s simply a 
collection of individuals.
This structure carries significant advantages. It distributes authority 
and streamlines decision-making processes. It makes it easy to mobilize 
a large number of people around a common goal. And, when operat-
ing effectively, it offers efficiencies that would be otherwise impossible 
to achieve individually regardless of knowledge, skill, or experience.
Unfortunately, these advantages do not come free. Larger orga-
nizations face increased transaction costs; coordinating thousands of  
people is far harder than coordinating 50. Bureaucracy and diseconomies  
of scale have ground more than one organization to a halt. Equally, 
directed authority is a benefit and a curse. It helps drive efficiency and 
experience. Being able to focus in a specific area helps build capability. 
It also constrains focus to the scope of authority. In most situations, 
this unknowingly eliminates one of two types of innovation.
To understand how this works in practice, consider the different 
operating models of two groups in an organization. On one side is 
a team responsible for various business-as-usual activities, many of 
which could be improved in countless ways through reusing the orga-
nization’s data and existing analytics capabilities. On the other is the 
executive team, driven by the shareholders to ensure growth and 
commercial success. Both are aligned around organizational success. 
The form that success takes, however, might be slightly different.
To the team, success might be defined by efficiency. Efficiency 
will improve profitability, thereby delivering shareholder value. One 
source of innovation in their mind might be the use of Six Sigma 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
174 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
techniques or analytical process automation. To the executive team, 
however, success might be defined through reinvention. If their mar-
ket is mature, opportunities for growth might be limited. Innovation 
in their mind might stem from leveraging existing data assets to move 
into new market segments, diversifying their business and opening 
new growth avenues.
Both are legitimately innovation, and both are valuable. There 
is a difference, though: one is evolutionary innovation and the other 
revolutionary innovation (or, in author Clayton M. Christensen’s ter-
minology, sustaining and disruptive innovation1). To the team, inno-
vation might come from chasing continuous improvement. Toyota, 
through their application of kaizen, became tremendously successful 
taking this approach. Constant and continual improvement over a 
sustained enough period of time can create deep pricing and quality 
differentiation.
To the executive team however, innovation might come from doing 
things fundamentally differently. They might be more interested in 
questioning their existing business models and potentially actively dis-
rupting their own markets. Reinvention is a powerful force and orga-
nizations like Apple are famous for actively cannibalizing their own 
markets before others can. This, too, can create deep differentiation,  
through developing inimitable goods, capabilities, or processes.2
Both are tremendously valuable. Critically though, it’s almost 
impossible to charge any single person with doing both. Even though 
he may have the capability and interest in doing either, asking him to 
do both amounts to asking someone to both improve what he’s doing 
as well as stop doing what he’s doing. This forces cognitive dissonance, 
the outcome of which can only be either ignoring one approach or 
becoming paralyzed with indecision.
The business requires repeatability and efficiency. However, revo-
lutionary innovation requires questioning the status quo and “break-
ing the rules.” Even worse, the second is an active threat to the first. 
Large organizations are built to sustain and perpetuate their business 
models. Successful revolutionary innovations force change and disrup-
tion. Without forethought or a plan, being put in charge of “disruptive  
innovation” is often a poisonous pill. When left unmanaged, the 
conflict between evolution and revolution almost always ends with 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  175
casualties; the organization fractures until the individuals charged with 
revolutionary innovation are driven from the company. All things 
being equal, in a battle between the two, business as usual always wins.
A prime example of this conflict involved a publisher facing market 
disruption. Like many traditional publishers, they were under threat from 
the twin forces of “free” content and the move to digital media. Their rev-
enue model was heavily biased toward advertising—even though they 
operated on a paid subscription basis, the subscription fees they received 
barely covered the cost of paper and distribution. Once the fixed costs of 
journalists and plant were taken into account, their subscriptions alone 
would have left them bankrupt in mere months.
Their profitability depended on advertising. And, the rates they 
could charge from advertising were based on their subscriber numbers. 
In effect, they didn’t sell content; they sold eyeballs. Their customers 
were not their readers; they were the companies interested in pay-
ing for advertising space. As business models go, theirs was a fairly 
standard one in the industry. It did, however, create an interesting 
dynamic when it came to inventory management.
For retailers, the ideal stock management model is to have no 
products left on shelves at the end of the replenishment period. They 
keep stock levels at a minimum, freeing up capital and improving 
liquidity. By shifting the focus of the business to replenishment rather 
than space management, they improve sales velocity and revenue 
generation.
For publishers, having no products left on the shelf at the end of 
the replenishment period is actually a significant problem. Because 
their revenues were directly tied to the number of people they could 
get their product in front of, having empty shelves meant that they 
might have been able to sell more product had they not had a stock-
out. Given they were already carrying the significant fixed cost of a 
large distribution network with a daily replenishment schedule, the 
incremental cost of an additional newspaper was negligible compared 
to the advertising losses caused by a smaller readership.
Managing this need to maximize readers had created all sorts of 
complexity. In their need to drive continual efficiency and support 
innovation, their distribution teams had developed countless com-
plex rules to take into account the difference between weekday and 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
176 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
weekend editions, the effect of rain in different suburbs, and even the 
effect of different covers on purchasing rates.
The rules were astonishingly specific. For example, they’d found 
that covers with busty women tended to sell better in specific suburbs 
on specific days of the week unless it was during school holidays! To 
take advantage of these variations on sales volumes, they’d built a 
tremendously complex set of rules that would determine the correct 
number of papers for distribution to a specific news outlet the night 
before deliveries were to take place.
When I dealt with them, the business had fractured into two dif-
ferent sets of opinions. The bulk of the business believed in their cur-
rent model. While it was becoming increasingly unmanageable, they 
believed that a more scalable technology platform designed for manag-
ing rules would help them extend their exception-based management 
approach down from a suburb level to a news-agent level.
There was also a small set of individuals who believed that they 
were going about this the wrong way. Rather than rely on what was an 
ever-growing team of distribution managers, they felt that they might 
be able to leverage their data assets to automatically generate accurate 
forecasts. They’d built prototypes that had shown that relatively unso-
phisticated stochastic forecasting and simulation methods could gener-
ate forecasts as accurate as their existing rule set. Importantly, though, 
those same forecasts had only required a team of five to develop and 
manage in comparison to the existing 80-strong distribution team.
Both groups were innovative. The distribution team were experts 
in evolutionary innovation from data analysis. The “new guard” were 
able to demonstrate the power of revolutionary innovation through 
automated analytics. Unfortunately, the organization ended up com-
promising on only evolutionary innovation. Because they couldn’t 
manage the internal conflict between the two groups, their core busi-
ness won the battle and they missed a spectacular opportunity.
THE SECRET TO SUCCESS: DYNAMIC VALUE
The trick to enabling innovation from big data is not to fight against 
these inherent conflicts but instead to embrace them. Authors Vijay 
Govindarajan and Chris Trimble talk of the “performance engine,” the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  177
core of the business that seeks operational excellence and ongoing 
profitability.3 This engine, while an excellent optimizer, is generally 
poor at revolutionary innovation. It’s the reason that most orga-
nizations are actively allergic to things that challenge their existing  
business model. Anything that threatens the status quo triggers an 
immune response that rapidly acts against disruption. This isn’t because 
people don’t have the skill, the knowledge, or even the interest. It’s 
because the organization’s operating model emphasizes discipline and 
repeatability over disruption.
Big data is an enabler for both evolutionary and revolutionary 
innovation. To realize both, organizations need to establish separate 
teams with different operating models. Analytical capabilities must 
be embedded within business-as-usual operations. Without access to 
these skills, organizations miss opportunities to realize incremental 
improvements through business analytics. Visualization, exploration, 
and process modeling through techniques such as Six Sigma can help 
identify and deliver countless improvements.
To ensure long-term success, organizations also need to be willing 
to challenge and potentially reinvent their existing business models. 
Big data, when harnessed, can transform organizations. In some cases, 
this might involve expanding into parallel industries, such as in the 
case of retailers using their knowledge of customer purchasing pat-
terns to expand into coalition loyalty programs or banking and finan-
cial services. In other cases, it might make entire areas of the business 
redundant due to analytical automation, such as in the case of the 
publisher discussed earlier.
The challenge, naturally, is to develop a holistic operating model 
that maintains a healthy dynamic tension between operational excel-
lence in the context of organizational stability and disruptive innova-
tion in the context of reinvention. This is easier than it would appear 
once the building blocks are understood. Overlaying these different 
types of innovation on the wheel of value gives the operating model 
and organization design shown in Figure 8.2.
Ideation is primarily a cultural challenge. People need to feel safe 
in sharing their ideas. The leadership team has a critical role in creating 
this culture, whether it’s through reward structures, recognition, or 
even simply a “good ideas” register. Good ideas on their own are worth 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
178 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
little, however; they need a home. Rather than try to task everyone 
with doing everything, it’s better to charge different groups with dif-
ferent objectives.
Invention is often best left to dedicated research and development 
teams. There are good reasons for this. For example, invention usually 
has very different goals from the performance engine. Not all inven-
tions will turn profitable. Instead, a common measure of success is the 
volume of novel and relevant outputs generated by the group. Because 
of this, putting too much emphasis on profitability through the pure 
research and development stage can act as an inhibitor for invention. 
The team becomes so focused on demonstrating return that creativity 
and ingenuity suffer.
Evolutionary innovation is often best left to the performance 
engine. Usually, they have direct responsibility for ongoing commercial 
success. They often measure success through very tangible financial 
measures such as profitability, cost, or revenue. And because of this, 
they understand their business better than anyone else in the orga-
nization. This places them in the best position to deliver continuous 
improvements. Not only do they usually have the best perspective on 
where the opportunities lie but they also have the best understanding 
Figure 8.2  Dynamic Value
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  179
of the real-world challenges that might prevent good ideas from being 
executed.
Finally, revolutionary innovation is often best left to a separate, 
dedicated team. Their names vary; often named SWAT or Tiger teams, 
their focus is on developing creative solutions to challenging problems. 
Usually multidisciplinary, they are granted significant freedom and 
encouraged to challenge and question assumptions. By nature, they 
are usually in direct conflict with the performance engine. Because 
of this, their sustainability is heavily dependent on the support they 
receive from their leadership team. They often also act as the bridge 
between the research and development team and the business as a 
whole, looking for opportunities to apply novel inventions in a com-
mercial context.
Managing the dynamic tension between these groups is both the 
challenge and the solution. Tension lies at the heart of innovation. Too 
little and the organization becomes complacent and lazy, comfortable 
in the belief that it’s doing the right thing. Every empire has eventually 
ended, from the Babylonians to the Romans to the British. Whether 
it’s measured in months or years, complacency is inevitably the start of 
the end in a competitive market.
However, too much tension and the organization becomes para-
lyzed by political gridlock. Each of these groups usually offers a wildly 
different perspective on what’s important to the business. And, each 
is usually right in their own way. Groupthink is a dangerous force and 
too much time spent in a self-reinforcing culture can lead to irrational 
or inefficient decision making.4 In the worst cases, the chasm between 
these groups becomes so significant that it fractures the organization.
The trick to managing this tension is to create counterbalancing 
forces that sustain and temper. Creating tension is as easy as estab-
lishing different groups with directly conflicting objectives. While  
there should be no overlap in the outcomes owned by each group, there 
are significant benefits to having these outcomes being somewhat 
contradictory.
For example, every bank maintains one group responsible for risk 
management and one or more groups responsible for customer acqui-
sition. Objectively, these groups are in direct conflict. To minimize risk, 
all a bank needs to do is to set acceptable risk thresholds as low as 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
180 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
possible. This would minimize defaults and significantly improve  
profitability across all products. However, doing so would usually 
severely impact market growth and share value—in avoiding all risk, 
the bank would forgo customers who, while risky, might never default. 
This would also put their customer growth rates lower than the mar-
ket average.
In this model, each group is responsible for a different outcome. 
The risk group is responsible for measuring and managing portfolio 
risk while the customer acquisition team is responsible for ensuring 
competitive or market-leading customer growth volumes. While dis-
tinct, these outcomes are interrelated. And by maintaining this con-
flict, the bank’s leadership team can ensure they have access to equally 
valid (if different) points of view when making decisions.
These different points of view help create tension. They also help 
sow discord; more than one organization has collapsed into a collec-
tion of holding companies or personal fiefdoms because of it. While 
some tension encourages creativity and debate, too much creates a 
dysfunctional culture. The trick to tempering this tension is to create 
de facto diplomats, knowledgeable about the organization’s broader 
context and capable of balancing the otherwise-polar positions these 
groups will sometimes take. While not usually an explicit part of their 
job description, their diplomacy comes through a combination of colo-
cation and professional mobility.
Rather than being tied solely to one of the three groups, they 
move between them on a relatively regular basis, gaining exposure 
to all aspects of the business. Not only does this help temper political 
differences but it helps develop their understanding of the business, 
­building their domain competencies and encouraging career progres-
sion and retention through exposure to new opportunities. To build 
trust and understanding, they work alongside their peers while in a 
particular group. Instead of being a disembodied voice on the other 
end of a phone, they become part of the team.
Because their skills are portable between business problems, data 
scientists and value architects fit this model perfectly. While they may 
still report into a different area, they become embedded in one of the 
three groups and help support invention, evolutionary improvements, 
or revolutionary innovation.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  181
Finally, the prototype solutions that each of these groups develop 
need to be commercialized in some way. This may involve the opera-
tional use of their analytical assets such as the use of algorithms to guide 
product recommendations, such as Amazon’s “Related to Items You’ve 
Viewed” or Netflix’s Recommendations. It may involve the commer-
cialization and/or productization of an algorithm such as the use of 
Quality Score by Google to inform AdWords. Commercialization goes 
beyond algorithms and mathematics. Among other things, it needs to 
meet regulatory and legal requirements. It needs to be robust and scal-
able enough to ensure business continuity. And, it needs to meet mar-
ket requirements; a great idea is worthless if no-one is interested in it 
or if it’s too expensive.
THE INNOVATION ENGINE
Eating the metaphorical elephant is easy. You just do it one mouthful 
at a time. It’s the same in facilitating innovation; get the culture, struc-
ture, and focus right and magic happens.
Building the right structure starts with defining what it is you’re 
trying to achieve and what the focus should be. Data can enable inven-
tion, making real a good idea. It can enable evolutionary innovation, 
delivering value through incremental improvements. It can also sup-
port revolutionary innovation, reinventing business models, and 
changing markets.
To succeed, groups need parameters to work within. Working off a 
totally blank page is exceedingly challenging; without knowing what 
success looks like, it’s impossible to know when one’s succeeded. The 
hunt for value from big data and business analytics can take place at 
two levels. Groups can search for local improvements in a targeted 
domain, using a business focus as the primary driver for direction. This 
equates to “going deep,” diving into a particular area and exhaustively 
pursuing total process control and analytical perfection in a specific 
area. Examples include excellence in logistics, customer engagement, 
or pricing.
They can also search globally, looking to leverage a functional capa-
bility across many domains. This equates to “going broad,” taking an 
existing analytical competency and exhaustively applying it across as 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
182 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
many relevant business problems as they can find. An example might 
be reusing predictive modeling and operational analytics capabilities 
across customer retention, fraud prevention, and next-best-offer rec-
ommendations. Together, these give the innovation engine, as shown in 
Figure 8.3.
On the bottom half of the figure are groups focused on support-
ing stakeholders in solving known problems across the business. These 
often include “insights” groups, embedded analysts, and competency 
centers. Their main motivation is to deliver efficiency and continu-
ous improvement through evolutionary innovations, honing their 
skills, and improving the performance engine. They tend to operate 
on a reactive basis, working in partnership with the business through  
a service-delivery model. They operate on an open-door policy, tightly 
integrated with business-as-usual operations.
In the top half are groups focused on finding the “unknown 
unknowns.” These often include SWAT and Tiger teams as well 
as Centers of Excellence. Their main motivation is to identify and 
deliver change through revolutionary innovations, challenging the 
Figure 8.3  The Innovation Engine
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  183
performance engine and chasing reinvention. They tend to operate 
on a proactive basis, actively hunting for opportunities to leverage big 
data and apply business analytics. Rather than waiting to be engaged, 
they talk in terms of value creation and look to drive organizational 
transformation.
On the left side of the figure are groups that usually exist inside 
their customers, being part of the group that covers their costs. Their 
focus is defined by their reporting line and their activities are often 
limited to a specific domain. Vertically focused, they align against a 
specific business function. Common examples include marketing ana-
lytics, logistical optimization, or pricing improvement.
On the right side are groups that usually exist outside their cus-
tomers, usually operating as an organizational group function. Their 
focus is defined by their functional capabilities and their activities are 
directed toward problems that can be solved by their area of expertise. 
Horizontally aligned, they provide common functions to the broader 
organization. Common examples include business intelligence compe-
tency centers and analytical centers of excellence.
Their broader engagement means that they normally report to a 
group function. Groups in the bottom-right quadrant typically have 
a close alignment to IT service delivery and as such often report to 
the chief information officer or chief knowledge officer. Typically cost 
centers, they often operate as either a fixed-cost group or a combina-
tion fixed-cost or transfer-price group funded by project investment. 
Methodologies such as ITIL and other service-based, highly repeatable 
techniques work well—as their goal is usually repeatability and effi-
ciency, they excel in delivering incremental value through operational 
efficiency.
Groups in the top right of the figure tend to emphasize flexibil-
ity and change. Their main requirement is to be located outside of 
their customers. When a group charged with enterprise transforma-
tion is located inside one of their customers, they regress to functional 
solutions and move from the right-hand side to the left-hand side of 
the framework. Equally, while there are examples where highly effec-
tive teams report to the chief information officer, their need for flex-
ibility and fixed-cost-based exploration during the early stages of the 
innovation operating model tends to run counter to highly efficient  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
184 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
IT organizations. Because of this, common locations include reporting 
to the chief operating officer, the chief analytics officer, or the chief 
data scientist. There’s nothing that precludes their existing under a 
group function such as the chief financial officer as long as they have  
a clear mandate to work across the group, not just in their own patch.
Success for these groups is usually measured by their ability to 
deliver value creation through change. Often operating as profit cen-
ters, whether through a direct profit and loss (P&L) or a shadow P&L, 
their goal is direct revenue generation, often to the point where the 
group is self-funded.
Groups in the bottom half of Figure 8.3 rarely require dedicated 
data scientists or value architects. Instead, their value comes from 
scale, repeatability, and service delivery. Groups in the top half, how-
ever, require data scientists and value architects if they are to suc-
ceed. Their value comes from reinvention and change. Without a clear 
linkage to value, the organization will typically reject the change they 
recommend.
A critical point about this framework is that a sufficiently large 
organization may have groups operating in all these quadrants. Rather 
than being a negative, this is actually a positive. Giving analysts the 
opportunity to see and solve both functional and enterprise business 
opportunities helps improve their “knowhow” and “understanding” 
dimensions within the human capital model described in Chapter 7. 
Giving them exposure to the variety of pressures each business unit 
faces helps improve their ability to act as a data diplomat, building 
their value architect skills and tempering tension without having to 
sacrifice the creativity it provides.
The aligning force behind what would otherwise be a highly com-
plex and potentially conflicting model is the commercialization team 
sitting behind the scenes. As each group is responsible only for up to  
the prototyping stage, the commercialization group acts as a gate  
to ensure that big data and business analytics solutions are not need-
lessly duplicated. A defined and clear operating model helps ensure 
every group understands their role within the overall process and, 
given appropriate leadership, minimizes effort duplication.
Overall, this may seem complex. Unfortunately, so is the field. At 
its simplest, the answer is this: separate improvement from disruption 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  185
and get the right teams focused on the right areas. Delivering a pack-
age from anywhere to anywhere else in the world overnight would 
once have seemed impossible. And yet, today we do it daily without a 
second thought. Get the model right and everything follows.
REINVENTING THE RO–NIN
An organization designed to facilitate innovation will have little suc-
cess without the right people and culture. While the ro¯nin may have 
the skills needed to help generate value from big data, they won’t 
always have the right mindset. The final piece of the picture is in get-
ting people to enable the organization rather than support it; democra-
tize analytics and anything’s possible.
Getting the right person is only the start—once hired, they have 
the responsibility to use their skills to improve outcomes. Over time 
these responsibilities have changed, and not always in ways that fall 
within people’s comfort zones. Consistent with the trends already 
discussed, the biggest of these changes has been a movement away 
from insight generation to driving change. This is more than just lip  
service—it requires very different responsibilities. Being aware of these 
differences and actively fostering them is one of the major differences 
between organizations that are successful in business analytics com-
pared to those that are simply mediocre.
Much like how Henry Ford redefined manufacturing, the tra-
ditional approach is very focused on activities and delivery. Those 
who have highly technical and specialized skills play the role of an 
expert, driving insight and answering questions. Because their skills 
are scarce, they form the core of a larger team focused on generating 
insight. Their role within this team is to apply advanced analytics to 
create some form of insight. Once they have this insight, the rest of the 
team carries the responsibility to translate it into something that’s eas-
ily digestible. This goes by many names but is often called a presentation 
layer and is delivered by the business intelligence (BI) team.
This information is then consumed by decision makers, usually 
with no linkage between the information and the resulting out-
comes. Because decision making happens independently from review-
ing insights, it’s impossible to quantify how much of a difference the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
186 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
insight made in driving a better outcome. Planners may or may not 
review the reports produced by the BI team; even if they do read them, 
there’s no guarantee that they acted on the insights.
Despite these limitations, this sequential approach makes intuitive 
sense. A core set of individuals extracts value, a larger set of individu-
als converts this intermediate good into a finished good, and the rest 
of the organization consumes that finished good. Henry Ford would 
be proud—the engineers do the work, the factory creates the product, 
and the public consumes the product. However, business analytics isn’t 
manufacturing. As logical as it may be, it inevitably creates a number 
of insurmountable bottlenecks that demand a different approach.
The first and biggest bottleneck is that there are only so many peo-
ple one can hire for this core group. Business analytics drives competi-
tive differentiation and one of its biggest sources of value is its ability 
to solve multiple business problems at relatively low incremental cost. 
Most of the cost lies in acquiring the right skills, technology, process, 
and information—once these are in place, the organization capital-
izes on economies of scope. Unfortunately, this still requires some 
degree of incremental resource. Because these skills are so scarce, it’s 
extremely difficult to scale to solve other problems within the organi-
zation. Simply put, there aren’t enough hours in the day to use this 
core team to solve other problems.
Paradoxically, this constraint isn’t for technical reasons. One 
would intuitively think that because of the high degree of specializa-
tion required to understand many fields of advanced analytics, many 
of the barriers would be due to the tools used. This isn’t the case—
while sophisticated analytics requires deeply technical knowledge to 
apply safely and robustly, the tools themselves are becoming increas-
ingly simple to use. Where building a predictive model used to require 
programming skills, modern tools allow someone with 20 minutes 
worth of training to develop a model. It may not necessarily be a good 
or robust model, but it will be a model and it will produce a prediction 
that in many cases is better than a guess.
Technologically, there is no good reason why everyone in the 
organization couldn’t create their own insights. This concept is 
often referred to as the “democratization of analytics”—it revolves 
around giving everyone the freedom to develop their own insights. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  187
Conceptually, this seems to eliminate the problem—if everyone can 
apply sophisticated analytics, specialized skills are irrelevant.
As with all oversimplifications, the reality is drastically different. 
It’s important to remember that just because it’s technically possible 
doesn’t mean that it will produce a good outcome—knowledge, train-
ing, and experience are critical elements in producing a reliable predic-
tion. Not all insights are equal and much of that specialist knowledge 
revolves around being able to differentiate reliable insights from 
those that are just mathematically attractive. As a very crude analogy, 
there’s nothing to stop one claiming anything they want as a business 
expense on their personal income tax. Unfortunately, the immutable 
force of reality (the taxation office in this case) will normally provide 
a rather sobering experience if those questionable insights are acted 
on. Without a tax accountant’s insights, it’s dangerously easy to make 
some serious mistakes.
This specialization combined with a lack of technologically based 
constraints changes the operating model. Rather than being an ana-
lyst, the most advanced practitioners need to instead become men-
tors and quality control experts, providing overarching governance 
and guidance to those creating insight. Their role shifts from being the 
engine of analytics to being an enabler, becoming the fuel that helps 
drive innovation. The BI team, in turn, shifts from visualizing already-
processed information to covering a broader spectrum of business ana-
lytics, usually covering both historical and predictive analytics. This 
is akin to becoming a “creator” of business analytics rather than just 
a “reporter.” To prevent bad assumptions, the core mentoring team 
provides a level of governance and review over insights before they go 
into production.
This transformation continues to the “information consumers” 
who become “active decision makers.” The distinction seems small 
but is enormous in practice—by linking the insights they’ve used to 
the outcomes and actions they’ve taken, they quantify the real value 
of business analytics. This is more than just a conceptual linkage and 
usually occurs at a very operational level with measurable differences. 
Reports gradually give way to workflows and approval processes.
Managing these newly defined skills takes focus; standard key 
performance indicators and management models rarely drive the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
188 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
most value. Organizations following a manufacturing approach tend 
to benchmark performance based on processing volumes, efficiency, 
and knowledge. There’s good reason for this—they view analytics as a 
series of discrete activities. Their focus is usually on trying to integrate 
different business units, each of which often acts seemingly indepen-
dently. Modelers are assessed on their ability to develop and deploy 
models. BI specialists are benchmarked on their ability to generate 
reports and insights are usually (but not always) designed to meet 
functional requirements defined by the business. Roles are normally 
defined based on technical knowledge.
One of the reasons this approach is so prevalent is because teams 
are usually arbitrarily defined based on technical skills. Rather than 
focusing on outcomes, an artificial distinction is made between the 
business intelligence or reporting team (often embedded within IT or 
finance), the analytics team (usually embedded within a functional 
line of business), and “the business.” Because these groups are func-
tionally and structurally separated, it makes sense to define roles in 
these terms. One of the biggest problems with this approach is that it 
makes it very difficult to task individuals based on outcomes—because 
technical activities and business outcomes are functionally separated, 
it’s hard for the organization to link a group or individual’s actions to 
specific outcomes.
Organizations focused on enablement usually benchmark per-
formance on outcomes. Analytics is seen as being part of a value 
chain and not an activity in its own right. Management focus is usu-
ally on achieving economies of scope by solving multiple business 
problems across different functional areas. Mentors and creators are 
benchmarked not only on their ability to drive positive outcomes but 
also their ability to proactively drive value creation by engaging with 
decision makers. Roles are defined based on experience and compe-
tency (rather than the ability to use a particular piece of technology).
The benefits of this approach are enormous. First, the organiza-
tion takes active steps toward achieving economies of scope by break-
ing down the barriers normally associated with functionally separated 
business units. Second, the organization overcomes many of the chal-
lenges inherent in hiring from a relatively small resource pool. Finally, 
it greatly simplifies measuring success—rather than make a subjective 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I n n o v a t i n g  w i t h  D y n a m i c  V a l u e  ◂  189
assessment of the value added by business analytics, it directly tracks 
outcomes through well-defined value chains. While it’s still possible 
to realize value from business analytics without moving to an enable-
ment model, adopting this approach helps drive maturity and com-
petitive differentiation.
NOTES
	1.	 Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great 
Firms to Fail (Boston: Harvard Business School, 1997).
	2.	 For more detail on how business analytics augments business models and leads to 
competitive differentiation, see Evan Stubbs, Delivering Business Analytics: Practical 
Guidelines for Best Practice (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013), Chapter 2, 
and Evan Stubbs, The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Profitability 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
	3.	 Vijay Govindarajan and Chris Trimble, The Other Side of Innovation: Solving the Execution 
Challenge (Boston: Harvard Business School, 2010).
	4.	 James K. Esser, “Alive and Well after 25 Years: A Review of Groupthink Research,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 73, nos. 2–3 (1998): 116–141.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
191
C H A P T E R  9
Creating a Plan
W
ithout knowing where you want to go, it’s impossible to know 
where you’ll end up. However, it’s important to remember that 
a plan is just a plan. Paraphrasing one of the world’s greatest 
military strategists, Helmuth von Moltke the Elder, “No plan survives 
beyond first contact.” Spending months of effort and millions of dol-
lars on internal costs and consultants to develop the “perfect” strategy 
is an instant recipe for disaster.
STARTING THE CONVERSATION
The best approach is to start and finish with a vision. From there, 
learn by doing, not by theorizing. Large-scale change is both risky and 
uncertain, especially when it comes to culture. Without the ability to 
point to clear successes on the way, even the best attempts to create a 
new culture will fail. Because of this, business analytics and innova-
tion from big data are best supported through continual incremen-
tal returns rather than all-encompassing programs of work. Success 
comes from building plans that involve shorter time to return, plans 
that rely heavily on experimentation and continual feedback, and 
plans that emphasize delivery over creativity. Always keep in mind 
that the most innovative solutions in the world are worthless if they 
can’t be commercialized.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
192 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Successful leadership requires three things:
	
1.	Knowing where you’re going
	
2.	Bringing everyone with you
	
3.	Making others equally responsible for the journey
It’s essential to remember that business analytics is a team sport 
focused on cultural change, first and foremost. Because of this, plan-
ning must be designed to form a team. Without this coalition of the 
willing, the best attempts will fail; when the team disappears, business 
analytics devolves into analytics.
Knowing where you want to go is essential. Somewhat surpris-
ingly, working out the precise path to get there is less important. Few 
journeys follow the planned route exactly. Instead, most journeys take 
a variety of detours along the way, visiting interesting destinations 
while still moving in the right general direction.
Because of the rapid rate of change in big data and business analyt-
ics, plans should follow a similar philosophy. In the early stages oppor-
tunism should be the focus, working off a maximum 12-month return 
cycle. Any innovations or proposed projects that take longer than a 
12-month delivery cycle should be de-prioritized in favor of opportu-
nities with shorter return cycles. There’s nothing wrong with extend-
ing this horizon as incremental successes help build trust. What’s 
important is getting there, not planning for it.
The remainder of this part of the text runs through a few planning 
tools that may help move a group through the storming, norming, and 
forming stages of team creation.1 They provide an example framework 
from which a leader can expand, covering:
◼
◼Defining a vision through the use of the Cover Story
◼
◼Identifying opportunities through the use of an Affinity Map
◼
◼Mapping responsibilities through the use of a Stakeholder 
Matrix
When executed effectively, they can help bring a group together, 
establish a common vision, and start working out individual 
responsibilities.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C r e a t i n g  a  P l a n  ◂  193
DEFINING THE VISION
This exercise helps the team create a view of what the future could 
look like. This vision will act as a framework to start developing a 
change plan leveraging big data and business analytics. It will act as  
a mobilizing force to consolidate the core team and allow everyone 
to state a common vision and message. And, it will act as a litmus test 
against which initiatives can be examined to confirm that they will 
move the organization in the right direction.
As the facilitator, by the end of this exercise your group should have:
◼
◼A variety of potential “constraint-free” future states for the 
organization or business unit
◼
◼A point from which to start working backward to develop 
potential initiatives and opportunities
The full exercise should take approximately 1 to 1.5 hours.
Approach
The goal of the exercise is to get the team to develop of a vision of how 
big data and business analytics might transform the organization. Once 
this vision is agreed, it’s simply a case of mapping out everything that 
would need to be in place to make it a reality.
There are often two challenges in trying to create a strategy for 
innovation from big data. First, it’s a technical field. People often feel 
uncomfortable strategizing in a domain they may know little about. 
What happens in most cases is that the technocrats direct the conver-
sation while the business experts stay quiet.
Second, it’s steeped in detail. Reality often acts as an anchor, con-
straining our creativity. Rather than think of the way things could be, 
individuals will often think about how things are and how things 
might incrementally change. When this happens, strategic planning 
turns into tactical planning and the team focuses almost exclusively on 
evolutionary innovations.
Mitigating these challenges is straightforward. Rather than plan 
around technology, the plans should always be defined in the context 
of the business. What’s important are the business and value outcomes, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
194 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
not the technical outcomes. For example, many teams immediately leap 
to their organization becoming a “leader in big data.” Unfortunately, 
this is largely meaningless and probably very expensive. Creating infra-
structure just to be better than everyone else does little to improve 
profitability or shareholder value.
Instead, the team might focus on what that might mean for the 
organization’s customers. In most cases, it’s unlikely that any particu-
lar customer will care what kind of infrastructure the organization is 
using behind the scenes. However, having access to broad and deep 
behavioral information might enable new forms of offer relevancy. It 
might eliminate the need for all physical branches, moving to a totally 
virtual engagement structure.
As the facilitator, the goal is to get the team to think as creatively 
as they can and then get them to take it one step further. Rather than 
focus solely on evolutionary or revolutionary innovations, the facili-
tator should be guiding the team to think harder in the areas where 
they’re not necessarily focusing. Think not only within your industry 
vertical but across industries as well; where might you expand into 
new businesses? How might your business model change and what 
might that mean for how the organization is currently structured?
However, this still needs to be somewhat grounded in reality; the 
team needs to understand that the final vision should represent an 
aspirational, game-changing position for the company in question. It’s 
not an exercise in science-fiction. Suggestions about inventing tele-
pathic devices should be qualified based on how feasible they are.
Equally, specificity is important—generalities like “right offer at 
the right time” should be probed and clarified. What does that mean 
in practice? How do those offers go out? How might they change the 
customer’s relationship with the organization?
And finally, not everything need focus solely on big data or busi-
ness analytics. All good ideas should be captured. Big data and business 
analytics are a core part of business but they’re not the only part.
Instructions
Using the Cover Story template shown in Figure 9.1, get the groups 
to create the story of your organization 10 years from today, told 
“after the fact.” The story should have narrative; it needs to be 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C r e a t i n g  a  P l a n  ◂  195
interesting enough that it would justify being on the cover of one or 
more magazines.
Each group should structure their narrative around the following 
sections:
◼
◼Cover: Describes the major success achieved by the organiza-
tion or business unit. It should be a one-liner, suitable for the 
magazine or publication’s cover. To help the group ideate, get 
them to consider what might be significant enough that the 
magazines they’ve identified would dedicate an entire issue to 
their organization.
◼
◼Headlines: Outlines the detail behind the story in headline 
form. These should also be one-liners and would represent the 
articles contained within the special edition or focus issue.
◼
◼Sidebars: Interesting side stories associated with the major suc-
cess. While somewhat tangential, they should fill out the edges 
of the narrative.
◼
◼Quotes: Quotes from people involved, benefiting from, or 
impacted by, the success (inside or outside the organization). 
These should be written from the perspective of the individ-
ual being described, not from the perspective of a marketer. In 
many cases, it helps to do a sanity check on whether someone 
might actually say the quote in question.
Figure 9.1  The Cover Story
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
196 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
The groups should also identify which magazines are publishing 
the material they describe. Is it Time magazine, U.S. Banker, a special 
edition of The Economist? To get the most out of the exercise, the facili-
tator should employ the following approach:
◼
◼Split the team into two groups of maximum six people. If there 
are too many people, split them into equal groups of no more 
than six people.
◼
◼Each group gets its own markers, templates, and sticky notes 
and is responsible for populating the template.
◼
◼Allow everyone 5 minutes to consider their own view of what 
the future might look like.
◼
◼At the end of the 5 minutes, each group should work collab-
oratively to generate one common story over the next 30–45 
minutes. The goal is to create a strong narrative, working from 
the end-state back to today. What’s important are the results 
and outcomes, not the details on how they got there.
◼
◼At the end of the collaboration session, each group then has 
5–10 minutes to present their findings.
◼
◼Once each group has presented, the team should discuss com-
mon themes, observations, insights, or concerns about what 
each of the future states might imply.
◼
◼The team should then work together to create a single common 
vision.
IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES
This exercise helps the team use the overarching vision to define poten-
tial points of improvement through structured brainstorming. It focuses 
on the future and ignores existing organizational constraints; the goal 
is to map out what would need to be put in place to achieve the vision.
As the facilitator, by the end of this exercise your group should have:
◼
◼A series of potential improvements or opportunities aligned by 
functional, outcome, or domain groupings
◼
◼A starting point for prioritizing projects or programs of work 
based on potential value
The full exercise should take approximately 30 minutes to 1.5 hours.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C r e a t i n g  a  P l a n  ◂  197
Approach
The goal of the exercise is to get the team to work out what’s needed 
to achieve the vision. It might be technology. It might be new skills. It 
might even be a significant change in culture. It will probably need all 
of these along with many other things.
By identifying the necessary building blocks and grouping them 
into categories, the team will often find patterns that map fairly cleanly 
into logical programs of work. The more information and the better 
the clustering from the exercise, the more valuable the output. As the 
facilitator, feel free to get engaged to ensure an appropriate level of 
granularity and parsimony.
Instructions
Starting with the vision established through the Cover Story exercise, 
complete the Affinity Map template shown in Figure 9.2.
◼
◼Spend 10 minutes having each participant write sticky notes 
on how the organization could move toward achieving the 
vision. It might help to frame these around what new capa-
bilities might be needed across people, process, data, and 
technology. If the vision involves real-time customer engage-
ment and the organization doesn’t yet have a real-time 
Figure 9.2  Affinity Map
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
198 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
communications platform, then that would justify a sticky 
note. If there’s broad reluctance to doing things differently, 
there might need to be a more customer-centric culture. The 
goal is to generate as many as possible; feel free to inject a bit 
of competition to reward whoever gets the most sticky notes 
up on the wall.
◼
◼At the end of this period, paste these sticky notes on the wall 
and, based on consensus and discussion, group them into cat-
egories. These categories should be organically determined 
and iteratively allocated, striking a balance between excessive 
granularity and oversummarization. They might span func-
tion, outcome, domain, or activity—as long as the groupings 
are internally consistent, they’re doing their job. For context, 
these categories will eventually form the basis for identify-
ing the streams of work that will need to be put in place to 
achieve the vision. Put any sticky notes that don’t immedi-
ately fit into the “parking lot” for further consideration or 
discussion.
◼
◼Avoid spending time discussing categories—if there is over-
lap and disagreement, write both and consider consolidat-
ing them if some categories are underrepresented. Aim to 
achieve a large number of data points with a reasonably 
parsimonious set of categories. These categories should rep-
resent initiatives that could feasibly be delivered in under a 
year. If they would take longer than a year to deliver, con-
sider how the initiative might be broken into smaller chunks 
of work.
◼
◼Once categorized, the team should then group the initiatives 
into logical phases. External value and ease of execution should 
be the focus; quick wins should be early.
MAPPING RESPONSIBILITIES
This exercise helps the team plan the core of an engagement strategy. 
It uses the outputs from the prior exercise as the guiding framework 
and identifies key influencers, decision makers, and other stakeholders 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C r e a t i n g  a  P l a n  ◂  199
of interest. The goal is to work out who should be included in the plan-
ning process and how they should be engaged.
As the facilitator, by the end of this exercise your group should 
have:
◼
◼A ranked list of key stakeholders across the organization taking 
into account their influence and power
◼
◼A skeleton targeting plan for use within a broader communica-
tion plan
◼
◼A responsibility matrix that outlines each individual or group’s 
engagement model
The full exercise should take approximately 1 to 2 hours.
Approach
The goal of the exercise is to get the team to start planning their 
communication and engagement strategy. Business analytics is pri-
marily about change management; without getting broader organi-
zational buy-in and commitment, even the best ideas will likely be 
rejected.
However, the reality is that not everyone has equal influence. 
Effective change management is more about identifying the right peo-
ple to engage with rather than trying to influence everyone. There are 
usually more people that could be engaged than there are hours in  
the day and spending too much time on communication can actually 
be detrimental. Communication is important. So is delivery.
It’s useful to view things in terms of interest and influence. Those 
who have low influence on the vision may simply need to be kept 
occasionally informed, ideally through low-touch techniques such 
as quarterly briefings. Those who have high influence on the vision 
but low interest may need regular catchups along with a strong value 
proposition to get them enthused. Those who have low influence but 
high interest might be the ideal people to join the coalition of the will-
ing, becoming change agents in their own right. And, those who have 
high influence and high interest may make ideal sponsors or champi-
ons to take part or full ownership over aspects of the transformation.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
200 
▸  B I G  D A T A ,  B I G  I N N O V A T I O N
Instructions
Using the Stakeholder Analysis template shown in Figure 9.3, list and 
map as many stakeholders as possible who will be impacted by, can 
influence, or will make decisions on the shortlisted target initiatives.
◼
◼Using sticky notes, populate the Stakeholder Analysis template 
with key stakeholders. Have the team populate the template 
with only the people who are directly relevant to phase 1 of 
the vision as well as people who have influence over key stake-
holders to the vision. The goal is not to create a comprehensive 
organization chart; be pragmatic.
◼
◼As the sticky notes are attached to the template, pay specific 
attention to their relative power: the ability to make or break a 
project does not always map to seniority or formal responsibil-
ity. If everyone clusters around a particular quadrant, rescale the 
entire diagram—not everyone has the same level of influence.
◼
◼Once completed, review the relative position of everyone and dis-
cus how or where people’s interests may not align to the targeted 
state. Where their current reality does not match the state that the 
vision would require, discuss what might influence their position.
Figure 9.3  The Stakeholder Matrix
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C r e a t i n g  a  P l a n  ◂  201
◼
◼Once the diagram has been finalized and the group agrees on 
everyone’s relative positioning, tag each person with a RACI code 
representing the targeted communication model. Each stake-
holder should have at least one letter written on their sticky 
note along with the initiative it refers to (identified in the pre-
vious exercise). If they will need to be responsible for the initia-
tive, they should have an R. If they will need to assist but won’t 
be responsible, they should have an A. If they have valuable 
insight and should be consulted, they should have a C. Finally, 
if they should simply be kept informed, they should have an I.
◼
◼The team should then go through each of the initiatives identified 
within phase 1 from the previous exercise and continue to map 
them against all the stakeholders in the influence map. Once com-
pleted, the data can be entered into a spreadsheet and expanded 
into a comprehensive communications and engagement strategy.
TAKING IT TO THE NEXT LEVEL
These exercises serve as an excellent starting point. There’s nothing 
to stop an adroit leader from extending them; other useful exercises 
might include:
◼
◼Working out how best to link activities to value through a com-
mon measurement framework
◼
◼Creating a roadmap of initiatives that balance internal and 
external value
◼
◼Crowdsourcing innovative through participative innovative
◼
◼Turbocharging innovation through hackathons or other com-
petitive games
Remember: the goal is not just to innovate. It’s also to have fun.
NOTE
	1.	 Using visual techniques is an excellent way of getting people engaged. Good 
books on the subject include David Sibbet, Visual Leaders: New Tools for Visioning, 
Management, & Organization Change (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013), and 
Luke Hohmann, Innovation Games: Creating Breakthrough Products through Collaborative 
Play (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2007).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
203
Conclusion: The Final 
Chapter Is Up to You
T
here’s not much more to say. Those who have the responsibility 
and power to act on the information provided in this book should 
count themselves lucky; it’s not often that one gets the opportu-
nity for reinvention.
Whether this book made the uncertain clear or simply validated 
what you already knew, the question is what you’ll do with this 
knowledge. Ideas are cheap; action, on the other hand, is hard.
Make a plan. Work out who has the interest and influence to also 
make the change. Create a vision and make it real. Transform the 
world.
The final chapter is up to you.
We live in interesting times; I hope that together we make the 
world even more interesting.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
205
Glossary
Advanced Analytics
A subset of analytical techniques that, among other things, often uses 
statistical methods to identify and quantify the influence and significant 
of relationships between items of interest, group similar items together, 
create predictions, and identify mathematical optimal or near-optimal 
answers to business problems.
Agent-Based Modeling
A computationally driven modeling approach that simulates the local 
interactions of autonomous agents with the goal of monitoring global 
outcomes.
Aggregation
A process by which variables are summed based on a classification or tem-
poral hierarchy. Common examples include totaling all sales for a given 
time period or geographic region.
Algorithm
A finite series of well-defined steps that achieve a desired outcome. These 
steps may be deterministic or include random or probabilistic elements.
Analytics
A data-driven process that creates insight. These processes incorporate a 
wide variety of techniques and may include manual analysis, reporting, 
predictive models, time series models, or optimization models.
Analytics Platform
A technology platform that provides standardized tools, an ability to col-
laborate, and the ability to migrate insight into operational processes.
Assets
Items of economic value created by a team through the application of 
competencies and tools. Within a business analytics context they are nor-
mally intangible in nature and often include models, processes, and elec-
tronic documentation.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
206 
▸  G L O S S A R Y
Big Data
A colloquial term referring to datasets that are otherwise unwieldy to deal 
with in a reasonable amount of time in the absence of specialized tools. 
Common characteristics include large amounts of data (volume), different 
types of data (variety), and ever-increasing speed of generation (velocity). 
They typically require unique approaches for capture, processing, analysis, 
search, and visualization.
Business Analytics
The process of leveraging all forms of analytics to achieve business out-
comes through requiring business relevancy, actionable insight, and per-
formance management and value measurement. These business outcomes 
are typically tangible and/or intangible value of interest to the organization.
Business Intelligence
A broad classification of information systems–based technologies that sup-
port the identification and presentation of insight. Common historical 
usage referred primarily to reporting-focused systems, but usage of the 
term has been broadened by some to include all forms of insight genera-
tion (including exploratory data analysis and predictive analytics).
Business Planning
An intermediate level of strategic planning, typically focusing on the indi-
vidual strategies that will lead to the broader organizational strategies. It 
may include the creation of competitive differentiation, cost minimiza-
tion, or vertical integration.
Center of Excellence
A centralized group targeted with supporting and driving change across 
the organization. Focus areas often vary based on organizational strategy 
and vision.
Champion/Challenger Process
A process that benchmarks alternative processes against the currently 
selected process. If an alternative, challenger process outperforms the cur-
rent, champion process, the champion process is usually replaced with the 
challenger process.
Churn
A term that refers to a customer going to a different provider. Depending 
on the context, it may refer to a total migration away from the organiza-
tion in question through to a reduction in consumption.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y  ◂  207
Community of Practice
An often virtual group intended to distribute knowledge, share experi-
ence, and cross-pollinate best practices across the organization.
Competencies
Reusable and generalizable skills held by a business analytics team. One 
common example is the ability to build predictive models.
Competency Center
A centralized group targeted with supporting the organization in particu-
lar competency. Focus areas often vary based on organizational strategy 
and vision.
Competitive Advantage
A strategic advantage held by one organization that cannot be matched by 
its competitors. This advantage may or may not be sustainable and, if not, 
may eventually be replicated by its competitors.
Contagious Churn/Viral Churn
A situation where individuals cancel their service because people in their 
network have canceled their service. Common reasons include being 
made aware of better options and “pull-through” by leveraging positive 
network externalities.
Cross-Sectional Modeling
A variety of methods that focus on analyzing time captured across entities 
at a specific point in time. Common applications include identifying differ-
ences between groups, relationships between outcomes and causal factors, 
and creating predictions.
Cross-Sell
A process by which new, nonoverlapping products are sold to existing 
customers.
Crowdsourcing
The process by which ideas, services, or other needs are solicited from pre-
dominantly amorphous and undefined large groups of people.
Data Cleansing
The process of detecting, removing, or correcting incorrect data.
Data Management Process
A series of well-defined steps that take source data, conduct a series of 
operations on it, and deliver it to a predefined location.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
208 
▸  G L O S S A R Y
Datamart
A shared repository of data, often used to support functional areas within 
the business. It is sometimes used as the direct access layer to the data 
warehouse.
Data Quality
A broad term that refers to the accuracy and precision of data being exam-
ined. Data that exhibits high quality correctly quantifies the real-world 
items it represents.
Data Scientist
A person who blends deep analytical skills with a scientific mindset. They 
often have sufficient domain expertise to innovate or invent.
Data Warehouse
A shared repository of data, often used to support the centralized consoli-
dation of information for decision support.
Decision Tree
An algorithm that focuses on maximizing group separation by iteratively 
splitting variables.
Derived Variable
A variable not included in the original data but based on the underlying 
characteristics of the source data. Common examples include calculating 
a three-month moving average and calculating Recency, Frequency, and 
Monetary statistics.
Departmental Platform
A centralized analytics environment based on a defined set of tools that 
supports a department or functional unit within an organization.
Design of Experiments
An experimentation process by which the impact of various influencers 
on items of interest can be tested in an efficient manner.
Discovery Environment
A logically defined and usually separate area within an analytics platform 
that provides users with the ability to create assets and generate insight.
Doge
A meme, often represented by a Shiba Inu: many views; much awesome.
Economies of Scale
The process by which cost per unit of output declines as production scales 
increase. A common driver is the presence of high fixed costs.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y  ◂  209
Economies of Scope
The process by which cost per unit of outputs declines as diversification 
increases.
Enabling Initiative
A business analytics initiative focused on creating processes or assets 
needed for a planned growth initiative or to deliver evolutionary effi-
ciency improvements.
Enterprise Platform
A centralized analytics environment based on a defined set of tools that 
supports the entire organization.
Enterprise Resource Planning
A variety of software-based systems that aim to standardize processes 
and information management within organizations, typically focusing on 
operational processes, including finance and accounting, supply chain and 
logistics, inventory management, and resource management.
Evolutionary Innovation
Improvements that take an existing process or activity and make it better.
Fiber Channel
A high-speed networking standard often used for storage networks, run-
ning on both twisted-pair copper and fiber-optic.
Functional Planning
The most granular level of strategic planning, typically focusing on the 
operational activities needed to achieve the objectives outlined at the busi-
ness level. It normally revolves around processes and resources and activi-
ties at this level are the most specific, often dealing with detailed execution 
plans and individual resources.
Future Shock
A term coined by Alvin Toffler in his book, Future Shock, first published in 
1970. It describes the confusion and shattering psychological stress created 
from too much change over a relatively short period. Symptoms include 
distress and disorientation.
Grouping Model
A type of model specifically focuses on grouping similar individuals or 
entities together based on multidimensional information. A common 
example is a customer segmentation model.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
210 
▸  G L O S S A R Y
Growth Initiative
A business analytics initiative focused on creating value. They tend to 
have fairly well-defined deliverables, and fixed timeframes with expected 
end-dates, and involve the creation of new assets and processes.
Hax and Wilde’s Delta Model
A way of looking at competitive advantage that looks for ways of maximiz-
ing the customer value proposition to achieve maximal customer bonding. 
It describes three broad strategies: best product, total customer solutions, 
and system lock-in.
High-Context Culture
A grouping of individuals with a tendency to rely on cultural norms 
and implicit communication when communicating. Cultural history and 
understanding is often extremely important.
HiPPO
The Highest Paid Person’s Opinion.
Ideation
The process of generating and communicating ideas. It includes the inno-
vation process and should eventually lead to commercialization.
Impute
The process of estimating likely values for missing data taking into account 
the statistical characteristics of the broader population, often simultane-
ously trying to minimize the bias introduced through estimation.
In-Database Processing
A technique involving migrating logic processing away from a generalized 
computing tier and into the database. A common example in analytics 
is transforming analytical processing steps into native database execution 
logic and deploying this logic into the database.
Independent Variables
A term referring to the inputs used within a model. They are typically 
unrelated to one another but should exhibit some form of causal relation-
ship toward the outcome being examined.
Information Asymmetries
A situation where one individual has an information advantage over 
another. It is typically a source of market failure and leads to pricing 
inefficiencies.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y  ◂  211
Innovation
The application of novel ideas to improve things that already exist. 
Sometimes, this different approach may be evolutionary. At other times, it 
may involve high amounts of disruption and be revolutionary.
Intangible Value
The immeasurable worth of an asset of outcome to an organization. 
Common examples include job satisfaction and the ability to make better 
decisions.
Invention
The original creation of a new thing based on a novel idea.
Join
Key Performance Indicator (KPI)A measure by which job performance is 
assessed. Often, bonuses or other rewards mechanisms are tied to these. 
See Merge.
Kryder’s Law
The trend for magnetic disk storage to double annually, leading to signifi-
cant ongoing increases in storage capacity. It was defined by Mark Kryder 
while at Seagate.
Low-Context Culture
A grouping of individuals with a tendency to explicitly communicate 
concepts and avoid relying on “things left unsaid.” Cultural history and 
understanding tends to be less important.
Market Failure
An economic condition where the allocation of goods by the market cre-
ates an inefficient outcome. In the absence of intervention, the free market 
will achieve a suboptimal result. Common examples include the creation 
of negative market externalities such as pollution or the abuse of shared 
public grounds, commonly known as the “tragedy of the commons.”
Meme
A term coined by Richard Dawkins, it describes an idea or other cultural 
element that replicates from individual to individual through nongenetic 
means.
Merge
A process by which two or more tables are combined into one, matching 
them using one or more common fields. A common example involves 
combining customer data with purchasing data to create a single table that 
incorporates all available information.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
212 
▸  G L O S S A R Y
Micro-Segmentation Modeling
A segmentation approach that creates very high numbers of segments, 
often in the thousands.
Model
An abstracted view of reality. Within analytics, it often refers to a math-
ematically or logically defined function that helps simplify multidimen-
sional information into a small set of useful measures.
Model Deployment
The process by which models are migrated from a discovery environment 
into an operational environment and used to provide ongoing scoring 
processes.
Model Development
The process by which models are created.
Model Factory
A service designed to support the rapid creation and execution of analyti-
cal methods. They often make heavy use of automation, templates, and 
other mass-production methods to achieve scale and efficiency that would 
otherwise be impossible.
Monte Carlo Sampling
A process by which samples are repeatedly drawn with replacement from 
an existing population. Typically, Monte Carlo sampling is used as an input 
generation process to run a variety of simulations and capture the result-
ing outputs.
Moore’s Law
The trend for the number of transistors on an integrated circuit to double 
roughly every two years, leading to significant ongoing increases in com-
puting power. It was defined by Gordon E. Moore, cofounder of Intel.
Multivariate Analysis
A form of statistical analysis that includes more than one variable at a 
time.
Organizational Benefits
Benefits that accrue to the broader organization.
Operational Activity
An ongoing process focused on preserving existing value. They tend to be 
more process-driven, have no fixed end date, and leverage existing assets, 
capabilities, and processes.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y  ◂  213
Operational Environment
A logically defined and usually separate area within an analytics platform 
that provides users with the ability to deploy assets into processes and 
workflows to support operational activities.
Operations Research
A subset of analytical techniques that apply mathematical optimization 
techniques to identify optimal or near-optimal answers to business prob-
lems. It is often used to support inventory optimization and supply-chain 
optimization, and optimize the allocation of scarce resources.
Opportunity Cost
The cost of the next-best choice to someone who has picked from a series 
of mutually exclusive options. It represents the option forgone.
Organizational Planning
The highest level of strategic planning, typically focusing on identify-
ing the markets where the organization will or won’t compete, targeting 
acquisitions or creating key competencies and cultures.
Performance Management
The application of technology, process, and psychology to manage behav-
ior and results and facilitate the delivery of strategic and tactical objectives.
Personal Benefits
Benefits that accrue to individuals within the organization.
Petabyte
An SI-defined measure of data storage equal to 1,000 terabytes. For com-
parison, a single commercial single-sided dual-layer DVD can store up to 
8.54 gigabytes.
Precrime
A term coined by author Philip K. Dick, it describes a group tasked with 
using prescience to identify and prevent crimes that have not yet occurred.
Predictive Modeling
A process by which the underlying relationships behind an outcome are 
identified, quantified, and used to create predictions for new information. 
These are often statistically based. A common example is using informa-
tion about customers who have canceled their phone service to statistically 
identify and quantify the major leading indicators that suggest someone 
will cancel. These indicators are then translated into a scoring process 
and used to score existing customers, helping to identify those who are 
at a high probability of cancellation. Once identified, they can then be 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
214 
▸  G L O S S A R Y
contacted before they cancel, potentially making a unique retention offer 
to discourage them from going to a competitor.
Pricing Analytics
The application of analytics to specifically support calculating optimal 
prices and understand the relationship between prices and demand 
through price elasticity models.
Propensity Model
A type of model that specifically focuses on creating predictions around the 
likelihood of an individual doing a particular action. Common examples 
include the propensity to default on a loan or to purchase a given product.
Psychohistory
A term coined by Isaac Asimov, it describes the application of psychol-
ogy, sociology, and applied statistics to make predictions about population-
level future behaviors.
Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID)
A low-power technology that supports low-cost wireless communication 
between readers and devices. Because of its low-cost structures, it is used 
to support a wide variety of asset management problems ranging from 
tracking casino chips to monitoring usage of toll roads.
Ratemaking
A variety of techniques that specifically focus on calculating premiums 
taking into account the frequency and severity of loss-making events.
Recency, Frequency, Monetary Analysis (RFM)
A technique commonly used in marketing applications to profile customer 
spending patterns. It derives a series of variables to identify how recently 
each customer spent money, how frequently they spend money, and how 
much money they spend with the organization in question.
Relational Model
A type of model that aims to identify relationships of interest and quan-
tify the strength of relationship between individuals or entities. Common 
examples include market basket analysis and social network analysis.
Reporting
A process by which insight is presented in a visually appealing and infor-
mative manner.
Revolutionary Innovation
Improvements that either create a new process or activity or take an exist-
ing process or activity and make it redundant.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y  ◂  215
Roadmap
Within the context of business analytics, a defined set of staged initiatives that 
deliver tactical returns while moving the team toward strategic outcomes.
Scoring Process
A process by which a predefined model is applied against new data, creat-
ing a new variable for each record that contains the result of the model. A 
common example is calculating the propensity of every customer to churn 
within a given time period.
Scoring Table
A table containing new data that is to be fed through a model converted 
to a scoring process, the output of which is usually a series of numerically 
based recommendations.
Segmentation
A process by which entities within a population are grouped into segments 
that have common characteristics. This grouping process may be manually, 
algorithmically, or statistically based and will often take into account any-
where from a handful to hundreds of common attributes across all the entities.
Segmentation Strategy
A strategy that identifies subgroups within the market and treats these 
groups differently. This targeted treatment can then drive offer relevancy 
and increase offer attractiveness.
Sensitivity Analysis
A form of simulation modeling that focuses specifically on identifying the 
upper and lower bounds of model outputs given a series of inputs with 
specific variance.
Sensor Data
Data generated by machines.
Simulation
A process by which processes or models are run repeatedly using a variety 
of inputs. The outputs are normally captured and analyzed to conduct 
sensitivity analysis, provide insight around likely potential outcomes, and 
identify bottlenecks and constraints within existing processes or models.
Simulation Modeling
An analytical technique that often involves running models repeatedly 
using a variety of inputs to determine the upper and lower bounds of pos-
sible outcomes. This simulation process is also sometimes used to identify 
the likely distribution of outputs given a series of assumptions around  
how the inputs are distributed.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
216 
▸  G L O S S A R Y
Single View of Customer (SVoC)
A consolidated view of all customer information within an organization.
Smart Meter
Consumption data generated by electrical meters and sent back to the util-
ity in set intervals, often every 15 minutes.
Social Network Analysis
The application of analytics to analyze relationships between individuals, 
often to help with contagious churn or viral marketing.
Six Sigma Process Improvement
A business management strategy focusing on quality control testing and 
optimizing processes through reducing process variance.
Strategic Planning
The process by which organizations identify a desired outcome, the resources 
required to support that outcome, and the plan to achieve the outcome. 
Typically, strategic planning is an important step in identifying the creation 
of new competitive advantages.
Stress Testing
A form of simulation modeling that focuses specifically on identifying the 
response of a model under specific, often highly negative scenarios. Common 
examples include testing the profitability of a bank given catastrophic levels 
of mortgage defaults or modeling extreme macroeconomic conditions.
Strongly Defined Process
A series of steps that is clearly defined, is repeatable, can be automated, and  
leads to the creation of value.
Structured Data
Data that fits cleanly into a predefined structure.
Tangible Value
The quantifiable and measurable worth of an asset or outcome to an orga-
nization. Common examples include financial improvements and saleable 
market value.
Team Platform
A centralized analytics environment based on a defined set of tools that 
supports a business analytics team.
Terabyte
An SI-defined measure of data store equal to 1,000 gigabytes. For com-
parison, a single commercial single-sided dual-layer DVD can store up to 
8.54 gigabytes.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y  ◂  217
Time Series Analysis
A variety of methods that focus on analyzing time-stamped information, 
often with an emphasis on identifying relationships between events and 
outcomes as well as creating predictions.
Tools
The basic building block through which most assets are created. They can 
be internally developed or purchased off the shelf, but without an appro-
priate set of purpose-built tools, a business analytics team is unable to 
create any new assets.
Training Table
A table containing data that is to be used to develop a model.
Transformation
A mathematically defined way of taking data and altering it based on a 
generalized mapping function, often with the goal of creating a different 
way of looking at the data in an easily reversible way. Common examples 
include taking the natural logarithm or exponentiation.
Unstructured Data
Data that cannot fit cleanly into a predefined structure.
Upsell
A process by which customers are upgraded to more expensive products, 
replacing their existing products.
Value
The intrinsic and extrinsic worth of an asset or outcome to an individual 
or organization.
Value Architect
A person who blends change management skills with analytical knowl-
edge. They often have sufficient practical experience and emotional intel-
ligence to transform an organization into an analytical competitor.
Viral Marketing
The application of direct marketing with the goal of leveraging individual’s 
personal networks to promote a message, increase mindshare, or drive 
pull-through sales through positive network externalities.
Weakly Defined Process
A series of steps that leads to the creation of value, is based on guidelines, 
and relies on the skill and ingenuity of the analyst to complete successfully.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
219
About the Author
Evan Stubbs lives in Sydney, Australia, one of the few places in the 
world where a 30-hour flight itinerary fails to raise even a single eye-
brow. His childhood was mainly spent (often unsuccessfully) avoid-
ing brain-controlling parasites, civil war, and biblical floods. He now 
spends most of his spare time filling in bandicoot holes in his back-
yard, avoiding murderous redbacks, writing, and otherwise keeping 
life (somewhat less) interesting.
He’s also the Chief Analytics Officer for SAS Australia/New 
Zealand and sits on the board of the Institute of Analytics Professionals 
of Australia. He’s a prolific speaker and evangelist for the power of 
analytics. Over the years he’s developed human–machine interfaces 
for concept cars, developed models that predict criminal behavior, and 
helped leadership teams navigate the upcoming storm. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
221
Index
A
abstraction, in prototyping, 144
action
intelligent, 67
intuitive, 62–63
need for, 133–134
action-based debate, in value 
creation perspective, 68
activities
manual, 135
matching to interests, 163
“activity” services, 112–113
activity targeting, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63–64
advanced analytics, xv, 205
Advanced Computing Center, 5
Affinity Map template, 197–198, 197f
age of uncertainty, 10–14, 23, 26, 31
agent-based modeling, 34, 205
aggregation, 205
agility, cost of, 85–87
aimless direction, in dominant 
culture, 63
algorithms
defined, 205
in prototyping, 144
Amazon, 4, 35–36, 181
analysis
multivariate, 212
sensitivity, 215
time series, 217
“analysis paralysis,” 62
analysts, numerical, 150–151
analytical creativity, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
analytics
See also business analytics
about, 63
advanced, xv, 205
defined, 205
“democratization of,” 186
pricing, 214
analytics platform, 205
Apple, 14, 29–30
Apple Maps application, 29
approach
to defining the vision, 193–194
to identifying opportunities, 197
to mapping responsibilities, 199
“art,” data science and, 158–159
Asimov, Isaac, 5
Foundation series, 3
assets
about, xv
defined, 205
transparency of, 137–138
attractive capability, in revolutionary 
disruption perspective, 77
automation, efficiency of, 135–137
aware and certain, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 91
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
222 
▸  I N D E X
aware but uncertain, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 88
B
Behavioral Insights Team, 4
benchmarks
beating, in functional innovation 
perspective, 74
ignoring, in revolutionary 
disruption perspective, 77
meeting, in value creation 
perspective, 68
BI (business intelligence) team, 
185–189, 206
big data. See also specific topics
defined, 206
emergence of, 15–21
big-chief syndrome, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 83
BioWare, 28
Black Swans, 14
BlackBerry, 14
Bletchley Park, 152
Brin, Sergey, 172
Broadmap, 30
Bungie, 28
bushido, 23–24
business analytics
as a catalyst for unlocking value 
from data, 22
compared with analytics, xiv–xv
defined, 206
requirements of, 151
value of, 126–127, 126f
business intelligence (BI) team, 
185–189, 206
business planning, 206
business support services, 115, 116
C
capability
culture and, 41–44, 43f, 95–100
importance of, 79
requirements for, 150–157
capability support services, 114, 
115, 116
cargo cult, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 88
cars, 11
cellular automata, 34
Centers of Excellence, 110–111, 
182–183, 206
centralized data, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 90
centralized group, 103–104
certain, aware and, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels, 
3–5 91
challenger process, 206
challenging delivery, in truth seeking 
perspective, 62
champion process, 206
change, rate of, 9–10
chaotic storage, 35–36
Christensen, Clayton M., 174
Churn, 206
clarity of insight, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
clarity of ownership, in dominant 
culture, 62
code-based approaches, 135
commercialization, 181
community of practice, 108, 207
competencies, xv–xvi, 207
competency centers, 108–110, 207
competency-centricity, in functional 
innovation perspective, 74
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X  ◂  223
competitive advantage, 207
competitiveness, in value creation 
perspective, 68
completeness, of data, 122–124
comprehensiveness, of data,  
121–122
computers, 11
connectivity, 13
considered execution, in functional 
innovation perspective, 73
considered optimization, in 
revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 77
considered planning, in value 
creation perspective, 67
considered reaction, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
contagious churn, 207
conversion rate, 64
Cook, Tim, 30
Cooper, Martin, 166
core concepts, xiv–xvi
cost recovery, 105–107
cottage industries, in truth seeking 
perspective, 62
Cover Story template, 194–195,  
195f
creating
plans, 191–201
value, xv, 140–148
cross-sectional modeling, 207
cross-sell, 207
crowdsourcing, 207
cultural imperative
about xii, 43f, 42, 63–62, 48f
functional innovation, 69–75
intuitive action, 62–63
revolutionary disruption, 75–78
truth seeking, 63–62
value creation, 62–69
culture
about, xv
capability and, 41–44, 43f,  
95–100
importance of, 79
D
data
completeness of, 122–124
comprehensiveness of,  
121–122
fragmented, 82
leveraging for value, xv
requirements for organizational 
design, 116–124
sensor, 215
structured, 17, 216
temporality, of 120
unstructured, 17–18, 217
data centralization, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 90
data cleansing, 207
data management process, 207
data quality, 208
data science, 152–153, 154–157, 
155f, 156f
data scientist, 208
data warehouse, 208
data-focused effort, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 82
datamart, 208
Dawkins, Richard, 16
decentralized data, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 88
decision tree, 208
decisioning systems, 134
defining visions, 193–192
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
224 
▸  I N D E X
deliberate reuse, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 90
Delivering Business Analytics (Stubbs), 
xii, xvi
Delta Model, 210
“democratization of analytics,” 186
democratized empowerment, 
in revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 78
denial, outright, in dominant 
culture, 63
departmental platform, 208
derived variable, 208
design of experiments, 208
desperation, frantic, in dominant 
culture, 63
differentiation targeting, in 
revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 77
digital footprint, 12
digitization, 12
directed path, 92
discovery environment, xvi, 208
disruption, 9–10, 75–78
disruptive innovation, 174
disruptor, being the, in revolutionary 
disruption perspective, 77
doge, 208
DoubleClick, 30
Dragon Age: Origins (video game), 28
dynamic management, 10
dynamic value, 169–189
about, xv, 169–170, 178f
innovation cycle, 170–172, 171f
innovation engine, xii, 170,  
181–185, 182f
innovation paradox, 172–176
reinventing the rōnin, 185–189
in revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 77
secret to success, 176–181
E
e-Commerce, 18
economies of scale, 208
economies of scope, 209
efficiency
of automation, 135–137
sources of, 137, 139
efficient machine, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 91
egalitarianism, in dominant culture, 
62
Embark, 30
embedded analysts, 102f
emergence, of big data, 15–21
empire, as indicator of organization 
operating at levels 3–5, 91
employee turnover, 163
enabler
about, 135
efficiency of automation,  
135–137
need for governance, 138–140
transparency of assets, 137–138
enabling initiative, 209
encapsulation, in prototyping, 144
Endoxon, 30
enterprise platform, 209
enterprise resource planning, 209
enterprise transformation, 104
era of uncertainty, 14, 34
ETL (extract, transform, and load), 
129–130
evolutionary innovation, 174, 178, 
178f, 209
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X  ◂  225
execution, considered, in functional 
innovation perspective, 73
experience, value of, 63
experimental innovation, in truth 
seeking perspective, 63
exploratory analysis, 131
exploratory data analysis tools, 136
exploratory data preparation,  
131–132
external value, xv, 67, 126,  
127–128
extract, transform, and load (ETL), 
128–129
F
Facebook, 5, 7, 14
fact-based debate, in truth seeking 
perspective, 62
feudal artisans, in dominant culture, 
62–63
fiber channel, 209
financial crisis, of 2007, 13
flexibility
importance of, 83
in return cycle, 147
focus, of organizational design, 
107–111
Ford, Henry, 185
formal profit-and-loss statement, 
102f, 106
Foundation series (Asimov), 3
fragmented data, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 82
fragmented inconsistency, in 
dominant culture, 62–63
Franklin, Benjamin, xii–xiii
frantic desperation, in dominant 
culture, 63
freedom, constraints of, 81–82
functional innovation
about, 69–70
benefits of being personal,  
70–73
common characteristics, 73–74
expanding culture, 75
functional planning, 209
functional reporting, 103, 102f
future shock, 9–10, 209
Future Shock (Toffler), 9–10
G
Gladwell, Malcolm
Outliers, 23
Globalization, 12
goals, of operating models, 127–134
Google, 7, 14, 29–30
Google AdWords, 181
governance, need for, 138–140
Govindarajan, Vijay, 176–177
Grand Theft Auto V (video game), 27
group formality, 102–105
grouping model, 209
growth initiative, 210
Guinness, 152
H
Harnham, 22
Hax and Wilde’s Delta Model, 210
haystack method, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 83
headlines, 195, 195f
hierarchy of needs, 25
high-context culture, 210
HiPPO leadership
defined, 210
in dominant culture, 62
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
226 
▸  I N D E X
hoarding, selfish, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 83
HopStop app, 30
human capital, 149–164
about, 149–150
capability requirements, 150–157
getting the right people, 157–162
keeping the people, 162–164
I
ideas/ideation, 15–16, 177–178, 210
identifying opportunities, 196–198
ignoring the benchmark, in 
revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 77
ImageAmerica, 30
improvement targeting, in functional 
innovation perspective, 74
impute, 210
incapacitated and paralyzed, in 
dominant culture, 63
inconsistency, fragmented, in 
dominant culture, 62–63
incremental value, in functional 
innovation perspective, 74
in-database processing, 210
independent variables, 210
information, value of, 128–131
information asymmetries, 210
information management, 128–131
“in-game telemetry,” 27
innovation
See also functional innovation
defined, 211
disruptive, 174
with dynamic value, 169–189
evolutionary, 174, 178, 178f, 209
experimental, 63
revolutionary, 174, 178f, 179, 214
innovation cycle, 170–172, 171f
innovation engine, xii, 170,  
181–185, 182f
innovation paradox, 172–176
insight, clarity of, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
insight, knowledge of, 131–133
“insight teams,” 109
Instagram, 5
Institute of Analytics Professionals, 
22, 25
instructions
for defining the vision, 194–196
for identifying opportunities, 
197–198
for mapping responsibilities, 
200–201
intangible value, 211
integrated coordination, in 
functional innovation 
perspective, 73–74
intelligent action, in value creation 
perspective, 67
intelligent enterprise, 79–93
about, xii, 43f, 42, 45n3, 79–80, 
80f
level 1: unstructured chaos, 80–84
level 2: structured chaos, 84–89
levels 3–5: the intelligent 
enterprise, 89–93
intelligent inaction, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
interests, matching to activities, 163
internal consultancy, 102f
internal value
about, xv, 126–127
sources of, 135
in truth seeking perspective, 63
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X  ◂  227
Internet access, 12
intuitive action
about, 62–63
common characteristics, 62–63
example of, 61
expanding cultures, 62–63
invention, 211
inward-looking, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL), 148, 
183–184
J
Jobs, Steve, 157
join, 211
K
Kahneman, Daniel
Thinking, Fast and Slow, 4
Katz, Lawrence, 6
KDNuggets, 22
Keyhole Inc., 30
knowledge of insight, 131–133
knowledge rush, 26–31
“known knowns,” 14
“known unknowns,” 14
Krugman, Paul, 5
Kryder’s Law, 17, 211
L
labor market shifts, 22–23
leader, being the, in functional 
innovation perspective, 74
leaders and leadership
big data and leadership, 5–7
the future, 3–5
requirements for successful, 192
level 1: unstructured chaos
about, 80–81
common characteristics, 82–83
freedom, 81–82
getting beyond, 83–84
level 2: structured chaos
about, 84
common characteristics, 87–88
cost of agility, 85–87
getting beyond, 88–89
levels 3–5: the intelligent  
enterprise
about, 89–90
common characteristics, 90–91
getting beyond, 91–93
leverage-focused effort, as indicator 
of organization operating at 
levels 3–5, 90
LG, 28
LinkedIn, 7
Locationary, 30
logic, in prototyping, 144
low-context culture, 211
M
“magic,” data science and, 159–161
managed utilities, in functional 
innovation perspective, 74
manual activity, 135
mapping, 29–30, 198–201
market failure, 211
market-based debate, in 
revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 78
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 25
McKinsey, 23
meeting the benchmark, in value 
creation perspective, 68
memes, 16, 211
merge, 211
micro-segmentation modeling, 212
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
228 
▸  I N D E X
Microsoft, 27, 28
model
accuracy of, 62
defined, 212
model deployment, 212
model factory, 212
modeling
agent-based, 34, 205
cross-sectional, 207
micro-segmentation, 212
predictive, 213–214
simulation, 215
statistical, 123
Monte Carlo sampling, 212
Moore’s Law, 16–17, 212
Motorola, 30
multivariate analysis, 212
MySpace, 14
N
need for action, 133–134
need for governance, 138–140
Nest, 30
Nobel Memorial Prize for Economic 
Sciences, 5
Nokia, 14
Nudge (Thaler & Sunstein), 4
“nudge unit,” 4
numerical analysts, 150–151
O
Oculus, 5
operating models
about, 125–127
creating value, 140–148, 141f
enabler, 135–140
goals of, 127–134
operational activity, 212
operational environment, xvi, 213
operational services, 114–115
operations research, 213
opportunities, identifying, 196–198
opportunity cost, 213
opportunity-based debate, in 
functional innovation 
perspective, 74
optimistic sharing, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 91
optimization, considered, in 
revolutionary disruption 
perspective, 77
optimization services, 115–116
organic path, 91
organizational benefits, 212
organizational design
about, 101–102
data requirements for, 116–124
focus of, 107–111
services offered, 111–116, 112f
structure of, 102–107, 102f
organizational planning, 213
outcome targeting, in value creation 
perspective, 68
Outliers (Gladwell), 23
outward-looking, in value creation 
perspective, 67
overpaid and unaware, as indicator 
of organization operating at 
level 1, 83
ownership, clarity of, in dominant 
culture, 62
P
Page, Larry, 172
PageRank, 172–173
paralyzed and incapacitated, in 
dominant culture, 63
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X  ◂  229
people
getting the right, 157–162
keeping the, 162–164
leveraging for value, xv
“performance engine,” 176–177
performance management, 213
perpetual reinvention, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 83
personal benefits, 213
personal tools, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 82
person-centricity, in dominant 
culture, 63
petabyte, 213
Pirsig, Robert
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle 
Maintenance, 63
planning, considered, in value 
creation perspective, 65
plans
creating, 191–201
defining the vision, 193–196
identifying opportunities, 196–198
mapping responsibilities, 198–201
starting the conversation,  
191–192
taking it to the next level, 201
polymath syndrome, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 88
precrime, 213
predictive modeling, 213–214
presentation layer, 185
price competitiveness, 163
pricing analytics, 214
problem-based debate, in dominant 
culture, 63
process, leveraging for value, xv
process-centricity, in truth seeking 
perspective, 62
processes, 62
processes, strongly defined
defined, 216
as indicator of organization 
operating at levels 3–5, 91
processes, weakly defined
defined, 217
as indicator of organization 
operating at level 2, 88
productivity, sources of, 139
profitability, path to, xii, 151f
profit-and-loss statement
formal, 102f, 106
shadow, 102f, 105–106
propensity model, 214
prototyping, 144
psychohistory, 214
purpose-built tools, 135–136
Q
Quiksee, 30
quorum sensing, 32
quotes, 195, 195f
R
Radio-Frequency Identification 
(RFID), 214
rate of change, 9–10
ratemaking, 214
reaction, considered, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
realized capability, in value creation 
perspective, 68
recency, frequency, monetary 
analysis (RFM), 130, 214
regression, 123
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
230 
▸  I N D E X
reinvention, avoidable, as indicator 
of organization operating at 
level 2, 88
relational model, 214
reporting, 214
responsibilities, mapping,  
198–201
return cycle, 147, 147f
reused capability, in functional 
innovation perspective, 74
revolutionary disruption
about, 75–77
common characteristics, 77–78
revolutionary innovation, 174, 178f, 
179, 214
RFID (Radio-Frequency 
Identification), 214
RFM (recency, frequency, monetary 
analysis), 130, 214
risk competency center, 109
roadmap, 215
Rockefeller, John D., 26–27
role-centricity, in value creation 
perspective, 68
rōnin
reinventing the, 185–189
rise of the 21–26, 107
S
salaries, increases in, 22
scalable factories, in value creation 
perspective, 68
science, data science and, 161–162
scoring process, 215
scoring table, 215
search-focused effort, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 87
segmentation, 215
segmentation strategy, 215
self-delusion, in dominant 
culture, 63
selfish hoarding, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 83
Self-Monitoring Analysis and 
Reporting Technology 
(S.M.A.R.T.), 18
sensitivity analysis, 215
sensor data, 215
sensor era, 18
services, offered by organizational 
design, 111–116, 112f
shadow profit-and-loss 
statement,102f, 105–106
Shankar, Mary, 4
shared groups, 107
shared service, 102f, 105, 106
sidebars, 195, 195f
simulation, 215
simulation modeling, 215
Single View of Customer  
(SVoC), 216
Six Sigma Process Improvement,  
216
S.M.A.R.T. (Self-Monitoring 
Analysis and Reporting 
Technology), 18
smart devices, 18
smart meter, 216
SMART Model, xii, 43f, 42, 157–158, 
158f
SnapChat, 7
social era, 17
social network analysis, 216
social web, 5, 7
Sony, 27, 28
Soros, George, 13
Stakeholder Analysis template,  
200–201, 200f
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X  ◂  231
Standard Oil, 26–27
statistical modeling, 123
strategic planning, 216
strategic services, 113–114
stress testing, 216
structure, of organizational design, 
102–107, 102f
structured data, 17, 216
structured era, 17
Stubbs, Evan
Delivering Business Analytics, xii, xvi
The Value of Business Analytics, xii, 
xvi, 46n3
Sunstein, Cass
Nudge, 4
survival, in dominant culture, 63
sustainability, ensuring, 146–148
sustaining innovation, 174
SVoC (Single View of Customer), 
216
SWAT teams, 182–183
systematized chaos, 31–36
T
tablets, 11
Taleb, Nassim, 14
tangible value, 216
team platform, 216
team tools, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 87
technology
changes in, 10–14
is an enabler, in value creation 
perspective, 69
is “nice to have,” in dominant 
culture, 62
is the answer, in truth seeking 
perspective, 62–63
leveraging for value, xv–xvi
technology support services,  
115–116
templates
Affinity Map, 197–198, 197f
Cover Story, 194–195, 195f
Stakeholder Analysis, 200–201, 
200f
temporality, of data, 120
terabyte, 216
Thaler, Richard
Nudge, 4
Thinking, Fast and Slow (Kahneman), 4
three-dimensional printers, 11
Tiger teams, 182–183
time series analysis, 217
Toffler, Alvin
Future Shock, 9–10
tools
See also technology
common, as indicator of 
organization operating at levels 
3–5, 90
defined, 217
top-down management, 36
training table, 217
transformation, 217
transparency, of assets, 137–138
trends, 10
Trimble, Chris, 176–177
trust, in dominant culture, 62
truth seeking
about, 62–63
common characteristics, 63
expanding culture, 62–63
technocrats, rise of, 62–63
U
unaware and overpaid, as indicator 
of organization operating at 
level 1, 83
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
232 
▸  I N D E X
uncertain, aware but, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
2, 88
uncertainty
age of, 10–14, 23, 26, 31
era of, 14, 34
unconscious ignorance, 84
unconsidered reaction, in dominant 
culture, 62
undefined processes, as indicator of 
organization operating at level 
1, 83
underdog, being the, in truth seeking 
perspective, 63
underutilized capability, in truth 
seeking perspective, 62
United Nations (UN), 5
“unknown unknowns,” 10, 142
unstructured data, 17–18, 217
upsell, 217
V
value
See also dynamic value
about, 140–141
of business analytics, xii, 42, 43f, 
126–127, 126f
creating, xv, 140–148
defined, 217
ensuring sustainability, 146–148
of experience, 63
external, xv, 67, 126, 127–128
forms of, xv
incremental, 74
of information, 128–131
intangible, 211
internal, xv, 63, 126–127, 135
leveraging data for, xv
tangible, 216
wheel of value, xii, 141–145,  
141f
value architect, xii, 217
value architecture, 153–157, 155f
value chain, closing the, 134
value creation
about, 62–63
common characteristics, 66–69
expanding culture, 69
regression, 63–66
The Value of Business Analytics 
(Stubbs), xii, xvi, 46n3
video game development, 27–28
viral churn, 207
viral marketing, 217
virtual CoE, 102f
virtual reality systems, 11
visions, defining, 193–196
von Moltke, Helmuth, 191
W
wage inflation, 163
Waze, 30
well-intentioned chaos, as indicator 
of organization operating at 
level 2, 88
Whatsapp, 5
wheel of value, xii, 141–145, 141f
Where2, 30
Y
YouTube, 30
Z
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle 
Maintenance (Pirsig), 63
ZipDash, 30
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

