
BIG DATA AND CLOUD 
COMPUTING FOR DEVELOPMENT
This book provides a framework for evaluating big data and cloud computing 
based on how they evolve to ﬁt users’ needs in developing countries in key 
areas, such as agriculture and education. The authors discuss how this frame-
work can be utilized by businesses, governments, and consumers to accelerate 
economic growth and overcome information and communication barriers.
 
By examining the ways in which cloud computing can drive social, economic, 
and environmental transformation, readers gain a nuanced understanding of the 
opportunities and challenges these technologies offer. The authors also provide an 
authoritative and up- to-date account of big data’s diffusion into a wide range of 
developing economies, such as Brazil and China, illustrating key concepts through 
in- depth case studies. Special attention is paid to economic development in the 
context of the new Sustainable Development Goals formulated by the United 
Nations, introducing readers to the most modern standard of economic evaluation.
 
Students of information management, entrepreneurship, and development, as 
well as policy makers, researchers, and practitioners, will ﬁnd Big Data and Cloud 
Computing for Development an interesting read and a useful reference source.
Nir Kshetri is a Professor at the University of North Carolina– Greensboro, 
USA, and a Research Fellow at the Research Institute for Economics and Busi-
ness Administration, Kobe University, Japan. He is the author of Global Entre-
preneurship, published by Routledge in 2014.
Torbjörn Fredriksson is the Head of ICT- related work for the United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in Geneva, Switzerland.
Diana Carolina Rojas Torres is an Assistant Professor of Entrepreneurship 
and Innovation at Universidad de la Sabana, Colombia.

“This book is essential reading for anyone who is interested in the social side 
of big data and cloud computing, particularly in the developing world. At a 
time when stories about the promise and peril of new information technologies 
are front page news, Kshetri, Fredriksson, and Torres provide an indispensable 
guide that helps us separate facts from hyperbole.”
Russell Funk, University of Minnesota, USA
“This remarkable book addresses an important area that many books on these 
topics don’t cover, examining how cloud computing and big data analytics drive 
social, economic, and environmental transformation in developing countries and 
outlining unrealized opportunities and challenges in realizing them. Illustrated 
with case studies from several countries, the book is a valuable source of relevant 
information for researchers, students, practitioners, and policy-makers interested 
in embracing the cloud and big data for socio-economic progress in emerging 
markets.”
San Murugesan, Editor in Chief, IEEE IT Professional & BRITE 
Professional Services, Australia
“This is an outstanding presentation of big data and cloud computing concepts, 
issues, opportunities, and challenges, including case studies and lessons learned 
from developing countries. It offers great inspiration, creativity, and cutting 
edge information which researchers, academics, businesses, and students will be 
pleased to read.”
Tomayess Issa, Curtin University, Australia

BIG DATA AND 
CLOUD COMPUTING 
FOR DEVELOPMENT
Lessons from Key Industries and 
Economies in the Global South
Nir Kshetri, Torbjörn Fredriksson, and 
Diana Carolina Rojas Torres

First published 2017 
by Routledge 
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2017 Taylor & Francis
The right of Nir Kshetri, Torbjörn Fredriksson, and Diana Carolina 
Rojas Torres to be identiﬁed as authors of this work has been asserted by 
them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and 
explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Names: Kshetri, Nir, author. | Fredriksson, Torbjèorn, author. | Rojas 
Torres, Diana Carolina, author.
Title: Big data and cloud computing for development : lessons from key 
industries and economies in the Global South / Nir Kshetri , Torbjèorn 
Fredriksson, & Diana Carolina Rojas Torres.
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2017.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016043154| ISBN 9781138689046 (hbk) | ISBN 
9781138689053 (pbk) | ISBN 9781315537924 (ebk) | ISBN 
9781134973514 (mobi/kindle)
Subjects: LCSH: Information technology–Economic aspects–Developing 
countries. | Big data. | Cloud computing. | Economic development–
Developing countries.
Classiﬁcation: LCC HC59.72.I55 K74 2017 | DDC 
338.900285/57–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016043154
ISBN: 978-1-138-68904-6 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-138-68905-3 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-315-53792-4 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo 
by Wearset Ltd, Boldon, Tyne and Wear

CONTENTS
List of Figures 
ix
List of Tables 
x
Preface and Acknowledgments 
xi
List of Abbreviations 
xiii
PART I
Big Data and Cloud Computing in the Global South: 
Key Concepts, Issues, Opportunities, and Challenges 
1
 1 Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud Computing in the 
Global South: Facilitators, Inhibitors, and Consequences 
3
1.1 Introduction 3
1.2 Deﬁnitions and Concepts 5
1.3 A Survey of BD and the Cloud in Developing 
Economies 8
1.4 Developing World- Based Firms in the Supply Side of BD 
and the Cloud 11
1.5 BD and the Cloud Industry and Market in Developing 
Economies: A Framework 16
1.6 Conclusions and Some Unanswered Questions 24
1.7 Roadmap to the Remainder of This Book 25
 2 The Roles and Signiﬁcance of Mobile Phones in the 
Value Proposition of Big Data and the Cloud 
31

vi  Contents
2.1 Introduction 31
2.2 The Deployment of BD- and Cloud- Based Mobile 
Computing Solutions 34
2.3 Appropriateness, Effectiveness, Feasibility, and 
Worthwhileness of BD- and Cloud- Based Mobile 
Computing Solutions in the Developing World 35
2.4 Key Areas of Deployment and Impacts 40
2.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments 50
 3 Privacy and Security Issues Associated with BD and the 
Cloud 
58
3.1 Introduction 58
3.2 Characteristics of Big Data and the Cloud in Relation to 
Security and Privacy 60
3.3 The Security and Privacy Situation in Developing 
Countries in the Context of BD and the Cloud 64
3.4 Measures Taken at Various Levels to Strengthen Security 
and Privacy in Developing Countries 66
3.5 Concluding Comments 69
PART II
Big Data and Cloud Computing in Key Development 
Areas in the Global South 
75
 4 Primary Industries 
77
4.1 Introduction 77
4.2 Some BD- and Cloud- Based Applications in the Primary 
Sector 79
4.3 Key Driving Forces in the Adoption of BD- and  
Cloud- Based Applications in the Primary Sectors 80
4.4 Concluding Comments 83
 5 Education and R&D 
86
5.1 Introduction 86
5.2 BD- and Cloud- Based E- Learning Tools and 
Systems 87
5.3 BD and Cloud Computing in R&D 92
5.4 Key Drivers of BD and Cloud Deployment in E- Learning 
and R&D 93
5.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments 96

Contents  vii
 6 E- commerce 
102
6.1 Introduction 102
6.2 Some Examples of BD- and Cloud- Based E- Commerce 
Applications Deployed in Developing Economies 104
6.3 Barriers to E- Commerce in Developing Economies 108
6.4 BD and the Cloud’s Potential to Overcome the Barriers to 
E- Commerce 110
6.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments 115
PART III
Case Studies of Diffusion and Impact of BD and Cloud 
Computing in Major Economies in the Global South 
123
 7 Sub- Saharan Africa 
125
7.1 Introduction 125
7.2 The Current State of BD and Cloud Market 126
7.3 BD and Cloud Deployment in Modern Versus Traditional 
Sectors 130
7.4 Key Driving Factors of BD and Cloud Industry and 
Market 132
7.5 Major Constraints Limiting the Development of BD and 
Cloud Industry and Market 136
7.6 Discussion and Concluding Comments 138
 8 India 
144
8.1 Introduction 144
8.2 The Current State of BD and Cloud Industry and Market 
in India: The General Environment 146
8.3 BD and Cloud Industry and Market in India 147
8.4 BD and Cloud Computing Apps in India 150
8.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments 156
 9 China 
162
9.1 Introduction 162
9.2 The Current State of the Diffusion of BD and Cloud 
Computing in China 164
9.3 Drivers of BD and Cloud Industry and Market 172
9.4 Discussion and Concluding Comments 179
10 Brazil 
187
10.1 Introduction 187

viii  Contents
10.2 Key Features of the Brazilian BD and Cloud Industry 
and Market 188
10.3 Economic and Infrastructural Factors Affecting the 
Development of the Brazilian Cloud Industry and 
Market 190
10.4 Institutional- and Policy- Related Factors Affecting the 
Development of the Brazilian BD and Cloud Industry and 
Market 192
10.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments 194
PART IV
Lessons Learned, Implications, and the Way Forward 
199
11 Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion 
201
11.1 Introduction 201
11.2 BD and the Cloud in Developing Countries in Relation 
to Innovation and Technological Progress 202
11.3 Challenges and Obstacles Associated with BD and the 
Cloud 203
11.4 Implications for Technology Marketers 205
11.5 Policy Implications 207
11.6 What Do We Know About BD and the Cloud in the 
Developing World? 208
11.7 Future Research Implications 210
11.8 Final Thought 212
Index 
215

FIGURES
1.1 Characteristics and Types of Cloud Computing 
6
1.2 Main Stakeholders and Market Relationships in the Cloud 
Economy 
7
1.3 A Framework for Big Data and Cloud Computing Related 
Indicators in Developing Countries 
17
2.1 A Comparison of Subscriptions per 100 People of Different 
Technologies in Developing and Developed Countries (2016) 
38
2.2 A Comparison of Computer and Internet Penetrations in 
Developing and Developed Countries (2012/2013) 
39

TABLES
 1.1 Some Examples of BD and Cloud Computing Applications 
in the Developing World 
12
 1.2 BD- and Cloud- Related Entrepreneurship of Developing 
World- Based Firms  
14
 1.3 Determinants of the BD and Cloud Industry in the 
Developing World 
22
 2.1 Key ICT Indicators for Countries with Various Levels of 
Economic Development 
32
 2.2 SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS for Mobile Phones in Developing 
Countries 
36
 2.3 Some Examples of the Impacts of Big Data- and Cloud- 
Based Mobile Computing Solutions on Improving Business 
Processes and Productivity and Creation of Markets 
48
 3.1 Big Data Characteristics in Relation to Security and Privacy 
61
 6.1 The Roles of Big Data and the Cloud in Overcoming the 
Barriers to E- Commerce 
113
 7.1 Cloud Deployment in Traditional and Modern Sectors in 
SSA Economies: A Comparison of Green Dreams’ iCow and 
Nedbank’s E- Banking 
131
 8.1 Big Data- and Cloud- Related Business and Entrepreneurial 
Activities in India  
152
 9.1 Big Data and Cloud Computing Applications and Their 
Impacts in China: A Sample of Examples 
166
 9.2 Some Examples Big Data- and Cloud- Related 
Entrepreneurship of Chinese Firms 
168
11.1 Key Findings and Implications 
211

PREFACE AND 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Big data (hereinafter: BD) and cloud computing (hereinafter: cloud) are likened 
and equated to the “Industrial Revolution” in terms of technological innova-
tion, structural change, and opportunities for economic growth. BD and the 
cloud are diffusing at an explosive rate. As cross- cutting technologies, they are 
having a transformative impact on economies and societies. In some sense, some 
developing economies are likely to experience more dramatic and signiﬁcant 
BD- and cloud- led socio- economic transformations. It is argued that the cloud 
is providing these economies with an opportunity to leapfrog and overcome 
barriers related to leveraging information and communications technology 
(ICT) for development. BD- and the cloud- related systems have been success-
fully deployed and are being combined with cellphones, blockchain, mapping 
applications, and other technologies to facilitate information ﬂow, which has 
already led to some gains in economic productivity and social progress.
 
In light of the above observations, the major goals of this book are to: (a) 
document, evaluate, and provide an authoritative and up- to-date account of the 
diffusion pattern of BD and the cloud in the developing world; (b) review the 
theoretical rationales for and factors affecting the diffusion of BD and the cloud 
in the developing world; (c) explain and make sense of the BD- and cloud- 
related paradoxical policy practices observed in some developing economies 
such as Brazil and China; (d) evaluate the effects of BD and the cloud in key 
development areas; (e) investigate the links between formal and informal insti-
tutional factors affecting the diffusion pattern of BD and the cloud in the devel-
oping world; (f ) articulate and show the importance of security, privacy, and 
intellectual property protection issues raised by BD and the cloud in the devel-
oping world; (g) develop systematic knowledge about the appropriateness and 
worthwhileness of BD, cloud, and mobile phone combination in the developing 

xii  Preface and Acknowledgments
world; (h) discuss implications of the ﬁndings of this book and make suggestions 
for businesses, governments, and consumers; (i) identify areas of research needed 
to improve our understanding of the diffusion and development patterns of BD 
and the cloud in the developing world; and (j) describe BD and cloud deploy-
ments in developing economies in the context of the new Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals currently being formulated by the United Nations.
 
Undergraduate and graduate students, researchers from a wide range of dis-
ciplines (e.g., economics, business and management, international relations, 
computer science and engineering, sociology, political science, etc.) represent 
the primary audience groups for this book. The book is also useful for policy 
makers and practitioners such as IT professionals, information system develop-
ers, information security specialists, CIOs, CTOs, and business executives, who 
need an informed understanding of the BD and cloud industry and market in 
the developing world. However, anyone with a broad interest in world affairs 
would ﬁnd the book a useful reading and reference source.
 
Regarding the ideas, concepts, and content presented in this book, the 
authors are grateful to several people for comments, suggestions, support, and 
encouragement. We would like to express deep appreciation to Sharon Golan, 
Acquisitions Editor, Business, and Management & Accounting at Routledge, 
who inspired us to undertake this project. Erin Arata, editorial assistant, US 
Business and Management at Routledge, did an excellent job in managing the 
project. Sharon and Erin shepherded the project with the greatest of care and 
professionalism through its various phases.
 
We would also like to acknowledge support by Konrad Lorenz University, 
Bogota, Colombia to work on related projects in big data. Finally, a special 
mention should be made of Minjing Sun, graduate assistant at the University of 
North Carolina at Greensboro, who did a very good job in the compilation of 
the bibliography.
Nir Kshetri, Torbjörn Fredriksson, and Diana Rojas
The views expressed in this book are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the 
views of the United Nations.

ABBREVIATIONS
ACCA 
Asia Cloud Computing Association
ACE 
Africa Coast to Europe
AfSIS 
Africa Soil Information Service
AI 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AIS 
Automated Identiﬁcation Systems
ALICE 
A Large Ion Collider Experiment
ATLAS 
A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS
AU 
African Union
AWS 
Amazon Web Services
B2B 
Business to Business
BD 
Big Data
BPO 
Business Process Outsourcing
BSA 
Business Software Alliance
BSE 
Bombay Stock Exchange
CAGR 
Compound Annual Growth Rate
CERN 
Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire
CESI 
China Electronics Standardization Institute
CHPC 
Centre for High Performance Computing
CIMI 
Cloud Infrastructure Management Interface
CKWs 
Community Knowledge Workers
CoD 
Cash on Delivery
COSTECH 
Commission for Science and Technology
CRM 
Customer Relationship Management
CS2C 
China Standard Software Company
CSA 
Climate Smart Agriculture
CSP 
Cloud Service Provider

xiv  Abbreviations
CUO 
Cloud User Organization
DMTF 
Distributed Management Task Force
DOVEs 
Driverless Operated Vehicle Environments
DSCI 
Data Security Council of India
DST 
Department of Science and Technology
EASSy 
East African Submarine Cable System
EC2 
Elastic Compute Cloud
ECPA 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
EHR 
Electronic Health Records
EIA 
Environmental Investigation Agency
EMR 
Electronic Medical Records
EthioSIS 
Ethiopian Soil Information System
FIP 
Fair Information Practices
FTC 
Federal Trade Commission
GBPS 
Gigabits per second
GCC 
Gulf Cooperation Council
GHGs 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
HIPAA 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
IaaS 
Infrastructure as a Service 
IAMAI 
Internet & Mobile Association of India
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology
IDC 
International Data Corporation 
IGF 
Internet Governance Forum
IoT 
Internet of  Things
IP 
Internet Protocol
ISP 
Internet Service Provider
IT&BPM 
IT and Business Process Management
ITU 
International Telecommunication Union
IUU 
Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated
IXP 
Internet Exchange Points
KBPS 
Kilobits per second
KENET 
Kenya Education Network
LDCs 
Least Developed Countries
M2M 
Mothers- 2-Mothers
M&A 
Merger and Acquisition
MADEX 
Mobile Application Data Exchange
MAMA 
Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action
MBPS 
Megabits per second
MFI 
Micro-ﬁnance Institution
MIIT 
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
MNREGA 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MOOC 
Massive Open Online Courses
NASSCOM National Association of Software and Services Companies

Abbreviations  xv
NCSP 
National Cyber Security Policy
NDRC 
National Development and Reform Commission
NESAP 
New Economy Skills for Africa Program
NIST 
National Institute of Standards and Technology
ODCA 
Open Data Centre Alliance
ODPS 
Open Data Processing Service
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OVF 
Open Virtualization Format
PaaS 
Platform as a Service
PII 
Personally Identiﬁable Information
PNBL 
Plano National de Banda Larga
PPP 
Public–Private Partnership
PSMA 
Port State Measures Agreement
RBI 
Reserve Bank of India
RFID 
Radio- Frequency Identiﬁcation
RNP 
Rede Nacional de Ensino e Pesquisa
SaaS 
Software as a Service
SANReN 
South African Research Network
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals
SEO 
Search Engine Optimization
SKA 
Square Kilometre Array
SMEs 
Small- and Medium- Sized Enterprises
SMS 
Short Message Service
SOE 
State- Owned Enterprise
SSA 
Sub- Saharan African
STEM 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
TCO 
Total Cost of Ownership
TEAMS 
The East African Marine System
TNC 
Transnational Corporation
UN 
United Nations
UNICEF 
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
VATS 
Value-Added Telecom Service
VC 
Venture Capital
WEF 
World Economic Forum
WHO 
World Health Organization
WTO 
World Trade Organization
YEAPI 
Youth Employment Accelerator Program Initiative


PART I
Big Data and Cloud 
Computing in the 
Global South
Key Concepts, Issues, 
Opportunities, and Challenges


1
DIFFUSION OF BIG DATA AND 
CLOUD COMPUTING IN THE 
GLOBAL SOUTH
Facilitators, Inhibitors, and Consequences
1.1 Introduction
Big data (hereinafter: BD) and cloud computing (hereinafter: cloud) are likened 
and equated to the “Industrial Revolution” in terms of technological innova-
tions, structural change, and the sources of economic growth.1 The uses of these 
technologies by businesses, governments, non- government organizations, and 
consumers are rapidly increasingly in the developing world. 
 
This book shows that the uses of BD and cloud technologies, often in com-
bination with other technological applications, can support the implementation 
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and its seventeen different 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).2 Advancing on the capability of devel-
oping countries to take active part in the BD and cloud ecosystems will there-
fore become increasingly important for accelerating progress in various targets, 
whether related to ﬁghting hunger, mitigating climate change, improving health 
and education, or boosting productivity.
 
The literature on BD and cloud computing has so far primarily focused on 
trends and developments in the advanced economies. This is only natural since 
this is where most action has been to date. However, as is showcased in this 
book, a growing number of interesting and creative ideas and techniques 
involving BD and the cloud are being developed and deployed throughout the 
developing world and in different contexts. 
 
For example, an intriguing application of BD and the cloud has been in 
improving water supply availability and reliability.3 The deployment of BD and 
the cloud has greatly empowered customers and forced water providers to be 
more accountable, efﬁcient, and transparent. Tools and applications have been 
built to improve the performance of government agencies, water aid groups, 

4  Big Data and Cloud
and other actors as well as to provide information directly to end customers. 
Various approaches have been used by a number of organizations involved in 
improving the water supply situation in the Global South. Some of them 
include the following.
 
In cities with irregular and intermittent water supplies, the start- up company 
NextDrop utilizes data gathered from cellphone users to predict when water 
would be available. Utility employees call NextDrop’s voice response system 
when they open water valves. The system sends a text message to local residents 
30–60 minutes before water delivery. Residents are contacted randomly by the 
system to verify the accuracy of the information that valve men provide. 
Updates from utility employees are used to generate Google Maps- based 
streaming visual data, which can be tracked by engineers to know valve status in 
real-time.4 NextDrop charges the consumer Rs.10 (about US$0.16) per month. 
The service was started in 2011 and in the ﬁrst ﬁve months it had over 10,000 
customers.5
 
The NGO Water for People uses Google’s data- tracking technology to assess 
the real- time performances and functioning of its water supply projects. Its 
cellphone- based app Field Level Operations Water (FLOW) helps to monitor the 
performance of water projects by providing a way to collect, manage, analyze, and 
display geographically referenced data. For instance, individuals on the ground can 
report information about broken water pumps.6 Mobile devices are used to collect 
data and photos from water distribution points. They are then uploaded to a dash-
board for real- time analysis. Data can be collected even in the absence of mobile 
connection. In such cases, information is automatically transmitted when the 
devices are connected. The data collected this way are combined with visual map-
 based reporting tools. As of 2015, over 200 organizations including UNICEF and 
Millennium Water Alliance were reported to use FLOW.7
 
Likewise, in the healthcare sector, take the case of mothers2mothers (M2M), 
a South African NGO. It is combining the cloud with database technology and 
mobile services to ﬁght the transmission of HIV/AIDS from mother to child.8 
Using the cloud, M2M digitizes patient records and shares them with counselors 
across the M2M networks, consisting of over 700 sites in Sub- Saharan Africa. 
The patient records contain information on treatment plans and advanced 
reporting tools, which would allow M2M to respond quickly. 
 
The use of BD and cloud solutions provides an opportunity to leapfrog and 
overcome barriers related to information and communications technology (ICT) 
infrastructure and use.9 The advantages of BD and cloud solutions can be 
enhanced further by combining them with other technologies and tools such as 
mobile phones and mapping applications to facilitate the ﬂow of information in 
a diverse range of economic activities.
 
In this chapter, we review factors that are driving the development of BD 
and cloud industries in the developing world, examine their potential impacts 
and look at the roles of businesses and policy makers in order to facilitate the 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  5
adoption and effective utilization of these technologies. We present a frame-
work for evaluating the attractiveness of BD and the cloud with reference to the 
evolving needs, capabilities, and competitive positions of developing countries.
1.2 Deﬁnitions and Concepts
Before proceeding with the analysis, it may be useful to provide some clariﬁca-
tions on deﬁnitions and concepts that will be used throughout the book. This 
section explains what we mean by BD, the cloud, different kinds of cloud appli-
cations, the main stakeholders in the cloud ecosystem, and how the cloud and 
BD are related.
1.2.1 Cloud Computing and Cloud Services
Cloud computing has been deﬁned by the US standardization body, the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), as follows: 
Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on- 
demand network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that 
can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort 
or service provider interaction.10
 
Cloud computing involves hosting applications on servers and delivering 
software and services via the Internet. In the cloud model, companies can access 
computing power and resources on the “cloud” and pay for services based on 
usage. This contrasts cloud computing from the traditional, ownership- based 
model of IT assets and resources. One way of describing cloud services is that 
they are services that are provided and used by clients “on demand at any time, 
through any access network, using any connected devices [that use] cloud com-
puting technologies.”11
 
There are different categories of cloud services and applications. The three 
types most commonly referred to are Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform 
as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS) (Figure 1.1).
 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): In IaaS, compute power and storage space are 
offered on demand. IaaS can provide server, operating system, disk storage, and 
database, among other things. One of the main advantages of IaaS is that it offers 
rapid elasticity and ﬂexibility. Amazon.com is one of the biggest IaaS providers. Its 
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) allows subscribers to run cloud application pro-
grams. IBM, Vmware, and HP also offer IaaS. China’s Huawei provides IaaS solu-
tion for operators, governments, and enterprises with data center IT infrastructure.
 
Platform as a Service (PaaS): Applications are developed and executed 
through platforms provided by cloud vendors. This model allows a quick and 

6  Big Data and Cloud
cost- effective development and deployment of applications. PaaS is often used 
by application developers working on mobile applications. Some well- known 
PaaS vendors include Google (Google App Engine), Salesforce.com (Force.
com), and Microsoft (Windows Azure platform). As another example, the US- 
based start- up, Cumulux, specialized on building, operating, and managing 
PaaS- based solutions, which was acquired by India’s Aditi Technologies. Some 
facilities provided under the PaaS model include database management, security, 
workﬂow management, and application serving.
 
Software as a Service (SaaS): It is a software distribution model, in which appli-
cations are hosted by a vendor and made available to customers over a network. 
The provider licenses an application to customers for use as a service on demand. 
With the SaaS, users do not need to hire professional IT staff to install and use 
software. SaaS is the most widespread form of cloud service. Some well- known 
examples include Google email, Google Apps, and Salesforce.com’s customer 
relationship management software. As a developing world- based example, MTN 
offers SaaS applications for micro-ﬁnance institutions.
 
Figure 1.1 highlights some of the characteristics of cloud computing, namely 
broad network access, rapid elasticity, on-demand services, pooling of resources, 
and multi- tenancy opportunities. It further recognizes that cloud services may 
Broad network
access
IaaS
Infrastructure
as service
PaaS
Platform
as service
Software
as service
SaaS
SERVICE CATEGORIES
DEPLOYMENT MODELS
Private
cloud
Community
cloud
Public
Rapid elasticity
Measured
service
On-demand
self-service
 
Resource
pooling
Multi-tenancy
CORE CHARACTERISTICS
FIGURE 1.1  Characteristics and Types of Cloud Computing
Source: UNCTAD, Information Economy Report 2013: The Cloud Economy and Develop-
ing Countries (New York and Geneva: United Nations, 2013), 7.

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  7
be provided in different conﬁgurations, involving private clouds (a proprietary 
resource for a single organization), public clouds (open to public use, such as 
webmail services), and hybrid clouds (mixing the two other deployment 
models).12
1.2.2 The Cloud Ecosystem and its Stakeholders
There are various stakeholders involved in what can be described as a cloud 
ecosystem (Figure 1.2). The UN Conference on Trade and Development iden-
tiﬁes the following main players: Cloud Service Providers (CSPs), communica-
tions network providers and power suppliers, inter- cloud service providers, 
cloud service customers, advertiser.
1.2.3 Big Data
In order to deﬁne BD, we start with the technology research company Gartner’s 
deﬁnition of BD, which are “high- volume, high- velocity and high- variety 
information assets that demand cost- effective, innovative forms of information 
processing for enhanced insight and decision making.”13 In this book’s context, 
Cloud service customers
Citizens/
consumers
SMEs
Large
enterprises
Cloud service providers
Cloud aggregators,
integrators and brokers
Governments
Advertisers
Communications network providers
and power suppliers
Legal and regulatory framework
Inter-cloud service
providers
FIGURE 1.2  Main Stakeholders and Market Relationships in the Cloud Economy
Source: UNCTAD, Information Economy Report 2013: The Cloud Economy and Develop-
ing Countries (New York and Geneva: United Nations, 2013), 10.

8  Big Data and Cloud
we deﬁne BD as data sets that can provide insights into human well- being, 
which satisfy at least one of the following characteristics compared to data sets 
that have been traditionally used in developmental issues: (a) are of higher 
volume; (b) are of wider variety; and (c) enable to make decisions and act faster.
1.2.4 Developing Country
By developing countries, we mean low- and middle- income countries accord-
ing to the World Bank’s (2014) classiﬁcation.14
1.2.5 The Relation between BD and the Cloud in Developing 
Economies: Each Driving and Feeding Off the Advancement 
of the Other
The US manufacturer of computer chips, Intel, observes that BD and cloud are 
converging, which makes BD analytics in clouds an appropriate option for 
organizations. The chipmaker argues that organizations increasingly need to 
develop a cloud- based BD in order to optimize the value of enterprise data.15
 
Thus BD and cloud computing play complementary roles. Each drives and 
feeds off the advancement of the other. While organizations often store their 
most sensitive data in- house, it makes more sense to locate huge volumes of less 
sensitive data that they own or that is generated by third- party externally in a 
cloud environment.16 BD requires new processing and volume requirements, 
which translates into the need for additional infrastructure. Clouds offer ﬂex-
ibility and efﬁciencies for accessing data and generating insights from the data. 
For instance, clouds make it easier to scale up for processing power and 
storage.17
1.3 A Survey of BD and the Cloud in Developing Economies
The market research ﬁrm, Gartner, estimated the size of the global public cloud 
services market at US$131 billion in 2013.18 It also noted that emerging eco-
nomies in Asia (e.g., Indonesia and India, Greater China) and Latin America 
(e.g., Argentina, Mexico, and Brazil) are experiencing the highest growth rates 
for cloud services. Likewise, according to the research ﬁrm, International Data 
Corporation (IDC), worldwide revenues for BD will grow from US$122 billion 
in 2015 to US$187 billion in 2019. The IDC’s study also found that the Middle 
East and Africa will be the fastest growing region (together with Latin 
America).19
 
Advanced countries still account for most of the global demand in BD and 
cloud computing. For instance, according to IDC, about 10 percent of Middle 
East and African servers were virtualized by the end of 2010. The proportion 
was 13 percent in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) economies, compared 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  9
with 20 percent or higher in more developed regions.20 The diffusion of the 
cloud has thus been slower in the Middle East compared to other economies 
with a similar level of economic development. 
 
A fascinating aspect of this new technology is that countries across the world 
can participate in cloud computing platforms by developing new technologies, 
standards, innovations, and services. The cloud’s open resources would allow 
developing countries to share the same resources and opportunities as players in 
the developing countries.21
 
The cloud is especially attractive if it is seen against the backdrop of scarcity 
of economic resources and a high propensity to share ICT tools.22 For instance, 
in some African countries, although a mobile phone belongs to a person, it is 
regarded as a device for the community.23 In the early 2000s, each phone in 
Bangladesh served an average of nearly seventy customers.24 In this connection 
it is worth noting that the one laptop per child (OLPC) program probably is 
among some of the highly visible initiatives to improve ICT access in the global 
South. For an important reason, however, the OLPC program has fallen short 
in supporting the South’s digitization initiative: it does not encourage sharing 
by multiple users. Despite optimistic promises of OLPC, the program thus has 
been far from successful.25 In this regard, the ﬁrst of the cloud’s direct beneﬁts is 
the possibility of sharing processors and data storage. That is, the cloud capital-
izes on modern computers’ unused capabilities and a single CPU can run mul-
tiple terminals used by several users.26
 
Cloud is also currently at the center of debate in the mitigation of greenhouse 
gas emissions. This issue is especially critical for developing economies given the 
serious air pollution problems facing them. ICT companies are estimated to 
account for 3 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions.27 According to a 
McKinsey Quarterly (2010) report, in 2009, the world’s 44 million data servers 
accounted for 0.5 percent of all electricity consumptions and their emissions were 
equivalent to those generated by Argentina or the Netherlands. The average data 
facility uses as much energy as 25,000 households and during 2000–2006, the 
amount of energy used to store and handle data doubled. The McKinsey Quar-
terly report noted: “Without efforts to curb demand, current projections show 
worldwide carbon emissions from data centers will quadruple by 2020.”28 
 
Some cloud- based applications are on the way to helping address environ-
mental issues. For instance, Google’s Earth Engine offers huge archives of satel-
lite images data well as cloud computing power for free. Google teamed up 
with the US Geological Survey (USGS), NASA, and TIME to release the 
earth’s images taken from space for more than a quarter- century.29 Analysts 
expect that these measures may prevent deforestation.30 In a related vein, execu-
tives at Microsoft and Facebook have said that the cloud could have positive 
environmental impacts. An Accenture study commissioned by Microsoft argued 
that companies could reduce data storage emissions by 30–90 percent by switch-
ing from on- site servers to data centers.31

10  Big Data and Cloud
 
Unsurprisingly, global corporations, local companies, and policy makers have 
started to devote more attention to the development of the cloud computing 
industry in the developing world.32 For instance, IBM has launched cloud com-
puting solutions and established data centers in a number of developing coun-
tries such as China, India, Vietnam, and Brazil. Other cloud players such as 
Microsoft, VMware, Salesforce, and Parallels are active in the developing world. 
Similarly, developing world- based ﬁrms have jumped on the cloud bandwagon. 
Cloud- related venture capital (VC) and other investments are also ﬂowing into 
developing economies.33 Overall, BD and the cloud have been a major focus of 
some businesses and government agencies in developing economies (Table 1.1).
1.3.1 An Example: The Case of Vietnam
While BD and the cloud are a recent phenomenon in developing economies, 
their growth rates and range of applications have been striking. The case of 
Vietnam is instructive in order to understand the key underlying mechanisms in 
the diffusion of BD and the clouds in the country. 
 
BD and the cloud industries and markets in Vietnam are driven fundament-
ally by the government’s belief that this technology would help build a skilled 
workforce and bring positive social and economic changes. A government 
agency uses the cloud approach to link other government agencies, universities, 
private- sector research, start- ups, and other organizations.34 Vietnam started col-
laboration with IBM in 2007 on a pilot cloud program to make science and 
technology resources available to universities and research institutions. Other 
cloud players are also attracted by the dynamism of the Vietnamese economy. 
Computer Sciences Corporation (CSC), for instance, was planning to develop 
its Vietnamese operation as a center for cloud computing operational and 
support services, primarily for SaaS.
 
Universities, government ministries, and telecommunication vendors have 
adopted the cloud to create new services. Government institutions and universi-
ties use the cloud to develop education programs. The Ministries of Education 
and Training, Science and Technology, and Information and Communications 
have jointly developed cloud- based academic programs, which offer computing 
courses, free software tools, and business case studies. Vietnam National Univer-
sity (VNU) has also established a cloud platform.35 IBM and VNU signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding about the use of cloud to build IT skills.
 
Vietnam Technology and Telecommunication (VNTT) offers the server or 
storage capacity and system capability for its clients, mainly SMEs. VNTT’s 
clients can expand these services as their needs grow. VNTT also announced its 
plan to launch applications that are designed speciﬁcally for construction and 
another set of applications for real estate companies.36

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  11
1.4 Developing World- Based Firms in the Supply Side of BD and 
the Cloud
In light of the stereotypically different expectations that surround the develop-
ing countries’ IT industry, they are playing crucial roles in the development of 
BD and cloud technologies. One obvious factor in the rapid growth of the BD 
and cloud industry and market in the developing world concerns the evolution 
of local entrepreneurial efforts.
 
Some highly visible examples of developing world- based ﬁrms supplying BD- 
and cloud- related services are presented in Table 1.2. At the same time, platforms 
provided by global cloud players such as Salesforce provide developing world- 
based developers with opportunities to build applications on the platforms.37
 
In 2009, CRL and AdventNet were among the high- proﬁle Indian cloud 
providers (Table 1.2). Other Indian IT companies such as Tata Consultancy 
Services (TCS) and Wipro have entered the cloud market. Wipro has built a 
“private cloud” for its internal use. The company is also considering other serv-
ices: public cloud, hybrid cloud, and helping independent software vendors 
design and implement SaaS.38 It was reported that Infosys has dedicated about 
175 engineers to identify better customer relations management and other areas 
in which cloud computing can help improve efﬁciency.39 Likewise, TCS started 
the cloud through pilot projects in 2009.40 As of February 2011, TCS had 130 
clients using its cloud services, which is expected to increase to 1,000 by the 
end of the year. TCS promised that its cloud services would save 30–40 percent 
of IT spending for SMEs.41 Other IT players, such as HCL Technologies and 
Bharti Airtel, have also embraced the cloud.
 
As noted above, the Indian company AdventNet’s Zoho division operates a 
popular suite of web- based applications.42 Likewise, Hyderabad- based Pressmart 
provides SaaS- based e- publishing and digitization services to the print industry. 
Pressmart solution can help ﬁrms deliver contents across multiple platforms such 
as Web, mobile, RSS, podcasts, blogs, social networking sites, articles, directo-
ries, and search engines.43 In 2008, Pressmart received VC investment from 
Draper Fisher Jurveston and NEA- IndoUS Ventures. In 2009, the company 
launched a self- publishing tool called eMag Lite to publish an online magazine. 
As of 2009, the company was reported to have digital publications customers 
from forty- nine countries.44
 
In China, local players account for the bulk of cloud- related investments. 
The Guizhou province in Southwest China, particularly the capital Guìyáng, 
epitomize the development of BD and cloud industry and market in China and 
the increasingly prominent roles of local players. China Telecom, China 
Unicom, and China Mobile announced total spending of US$2.4 billion to 
build three Internet data centers in Guizhou housing two million servers.45 Ali-
baba’s cloud arm Aliyun has a contract to manage data of the provincial govern-
ment of Guizhou.46

TABLE 1.1  Some Examples of BD and Cloud Computing Applications in the Developing World
BD/Cloud Application
Examples
E-commerce 
s   #HINA 7ANG &U *ING HAS DEPLOYED SEVERAL KEY "$ AND CLOUD SERVICES TO SHARE SUPPLY CHAIN INFORMATION AND implement B2B e-commerce with suppliers.
E-education 
s   3OUTH !FRICA 4HE #OMPUTATIONAL )NTELLIGENCE 2ESEARCH 'ROUP AT THE 5NIVERSITY OF 0RETORIA USES CLOUD computing for the next-generation medical research.
s   %AST !FRICA 4HE (IGHER %DUCATION !LLIANCE FOR ,EADERSHIP 4HROUGH (EALTH (%!,4( !LLIANCE	 A CONSORTIUM of seven universities, which includes universities in Kenya; Jimma University, Ethiopia; University of Kinshasa, 
Democratic Republic of Congo; Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Tanzania; and Makerere 
University, Uganda, is working with industry experts to extend education through virtual computing labs that 
students access remotely.
s   )NDIA 4HE ))4 +ANPUR AND OTHER ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS USE THE CLOUD
s   6IETNAM 6.5S USE OF THE CLOUD TO BUILD )4 SKILLS
E-governance 
s   6IETNAM 4HE -INISTRY OF %DUCATION AND 4RAINING THE -INISTRY OF 3CIENCE AND 4ECHNOLOGY AND THE -INISTRY of Information and Communications have jointly developed cloud-based academic programs, which offer 
computing courses, free software tools, and business case studies.
E-health 
s   #HINA 4HE 'UANG $ONG (OSPITAL OF 4RADITIONAL #HINESE -EDICINE HAS IMPLEMENTED A SUITE OF HEALTHCARE DATA
sharing and analytics technologies.
E-banking 
s   )NDIA )#)#)S INSURANCE ARM HAS USED :OHOS WEBBASED APPLICATIONS TO DEVELOP INNOVATIVE SERVICES SUCH AS A personalized insurance for diabetes.
s   3OUTH !FRICA .EDBANK HAS AUTOMATED BUSINESS PROCESSES THROUGH CLOUD
E-environment
s   #HINA 5NIVERSITIES ACCESS TO A SUPERCOMPUTER POWER TO ANALYZE CLIMATE DATA
s   7EST !FRICA 4HE 5+S (ADLEY #ENTER FOR #LIMATE 0REDICTION AND 2ESEARCH IS NEGOTIATING WITH !MAZON TO sponsor a researcher for free access to cloud.
Industrial environments (e.g., 
maritime industry)
s   3AUDI !RABIAN 3HIPPING #OMPANY "AHRI USES "$ TO STREAMLINE OPERATIONS AND IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICE )TS “Next Best Cargo” model suggests the most lucrative cargo that a charterer can consider.1

Retailing 
s   !LIBABA USES 7I&I SNIFFERS BEACONS AND OTHER METHODS TO COLLECT DATA ABOUT STORE VISITORS FOR RETAIL STORES 3UCH data helps to determine trafﬁc ﬂows in stores. Here is how WiFi sniffers work: If a store visitor opens WiFi, 
her/his cellphone sends out a signal looking for available WiFi, which can be captured by the WiFi server. The 
information is a unique ID for a device. If a store visitor’s device has an app with beacon capability, the signal 
sent to the server can capture the cellphone’s location. As of the mid-2016, Alibaba was reported to develop 
about 20,000 consumer data models based on various behavioral and demographic proﬁles. Some models had as 
many as 1 million Chinese customers.2
Effective management of trafﬁc 
congestion
s   3OUTHEAST !SIAS LARGEST RIDEHAILING APP 'RAB AND THE 7ORLD "ANK HAVE TEAMED UP TO PROVIDE DATA TO THE region’s transportation agencies, which is expected to ﬁght trafﬁc congestion. Grab and the World Bank 
provide the data for free. The initiative is called OpenTrafﬁc. The Philippines Department of Transportation 
and Communications (DOTC) launched the program in Metro Manila and Cebu City in the mid-2016.3 The 
open source tool converts GPS data from Grab’s 250,000-plus drivers in six countries in the region into speeds, 
ﬂows, intersection delays, and other trafﬁc statistics. The data are anonymized, which help analyze peak hours 
for major roads and highways, identify areas most vulnerable to bad weather, and identify roads with the most 
accidents. Public agencies can use the data to manage travel demand. The data may also help cut travel time, 
design ﬂexible routing schemes, and assign trafﬁc personnel in areas that need the most.4
Notes
1  L. Dixon, Bahri Calls for Big Data Increase, Middle East Business Review, June 1, 2016, www.businessreviewmiddleeast.com/technology/536/Bahri-calls-for-big-
data-increase.
2 Anna Hamill, How Alibaba Uses Big Data to Understand China’s Shoppers, Warc Exclusive, May 2016, www.warc.com.
3  E. Rumney, Philippines Pilots Big Data Trafﬁc Management Tool, Public Finance International, April 5, 2016, www.publicﬁnanceinternational.org/news/2016/04/
philippines-pilots-big-data-trafﬁc-management-tool.
4 Judith Balea, Grab Gifts Governments Data to Make Trafﬁc Jams Less Awful, Tech in Asia, April 5, 2016, www.techinasia.com/grab-big-data-trafﬁc.

TABLE 1.2 BD- and Cloud-Related Entrepreneurship of Developing World-Based Firms
Alibaba Group (China)
s   -ARCH  ANNOUNCED A PLAN TO SPEND 53 MILLION IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT MARKETING AND ESTABLISHING cloud computing centers that provide SaaS to its customers, especially SMEs.
s   3EPTEMBER  ANNOUNCED THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW STAFF SUBSIDIARY FOCUSING ON THE CLOUD
s   -ID !LISOFT !LIBABAS SOFTWARE SUBSIDIARY HAD CAPTURED MORE THAN  OF THE #HINESE 3AA3 MARKET
s   !LIBABAS "$ ECOSYSTEM IS ARGUABLY THE STRONGEST AMONG THE WORLDS MAJOR PLAYERS )T CONNECTS THE WHOLE VALUE chain ranging from branding, broadcasting and, sales conversion.1
Baidu (China)
s   )N  IT SIGNED A DEAL WITH THE 5NITED .ATIONS $EVELOPMENT 0ROGRAM TO BUILD A "$ LAB TOGETHER2 Its 
Beijing Big Data Lab seeks to ﬁnd new applications for predictive modelling, machine learning and natural 
language processing in healthcare, disaster relief, and other areas.3
s   4HE lRST ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION SOLUTION LAUNCHED BY THE LAB IS h"AIDU 2ECYCLEv AN EWASTE RECYCLING APP Users can take a photo of their electronic waste and estimated scrap price. As of 2014, users in Beijing and 
Tianjin could arrange e-waste pick-up, which was provided by a recycling partner. The service is expected to 
be expanded to more cities.4
China Mobile (China)
s    ESTABLISHED AN 2$ CENTER IN 3UZHOU WITH A PLAN TO HAVE A TEAM OF n RESEARCHERS WORKING ON BD and the cloud.5
s   -ID HAD  MILLION )O4 USERS IN AUTOMOTIVE AND INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS 4HE GOAL IS TO CONNECT  BILLION devices by 2020.6
s   4HE CLOUD HAS enhanced advanced mobile Internet and helped to diversify demand.
s   *UNE  SIGNED A 53 BILLION AGREEMENT WITH .OKIA TO BUILD A hCLOUD NETWORKv .OKIA WOULD BUILD A new type of base station which uses multiple radio technologies. It would old technologies as well as the 5G 
networks and connected objects.7
Stefanini IT Solutions (Brazil)
s   Stefanini is a Global IT Services provider, which had over 18,000 employees and ofﬁces in thirty countries 
across ﬁve continents in 2014.8
s   -ARCH  ANNOUNCED AN INVESTMENT OF 53 TO BOOST CLOUD COMPUTING PRODUCT OFFERING
s   -AY  INVESTED IN THE CREATION OF $ATASTORM WHICH IS A NEW COMPANY DEDICATED EXCLUSIVELY TO "$ analytics. Datastorm combines skills in mathematics, statistics, technology, and business. Its multicultural team 
has professionals in diverse areas such as technology, design, math, and statistics.9

Infosys (India)
s   0ARTNERED WITH ITS MAJOR CLIENTS IN CLOUD RESEARCH
s   0ROVIDES CLOUD COMPUTINGBASED SERVICES FOR THE AUTO SECTOR
s   3EPTEMBER  !NNOUNCED A PARTNERSHIP WITH (UAWEI TO JOINTLY OFFER CLOUD "$ AND COMMUNICATION solutions. The partnership combines Huawei’s cloud infrastructure and Infosys’ IT service expertise.10
Computational Research 
Laboratories (CRL) (India)
s   ! LAB RUN BY THE 4ATA 'ROUP
s   -ARCH  9AHOO SIGNED A RESEARCH PACT WITH #2, TO SUPPORT CLOUD RESEARCH
s   #,2 WOULD PROVIDE %+! SUPERCOMPUTER WHICH WAS THE WORLDS FOURTH FASTEST IN -ARCH 
AdventNet (India)
s   :OHO DIVISION OPERATES A POPULAR SUITE OF WEBBASED APPLICATIONS
s   :OHO HAD OVER  MILLION USERS IN -ARCH   MILLION IN 3EPTEMBER   USERS  OF TOTAL IN India and China).
s   4HE )#)#) BANKS INSURANCE ARM USES :OHOS APPLICATIONS TO DEVELOP INNOVATIVE SERVICES SUCH AS A PERSONALIZED insurance for diabetes. Premiums are adjusted depending on how well policyholders stick to a ﬁtness plan.
Mediatrac (Indonesia)
s   #OLLECTIVE )NTELLIGENCE !GRICULTURE #)!GRICULTURE	 A SUBSIDIARY OF -EDIATRAC HAS DEVELOPED PRECISION FARMING techniques, which is adapted to the Indonesian context.
Source: Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in the Global South: Drivers, Effects and Policy Measures, Third World Quarterly (2011) 32(6), 995–1012.
Notes
 1 B. Deagon, How Alibaba’s Business Model Transcends Amazon, Facebook, Google, June 29, 2016, www.investors.com/news/technology/how-alibabas-business-
model-transcends-amazon-facebook-google/.
 2 China Tech News, United Nations Builds Big Data Lab With Baidu, August 25, 2014, www.chinatechnews.com/2014/08/25/20835-united-nations-builds-big-
data-lab-with-baidu.
 3 B. Marr, The Amazing Ways Big Data is Used in China, Data Science Central, March 4, 2016, www.datasciencecentral.com/proﬁles/blogs/the-amazing-ways-big-
data-is-used-in-china.
 4 China Tech News, United Nations Builds Big Data Lab With Baidu.
    CNC #HINA -OBILE 0LANS TO "UILD A #LOUD #OMPUTING 2$ 'ROUP OF  PEOPLE !UGUST   WWWCNCNETAHTML
 6 Z. Shenshen, China Mobile to Develop IOT Business, Shanghai Daily, June 29, 2016, www.shanghaidaily.com/business/it/China-Mobile-to-develop-IOT- 
business/shdaily.shtml.
 7 Business Standard, Nokia to Build China Mobile’s Cloud Network: China Mobile is the World’s Largest Mobile Operator and One of Three Public Operators in 
China, Business Standard, June 13, 2016, www.business-standard.com/article/pti-stories/nokia-to-build-china-mobile-s-cloud-network-116061300972_1.html.
 8 Stefanini Colombia, History, 2014, www.stefaninicolombia.com/english/historia/.
 9 Interacción entre Big Data y Cloud Computing es fundamental para las organizaciones que desean generar ventajas competitivas, January 2015, https://stefanini.
com/es/2015/01/big-data-y-cloud-computing-entienda-la-relacion-entre-esas-tendencias/.
10 Info Sys, Press Releases: Infosys and Huawei Announce Global Partnership to Offer Cloud, Big Data and Communication Solutions, September 18, 2014, www.
infosys.com/newsroom/press-releases/Pages/cloud-bigdata-communication-solutions.aspx.

16  Big Data and Cloud
 
What is even more striking is that Chinese BD and cloud players are making 
signiﬁcant investments overseas. Aliyun opened its ﬁrst overseas data center in 
the USA in 2015.47 In 2015, the Alibaba Group announced an investment of 
US$1 billion in cloud computing globally. The plan included the establishment 
of data centers in the Middle East, Japan, and Europe. In May 2016, the Alibaba 
Group teamed up with Japan’s SoftBank Group to form a cloud computing 
service venture—SB Cloud Corp—targeting Japanese customers, which range 
from start- ups to global organizations.48 In April 2016, Alibaba acquired Lazada, 
which is Southeast Asia’s largest e- commerce website. Lazada would use Alibaba 
BD and analytics services.49
 
Chinese IT players are emerging as increasingly promising challengers to 
Western ﬁrms. As of mid- 2016, Aliyun was reported to have more than half a 
million paying customers for its cloud services. While cloud computing was 
only 4 percent of Alibaba’s overall business as of 2016, it is estimated to exceed 
US$1 billion in sales by 2018.50 As of 2015, Aliyun’s value was estimated at 
US$22 billion.51
 
Likewise, the cloud has been a critical component of Huawei’s enterprise 
business.52 As of early 2015, Huawei had over 480 data centers worldwide, 
which included 160 cloud data centers.53
1.5 BD and the Cloud Industry and Market in Developing 
Economies: A Framework 
As a visual aid, our proposed framework (Figure 1.3) explains contexts, mecha-
nisms, and processes associated with the development of BD and the cloud 
industry in the developing world in terms of three interconnected ﬂows. It 
schematically represents how the three components are related. Impacts of the 
cloud (right side of Figure 1.3) reﬂect the “value” created by the cloud, which 
are the ultimate objectives that policy makers want to accomplish. Cloud- 
related performances (the box in the middle) are actions of various economic 
actors that are instrumental in delivering the impacts of the cloud. Determinants 
(left side of Figure 1.3) are key factors that affect cloud- related performances. 
Let’s take a look at each of the components in turn.
1.5.1 Impact
1.5.1.1 Operational Efﬁciency: Productivity and Efﬁciency Gains
Operational efﬁciency is related to the costs of accomplishing corporate func-
tions. Anecdotal evidence from China, India, and South Africa indicates that 
the adoption of BD and the cloud may lead to productivity and efﬁciency gains. 
As noted earlier, cloud has enabled some South African call centers to increase 
productivity by 20 percent.54 The Indian cloud provider, Netmagic, reported 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  17
that the company’s cloud services helped its clients cut costs by 25–30 percent.55 
Microsoft claimed that its cloud services offered in India would help reduce IT 
costs by 10–50 percent.56 Likewise, the cloud- based model has helped Chinese 
software start- ups access to infrastructures and data centers and utilize virtualized 
computing resources, which has led to a reduction of the upfront investments 
and product development costs. 
 
Indian banks such as HDFC, ICICI, Kotak Mahindra Bank, ING Vysya 
Bank, and Citibank are using BD to enhance operational efﬁciency. For 
example, HDFC bank processes loan applications without human intervention. 
It was reported that it resulted in the bank’s personal loan business growth by 30 
percent.57 It was reported that the State Bank of India (SBI) had hired sixteen 
statisticians and economists in 2014 to develop and implement its BD strategy. 
As of 2015, the bank had 170 terabytes (TB) of data and daily transaction data 
of about 4 TB was being added. It had over 200 million savings accounts.58 The 
bank was reportedly studying cities in which colleges show the highest rate of 
delinquencies in student loans, the locations where branches and ATMs should 
be located, and the optimum amount of cash that ATMs should carry.59
1.5.1.2 IT Security Enhancement
Most organizations in the developing world have weak cyber- defense mecha-
nisms. In 2002, North America accounted for 58 percent of the global IT 
security market.60 An estimate suggested that in 2006, about three million of 
Brazil’s SMEs lacked anti- virus software in their PCs.61 Likewise, in 2009, 60 
Determinants
Development and structure of
related industries
Forward linkages
(e.g., development of industries
utilizing BD and cloud
computing).
Backwards linkages
(e.g., R&D activities).
Bandwidth availability and price
Externality mechanisms: Local
firms’ technological capability.
Institutional legitimacy to BD
and the cloud: Government’s
support and institutional
preferences.
Performance indicators
Availability of BD and 
cloud related 
infrastructure and 
services.
BD and cloud awareness.
Diffusion of BD and the 
cloud computing.
Width and depth of BD 
and cloud adoption.
BD-related local 
entrepreneurial activities.
Impacts
Operational efficiency
Security enhancement.
Development of new 
products and services.
Extending market 
reach.
Exports of BD- and 
cloud-related services.
FIGURE 1.3   A Framework for Big Data and Cloud Computing Related Indicators 
in Developing Countries
Source: Adapted from Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in the Global South: Drivers, Effects and 
Policy Measures, Third World Quarterly (2011) 32(6), 995–1012.

18  Big Data and Cloud
percent of Kenyan banks were reported to have insecure systems.62 The cloud 
has a possibility to enhance data security for such companies. In this regard, the 
concept of “hollow diffusion” of e- commerce can be helpful in understanding 
weak defense.63 Many companies in developing countries lack the technological 
and human resources to focus on security. “Hollow diffusion” can take place in 
human terms (lack of skill and experience) as well as in technological terms 
(failure to use security products). Some ISPs in industrialized countries block 
contents originating from problematic networks in developing countries.64
 
It is being increasingly recognized that despite its potential to provide low- 
cost security, organizations may increase risks by storing sensitive data in the 
cloud.65 The cloud is thus a double- edged sword from the security standpoint. 
Yet many of the reasons why businesses and consumers in the global South face 
various security risks suggest that the cloud may offer more security- related ben-
eﬁts to them than their counterparts in the global North. Especially, the cloud’s 
economies of scale allow a business model in which third parties can integrate 
applications into the cloud to provide a cost- effective security.66 Delivery of 
security on the cloud can address some of the human (e.g., problems to install 
and maintain software) and technological issues, and may strengthen the defense 
mechanisms.
1.5.1.3 Development of New Products and Services
The cloud has helped some ﬁrms in the global South to launch new products 
and services commercially. Zoho’s applications are used by hospitals and banks 
in India to develop new products (Table 1.2). As another example of cloud use 
to develop new products and services, consider the Computational Intelligence 
Research Group at the University of Pretoria. As noted earlier, students in the 
university use the cloud to develop new drugs.
1.5.1.4 Extending Market Reach
BD and the cloud can extend the market reach of SMEs. For instance, industrial-
ized world- based healthcare providers are increasingly offshoring services related 
to medical transcription, billing, and insurance claims teleimaging and telepathol-
ogy to India. The business is currently dominated by big players such as Wipro 
and Teleradiology solutions. Cloud computing is likely to open the door for 
smaller Indian players to participate in the global healthcare offshoring industry, 
by reducing the need for upfront investments for small offshoring companies.
1.5.1.5 Exports of BD- and Cloud- Related Services
There has been some achievement on the export of cloud- related applications 
and services. Unbelievable as it may sound, some developing world- based 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  19
 technology companies such as AdventNet have been exporting cloud- based 
applications (Table 1.2).
1.5.2 Performance
1.5.2.1 Availability of BD- and Cloud- Related Services
The diffusion of cloud in most developing economies has been hindered by the 
lack of availability of businesses supplying such services. These countries tend to 
lack market and infrastructures that control the availability of the cloud and thus 
multinationals such as IBM and Google are likely to enter much later in these 
countries.
1.5.2.2 Awareness of BD and the Cloud
Awareness is the ﬁrst step in the cloud adoption process. As noted above, there 
has been a lack of awareness of BD and the cloud among some enterprises in 
the developing world.
1.5.2.3 Diffusion of BD and the Cloud
Diffusion measures the penetration level of the cloud or the number of organi-
zations that adopt this technology. It can also be measured with speciﬁc cloud 
application such as number of users of Zoho’s productivity tools or IBM’s Pan-
gooSky platform.
1.5.2.4 Width and Depth of BD and Cloud Adoption
Obviously a higher cloud performance is achieved by wider and deeper adop-
tion of the technology. Note that the width of BD or cloud adoption can be 
deﬁned as the number of different uses (Table 1.1).67 Similarly, the depth of BD 
or cloud adoption can be deﬁned as the amount of usage of the cloud by busi-
nesses (e.g., frequency of software download from the cloud, amount of data 
stored on the cloud, etc.). At the ﬁrm level, the concepts related to width and 
depth can be further elaborated. For instance, a higher width of BD or cloud 
usage is associated with a greater number of employees in a company using 
these technologies for performing a particular function, and overall depth, 
which is related to the total BD or cloud usage.68
1.5.2.5 BD- and Cloud- Related Entrepreneurship
Cloud- related entrepreneurship can be deﬁned as the enterprising cloud- related 
actions undertaken to generate “value, through the creation or expansion of 

20  Big Data and Cloud
economic activity, by identifying and exploiting new products, processes or 
markets.”69 To capitalize on the cloud, developing world- based ﬁrms are 
gaining resources from internal and external sources and are integrating and 
rearranging them to enhance technological capabilities. In the context of a 
rapidly emerging and evolving industry such as the cloud, this process is also 
referred to as the development of dynamic capabilities, which is likely to help 
them “to match and even create market change.”70 For instance, developing 
world- based ﬁrms have intensiﬁed cloud research and are receiving VC 
investments.
 
Some developing economies have set forth an ambitious agenda on the BD 
front. For instance, China’s goal has been to create ten global leading enterprises 
in the BD industry and 500 ﬁrms focusing on BD applications, services, and 
manufacturing by 2020.71
1.5.3 Determinants
In examining the factors that can help the cloud industry thrive (high perform-
ance and high impact), one would do well to recall the comment by Adams: 
“like ﬁre technology depends on its environment to ﬂare or die.”72 A technolo-
gy’s ecosystem and environment are inﬂuenced by numerous factors. First, the 
diffusion of a technology is inﬂuenced by the nature of domestic demands and 
inputs73 such as consumer preferences, income, input, infrastructures, govern-
ment regulations, and technological economies of scope (a function of experi-
ence with previous generations of technology). Second, the importance of 
industry structure has been emphasized in the literature.74 Of special interest to 
this book is the development of related and supporting infrastructure such as 
access to broadband and PCs. Competition level, size, and distribution of cloud 
suppliers, as well as the nature and structure of related industries fall under this 
category. Finally, transfer and export conditions such as trade policy, export ori-
entation of ﬁrms, strategic regulation, and market size also affect an industry’s 
growth.75
1.5.3.1 Development and Structure of Related Industries 
Development and diffusion of the cloud are tightly linked to the forward link-
ages (demand), backward linkages (supply), and horizontal or inter- sectoral 
linkages.76
1.5.3.2 Forward Linkages
The strength of forward linkages between the cloud and the rest of the domestic 
economy plays an essential role in determining the development of the cloud 
industry. For instance, in the VNTT example above, a lack of strong demand 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  21
from companies in the construction and real estate industries limits deploy-
ment of the company’s cloud applications. The availability of e- governance 
services and solutions for businesses and citizens such as health care and educa-
tion, permit, drivers’ licenses, bills payment, land records and registration, 
e- tendering, e- tax ﬁle return, beneﬁts determination and distribution would 
strengthen forward linkages. In China and India, the strong demand has 
helped create strong forward linkages for global and local cloud providers 
(Table 1.3).
1.5.3.3 Backward Linkages
The development of industries that supply various ingredients needed for the 
cloud industry helps to foster stronger backward linkages. In India and China, 
THE 2$ IN CLOUD AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUPERCOMPUTER INDUSTRY HAS PRO-
vided strong support for backward linkage (Tables 1.2 and 1.3).
1.5.3.4 Horizontal or Inter- Sectoral Linkages: Bandwidth 
Availability and Price
Cloud computing services require relatively high bandwidth to work well. 
Bandwidth unavailability is the most glaring shortcoming of most developing 
countries, especially in rural areas, which limits the diffusion of BD and the 
cloud in developing economies.77 High bandwidth is especially important if data 
to be transferred include large ﬁles (such as high- quality multimedia content and 
videos). A major challenge in the developing world is thus to expand bandwidth 
and enhance access to reliable and affordable broadband connectivity.
1.5.3.5 Externality Mechanisms
Firms’ technology- related behaviors have self- reinforcing effects. IT ﬁrms may 
generate externalities by making cloud- related specialized inputs and services 
available, forming a specialized “labor market”; and facilitating the exchanges 
and spillovers of information and technology.78 These externalities, which 
originate from other ﬁrms in the same industry, are called MAR externalities.79 
MAR externalities represent the positive role of specialization on growth 
through knowledge spillovers.80 There is also a possibility of “inter industry 
knowledge spillovers,” 81 which are referred to as Jacobs externalities.
1.5.3.6 Local Firms’ Technological Capability
Technological capabilities of some developing world- based ﬁrms have gener-
ated positive externalities to the local economy. Technological capabilities com-
bined with low cost and experiences in serving the home market may allow 

TABLE 1.3 Determinants of the BD and Cloud Industry in the Developing World
Determinant
Mechanisms
Examples
Development and 
structure of related 
industries
Forward linkages
s   #HINA THE GOVERNMENT IS PLANNING TO CREATE A FULLY ELECTRONIC PREDICTIVE HEALTH information network, which would create demands for cloud-based services.
s   #HINA AND )NDIA ECONOMIES OF SCALE IN "" ECOMMERCE SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT and e-healthcare.
Backward linkages
s   #HINA CLOUD RELATED 2$ HAS HELPED THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CLOUD INDUSTRY  OF world’s top 500 companies have invested in China and have established over 1,160 
2$ CENTERS IN THE COUNTRY )"- COMPUTING CENTERS IN #HINA FOR INSTANCE DRAW UPON EXPERTS FROM )"-S 2$ FULLSCALE LABS IN THE COUNTRY WHICH ARE GLOBALLY oriented and work on most advanced products.
Horizontal or inter-sectoral 
linkages
s   3OUTH !FRICA HIGH SPEED AND LOW COST OF BANDWIDTH FACILITATED THE DEVELOPMENT THE cloud industry.
Externality mechanisms
Local ﬁrms’ technological 
capability (MAR and Jacobs 
externalities)
s   #HINAS !LIBABA AND )NDIAS )NFOSYS ILLUSTRATE HOW LOCAL lRMS SPECIALIZATION IN VARIOUS IT areas can contribute to the growth of the local cloud market through knowledge 
spillovers.
Institutional legitimacy
Government’s support
s   6IETNAM THE CLOUD IS DRIVEN FUNDAMENTALLY BY THE GOVERNMENTS BELIEF THAT IT WOULD help build a skilled workforce.
s   #HINA 4HE CLOUD HAS A STRONG SUPPORT FROM THE GOVERNMENT SUBSTANTIAL FUNDS IN ITS US$586 billion economic incentive budget.
Institutional concerns
s   3ECURITY ISSUES ARE LIKELY TO BE A BIG CONCERN IN AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES
s   "$ AND THE CLOUD MAKES IT EASIER FOR THE GOVERNMENT TO SPY ON CITIZENS

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  23
them to develop value- creating strategies and to realize a signiﬁcant share in the 
cloud market, especially in the home countries (Table 1.2).
 
Indian IT companies such as TCS, Infosys, and Wipro are today leading 
global IT players. Their specialization in IT sectors has generated Jacobs82 exter-
nalities for the cloud. Some see India as an early cloud as the country’s software 
companies had huge data- processing centers that big companies around the 
world used for on- demand computing.83 In this case, the externalities can be 
considered as MAR externalities. In sum, some Chinese and Indian companies 
are in a good position to provide software and services that run on some of the 
dominant cloud platforms as well as to develop their own platforms, products, 
and services.
1.5.3.7 Institutional Legitimacy to BD and the Cloud
All economic phenomena have institutional components and implications.84 
Institutionalists have recognized that the success of an innovation is tightly 
linked to the context provided by institutions in an economy. By institutions, 
we mean “the macro- level rules of the game,”85 which can be formal (e.g., laws 
and regulation) as well as informal (e.g., social norms and culture). Institutions 
provide the “cognitive, normative, and regulative structures”86 that determine 
institutional preference for an innovation such as the cloud.
1.5.3.8 Government Policy and Support
The development of an industry such as the cloud is a function of the level of 
government priority set for this sector87 and the focus of national industrial and 
technological policies on fostering and strengthening this sector.88
 
As reviewed above, government supports have stimulated the BD and cloud 
industry in Vietnam. Likewise in China, in 2012, the entire Chinese banking 
industry was estimated to have about 100 terabytes (100,000 gigabytes) of cus-
tomer data. By March 2014, only the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China 
was reported to have 4.9 petabytes (4,900,000 gigabytes) of data.89 A number of 
legislation changes in 2013 regarding use of customer data acted as a key force 
that drove banks, investment funds, and insurance companies to quick adoption 
of BD.
1.5.3.9 Institutional Concerns
The diffusion rate of an innovation is positively related to the innovation’s com-
patibility with the social system.90 In this regard, the cloud may face roadblocks in 
social systems with certain characteristics. Many are concerned about data privacy 
and security associated with unauthorized access and use of information stored in 
the cloud.91 For example, an obvious danger of the cloud in an authoritarian 

24  Big Data and Cloud
regime concerns the possibility that the government may intensify further controls 
on its citizens. Note that the cloud has been described as the ultimate spying 
machine.92
 
In a discussion of the institutional implications associated with the cloud, China 
deserves special attention. Among Chinese leaders, there are suspicions that the 
country is under cyber- attack from the USA. Computer hardware and software 
imported from the USA and its allies are subject to detailed inspection. Chinese 
technicians take control of such imports and resist or closely monitor if Western 
experts install them.93 The Chinese government may not be comfortable with the 
idea of storing data on the cloud provided by foreign multinationals.
1.6 Conclusions and Some Unanswered Questions
The foregoing discussion helps us understand the contexts, mechanisms, and 
processes associated with the development and deployment of BD and the cloud 
in the developing world. While it took many years and large investments for 
the developed world to acquire infrastructure, data centers, and customized 
application software, cloud computing has made it possible for developing 
world- based organizations to access them more easily.94
 
The above discussion also indicates that BD and the cloud may increase the 
effectiveness and enrich the uses of other technologies, such as mobile tele-
phony. There are two interrelated reasons why this is likely to happen. First, 
recent developments in the cloud have made it possible for less sophisticated 
mobile phone owners based in the global South to access and use various appli-
cations in the cloud. Thanks to recent developments, any mobile phone that is 
capable of running a web browser can access mobile applications in the cloud. 
This means that even low- cost phone users in the developing world can tap 
into applications that are currently accessible only to smart phones. Second, 
consumers in the global South are using increasingly sophisticated mobile 
devices, which can accelerate the diffusion of mobile- based cloud and enrich 
the experience of cloud use. For instance, the smartphone penetration rate in 
China in 2015 was estimated at 38.6 percent or a total of about 525.8 million.95
 
Regarding the potential and impact of the cloud in the global South, 
however, there is a need for more empirical studies. Some analysts suggest that 
developing countries are likely to be attractive markets for cloud computing 
services and this technology will make “Health Care 2.0,” “Banking 2.0,” and 
“Education 2.0” realities in these countries.96 While BD and the cloud are dif-
fusing rapidly in developing countries, it is not clear how these possibilities are 
being realized.
 
In theory, it should be easier for developing economies to catch up with 
the West as the cloud allows them to have access to the same IT infrastruc-
ture, data centers, and applications. For instance, the cloud would help devel-
oping world- based researchers to access to the data required for research as 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  25
well as telecommunications and computing infrastructures.97 As to the poten-
tial of BD and the cloud in the developing world, the ﬁrst observation is that 
these technologies reduce infrastructure costs and level the playing ﬁeld for 
small- and medium- sized enterprises (SMEs).98 For instance, companies such 
as Alibaba provide cloud and BD analytics services to small vendors. The 
second commonplace observation is that, unlike client- based computing, 
which requires the installation and conﬁguration of software and updates with 
each new release as well as revisions of other programs with every update, 
software on the cloud is easier to install, maintain, and update.99 This beneﬁt 
is especially important for rural users with little IT training.100 Third, cloud 
services provide an organization with the ﬂexibility of scaling up the use if the 
demand increases.101 This approach requires low upfront investment and is 
thus ideal for SMEs. Fourth, proponents of the cloud also cite observers who 
argue that as software becomes free via web- based applications or available in 
SaaS, software piracy is likely to reduce.102 It is argued that the cloud allows 
businesses and consumers to use more secure systems, which is likely to 
reduce the incentives to use pirated software.103
 
A ﬁnal observation is that the cloud enables business models in which third 
parties can provide a cost- effective security for SMEs.104 However, these obser-
vations may have underscored how economic and institutional problems remain 
central to the diffusion of ICTs in the developing world. For instance, while 
BD and the cloud have a big potential to transform economic, social, and polit-
ical institutions in developing countries, they have not yet been sufﬁciently 
exploited there.105 There is little, if any, empirical evidence, which shows how 
effectively these theories, ideas, and speculations can translate into practice in 
developing countries.
 
The as yet unanswered questions thus include, as follows: (1) What factors 
drive the diffusion of BD and the cloud in developing countries? (2) What are 
the potential economic, social, and political impacts of these technologies in 
these countries? (3) What roles can businesses and policy makers play to facil-
itate the adoption and effective utilization of BD and the cloud?
1.7 Roadmap to the Remainder of This Book
The remainder of this book is divided up as follows. Chapters 2 and 3 discuss 
the institutional and technological dimensions associated with BD and the cloud 
in developing countries. In Chapters 4 through 6 we analyze the development 
and deployment of BD and the cloud in selected key industries and economic 
SECTORS  SUCH  AS  EDUCATION  AND  2$  PRIMARY  SECTORS  AND  E COMMERCE  )N Chapters 7 through 10, we look at BD and cloud deployment in some regional 
and national economies, notably Sub- Saharan Africa, India, China, and Brazil. 
In Chapter 11, we discuss key ﬁndings, provide implications, and conclude the 
book with some goals for the future.

26  Big Data and Cloud
Notes
  1 M. Price, Pinning Down the Cloud, Wall Street Journal, February 15, 2011, p. R3.
  2 See United Nations, Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable 
Development, 
www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
2%3,ANG%   3 Brett Walton, Do It and Prove It—Information Technology Opens Up the Water 
Sector, Circle of Blue, January 10, 2011, www.circleofblue.org/waternews/2011/
WORLDDO ITAND PROVEIT%INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY OPENSUP THE
water- sector/.
  4 A. Schwartz, How NextDrop Is Using Cell Phones, Crowdsourcing to Get Water to 
the Thirsty, Fast Company, June 27, 2011, www.fastcompany.com/1762699/how-
 nextdrop-using- cell-phones- crowdsourcing-get- water-thirsty. 
  5 K.M. Newman, Water Startup NextDrop Faces Unpredictable Obstacles in India, 
February 8, 2012, http://tech.co/nextdrop- 2012–02. 
  6 Rahim Kanani, Water for People CEO: We Need to Focus on Outcomes, Not 
Inputs, The Little Black Book of Billionaire Secrets, Forbes, September 18, 2012, 
www.forbes.com/sites/rahimkanani/2012/09/18/water- for-people- ceo-we- need-
to- focus-on- outcomes-not- inputs/#5c2233a92397. 
  7 Case Study: Akvo Field Level Operations Watch (FLOW): Mobile Technology 
Improves Access to Clean Water and Sanitation, Cisco.com 2015, http://csr.cisco.
com/casestudy/ﬂow.
  8 V.C. Silva, African NGO Taps IT to Help Prevent HIV Transmission, IDG Magazines 
Norge AS, January 28, 2011, http://news.idg.no/cw/art.cfm?id=E669CBCD-
1A64–67EA-E47FFECA76A12C2A.
  9 M.A. Goodburn and S. Hill, The Cloud Transforms Business, Financial Executive 
(2010), 26(10), 34–39. 
 10 P. Mell and T. Grance, The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing Recommendations 
of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, September 2011. Computer 
Security Division Information Technology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology. 
 11 ITU, Focus Group on Cloud Computing Technical Report Part 1: Introduction 
to the Cloud Ecosystem: Deﬁnitions, Taxonomies, Use Cases And High- Level 
Requirements (Geneva: ITU, 2012). 
 12 See UNCTAD, Information Economy Report 2013: The Cloud Economy and 
Developing Countries (New York and Geneva: United Nations, 2013).
 13 Gartner.com, Big Data, IT Glossary, 2013, www.gartner.com/it- glossary/big-
 data/.
 14 World Bank, World Bank Income Classiﬁcations, July 24, 2014, www.worldbank.
org/en/news/press- release/2014/07/24/kyrgyz- republic-becomes- lower-middle-
 income-country.
 15 Intel.com, Solution Brief: Big Data in the Cloud: Converging Technologies, How 
to Create Competitive Advantage Using Cloud- Based Big Data Analytics, 2015, 
www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/big- data/big- data-cloud- technologies-brief.
html.
 16 Ibid.
 17 N. Kshetri, Big Data’s Big Potential in Developing Economies: Impact on Agriculture, 
Health and Environmental Security (Wallingford, Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences 
International [CABI] Publishing, 2016).
 18 gartner.com, Gartner says worldwide public cloud services market to total $131 
Billion, 2013, www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2352816. 
 19 Thor Olavsrud, Big Data and Analytics Spending to Hit $187 Billion, CIO, CIO, 
May 24, 2016, www.cio.com/article/3074238/analytics/big- data-and- analytics-
spending- to-hit- 187-billion.html.

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  27
 20 R. Jones, A Technological Revolution, MEED: Middle East Economic Digest, 
December 31, 2010, 54(53): 31. 
 21 Focus Taiwan, Asia Well- Poised to Join Global Society: Trend Micro, January 11, 
  HTTPFOCUSTAIWANTW3HOW.EWS7EB.EWS?$ETAILASPX4YPEA!,,)$
=201101110047. 
 22 N. Dholakia and N. Kshetri, Mobile Commerce as a Solution to the Global Digital 
Divide: Selected Cases of e- Development, in S. Krishna and S. Madon (Eds.), The 
Digital Challenge: Information Technology in the Development Context (Aldershot: Ashgate 
Publications, 2003), 237–250. 
 23 A. Lopez, The South Goes Mobile, UNESCO Courier, July/August, 2000, www.
unesco.org/courier/2000_07/uk/connex.htm. 
 24 Business Week, Providing Rural Phone Services Proﬁtably in Poor Countries, 2001, 
http://adsections.businessweek.com/digital/proﬁt.htm.
 25 E. Yujuico and B.D. Gelb, Marketing Technological Innovation to ldcs: Lessons 
from One Laptop Per Child. California Management Review (2010), 53(2), 50–68.
 26 Ibid.
 27 Corbin Hiar, How Green is Facebook, Microsoft Push into Cloud Computing?, 
MediaShift, January 12, 2011, www.pbs.org/mediashift/2011/01/how- green-is-
 facebook-microsoft- push-into- cloud-computing012.html. 
    &OR -C+INSEY 2EPORT SEE -C+INSEY  #OMPANY %NERGY %FlCIENCY ! #OMPELLING Global Resource, March 2010. 
 29 Google Ofﬁcial Blog, A Picture of Earth Through Time, May 9, 2013, https://
googleblog.blogspot.com/2013/05/a- picture-of- earth-through- time.html.
 30 Economist, Seeing the World for the Trees, The Economist, December 18, 2010, 
397(8713), 153–154.
 31 Hiar, How Green is Facebook, Microsoft Push into Cloud Computing?
 32 N. Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Developing Economies, IEEE Computer (October 
2010) 43(10), 47–55.
 33 S. Sanyal, Behold the Indian SaaS Entrepreneur, Siliconindia (October 2008), 11(9), 38; 
and S. Zhoudong, Venture Capital Eyes Chinese Software Sector, China Daily, July 4, 
2008, www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/2008–07/24/content_6874313.htm. 
 34 M. Cleverley, Viewpoints: Emerging Markets: How ICT Advances Might Help 
Developing Nations, Communications of the ACM (2009) 52(9), 30–32.
 35 A.M. Ariff, My Bit: Business Trends Spur Cloud Computing, The Edge Malaysia, 
October 6, 2008. 
 36 K.B. Leong, VNTT Rides on Cloud to Deliver New Services, Search SMB Asia, 
August 31, 2009, www.searchsmbasia.com/en/content/vntt- rides-cloud- deliver-
NEW SERVICESPAGE# 
 37 Economist, The Long Nimbus, The Economist, October 25, 2008, 389(8603), 
15–17.
 38 J. Foley, Wipro to Enter Cloud Computing Market, Information Week, April 14, 
2009, www.informationweek.com/cloud- computing/blog/archives/2009/04/wipro_ 
to_enter.html. 
 39 M. Kakkar, Cloud Computing’s Latest Battleﬁeld: India, ZDNet, September 13, 
2010, www.zdnet.com/blog/india/cloud- computings-latest- battleﬁeld-india/179.
 40 G. Morgan, Looking Beyond the Storm Clouds, Computing, May 7, 2009, 
www.computing.co.uk/computing/analysis/2241634/looking- beyond-storm-
 clouds-4644972. 
 41 L. Joseph, TCS Offers Cloud to Small Companies, Hopes for Billion- Dollar Rain, 
DNA India, February 16, 2011, www.dnaindia.com/money/report_tcs- offers-
cloud- to-small- companies-hopes- for-billion- dollar-rain_1508458.
 42 Economist, The Long Nimbus. 
 43 Sanyal, Behold the Indian SaaS Entrepreneur, 38. 

28  Big Data and Cloud
 44 J. Ribeiro, Pressmart Targets Small Newspapers Aiming to Go Online, PCWorld, 
October 12, 2009, www.pcworld.com/article/173469/article.html.
 45 Fan Feifei and Jun Yang, National Big Data Pilot Zone to Open in Guizhou, China 
Daily, March 3, 2016, http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2016–03/03/
content_23716962.htm.
 46 Carter Dougherty, China Clears Way for Cloud Computing Industry in Himalayan 
Plateau, Despite Immense Obstacles, International Business Times, June 12, 2016, 
www.ibtimes.com/china- clears-way- cloud-computing- industry-himalayan-
 plateau-despite- immense-obstacles- 2379198.
 47 Gillian Wong, Alibaba Plans $1 Billion Cloud- Computing Push: Chinese E- 
Commerce Giant will Set Up Data Centers Around the World as it Challenges 
Amazon.com, Wall Street Journal, July 29, 2015, www.wsj.com/articles/alibaba-
 plans-1-billion- cloud-computing- push-1438160558. 
 48 Lulu Yilun Chen, Alibaba, SoftBank Team Up for Cloud Computing Service in 
Japan, Bloomberg, May 12, 2016, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016–05–13/
alibaba- softbank-team- up-for- cloud-computing- service-in- japan. 
    3UCHIT ,EESA .GUANSUK ,AZADA !LIBABA AS "RIDGE TO #HINA  "IG $ATA 0ROVIDER Bangkok Post, July 5, 2016, www.bangkokpost.com/learning/advanced/1028138/
lazada- alibaba-as- bridge-to- china-big- data-provider.
 50 Selina Wang, Alibaba’s Cloud Business Ambitions Taking Shape for Investors, 
Bloomberg, May 6, 2016, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016–05–06/alibaba-
 s-cloud- business-ambitions- taking-shape- for-investors.
 51 Seekingalpha.com, Alibaba has a Leading Cloud Division Too, Seeking Alpha, April 
27, 2015, http://seekingalpha.com/article/3105586-alibaba- has-a- leading-cloud-
 division-too. 
 52 People’s Daily, Huawei’s Enterprise Business Revenue to Double, People’s Daily 
Online, March 3, 2011, http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/90001/90778/7306394.
html.
 53 Eileen McNulty, Huawei Tech Chief Discloses Company’s Big Data, IoT Expansion 
Strategy for the Future, Dataconomy, January 7, 2015, http://dataconomy.com/
huawei- tech-chief- discloses-companys- big-data- iot-expansion- strategy-for- the-
future/.
 54 R. Firth, Use the Cloud to Work from Home, ITWeb, August 13, 2009, www.
ITWEBCOZASECTIONSTECHFORUMASP36IRTUALISATION!624
/GOOGLE  55 Peerzada Abrar, Managed Services Spell Big IT Business, The Economic Times, July 
27, 2009, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/Infotech/Managed- services-spell-
 big-IT- business/articleshow/4823813.cms.
 56 Puneet Mehrotra, Microsoft Evaporating to a Cloud, Hindustan Times, November 7, 
2009. 
 57 Sabih Javed, Is India’s Finance Sector Ready to Handle the Big Data and Credit 
Scores Effectively?, Tech in Asia, June 3, 2016, www.techinasia.com/talk/indias-
 ﬁnance-sector- ready-handle- big-data- credit-scores- effectively. 
 58 Mayur Shetty, SBI Uses Big Data Mining to Check Defaults, Biz Loss, Times of 
India, August 8, 2015, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/business/india- business/
SBI- uses-big- data-mining- to-check- defaults-biz- loss/articleshow/48397829.cms. 
 59 Jochelle Mendonca, State Bank of India Hires 16 Statisticians and Economists to 
Drive Performance, The Economic Times, January 29, 2015, http://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/industry/banking/ﬁnance/banking/state- bank-of- india-hires-
 16-statisticians- and-economists- to-drive- performance/articleshow/46048348.
cms.
 60 Europemedia, Terrorist Attacks Mean Bid E- Security Spending, Europe Media, June 
13, 2002, 1. 

Diffusion of Big Data and Cloud  29
 61 Business Wire, SMBs in Brazil to Spend $260USM on IT Security in 2007; Up to 
 OF "RAZIL BASED -"S #ITED %NHANCED $ATA 3ECURITY AND 0RIVACY AS +EY &ACTORS Inﬂuencing IT Purchases, AMI Partners Study Finds, Business Wire, November 20, 
2006. 
 62 Kui Kinyanjui, High Speed Internet Exposes Kenya to Cybercrime, Business Daily, 
August 13, 2009, www.businessdailyafrica.com/-/539444/638794/-/rx1rgv/-/. 
 63 C. Otis and P. Evans, The Internet and Asia- Paciﬁc Security: Old Conﬂicts and New 
Behaviour, Paciﬁc Review (2003) 16(4), 549–550.
 64 Simson Garﬁnkel, Leaky Cyber Borders: The Net Effect. MIT Technology Review, 
June 1, 2002, www.technologyreview.com/articles/garﬁnkel0602.asp. 
 65 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing and Cybercrime2.0, ITU- T Workshop on 
Addressing Security Challenges on a Global Scale, December 6–7, 2010, International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), The United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland; Nir 
Kshetri, Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing, Proceedings of the Paciﬁc 
Telecommunications Council’s (PTC) Annual Conference, Honolulu, HI, January 
16–19, 2011.
 66 R.L. Grossman, The Case for Cloud Computing, IT Professional (2009) 11(2), 23–27.
 67 H. Gatignon and T.S. Robertson, A Propositional Inventory For New Diffusion 
Research, Journal of Consumer Research (1985) 11, 849–867.
 68 R. Dholakia, N. Dholakia, and N. Kshetri, Gender and the Internet Usage, in 
Hossein Bidgoli (Ed.), The Internet Encyclopedia (New York: Wiley, 2004), 12–22.
 69 N. Ahmad and A.N. Hoffmann, A Framework for Addressing and Measuring 
Entrepreneurship, OECD Statistics Working Paper, January 2008, www.olis.oecd.org/
olis/2008doc.nsf/LinkTo/NT000009FA/$FILE/JT03239191.PDF, 8.
 70 K. Eisenhardt and M.J.A. Martin, Dynamic Capabilities: What are They?, Strategic 
Management Journal (2000) 21(10/11), 1107. 
 71 Telecomasia.net, China Unveils Guidelines for Big Data, Telecom Asia, September 
24, 2015, www.telecomasia.net/content/china- unveils-guidelines- big-data.
 72 R.M. Adams, Paths of Fire: An Anthropologist’s Inquiry into Western Technology 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996). 
 73 R. Vernon, International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics (1966) 80, 190–207.
 74 M. Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (London: Macmillan, 1990). 
 75 M. Beise, Lead Markets: Country- Speciﬁc Success Factors of the Global Diffusion of 
Innovations (Heidelberg: Physica- Verlag, 2001). 
 76 J.R. Markusen and A.J. Venables, Foreign Direct Investment as a Catalyst for 
Industrial Development, European Economic Review (1999) 43(2), 335–356.
 77 T.S. Parikh, Engineering Rural Development, Communications of the ACM (January 
2009) 52(1), 54–63.
 78 A. Marshall, Principles of Economics, 8th edn (London: Macmillan, 1920).
 79 Ibid.; K.J. Arrow, The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing, Review of 
Economic Studies (1962) 29, 155–173; and P.M. Romer, Increasing Return and Long-
 Run Growth, Journal of Political Economy (1986) 94, 1002–1037.
 80 M.J.G. Bun and A.E. Makhlouﬁ, Dynamic Externalities, Local Industrial Structure 
and Economic Development: Panel Data Evidence for Morocco, Regional Studies 
(2007) 41(6), 823–837. 
 81 J. Jacobs, The Economy of Cities (New York: Vintage, 1969).
 82 Ibid.
 83 B. Dudley, Is India the Future for Tech?, Boston Herald, April 1, 2009, www.
bostonherald.com/business/general/view/2009_04_01_Is_India_the_future_for_
TECH?SRVCBUSINESSPOSITIONRECENT?BULLET  84 S. Parto, Economic Activity and Institutions: Taking Stock, Journal of Economic Issues 
(2005) 39(1), 21–52.

30  Big Data and Cloud
 85 D.C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), 27.
 86 R. Scott, Institutions and Organizations (Thousand Oaks: CA: Sage, 2001).
 87 NAS (National Academy of Science), Allocating Federal Funds for Science and Technology 
(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1995).
 88 Beise, Lead Markets.
 89 B. Marr, The Amazing Ways Big Data is Used in China, Data Science Central, March 
4, 2016, www.datasciencecentral.com/proﬁles/blogs/the- amazing-ways- big-data-
 is-used- in-china. 
 90 E.M. Rogers, The Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd edn (New York: Free Press, 1983); and 
Gatignon and Robertson, A Propositional Inventory For New Diffusion Research. 
 91 Business Week, What to Entrust to the Cloud, April 6, 2009 (4125), 89–90; M. 
McCall, What’s Hot for 2009? Top 10 Areas of Opportunity in the Downturn, 
Business Week, January 8, 2009, www2.computer.org/portal/web/buildyourcareer/
careerwatch/hs7; and L. McCreary, What Was Privacy? Harvard Business Review 
(2008) 86(10).
 92 Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Developing Economies.
 93 J. Adams, Virtual Defense, Foreign Affairs (2001) 80(3), 98–112. 
 94 Cleverley, Viewpoints: Emerging Markets.
    #HINA )NTERNET 7ATCH #HINA 3MARTPHONE 0ENETRATION 2ATE TO 2EACH  IN  China Internet Watch, October 12, 2015, www.chinainternetwatch.com/14941/
urban- smartphone-users- half-new- equipment-next- year/.
 96 Economist, The Long Nimbus.
 97 C. Werth, Number Crunching Made Easy, Newsweek, May 2, 2009, www.newsweek.
com/id/195734. 
 98 J.M. Irani, Cloud Computing: New Rage Among Net Community, September 
5, 2008, Economic Times, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/msid-
 3446192,prtpage- 1.cms. 
 99 Parikh, Engineering Rural Development; and G. Gruman and E. Knorr, What 
Cloud Computing Really Means, InfoWorld, April, 2008.
100 Paul McFedries, The Cloud is the Computer (Technically Speaking), IEEE Spectrum 
(2008) 45(8), 20. 
101 Grossman, The Case for Cloud Computing.
102 S. Bhanoo, Cloud Computing May Curb Video Game Piracy, CIO, March 26, 2009, 
www.cio.com/article/486979/Cloud_Computing_May_Curb_Video_Game_ 
Piracy. 
103 Emeka Aginam, Cloud Services Could Limit Software Piracy – President Microsoft 
International, Vanguard, May 17, 2016, www.vanguardngr.com/2016/05/cloud-
 services-limit- software-piracy- president-microsoft- international/.
104 Grossman, The Case for Cloud Computing.
105 Nir Kshetri, Big Data’s Big Potential in Developing Economies: Impact on Agriculture, 
Health and Environmental Security (Wallingford: Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences 
International [CABI] Publishing, 2016).

2
THE ROLES AND SIGNIFICANCE 
OF MOBILE PHONES IN THE 
VALUE PROPOSITION OF BIG 
DATA AND THE CLOUD
2.1 Introduction
The use of mobile devices, rather than personal computers, to access BD- and 
cloud- based applications stands out as a particularly appealing and promising 
choice for developing economies, especially the least developed countries 
(LDCs). Among the most compelling reasons is that less than a third of the 
population in developing countries owned a PC in 2015, compared with a cell-
phone subscription penetration of 92 per 100 inhabitants (Table 2.1). In India, 
for instance, mobile phone subscriptions reached one billion in 2015, which is 
83 percent of the country’s population.1 On the other hand, India’s PC penetra-
tion in the same year was estimated at 10 percent.2 Indeed, more people world-
wide have a mobile subscription than have access to a clean toilet, electricity, or 
clean drinking water.3 Unsurprisingly, there are already many successful exam-
ples of projects involving BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions in 
developing economies. This chapter focuses on more general issues of BD, the 
cloud, and mobile phone combination to deliver value to end- users.
 
In order to illustrate the above point, consider the use of mobile computing 
solutions to deal with the shortage of clean drinking water. It is estimated that 
women and girls in developing countries spend between three minutes to three 
hours per day in collecting water for drinking, cooking, cleaning, laundering, 
etc.4 Reducing this time would give them more time to spend on productive 
economic and social endeavors such as agriculture and farming- related activities, 
focusing on maternal and child- health-related issues and attending school. 
Various approaches have been reported involving the cloud and mobiles in 
combination with mapping applications and other technologies to facilitate 
information ﬂow and to improve water supply availability and reliability.5

TABLE 2.1 Key ICT Indicators for Countries with Various Levels of Economic Development
Fixed-Telephone 
Subscriptions
Mobile-Cellular 
Telephone 
Subscriptions
Active Mobile-
Broadband 
Subscriptions
Fixed Broadband 
Subscriptions
Households with 
a Computer
Households with 
Internet Access
Individuals Using 
the Internet
Developed
39
120.6
86.7
29
80.8
81.3
82.2
Developing
 9.4
 91.8
39.1
 7.1
32.9
34.1
35.3
LDCs
12.1
 0.5
 6.7
 9.5
World
14.5
 96.8
47.2
10.8
45.4
46.4
43.4
Source: ITU (2015).

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  33
 
An innovative use of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions has 
been in minimizing water loss due to leaky pipes. One estimate suggested that 
60 percent of water worldwide is lost due to leaky pipes.6 It should therefore 
come as no surprise that improving water management is a key target under the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Target 6.4 says: “By 2030, substantially increase 
water- use efﬁciency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and 
supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the 
number of people suffering from water scarcity.”7
 
In May 2013, IBM and South Africa’s City of Tshwane teamed up to launch 
“Water Watchers,” a mobile application that can be used to report water- related 
issues. The app’s users take a picture that shows a water- related problem and 
answer three related questions. The data is then uploaded in real- time on a 
cloud server. The information generated can be expected to identify a water 
“leak hot spot” map.8
 
EpiSurveyor, which is among the most popular and publicized tools for col-
lecting and analyzing data, has been used in improving water supply availability 
and reliability. This tool was developed by DataDyne, which is a non- proﬁt 
organization. Aquaya.org employs this application to help operators of rural 
water systems submit water quality data to their managers.9 It has also been used 
in health care, agriculture, business, research, and conservation.10 In 2008, the 
World Health Organization (WHO) and the Kenyan health ministry used 
EpiSurveyor to ﬁght polio. Health workers used EpiSurveyor to track an emer-
gency vaccination campaign, which helped to stop a potential polio epidemic.11 
The survey forms can then be downloaded to a mobile phone, which can be 
used to collect and upload data in real-time to an EpiSurveyor account.12 It was 
reported that as of April 2012, EpiSurveyor was reported to have about 8,000 
users in over 170 countries such as Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia, India, 
Pakistan, the Philippines, Nicaragua, Brazil, and Indonesia. The WHO’s African 
Regional Ofﬁce (WHO/AFRO) has implemented EpiSurveyor in ﬁfteen Sub- 
Saharan Africa (SSA) countries.13 This Java- based application is a free, web- 
based software for data collection which can be used on number of phone 
brands.14
 
Other applications involving BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solu-
tions have helped to deal with developmental, political, and social issues such as 
improving health outcomes, ﬁghting corruption, and reducing poverty. For 
instance, such solutions have transformed health care by driving down costs, 
changing workﬂow, improving business continuity, and making an adequate 
provision for disaster recovery.15 In SSA economies, BD- and cloud- based 
mobile computing solutions have enabled a quicker response in curing diseases 
such as HIV infection/AIDS and improved early warning and faster response to 
crises such as an outbreak of malaria. In the Millennium Village- related projects, 
which covered more than twenty SSA countries as of early 2014, BD- and 
cloud- based mobile computing solutions were being utilized in health care, 

34  Big Data and Cloud
education, and other social infrastructure and services for the people. For 
instance, community health workers in the MVPs in Ethiopia and other coun-
tries use BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions to deliver healthcare 
services directly to households and collect health information for improved 
monitoring.
 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions have boosted productivity 
of traditional sectors such as agriculture and farming as well as that of enterprises 
in the modern sector. For instance, the mobile application, iCow, which helps 
small- scale Kenyan dairy farmers track and manage cows’ fertility cycles, has 
helped to increase milk production by 2–3 liters per cow per day.16
 
No less important is the role of the data and information generated through 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions in the creation and function-
ing of the market. The data and information play an especially important role in 
developing countries because factors such as underdeveloped intermediary insti-
tutions and informational opaqueness of small and young ﬁrms have acted as a 
barrier to the functioning of markets in these countries.17 For instance, as of 
September 2013, the information created by the cloud- mobile platform, Agri-
Life, which provides ﬁnancial institutions and suppliers “near- real-time informa-
tion” on farmers’ ability to pay for services,18 facilitated over US$2 million in 
revolving credit lines to about 120,000 small farmers in Kenya and Uganda.19
2.2 The Deployment of BD- and Cloud- Based Mobile 
Computing Solutions
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions in developing economies are 
supplied by local as well as foreign ﬁrms. Regarding the SaaS model, unlike 
client- based computing, cloud- based software is easier to install, maintain, and 
update and does not require a huge initial capital commitment. For instance, 
merchants using Kopo Kopo software (Table 2.2) do not need to worry about 
installing and conﬁguring the software and updating it with each new release, as 
well as revising other programs with every update and can pay on a per usage 
basis.
 
The cloud reduces infrastructure costs, which can be illustrated with the 
deployment of PaaS. For instance, the South African start- up, Nomanini sells a 
“business in a box,” a cloud- based mobile prepaid airtime machine, to small 
informal entrepreneurs, which allows them to set up a “mini- business.” It is 
called Lula (meaning “easy” in Zulu language), which is especially useful for 
providing services to support individuals engaged in small business and informal 
economic activities such as taxi drivers and “on the go” vendors. Lula generates 
and prints codes which people purchase to add minutes to their mobile phones. 
Lula runs on Google App Engine, which is the same infrastructure that powers 
Google’s own applications such as Google Calendar, Gmail, and Google Docs. 
That is, Google provides the framework and storage and manages servers for 

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  35
Lula. Google also provides services to software applications associated with Lula 
beyond those that are available from the operating system (known as middle-
ware). In addition, Google provides runtime- related services such as supporting 
the execution of programs required to print vouchers using Lula. Nomanini’s 
goal is to reach one million informal market merchants by 2020. That also 
allows the company to build up a huge amount of data about the informal 
markets.20
 
An IaaS model allows delegating functions such as storage and computing to 
the cloud provider. For instance, according to biNu’s developers, by moving 
much of the processing to the cloud, biNu works ten times faster than regular 
mobile web browsers. In this way, biNu creates a virtual “smartphone in the 
cloud” for a user.21 It makes graphics and text on the cloud and the data is sent 
back to the phone as tiny images. An advantage of sending the data as images is 
that the text can be displayed in any language irrespective of the language a 
phone is programmed to handle. Each image consists of only one or two packets 
of data of less than one kilobyte (KB) each. Information is not sent twice. The 
servers remember the information that is sent before and provide only new 
instructions that are needed to change the content on the screen.22 The cloud 
also provides the ﬂexibility of scaling up uses when the demand increases.
2.3 Appropriateness, Effectiveness, Feasibility, and 
Worthwhileness of BD- and Cloud- Based Mobile Computing 
Solutions in the Developing World
The high penetration of mobile phones in developing countries makes BD- and 
cloud- based mobile computing solutions among the most appropriate and useful 
technologies. The least gap between developed and developing countries is 
observed for mobile subscriptions compared to most ICTs, which makes BD- 
and cloud- based mobile computing solutions particularly promising. For 
instance, in 2016, mobile phone (non- broadband) subscription was only 34 
percent higher in developed countries as compared to developing countries. On 
the other hand, mobile broadband subscription, ﬁxed broadband subscription, 
and ﬁxed telephone subscription in developed countries were 221 percent, 367 
percent, and 428 percent, respectively, as high as in developing countries 
(Figure 2.1). Likewise, the proportion by which developed countries’ Internet 
and computer penetrations exceeded those of developing countries ranged from 
149 percent to 177 percent in 2013 (Figure 2.2).
 
The cloud has increased the effectiveness and enriched the uses of cellphones. 
New technological developments, related to cellphones and the cloud, are con-
tributing to a more rapid diffusion of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing 
solutions. First, less sophisticated cellphones are now “cloud- ready” as a result 
of recent developments. A cellphone capable of running a browser can access a 
number of mobile cloud applications. Low- cost phone users can thus tap into 

TABLE 2.2 SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS for Mobile Phones in Developing Countries
Cloud-Based 
Application
Explanation 
Some Well-Known Examples
Examples of BD- and Cloud-Based Mobile 
Computing Solutions from Developing Countries
SaaS
A software distribution model, in which 
applications are hosted by a vendor and 
made available to customers over a 
network. Clients can access them from a 
web browser and thus do not need to 
install or download anything on their 
devices.
It is considered to be the most mature 
type of cloud computing.
Google email, Google Apps, Salesforce.
com’s customer relationship management 
software.
Kenya’s Kopo Kopo delivers software to 
SMEs via the web, which allows accepting 
and tracking purchases made with mobile 
money. It can be accessed by PC and 
Android phones. The software is capable of 
seamless incorporation of transactions into 
accounting software such as Quickbooks 
and its management. SMEs can also analyze 
buying trends, and employ SMS to 
communicate with customers (e.g., 
upcoming sales). By the end of 2013, over 
10,000 retail merchants in Kenya used 
Kopo Kopo, which made it Safaricom’s 
largest merchant aggregator and among the 
largest in SSA.
PaaS
Customized applications are developed 
quickly and in a cost-effective manner and 
executed through a platform provided by 
a vendor. The client manages the 
applications and data. Some facilities 
provided under PaaS model include 
database management, security, workﬂow 
management, and application serving.
Google App Engine, Salesforce.com 
(Force.com), Microsoft (Windows Azure 
platform).
Nomanini’s Lula is a US$200 portable 
orange device, which acts like a small digital 
vending machine for prepaid vouchers for 
airtime credit. Nomanini deploys codes to 
Google’s data centers. It runs on Google 
App Engine, which processes a request, and 
a voucher is printed in a few seconds. In 
November 2012, 40,000 people bought 
airtime through Lula.3

IaaS
Computing power and storage space are 
offered on demand. That is, a cloud 
provider installs the client’s virtual server 
on its infrastructure and charges a rent 
based on the resources used. IaaS can 
provide server, operating system, disk 
storage and database, among other things.
Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), 
IBM, Vmware, and HP.
The nonproﬁt organization Worldreader 
makes free books available to kids in SSA. 
The books can be accessed by low-end 
mobile devices and older 2G mobile 
networks. A free mobile software platform 
biNu is used to access the books. biNu 
moves much of the processing to the cloud 
instead of doing it on the phone. In 2013, 
biNu was reported to have over 4 million 
monthly users. Its Worldreader app was 
released as a beta version in April 2013, 
which had been installed on about 5 million 
mobile phones as of 2013-end.4
Notes
1  M. Sandell, Kopo Kopo helping Kenyans Pay by Mobile Phone, 2012, www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/blog/kopo-kopo-helping-kenyans-pay-
mobile-phone.
2 S. Wakoba, The Rise & Rise of Kenya’s Kopo Kopo, Techmoran, 2014, http://techmoran.com/the-rise-rise-of-kenyas-kopo-kopo/.
3 Google Ofﬁcial Blog, Cloud Computing Enabling Entrepreneurship in Africa, 2012, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012/12/cloud-computing-enabling.html.
4  C. Ruz, Cloud Computing Key to Improving Literacy in Africa, Science Node, December 11, 2013, https://sciencenode.org/feature/cloud-computing-key-improving-
literacy-africa.php.

38  Big Data and Cloud
applications that are currently accessible only through smartphones. Second, 
consumers in developing countries are using increasingly sophisticated devices 
facilitating the diffusion of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions. 
According to the NPD Group, in the third quarter of 2013, China’s smart-
phone penetration rate was 55 percent. In the fourth quarter of 2013, smart-
phone sales in India grew by 167 percent.23 Handset makers, meanwhile, are 
offering ultra- cheap smartphones. To take an example, China’s mobile chip 
supplier, Spreadtrum Communications and Mozilla, announced that they have 
teamed up to launch a US$25 smartphone for the world’s emerging markets.24
 
The unavailability and high costs of bandwidth can be the major challenges 
in offering bandwidth intensive applications in developing countries. In coun-
tries such as South Africa, whereas bandwidth is available, the price of broad-
band is a critical barrier for using cloud- based services.25 Thus most mobile 
phones used in developing countries are only adequate for non- bandwidth 
intensive applications such as text messaging.
 
In order to demonstrate the usefulness, appropriateness, and effectiveness of 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions in developing countries, we 
discuss an application to enhance transparency and ﬁght corruption in Guate-
mala. In 2010, a national survey of the beneﬁciaries of Mi Familia Progresa 
(Mifapro) was administered with low- cost mobile phones and EpiSurveyor (free 
software) for data collection. Mifapro was the then President Alvaro Colom’s 
ﬂagship social program. It was a conditional cash transfer (CCT) aimed at 
improving the quality of life of poor families. Before 2010, similar surveys were 
carried out using paper- based data collection methods, which suffered from 
120
100
80
60
40
20
140
0
Fixed
telephone
subscription
Mobile
telephone
subscription
Active mobile
broadband
subscription
Fixed
broadband
subscription
Individuals
using the
Internet
8.8
37.7
13.7
94.1
126.7
99.7
40.9
90.3
49.4
8.2
30.1
11.9
40.1
81
47.1
Developing
Developed
World
FIGURE 2.1   A Comparison of Subscriptions per 100 People of Different Technolo-
gies in Developing and Developed Countries (2016)
Source: ITU, 2016.

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  39
drawbacks such as frequent errors, storage burdens, and the high costs of double 
data entry. While handheld devices not connected to the cloud, such as personal 
digital assistants (PDAs) are sometimes used to replace paper- based methods, 
they have their own shortcomings. The data need to be downloaded to laptops 
in frequent intervals are not available in real- time, and may be corrupted or 
even lost if PDAs are damaged, misplaced, or stolen. In this way, mobile- based 
clouds perform well from the standpoint of disaster recovery. BD- and cloud- 
based mobile computing solutions helped overcome these limitations. The 2010 
CCT survey relied on EpiSurveyor installed on entry- level mobile phones to 
collect information from 500 Mifapro beneﬁciaries, mainly indigenous women. 
It was funded by the United Nations Foundation, the Vodafone Foundation, 
and a World Bank Development Marketplace Grant. It drastically reduced the 
60
40
20
80
0
Developed
Developing
World
77.7
76.8
75.5
28.0
27.6
30.7
41.3
40.7
38.8
Households with Internet access at home (2013)
Individuals using the Internet (2013)
Households with a computer (2012)
FIGURE 2.2   A Comparison of Computer and Internet Penetrations in Developing 
and Developed Countries (2012/2013)
Source: ITU, 2014 (computer penetration data are for 2012, Internet penetration data are for 
2013).

40  Big Data and Cloud
cost and enhanced survey accuracy. The results accelerated the implementation 
of a nationally representative beneﬁciary survey of the CCT program.26
 
EpiSurveyor was arguably the ﬁrst cloud application for data collection in 
international development. The process and results were compared with the 
2009 paper- based survey conducted with 200 beneﬁciaries. It was reported that 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions reduced average interview 
cost by 71 percent and average interview length by 3.6 percent. The data 
quality was reported to improve and 89 percent of the interviewers preferred 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions methods compared to the 
paper- based survey.27 In contrast to paper- or PDA- based approaches, the use of 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions resulted in no data loss.
 
Other worthwhile applications of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing 
solutions concern ﬁnancial services such as stock trading. In October 2010, Intel 
announced an agreement with an alliance of seventy companies, including the 
Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and CtrlS to develop hardware and software for 
an open and interoperable cloud. The Open Data Centre Alliance (ODCA) 
works to address security, energy efﬁciency, and interoperability.28 The BSE 
expects that the new trading platforms supported by BD- and cloud- based 
mobile computing solutions will broaden the participation of younger Indians, 
deepen and widen asset classes traded in pension funds, insurance and mutual 
funds and others.29 As noted above, as of 2015, only 10 percent of Indians 
owned a computer, but more than a billion had mobile subscriptions.
2.4 Key Areas of Deployment and Impacts
2.4.1 Impact on the Healthcare System
Some of the most dramatic impacts of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing 
solutions in developing economies have been documented in health care. For 
instance, the South African NGO mothers- 2-mothers (M2M) system/approach 
combines the cloud and mobile technologies with a database to ﬁght HIV/AIDS 
transmission from mothers to children.30 Note that annually over 400,000 babies 
are born with HIV infected in Africa. This is partly due to the lack of knowledge 
about the disease and treatment options as well as the stigma associated with HIV. 
M2M digitizes patient records and shares with doctors, nurses, mentor mothers, 
and counselors across its networks of over 700 sites.31 The records contain 
information on treatment plans, and advanced reporting tools, which allow quick 
response. Women in villages authenticate children’s medication with text mes-
sages.32 As of 2011, M2M has served more than 1.5 million women in nine SSA 
countries.33 It is estimated that the cost is less than US$75 per beneﬁciary.34
 
Kenya also provides an example of efforts to ﬁght the HIV/AIDS pan-
demic. It takes three months to get the results of HIV tests in the country. 
The consequences of the long delay may prove to be fatal as timely treatment 

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  41
is a key factor for a baby’s survival. The Kenyan Ministry of Health has 
teamed up with several organizations to develop a solution based on mobile 
clouds in order to reduce the reporting time for HIV test results. A mobile 
cloud platform enables data gathering on a central server and better structure 
workﬂows, delivers test results and produces activity reports on a short notice. 
It is expected that the implementation of such a platform can reduce the time-
line for test result delivery to two weeks.35
 
As a further example, in Malawi, the cloud- based Mother Infant Pair (MIP) 
mobile application was developed by D- Tree International and designed for Health 
Surveillance Assistants (HSAs) working with pregnant HIV- infected women. The 
MIP was developed according to the Community-Based Maternal and Neonatal 
Care (CBMNC) guidelines, which aims to regulate community infant care until 
the child is two years old. All HSAs are properly trained on CBMNC guidelines as 
well as on MIP. During the home visits before and after the birth, the MIP- 
installed mobile phone takes the HSA over the questions that need to be asked to 
the client, as well as the associated advice that need to be communicated. MIP uses 
the General Packet Radio Service (GPRS). Data transmission using the GPRS 
costs US$0.00003/KB, which is signiﬁcantly lower than the cost of a SMS, which 
is US$0.03/KB. The data is sent to a cloud server and can be downloaded from 
the Internet. The average size of submitted forms is 3–5 KB.36
 
Moving to a different topic, the reduction of maternal and infant mortality is 
a key priority in many countries. For example, the SDG target is to reduce the 
global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births by 2030.
 
As of 2010, about 2,500 midwives were working in 652 primary healthcare 
centers serving 10.7 million people in Nigeria.37 BD- and cloud- based mobile 
computing solutions are well positioned for contributing towards this goal. In 
order to collect data from midwives, Nigeria’s Mobile Application Data 
Exchange (MADEX) has developed an SMS- based data collection platform. 
Data sent by midwives is forwarded to the central cloud- based server. Due to 
simplicity of the processes, cloud- based systems such as MADEX are appropri-
ate for technologically less savvy users.38 Etisalat Group and D- Tree Inter-
national teamed up to develop a mobile phone app for African midwives, which 
can identify risks in pregnant mothers, and ﬁnd and identify a means of trans-
portation to reach the closest health center.39 As of 2012, mobile midwife serv-
ices in Ghana uploaded data from the ﬁeld, registering health information for 
14,000 expectant mothers with a central database hosted in the cloud. The data 
can be updated by any authorized users such as government workers and local 
clinicians. The Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) announced that 
it would reach over 120 million new mothers across Bangladesh, India, and 
South Africa by 2018.40
 
World leaders have also agreed on a target to end the epidemics of AIDS, 
malaria, and various other diseases by 2030. The Malaria Surveillance & 
Mapping project in Botswana was a pilot program launched in 2011, which 

42  Big Data and Cloud
aims to move away from paper reports towards mobile clouds. Healthcare 
workers are equipped with mobile phones to gather and upload malaria data to 
the cloud. The data can also be tagged with a GPS coordinate, pictures, video, 
and audio. If there are signals of an outbreak of malaria, Ministry of Health ofﬁ-
cials and other health workers in the area receive a real- time notiﬁcation via 
text message.41
 
In Africa, electronic medical records (EMRs) and electronic health records 
(EHRs) are being developed and implemented using entry- level cellphones. 
Before proceeding further, it is important to stress that EMRs such as in the 
USA would be prohibitively expensive and hard to manage in the developing 
world. In 2012, Duke University announced its plan to spend US$700 million 
to implement EHR from the vendor, Epic Systems. EHR projects involve 
storing additional terabytes of data and providing security capabilities in order to 
comply with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
requirements. Maintaining a robust and secure network for doctors and other 
clinicians to access the data remotely through iPads or smartphones represented 
additional costs of the project.42 As another example, California’s Sutter Health 
spent about US$1 billion in EHR.43 Most developed world- based health organ-
izations suffer from the lack of experienced people to manage high- level pro-
jects involving ICTs.44 Moreover, health organizations need to deal with system 
breakdown and collapse from time to time. For instance, Sutter Health EHR 
failed in August 2013. Nurses and clinical staff were unable to access patient 
information for a day.45
 
In the Millennium Village of Koraro in Northern Ethiopia, community 
health workers are equipped with cloud- based OpenMRS (medical record 
system) and a smartphone- based health- data management system. They visit 
households to collect information and report on diseases such as malaria, 
number of births, malnutrition incidence, and the health status of pregnant 
women.46 At the time, the MVP’s goal was to train, equip, and deploy one 
million community health workers in rural areas of SSA by 2015.47
 
An innovative application in the early phases of development can help to 
identify counterfeit or sub- standard drugs.48 Individuals ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make 
decisions in the face of inadequate information as to whether a drug they are 
buying in order to save a life is genuine or not. While buying a drug at a phar-
macy store, a customer can ﬁnd a twelve- digit code by scratching a sticker on 
the surface of the package and then send a text message to a given number. The 
code sent by the customer is matched with the one registered by the pharma-
ceutical company in HP’s cloud database. The customer then receives a response 
back that tells whether the drug is counterfeit or genuine. Although this applica-
tion provides obvious commercial beneﬁts to drug manufacturers and patients, 
one of the most important ones is that it helps save lives by enabling the cus-
tomers to check the authenticity of life- saving drugs. This system was developed 
in Africa by the non- proﬁt organization, mPedigree, and HP Labs. The techno-

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  43
logy provider had launched a program to track and authenticate drugs in Nigeria 
and Ghana. As of September 2011, HP was negotiating with Indian pharmaceu-
tical companies such as Cipla, Tablet India, and CAMA.
 
In Africa, Bharti Airtel and the US company Sproxil have teamed up to 
crack down on counterfeit pharmaceuticals using similar technology—Sproxil’s 
Mobile Product Authentication (MPA) system. As of 2012, Sproxil operated in 
Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, and India. According to the World Health Organiza-
tion, counterfeit medicines can account for 30 percent of the market in many 
African countries.49 One study conducted in twenty- one SSA countries found 
that one- third of malaria drug samples failed chemical testing and one- ﬁfth were 
conﬁrmed as fake.50
 
Drug manufacturers have realized that taking counterfeits off the market and 
making counterfeiters unproﬁtable is only one of the many beneﬁts that Sprox-
il’s MPA system can offer. Drug manufacturers can also get insights into loca-
tions that are counterfeit hotspots and the quantities of counterfeit drugs.
 
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions are also contributing to 
the growth of health micro- insurance programs. Linda Jamii (Swahili for 
“protect your family”), is a mobile cloud- based health micro- insurance program 
implemented by Safaricom in partnership with Changamka Micro- Health and 
the insurance provider Britam. Linda Jamii’s clients are self- employed Kenyans. 
It provides in- patient and out- patient cover, maternity cover, dental and vision, 
income replacement, funeral expense payout, and other coverage for an annual 
premium of US$150 per family. While registration for insurance must be done 
in person, the rest of the processes, such as registration and submitting claims, 
are done through a mobile phone. A cloud- based application manages the entire 
process.51
2.4.2 Impact on the Farming and Agricultural Sector
Total factor productivity in agriculture is much lower in LDCs than in 
developed economies.52 World leaders have set as a target under the SDGs to 
double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small- scale food producers, 
in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists, and ﬁshers. 
Technology can again serve an important role in this context.
 
Most encouraging and inspiring examples of mobile- based cloud computing 
deployments can be found in SSA, which have led to economic and social 
transformations. For instance, uses of mobile clouds in agricultural and farming 
activities have markedly enhanced productivity. For instance, the Apps4Africa 
Award- winning app iCow, already mentioned, helps small- scale dairy farmers 
track and manage their cows’ fertility cycles. The app informs farmers about the 
important days of cow gestation period; collects and stores milk and breeding 
records, and sends farmers best practices. It also helps farmers ﬁnd the nearest 
vets and other service providers. Its developer, Green Dreams, has also formed a 

44  Big Data and Cloud
system involving Google Docs. If Green Dreams and the vet contacted by the 
farmer are unable to answer the farmer’s question, it is uploaded on the system. 
The vets send messages among themselves and come up with the best answer, 
which is then forwarded to the farmer.53 As of December 2012, different fea-
tures of the iCow platform were used by 42,000 farmers in forty- two countries. 
Due to the ease of use, affordability, and convenience, iCow has high retention 
and satisfaction rates. For instance, iCow’s surveys indicated that 82 percent of 
farmers who started using the platform in June 2011 were still using it until 
January 2012.54 In June 2013, Safaricom announced a partnership with iCow.55
 
In Uganda, so- called “community knowledge workers” (CKWs) use 
Android phones loaded with an open- source data  collection application. Data is 
automatically fed into the clouds of the US cloud provider Salesforce. As of 
2011, there were about 400 CKWs in Uganda. They used solar power, bicycles, 
and other means to recharge the phone batteries. The concept was developed 
by the Seattle- based Grameen Foundation Technology Center. It offers selected 
farmers loans to buy an Android phone, which is loaded with information about 
the time and methods of planting crops, caring for farm animals, and ﬁnding 
markets for products. Those farmers act as CKWs and serve as experts in the 
villages. Other farmers can ask questions about crops or farm animals. The 
CKWs interact with farmers and gather information about them.56
 
The project also created a cloud- hosted database for Ugandan farmers. 
Farmers contribute questions and answers about agricultural practices for the 
database. It contains answers to frequently asked questions, which can be 
accessed via a free SMS service. The project generated US$1 million in income 
when government agencies and commercial organizations in Uganda paid for 
farming data. For instance, a brewery in the capital city Kampala wanted 
information on barley crop supply chains.57
 
Another innovative BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solution is 
Farmforce, a US$2 million platform developed by the Swiss- based Syngenta 
Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture, which was backed by the Swiss govern-
ment. Small- scale farmers in Kenya use the cloud- based mobile platform Farm-
force software to store and manage data on pesticide contents in their crops 
before exporting. Farmforce operates on a subscription- based SaaS model, 
which tracks pesticide residues in produce. Farmers can access the software 
freely online via a mobile phone. The farmers no longer need to use manual 
record keeping of farm activities and operations.58 Farmforce software can be 
used for all types of crops. It was reported that a number of developing coun-
tries such as Ghana, Guatemala, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Zimbabwe had 
expressed interest in Farmforce.59 Despite the rising demands in industrialized 
countries of fruit and vegetables, developing- world-based small- scale farmers 
face barriers related to quality standards and pesticide traceability.60 The use of 
Farmforce would help small- scale farmers identify and document important 

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  45
requirements related to quality standards and pesticide traceability in order to 
improve marketability of their crops. 
 
The Nigerian farm services company Babban Gona (which means “Great 
Farm” in Hausa) has been using Farmforce since 2013. In the ﬁrst year, 692 
farmers were enrolled, which covered 583 hectares.61 The number of farmers 
enrolled increased to more than 2,000 in 2014.62 Farmforce records information 
about farmers’ personal proﬁles, growing activity, yields, and other indicators.
 
As yet another example, in Uganda, cloud- based mobile platforms have 
helped small farmers access agricultural information and ﬁnancial services. For 
instance, farmers can use mobile phones to order and pay for seeds and fertil-
izers, and collect payment for their produce.63
 
The cloud- based platform, AgriLife, which is accessible via mobile phone, is 
used for collecting data and analyzing farmers’ production capability and history. 
In order to ensure fast, easy, and efﬁcient availability of resources and services to 
distant, rural farmers, the platform also acts as an integration point for ﬁnancial 
institutions, mobile network operators, produce buyers, and their agents.64 The 
data analysis provides a better understanding of small farmers’ needs and produc-
tion capability. Service providers can tailor their offerings such as crop insur-
ance, input payments, and savings accounts based on the data.65 Uganda’s 
Farmers Centre (FACE) was an early adopter of AgriLife. FACE started upload-
ing information on its 10,000 farmer clients, who travel long distances to pur-
chase inputs and aggregate their produce at FACE warehouses for processing/
sale. Before using AgriLife, FACE collected information by paper- based ques-
tionnaires. The data was stored on a computer, which had crashed. A cloud- 
based farmer registration process via mobile phone thus proved to be an 
attractive option. Small farmers’ transaction data helps them build a credit 
history, which is used by value- chain actors to provide credit and other 
resources such as seeds, fertilizers, and pest- control chemicals agents.66
 
The AgriLife platform was developed by the Kenya- based IT company 
MobiPay and was launched in late 2012. Mercy Corps supported the expansion 
of AgriLife to Uganda and helped build relationships with other service provid-
ers and integrate them into the platform so they can reach rural clients more 
effectively. As noted earlier, as of September 2013, AgriLife has facilitated over 
US$2 million in revolving credit lines to about 120,000 small farmers in Kenya 
and Uganda. The AgriLife platform is also being used in Zimbabwe, Zambia, 
and Senegal.67
2.4.3 BD- and Cloud- Based Mobile Computing Solutions in 
the Development of Index Insurance
Several researchers and practitioners have advocated the development and use of 
index insurance contracts to manage the risks faced by farmers and agricultural 
producers.68 Note that whereas conventional insurance compensates an insurer 

46  Big Data and Cloud
based on veriﬁable losses, under an index insurance scheme, payment to an 
insured farmer depends on the observed value of a speciﬁed “index.”69 Prior 
researchers have suggested that the beneﬁts of index insurance contracts are likely 
to be greater to lending institutions such as agricultural and industrial development 
banks and MFIs than to an individual borrower.70 The development of an index 
that would provide an accurate measurement of systemic agricultural production 
shocks in a lending institution’s geographic boundaries can help effectively track 
its cash ﬂows.71 This means that by diversifying a large proportion of the 
borrower- speciﬁc idiosyncratic risks, a lending institution is likely to face lower 
basis risk than faced by its borrowers individually.72 The loan portfolios of most 
MFIs in developing countries are typically concentrated in urban areas. Systemic 
risks associated with droughts, ﬂoods, cyclones, and other extreme weather- related 
events tend to make agricultural loans less attractive and hinder the ability and 
enthusiasm of MFIs to expand their services to rural farmers.73
 
The social enterprise Kilimo Salama (which means “safe agriculture” in 
Swahili) developed an index insurance in an attempt to serve a vulnerable 
market that traditional insurance schemes do not reach. Kilimo Salama was a 
partnership between the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture, UAP 
Insurance, and Safaricom. It developed a scheme for small farmers in Kenya to 
protect them against poor weather conditions. Its “weather- based index insur-
ance” uses weather stations across the country. Farmers can buy the insurance at 
the beginning of the season for about 10–20 percent of the amount they invest 
in seeds and inputs.74 For some farmers the cost of insurance amounts to as little 
as 1 kg of maize, seed, or fertilizer.75 The insurance, which is completely auto-
mated, is distributed through dealers who use an advanced phone application 
with camera and phone functions to scan and capture policy information 
through a code. The information is uploaded to Safaricom’s mobile cloud- based 
server, which administers policies. Farmers receive information about their 
policy and payouts in SMS messages.76 Weather stations are equipped with 
wireless sim- cards that transmit data every ﬁve minutes to a cloud- based server. 
At the end of the season, the data is aggregated and coupled with satellite data, 
and used to map out rain patterns. Kilimo Salama then worked with agrono-
mists to calculate the index to identify the locations with too much rain, too 
little rain, or rain at the wrong time. Farmer payouts are calculated based on 
their crops, location, and the number of seeds purchased.77 Thanks to Kilimo 
Salama’s insurance scheme, banks and micro- ﬁnance institutions were more 
comfortable in giving loans, making access to essential credit easier for farmers.
 
The for- proﬁt company, Acre Africa, evolved from the Kilimo Salama 
project and is now the brand name of Agriculture and Climate Risk Enterprise 
Ltd (ACRE). It continues to link farmers to insurance products so that they can 
conﬁdently invest in their farms. Cumulatively, by 2015, over 800,000 farmers 
in Kenya, Tanzania, and Rwanda had been insured through products designed 
by the company.78

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  47
2.4.4 Impact on Educational Outcomes
BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions can also have a positive 
impact on education and literacy- related activities. The Connect to Learn (CtL) 
program provides schools with laptops or netbooks and free wireless to access 
news, information, and educational content in the cloud.79 The students can 
also interact with fellow students around the world.80 As of early 2014, there 
were twelve CtL program sites in ten countries in Africa.81
 
Philanthropic and charitable causes have also been a factor in stimulating the 
deployment of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions in such activ-
ities. For instance, Worldreader, which describes its mission as to “make digital 
books available to children and their families in the developing world, so mil-
lions of people can improve their lives,” uses [Amazon’s] AWS to download 
books.82 Worldreader has made thousands of free books available on the cloud 
which can be accessed by low- end mobile devices and older 2G mobile net-
works. The books can be accessed through a free mobile software platform 
biNu. Most of the processing is performed in the cloud’s servers instead of on 
the phone, which allows biNu to work ten times faster than regular mobile web 
browsers.83
 
As noted above, the education and literacy charity Worldreader launched a 
book app, with thousands of free books, which consists of a wide range of 
genres such as romance novels to mathematics textbooks. The app is designed 
to run on moderately priced and multipurpose phones (feature phones)84 rather 
than high- end smartphones. In this way, biNu allows feature phones and low- 
end smartphones to have a smartphone- like experience through cloud- based 
apps and services.85 This also means that the app is appropriate for SSA’s over-
crowded narrow band 2G networks, which are primarily used for voice trans-
mission but are also capable of transferring data, but only very slowly and 
unreliably. Note too that 2G networks are less compatible with the functions of 
smart phones. The app can be accessed through biNu, which is a free software 
delivery platform for mobile devices. biNu also gives users free airtime on 
prepaid mobile phones for completing surveys.86
2.4.5 Impacts on Business Processes, Productivity, and the 
Creation of Markets
In this section, we discuss the impacts of BD- and cloud- based mobile com-
puting solutions on business processes and productivity and the creation of 
markets. BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions allow for better 
workﬂow by saving time and allowing data to ﬂow automatically into the 
clouds. The impacts on business processes and productivity were illustrated 
above through various examples and comparisons with other available altern-
atives (Table 2.3).

TABLE 2.3  Some Examples of the Impacts of Big Data- and Cloud-Based Mobile Computing Solutions on Improving Business Processes and 
Productivity and Creation of Markets
Improving Business Processes and Productivity
Creation of Market
Facilitating Information Exchange
Matching Buyers and Sellers
Healthcare
s   -- DIGITIZATION OF PATIENT RECORDS HAVE led to lower costs and quicker response.
s   4HE +ENYAN -INISTRY OF (EALTHS PROPOSED BD- and cloud-based mobile computing 
solutions solution is expected to reduce the 
timeline for HIV test result delivery from 
three months to 2 weeks.
s   --S SHARING OF PATIENT INFORMATION WITH counselors.
s   4HE (0S CLOUD DATABASE WAS DESIGNED TO provide information as to whether or not a 
drug is genuine.
s   -OBILE PHONE APP FOR African midwives 
developed by Etisalat. 
Group and D-Tree ﬁnd 
and identify a means of 
transportation to reach 
the closest health center.
Primary economic 
ctivities such as 
agriculture and 
livestock-raising
s   &!#%S USE OF !GRI,IFE TO COLLECT information about farmer clients led to 
lower data collection costs compared to 
paper-based questionnaires.
s   &ARMFORCE ELIMINATED THE NEED TO USE manual record keeping of farm activities 
and operations.
s   I#OWS POSITIVE IMPACT ON MILK production.
s   +ILIMO 3ALAMAS WEATHERBASED INDEX provides information for banks and MFIs, 
to provide loans to farmers.
s   !GRI,IFE 3ERVICE PROVIDERS CAN TAILOR offerings such as crop insurance, input 
payments, and savings accounts based on 
small farmers’ needs and production 
capability.
s   %SOKO COLLECTS AND PROVIDES INFORMATION ON current market prices.
s   I#OW HELPS FARMERS lND the nearest vets and 
other service providers.
s   %SOKO PROVIDES information on bids and 
offers.
SMEs in non-primary 
economic activities
s   4HE -4. #LOUD OFFERS PACKAGES TO manage the infrastructure and platforms to 
support business functions such as 
accounting, human resource, customer 
relations management, email and 
videoconferencing, storage and back-up for 
small businesses.
s   +OPO +OPO ALLOWS 3-%S TO EMPLOY 3-3 to communicate with customers.
s   ,ULA OWNERS ACT AS intermediaries, matching 
buyers with sellers of 
airtime.

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  49
 
Let us now consider such possibilities in small- and medium- sized enter-
prises (SMEs). The South Africa- based telecommunications company MTN 
launched pilot cloud computing services targeting SMEs in Uganda, Cam-
eroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, and South Africa. Following the pilot 
projects, it launched a suite of cloud services for SMEs in Ghana and Nigeria 
in December 2012. For instance, MTN MyOfﬁce, a suite of SME- focused 
ICT solutions designed to enhance the way businesses work and collaborate is 
available in Nigeria.87 The subscribers of MTN’s SME Closed User Group 
(CUG) can pay a ﬂat monthly fee and enjoy zero- rated call services among 
their staff. The service is available to SMEs with 2–199 employees. According 
to MTN, this offering has already been adopted by SMEs in manufacturing, 
hospitality, micro- ﬁnance, and advertising. The MTN Cloud offers packages 
to manage the infrastructure and platforms to support business functions such 
as accounting, human resource, customer relations management, email, and 
video conferencing, storage and back- up for small businesses. The business 
software and data are stored on a cloud which end- users can access through 
mobile phones as well as a PC.88
 
The roles of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions in market 
creation are much less appreciated but may be quite important. Kenya’s Musoni 
Systems established the world’s 100 percent mobile micro- ﬁnance institution in 
2009.89 Its cloud- based core banking solution has a huge amount of information 
on small- scale ﬁnancial service providers as well as low- income consumers.90
 
Among the key functions of markets are to match buyers and sellers, facil-
itate the exchange of information, goods, services, and payments and to 
provide an institutional infrastructure, such as a legal and regulatory frame-
work.91 Factors such as transportation and communication infrastructures and 
intermediary institutions are essential for the creation and functioning of 
markets.92 Regarding buyer/seller matching services, more broadly, we discuss 
how BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions have facilitated the 
dialogue, interaction, and coordination between producers and users of goods 
and services in developing countries. Market creation can occur through 
various mechanisms and with varying effects on the market participants. The 
HP’s cloud database was designed to provide information as to whether or not 
a drug is genuine. Lula owners act as intermediaries, matching buyers with 
sellers of airtime.
 
Developing world- based farmers are often paid low prices for their products. 
On the other hand, the poorly informed farmers pay higher prices in order to 
obtain the needed inputs that market conditions dictate.93 BD- and cloud- based 
mobile computing solutions have made it possible to ﬁght these problems. In 
Mauritius and Ghana, Esoko, a mobile- enabled cloud service, collects and pro-
vides information to farmers on such topics as current market prices, bids and 
offers, weather, and tips. Advisories are also sent by voice messages and a live 
call center of agricultural experts is made available.94

50  Big Data and Cloud
 
SMEs are especially likely to beneﬁt from the data and information created 
by BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions because developing eco-
nomies are characterized by the lack, or poor performance, of credit rating 
agencies providing information about the creditworthiness of SMEs. A national 
credit bureau would collect and distribute reliable credit information and hence 
increase transparency and minimize the banks’ lending risks. Many emerging 
economies lack such an agency and some have a poorly functioning one. This 
situation puts SMEs in a disadvantaged position in the credit market. SMEs tend 
to be more informationally opaque than large corporations because they often 
lack certiﬁed audited ﬁnancial statements and thus it is difﬁcult for banks to 
assess or monitor their ﬁnancial conditions.95
2.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments
Developing economies’ broad political, economic, and social contexts have 
given rise to the growth of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions. 
Unsurprisingly, a number of creative approaches to the deployment, operation, 
and use of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions have already been 
reported in the developing world. While initial investment costs may be relat-
ively high in some cases, possible savings due to efﬁciency gains, improved 
quality, and other advantages are obtained, which often exceed the initial 
investment. The simple fact that the data are created digitally as opposed to 
being digitized manually dramatically reduces the costs. The cost savings that 
could be achieved through the immediate digitization and data transmission and 
automated data aggregation were much greater than the purchasing and data 
transmission costs of mobile phones.96
 
One advantage of the cloud is that if a device fails or is lost, the information 
is still securely saved in the cloud.97 There is no need to worry about data loss in 
issues such as theft and burglary involving cellphones and computer crash, 
which are not uncommon. To take just one example, between 2010 and 2011, 
three million cellphones were stolen in Colombia.98 Likewise, before using 
AgriLife, FACE had collected information on its clients (farmers) and stored on 
a computer, which had crashed.99
 
We noted earlier that health organizations in the USA suffer from the lack of 
skills related to high- level project management.100 The shortage of skills and 
talent is a more serious problem in developing countries. Since clients can access 
resources from a web browser, they are not required to install or download any-
thing on their devices. The cloud is thus a more appropriate choice.
 
Kopo Kopo’s software and Nomanini’s Lula capitalize on, adapt to, and 
improve the functioning of the mobile money market. For instance, Lula 
owners wear a lanyard around their necks to carry the device so they are 
instantly noticed in places such as a busy train stations.101 Africa’s prepaid airtime 
market was estimated at US$60 billion in 2013.102 A key reason behind the 

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  51
increasing success and popularity of Lula is that prepaid minutes can be used as 
cash or spent in shops in a number of African countries such as Côte d’Ivoire, 
Egypt, Ghana, Uganda, and Nigeria.103 In November 2013, Nomanini entered 
the Kenyan market. The company also announced its plan to enter Zambia, 
Nigeria, and Tanzania.104 Many people in Africa, especially in rural areas, use 
such vouchers to pay for services such as electricity, water, insurance, and 
airtime for mobile phones. The low penetration rates of computers, the Inter-
net, and smartphones, and the fact that a large proportion of the population 
lacks a documented home address make this an attractive option economically 
and technologically. Mobile prepaid services do not require Internet access or a 
bank account and can be purchased in small or large amounts. A further reason 
for the popularity of such vouchers is that it is difﬁcult to distribute physical 
vouchers because of theft and fraud risks.
 
The lack of availability and quality of cloud- related infrastructure have hin-
dered cloud adoption in developing countries.105 In SSA, only 53 percent of the 
urban population and 8 percent of rural population have electricity. According 
to PenWell Corporation, the SSA generates 47 MW of electricity, which is less 
than 0.6 percent of the global market.106 Likewise, according to the consultancy 
ﬁrm Balancing Act, SSA had less than 100 data centers in 2011.107 In the same 
year, there were more than 500,000 data centers worldwide,108 which means 
that SSA accounted for less than 0.02 percent of the data centers worldwide. 
There is also the lack of high bandwidth infrastructures. As of 2012, eight SSA 
countries were 100 percent dependent on satellite for international connectivity 
due to the lack of ﬁber optic links.109 Moreover, the battle to provide cloud 
services is about more than just getting ﬁber connections. For instance, in the 
early 2013, Liberia and Sierra Leone were connected to the ACE cable, which 
was their ﬁrst ﬁber network. Since only a few landlines exist in these countries, 
dispersing bandwidth would take further efforts.
 
Economic and infrastructure- related barriers, while less pronounced, remain 
signiﬁcant for many people living in a rural area, and poor households. In 
Uganda, low network coverage and the instability of the network in the most 
remote areas have acted as major barriers that have hindered or slowed down 
the wide acceptance of mobile clouds. Additional barriers that revolve around 
the lower adoption of the technology include the high cost of phones (about 
US$20) and calls (about US$0.20 per minute), and the difﬁculty in charging 
mobile phones.110
 
Developing countries perform relatively poorly compared to developed 
countries in most factors related to cloud computing. On the other hand, some 
constraints that have hindered the diffusion of the cloud in developed countries 
are less restrictive in developing ones. For instance, due to the requirement of 
stringent security measures in order to comply with the HIPAA requirements, 
healthcare organizations in the USA are reluctant to use the cloud despite signi-
ﬁcant potential efﬁciency gain.

52  Big Data and Cloud
 
The Mifapro case shows how data collection using the cloud and mobile 
technologies can help coordinate, monitor, evaluate, and implement policies 
that are targeted towards the poor indigenous and disadvantaged groups living 
in remote, marginalized, and underdeveloped areas. The deployment of the 
cloud in rural areas may also create signiﬁcant business opportunities.
Notes
  1 Saritha Rai, India Just Crossed 1 Billion Mobile Subscribers Milestone and the 
Excitement’s Just Beginning, Forbes, January 6, 2016, www.forbes.com/sites/
saritharai/2016/01/06/india- just-crossed- 1-billion- mobile-subscribers- milestone-
and- the-excitements- just-beginning/#443d0eb15ac2. 
  2 DQINDIA Online, Lenovo Brings its “Start Up with Lenovo” to Karnataka, Data 
Quest India, September 29, 2015, www.dqindia.com/lenovo- brings-its- start-up-
 with-lenovo- to-karnataka/. 
  3 Pure Water Box, Water Drops, 2012, www.purewaterbox.ca/2012/12/water-
 drops-6/.
  4 Lyla Mehta, Water and Human Development, World Development (July 2014) 59, 
59–69; mHealth Info, EpiSurveyor Mobile Health Data Collection, 2010, www.
mhealthinfo.org/project/episurveyor- mobile-health- data-collection.
  5 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in the Global South: Drivers, Effects and Policy 
Measures, Third World Quarterly (2011) 32(6), 995–1012; Brett Walton, Do It and 
Prove It—Information Technology Opens Up the Water Sector, Circle of Blue, 
January 10, 2011, www.circleofblue.org/waternews/2011/world/do- it-and- prove-
it%E2%80%94information-technology- opens-up- the-water- sector/.
  6 Joanne Carew, World War Water, ItWeb, May 22, 2013, www.itweb.co.za/?id= 
64253:World- War-Water.
  7 SDSN, Indicators and a Monitoring Framework: Launching a data revolution for 
the Sustainable Development Goals, Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 
2016, http://indicators.report/targets/6-4/.
  8 Ibid.
  9 M. Kanyi, Case Studies: Who Uses Magpi (formerly EpiSurveyor), 2012, https://
datadyne.zendesk.com/entries/21282536-Case- Studies-Who- Uses-Magpi-
 formerly-E; Stephen Goldstein, Mobile Data Collection: A Leapfrog Technology for 
Health Improvement, K4Health, January 26, 2012, www.k4health.org/blog/post/
mobile- data-collection- leapfrog-technology- health-improvement.
 10 Goldstein, Mobile Data Collection. 
 11 mHealth Info, EpiSurveyor Mobile Health Data Collection.
 12 C. Schuster and C. Perez- Brito, Cutting Costs, Boosting Quality and Collecting Data Real-
 Time: Lessons from a Cell Phone- Based Beneﬁciary Survey to Strengthen Guatemala’s Conditional 
Cash Transfer Program, En Breve (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011), 166.
 13 mHealth Info, EpiSurveyor Mobile Health Data Collection.
 14 Goldstein, Mobile Data Collection.
 15 G. Walton, Mobile Healthcare is Here, More Changes to Come, Frontiers of Health 
Services Management (2012) 29(2), 21–27.
 16 ILRI (International Livestock Research Institute) News, Cows in the Cloud: 
Kenyans are Registering Their Cows, and Increasing Their Milk Yields, on Their 
Mobile Phones, ILRI News, December 18, 2012, www.ilri.org/ilrinews/index.php/
archives/10173. 
 17 A.N. Berger, L.F. Klapper, and G.F. Udell, The Ability of Banks to Lend to 
Informationally Opaque Small Businesses, Policy Research Working Paper Series 
2656, The World Bank, 2001; R. Cressy, Introduction: Funding Gaps, Economic 

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  53
Journal (2002) 112, F1–F16; T. Khanna, Business Groups and Social Welfare in 
Emerging Markets: Existing Evidence and Unanswered Questions, European Economic 
Review (2000) 44, 748–761; Nir Kshetri, Global Entrepreneurship: Environment and 
Strategy (New York: Routledge, 2014).
 18 Capacity, AgriLife Platform, 2013, www.capacity.org/capacity/opencms/en/topics/
gender- and-social- inclusion/agrilife- web-platform- kenya.html.
 19 G- AnalytiX, Credit Information Sharing: Unlocking Access to Affordable Credit: 
Alternative Data to Drive Financial Inclusion, The 2nd Regional Credit Information 
Sharing Conference, September 24–25, 2013, Nairobi: Kenya. 
 20 Wim van der Beek, Five Factors That Differentiate Africa’s Fintech, CNBC Africa, 
June 13, 2016, www.cnbcafrica.com/news/ﬁnancial/2016/06/13/factors- that-
differentiate- ﬁntech-in- africa/. 
 21 BiNu, Mobile Internet for the Next Two Billion: A Whitepaper on Using Cloud 
Technology to Create a Virtual Smartphone Experience for the Next Two Billion 
Internet Consumers, May 2014, http://bi.nu/ﬁles/Mobile_Internet_for_the_Next_
Two_Billion.pdf.
 22 C. Ruz, Cloud Computing Key to Improving Literacy in Africa, Science Node, 
December 
11, 
2013, 
https://sciencenode.org/feature/cloud- computing-key-
 improving-literacy- africa.php.
 23 Clare McDonald, Smartphone Sales Decline in Mature Markets, Computer Weekly, 
February 14, 2014, www.computerweekly.com/news/2240214383/Smartphone-
 sales-decline- in-mature- markets.
 24 Junko Yoshida, $25 Smartphones on Firefox OS to Rock MWC: Spreadtrum and 
Mozilla Target First- Time Smartphone Users, EE Times, February 23, 2014, www.
eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1321112.
 25 Sean Gallagher, How Africa is Embracing “the Cloud” on Its Own Terms, Ars 
Technica, June 12, 2012, http://arstechnica.com/business/2012/06/why- africa-
embraces- cloud-computing/.
 26 Kanyi, Case Studies: Who Uses Magpi; Schuster and Perez- Brito, Cutting Costs, 
Boosting Quality and Collecting Data Real- Time, 166.
 27 Schuster and Perez- Brito, Cutting Costs, Boosting Quality and Collecting Data Real-
 Time, 166.
 28 Economic Times, Intel, Partners Enter into Alliance for Cloud Computing, Economic 
Times, October 28, 2010, http:/economictimes.indiatimes.com/infotech/software/
Intel- partners-enter- into-alliance- for-cloud- computing/articleshow/6829239.cms.
 29 James Lamont, Financial Services: Shuttered Too Long, Financial Times, January 25, 
2011, 
www.ft.com/cms/s/0/690b0d9a-28c0–11e0-aa1800144feab49a.html#axzz 
1D1Z8HD5B; Economic Times, Intel, Partners Enter into Alliance for Cloud 
Computing. 
 30 Kshetri, Cloud Computing in the Global South.
 31 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Developing Economies, IEEE Computer (2010) 
43(10), 47–55; Kshetri, Cloud Computing in the Global. 
 32 S. Wakoba, The Rise & Rise of Kenya’s Kopo Kopo, Techmoran, January 19, 2014, 
http://techmoran.com/the- rise-rise- of-kenyas- kopo-kopo/.
 33 HP Press Release, HP and mothers2mothers Partner to Prevent Mother- to-Child 
Transmission of HIV in Africa, January 25, 2011, www8.hp.com/us/en/hp- news/
press- release.html?id=839911#.UwwSDc691mc. 
 34 K. Greenwood, The Scoop on the Kravis Prize Awards Dinner, Skoll Foundation, 
2012, 
www.skollfoundation.org/the- scoop-on- the-kravis- prize-awards- dinner/ 
#more- 7568.
 35 mHealth Info, Health Management Information System (HMIS), 2013, www.
mhealthinfo.org/category/projecttags/all/health- management-information- system-
hmis. 

54  Big Data and Cloud
 36 Lyness Kanada, Mother Infant Pair Mobile Application in Malawi, Solutions Center, 
March 18, 2013, http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/case_studies/view/mother-
 infant-pair- mobile-application- in-malawi. 
 37 Madeline Taskier, Celebrate Solutions: The Midwives Services Scheme, Nigeria, 
Women Deliver, January 24, 2011, www.womendeliver.org/updates/entry/celebrate-
 solutions-the- midwives-services- scheme-nigeria. 
 38 USAID, Using Mobile Technology to Improve Family Planning and Health 
Programs Meeting Report, Dares Salaam, Tanzania, November 12–16, 2012.
 39 Close- Up Media GSMA Reports Winners of Global Mobile Awards, Entertainment 
Close- Up, 7, via Factiva, 2012. 
 40 Matthew Hall, Cloud and Mobiles Fighting Corruption in Developing Nations, The 
Age, May 14, 2012, www.theage.com.au/it- pro/cloud/cloud- and-mobiles- ﬁghting-
corruption- in-developing- nations-20120514–1ylsf.html?page=1.
 41 mHealth Info, Malaria Surveillance & Mapping, 2011, www.mhealthinfo.org/
project/malaria- surveillance-mapping. 
 42 Nicole Lewis, EHR Implementation Still Costs Too Much, Information Week, July 
6, 2012, www.informationweek.com/healthcare/electronic- health-records/ehr-
 implementation-still- costs-too- much/d/d- id/1105211. 
 43 Erin McCann, Setback for Sutter After $1B EHR Crashes, Healthcare IT News, August 
28, 2013, www.healthcareitnews.com/news/setback- sutter-after- 1b-ehr- system%20
crashes. 
 44 Lewis, EHR Implementation Still Costs Too Much. 
 45 McCann, Setback for Sutter After $1B EHR Crashes. 
 46 Ericsson Press Release, Ericsson Launches 3G and Connect to Learn in the Millennium 
Village in Ethiopia, February 14, 2013, www.ericsson.com/news/1678153.
 47 Connect a School, Ericsson Launches 3G and Connect to Learn in the Millennium 
Village in Ethiopia, March 13, 2013, http://connectaschool.org/fr/node/4448. 
 48 Chandu Gopalakrishnan, How Cloud Technology Can Help You Spot Fake Drugs. 
Times of India, September 29, 2011, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/
personal- tech/computing/How- cloud-technology- can-help- you-spot- fake-drugs/
articleshow 10168266.cms. 
 49 Andrew Bowman, Scratching Out Africa’s Counterfeit Medicines, Financial Times, 
August 28, 2012, http://blogs.ft.com/beyond- brics/2012/08/28/scratching- out-
africas- counterfeit-medicines/.
 50 Gaurvika ML Nayyar et al., Poor- Quality Antimalarial Drugs in Southeast Asia and 
Sub- Saharan Africa, The Lancet (June 2012) 12(6), 488–496, www.thelancet.com/
journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(12)70064-6/fulltext. 
 51 Jeannine Lemaire, Scaling Up Mobile Health: Developing mHealth Partnerships For 
Scale, Second Report in a Series Of Special Reports On Scaling Up Mobile Health, 
Commissioned by Advanced Development For Africa, 2013. 
 52 F. Caselli, Accounting for Cross- Country Income Differences, in P. Aghion and 
S. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, 1A (Amsterdam: Elsevier–North 
Holland, 2005). 
 53 ILRI News, Cows in the Cloud.
 54 iCow, www.icow.co.ke/.
 55 Dennis Mbuvi, Kenyan Dairy Farmers to Beneﬁt from Safaricom’s Partnership with 
iCow, CIO East Africa, June 26, 2013, www.cio.co.ke/news/main- stories/kenyan-
 dairy-farmers- to-beneﬁt- from-safaricom%27s-partnership- with-icow; Nir Kshetri, 
Cloud Computing in Sub- Saharan Africa, IEEE IT Professional 15(6), (2013), 
64–67. 
 56 Nancy Gohring, Android Phones Help Poor Farmers in Uganda, PCWorld, July 20, 
2011, www.pcworld.com/article/236194/article.html. 
 57 Hall, Cloud and Mobiles Fighting Corruption in Developing Nations.

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  55
 58 Jocelyne Sambira, Simple Invention Brokers Peace Between Humans and Wildlife, 
Africa Renewal, August 2013, www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/august- 2013/
africa- wired. 
 59 Geoffrey Kamadi, New Technology Helps Small Farmers Attract “Big” Business, 
Africa Renewal, November 2013, http://allafrica.com/stories/201311190937.html. 
 60 Barbara Dinham, Growing Vegetables in Developing Countries for Local Urban 
Populations and Export Markets: Problems Confronting Small- Scale Producers, Pest 
Management Science, April 7, 2003. 
 61 See Babban Gonat, www.babbangona.com/; and Doreo Partners, An Impact 
Investment Firm in Nigeria, Signed Up to Farmforce in 2013 on Behalf of One of 
its Investee Companies, Babban Gona, Farmforce, www.farmforce.com/case- studies/
doreo.
 62 Syngenta Foundation For Sustainable Agriculture, Doreo Partners: Creating 
Companies, Creating Wealth, Creating Jobs, Case Study, 2015.
 63 Kamadi, New Technology Helps Small Farmers Attract “Big” Business.
 64 Kyla Yeoman, Mobile Phones Unleash Farmers in Uganda, Christian Science 
Monitor, May 9, 2013, www.csmonitor.com/World/Making- a-difference/Change-
 Agent/2013/0509/Mobile- phones-unleash- farmers-in- Uganda. 
 65 Ibid.
 66 Ibid.
 67 G- AnalytiX, Credit Information Sharing; M.J. Miranda and D.V. Vedenov, 
Innovations in Agricultural and Natural Disaster Insurance, Amer ican Journal of 
Agricultural Economics (2001) 83, 650–655. 
 68 B.J. Barnett and O. Mahul, Weather Index Insurance for Agriculture and Rural 
Areas in Lower- Income Countries, Amer ican Journal of Agricultural Economics (2007) 
89, 1241–1247. 
 69 M.J. Miranda and C. Gonzalez- Vega, Systemic Risk, Index Insurance, and Optimal 
Management of Agricultural Loan Portfolios in Developing Countries, Amer ican 
Journal of Agricultural Economics (2011) 93(2), 399–406.
 70 J.R. Skees and B.J. Barnett, Enhancing Microﬁnance Using Index- Based Risk-
 Transfer Products, Agricultural Finance Review (2006) 66, 235–250. 
 71 Miranda and Gonzalez- Vega, Systemic Risk, Index Insurance, and Optimal 
Management.
 72 Ibid.
 73 Ibid.
 74 Jonathan Kalan, Tech Fix for Africa’s Big Farming Challenge, BBC, April 8, 2013, 
www.bbc.com/future/story/20130408-tech- taps-africas- farm-potential. 
 75 Pavithra Rao, Livestock Tracking in Africa Goes High Tech, Africa Renewal: 
Africa 
Wired, 
2014, 
www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/special- edition-
agriculture- 2014/africa- wired.
 76 Suzannah Schneider, Five Ways Cell Phones are Changing Agriculture in Africa, 
Food Tank, January 2015, https://foodtank.com/news/2015/01/ﬁve- ways-cell-
 phones-are- changing-agriculture- in-africa/. 
 77 Kalan, Tech Fix for Africa’s Big Farming Challenge.
 78 See Agriculture and Climate Risk Enterprise Ltd. (ACRE), http://acreafrica.com/
services/.
 79 Mobile Development Intelligence, Mobile for Development Intelligence, 2013, 
https://mobiledevelopmentintelligence.com/products/1255-connect- to-learn. 
 80 BiztechAfrica, Cloud Computing Delivers Schooling in Africa, BiztechAfrica, March 
19, 
2012, 
www.biztechafrica.com/article/cloud- computing-delivers- schooling-
africa/2319/#.UwIKCM691mc.
 81 Connect to Learn, Investments in Girls, Connect to Learn Highlighted by Global 
Leaders at WEF 2014, Connect to Learn, January 27, 2014, http://connecttolearn.

56  Big Data and Cloud
org/media/CTL- in-the- news/2014-01-investments- in-girls- highlighted-by- global-
leaders- f. 
 82 Quentin Hardy, Active in Cloud, Amazon Reshapes Computing, New York Times, 
August 27, 2012, www.nytimes.com/2012/08/28/technology/active- in-cloud-
 amazon-reshapes- computing.html?_r=0. 
 83 Ruz, Cloud Computing Key to Improving Literacy in Africa.
 84 Compared to a basic mobile phone, which can only be used for voice calling and text 
messaging, a feature phone has additional functions but not as many as in a smart phone. 
 85 Imran Mirza, Frontline SMS and biNu, GHDonline, August 18, 2013, www.
ghdonline.org/innovation/discussion/frontline- sms-and- binu/. 
 86 See binu.com 2013. Help. http://m.bi.nu/help.php; and Ruz, Cloud Computing 
Key to Improving Literacy in Africa.
 87 See MTN Business, Nigeria, http://mtnbusiness.com.ng/sme_page. 
 88 Lawrence Quartey, MTN Introduces Mobile Cloud Services in Ghana. The Africa 
Report, April 10, 2013, www.theafricareport.com/West- Africa/mtn- introduces-
mobile- cloud-services- in-ghana.html. 
 89 See Musoni, Our Story, http://musonisystem.com/about/.
 90 van der Beek, Five Factors that Differentiate Africa’s Fintech.
 91 Y. Bakos, The Emerging Role of Electronic Marketplaces on the Internet, 
Communications of the ACM (1998) 41(8), 35–42. 
 92 H. de Soto, The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails 
Everywhere Else (New York: Basic Books, 2000); Khanna, Business Groups and Social 
Welfare in Emerging Markets; G. Kistruck and P. Beamish, The Interplay of Form, 
Structure, and Embeddedness in Social Intrapreneurship, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice (2010) 34, 735–761.
 93 T. London, R. Anupindi, and S. Sheth, Creating Mutual Value: Lessons Learned 
from Ventures Serving Base of the Pyramid Producers. Journal of Business Research 
(2010) 63, 582–594. 
 94 A6 Labs 6 Innovative Startups that Will Transform Africa’s Agricultural Sector, 2013, 
www.after6creatives.com/blog/6-innovative- startups-that- will-transform- africas-
agricultural- sector/. 
 95 Berger et al., The Ability of Banks to Lend to Informationally Opaque Small 
Businesses; Kshetri, Global Entrepreneurship.
 96 Schuster and Perez- Brito, Cutting Costs, Boosting Quality and Collecting Data Real-
 Time, 166.
 97 Walton, Mobile Healthcare is Here, More Changes to Come.
 98 Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Sub- Saharan Africa.
 99 Yeoman, Mobile Phones Unleash Farmers in Uganda.
100 Lewis, EHR Implementation Still Costs Too Much. 
101 Brian Roemmele, This Orange Box You’ve Never Seen Before is Changing 
Payments. Quora, July 29, 2013, http://acceptingpayments.quora.com/This- Orange-
Box- You%E2%80%99ve-Never- Seen-Before- Is-Changing- Payments.
102 Kate Douglas, How Nomanini wants to Replace Airtime Scratch Cards, How We 
Made It in Africa, August 5, 2013, www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/how- nomanini-
wants- to-replace- airtime-scratch- cards/28794/. 
103 Economist, Airtime is Money. The Economist, January 19, 2013, www.economist.
com/news/finance- and-economics/21569744-use- pre-paid- mobile-phone-
 minutes-currency- airtime-money. 
104 Nomanini, 
November 
19, 
2013, 
http://nomanini.com/news/2013/11/19/
nomanini- expands-operations- east-africa.
105 UNCTAD, Information Economy Report 2013: The Cloud Economy and 
Developing Countries, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(Geneva: United Nations, 2013). 

Mobility, Big Data and Cloud  57
106 I.S. da Silva, Power Failures, Low Bandwidth? Try Cloud Computing, Biz 
Community, October 28, 2011, www.bizcommunity.com/Article/196/16/66342.
html.
107 ITU 2012. Cloud Computing in Africa: Situation and Perspectives. Geneva: 
International Telecommunications Union. 
108 Rich Miller, How Many Data Centers? Emerson Says 500,000, Data Center Knowledge, 
December 14, 2011, www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2011/12/14/how-
 many-data- centers-emerson- says-500000/.
109 Africa Bandwidth Maps, Africa’s International Bandwidth Approaches 1 Tbps Mark, 
Africa Bandwidth Maps, April 19, 2012, www.africabandwidthmaps.com/?p=2787.
110 Yeoman, Mobile Phones Unleash Farmers in Uganda.

3
PRIVACY AND SECURITY ISSUES 
ASSOCIATED WITH BD AND THE 
CLOUD 
3.1 Introduction
Privacy and security issues associated with BD and the cloud have been a top 
concern for ﬁrms in developing as well as developed countries. According to a 
study conducted by EMC in 2014, data loss and associated business downtime 
cost the global economy over US$1.7 trillion annually.1 China alone is estim-
ated to have more than 1.5 million hackers, who have created an underground 
industry of more than US$15 billion by exploiting security ﬂaws in BD, the 
cloud, and the IoT.2 Likewise, a study conducted by Compﬁx Data indicated 
that over 45 terabytes of data is lost every year in Kenya alone. The study also 
found that a company that experiences an outage of ten days or more due to 
data loss cannot fully recover and 50 percent of such companies go bankrupt.3
 
Likewise, GCC economies’ modernization of their natural gas and petro-
chemical industries involves signiﬁcant investment in BD and the cloud, making 
CS a key security concern. The attacks on Aramco, which were attributed to a 
virus called Shamoon, wiped out the hard drives of 30,000 computers, 85 
percent of the oil giant’s devices, shutting the company’s business down for two 
weeks, which cost the company over US$15 million.4 Several months later, the 
Shamoon malware attacked again in an attempt to disrupt international supply 
ﬂows.5 This problem extends past Saudi Arabia: in the same month, Qatar’s 
liquid natural gas company RasGas experienced cyber- attacks associated with 
the same virus, shutting down their website and computer servers.6
 
According to the 2016 Vormetric Data Threat Report (DTR) released by 
Vormetric, a CS company, 87 percent of Mexican and 84 percent of Brazilian 
IT decision makers thought that their organizations were vulnerable to cyber- 
attacks.7 The survey also found that 65 percent of organizations in Mexico and 

Privacy and Security  59
62 percent in Brazil had experienced a CS breach in the past. Such concerns 
have acted as a primary barrier to the adoption of BD and the cloud. Due to 
concerns related to data security and overall beneﬁts, businesses are cautious in 
spending in BD and cloud services.8 For instance, according to a survey released 
by Microsoft in 2014, 32 percent of South African businesses and 33 percent of 
Egyptian businesses expressed concerns about cloud security. The proportion 
for the MEA (Middle East and Africa) was 26 percent.9
 
BD and cloud security issues are related to a number of important organiza-
tional outcomes. For instance, cloud services in some countries are experiencing 
a negative country- of-origin effect due to security issues. For instance, accord-
ing to the 15th annual Business Climate Survey of the Amer ican Chamber of 
Commerce in China conducted with companies operating in China (most of 
which were from the USA) (“AmCham China”), which was released in March 
2013, only 10 percent considered using China- based cloud computing. The 
respondents expressed concerns about data security. Twenty- six percent of the 
respondents stated that their proprietary data or trade secrets related to China 
operations had been stolen.10
 
A top concern for consumers has been privacy and security practices of com-
panies handling their data. For instance, online credit services in China that use 
BD analytics in extending loans are being accused of abusing personal data to 
collect debts. Alibaba’s Ant Check Later, which allows users to delay payments 
and pay in installments, allegedly misused personal data. An online user reported 
that he was contacted by Ant Check Later for information about his friend, 
who owes money to the payment service. Users of JD.com (Jingdong Mall) 
reported similar problems. JD.com ﬁnancial unit operates JD Baitiao, which is 
similar to Ant Check Later. In a question posted on the online legal advice site 
110.com, a JD.com user asked if it was legal for JD.com to give a third- party 
service his personal information for the purpose of debt collection. Ant Finan-
cial Services reportedly said that the practice of contacting a borrower’s friends 
or relatives to help with collecting debts is common in the ﬁnancial sector. 
TMTpost cited a China Youth Daily poll, which showed that 75.9 percent of 
respondents believed there was abuse of BD.11
 
Finally, it is important to compare privacy and security issues associated with 
BD and the cloud in developing and industrialized countries. In the industrial-
ized world, cloud and BD users are becoming educated and are bringing more 
holistic perspectives to incorporate all the relevant issues that are important to 
them such as cost saving, productivity gain, security and privacy issues and, 
control over data. They have also changed their behavior in response to chang-
ing perceptions of the beneﬁts and risks and their potential and realized power. 
Over time, this may give venders a better assessment of clients’ needs and 
power, which may lead to an effective tailoring of services and improvements in 
privacy and security issues.12 Such conditions are less likely to be found in 
developing countries due primarily to the newness of the cloud and BD.

60  Big Data and Cloud
3.2 Characteristics of Big Data and the Cloud in Relation to 
Security and Privacy
3.2.1 Security and Privacy Issues Associated with the Cloud
A signiﬁcant gap remains between CSPs’ claims and users’ views of the cloud’s 
security, privacy, and transparency. The cloud industry’s response has been: 
“Clouds are more secure than whatever you’re using now.”13 But many users 
do not agree. Issues such as security, privacy, and availability are among the 
topmost concerns in organizations’ cloud adoption decisions rather than the 
total cost of ownership.14 Due primarily to concerns related to security, privacy, 
and conﬁdentiality, critics have argued that its perceived costs may outweigh 
the beneﬁts.15 Organizations worry about hidden costs associated with security 
breaches or lawsuits tied to data breach. Many businesses and consumers are 
cautious in using the clouds to store high- value or sensitive data and 
information.
3.2.2 Security and Privacy Issues Associated with Big Data
As presented in Table 3.1, the various characteristics or dimensions of BD iden-
tiﬁed by Gartner and SAS are tightly linked to privacy and security issues. For 
instance, in order to create highly customized offerings, a company may need to 
mine a huge amount (volume) of structured and unstructured (variety) data 
from multiple sources (complexity). In some cases, this process may also involve 
the use of high velocity data. BD may challenge the Fair Information Practices 
(FIPs), which are an established set of principles for addressing privacy concerns 
on which modern privacy laws are based (Table 3.1).16
 
Finally, if consumer data is not handled appropriately by organizations, in 
addition to privacy and CS issues, there are also possibilities of civil rights viola-
tion such as discrimination. For this reason, regulators such as the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) are showing concerns that BD may “perpetuate and even 
amplify” societal biases by screening out certain groups, often disadvantaged 
ones, from opportunities for employment, credit, or other forms of 
advancement.17
3.2.2.1 Volume
Developing world- based organizations are experiencing a huge amount of data 
ﬂows from various sources. For instance, Etisalat’s operating brand, Mobily, in 
Saudi Arabia noted that 1.3 petabytes of data ﬂows daily through the company’s 
network.18 Organizations such as Etisalat are often required to store all data in 
one location in order to facilitate analysis. The higher volume and concentra-
tion of data makes a more appealing target for hackers. Moreover, a higher data 

TABLE 3.1 Big Data Characteristics in Relation to Security and Privacy
Characteristic
Explanation
Effect on Privacy and Security
Volume
Huge amount of data is created from 
a wide range of sources such as 
transactions, unstructured streaming 
from text, images, audio, voice, 
VoIP, video, TV and other media, 
sensor and machine-to-machine apps.
s   (IGH DATA VOLUME WOULD LIKELY ATTRACT A GREAT DEAL OF ATTENTION FROM CYBERCRIMINALS
s   !MPLIlED TECHNICAL IMPACT
s   6IOLATION OF TRANSPARENCY PRINCIPLE OF &)0S
s   &IRMS MAY NEED TO OUTSOURCE TO #30S WHICH MAY GIVE RISE TO PRIVACY AND SECURITY ISSUES
Velocity 
(Fast Data)
Some data is time-sensitive for 
which speed is more important than 
volume. Data needs to be stored, 
processed and analyzed quickly.
s   )NCREASING CONSUMER CONCERNS OVER PRIVACY IN THE CONTEXT OF BEHAVIORAL ADVERTISING BASED ON real-time proﬁling and tracking technologies such as cookies.
s   6IOLATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL PARTICIPATION PRINCIPLE OF &)0S
s   )NCREASE IN THE SUPPLY AND DEMAND OF LOCATIONBASED REALTIME PERSONAL INFORMATION WHICH has negative spillover effects (e.g., stalking people in real-time).
s   0HYSICAL SECURITY RISKS
Variety
Data comes in multiple formats such 
as structured, numeric data in 
traditional database and unstructured 
text documents, email, video, audio, 
ﬁnancial transactions.
s   5NSTRUCTURED DATA IS MORE LIKELY TO CONCEAL 0))
s   ! LARGE VARIETY OF INFORMATION WOULD MAKE IT MORE DIFlCULT TO DETECT SECURITY BREACHES REACT appropriately and respond to attacks (freepatentsonline.com, 2003).
s   -OST ORGANIZATIONS LACK MECHANISMS TO ENSURE THAT EMPLOYEES AND THIRDPARTIES HAVE appropriate access to unstructured data and they are in compliance with data protection 
regulations.
Variability
Data ﬂows can vary greatly with 
periodic peaks and troughs. These 
are related to social media trends, 
daily, seasonal and event-triggered 
peak data loads and other factors.
s   /RGANIZATIONS MAY LACK CAPABILITIES TO SECURELY STORE HUGE AMOUNTS OF DATA AND MANAGE THE collected data during peak data trafﬁc.
s   !TTRACTIVENESS AS A CRIME TARGET INCREASES DURING PEAK DATA TRAFlC
s   0EAK DATA TRAFlC MAY CAUSE HIGHER NEEDS TO OUTSOURCE TO #30S WHICH GIVE RISE TO IMPORTANT privacy and security issues.
Complexity
Data comes from multiple sources 
which require linking, matching, 
cleansing, and transforming across 
systems.
s   2ESULTING DATA IS OFTEN MORE PERSONAL THAN THE SET OF DATA THE PERSON WOULD CONSENT TO GIVE
s   $ATA COLLECTED FROM ILLICIT SOURCES IS MORE LIKELY TO HAVE INFORMATION ON TECHNOLOGICALLY LESS savvy consumers, who are likely to suffer a more negative welfare effect than technologically 
more savvy consumers.
Source: Adapted from N. Kshetri, Big Data’s Impact on Privacy, Security and Consumer Welfare, Telecommunications Policy (2014) 38, 1134–1145.

62  Big Data and Cloud
volume increases the probability that the data ﬁles and documents may contain 
inherently valuable and sensitive information. Information stored for the 
purpose of BD analytics is thus a potential goldmine for cybercriminals. A huge 
amount of data means that security breaches and privacy violations are likely to 
lead to more severe consequences and losses via reputational damage, legal liab-
ility, ethical harms, and other issues, which is also referred to as an ampliﬁed 
technical impact.19
 
The availability of a huge amount of data also increases the possibility that 
personal data can be put to new uses to create value. The US FTC Commis-
sioner pointed out the possibility that ﬁrms, “without our knowledge or 
consent, can amass large amounts of private information about people to use for 
purposes we don’t expect or understand.”20 Such uses often violate the transpar-
ency principle of FIPs.21
 
A huge data volume is also related to the demand or even the necessity of 
outsourcing. An issue of more pressing concern is determining relevance within 
large data volumes and how to use analytics to create value from relevant data. 
Firms may thus rely on CSPs for analytic solutions.
3.2.2.2 Velocity
The quickly degrading quality of real- time data is noteworthy.22 In particular, 
clickstream data (clickpaths), which constitute the route chosen by visitors when 
they click/navigate through a site, is typically collected by online advertisers, 
retailers, and ISPs. The fact that such data can be collected, stored, and reused 
indeﬁnitely poses signiﬁcant privacy risks.23 Some tracking tools can manipulate 
clickstreams to build a detailed database of personal proﬁles in order to target 
Internet advertising.24
 
An important use of BD is real- time consumer proﬁle- driven campaigns such 
as serving customized ads. For instance, location- tracking technologies allow 
marketers to serve SMS and other forms of ads based on real- time location. This 
process often involves passive data collection without any overt consumer inter-
action. The lack of individual consent for the collection, use, and dissemination 
of such information means that such a practice violates the individual participa-
tion principle of FIPs.25 
 
BD initiatives have led to an increase in both the supply and demand of 
location- based real- time personal information. Data created and made available 
for use in the implementation of BD initiatives also have negative spillover 
effects. Particularly, the availability of location information to third parties may 
have some dangerous aspects. One example is the use of location data for stalk-
ing people in real-time. For instance, the iOS app Girls Around Me,26 which was 
developed by the Russian company I- Free, leveraged data from Foursquare to 
scan and detect women checking into a user’s neighborhood. The user could 
identify a woman he liked to talk, connect with her through Facebook, see her 

Privacy and Security  63
full name, proﬁle photos, and also send her a message. The woman being 
tracked however would have no idea that someone was “snooping” on her.27 
As of March 2012, the app had been downloaded over 70,000 times.28
 
There is also a physical risk of (near) real- time data. For instance, a China 
Daily article commented that in China, illegal companies buy databases from 
malicious actors and provide services to their clients, which include private 
investigation, illegal debt collection, asset investigation, and even kidnapping.29
3.2.2.3 Variety
By combining structured and unstructured data from multiple sources, ﬁrms can 
uncover hidden connections between seemingly unrelated pieces of data. In 
addition to the amount, a high variety of information in BD makes it more dif-
ﬁcult to detect security breaches, react appropriately, and respond to attacks.30
 
One estimate suggested that only about 10 percent of available data is in a 
structured form (e.g., transactional data on customers, time- series data from sta-
tistical agencies on various macro- economic and ﬁnancial indicators) which can 
be presented in rows and columns.31 Especially because of the relative newness, 
most organizations lack the capability to manage unstructured data, which argu-
ably contains more sensitive information. Processes and technology solutions for 
securing unstructured data are still in the nascent phase and governance issues 
are not addressed.32 For instance, organizations often lack mechanisms to ensure 
that permanent and temporary employees and third parties have appropriate 
access to unstructured data and that they are in compliance with data protection 
regulations.33 According to a survey released in 2013 by Ernst & Young Global 
Limited, which was conducted among Indian ﬁrms, 43 percent of the respond-
ents were concerned about data privacy and the security risks associated with 
handling of unstructured data as among the major challenges.34
3.2.2.4 Variability
The variability characteristic is related to the time- variant nature of security and 
privacy risks. The volume of data collected and stored, which need protection, 
will grow during the peak data collection and ﬂow periods. It is during such 
periods that organizations may lack the internal capacity and tools to manage 
and protect information. A related point is that the attractiveness as a crime 
target is high during such periods.
 
The variability characteristic of BD may also necessitate the outsourcing of 
hardware, software, and business- critical applications to CSPs. Applications such 
as ERP and accounting systems are required to be conﬁgured for peak loads 
during daily and seasonal business periods or when quarterly and annual ﬁnan-
cial statements are prepared.

64  Big Data and Cloud
3.2.2.5 Complexity
BD often constitutes aggregated data from various sources that are not neces-
sarily identiﬁable. There is thus no process to request the consent of a person 
for the resulting data, which is often more personal than the set of data the 
person would consent to give.35 A related privacy risk involves re- identiﬁcation. 
It is possible to use a data aggregation process to convert semi- anonymous or 
certain personally non- identiﬁable information into non- anonymous or person-
ally identiﬁable information.36 Health- related data is of special concern. Based 
on a consumer’s search terms for disease symptoms, online purchases of medical 
supplies, and RFID tagging of drug packages can provide marketers with 
information about the consumer’s health.37 Access to such information would 
enable an insurance underwriter to predict certain disease and disorder probabil-
ities, which would not be possible using information voluntarily disclosed by 
consumers.
 
Many of the innovations involving BD use multiple data sources and involve 
transferring data to third parties.38 Many organizations believe that making data 
anonymous before sharing with third parties would make it impossible to 
identify. This is often a convenient but possibly false assumption. Researchers 
have presented a variety of methods and techniques that can be used to de- 
identify personal data and reassociate with speciﬁc consumers.39 BD processes 
can generate predictive models that have a high probability of revealing PII40 
and thus make anonymization impossible. Failure to protect PII and unintended 
or inappropriate disclosure violate the security provision of FIPs.41 In some 
cases, the identiﬁed person may suffer physical, psychological, or 
economic harm.
 
Some data may come from illicit sources. One example is the criminal outﬁt, 
Superzonda, which allegedly sent 30–40 million spam emails a day in the early 
2000s.42 Superzonda’s most proﬁtable venture was to provide information on 
consumers interested in a product (e.g., mortgage) to legitimate businesses for 
lead generation. Each package of data (consisting of name, phone number, 
address, amount of loan desired and current home value) was reportedly sold to 
mortgage companies for US$20.43 Less sophisticated and vulnerable consumers 
are more likely to be fooled by the tricks of illicit actors such as Superzonda.
3.3 The Security and Privacy Situation in Developing Countries 
in the Context of BD and the Cloud
Most of the current discussion on BD and the cloud in relation to security and 
privacy has been focused on industrialized countries. One commentator noted 
that about 90 percent of the discussion at the 2013 Internet Governance Forum 
(IGF ) held in Bali, Indonesia referred to BD as a surveillance tool. At the same 
time, the debate focusing on developing countries treated BD as a means to 

Privacy and Security  65
observe people to ﬁght poverty. The argument provided by IGF participants 
was that data can help provide access to clean drinking water, health care, and 
other necessities. Some have challenged this view and noted that poor people 
have no less reason than rich people to be worried about surveillance.44
 
Privacy violation is most likely to occur in countries with poor protection of 
civil liberties. The worst case is that authoritarian governments may see and use 
detailed, real- time data on citizens. However, due to the secrecy in the way 
information is handled, the affected individuals may not have a way to know 
that their information is inappropriately accessed and used. Likewise, some busi-
nesses may obtain, use, and sell personal data for their own gain. There may not 
be any restrictions on such activities and people whose information is used or 
sold may lack control over how their personal data is handled.45
 
CS and privacy issues in developing countries need to be seen in the back-
drop of rapid diffusion of modern technologies such as the IoT. Banks and 
retailers are using customers’ real- time geo- location technologies for authentica-
tion and other purposes. New types of biometric data such as ﬁngerprints, iris 
scans, voice- recognition software, and facial recognition are also being used for 
authentication. Location and ﬁnancial data and other information can be 
attacked by cybercriminals. Such new developments require new security meas-
ures and user authentication to make sure that customers are happy and trans-
mitted data is secure. It is important for users to understand that they can fully 
trust the connected devices that are tied to bank accounts.46
 
Most developing world- based organizations which collect consumer data 
perform extremely poorly in protecting privacy. Consider the 2015 Corporate 
Accountability Index of the Washington DC- based non- proﬁt research initi-
ative, Ranking Digital Rights.47 With regard to user privacy, Tencent ranked 
thirteen out of the sixteen tech companies surveyed. The survey did not include 
Baidu and Alibaba. The companies included in the survey were evaluated using 
a number of criteria such as the existence of privacy policies, how user informa-
tion is collected and shared, and security practices.
 
The companies surveyed were selected based on privacy policies, collection 
and sharing of user information, security standards, and other criteria. Google 
ranked #1 with a score of 57 percent. Tencent, which was the only Chinese 
company analyzed, received 17 percent and ranked #13. The bottom three 
companies were the United Arab Emirate’s Etisalat, South Africa’s MTN, and 
Russia’s Mail.Ru, which received 14 percent, 14 percent, and 11 percent 
respectively.48
 
Consider Etisalat, which as of 2014 operated across seventeen countries in 
the Middle East, Africa, and Asia.49 Etisalat has recently launched a number of 
projects to utilize BD and the cloud. In January 2016, Etisalat shut down 
Egypt’s access to Free Basics, which is Facebook’s zero- rated Internet services 
offering, which is an encrypted service. It was believed that the restriction was 
requested by the Egyptian government in order to silence dissents just before 

66  Big Data and Cloud
the anniversary of the 2011 uprising and the Mubarak regime’s fall on 
January 25. Etisalat had also shut down the Internet in Egypt in 2011, along 
with other telecommunications companies Orange and Vodafone. However, 
unlike Orange and Vodafone, Etisalat did not join the Telecommunications 
Industry Dialogue on free expression and privacy and it did not respond to 
Human Rights First when questioned about the incident. In Morocco, Etis-
alat had shut down Viber in the past. It was reported that Etisalat received 
zero credit in the Index on network security. The company does not disclose 
anything about its standards for encryption and security in its products and 
services.50
 
In these countries public policy agencies such as central banks are indifferent 
towards privacy protection. For instance, in 2013, the Bank of Russia ﬁned the 
LSE- listed Russian Internet company, Mail.ru Group, $15,000 for refusing to 
provide data on users’ personal messages. The Bank had requested the Mail.ru 
Group to provide information regarding Mail.ru users’ correspondence. Mail.ru 
had refused to provide the requested information arguing that the Russian 
Constitution protects private personal correspondence.51
3.4 Measures Taken at Various Levels to Strengthen Security 
and Privacy in Developing Countries
International organizations, governments, NGOs, and private sector actors in 
developing countries are directing more efforts towards strengthening data 
privacy and CS issues. A 2016 survey by the UN Conference on Trade and 
Development found that more than half of all developing countries still 
lacked national legislation to protect data and privacy online. In addition, 
many countries have legislation that needs to be updated and/or better 
enforced.52
3.4.1 International Institutions 
There is no globally accepted instrument to address the concerns related to data 
protection and privacy. The current system for data protection is highly frag-
mented, with diverging global, regional, and national regulatory approaches.53 
At the same time, various measures are being taken at the international level to 
address this situation. For instance, the African Union Convention on Cyber 
Security and Personal Data Protection requires member states to establish a legal 
framework for the “protection of physical data and national Data Protection 
Authorities” (DPAs).54 Other regional initiatives include agreements by the 
European Union, the Asia- Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation and the Common-
wealth. At the global level, the Council of Europe Data Protection Convention 
of 1981 (“Convention 108”) is the most prominent binding international agree-
ment on data protection.55

Privacy and Security  67
3.4.2 National Governments
As a response to domestic and international pressures to build CS measures, in 
July 2013, the Government of India released the National Cyber Security Policy 
(NCSP). The NCSP outlines the basic policies and strategies “to build a secure 
and resilient cyberspace for citizens, businesses and government.”56 It set forth 
fourteen objectives that included enhancing the protection of critical infrastruc-
ture and developing 500,000 skilled CS professionals in the next ﬁve years.57 
The development of public–private partnership (PPP) efforts towards enhancing 
the CS is a key component of the NCSP. Note that PPPs are especially well- 
suited and justiﬁed for areas that require diverse types of expertise and know-
ledge in order to address complex problems.58 This condition ﬁts squarely 
with CS.59
 
Some economies are implementing policy measures that require companies 
to establish local data centers. For instance, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) 
prevents storing certain categories of ﬁnancial information and data outside the 
country.60 South Africa’s new rules prohibit sending personal information to 
countries that do not provide the same level of protection to such information 
as the country’s strict privacy laws.61
 
It is important to discuss the importance of CS vis- à-vis privacy. It is 
reported that, in some developing economies, while there has been an increas-
ing awareness, understanding, and knowledge about CS and they have exhib-
ited a higher degree of preparedness to address CS problems, there is the lack of 
regulatory and enforcement capacity for privacy protection. For instance, in 
Rwanda, for government organizations dealing with ICTs such as Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB) and Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Authority 
(RURA), Rwanda National Police (RNP) were reported to have departments 
that deal with cybersecurity and cybercrime. Nonetheless, data protection has 
not received serious consideration among these agencies. There has also been 
the lack of laws to safeguard data privacy. These agencies do not have speciﬁc 
institutions that are specially designated to look at data privacy issues.62
 
On the other hand, some countries have focused their attention more on 
privacy compared to CS. For instance, Saudi Arabia has some laws related to 
privacy and data collection, but it lacks mechanisms to ensure data security or 
notiﬁcation of data breaches.63
3.4.3 Professional and Trade Associations
As important sources that shape institutional structures in an economy, profes-
sional and trade associations play signiﬁcant roles in bringing and legitimating 
institutional changes in the areas of security and privacy in BD and the cloud 
environments.64 In order to understand professional and trade associations’ roles 
in shaping a nascent industry in a developing economy (e.g., BD and the cloud), 

68  Big Data and Cloud
it is important to examine such associations in relation to other institutional ele-
ments—most notably, the state. Note that the state is arguably the most 
important institutional actor.65 With regard to the state’s role in inﬂuencing 
industry behavior in emerging economies, however, it is important to note that 
the rule of law is “often weakly developed” or sometimes “ignored with impu-
nity” in such economies.66 Second, in nascent and formative sectors such as BD 
and the cloud, there is no developed network of regulatory agencies comparable 
to established industrial sectors.67 In such settings, professional and trade associ-
ations may emerge to play unique and important roles in shaping the industry.
 
India’s Data Security Council of India (DSCI), an industry body, entered 
into a partnership with Pearson VUE to deliver a data privacy credentialing 
program: DSCI Certiﬁed Privacy Professional (DCPP). The certiﬁcation is 
expected to address the need for privacy professionals in the country. DCPP 
equips individuals with the necessary privacy- related skill sets. Individuals with 
the DCPP certiﬁcation will be aware about privacy- related concepts and princi-
ples and the data privacy landscape in India and other economies. They will also 
learn about contemporary global developments in privacy- related matters, data 
protection regulations, and trans- border data ﬂows.68
 
In India, a report by the Internet & Mobile Association of India (IAMAI), a 
not- for-proﬁt industry body, argued against a mandatory requirement to set up 
data centers in India. It maintained that data location requirement is likely to 
harm Indian companies. The report cited many examples of Indian companies 
that rely on international data centers. For instance, Zoho’s data centers are in 
California and New Jersey. Myntra and Redbus host servers with CSPs such as 
AWS. Likewise, in the beginning Flipkart relied on data centers in Canada.69
 
In some countries, Internet companies are directing more efforts towards 
strengthening CS. In China, an e- commerce union has been formed, whose 
members comprise of major online ﬁrms. The union analyses vendor data such 
as those related to transactions and other sales activity in order to identify rogue 
online vendors.70
3.4.4 Providers of BD and the Cloud
Developing world- based providers of BD and the cloud are taking measures to 
strengthen security. For instance, as of 2014, China’s Aliyun was reported to 
have a 100-plus personnel team to provide cloud security.71
3.4.5 Organizations and Consumers Using BD and 
the Cloud
CUOs are increasing their orientation towards security and privacy. According 
to a survey released in 2013 by Ernst & Young Global Limited, which was con-
ducted among Indian ﬁrms, 69 percent of respondents were planning to 

Privacy and Security  69
strengthen CS.72 Likewise, as noted earlier, China Youth Daily’s poll showed that 
over three- quarters of respondents believed there was abuse of BD.73
3.5 Concluding Comments
The examples related to the attacks on Aramco and RasGas are illustrative of a 
widespread problem not only in GCC economies but also in all other eco-
nomies, including developing economies. Organizations and consumers in 
developing countries face unique risks and challenges related to privacy and 
security in the BD and cloud environments.
 
Despite some initiatives, limited international cooperation on privacy and 
security issues exists among developing countries. For instance, while the 
African Union (AU) adopted its Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal 
Data Protection in 2014, only eight of the ﬁfty- four members of the AU had 
signed the Convention as of July 2016. By that time, no country had ratiﬁed 
the Convention.74
 
The actions of Etisalat and many other companies involved in handling per-
sonal data indicate that the lack of privacy and security is often the product of 
the thoughtless and indifferent attitudes of these companies towards these issues. 
There thus remains a notable lack of institutionalization of privacy and security 
issues among most ﬁrms handling consumer data in developing countries.
 
From the privacy and security standpoint, BD and the cloud are likely to 
affect the welfare of unsophisticated, vulnerable, and technologically unsavvy 
consumers more negatively. Such consumers may lack awareness of multiple 
information sources and are less likely to receive up- to-date and accurate 
information about multiple suppliers in a manner that facilitates effective search 
and comparisons. They are also not in a position to assess the degree of sensi-
tiveness of their online actions and are more likely to be tricked by illicit actors. 
Consumers in developing countries are more likely than those in developed 
countries to exhibit these features and proﬁles.
Notes 
 1 Dell Emc, Over $1.7 Trillion Lost Per Year from Data Loss and Downtime 
According to Global IT Study, December 2, 2014, www.emc.com/about/news/
press/2014/20141202–01.htm.
 2 Zhu Shenshen, Internet Flaws See Annual Loss of Over US$15b, Shanghai Daily, 
July 5, 2016, www.shanghaidaily.com/business/it/Internet- ﬂaws-see- annual-loss- of-
over- US15b/shdaily.shtml.
 3 IT News Africa, Kenya: Liquid Telecom Unveils Backup and Restore Service, April 
21, 2016, www.itnewsafrica.com/2016/04/kenya- liquid-telecom- unveils-backup-
 and-restore- service/.
 4 Jeffrey Carr, Why Wasn’t Saudi Aramco’s Oil Production Targeted?, September 
10, 
2012, 
http://jeffreycarr.blogspot.de/2012/09/why- wasnt-saudi- aramcos-oil-
 production.html.

70  Big Data and Cloud
 5 Alexander Cornwell, Cyber Attacks an Increasing Threat for Mideast Oil and Gas, 
Gulf News, October 16, 2014, http://gulfnews.com/business/oil- gas/cyber- attacks-
an- increasing-threat- for-mideast- oil-and- gas-1.1399982.
 6 Nir Kshetri, Cybersecurity Strategies of Gulf Cooperation Council Economies, 
Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, March 16, 2016, http://journal.georgetown.
edu/cybersecurity- strategies-of- gulf-cooperation- council-economies/.
 7 87 percent of Mexican and 84 percent of Brazilian IT Decision Makers Say their 
Organization is Vulnerable to Data Threats, PRNewswire, May 18, 2016, www.
prnewswire.com/news- releases/87-of- mexican-and- 84-of- brazilian-it- decision-
makers- say-their- organization-is- vulnerable-to- data-threats- 300270543.html.
 8 Robert D. Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China: A Review, The Information 
Technology & Innovation Foundation, July 2014.
 9 Simnikiwe Mzekandaba, Cloud Computing Becoming the Norm in SA, Says Microsoft, 
IT Web Africa, July 23, 2014, www.itwebafrica.com/home- page/channel/612-south-
 africa/233259-cloud- computing-becoming- the-norm- in-sa- says-microsoft. 
10 Joanne Sum- Ping, Survey: Foreign Companies Fear Data, IP Theft in China, Inside 
Tech Media, April 8, 2013, www.insidetechmedia.com/2013/04/08/survey- foreign-
companies- fear-data- ip-theft- in-china/. 
11 Want China Times, Online Credit Services in China Accused of Abusing Personal 
Data, September 27, 2015, www.wantchinatimes.com/news/content?id=201509270
00087&cid=1203. 
12 N. Kshetri, Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing: The Role of Institutions 
and Institutional Evolution, Telecommunications Policy (May–June, 2013) 37(4–5), 
372–386. 
13 D. Talbot, Security in the Ether, Technology Review (2010) 113(1), 36–42. 
14 J. Brodkin, 5 Problems with SaaS Security, Network World (2010) 27(18), 1–27. 
15 Steve Tillery, How Safe is the Cloud?, Baseline, October 15, 2010, www.baselinemag.
com/c/a/Security/How- Safe-Is- the-Cloud- 273226S. 
16 I.S. Rubinstein, Big Data: A Pretty Good Privacy Solution (New York: New York 
University School of Law, 2013). 
17 Christine E. Lyon and Mary Race, Big Data Can Lead to Big Legal Problems for 
Companies: Algorithms Can Perpetuate, and Even Amplify, Racial Biases by Screening 
Out Certain Groups, Market Watch, June 1, 2016, www.marketwatch.com/%28S%28
rnrsydaynixa5x55oiibxm45%29%29/story/big- data-can- lead-to- big-legal- problems-
for- companies-2016–06–01. 
18 IT News Africa, Etisalat Celebrates 150 Million Subscribers, February 25, 2014, www.
itnewsafrica.com/2014/02/etisalat- celebrates-150-million- subscribers/.
19 ISACA, Generating Value from Big Data Analytics, White Paper, January, 2014, www.
isaca.org/Knowledge- Center/Research/ResearchDeliverables/Pages/Generating-
 Value-From- Big-Data- Analytics.aspx. 
20 J. Brill, Demanding Transparency from Data Brokers, Washington Post Opinions, August 
15, 2013, www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/demanding- transparency-from- data-b
rokers/2013/08/15/00609680–0382–11e3–9259-e2aafe5a5f84_story.html. 
21 H. Teufel, II. Privacy Policy Guidance Memorandum, Memorandum Number: 2008–01, 
December 29, 2008, The Privacy Ofﬁce U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 
22 ScaleDB, High- Velocity Data – The Data Fire Hose, 2012, http://scaledb.com/high-
 velocity-data.php. 
23 Gavin Skok, Establishing a Legitimate Expectation of Privacy in Clickstream Data, 
Michigan Telecommunications & Technology Law Review (2000), http://cyber.law.harvard.
edu/privacy/PrivacyInClickstream%28Skok%29.htm.
24 CDT, CDT’s Guide to Online Privacy, Center for Democracy & Technology, 2000, 
www.cdt.org/privacy/guide/start.
25 Teufel, Privacy Policy Guidance Memorandum. 

Privacy and Security  71
26 In March 2012, Foursquare revoked API access to the app, which forced the developers 
to pull the product from Apple’s iTunes Store, see S. Austin and A. Dowell, “Girls 
Around Me” Developer Defends App After Foursquare Dismissal, Wall Street 
Journal, March 31, 2012, http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2012/03/31/girls- around-me-
 developer-defends- app-after- foursquare-dismissal/. 
27 N. Bilton, Girls Around Me: An App Takes Creepy to a New Level, New York Times, 
March 30, 2012, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/03/30/girls- around-me- ios-
app- takes-creepy- to-a- new-level/.
28 Austin and Dowell, “Girls Around Me” Developer Defends App After Foursquare 
Dismissal.
29 Z. Yan, Personal Data Crimes Set to be Deﬁned, China Daily, July 4, 2012, www.
chinadaily.com.cn/china/2012–07/04/content_15546503.htm.
30 FPO, 2003, freepatentsonline.com.
31 Frank Gens, IDC Predictions 2012: Competing for 2020. IDC Analyze the Future, 
December, 2011, http://cdn.idc.com/research/Predictions12/ Main/downloads/
IDCTOP10Predictions2012.p. 
32 Varonis Systems, Ponemon Institute Study – Survey on the Governance of Unstructured 
Data, 2008, www.varonis.com/metadata/ponemon- study/.
33 Ibid. 
34 EY, Big Data and Enterprise Mobility: Growing Relevance of Emerging Technology 
Themes: The India Perspective, 2013, www.ey.com/IN/en/Industries/Technology/
Big- data-and- enterprise-mobility- in-India. 
35 A. Pirlot, Big Data: A Tool for Development or Threat to Privacy?, Privacy 
International, January 21, 2014, www.privacyinternational.org/blog/big- data-a- tool-
for- development-or- threat-to- privacy. 
36 ISACA, Generating Value from Big Data Analytics. 
37 D. Talbot, Data Discrimination Means the Poor May Experience a Different Internet. 
Technology Review, October 9, 2013, www.technologyreview.com/news/520131/
data- discrimination-means- the-poor- may-experience- a-different- internet/. 
38 Thomas M. Lenard and Paul H. Rubin, The Big Data Revolution: Privacy 
Considerations, Technology Policy Institute, December, 2013, https://techpolicyinstitute.
org/wp- content/uploads/2013/12/the- big-data- revolution-privac- 2007594.pdf.
39 J. Brill, Big Data, Big Issues, Fordham University School of Law, March 2, 2012, 
www.ftc.gov/public- statements/2012/03/big- data-big- issues; and Brill, Demanding 
Transparency from Data Brokers. 
40 K. Crawford and J.M. Schultz, Big Data and Due Process: Toward a Framework to 
Redress Predictive Privacy Harms. New York University Public Law and Legal Theory 
Working Papers. Paper 429 (2013), http://lsr.nellco.org/nyu_plltwp/429/. 
41 Teufel, Privacy Policy Guidance Memorandum.
42 Bob Sullivan, Who Proﬁts from Spam? Surprise, August 8, 2003, www.msnbc.
msn.com/id/3078642/ns/technology_and_science- security/t/who- proﬁts-spam-
 surprise/#.TsZa31anz1U. 
43 Ibid. 
44 Linnet Taylor, Surveil the Rich, Observe the Poor: Big Data at the Internet 
Governance Forum 2013, October 25, 2013, http://linnettaylor.wordpress.
com/2013/10/25/surveil- the-rich- observe-the- poor-big- data-at- the-internet-
 governance-forum- 2013/. 
45 All Africa, Africa: Developing Countries at Risk of Missing Out on Big Data Beneﬁts, 
December 16, 2015, http://allafrica.com/stories/201601081164.html.
46 Christelle Toureille, Will the Internet of Things Impact Banking?, IT News Africa, May 19, 
2016, www.itnewsafrica.com/2016/05/will- the-internet- of-things- impact-banking/.
47 Ranking Digital Rights, Privacy, 2016, https://rankingdigitalrights.org/index2015/
categories/privacy/.

72  Big Data and Cloud
48 F. Kecheng, Say Goodbye to Privacy When Surﬁng China’s Internet: China’s Internet 
Giants have a Low Worldwide Ranking When it Comes to User, May 11, 2016, 
www.sixthtone.com/news/say- goodbye-privacy- when-surﬁng- china%E2%80%99s-
internet.
49 Duncan Macrae, How Etisalat Misr Combines Cloud And Marketing To Drive 
Business Growth, Tech Week Europe, October 20, 2014, www.techweekeurope.co.uk/
workspace/etisalat- misr-combines- cloud-marketing- drive-business- growth-153895.
50 Access Now, Etisalat Shuts Off Internet Services in Egypt and Morocco, Access 
Now, January 6, 2016, www.accessnow.org/etisalat- shuts-off- services-in- egypt-and-
 morocco/.
51 East–West Digital News, Mail.ru Group Fined for Refusing to Divulge 
Private Correspondence, East–West Digital News, October 17, 2013, www.
ewdn.com/2013/10/17/mail- ru-group- fined-for- refusing-to- divulge-private-
 correspondence/.
52 UNCTAD, Data Protection Regulations and International Data Flows: Implications for 
Trade and Development, http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/dtlstict2016d1_
en.pdf.
53 Ibid.
54 All Africa, East Africa: Why Rwanda Needs a Law On Data Protection, All Africa, 
September 7, 2015, http://allafrica.com/stories/201509071166.html.
55 For more information, see UNCTAD, Data Protection Regulations and International 
Data Flows.
56 Times of India, Government Releases National Cyber Security Policy 2013, Times of 
India, July 2, 2013, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/it- services/Government-
 releases-National- Cyber-Security- Policy-2013/articleshow/20874965.cms.
57 Ibid. 
58 J.X. Yu and Z.Y. Qu, PPPs: Inter- Actor Relationships Two Cases Of Home- Based 
Care Services in China, Public Administration Quarterly (2012) 36(2), 238–264.
59 Nir Kshetri, The Quest to Cyber Superiority: Cybersecurity Regulations, Frameworks, and 
Strategies of Major Economies (New York, Berlin, and Heidelberg: Springer- Verlag, 2016).
60 Ben Uzor, Rising Data Centre Deployments Reﬂects $1 bn Cloud Service Potential, 
BusinessDay, January 6, 2015, www.businessdayonline.com/rising- data-centre-
 deployments-reﬂects- 1bn-cloud- service-potential/.
61 M. Scott, Where Tech Giants Protect Privacy, New York Times, December 14, 2014, 
www.nytimes.com/2014/12/14/sunday- review/where- tech-giants- protect-privacy.
html.
62 All Africa, East Africa: Why Rwanda Needs a Law On Data Protection.
63 A. Talbott, Privacy Laws: How the US, EU and Others Protect IoT Data (or Don’t): 
Rules about Data Security can Vary Widely. Here’s a Look at Laws in Place in the US, 
the EU, Canada, APAC, and More, ZDNet, March 7, 2016, www.zdnet.com/article/
privacy- laws-how- the-us- eu-and- others-protect- iot-data- or-dont/. 
64 Nir Kshetri and Nikhilesh Dholakia, Professional and Trade Associations in a Nascent 
and Formative Sector of a Developing Economy: A Case Study of the NASSCOM 
Effect on the Indian Offshoring Industry, Journal of International Management (2009) 
15(2), 225–239. 
65 R.K.F. Bresser and K. Millonig, Institutional Capital: Competitive Advantage in Light 
of the New Institutionalism in Organization Theory, Schmalenbach Business Review 
(2003) 55 (3), 220–241. 
66 M. Bratton, Formal Versus Informal Institutions in Africa. Journal of Democracy (2007) 
18, 96–110. 
67 W.W. Powell, The Social Construction of an Organizational Field: The Case of 
Biotechnology. Paper presented at the Warwick–Venice Workshop on Perspectives 
on Strategic Change, University of Warwick, 1993.

Privacy and Security  73
68 Express Computer, DSCI partners with Pearson VUE to deliver new data privacy 
exam, October 5, 2015, http://computer.ﬁnancialexpress.com/news/dsci- partners-
with- pearson-vue- to-deliver- new-data- privacy-exam/13985/.
69 Nikhil Pahwa, Setting Up Data Centers in India Shouldn’t Be Mandatory – 
Amitabh Kant, CEO Niti Ayog, Medianama, May 26, 2016, www.medianama.
com/2016/05/223-data- centers-in- india-amitabh- kant/.
70 Clickz, Elisa Harca Big Data in China is a Big Deal, Clickz, February 16, 2015, www.
clickz.com/clickz/column/2395253/big- data-in- china-is- a-big- deal.
71 Want China Times, Alibaba’s Cloud Computing Unit Eyeing Government Agencies, 
2014, www.wantchinatimes.com/news- subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20140724000083&cid=
1206.
72 EY, Big Data and Enterprise Mobility.
73 Want China Times, Online Credit Services in China Accused of Abusing 
Personal Data.
74 Council on Foreign Relations, Cyber Diplomacy with Africa: Lessons From the African 
Cybersecurity Convention, July 7, 2016, http://blogs.cfr.org/cyber/2016/07/07/
cyber- diplomacy-with- africa-lessons- from-the- african-cybersecurity- convention/.


PART II
Big Data and Cloud 
Computing in Key 
Development Areas in 
the Global South


4
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
4.1 Introduction
Primary sectors remain dominant in most LDCs. This sector, however, is a 
laggard sector in the adoption of new technologies. For instance, according to 
Wolfgang von Loeper, a former farmer, and the founder of MySmartFarm app, 
the average African smallholder farmer produces only a quarter to half of the 
productive potential.1 This low productivity of smallholder farmers is attribut-
able to their low rate of adoption of modern technologies. For instance, the 
Indian BD and cloud market for agriculture—despite some signs of progress—
remains relatively backward compared to some other developing countries. The 
agricultural sector in India has not received the attention that it needs and 
deserves. For instance, fruits and vegetables worth US$2 billion are wasted 
annually in India due to the lack of supply chain management and cold storage 
facilities. The agricultural sector is characterized by extremely low investments 
in modern ICTs. For instance, in 2015, US$6 billion was invested in tech start- 
ups, of which agriculture start- ups attracted less than 1 percent of the total.2
 
Several beneﬁts have been identiﬁed that BD and the cloud can offer to the 
primary sector. For instance, just like in computer chips and other sophisticated 
industries, sensors in primary industries such as agriculture, oil and gas, and pulp 
and paper can be used to take detailed readings on process conditions. Based on 
the readings, automatic adjustments can be made in order to reduce waste, 
downtime, and human interventions.3 According to Monsanto, the world’s 
biggest seed company, tailoring information and advice to farmers could increase 
annual worldwide crop production by about US$20 billion.4
 
In the oil and gas sector, conditions of machines and equipment can be mon-
itored, which can result in more effective maintenance and inspection based on 

78  Key Development Areas
industry as well as historical and real- time data. Early warnings from sensor data 
can help replace planned maintenance with preventive maintenance, which can 
reduce downtime. Instant information from oil wells can provide information 
to make timely decisions on underperforming wells. Detection of anomalies 
while drilling as well as during operation can lead to more effective decisions 
for cost savings.5
 
Nonetheless, the transformative potential of BD and the cloud has not yet 
been realized in the primary sectors. For instance, an observation is that the oil 
and gas industry is not among early adopters of digital technologies.6 BCG’s 
Grant McCabe, who is the team leader for “next-generation mining” noted: 
“There is enormous slack in many mining systems. The industry has not been 
run with manufacturing discipline.”7 Only a small proportion of ﬁrms in the oil 
and gas sector are actively using the BD. For instance, according to research by 
DNV GL, one in ﬁve UAE oil and gas companies considered themselves to be 
highly digitalized.8
 
Mining companies are increasingly adopting what is referred to as “the next 
generation of underground mining.”9 An article published in the Financial Times 
in 2014 explains how miners located half a kilometer below ground at Chelo-
pech in Bulgaria use tablets to feed data, which is analyzed by a control room 
on the surface to make decisions on a real- time basis.10 The mine’s owner, 
Dundee Precious Metals, installed 45 km of ﬁber optic cable in order to build 
an underground WiFi network.11 
 
Surveying of potential oil drilling sites involves monitoring seismic waves 
moving through the earth. At a spot being surveyed, the patterns are examined 
to see if the waves are distorted as they pass through oil or gas. In the past, a few 
thousand readings were taken at a potential drilling site. Advancements in BD 
analytics and other technologies have made it possible to increase the number of 
readings to more than one million. This increases the accuracy of images of 
sites. Shell uses ﬁber optic cables to analyze the data generated by sensors. The 
data is transferred to its cloud servers, maintained by AWS. Data from a poten-
tial oil ﬁeld is compared with thousands of other sites around the world in order 
make more accurate recommendations regarding the sites to drill. Production 
forecasting, which entails estimating the likely output of a reservoir, determines 
the resources that should be spent on collecting it. Data- led decisions allow 
operators to have more conﬁdence regarding the efﬁciency with which oil can 
be extracted. Shell also uses BD to ensure that machines are working properly, 
which minimizes breakdowns and failure. This is especially important as oil 
drilling machines operate in adverse conditions for long periods of time, which 
increases the probability of wear and damage.12 The machines are ﬁtted with 
sensors, which collect data about various performance indicators.13
 
How the adoption of BD, cloud, and other related technologies in the 
primary sector, especially among smallholder farmers, can be accelerated in 
order to increase productivity is a pressing policy issue that adjoins larger political 

Primary Industries  79
and social concerns of national governments, donor agencies, and other relevant 
actors. The signiﬁcance of this issue also stems from the fact that primary sectors 
can assist to maintain the resilience of the economic system of developing coun-
tries. During the ﬁrst half of 2009, the export from LDCs declined by over 43 
percent compared to the ﬁrst half of 2008. The market for primary commod-
ities was among the ﬁrst to rebound. During 2007–2008, primary commodities 
including fuels accounted for 80.6 percent of merchandise exports by LDCs.14 
Likewise, a distinguishing feature of the South–South economic relations is that 
the ﬂows of trades and investments among these economies are concentrated in 
the primary sectors. For instance, the majority of investments in Africa from 
BRIC economies are in these sectors.15
4.2 Some BD- and Cloud- Based Applications in the Primary 
Sector
A number of different BD- and cloud- based applications have been developed 
and deployed in the primary sector of developing countries. As noted above, 
tools such as Maana’s “Enterprise Knowledge Graph” allows data analysts, busi-
ness analysts, data scientists, and enterprise architects in an organization to 
collaborate.
 
In the agricultural sector, we noted in Chapter 2 that BD- and cloud- based 
mobile computing apps such as iCow and AgriLife have led to increased pro-
ductivity of traditional sectors such as agriculture and farming. Some of the apps 
also helped create the market by providing near- real-time information on 
farmers’ ability to pay for services to ﬁnancial institutions and suppliers.
 
Bengaluru, India- based Flybird Agri Innovations’ Smart Irrigation Controller 
(Siri), deploys sensors in the soil to detect moisture content and take measures 
to prevent under or over irrigation and fertigation. It is reported that Siri helps 
save water by 25–30 percent.16 As of April 2016, Flybird’s sensors were installed 
in forty- ﬁve villages in Karnataka to help farmers optimize irrigation.17
 
Another example that provides a platform in the agricultural sector is 
Springg, which is based in Wageningen, the Netherlands and Istanbul, Turkey. 
Springg’s social media environment can link individual farms with other similar 
farms. Suppliers can create apps in order to deliver value to their customers by 
linking their services to relevant data.18 Its app SoilCares provides insight on 
nutrients and soil composition and provides advice that can be implemented to 
fertilize crops. It is claimed that productivity can be increased by up to 500 
percent.19
 
Springg’s mobile test centers collect local soil data with sensors and run soil 
analyses on site. Local farmers can get immediate results on soil conditions and 
make decisions regarding the best fertilizers for crops. Soil data is then sent in to 
a centralized database and analyzed further to extract additional information.20 
Among over 500 million farmers in the world, only about 20 million can afford 

80  Key Development Areas
testing of soil samples using traditional laboratories. Such labs are often located 
in urban areas and cost thousands of dollars.21
 
As of December 2015, over 25,000 farmers had used the SoilCares system.22 
For example, a farmer in rural Kenya was able to reduce fertilizer costs by 
US$100 in six months and increased his crop yields fourfold.
 
Apps have also been developed for the forestry and ﬁshing sector. Global 
Fishing Watch uses data and mapping to deal with environmental problems such 
as deforestation, illegal waste dumping, and oil spills. The Pew Charitable 
Trust’s Eyes on the Seas project combines satellite data, ﬁshing vessel, and other 
information to help authorities monitor ﬁshing activity. Likewise, Global Forest 
Watch uses a wide variety of data to spot illegal logging or other activities that 
damage forest resources. Public platforms such as Global Fishing Watch enable 
anyone to act as a watchdog and to report environmental crimes. Such activities 
can press companies to engage in appropriate behavior and governments to pass 
and enforce environmental laws.23
 
NGO Oceana, the non- proﬁt environmental mapping service SkyTruth, and 
Google have teamed up to develop the Global Fishing Watch public platform, 
which shows the location of ﬁshing vessels. By checking AIS data used in track-
ing ships and vessel trafﬁc services, it can be ensured that ﬁshing ships do not 
enter banned or restricted areas. The data can be used to improve knowledge 
about illegal ﬁshing. According to the United States National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, 40 percent of the catch in some ﬁsheries are 
illegal, unreported, or unregulated (IUU). While activist organizations such as 
Global Fishing Watch are taking initiatives to track environmental offenses, they 
face a number of difﬁculties. For instance, vessels may turn off their AIS trans-
mitters. Buyers, however, could force ﬁshing companies to become more com-
pliant by insisting that their ﬁsh comes from vessels that have their transmitters 
operational at all times, thus being transparent about where they are ﬁshing.
4.3 Key Driving Forces in the Adoption of BD- and Cloud- Based 
Applications in the Primary Sectors
A number of forces have come together to drive the adoption of BD and the 
cloud in the primary sector.
4.3.1 Relevant Policy- and Decision- Makers’ Interest in BD 
and the Cloud
Developing countries’ policy and decision makers in primary sectors have put 
BD and the cloud high on their organizational and national developmental 
agenda. They are gaining a better understanding of the transformative potential 
of BD and the cloud. For instance, according to the above noted study con-
ducted by DNV GL in the UAE, over half of senior oil and gas professionals in 

Primary Industries  81
the country saw BD’s high potential to transform the operating efﬁciency of the 
industry.24
 
In order to improve efﬁciency in the mining industry, Kazakhstan signed a 
deal with Google and McKinsey to utilize BD in the industry. Kazakhstan wants 
to become a pioneer in the BD deployment to improve the efﬁciency of the 
country’s mines. Kazakhstan has established a “mining industry competence 
center,” which gathers data from sensors within mining and processing equip-
ment located in different parts of the country. The use of real- time data allows 
companies in the industry to identify bottlenecks and improve efﬁciency.25
 
In a benchmark study of the oil and gas industry commissioned by industry 
advisor DNG VL, which was released in early 2016, most survey respondents were 
of the view that digitalization would have a signiﬁcant impact on the oil and gas 
sector in 2016. Among the most prominent technologies identiﬁed the respondents 
included: unconventional gas extraction technologies (20 percent), BD analytics (16 
percent), the IoT/smart technology (15 percent), and digital oilﬁelds (15 percent).26
4.3.2 BD- and Cloud- Related Investments in the Primary 
Sector
Investments in BD and cloud technologies are ﬂowing from the public as well 
as private sectors. For instance, India’s meteorology ofﬁce uses a statistical 
method introduced in the 1920s under the British colonial rule. In June 2016, 
India announced a plan to spend US$60 million on a new supercomputer 
system in order to improve the accuracy of weather forecasts. The new system 
generates three- dimensional models to predict the monsoon’s development. 
Some experts think that better forecasting could help India boost farm output 
by as much as 15 percent by helping farmers make decisions regarding the best 
time to sow, irrigate, or apply fertilizer.27
 
There has been a rapid increase in investment activity in agri- technology. 
The amount of investment in the agri- technology sector was US$500 million in 
2010, which increased to US$4.2 billion in 2015 according to AgFunder, the 
online investment site.28 In the ﬁrst half of 2015, agricultural technology 
(agtech) raised US$2.06 billion in venture capital investment in 228 deals. Pre-
cision agriculture technologies such as drones and satellite imagery attracted 
US$400 million.29
 
Firms in the oil and gas industry are also engaged in investment and business 
activities in order to strengthen their BD ecosystem. In mid- 2016, Saudi 
Aramco Energy Ventures led a Series B funding round of US$26 million for the 
US- based start- up Maana, which specializes in BD search engine platform to 
help Fortune 100 companies in industries such as oil and gas, manufacturing, 
health care, and insurance to maximize the use of their information.30 Other 
major gas and oil investors such as Shell Technology Ventures and Chevron 
Technology Ventures also participated in the funding round. Using Maana’s 

82  Key Development Areas
“Enterprise Knowledge Graph,” data analysts, business analysts, data scientists, 
and enterprise architects in an organization can collaborate in a single, integrated 
system.
4.3.3 The Roles of the Transnational Corporations (TNCs)
In one way, transnational corporations (TNCs) are likely to be a driving force 
behind the diffusion of cloud and BD in the primary sector of developing coun-
tries. For instance, large food and biotechnology TNCs such as Monsanto and 
Syngenta already have a notable presence in developing countries, which is a 
positive factor from the standpoint of BD- led productivity growth in these 
countries. During 2005–2007, the share of agriculture in FDI inﬂows was 15.1 
percent in Cambodia and 12 percent in Laos.31 Monsanto reportedly has control 
on over 95 percent of the Indian cotton seed market.32 TNCs, which are often 
producers, processors, or traders of agricultural products or sellers of inputs or 
machinery, engage in a contracting system in which they assume a variety of 
responsibilities including providing technical assistance and marketing to devel-
oping world- based small farmers.33 NCs such as Monsanto and Syngenta, which 
have become a driving force behind the utilization of BD in the industrialized 
world, are thus likely to act as a key channel in the international technology 
transfer of BD.
 
A typical offshore oil production platform is estimated to have over 40,000 
data tags. However, not all of them are connected or used. In order to convert 
to making better business and operating decisions using the data sets, new and 
carefully designed capabilities for data manipulation, analysis, and presentation 
are required. In addition, tools to support decision- making are needed. One 
estimate suggested that if production efﬁciency of a brownﬁeld oil and gas 
service company is improved by 10 percent, proﬁtability will increase in the 
US$220 million to US$260 million range. Digitization can also extend ﬁeld life. 
Even higher potential could be achieved in greenﬁeld assets by including instru-
mentation from the start.34
 
Global technology providers have become an even more important force in 
driving the adoption BD and cloud in the primary sectors in the developing 
world. In mid- 2016, Microsoft opened its biggest center of excellence for the 
oil and gas industry in Dubai. The center seeks to help organizations in the oil 
and gas sector to utilize the latest technologies such as the IoT, BD analytics, 
and cloud computing using Microsoft Azure and Ofﬁce 365.35
4.3.4 The Roles of International Agencies
In some countries, international agencies have been the driving force behind 
the adoption of BD and the cloud. For instance, Haiti’s Ministry of Agriculture 
has strengthened its knowledge management system through its adoption of 

Primary Industries  83
cloud technology. This project is funded by the World Bank and makes Haiti’s 
agricultural infrastructure, which was destroyed by earthquake in 2010, resilient 
to natural disasters.36
4.4 Concluding Comments
Some encouraging signs have emerged to suggest that the adoption of BD and 
the cloud are likely to get a big boost in the primary sectors of some developing 
countries. Among the most encouraging factors is the rapid increase in invest-
ment in this sector. For instance, as noted earlier, agtech is one of the sweet 
spots for VC investors. The VC investments are likely to lead to the develop-
ment of technologies that are likely to beneﬁt smallholder farmers. As noted 
above, policy and decision makers in these sectors are gaining a better under-
standing of the transformative potential of BD and the cloud.
 
Agtech companies are developing new and cutting- edge innovations in BD 
and cloud computing that are likely to facilitate smallholder farmers’ adoption of 
these technologies. Technologies and apps such as iCow, AgriLife, and Soil-
Cares systems have helped overcome the various barriers that smallholder 
farmers confront in the adoption of new technologies to increase farm 
productivity.
Notes
 1 S. Jacobs, Big Data Comes to Africa, This is Africa, March 3, 2014, www.
thisisafricaonline.com/News/Big- Data-comes- to-Africa. 
 2 J. Anand, Here’s Why Agriculture Startups are Blossoming: Agriculture in India is 
a $370 Billion Sector, But There is Little Application Of Technology to Improve 
Productivity and Lift Millions Out of Poverty, ETCio.com, 24 April, 2016, http://
cio.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/strategy- and-management/heres- why-
agriculture- startups-are- blossoming/51965420. 
 3 Jacques Bughin, Michael Chui, and James Manyika, Clouds, Big Data, and Smart Assets: 
Ten Tech- Enabled Business Trends to Watch, McKinsey & Co., September 22, 2010, 
www.mckinsey.com/mgi/overview/in- the-news/clouds- big-data- and-smart- assets. 
 4 J. Bunge, Big Data Comes to the Farm, Sowing Mistrust: Seed Makers Barrel Into 
Technology Business, Wall Street Journal, February 26, 2014. 
 5 Arabian Oil and Gas, UAE Oil and Gas Turns Focus to Big Data, March 21, 2016, 
www.arabianoilandgas.com/article- 15458-uae- oil-and- gas-turns- focus-to- big-data/.
 6 Aaron Hand, Lower Prices Push Oil and Gas Industry to Further Standardization, 
Big Data, Automation World, February 8, 2016, www.automationworld.com/lower-
 prices-push- oil-and- gas-industry- further-standardization- big-data. 
 7 James Wilson, Miners Tap into Rich Seam of “Internet of Things,” Financial Times, July 
16, 2014, https://next.ft.com/content/854fb212–084b-11e4–9380–00144feab7de.
 8 Arabian Oil and Gas, UAE Oil and Gas Turns Focus to Big Data. 
 9 Wilson, Miners Tap into Rich Seam of “Internet of Things.”
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid.
12 Petroleum Industry Review, Big Data in Big Oil: How Shell Uses Analytics to 
Drive Business Success – Forbes, August 10, 2015, www.petroleumindustryreview.

84  Key Development Areas
com/2015/08/big- data-in- big-oil- how-shell- uses-analytics- to-drive- business-
success- forbes/. 
13 Mike Becker, Guest View: Why a Double Dose of Big Data is Even Better, SD Times, 
June 13, 2016, http://sdtimes.com/guest- view-double- dose-big- data-even- better/. 
14 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, From Brussels to Istanbul: 
Key Development Challenges Facing the Least Developed Countries: Compilation of 
Documents of Pre- Conference Events Organized by UNCTAD in Preparation for 
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries (LDC–IV), 
Istanbul, Turkey, May 9–13, 2011. 
15 Taku Fundira, A Glance at Africa’s Engagement with the BRICS, Bridges Africa, 
June 4, 2012, 1(2), www.ictsd.org/bridges- news/bridges- africa/news/a- glance-at-
 africa%E2%80%99s-engagement- with-the- brics. 
16 Vipin Maurya, AgriTech Startup Flybird is Building Automation Devices for Farmers, 
iamwire, June 4, 2016, www.iamwire.com/2016/06/agritech- startup-ﬂybird- building-
automation- devices-farmers/137369.
17 Anand, Here’s Why Agriculture Startups are Blossoming.
18 Springg, About us, 2016, www.springg.com/en/page/about_us.
19 Talend, How Big Data is Helping Solve World Hunger: Springg Utilizes Smart Meter 
Technology and Cutting- Edge, Big Data Integration Software from Talend to Turn 
Dirt into Data, December 23, 2015, www.talend.com/about- us/press- releases/how-
 big-data- is-helping- solve-world- hunger. 
20 M. Shacklett, Farmers get Analytics 5x Faster, Thanks to Guerrilla Big Data Software: 
Find Out How “In The- Field” Guerrilla Data Collection and Analytics Apps are 
Being Used, and Why the Early Results for This Data Model Look Promising, June 
3, 2016, www.techrepublic.com/article/farmers- get-analytics- 5x-faster- thanks-to-
 guerrilla-big- data-software/. 
21 Talend, How Big Data is Helping Solve World Hunger.
22 Ibid.
23 iEcoAfrica, Data- Driven Technology That Catches More Than Fish, February 12, 
2016, www.iecoafrica.com/insight/data- driven-technology- that-catches- more-than-
 ﬁsh. 
24 Arabian Oil and Gas, UAE Oil and Gas Turns Focus to Big Data.
25 Jack Farchy, Google and McKinsey to Mine Kazakh Data: Central Asian Country 
Signs Tech Deal to Harness Power of “Big Data” Analysis and Improve Mining, 
Financial Times, April 20, 2016, https://next.ft.com/content/730f1330–0714–11e6-
a70d-4e39ac32c284.
26 Hand, Lower Prices Push Oil and Gas Industry to Further Standardization, Big Data. 
27 Gadgets 360, India’s Colonial- Era Monsoon Forecasting to Get High- Tech Makeover, 
Reuters, June 8, 2016, http://gadgets.ndtv.com/science/features/indias- colonial-era-
 monsoon-forecasting- to-get- high-tech- makeover-846667.
28 S. Daneshkhu, Future Farming Relies on New Technology, Financial Times, January 
14, 2016, www.ft.com/cms/s/2/53960dd4–981e-11e5–9228–87e603d47bdc.html.
29 L. Burwood- Taylor, Moving to Mainstream: AgTech Gathers $2.06bn in the First 
Half of 2015, AgFunder News, July 31, 2015, https://agfundernews.com/?s=Moving+
to+Mainstream%3A+AgTech+Gathers+%242.06bn+in+the+First+Half+of+2015. 
30 T. Soper, Maana Raises $26M from Top Oil and Gas Investors For Big Data Analytics 
Platform, May 3, 2016, www.geekwire.com/2016/maana- raises-26m-top- oil-gas-
 investors-big- data-analytics- platform/.
31 UNCTAD, World Investment Report 2009: Transnational Corporations. Agricultural 
Production and Development.
32 John Vidal, GM Crops Promote Superweeds, Food Insecurity and Pesticides, Say 
NGOs. Guardian, October 19, 2011, www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/
oct/19/gm- crops-insecurity- superweeds-pesticides. 

Primary Industries  85
33 D.J. Glover, Contract Farming and Smallholder Outgrower Schemes in Less-
 Developed Countries, World Development (1984) 12(11/12), 1143–1157; and D.J. 
Glover, Increasing the Beneﬁts to Smallholders from Contract Farming: Problems 
for Farmers’ Organizations and Policy Makers. World Development (1987) 15(4), 
441–448. 
34 Stefano Martinotti, Jim Nolten, and Jens Arne Steinsbø, Digitizing Oil and Gas 
Production, McKinsey & Co., August 2014, www.mckinsey.com/industries/oil- and-
gas/our- insights/digitizing- oil-and- gas-production.
35 Times of Oman, Microsoft Launches Centre for Oil and Gas in Dubai, June 17, 2016. 
http://timesofoman.com/article/86219/Business/Microsoft- launches-centre- for-oil-
 and-gas- in-Dubai.
36 World Bank. 2013. Agriculture in Haiti: A Quiet Revolution Under the Cloud, 
www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/03/08/agriculture- in-haiti- a-quiet-
 revolution-under- the-cloud.

5
EDUCATION AND R&D
5.1 Introduction 
Just like the primary industries discussed in Chapter 4, education is often con-
sidered to be a laggard sector in the adoption of new technologies.1 In recent 
years, this trend has changed. According to Markets and Markets, the global 
cloud computing market in education will grow from US$5.05 billion in 2014 
to US$12.38 billion by 2019.2 BD and the cloud are playing the central role in 
R&D and educational system in developing countries. For instance, South 
Korea’s Ministry of Education, Science and Technology is implementing a 
program that will turn the nation’s classrooms paperless by 2015. This program 
will provide each student with a tablet and access to textbooks and other 
educational materials from a cloud computing system.3
 
Before proceeding further, it is important to note that the conventional 
learning environments suffer from several limitations such as the lack of imme-
diate feedback to students, requirement for teachers to spend many hours 
grading routine assignments, and failure to take advantage of digital resources in 
order to improve the learning process. A complaint that is often made is also 
that there are a number of drawbacks in the system of recruiting, training, 
supervising, and monitoring teachers in developing countries. There is arguably 
the lack of proactivity of teachers to show students how to improve compre-
hension. It is also argued that the education system is mainly input driven. The 
management of the education system at best focuses exclusively on logistical 
targets such as money spent and construction of schools. There is often no 
environment to provide support or incentives to produce high learning achieve-
ment.4 Other challenges that have affected the quality of education in develop-
ing counties include high rate of teacher absenteeism, the role of political 

Education and R&D  87
patronage in the hiring of teachers, low technical quality, and the ineffectiveness 
of teacher training.5
 
The upshot of these tendencies is that a large proportion of children and 
youths in developing countries are deprived of educational opportunities. For 
instance, in Africa, thirty million children fail to attend primary school 
education.6
 
Some of the above- mentioned problems can be addressed by BD- and cloud-
 based learning solutions. For instance, Bridge International Academy, which 
provides e- learning solutions claimed that its tools have reduced unexcused 
teacher absenteeism to less than 1 percent.7 Technology use would lead to 
better monitoring and control. If a teacher fails to sign into the tablet, Bridge 
can call the teacher to ﬁnd out the reason. Data- driven approaches make it pos-
sible to analyze learning in real- time and offer systematic feedback to students as 
well as to teachers.8
 
BD and the cloud have also facilitated R&D activities in developing countries. 
For instance, thanks to the cloud, it has been possible to have supercomputer 
power to access educational resources and to analyze data on disease spread pattern 
and climate changes.9 Likewise, Yahoo! has collaborated with the Indian Institute 
of Technology Madras (IIT- Madras). It established a Grid Computing Lab, which 
allows researchers to access and conduct research on BD and cloud computing.10 
To take another example, scientists at University of Washington’s Center for 
Infectious Disease Research and India’s Goa Medical College used cloud comput-
ing and BD to conduct research into factors that make some malaria cases severe 
and life- threatening. The research team analyzed data on sixty patients using 
advanced computing techniques to ﬁnd relevant patterns. The project analyzed 
ﬁfty parasite binding proteins and additional variables for each of the patients. 
Finding patterns in a large number of variables required the use of machine learn-
ing and other computing techniques.11
 
BD and cloud computing have allowed African biomedical researchers to 
conduct R&D on diseases such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and trop-
ical diseases. Note that these Africa- speciﬁc diseases are often ignored by 
Western pharmaceutical companies.12 The Computational Intelligence Research 
Group at the University of Pretoria uses the cloud for medical research—in par-
ticular, to help develop drugs for treating serious illnesses speciﬁc to Sub- 
Saharan Africa.13
5.2 BD- and Cloud- Based E- Learning Tools and Systems
Imported as well as locally developed BD- and cloud- based e- learning tools and 
systems are rapidly transforming developing countries’ educational landscapes. 
BD and the cloud are being deployed at all levels of educational situations. In 
this section, we brieﬂy review some of the e- learning tools and the organiza-
tions involved in developing them.

88  Key Development Areas
5.2.1 BRCK’s Kio Kit and Kio Tablets
Kio tablet and the Kio Kit (“Kio” is Swahili for mirror) are the ﬂagship prod-
ucts developed by the Kenyan technology company BRCK.14 Kio Kit is also 
referred to as a digital classroom in a box, which is a tablet learning system 
designed to work in a rural African classroom. The Kio Kit includes forty cus-
tomized tablets, forty earphones, a router and a plug to provide wireless charg-
ing in a 40 kg rugged case.15 The system is a self- powered mobile WiFi device, 
which is managed via a cloud- based interface.16
 
The Kio Kit tablets are pre- loaded with the Kenyan curriculum and inter-
national contents. They also contain web- based content, videos from local pro-
viders such as Kenya’s eLimu, local edutainment broadcaster Mediae (its Know 
Zone programs), eKitabu, a Kenyan e- book company and Tanzania’s Ubongo 
Media, and international organizations such as Pearson, TED- Ed and Khan 
Academy.17
 
The system was designed in Kenya and is equipped with a sim card and 
Internet connectivity. However, when the devices are provided to students, 
they are not connected to the Internet, which means that students cannot look 
at non- educational contents. New materials can be updated on the tablets when 
they are connected to BRCK. The Kio Kit houses a web server also referred to 
as “micro- cloud,” which is an ofﬂine version of the Internet. It provides rich, 
interactive content available on the web but users do not need to pay expensive 
data costs.18
 
The Kio Kit is encased in a tough, water- resistant plastic container, which 
also acts as a charger when the tablets are stored. The whole unit can also be 
charged from a wall outlet, solar power, or a car battery.19
 
The seven- inch Kio tablet is breakproof for up to a 70 cm drop on a con-
crete ﬂoor. It can also survive occasional water spills and dust exposure. It has a 
scratch resistant screen coating and rubber outer shell.20 BRCK Kio Kit won 
the Stuff Magazine’s “Educational Tech of the Year” Award for its innovative 
design.
 
New materials are uploaded on the BRCK wirelessly during the night when 
more bandwidth is available. The materials are then shared with the tablets 
during classes.21 A teacher thus can take the Kio Kit home and download the 
lessons for the next day if there is no connectivity in the school.22 In remote 
areas that lack Internet access or where Internet access is expensive, updates are 
made by a technician in person.23
 
BRCK runs on an open source Linux server, which reduces the costs. Each 
kit costs US$5,000.24 As of 2015, BRCK was working with local Chase Bank in 
order to offer a twelve monthly payments plan to buy the kit.25
 
It was reported that BRCK was bought by customers in Europe and the 
USA. The African Wildlife Foundation and the European Council of Inter-
national Schools had also shown interest in BRCK.26

Education and R&D  89
5.2.2 Bridge
As of 2014, Bridge International offered three years of early childhood educa-
tion, and seven years of primary education (Classes 1–7).27 Bridge utilizes BD, 
algorithms, and a scripted- learning education methodology. Bridge was opened 
in Kenya in 2008. Seven Bridge International Academies were opened in 
Uganda in February 2015 and two were opened in Nigeria in September 2015. 
As of 2015, Bridge had 414 schools across three countries. 
 
As of September 2015, Bridge served about 120,000 students. It has a huge 
amount of data on its students. The longitudinal data on children captures their 
developmental process. Thanks to the value and insights provided by the data, 
Kenya’s Ministry of Education was reported to be reconsidering the regulatory 
framework.28 The goal is to reach 10 million children by 2025.29
 
Bridge opened a London ofﬁce in 2015. Bridge was awarded WISE Awards 
for innovation in education. WISE inspires girls and women to study and build 
careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).30
 
In 2015, an Indian expansion team was founded. It was reported that Bridge 
expressed an interest in partnering with the Andhra Pradesh government.31 
Bridge’s plan was to launch in India in the 2016/2017 academic year.32
 
In March 2016, the Liberian education minister announced that the coun-
try’s entire pre- primary and primary education system would be outsourced to 
Bridge. Under the public–private arrangement, Bridge would pilot the program 
in ﬁfty public schools in 2016 and design curriculum materials. Phase two 
involves the rollout of mass implementation over ﬁve years.33
 
The Internet and Barnes & Noble’s Nook tablets are used to deliver lesson 
plans. Teachers are provided with tablets, which are used for instruction, assess-
ment, and data- gathering.34 The tablets are used to collect test results from stu-
dents, which serve as a means of monitoring progress.
 
Teachers check in via their tablets when they arrive. They run lessons almost 
verbatim from the tablet’s scripts, which are data driven. The data is compiled 
and analyzed at Bridge’s Nairobi ofﬁces and Massachusetts- based headquarters.35
 
Bridge argues that the use of technology and standardized procedures 
enhance the quality of education it offers.36 It has attracted diverse investors. 
The California- based venture- capital ﬁrm Learn Capital LLC is Bridge’s largest 
shareholder in with a 15 percent stake. Bridge has a plan to seek a stock market 
listing in NSE in 2017.37 In March 2015, Facebook co- founder Zuckerberg 
invested US$10 million in Bridge.38 In 2014, the IFC announced an investment 
of US$10 million in equity to support the expansion of Bridge. The UK’s 
development ﬁnance institution CDC also announced its plan to invest US$6 
million in equity. The goal was to support the company’s plans to expand to 
more African countries.39
 
Bridge uses technology and data to manage non- instructional activities such 
as billing, payments, expense management, payroll processing, and prospective 

90  Key Development Areas
admissions, which leads to a reduction in overhead costs to run an academy. 
These activities are automated and centralized through the Academy Manager’s 
smartphone application and the Teachers’ tablet application. A Bridge Inter-
national Academy has only one employee in management: the Academy 
Manager (the “principal”). Bridge argues that a high degree of digitization 
means that the Academy Manager can focus on more critical works that must 
be executed locally such as overseeing classroom instruction and managing rela-
tionships with parents and the local community.40
 
It was reported in 2014 that the company was developing software, which 
analyzes previous test scores and levels of participation so that teachers know the 
students that need to be called on for a speciﬁc question.41 In this way, the 
system is output rather than input focused.
 
Bridge also ensures 100 percent teacher attendance with a pool of on- call 
substitutes and other measures. Note that in Kenya, teachers have an absent-
eeism rate of 47.3 percent in government schools and more than 30 percent in 
private schools.42
 
Bridge charges a tuition fee of US$6 a month. It does not accept cash. 
Parents can pay by smartphone.43
5.2.3 DreamBox
DreamBox uses game technologies and immersive math courseware in order to 
make learning more fun and interesting. Algorithms adapt the learning experi-
ence to a student’s needs. Brilliant.org makes it possible for talented students in 
mathematics and physics to learn at their own speed. Its global massive online 
open courses (MOOCs) use social networks, videos, and community inter-
actions to offer university- level classes.44
5.2.4 Eneza
Eneza Education has developed a mobile platform, which utilizes BD and the 
cloud to offer students access to quizzes, mini- lessons, and other educational 
contents.45 For instance, a student who wants to take a math quiz texts a code. 
The system texts back the student with math topics based on the national cur-
riculum. The student selects the topic, and is then texted back with ﬁve 
multiple- choice questions. After the student ﬁnishes the quiz, the system pro-
vides feedback on the answers. Eneza also allows users to search Wikipedia 
using SMS. Students can also ask a teacher questions. Teachers can monitor 
their students’ performance through their accounts.
 
Schools can pay US$180 annually to have access to student data and teaching 
resources. Parents can get similar accounts for about US$15/year. Using the 
Eneza platform, students, teachers, parents, and school leaders can communicate 
with each other.

Education and R&D  91
 
As of mid- 2015, Eneza had more than 300,000 students from over 700 
schools in Kenya and over twenty schools had subscribed its data.46 By early 
2016, Eneza was operating in Kenya, Tanzania, and Ghana and it plans to 
launch in Nigeria and South Africa in 2017.47
 
Some of the key challenges faced by Eneza in rural areas include the lack of 
devices and the difﬁculties of establishing and maintaining relationships with 
mobile network operators.48 As of 2013, thanks to a partnership with Safaricom, 
the cost of taking a ﬁve- question test was three Kenyan shillings (about 
US$0.03). Before the partnership, the cost was twenty Kenyan shillings (about 
US$0.23). Eneza wants to reduce the costs of its services to students. The 
company is developing other revenue streams such as selling data via subscrip-
tion to schools, the government, and other stakeholders, interested in knowing 
students’ performance.
5.2.5 Coursera
Coursera is a MOOC platform, which provides cloud- based education by offer-
ing courses in science, math, medicine and other areas. The goal is to help stu-
dents gain market- relevant IT skills.49 
 
The World Bank’s New Economy Skills for Africa Program (NESAP- ICT) 
and Tanzania’s Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) part-
nered with Coursera to launch an initiative to incorporate Coursera offerings to 
pilot the Youth Employment Accelerator Program Initiative (YEAPI).50
 
In 2013, as part of its Global Learning Hubs program, the US Department of 
State’s Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs facilitated discussion to offer 
Coursera courses on a number of subjects in over thirty countries including 
China, India, Tunisia, Georgia, and Bolivia.51
 
In June 2016, Coursera and the Indian School of Business (ISB) announced 
the launch of four courses on “Financial Markets and Investment Strategy.” The 
ISB had offered on Coursera’s MOOCs platform for the ﬁrst time in 2014.52 As 
of 2015, 40 percent of students who took Coursera classes were from emerging 
economies, which included 9 percent from Latin America and 4 percent from 
Africa.53
5.2.6 Advance Learning Interactive Systems Online (ALISON)
ALISON provides cloud- based learning solutions. As of mid- 2016, ALISON 
had 1.5 million users in Africa, and half a million were active every month.54 
ALISON earns about 60 percent of revenue through certiﬁcation and 40 
percent by advertising.

92  Key Development Areas
5.2.7 Udacity
In order to address the skills gaps the Mountain View, California- based online 
education company Udacity works with companies such as Google, Facebook, 
Amazon, Github, and Cloudera to design courses. It does not consider tradi-
tional universities as a model. Most of Udacity’s courses were created with at 
least one company’s help. Companies also offer material as well as experts to 
help build courses and provide internship opportunities for students. They also 
give Udacity funding and resources. For example, Google gave Udacity US$4 
million to create its Android Nanodegree55 program, which teaches “tools, prin-
ciples, and patterns that underlie all Android development.”56 
 
Udacity entered into India in 2015. As of mid- 2015, India was Udacity’s 
second largest market in terms of the number of students. The company was 
enrolling at least 27,000 students in India every month.57
 
In April 2016, it announced that it would open ofﬁces in China and make 
more than 100 of its free online courses available in the country under the 
domain name youdaxue.com.58
 
India’s Flipkart has a partnership with Udacity to hire graduates based on 
capabilities built through, Nanodegree program. In 2016, Flipkart hired three 
students without in- person interviews based on their Nanodegree projects and 
Udacity proﬁles.59
5.3 BD and Cloud Computing in R&D 
A number of notable observations are reported regarding the use of BD and the 
cloud in R&D activities. As we have seen above in this chapter and in earlier 
chapters, BD and the cloud have strongly stimulated and facilitated R&D in the 
developing world. For instance, EpiSurveyor (Chapter 2) has been used in 
research.60 The app can be used to collect data on mobile phones. In the past, 
such data used to be collected using paper- based surveys. The major beneﬁts of 
collecting data on mobile phones include speed, ease of use, and amenability to 
modiﬁcation in order to respond to changing circumstances. Moreover, col-
lected information can be automatically processed and analyzed.61
 
Here we brieﬂy illustrate and summarize the use of BD and the cloud in two 
key developing countries: Brazil and South Africa.
5.3.1 Brazil
Brazil’s universities and research institutes are using public as well as private 
cloud services. As of 2015, the Brazilian research and education network Rede 
Nacional de Ensino e Pesquisa (RNP), which is Brazil’s academic Internet 
backbone, connected about 350 public and private universities and research 
institutions through a national backbone.62 RNP’s data center also hosts its 

Education and R&D  93
partner institutions’ applications including a web portal offering access to a large 
number of international scientiﬁc journals.63
5.3.2 South Africa
Thanks to South Africa’s signiﬁcant investment in cyber infrastructure, the 
country’s researchers are increasingly using high performance computing for 
research and education. The Centre for High Performance Computing (CHPC) 
was established in 2007 by the South Africa Department of Science and Tech-
nology (DST). The CHPC’s BD- related activities include providing training to 
data scientists, supporting research projects using BD, and facilitating research-
ers’ participation and collaboration with international networks. The South 
African Research Network (SANReN) provides cyber infrastructure for BD to 
South African universities. In collaboration with the Tertiary Education 
Research Network of South Africa (TENET), the SANReN has connected 
South African universities to ﬁber- based cyber infrastructure.64
 
A number of organizations have been established to deploy BD in research 
activities. The Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University launched the new 
Centre for Broadband Communication in order to conduct research around 
ﬁber optic data transport for the SKA.65
 
The radio telescope project Square Kilometre Array (SKA) is expected to 
facilitate the use of BD in SSA. The SKA is planned to be built in South Africa 
and Australia from 2018.66 SKA’s satellite dishes will cover Australia, New 
Zealand, and eight SSA countries. After its completion, the SKA is expected to 
be the world’s single largest source of data. It is likely to help the host countries 
develop data- processing skills and enhance the BD ecosystem.67
 
Also, the Consortium for Advanced Research Training in Africa has worked 
with Google to develop a virtual research platform, letting nine university part-
ners, four research institutes, and eight partners in North America, Europe, and 
Australia collaborate on research, manage application processes, submit online 
assignments, attend webinars, and participate in discussion forums.
 
Medical research is being combined into huge searchable databases, which 
make it easier to assess and compare results. By looking at databases with related 
prescription dosages, environmental patterns, and age- related trends, physicians 
can accurately pinpoint the most likely causes of a health problem such as drug, 
weather and humidity, or animal migration patterns.68
5.4 Key Drivers of BD and Cloud Deployment in E- Learning 
and R&D
A number of forces and trends have given rise to a rapid deployment of BD and 
the cloud in e- learning and R&D activities. Here, we discuss some of the key 
driving factors.

94  Key Development Areas
5.4.1 Government Initiatives
Some governments have launched programs to facilitate access to BD- and 
cloud- based education to the broader public. One such program is Rwanda’s 
one digital ID per child program. The goal of the program is to provide access 
to digital education content via Ofﬁce 365.69
5.4.2 Local Innovations and Entrepreneurial Efforts
Local entrepreneurial ﬁrms have been among the driving forces behind the digi-
tization of educational activities in developing countries. BRCK is a high- 
proﬁle example of a successful technology ﬁrm focusing on the education sector 
based in developing countries. BRCK is one of the ﬁrst consumer electronics 
companies in Kenya. As of 2015, BRCK had sold over 2,500 devices in ﬁfty- 
four countries.70 As of March 2016, Kio Kits had been sold in schools in Kenya, 
Tanzania, and the Solomon Islands. There were also orders coming in from 
Sudan.71
5.4.3 Transnational Companies’ Efforts
Multinational companies’ efforts correlate with the development and deploy-
ment of BD and the cloud in R&D and educational activities in the developing 
world. In April 2016, Google announced its plan and commitment to train one 
million Africans in digital skills. Google supports Livity Africa to run two train-
ing programs: (1) Digify Bytes aims to provide young people with digital skills; 
and (2) Digify Pro is a three- month program aimed at digital specialists.72 As of 
April 2016, the programs had been launched in Nigeria, Kenya, and South 
Africa. Google has also launched digifyafrica.com, which is an online- learning 
portal containing a wide range of digital skills courses that are available to 
anyone in Africa for free.
 
IBM has launched similar initiatives in Africa. In 2015, IBM announced a 
plan to expand its Africa Technical Academy and Africa University Program 
and invest US$60 million by 2017 to bridge the skills gap for technical talent in 
Africa. The goal of the program is to provide IT professionals with advanced 
skills in analytics, cloud, and BD technologies. The training and certiﬁcation 
programs are expected to beneﬁt 1,000 faculty members and 35,000 students in 
eighty universities in more than twenty African countries by 2017. In Kenya, 
for instance, IBM has partnered with the Kenya Education Network (KENET) 
in order to deliver advanced hands- on certiﬁcation courses to faculty members 
and students in ﬁfty universities.73
 
IBM also has similar initiatives in other countries. For instance, universities in 
China, Qatar, Turkey, and other developing countries have participated in the 
IBM Cloud Academy, which allows access to a range of educational resources.74

Education and R&D  95
 
Hewlett- Packard Laboratories in India has developed a cloud- based person-
alized education delivery system. It provides an online school hosting service, 
where a virtual school can be created using the infrastructure (servers, storage, 
communication, and e- learning software). Its facilities include audio/video ses-
sions or online chats.75
 
Vietnam started collaborations with IBM in 2007. In 2008, the US- based IT 
services company Computer Sciences Corporation (CSC) and Vietnam’s First 
Consulting Group Vietnam (FCG) merged. CSC developed its Vietnamese 
operation as a center for cloud operational and support services. The University 
of Information Technology, a member of Vietnam National University, is using 
IBM PureFlex System, IBM Tivoli Service Delivery Manager, and IBM 
Workload Deployer to build a Smarter Computing IT infrastructure that hosts 
the university’s virtual campus and deploys virtual education services. The cloud 
is used to link government agencies, universities, private- sector research, start- 
ups, and other organizations.76
 
As a ﬁnal example, the Netherlands- based technology company Philips has 
teamed up with the Chinese Society of Cardiology to build the China National 
Cardiovascular Data Repository. Philips is also reported to be working on other 
databases in China.77
5.4.4 International Organizations
International organizations are also a driving force behind the adoption of BD 
and the cloud in e- learning and R&D. The United Nations Educational, Sci-
entiﬁc, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and HP’s “brain gain” initiatives 
entail cloud use to connect students with researchers abroad. Burkina Faso’s 
University of Ouagadougou has launched projects modeling the movement of 
pollutants in the Sourou River drainage basin. By 2009, successful pilot projects 
were carried out in Ghana, Nigeria, Senegal, and Zimbabwe. By 2011, twenty 
educational institutions in sixteen countries beneﬁted from the project.78
 
In June 2016, the Government of Rwanda and the World Bank signed a 
US$20 million credit facility agreement to strengthen higher education, which 
was part of a US$140 million credit approved by the World Bank for the 
Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project 
(ACE II).79 Other countries in the region receiving similar credits include Ethi-
opia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. The Uni-
versity of Rwanda’s College of Science and Technology would host a 
multidisciplinary center to use BD by combining expertise in statistics, eco-
nomics, business, computer science, and engineering.
 
Capacity Kenya, a USAID funded project, in collaboration with the Kenya 
Medical Training College and Africa Medical and Research Foundation, has 
hosted a local cloud environment that is used to locate and map healthcare 
specialists and develop virtual learning platforms for medical students.80

96  Key Development Areas
5.4.5 International Collaborations 
International collaborations and development of research capacity are some of 
the initiatives underway in developing countries to overcome resource chal-
lenges. For instance, CLR’s EKA supercomputer, which was the world’s fourth 
fastest in March 2009, was used for joint cloud research with Yahoo.
 
South African researchers have engaged in BD partnerships that include 
international public and private institutions. Some notable partners include the 
UK’s Cambridge University; and the Large Hadron Collider ATLAS (A Toroi-
dal LHC ApparatuS)81 and A Large Ion Collider Experiment (ALICE) at the 
European Organization for Nuclear Research (Conseil Européen pour la 
Recherche Nucléaire in French) (CERN) and the pan- European data network 
for the research and education community, Geant.82 The Human Heredity and 
Health in Africa (H3Africa) focuses on bioinformatics- related research in collab-
oration with Cambridge. Similarly, the UbuntuNet Alliance, which is a plat-
form for the AfricaConnect project, connects African countries to Geant. This 
allows South Africa to participate in large science projects in order to pursue 
data- intensive scientiﬁc discovery.83 Likewise, China Telecom has teamed up 
with Cambridge University in research involving M- health.84
5.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments
BD and the cloud are likely to address some of the challenges related to educa-
tion and R&D in developing countries. A number of encouraging signs have 
emerged to suggest that BD and the cloud can transform the R&D and educa-
tional systems in developing countries. E- learning tools such as Kio Kit epito-
mize the evolving role that BD and the cloud can play in enhancing educational 
outcomes.
 
The above discussion suggests that uses of BD and cloud in education are 
driven by philanthropic and charitable causes as well as motivated by proﬁt- 
oriented behaviors. Various platforms used have different levels of sophistication 
of technologies. Some platforms have been developed speciﬁcally for the devel-
oping world while others have been exported to developing countries following 
successful implementation in industrialized countries.
 
Nivi Sharma, president of BRCK Education noted that the use of e- learning 
solutions is only 20 percent technical such as switching on, accessing contents, 
and navigating different sections. According to her, socializing teachers is about 
80 percent of the challenge, which entails motivating them to think differently 
about the teaching and learning approaches.85
 
The above said, BD- and cloud- based learning solutions currently have a 
number of drawbacks and limitations. It is argued that teachers are “barely 
trained, unqualiﬁed, poorly paid.” Students do not have access to their own 
tablets. Teachers are expected to all read the scripts aloud word- for-word and 

Education and R&D  97
the contents are delivered on the tablet at the same time in each school every 
day. This “teacher turned- robot” would not be tolerated in most schools in 
most developed countries.86
 
Kio Kit and Eneza are based on less sophisticated technological solutions, 
which are well-suited in the context of LDCs. In a developing country, a com-
pany’s success depends on its ability to reduce costs. For instance, Eneza is 
exploring a number of revenue streams in order to reduce the costs of student 
access. In addition, the systems need to consider the unique situations facing 
developing countries. For instance, the Kio Kit is drop, dust, and water 
resistant.
 
A less discussed beneﬁt is that the availability of a complete digital record of 
students’ achievement and performance signiﬁcantly reduces the time to hire 
and recruit for potential employers. For instance, Flipkart’s hiring decisions 
were based solely on the candidates’ Nanodegree projects and Udacity proﬁle.87 
In this way, Flipkart has eliminated the in- person interview for well-qualiﬁed 
students in Udacity’s Nanodegree program.
Notes
 1 J. Klostermann, Education Technology, Cloud Tweaks, September 29, 2015, http://
cloudtweaks.com/2015/09/5-predictions- for-education- technology/.
 2 PRNewswire, Cloud Computing in Education Market Worth $12.38 Billion by 
2019, PRNewswire, July 22, 2014.
 3 Nir Kshetri and Lailani Laynesa Alcantara, Cloud Computing in Emerging Markets, 
San Murugesan and Irena Bojanova (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Cloud Computing (Chichester: 
Wiley- IEEE, 2016).
 4 L. Pritchett, Towards a New Consensus for Addressing the Global Challenge of the 
Lack of Education, Harvard University – Harvard Kennedy School (HKS); Center for 
Global Development, Center for Global Development Working Paper No. 43, June 29, 
2004, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1112689.
 5 The World Bank. 2004. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for 
the Poor.
 6 Rosie Spinks, Using Technology to Bridge the Learning Gap Across Africa 4 Guardian, 
April 4, 2016, www.theguardian.com/media- network/2016/apr/04/technology-
 bridge-learning- gap-africa.
 7 Matina Stevis and Simon Clark, Zuckerberg- Backed Startup Seeks to Shake Up African 
Education, Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2015, www.wsj.com/articles/startup- aims-
to- provide-a- bridge-to- education-1426275737.
 8 D.M. West, Big Data for Education: Data Mining, Data Analytics, and Web Dashboards, 
Brookings, September 4, 2012, www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2012/09/04-
education- technology-west.
 9 Nir Kshetri, Institutional and Economic Factors Affecting the Development of the 
Chinese Cloud Computing Industry and Market, Telecommunications Policy (2016) 40, 
116–129.
10 Kshetri and Alcantara, Cloud Computing in Emerging Markets.
11 Business Journal, Seattle Researchers Use Big Data, Advanced Computing to 
Make Major Malaria Discovery, Puget Sound Business Journal, May 16, 2016, www.
bizjournals.com/seattle/blog/health- care-inc/2016/05/seattle- researchers-use- big-
data- advanced.html.

98  Key Development Areas
12 Economist, Scientiﬁc Research in Africa is Gathering Momentum, The Economist, 
August 7, 2014, www.economist.com/news/middle- east-and- africa/21611112-
scientiﬁc- research-africa- gathering-momentum- rise.
13 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Sub- Saharan Africa, IEEE IT Professional 
(November/December, 2013) 15(6), 64–67. 
14 Heenali Patel, Could This Little Black Box Beat Facebook in Race to Connect Africa? 
CNN, January 14, 2016, www.cnn.com/2016/01/13/africa/kenya- tech-startup-
 internet-innovation/.
15 B. Jefwa, East Africa: BRCK Wins Educational Tech of the Year Award, CIO East 
Africa (Nairobi) January 21, 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/201601211423.html.
16 For more on BRCK, see http://shop.brck.com/brcks/brck- v1.html; Spinks, Using 
Technology to Bridge the Learning Gap Across Africa. 
17 Dinﬁn Mulupi, Is This “Digital Classroom in a Box” the Future of Education in 
Africa?, How We Made It in Africa, 7 February, 2016, www.howwemadeitinafrica.
com/is- this-digital- classroom-in- a-box- the-future- of-education- in-africa/.
18 T. Shapshak, This BRCK will Revolutionize Education in Africa, Forbes, September 
22, 
2015, 
www.forbes.com/sites/tobyshapshak/2015/09/22/this- brck-will-
 revolutionize-education- in-africa/#4836c0a5349f.
19 S. Cass, CeBIT2016: The Kio Kit is a Classroom in a Box, IEEE Spectrum, March 16, 
2016, http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech- talk/at- work/education/cebit2016-the- kio-kit-
 is-a- classroom-in- a-box.
20 Mulupi, Is This “Digital Classroom in a Box” the Future of Education in Africa?
21 Mail & Guardian Africa, In Kenya, a Digital Classroom in a Box – A Local Fix for a 
Very Local Problem, Mail & Guardian Africa, 16 November, 2015, http://mgafrica.
com/article/2015–11–16-in- kenya-a- digital-classroom- in-a- box.
22 Brett Haggard, BRCK’s Kio Kit is the Toughest School- In-A- Box Tablet- Based 
Classroom for Africa Yet, 22 September, 2015, www.htxt.co.za/2015/09/22/brcks-
 kio-kit- is-the- toughest-school- in-a- box-tablet- based-classroom- for-africa- yet/. 
23 J. Aglionby, BRCK: Rugged Tech for African Schools, Financial Times, September 
29, 2015, https://next.ft.com/content/6c1ba804–614c-11e5-a28b-50226830d644. 
24 Mulupi, Is This “Digital Classroom in a Box” the Future of Education in Africa?
25 All Africa, Kenya’s BRCK Provides African Digital Classroom in a Ruggedized 
Box With Its New Kio Kits, All Africa, October 1, 2015, http://allafrica.com/
stories/201510201550.html.
26 Aglionby, BRCK: Rugged Tech for African Schools.
27 International Finance Corporation (IFC), IFC Supports Expansion of Primary 
Education with Investment in Bridge International Academies, January 21, 2014, 
www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/industry_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/
industries/health+and+education/news/bridgeschools_feature.
28 Nathaniel Calhoun, A Key Moment in Kenya: What Ed Tech Can Learn From 
the GMO Backlash, Singularity Hub, September 26, 2015, http://singularityhub.
com/2015/09/26/a- key-moment- in-kenya- what-ed- tech-can- learn-from- the-gmo-
 backlash/.
29 Khosla Ventures, Bridge International Academies, 2016, www.khoslaventures.com/
portfolio/bridge- international-academies.
30 Bridge International Academies, Bridge International Academies 2016. History, 2016, 
www.bridgeinternationalacademies.com/company/history/. 
31 Vijayawada, Bridges International to Partner with AP state government, Business 
Standard, September 9, 2015, www.business- standard.com/article/pti- stories/bridges-
 international-to- partner-with- ap-state- government-115090901472_1.html. 
32 Education Investor, Bridge International Academies to Expand to India, Education 
Investor, August 28, 2015, www.educationinvestor.co.uk/ShowArticle.aspx?ID=4851
&AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1. 

Education and R&D  99
33 Christine Mungai, An Africa ﬁrst! Liberia Outsources Entire Education System to a 
Private Amer ican Firm. Why All Should Pay Attention, Mail & Guardian Africa, 31 
March 2016, http://mgafrica.com/article/2016–03–31-liberia- plans-to- outsource-
its- entire-education- system-to- a-private- company-why- this-is- a-very- big-deal- and-
africa- should-pay- attention. 
34 Recours4Kenya, Bridge International: Data Ofﬁcers: Who We Are 2016, https://
r4kenya.com/job/bridge- international-data- ofﬁcers/.
35 Terrance F. Ross, Is It Ever Okay to Make Teachers Read Scripted Lessons?, The 
Atlantic, October 10, 2014, www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2014/10/is- it-
okay- to-make- teachers-read- scripted-lessons/381265/.
36 Stevis and Clark, Zuckerberg- Backed Startup Seeks to Shake Up African 
Education.
37 Ibid.
38 Ibid.
39 International Finance Corporation (IFC), IFC Supports Expansion of Primary 
Education with Investment in Bridge International Academies, January 21 www.
ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/industry_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/
industries/health+and+education/news/bridgeschools_feature.
40 Bridge International Academies. 2013. Model. www.bridgeinternationalacademies.
com/approach/model/.
41 Ross, Is It Ever Okay to Make Teachers Read Scripted Lessons? 
42 E. Wolfe, “Academies- in-a- Box” Are Thriving—But Are They the Best Way to 
School the World’s Poor?, California Magazine, April 15, 2014, http://alumni.berkeley.
edu/california- magazine/just- in/2014–04–16/academies- box-are- thriving-are- they-
best- way-school- worlds. 
43 Economic Times, To Make Digital Connectivity Programs Sustainable, Focus on 
Revenue, Scale, and Value, The Economic Times, June 3, 2016, http://telecom.
economictimes.indiatimes.com/tele- talk/to- make-digital- connectivity-programs-
 sustainable-focus- on-revenue- scale-and- value/1539.
44 Jacques Bughin, Michael Chui, and James Manyika, Ten IT- Enabled Business 
Trends for the Decade Ahead, McKinsey & Co., May 2013, www.mckinsey.com/
insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/ten_it- enabled_business_trends_for_the_
decade_ahead. 
45 Sergio De Simone, Mobile- First in Africa: Education, Birth Registration, Banking, 
InfoQ, May 6, 2015, www.infoq.com/articles/mobile- ﬁrst-africa- education-banking. 
46 Ibid.
47 T. Jackson, The Techie who Hates Teachers and the Teacher who Hates Tech, 
Disrupt Africa, January 18, 2016, http://disrupt- africa.com/2016/01/the- techie-who-
 hates-teachers- and-the- teacher-who- hates-tech/.
48 Ibid. 
49 For more on Counsera, see http://edf.stanford.edu/readings/coursera; Trucano, M. 
2013. MOOCs in Africa, April 12, http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/moocs- in-
africa.
50 World Bank, Free Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) to Accelerate Youth 
Employment in Africa, February 21, 2013, http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/
EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/0,,contentMDK:23368962~pagePK:2
10058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:282386,00.html.
51 State Government, U.S. Department of State and Coursera Partner to Offer Enhanced 
Learning Opportunities, Ofﬁce of the Spokesperson, October 31, 2013, www.state.
gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2013/10/216098.htm.
52 Deccan Chronicle, Coursera, ISB Launch Investment Management Courses Deccan 
Chronicle, June 10, 2016, www.deccanchronicle.com/business/companies/100616/
coursera- isb-launch- investment-management- courses.html.

100  Key Development Areas
53 J. Wurth, Coursera Chief: iMBA a Glimpse at Future, The News Gazette, December 
3, 
2015, 
www.news- gazette.com/news/local/2015–12–03/coursera- chief-imba-
 glimpse-future.html. 
54 A. Bhargava, Our Main Interest is to Ensure Education is Available Free to All: Mike 
Feerick: Interview with founder & CEO, ALISON, a For- Proﬁt Social Enterprise 
Providing Online Workplace Skills to Learners All Over the World, June 11, 2016, 
www.business- standard.com/article/companies/our- main-interest- is-to- ensure-
education- is-available- free-to- all-mike- feerick-116060601258_1.html.
55 The name indicates that it is shorter than a one- year associate’s degree.
56 See Udacity nanodregree program, www.udacity.com/course/android- developer-
nanodegree–nd801; K. Chaykowski, Udacity Debuts in China, Launches 
In- Person Group Tutoring, Forbes, April 21, 2016, www.forbes.com/sites/
kathleenchaykowski/2016/04/21/udacity- debuts-in- china-launches- in-person-
 group-tutoring/#50cf846c4bd0.
57 A. Singh, Udacity, An Online Learning Portal That is Changing the $3bn Indian 
Market on its Head, Business Insider, July 12, 2016, www.businessinsider.in/Udacity-
 an-online- learning-portal- that-is- changing-the- 3bn-Indian- market-on- its-head/
articleshow/53177556.cms.
58 Chaykowski, Udacity Debuts in China, Launches In- Person Group Tutoring. 
59 Brinda Dasgupta, Flipkart Partners with Udacity to Hire Graduates Based on 
Nanodegree Projects, The Economic Times, January 28, 2016, http://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/jobs/flipkart- partners-with- udacity-to- hire-graduates- based-on-
 nanodegree-projects/articleshow/50752386.cms.
60 Stephen Goldstein, Mobile Data Collection: A Leapfrog Technology for Health 
Improvement, K4Health, January 26, 2012, www.k4health.org/blog/post/mobile-
 data-collection- leapfrog-technology- health-improvement.
61 Ken Banks, 2011. Mobile Phones and the Power of Data Collection, National Geographic 
Emerging Explorer, November 17, http://voices.nationalgeographic.com/2011/11/17/
mobile- phones-and- the-power- of-data- collection/. 
62 José Luiz Ribeiro Filho et al., Structuring and Implementing the Brazilian Academic 
Cloud: Strategy, Modelling, Challenges and Services, Proceedings and Report of the 
8th UbuntuNet Alliance annual conference, 2015, 190–209. 
63 EU Brazil Cloud Connect, EU Brazil Cloud Computing for Science Cloudscape Brazil 
2015, Federating Cloud e- Infrastructures and Creating new Markets, CloudScapeBrazil 
2015 Position Papers December 2015. 
64 Jacquelene Friedenthal, Human Capital Development for Big Data in South 
Africa, Global Statement, Embassy of Switzerland, September 2015, https://
globalstatement2015.wordpress.com/2015/09/23/big- data-in- south-africa/.
65 Ibid. 
66 SKA Africa, Square Kilometre Array, Media releases and statements www.ska.ac.za/
media/releases.php.
67 Economist, Scientiﬁc Research in Africa is Gathering Momentum.
68 Shelly Dutton, What Justin Bieber Proves About the Human Face of Big Data, 
Business 2 Community, September 8, 2011, www.business2community.com/big- data/
what- justin-bieber- proves-about- the-human- face-of- big-data- 01321898.
69 Angela Nganga, African Governments can Lead Cloud Computing Revolution, 
Standard, May 3, 2016, www.standardmedia.co.ke/business/article/2000200445/
african- governments-can- lead-cloud- computing-revolution.
70 Patel, Could This Little Black Box Beat Facebook in Race to Connect Africa? 
71 Cass, CeBIT2016.
72 IT News Africa, Google to Train 1 Million People in Africa in Digital Skills, April 12, 
2016, www.itnewsafrica.com/2016/04/google- to-train- 1-million- people-in- africa-
in- digital-skills/.

Education and R&D  101
73 A. Kajunju and J. Crozier, Closing Africa’s Skills Gap and Fostering Innovation 
Through Technology, Hufﬁngton Post, September 23, 2015, www.hufﬁngtonpost.
com/amini- kajunju/closing- africas-skills- ga_b_8180370.html.
74 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Developing Economies, IEEE Computer (October 
2010) 43(10), 47–55. 
75 N. Suresh, 2011. Innovative Solutions Made for India, Technology Review India 3(1), 11.
76 M. Cleverley, Viewpoints: Emerging Markets: How ICT Advances Might Help 
Developing Nations, Communications of the ACM (2009) 52(9), 30–32.
77 H. Nan, A “Cornerstone” in Health Innovations. China Daily, October 27, 2015, 
www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/2015–10/27/content_22292573.htm. 
78 UNESCO Education, Brain Gain Initiative, September 10–11, 2013, Paris, http://
tinyurl.com/lojktjc. 
79 Peterson Tumwebaze, WB Boosts Higher Education with Rwf15bn Credit Facility, New 
Times, June 18, 2016, www.newtimes.co.rw/section/article/2016–06–18/200900/.
80 Peter Nalika, KMTC Kitui Takes Healthcare to the Cloud, CIO East Africa, December 
13, 2012, http://tinyurl.com/pahlah8.
81 ATLAS is among the ﬁve large particle detectors associated with the Large Hadron 
Collider at the CERN laboratory.
82 Friedenthal, Human Capital Development for Big Data in South Africa.
83 Ibid.
84 Nir Kshetri, Big Data’s Big Potential in Developing Economies: Impact on Agriculture, 
Health and Environmental Security (Wallingford, Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences 
International (CABI) Publishing, 2016).
85 Mulupi, Is This “Digital Classroom in a Box” the Future of Education in Africa?
86 Steven J. Klees, Why World Bank Praise for a Proﬁt- Making Education Firm in 
Kenya was a Bad Idea, The Conversation, June 19, 2015, https://theconversation.com/
why- world-bank- praise-for- a-proﬁt- making-education- ﬁrm-in- kenya-was- a-bad-
 idea-42032.
87 Subho Ray, 20 Million Mobile App Developers Required by 2020: IAMAI President, 
The Economic Times, July 14, 2015, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2015–07–14/news/64405828_1_app- industry-app- ecosystem-app- economy.

6
E- COMMERCE
6.1 Introduction
Prior theory and empirical research on diffusion and adoption of e- commerce 
argues that ﬁrms based in developing economies face more barriers and obstacles 
to e- commerce utilization than those in industrialized countries.1 BD and the 
cloud have been touted as a key mechanism for leveling the playing ﬁeld for 
ﬁrms in developing economies, especially SMEs.2 
 
A key beneﬁt of the cloud is that it helps to cut IT costs. The cloud also 
allows ﬁrms to beneﬁt from a number of technologies without requiring a deep 
knowledge and expertise about the technologies’ underlying principles and con-
cepts. This means that ﬁrms can focus on their core businesses instead of being 
impeded by technical difﬁculties and obstacles. Such beneﬁts are of special value 
to ﬁrms in developing economies due to a number of economic, technological, 
and cognitive barriers they face in acquiring and using e- commerce 
technologies.
 
Most SMEs are not in a position to buy servers and storage and hire the IT 
staff to support them. The key activities associated with e- commerce such as 
designing websites, using search engine optimization techniques, managing 
email marketing campaigns, and inventory management and hiring data engi-
neers to capture complex data requirements are prohibitively expensive to build 
in- house for SMEs, and even for large enterprises in developing economies. 
Thanks to the cloud, ﬁrms in developing economies are in a position to provide 
more sophisticated e- commerce-related functionalities and capabilities, complex 
features, and user interfaces. For instance, multi-channel e- commerce platforms 
provided by CSPs such as ChannelAdvisor3 help to synchronize a retailer’s 
e- commerce channels and its marketing strategy. It also helps the retailer to 

E-commerce  103
expand to additional channels and take the e- commerce channel to the next 
level.4 Likewise, the Chinese company Alibaba’s AliCloud provides e- retailers 
with analytical data about website activities and predictions for indicators such 
as future sales and the products that are likely to be in high demand in the next 
period.5
 
Unsurprisingly BD- and cloud- based e- commerce activities are diffusing 
rapidly in developing economies, and serving a wide range of users and geo-
graphic areas thereby contributing to bottom lines of e- commerce ﬁrms. Con-
sider China, the world’s largest online retail market, in which e- commerce 
accounted for more than 13 percent of total retail sales of consumer goods in 
2016. A McKinsey Quarterly article asserted that e- commerce penetration in 
top- tier cities is reported to be about 90 percent of Internet users.6 Unsurpris-
ingly, there has been a rapid growth of data related to a number of indicators 
such as online shoppers, stock keeping unit (SKU) of products, response to price 
changes, promotional performance, and purchase habits of online shoppers. 
China’s major e- commerce players are using this data to build models in order 
to increase customer spending and retention. For example, BD can help 
segment and identify customer groups at different life stages and target offerings 
in order to increase sales. Some e- retailers are also reported to be using machine 
learning to make decisions related to product lines and promotional activities.7
 
In some developing economies, BD- and cloud- based e- commerce activities 
are expanding from Tier 1 cities to smaller cities and villages. For instance, the 
Indian e- retailer Jabong.com, which uses cloud offerings from Oracle, Adobe, 
and other CSPs,8 receives 60 percent of its revenues from smaller towns.9 In 
2012, Alibaba announced that its cloud- based app, Alipay, had established a 
rural business unit to reach non- e-commerce users in third- and fourth- tier 
cities and in rural areas.10
 
The evolution of cloud- based e- commerce has been a key driving force 
behind the rapid growth of the cloud industry and market in some developing 
economies. For instance, in Brazil, e- commerce ﬁrms, especially those exhibit-
ing big seasonal variations in demands, have been among the early adopters of 
the cloud.11 In India, companies such as MakeMyTrip.com, Flipkart.com, and 
Bookmyshow.com are using BD and the cloud to provide e- commerce offer-
ings to beneﬁt from the country’s rapidly expanding e- commerce market.12 For 
instance, Flipkart is reported to analyze twenty- ﬁve million rows of inventory 
data every day in order to make data- driven decisions. BD tools are reported to 
help e- commerce companies such as Snapdeal and HomeShop18 to generate 
30–40 percent of their orders.13
 
The rapid diffusion of cloud- based e- commerce activities in developing eco-
nomies are also associated with and facilitated by global CSPs’ entry into these 
economies. Firms in these economies are using e- commerce apps developed by 
global CSPs such as Google, Microsoft, Amazon, and Dell. For instance, the 
Indian online store Flipkart’s cloud infrastructure is built on Dell PowerEdge 

104  Key Development Areas
servers.14 Another Indian retailer, Zovi, uses cloud apps of Google, AWS, and 
GitHub. Likewise, as of September 2014, over 2,000 Chinese e- commerce 
companies, including Lefeng.com (cosmetics retailer) and Xiu.com (a fashion 
e- commerce site), were reported to be using Microsoft’s Azure platform.15
 
Regarding established foreign CSPs’ entry in developing economies, it is 
worth noting that they offer more sophisticated applications and services com-
pared to local CSPs. In order to illustrate this, let’s compare AWS and Alibaba’s 
cloud offerings. According to Alibaba’s ﬁling with the US SEC for an IPO, its 
cloud was capable of handling 3.6 million transactions per minute in 2014.16 On 
the other hand, Amazon’s data storage system reportedly handled 1.5 million 
requests per second in 2013.17 Likewise, as of August 2014, whereas Alibaba had 
only three BD centers in China and a smaller one in Hong Kong, AWS had 
twenty- ﬁve big and ﬁfty- two smaller data centers worldwide.18 Local CSPs such 
as Alibaba, on the other hand, are more effective in providing cloud- based solu-
tions suitable for local needs.
 
This chapter assesses the roles of BD and the cloud in stimulating the 
e- commerce markets in developing economies and their potential in overcom-
ing various e- commerce barriers in developing economies. Speciﬁcally, we 
focus on BD and the cloud’s roles in overcoming economic, socio- political, and 
cognitive barriers, which are identiﬁed as key hurdles in ﬁrms’ and consumers’ 
e- commerce adoption in developing economies.19 Following the OECD, we 
deﬁne an e- commerce transaction as the sale or purchase of products over the 
Internet or broad computer mediated networks.
6.2 Some Examples of BD- and Cloud- Based E- Commerce 
Applications Deployed in Developing Economies
6.2.1 The Demand Side: Users of BD- and Cloud-Based 
E- Commerce Solutions
Key features of the cloud have made it an attractive choice for offering 
e- commerce solutions by domestic and foreign companies to serve the develop-
ing economies. Zovi, a Bangalore India- based e- retailer, uses Google’s cloud 
application for communication and document storage and AWS for application 
(e.g., relationship- marketing software, chat, email, browsing, e- banking, security 
applications) and analytics (e.g., tools that allow the company to personalize 
services and product recommendations). For codes that drive the platform/
storefront, it uses the free open source hosting platform GitHub.20 The compa-
ny’s Chief Technology Ofﬁcer (CTO) noted that it made more sense ﬁnancially 
and operationally to invest resources on the core business of software develop-
ment rather than on hardware infrastructure and required maintenance. He 
further noted that AWS deployment helped the company avoid spending US$1 
million in initial capital expenses for hardware. The company also reportedly 

E-commerce  105
saved US$200,000 on annual operating expenses. Thanks to the cloud’s scalabil-
ity, the company was able to deal with the increase in visitors from 50 to 
100,000 per day without any intervention by the company.21
 
Snapdeal has placed the entire IT infrastructure on the cloud which include 
storage, web accelerator (proxy server to reduces time to access a website), and 
ﬁrewall components. It extensively utilizes SaaS solutions. It uses Google 
AdWords for tweeting catalogues and listings, contextual advertising, customer 
loyalty programs, and roll out campaigns.
 
Likewise, Bajaj Finserv’s auto loans business has adopted SaaS, which has led 
to better and faster decision- making. During the Diwali festival season, it pro-
cesses about 50,000 loans a day, which is ten times more than that could be 
handled by its regular capacity. Bajaj’s portal architecture, the main customer- 
facing interface dealing with over 410,000 customers, is entirely SaaS- driven. Its 
core data warehousing is on the cloud SQL Server, which is a relational data-
base system. Bajaj Finserv’s adoption of Salesforce.com’s offering led to an 
increase of loan applications from 1,500 to a peak of 8,500 per day during the 
festival season. The ability to send out SMS directly from Salesforce.com to 
dealers to communicate loan approval is reported to have had a signiﬁcant 
impact on loan turnaround times. It helped fulﬁll its ultimate goal in marketing 
the personal loan as a viable alternative to the credit card.22
 
Foreign multinationals operating in developing economies have also used the 
cloud to offer their products online. In 2012, the French cosmetics company 
Clarins launched an e- commerce site in Demandware. Before that the company 
had sold its products through other outlets. According to Laurent Malaveille, 
executive vice- president for global digital, CRM and e- commerce, a cloud- based 
e- commerce platform can effectively outsource the system’s day- to-day technical 
operations. The company’s e- commerce group got more time to focus on key 
features such as the loyalty program that are linked to the company’s success in 
online sales. The company reported a double- digit sales growth on its Chinese site 
in the ﬁrst six months after the launch.23 As of early 2014, Clarins had twelve 
e- commerce sites worldwide. Each site is customized for local tastes and runs on 
an SaaS e- commerce platform. Clarins could move quickly into many inter-
national markets without the necessity of adding IT staff to handle the expansion. 
Another advantage of the cloud is that it can handle the trafﬁc surges during holi-
days and promotions more effectively. The SaaS route also enabled the delivery of 
upgrades and new features automatically.
6.2.2 The Supply Side: Providers of BD- and Cloud- Based 
E- Commerce Solutions and Infrastructures in Developing 
Economies
As mentioned earlier, global CSPs’ entry has been a key factor in stimulating 
cloud- based e- commerce in developing economies. Microsoft’s Azure platform 

106  Key Development Areas
was launched in China in March 2014 with data centers in Beijing and Shang-
hai. By September 2014, it was reported to have 9,000 clients, 20 percent of 
which were e- commerce companies.24 They included Lefeng.com (cosmetics 
retailer), Xiu.com (a fashion e- commerce site, which ranked #54 in the Internet 
Retailer China 500,25 with 2013 online sales of US$180 million), and Cogobuy.
com (a B2B site). Xiu.com reported that Azure helped it handle the spike in 
trafﬁc triggered by an online sales event, which increased the sales by 500 
percent. Xiu.com’s technology director put the issue this way: 
During peak business days, our site may be hard to access for online 
shoppers. Without the cloud service we would have to spend lots of 
money and time to install new servers, and many of them would be idle 
for normal days when we don’t have sales. Azure helps us save the cost 
of buying servers, and expands our site access capability only when we 
need it.26 
As a further example, Brazil’s e- commerce website platform Shop Delivery, 
which allows businesses to create and run their own online store, uses Micro-
soft’s Azure.27
 
Canada’s Shopify offers cloud- based POS software for brick- and-mortar 
retailers (e.g., a cash register to input products, tally costs, and conduct ﬁnancial 
transactions, communicate with inventory levels, etc.) as well as to e- retailers. 
For e- retailers, it offers site templates that can be customized, integrated shop-
ping carts, search engine optimization (SEO) feature, email marketing, inven-
tory management, and analytics. Users also gain from m- Commerce shopping 
cart, payment gateways to authorize credit card payments, and social media 
integration. In July 2013, Shopify teamed up with Singapore’s SingTel to offer 
e- commerce solutions in Asia. Shopify started offering localized e- commerce 
solutions in India, Indonesia, and Malaysia.28 About 1,000 new stores were 
created in the last week of August 2013 on Shopify in India.29
 
GS- based technology companies are evolving rapidly and are playing key 
roles in the development of BD- and cloud- based e- commerce. Alibaba, which 
is now the world’s largest e- commerce company, is among the most high 
proﬁle companies in developing economies with signiﬁcant operations in cloud-
 based e- commerce activities. It has been taking a number of initiatives to 
become a one- stop shop for SMEs conducting business online. It provides serv-
ices such as online marketplaces, back- end e- commerce merchant services and 
its own cloud- computing e- commerce platform.30 As of September 2014, its 
e- commerce platform offered traditional features such as online storefronts and 
an order management system. The company is planning to augment the depth 
of its offerings by expanding features to support online merchants. In August 
2014, AliCloud introduced a data mining and analytics product known as Open 
Data Processing Service (ODPS), which provides e- retailers with analytical data 

E-commerce  107
about website activities. The users of the service are required to pay about 
US$100 per month.31 When merchants enter sales data, the ODPS algorithm 
scans them and provides predictions for indicators such as future sales and the 
products that are likely to be in high demand in the next period.32
 
Alibaba’s cloud computing business unit has also launched Aliyun Search, 
which will help users to research various brands and products in order to make 
buying decisions.33 Alibaba’s cloud unit also specializes in data management 
which involves e- commerce data mining and processing to customization. Sug-
gestions from Aliyun Search are reportedly based on buying behavior and the 
results are presented based on an e- commerce point of view. Experts say that 
Alibaba is in the best competitive position to develop an e-commerce-oriented 
search engine since it can combine Yahoo’s search algorithm with purchasing 
insights from Taobao and ETao.34 Note that Alibaba’s Taobao is China’s largest 
e- commerce platform and ETao is a comparison shopping engine, which 
reportedly had over a billion product listings and more than 5,000 B2C and 
group buying websites.35 The cloud- based app, Alipay Wallet, allows users to 
link Alipay accounts to local bank accounts. Users can also transfer money into 
it from a prepaid account. In this way, it facilitates online payment services in 
e- commerce.36 In August 2014, Alipay Wallet announced that it had released 
more than sixty new APIs for third- party developers in order to build online 
storefronts.37 This means that online storefronts can integrate Alipay’s under-
lying programming functions into their applications, which is expected to make 
it easier and faster for the merchants to develop Alipay Wallet virtual storefronts. 
Alipay started recruiting merchants for its wallet app in June 2014. In two 
months, it recruited over 1,000 merchants.38 Retailers who set up in- app store-
fronts can sell and market products to Alipay Wallet users and gain access to 
data analytic tools that allow them to personalize product recommendations.39
 
Another visible Chinese e- commerce company is JD.com. It uses BD to 
keep inventories low and speed up delivery. It also employs sophisticated BD- 
based models to run ﬁnancing for customers.40 JD.com has formed a partnership 
with Tencent to integrate e- commerce into the WeChat app. Based on what a 
user is buying and searching at JD.com, Tencent can send coupons in real-
time.41
 
JD.com has also made heavy investments in the IoT. Its 3 System Fridge has 
sensors on every shelf and an internal camera. It registers the time and date 
when food items are stored inside. The data is fed to a smart screen on the 
fridge’s front side, which alerts when an expiry date is coming close. It can also 
order the next grocery list from JD.com based on the fridge’s contents.42 As of 
mid- 2016, JD.com was working with the Joy Link platform, which connects a 
3 System Fridge with the consumer’s digital devices. The internal camera can be 
accessed from a smart device’s app. A consumer thus can check the fridge’s con-
tents even when they are away from home and order groceries. The smart 
screen on the front also provides opportunities for advertising for e- marketers.43

108  Key Development Areas
 
The Delhi- based customer segmentation and marketing automation platform 
Betaout offers an SaaS- based offering for e- commerce companies. It provides 
real-time data and machine learning to segment customers, which can help 
e-commerce companies retain customers, increase conversions, and personalise 
user engagement.44 
 
Another example of an e- commerce solution developed in developing 
economies is uAfrica.com.45 It provides a platform to build a cloud-based 
e- commerce site (uShop.co.za). Its initial offerings included basic online store-
front services. The company plans to expand to additional services related to 
payments, logistics, and marketing supports and then to a multi- channel selling 
solution. An important feature of uAfrica.com’s basic product offering is the 
ability to trade via mobile devices.46 As another example, in 2014, Nigeria’s 
Delivery Science launched an SaaS- based model which provides automated 
proof- of-delivery, intelligent transportation management, and inventory man-
agement to facilitate ﬁrms’ e- commerce activities.47 Delivery science’s BD appli-
cations help e- commerce and logistics businesses track and manage deliveries. Its 
proof- of-deliver product has been updated to integrate services such as simple 
transport management, point- of-sale, and inventory management and allocation 
products.48
 
India’s Wipro offers cloud-based e- commerce solutions, including omni- 
channel B2B & B2C e- commerce, platform transformations, and marketplace 
implementation.49 Note that an omni- channel strategy involves supporting all 
channels with a holistic view of customer experience. Omni- channel inter-
actions are integrated and connected, and aim to provide rich customer experi-
ences across devices, channels, time, and context.50
6.3 Barriers to E- Commerce in Developing Economies
As noted earlier, prior research has identiﬁed e- commerce barriers in terms of 
three forms of negative feedback systems: economic, socio- political, and 
cognitive.51
6.3.1 Economic Barriers
GS- based ﬁrms face a number of economic barriers, such as the high costs of ICT 
infrastructure, equipment, and operation and the lack of purchasing power. Prior 
research suggests that ﬁrms which use technologies that are more web- compatible 
and with a higher number and variety of web functionalities (e.g., presentation of 
contents, capture of transactions securely, and personalization, etc.) are more likely 
to adopt e- commerce.52 A larger proportion of ﬁrms in developing economies 
than in more industrialized countries lack such technologies.
 
The unavailability of credit cards is another major hurdle. This has been a 
major barrier since as of 2013, only 3 percent of the Sub- Saharan African 

E-commerce  109
population had credit cards.53 In Africa, the lack of viable payment systems is 
considered to be a bigger hurdle than the lack of connectivity.54 There are 
also problems associated with the lack of economies of scale in small develop-
ing countries.55 Slow Internet diffusion in developing countries can be attrib-
uted to market and infrastructural factors controlling the availability of ICTs. 
A large proportion of the population in many developing economies also lacks 
the basic prerequisites to Internet use. In Tanzania and other countries, for 
instance, a lack of electrical supply and a low teledensity have resulted in a 
low Internet usage in rural areas.56 Consequently ﬁrms in developing eco-
nomies, especially SMEs, exhibit a very low level of adoption of the Internet 
and e- commerce. For instance, in India, as of 2013, only about 5 percent of 
SMEs were reported to be using a digital platform.57
 
Due to the above barriers e- commerce provides, in developing economies 
they are exploring alternative business models.58 A large proportion of 
e- commerce in Asian economies such as China, Indonesia, and India takes place 
on a cash on delivery (CoD) basis.59 The CoD system, however, has some major 
drawbacks, especially from the businesses’ perspective. In Indonesia, for instance, 
it is a common practice for customers to cancel their purchases after the prod-
ucts are delivered. In other cases, customers order more than one unit of the 
same product (e.g., in different sizes, and colors), then choose the one they like 
after the products are delivered.60
6.3.2 Socio- Political Barriers
Socio- political barriers can be explained in terms of formal and informal institu-
tions.61 They often tend to be more difﬁcult and time- consuming to overcome 
than technological barriers.62 The literature provides abundant evidence that 
legal barriers are among major hindrances to e- commerce in the developing 
world. A survey conducted among Brazilian consumers indicated that the low 
e- commerce adoption rate was related to government regulations such as 
concern about privacy and security, lack of business laws for e- commerce, inad-
equate legal protection for Internet purchases, and concern over Internet taxa-
tion.63 Likewise, in China, the lack of institutional trust due to the weak rule of 
laws was a major barrier to e- commerce.64
6.3.3 Cognitive Barriers
Cognitive factors are related to mental maps of individuals and organizational 
decision makers.65 Some analysts argue that cognitive barriers are more serious 
than other categories of barriers in developing countries.66 Many effects such as 
inadequate awareness, knowledge, skills, and conﬁdence serve as cognitive feed-
backs. In developing countries, organizations’ human, business, and technolo-
gical resources, a lack of awareness and understanding of potential opportunities, 

110  Key Development Areas
risk aversion, and inertia often lead to a negative cognitive assessment of 
e- commerce.67 Businesses are also concerned about handling demands during 
peak- load periods. A ﬁnal consideration with cognitive barriers is related to 
general and computer illiteracy and a lack of English language skills.68
6.4 BD and the Cloud’s Potential to Overcome the Barriers to 
E- Commerce
Table 6.1 presents the cloud’s role in overcoming various barriers to 
e- commerce in developing economies. The table also gives some perspective to 
the barriers that are not overcome by the cloud or new barriers that have 
emerged in the cloud environment.
6.4.1 The Roles of BD and the Cloud in Overcoming 
Economic Barriers
The main attractiveness of the cloud is that it leads to a reduction in upfront 
investments and addresses constraints related to organizations’ human, business, 
and technological resources. For instance, India’s Apeejay Stya and Svran 
Group, which is a US$1 billion plus conglomerate, moved the entire IT func-
tions including the mission- critical ones to AWS. The company reported that 
by doing so, it reduced IT staff from twenty- three to three and cut costs by 
over 80 percent.69
 
As noted above, market and infrastructural factors controlling the availability 
of ICTs and a lack of purchasing power act as key barriers in developing eco-
nomies. To address the low purchasing power, local and foreign CSPs are offer-
ing e- commerce solutions at low prices. In August 2014, the head of AWS in 
India noted that the company had lowered prices forty- ﬁve times since 2006.70 
Offerings by local and foreign companies are bundled as solutions to facilitate 
the use of the cloud for e- commerce. In India, for instance, Airtel’s data solu-
tions (DSL, the premium Internet offering Internet Leased Port [ILP], 3G and 
4G) are bundled with Shopify’s cloud- based solutions. The bundled offerings 
provide the features needed for SMEs’ e- commerce deployment.71
 
A large number of ﬁrms and individuals in developing economies tend to use 
technologies that lack web compatibilities and have a limited number and 
variety of web functionalities. For instance, it is not possible to use low- end 
mobile phones to perform most e- commerce activities. In this regard, note that 
in 2011, India had more than 700 million mobile phone users, which was about 
forty times the number of Internet users in the country. Over 50 percent of 
these phones had only voice and text messaging capabilities. Technology com-
panies have come up with innovative solutions in order to overcome obstacles 
associated with accessing the cloud- based applications with technologies with 
limited functionalities such as low- end mobile phones. To take one example, to 

E-commerce  111
cater to the needs of low- end mobile phone users, Hewlett- Packard has 
developed cloud- based SiteOnMobile to deliver Internet experience over low- 
end phones.72
 
Many SMEs in India that have invested in e- commerce websites but they 
have not been able to beneﬁt from them. SiteOnMobile enables them to deﬁne 
speciﬁc tasks on their websites. One example of a task could be “Buy Solar 
Stoves.” SiteOnMobile makes those tasks accessible to their customers from 
mobile phones. For this purpose, HP introduced the concept of “Tasklets,” 
which are special types of “task- based widgets” that can be created by a user by 
“showing the action once on the browser.”73 For the ﬁrst time, the user per-
forms the tasks on multiple websites using HP’s special browser. SiteOnMobile 
then automatically generates a widget- like interaction for that task for the user. 
Let us assume that a user has created a tasklet of “Book a Taxi.” In order to 
book a taxi, the user does not have go through several webpages to reach the 
booking page. SiteOnMobile will perform all the steps for the user for sub-
sequent uses once the interactions are created in HP’s special browser. The task-
lets can be accessed by users via SMS or voice services. SiteOnMobile performs 
all the needed tasks on the cloud and sends back the result to the user over 
SMS. For example, if an SMS “Book a Taxi” is sent to a predeﬁned SMS access 
code, a taxi will be booked and the user will receive back details about the taxi 
that has been booked.74
 
Regarding the barriers associated with a low penetration of mainstream 
online payment methods such as credit cards, it was reported that foreign CSPs 
require cloud users to pay with credit cards. Among the encouraging develop-
ments is the emergence of local CSPs, which sell to non- credit card users. In 
Africa, for instance, CSPs accept payments by the mobile payment system, 
MPesa. Likewise, given the unavailability of mainstream payment methods such 
as credit cards and the risks of existing mechanisms such as CoD, cloud- based 
payment mechanisms such as Alipay possess a high degree of attractiveness and 
utility. Alipay Wallet’s features include payments at brick- and-mortar stores, 
transportation booking, and appointment booking at hospitals. Merchants can 
also offer discounts, coupons, and special membership privileges to Alipay 
Wallet users.75 Users of Alipay can also make e- payments at brick- and-mortar 
shops.76 In June 2014, the Chinese online grocery store Yihaodian, which is 
majority- owned by WalMart, launched a store front on Alipay Wallet. It 
allowed customers to buy groceries from their Alipay Wallet app.77
6.4.2 The Roles of BD and the Cloud in Overcoming  
Socio- Political Barriers 
The cloud’s transformative potential has resulted in signiﬁcant national political 
decisions to utilize this technology for key economic activities. To some extent, 
such decisions addressed issues such as the lack of appropriate government 

112  Key Development Areas
 regulations related to privacy and security, and the lack of institutional trust. 
For instance, Brazil’s federal representative Ruy Carneiro presented a bill 
for the creation of a cloud computing framework and the introduction of data 
protection laws. The bill is intended to address the lack of regulations around 
data privacy protection. It also addresses interoperability and standards for serv-
ices provision.78 Likewise, India’s industry body, National Association of Soft-
ware and Services Companies, has issued best practice security standards, 
procedures, and guidelines for its member companies. However, compliance is 
voluntary.
6.4.3 The Roles of BD and the Cloud in Overcoming 
Cognitive Barriers
Unlike client- based computing, cloud- based software is easier to install, main-
tain, and update.79 For instance, in the above examples, Demandware makes 
new features available to Clarins on a rolling basis. Thus in order to expand 
e- commerce activities, Clarins is not required to undergo any major upgrade 
project or add staff for maintenance.80
 
The cloud’s key features such as ability to reduce upfront investments and 
handle business processes and transaction without the intervention of an organ-
ization have greatly increased the conﬁdence of ﬁrms in developing economies. 
According to a survey conducted by Vmware and Forrester in 2012, 80 percent 
of respondents in India believed that the cloud would help reduce IT costs, and 
82 percent believed that it will help optimize IT management and automation 
capabilities.81
 
Measures taken by global CSPs have also helped overcome cognitive barriers 
associated with e- commerce adoption. Global CSPs such as Amazon and 
Google hold seminars for start- ups in India, Indonesia, and many other devel-
oping economies.82 There are also consultants, who teach businesses how to use 
the clouds of Amazon and other CSPs. In addition, Google has teamed up with 
Endurance International Group to help African and Southeast Asian SMEs to 
launch online businesses. Endurance helps SMEs set up Google My Business, 
which is a free service and helps customers ﬁnd a business online. SMEs can pay 
for add- ons such as the creation of a full- blown website and launch of 
e- commerce.83 In this way, ﬁrms’ e- commerce adoption constitutes a gradual 
process instead of a quick change.
6.4.4 Barriers That Still Remain and New Barriers That Have 
Emerged in the BD and Cloud Environment
Obviously, it is not possible for BD and the cloud to overcome all the barriers 
facing developing economies. These economies still face severe market and 
infrastructure constraints. Most cloud services, for instance, rely on bandwidth, 

TABLE 6.1 The Roles of Big Data and the Cloud in Overcoming the Barriers to E-Commerce
Barrier
Barriers Overcome by BD and the Cloud
Barriers That Still Remain and New Barriers That Have Emerged in 
the BD/Cloud Environment
Economic
s   )NNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS TO OVERCOME OBSTACLES ASSOCIATED WITH accessing the cloud-based applications with low-end mobile 
phones (e.g., SiteOnMobile).
s   #30S ARE OFFERING ECOMMERCE SOLUTIONS AT LOW PRICES
s   /FFERINGS BY LOCAL AND FOREIGN COMPANIES ARE BUNDLED
s   ,OCAL PAYMENT SOLUTIONS SUCH AS -0ESA AND !LIPAY
s   ,ACK OF BANDWIDTH
s   ,ACK OF ELECTRICITY
s   ,ACK OF LOCAL DATA CENTERS
s   ,IMITED )NTERNET AND 0# USE
Sociopolitical
s   )NTRODUCTION OF DATA PROTECTION LAWS EG "RAZIL	
s   4RADE ASSOCIATIONS ROLES )NDIAS .!33#/-S BEST PRACTICE security standards, procedures, guidelines.
s   ,OCAL DATA CENTER REQUIREMENT AND OTHER PROTECTIONIST measures in the cloud sector (e.g., in Brazil, China and 
India).
Cognitive 
s   #LOUDBASED SOLUTIONS ARE EASIER TO INSTALL MAINTAIN AND update.
s   !BILITY TO REDUCE UPFRONT INVESTMENTS AND HANDLE BUSINESS processes and transaction: increased the conﬁdence.
s   -EASURES TAKEN BY GLOBAL #30S TO CREATE CLOUD AWARENESS (e.g., Google’s seminars for start-ups).
s   #ONCERN ABOUT THE LOSS OF CONTROL IN THE CLOUD MODEL Unwillingness to outsource.
s   2EDUCTION IN CONTROL OVER CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE
s   #ONCERNS RELATED TO DATA SECURITY

114  Key Development Areas
which is the most glaring shortcoming of most developing countries, especially 
in the rural areas. Likewise, the cloud is not of much use to ﬁrms who lack 
access to basic needs such as electricity.
 
Cloud- based e- commerce solutions in these economies are provided using 
cloud servers located at distant data centers in foreign countries. For instance, 
India’s nationwide cab- booking service Getmecab uses Amazon servers. The 
closest servers are in Singapore.84 Likewise, India’s Tata Communications 
opened a data center in Singapore to offer cloud services to foreign clients due 
to Singapore’s cutting- edge IT infrastructure, the availability of IT experts, and 
government incentives.85 Due primarily to poor bandwidth in India, Tata Com-
munications decided to locate the facility in Singapore, despite Singapore’s 
expensive land and high temperatures, which increase the costs of keeping the 
servers cool. As of 2014, India’s national 3G coverage in India was 9 percent. In 
those cities where 3G coverage is available, the services perform poorly due to 
congestion.86
 
Many governments have viewed the cloud as a disruptive technology with 
the potential to change the national competitive performance. They are also 
preoccupied with national security concerns regarding the sensitive data and 
information stored in the cloud. Consequently many governments in develop-
ing economies have pursued a somewhat protectionist agenda regarding the 
development of the cloud industry and market. These barriers are especially 
problematic for global efﬁciency because technologies such as cloud are cross- 
border in nature.87
 
The Indian government proposed a measure which requires companies oper-
ating in the country to locate part of their IT infrastructure in the country. This 
requirement was for providing law enforcement agencies ready access to 
encrypted data on servers in India. This measure also prohibits businesses to 
move data related to Indian citizens and government organizations out of the 
country. Failure to comply will be a criminal offence and responsible people 
will face prosecution.88 The guidelines of the central bank, the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI), prohibit storing customer data outside India, which limits cloud 
adoption by ﬁnancial services companies.89
 
Similarly, due to concerns related to national security, currency control, and 
industrial policy, China has local data server requirements.90 The Chinese gov-
ernment has also expressed a desire to see the cloud industry dominated by local 
companies. In addition, it wants Chinese companies to control a higher share of 
world cloud markets. To fulﬁll this desire, it has taken a number of measures. 
According to the NDRC, the government has viewed cloud computing as a 
strategic industry.91 It is worth noting that companies in other strategic sectors 
are eligible for market protection. China has classiﬁed cloud computing as a 
value-added telecom service (VATS). Under the Chinese regulatory regime, 
and in accordance with China’s WTO commitments, foreign- company owner-
ship is capped at 50 percent in VATS ventures and 49 percent for basic telecom 

E-commerce  115
services.92 This means that foreign CSPs are required to ﬁnd local partners in 
order to operate in China. While the central government deﬁnes cloud com-
puting as a value- added service, there is no speciﬁc “cloud computing” category 
in the license list of value- added services. To deploy its Microsoft Ofﬁce 365 in 
China, it is hosted by a Chinese domestic company by license requirement. 
Other foreign cloud providers such as Amazon, IBM, and SAP have followed 
similar models.93
 
In the same vein, in September 2013, the then Brazilian President Rousseff 
asked the Congress to introduce regulations to require foreign companies to 
store data generated by Brazilians on local servers.94 Among foreign ICT com-
panies, there is widespread and growing disenchantment with the adequacy of 
the Brazilian regulatory system for the cloud industry. In the 2012 ranking of 
the Business Software Alliance of twenty- four countries, in terms of the cloud 
environment, Brazil ﬁnished last. In the 2013 BSA Global Cloud Computing 
Scorecard, Brazil improved slightly and ranked twenty- second of the twenty- 
four economies considered.95 The scorecard considered Data Privacy, Security, 
Cybercrime, Intellectual Property Rights, Support for Industry- Led Standards, 
and International Harmonization of Rules Promoting Free Trade and ICT 
Readiness, Broadband Deployment. Brazil was among the countries showing 
the most improvement in their infrastructure score for 2013. Brazil also lacks an 
appropriate framework for the development of ICT standards, and gives 
domestic service providers preferential treatment in public procurement.96
 
Regarding the cognitive institutions, the cloud involves outsourcing IT 
functions. Some organizations hold the view that the adoption of the cloud 
model would result in the loss of control. For instance, China’s state- owned 
enterprises (SOEs) exhibit a higher level of concern regarding data security: they 
have a tendency to distrust CSPs and are reluctant to outsource IT needs and 
move to the cloud.97 Indeed, until not long ago, SOEs were not allowed to use 
outsourced data center services.98 There also have been concerns related to data 
security, which has made businesses cautious in spending on cloud services. A 
further limitation of cloud- based e- commerce solutions concerns the reduction 
in control over customer experience.99 
6.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments
While some of the barriers to e- commerce highlighted above could be miti-
gated through the use of clouds (e.g., the lack of human, business, and techno-
logical resources, the low level of computer illiteracy, etc.), other barriers (e.g., 
the lack of credit card, the lack of awareness and understanding of potential 
e- commerce opportunities), require broader efforts to overcome. Some socio- 
political measures (e.g., by the Brazilian government and India’s NASSCOM) 
taken to facilitate the development of the cloud industry and market are likely 
to have positive effects on e- commerce. Nonetheless, other sets of measures 

116  Key Development Areas
taken by national governments to protect economic and national security con-
cerns, which are associated with the cloud’s radical and disruptive nature, are 
likely to have adverse effects on the healthy competition and may limit the 
choices available to businesses. Buyers and sellers are thus likely to face different 
types of socio- political barriers to engage in e- commerce activities. Reduction 
in control over customer experience and concerns regarding security in the 
cloud should also be taken into account to assess the potential of cloud- based 
e- commerce solutions.
 
Overall, the cloud has increased the conﬁdence and capability, and improved 
the competence of ﬁrms in developing economies, especially of SMEs, to 
engage in e- commerce activities. Cloud- based e- commerce infrastructures and 
applications as well as retail solutions such as POS systems are less expensive, 
which is especially important for SMEs. Another key beneﬁt is that thanks to 
the cloud, businesses are less concerned about fulﬁlling demands during the 
peak data ﬂow periods.
 
The experiences of economies such as China and India indicate that cloud- 
based e- commerce solutions provided by local and global CSPs have enriched 
the e- commerce ecosystems of these economies. These CSPs’ cloud offerings 
have increased the breadth and depth of e- commerce offerings and have made it 
convenient and attractive for both buyers and sellers to engage in e- commerce 
activities. In a further attempt to improve the ease with which ﬁrms can adopt 
cloud- based e- commerce, offerings by local and foreign companies are being 
bundled as solutions.
Notes
 1 Nir Kshetri, Barriers to E- Commerce and Competitive Business Models in Developing 
Countries: A Case Study, Electronic Commerce Research and Applications (2007) 6, 
443–452.
 2 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Developing Economies, IEEE Computer (2010) 
43(10), 47–55. 
 3 See Channel Advisor, www.channeladvisor.com/.
 4 Yoko Wang, Multichannel E- Commerce Platform: The Simple Solution to Manage 
Online Retail Business, Enterprise Innovation, June 21, 2013, http://enterpriseinnovation.
net/article/multichannel- e-commerce- platform-simple- solution-manage- online-
retail- business-1614127842.
 5 Frank Tong, Alibaba Expands Its Cloud Computing Business, Internet Retailer, 
September 3, 2014, www.internetretailer.com/2014/09/03/alibaba- expands-its-
 cloud-computing- business.
 6 K.W. Wang, Using Analytics to Turbocharge China’s e- Commerce Performance, 
McKinsey Quarterly, June, 2016, www.mckinsey.com/industries/high- tech/our-
 insights/using- analytics-to- turbocharge-chinas- ecommerce-performance?cid=china-
 eml-alt- mkq-mck- oth-1606.
 7 Ibid. 
 8 Sudhir Chowdhary, Oracle Helps Indian Firms Click with the Cloud, Indian Express, 
January 27, 2014, http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/oracle- helps-indian- ﬁrms-
click- with-the- cloud/1220809/; and Information Week, 80 percent of Marketers are 

E-commerce  117
Leveraging Analytics to Drive Their Business: Adobe Report, Information Week, 2013, 
www.informationweek.in/informationweek/news- analysis/286416/80-percent-
 marketers-leveraging- analytics-drive- business-adobe- report.
 9 Manideepa Talukdar, Online Shopping in Small Town India: Will it be a Feasible 
Model? Infosys, 2014, www.infosysblogs.com/retail- cpg/2014/01/online_shopping_
in_small_town_.html. 
10 China CSR, Alipay Aims to Bring E- commerce to Rural Chinese, China CSR, 
December 24, 2012, www.chinacsr.com/en/2012/12/24/8743-alipay- aims-to-
 bring-e- commerce-to- rural-chinese/.
11 A. Mari, Brazilian Cloud Computing Market to Reach $1.1bn by 2017, ZDNet, 
2014, 
www.zdnet.com/brazilian- cloud-computing- market-to- reach-1–1bn-by- 
2017–7000028158/.
12 Sandeep Mathur, Cloud Computing is a Force Multiplier for Emerging Markets, Forbes, 
January 9, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/oracle/2014/01/09/cloud- computing-is- a-
force- multiplier-for- emerging-markets/2/.
13 C. Murgai, Why Big Data is a Game Changer for the Indian eCommerce Industry, 
Data Quest India, March 23, 2015, www.dqindia.com/why- big-data- is-a- game-
changer- for-the- indian-ecommerce- industry/. 
14 Economic Times, With Dell’s PowerEdge Servers, Flipkart Leads India’s E- 
Commerce Transformation, The Economic Times, February 21, 2014, http://articles.
economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014–02–21/news/47559480_1_flipkart- online-
shopping- technology-partner.
15 Frank Tong, Microsoft Offers Its Azure Cloud Computing Service to Chinese E- 
Retailers, Internet Retailer, September 9, 2014, www.internetretailer.com/2014/09/05/
microsoft- offers-cloud- computing-services- chinese-e- retailers.
16 Quentin Hardy, Alibaba has a Computing Cloud, and It’s Growing, Too, New York 
Times, August 4, 2014, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/08/04/alibaba- has-a-
 computing-cloud- and-its- growing-too/.
17 Quentin Hardy, Amazon Bares Its Computers, New York Times, November 15, 2014, 
http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/11/15/amazon- bares-its- computers/?_php 
=true&_type=blogs&_r=0.
18 Hardy, Alibaba has a Computing Cloud, and It’s Growing, Too. 
19 Kshetri, Barriers to E- Commerce and Competitive Business Models in Developing 
Countries. 
20 Varun Haran, How Cloud Storage is Empowering a New Breed of Indian Digital 
Service Companies, Information Week, April 1, 2014, www.informationweek.in/
informationweek/news- analysis/288141/cloud- storage-empowering- breed-indian-
 digital-service- companies.
21 Heena Jhingan, Saving with Amazon Cloud, Financial Express, June 7, 2013, http://
archivecomputer.ﬁnancialexpress.com/case- study/1403-saving- with-amazon- cloud.
22 Rajiv Rao, Reaching for the Cloud: India’s SaaS Journey, ZDNet, December 11, 2013, 
www.zdnet.com/in/reaching- for-the- cloud-indias- saas-journey- 7000023820/.
23 Mary K. Pratt, Cloud- Based ECommerce Platforms Give Retailers Global Flexibility, 
CIO, Febraury 26, 2014, www.cio.com/article/748449/Cloud_based_Ecommerce_
Platforms_Give_Retailers_Global_Flexibility.
24 Tong, Alibaba Expands Its Cloud Computing Business.
25 China 500: Meet the Kingpins of the World’s No. 1 E- Commerce Market, Internet 
Retailer, www.internetretailer.com/china500/.
26 Tong, Microsoft Offers Its Azure Cloud Computing Service to Chinese e- Retailers. 
27 Michael Oleaga, Microsoft Azure Improves Mexico’s Government Tax Return 
Agency, Cloud Computing Platform Expands in Brazil, Latin Post, June 17, 2014, 
www.latinpost.com/articles/15020/20140617/microsoft- azure-improves- mexicos-
government- tax-return- agency-cloud- computing.htm.

118  Key Development Areas
28 Enricko Lukman, After Singapore and India, Shopify Launches in Indonesia and 
Malaysia, Tech in Asia, August 22, 2013, www.techinasia.com/singapore- india-
shopify- launches-indonesia/.
29 K. Thomas, 1,000 New Stores in a Week: Shopify Success in India Wildly Exceeds 
Company Expectations, Tech Vibes, August 29, 2013, www.techvibes.com/blog/
shopify- success-in- india-2013–08–29.
30 M. Jing, Amazon Brings its Cloud Computing to China, China Daily, January 2, 2014, 
www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2014–01/02/content_17209279.htm.
31 Tong, Alibaba Expands Its Cloud Computing Business.
32 Ibid. 
33 Adaline Lau, Aliyun Search Could Impact Baidu and E- Commerce in China, Click 
Z, March 2, 2013, www.clickz.com/clickz/column/2282153/aliyun- search-could-
 impact-baidu- and-ecommerce- in-china.
34 Ibid.
35 Ibid.
36 GSMA, Digital Commerce Continues to Grow in China, GSMA, June 14, 2014, 
www.gsma.com/newsroom/digital- commerce-continues- to-grow- in-china/.
37 Melanie Lee, Alipay Wallet Opens its Platform to Merchants and Developers, Alizila, 
August 27, 2014, www.alizila.com/alipay- wallet-opens- its-platform- merchants-and-
 developers#sthash.KTK3e3Gt.dpuf. 
38 Ibid.
39 Ibid.
40 J. Hiner, 7 Chinese Companies That will Shape the Future of the Tech Industry: 
My Week in Beijing, ZDNet, May 22, 2016, www.zdnet.com/article/7-chinese-
 companies-that- will-shape- the-future- of-the- tech-industry- my-week- in-beijing/.
41 Ana Swanson, How Baidu, Tencent and Alibaba are Leading the Way in China’s 
Big Data Revolution, South China Morning Post, August 25, 2015, www.scmp.com/
tech/innovation/article/1852141/how- baidu-tencent- and-alibaba- are-leading- way-
chinas- big-data. 
42 Evelina Lye, Five Chinese Brands that will be Household Names Next Year, The 
Drum, June, 14, 2016, www.thedrum.com/opinion/2016/06/14/ﬁve- chinese-
brands- will-be- household-names- next-year.
43 Evelina Lye, CES Asia 2016: Why Should Marketers Care?, Campaign, May 12, 2016, 
www.campaignasia.com/article/ces- asia-2016-why- should-marketers- care/408078. 
44 S.C. Kumar, How to Herd Money Towards Ecommerce Companies; Check Out 
Betaout, Financial Express, June 6, 2016. www.ﬁnancialexpress.com/article/industry/
companies/how- to-herd- money-towards- ecommerce-companies- check-out-
 betout/274482/.
45 See UAfrica.com, www.uafrica.com/about- us. 
46 Stella Kaibung’a, 2014. South Africa: Uafrica.com Spreads Services to Other African 
Countries, All Africa, July 11, 2014, http://allafrica.com/stories/201407140088.html. 
47 Sam Wakoba, Nigeria’s Delivery Science Turns Big Data Around to Simplify Logisitics 
Management, Techmoran, September 16, 2014, http://techmoran.com/nigerias-
 delivery-science- turns-big- data-around- simplify-logisitics- management/#sthash.
Ze2eatyl.dpbs.
48 Gbenga Onalaja, Five Nigerian Enterprise Startups to Watch Out For, Techcabal, 
October 
7, 
2015, 
http://techcabal.com/2015/10/07/ﬁve- nigerian-enterprise-
 startups-to- watch-out- for/.
49 Wipro, 
2014, 
eCommerce, 
www.wipro.com/services/application- services/
eCommerce.aspx.
50 Neldi Rautenbach, “Po- ta-to”, “:Po- tah-to”? Omni- channel, Multi- channel 
Confusion, Business 2 Community, September 10, 2014, www.business2community.
com/marketing/po- ta-po- tah-omni- channel-multi- channel-confusion- 01003612. 

E-commerce  119
51 Kshetri, Barriers to E- Commerce and Competitive Business Models in Developing 
Countries; Tomo Noda and David J. Collis, Developing Countries; The Evolution 
of Intraindustry Firm Heterogeneity: Insights from a Process Study, The Academy 
of Management Journal (August 2001) 44 (4), 897–925; D.A. Levinthal, Strategic 
Management and the Exploration of Diversity, in C.A. Montgomery (Ed.), Resource-
 Based and Evolutionary Theories of the Firm: Toward a Synthesis (Boston, MA: Kluwer 
Academic, 1995), 19–42; W.B. Arthur, Positive Feedbacks in the Economy, Scientiﬁc 
Amer ican (February 1990), 92–99.
52 W.Y. Hong and K. Zhu, Migrating to Internet- Based E- Commerce: Factors Affecting 
E- Commerce Adoption and Migration at the Firm Level, Information & Management 
(2006) 43(2), 204–221. 
53 The Economist, Continent of Dreams: Across Africa, Banks are Expanding. Their 
Returns Aren’t, The Economist, February 28, 2013, http://tinyurl.com/c6nvs6t. 
54 Hilary Heuler, Why Doesn’t Africa have its Own Amazon Yet? ZDNet, July 2, 2014, 
www.zdnet.com/why- doesnt-africa- have-its- own-amazon- yet-7000031152/.
55 C. Mercer, Telecentres and Transformations: Modernizing Tanzania Through the 
Internet, African Affairs (2000) 105, 243–264; C. Kenny, Development’s False Divide, 
Foreign Policy (January/February 2003), 76–77; R. Miller, Leapfrogging? India’s 
Information Technology Industry and the Internet, IFC Discussion Paper No. 42 
(2001); D. Biederman, Ecommerce Comes to Asia, Trafﬁc World (2000) 26(9), 23.
56 Mercer, Telecentres and Transformations. 
57 Infotechlead, Shopify E- Commerce Solution Available on Airtel’s Cloud Platform for 
Indian SMBs, Info Tech Lead, December 1, 2013, http://infotechlead.com/2013/12/01/
shopify- e-commerce- solution-available- airtels-cloud- platform-indian- smbs-16851.
58 Nir Kshetri, Normative and Cognitive Institutions Affecting a Firm’s E- Commerce 
Adoption, Journal of Electronic Commerce Research (2010) 11(2), 157–174. 
59 N. Kshetri and N. Dholakia, E- Commerce Patterns in South Asia: A Look Beyond 
Economics, Journal of Asia Paciﬁc Business (2005) 6(3), 63–79. 
60 Enricko Lukman, Facts That You Should Know About Cash- On-Delivery in Indonesia, 
Tech in Asia, October 28, 2014, www.techinasia.com/facts- cash-delivery- indonesia/. 
61 D.C. North, Epilogue: Economic Performance Through Time, in L.J. Alston, T. 
Eggertsson, and D.C. North (Eds.), Empirical Studies in Institutional Change (Cambridge, 
MA: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 342–355; W.R. Scott, Institutions and 
Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995 & 2001). 
62 P.B. Tigre and J. Jason Dedrick, E- commerce in Brazil: Local Adaptation of a Global 
Technology, Electronic Markets (2004) 14(1), 36–47; C. Kenny, Why Aren’t Countries 
Rich? Weak States and Bad Neighborhoods, Journal of Development Studies (1999) 35, 
26–47; C. Kenny, Information and Communications Technologies for Direct Poverty 
Alleviation: Costs and Beneﬁts, Development Policy Review (2002) 20(2), 141–157; 
J.E. Oxley and B. Yeung, E- Commerce Readiness: Institutional Environment and 
International Competitiveness, Journal of International Business Studies (2001) 32(4), 
705–723.
63 Tigre and Dedrick, E- Commerce in Brazil. 
64 Nir Kshetri, The Adoption of E- Business by Organizations in China: An Institutional 
Perspective, Electronic Markets (2007) 17(2), 113–125; J. Gibbs, K.L. Kraemer, and J. 
Dedrick, Environment and Policy Factors Shaping Global E- Commerce Diffusion: A 
Crosscountry Comparison, Information Society (2003) 19(1), 5–18; Alev M. Efendioglu, 
Vincent F. Yip, Chinese Culture and E- Commerce: An Exploratory Study, Interacting 
with Computers (2004) 16(1), 45–62.
65 A.S. Huff, Mapping Strategic Thought, in A.S. Huff (Ed.), Mapping Strategic Thought 
(Chichester: Wiley, 1990), 11–49. 
66 UNCTAD, Building Conﬁdence: Electronic Commerce and Development, United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Geneva, 2000. 

120  Key Development Areas
67 S. Moodley and M. Morris, Does E- Commerce Fulﬁl its Promise for Developing 
Country (South African) Garment Export Producers? Oxford Development Studies 
(2004) 32(2), 155–178; A. Molla and P.S. Licker, Perceived E- Readiness Factors 
in Ecommerce Adoption: An Empirical Investigation in a Developing Country, 
International Journal of Electronic Commerce (2005) 10(1), 83–110; Miria Pigato, Information 
and Communication Technology, Poverty and Development in Sub- Saharan Africa and South 
Asia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2000). 
68 Kenny, Development’s False Divide.
69 V. Aggarwal and J. Mendonca, Amazon Links 8,000 Indian Firms to Cloud Services, 
The Economic Times, August 21, 2014, http://retail.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/news/e- commerce/e- tailing/amazon- links-8000-indian- firms-to- cloud-
services/40558150.
70 Ibid. 
71 Infotechlead, Shopify e- commerce solution available on Airtel’s cloud platform for 
Indian SMBs. 
72 Delivering Health Care on Phone, Technology Review India (January 2011) 3(1).
73 Solutions Made for India: Technologists Respond Admirably to Technology Review 
India’s Grand Challenges Project, Technology Review India (January 2011) 3 (1), 48. 
74 Ibid.
75 Paul Bischoff, WeChat and Alipay Ramp Up Ecommerce Race With New Features 
for Online and Ofﬂine Merchants, Tech in Asia, August 29, 2014, www.techinasia.
com/wechat- alipay-ramp- ecommerce-race- features-online- ofﬂine-merchants/. 
76 Lee, Alipay Wallet Opens Its Platform to Merchants and Developers.
77 Ibid.
78 A. Mari, Brazil May Introduce Cloud Computing Regulations, XclueSiv, June 5, 2013, 
http://xcluesiv.com/blog/2013/06/05/brazil- may-introduce- cloud-computing-
 regulations/.
79 T.S. Parikh, Engineering Rural Development, Communications of the ACM (2009) 
52(1), 54–63.
80 Pratt, Cloud- Based Ecommerce Platforms Give Retailers Global Flexibility.
81 Pradeesh Chandran, Cloud Adoption Growing in India: Study, Business Standard, 
October 30, 2012, www.business- standard.com/article/technology/cloud- adoption-
growing- in-india- study-112103000194_1.html.
82 Quentin Hardy, Cloud Computing for the Poorest Countries, New York Times, 
August 29, 2012, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/29/cloud- computing-for-
 the-poorest- countries/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0. 
83 M. Wilson, Google Teams Up with Endurance to get African and Southeast Asian 
Businesses Online for Free, Beta News, September 24, 2014, http://betanews.
com/2014/09/24/google- teams-up- with-endurance- to-get- african-and- southeast-
asian- businesses-online- for-free/.
84 Hardy, Cloud Computing for the Poorest Countries.
85 W. Arnold, Regulations and Security Concerns Hinder Asia’s Move to Cloud 
Computing, New York Times, October 11, 2010, www.nytimes.com/2010/10/11/
technology/11cloudasia.html.
86 BiNu, Mobile Internet for the Next Two Billion: A Whitepaper on Using Cloud 
Technology to Create a Virtual Smartphone Experience for the Next Two Billion 
Internet Consumers, May 2014, http://bi.nu/ﬁles/Mobile_Internet_for_the_Next_
Two_Billion.pdf.
87 Archana Venkatraman, European Commission Builds a Case for a Single Cloud 
Computing Market, Computer Weekly (2014), 6–7.
88 Business Roundtable (BRT), Promoting Economic Growth through Smart Global 
Information Technology Policy: The Growing Threat of Local Data Server 
Requirements, 2012.

E-commerce  121
89 V. Aggarwal, Microsoft May Become First MNC to Set Up Cloud Data Centre in 
India, The Economic Times, August 6, 2014, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2014–08–06/news/52514307_1_cloud- services-data- centre-cloud- adoption.
90 Business Roundtable, Promoting Economic Growth through Smart Global Information 
Technology Policy.
91 Eric Johnson, Alibaba, China Mobile Push for More of World Cloud Computing 
Market, The Street, June 5, 2014, www.thestreet.com/story/12735135/1/alibaba-
 china-mobile- push-for- more-of- world-cloud- computing-market.html. 
92 Chistine Kahler and Weizhen Li, The Value- Added Telecom Services Market 
Ripens, China Business Review, May 1, 2010, www.chinabusinessreview.com/the-
 value-added- telecom-services- market-ripens/.
93 Robert D. Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China: A Review, The Information 
Technology & Innovation Foundation, July 2014. 
94 B. Brooks and F. Bajak, Brazil Looks to Break from US- Centric Internet over Spying 
Online, September 2013, www.sfgate.com/news/world/article/Brazil- looks-to-
 break-from- US-centric- Internet-4819946.php. 
95 For the 2013 BSA Global Cloud Computing Scorecard, see http://cloudscorecard.
bsa.org/2013/index.html.
96 ITU, Demystifying Regulation in the Cloud: Opportunities and Challenges for Cloud 
Computing, GSR 2012 Discussion Paper.
97 K. Hille, NEC to Offer Cloud Computing in China, Financial Times, August 31, 
2010, 
www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/3775900e-b4c9–11df-b0a6–00144feabdc0.html# 
axzz1ZU0szQ00.
98 Arnold, Regulations and Security Concerns Hinder Asia’s Move to Cloud Computing; 
and China Economic Review, Can Amazon and Microsoft Crack Cloud Computing 
in China? China Economic Review, July 15, 2014, www.chinaeconomicreview.com/
china- cloud-computing- microsoft-azure- amazon-aws- ibm-aliyun.
99 Gene Alvarez and Tim Weaver, The Top Four Impacts of Cloud Computing on E- 
Commerce Applications, Gartner, January 16, 2014, www.gartner.com/doc/2651117/
top- impacts-cloud- computing-ecommerce.


PART III
Case Studies of Diffusion 
and Impact of BD and 
Cloud Computing in 
Major Economies in the 
Global South


7
SUB- SAHARAN AFRICA
7.1 Introduction
BD and the cloud have become increasingly pervasive in SSA economies. 
According to the undersea cable operator, MainOne, the African cloud market 
was US$35.6 billion in 2015.1 The market research company, IDC estimated 
that South African cloud services market reached US$230 million in 2014.2
 
According to IBM, as of 2014, about half of the medium and large businesses 
in South Africa and Kenya had adopted the cloud.3 A survey of World Wide 
Worx and Cisco revealed that 44 percent of Nigerian businesses had plans to 
adopt the cloud in 2014. Another study found that at least 40 percent of busi-
nesses in Nigeria and Kenya were in the planning stages of BD projects in 2015.4
 
Some economic sectors are more advanced than others in the adoption of 
BD analytics and the cloud. For instance, SSA- based ﬁrms in retail, telecoms, 
oil and gas, and banking are most likely to use the cloud to handle large volumes 
of data transactions.5 To take an example, in Nigeria and Angola, the oil indus-
try has driven the investment in data centers. This industry exhibits a high 
degree of orientation towards the global market.6
 
Most SSA economies in the past needed to rely on satellite for Internet con-
nection. Satellite- based connections are expensive. Moreover signals often need 
to take a 76,000 km round- trip to and from orbits. The resulting delays are 
especially disruptive and troubling for data- intensive applications or banking 
transactions.7 In this regard, an important factor is that undersea cables have 
landed in some of these economies. Due to this, data centers are growing 
rapidly in Kenya and other countries.8
 
Competitively priced fast and ultra- fast internet access is becoming widely 
available in SSA economies. The region’s telecom companies are using this as a 

126  Case Studies
selling point to attract customers. For instance, Liquid’s ads in Zambia and Zim-
babwe say that it takes a shorter time to download a movie than to prepare 
popcorn by microwave.9
 
Major challenges and barriers to the BD and the cloud pathways include the 
lack of local infrastructures, unaffordability, and relatively narrow local offerings. 
For instance, according to Seacom, in 2014, 90 percent of African internet 
content was hosted outside the continent. The resulting latency has a visible 
effect on video streaming and other bandwidth consuming applications. Such 
services and applications also cost more on the continent.10
7.2 The Current State of BD and Cloud Market
A number of creative BD- and cloud- based apps have been developed that are 
unique to SSA economies.
7.2.1 Education
The Higher Education Alliance for Leadership through Health, a consortium of 
seven universities (in Kenya, Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Tanzania, and Uganda), works with industry experts to extend education 
through virtual labs that students access remotely.
 
South Africa’s Center for Higher Education Transformation lets African uni-
versities access and manipulate its performance data stored on a Google plat-
form.11 Also, Google has provided its cloud- based Apps for Education to 
universities in Rwanda, Kenya, and Mauritius.
 
In 2009, Microsoft donated 250,000 laptops to teachers in Ethiopia. The 
software in the laptop is managed by the US company FullArmor through 
Microsoft’s Azure cloud platform.12 Teachers can download curriculum; main-
tain, view, and track academic records; and transfer student data securely.13
7.2.2 Health Care 
As explained in Chapter 1, in South Africa, the Mothers- 2-Mothers (M2M) 
program combines the cloud with database technology and mobile services to 
ﬁght HIV/AIDS transmission from mother to children. M2M digitizes patient 
records and shares them with counselors across its networks of over 700 sites in 
Africa. The records contain information on treatment plans and advanced 
reporting tools, which allow quick response. As of 2011, M2M had served more 
than 1.5 million women in nine Sub- Saharan African countries.
 
In Nigeria and Ghana, a cloud- based app is used to identify fake prescription 
drugs. When buying a drug, a customer can ﬁnd a twelve- digit code by scratch-
ing a sticker on the package and can then send a text message to a number. The 
code is matched with that registered by the pharmaceutical company in HP’s 

Sub-Saharan Africa  127
cloud database. The customer receives a response back that tells whether the 
drug is counterfeit. 
 
Scientists hope that it is possible to use BD to dramatically reduce and even 
eliminate some diseases such as malaria. For instance, in Namibia, satellite 
imagery is being used to map environmental conditions that can help malaria 
parasites and mosquitos to grow. For instance, factors such as vegetation density, 
population, and rainfall which are found to affect mosquito and parasite popula-
tions and the rate of transmission are tracked. This information is combined 
with the movement pattern of malaria- infected people. Anonymized cellphone 
records of over two million users provided by Namibia’s largest network pro-
vider, Mobile Telecommunications Limited (MTC), was used to study travel 
patterns. This information allowed interventions such as indoor spraying with 
insecticide to disrupt the malaria transmission cycle. For instance, in 2013, 
Namibia’s Ministry of Health used the information to target bed net distribution 
and indoor insecticide spraying to areas with urgent needs. The limited 
resources were used to reach 80,000 people that were most likely to be affected 
by the malaria transmission cycle.14
7.2.3 Farming and Agriculture
Improving agricultural productivity is likely to be among the most positive 
effects of BD in SSA economies. It is estimated that the average African small-
holder farmer produces only a quarter to half of the productive potential. BD 
can help them make full use of their productive potential. BD can also help 
farmers reduce costs by providing access to detailed information about irrigation 
and reduce wastage in resources.15
 
A number of efforts and initiatives are being undertaken to digitize SSA’s 
agricultural activities. A promising area of BD and cloud utilization to increase 
agriculture productivity is soil infrared spectroscopy. Data about soil characteris-
tics such as texture, organic matter, and fertility help determine fertilizer needs 
and can be used as a basis for precise prescriptions. One way to get information 
about soil characteristics is to use orbiting satellites, which can collect data in a 
cost-effective manner by measuring electromagnetic radiation reﬂected from 
farmlands.16 Efforts have been made to develop national and regional databases 
for soil properties. In 2009, Nairobi, Kenya- based World Agroforestry Centre 
started cataloguing the radiation signature of about 100,000 samples of African 
soils. It also announced a plan to give the information to Colombia- based Inter-
national Centre for Tropical Agriculture in order to build a database, known as 
the Digital Soil Map. The goal of the project was to combine the information 
with regularly updated satellite imagery of farmland in forty- two African coun-
tries in order to provide farmers with free forecasts.17 The Africa Soil Informa-
tion Service (AfSIS) has developed a soil infrared spectroscopy technique to 
predict the characteristics of a soil sample based on the light reﬂected by the 

128  Case Studies
sample. A test costs only US$1 to the farmer. AfSIS has also launched a soil 
properties map of Africa at a 250 m × 250 m resolution. AfSIS was reported to 
be helping SSA economies such as Ethiopia, Ghana, Nigeria, and Tanzania to 
establish national soil information systems and services, which are based on soil 
spectroscopy and digital soil- mapping technology.18
 
At a country level, Ethiopia’s Agricultural Transformation Agency is reported 
to be developing the Ethiopian Soil Information System (EthioSIS), which is a 
digital soil map analyzing the country’s soils down to a resolution of 
10 km x 10 km. In 2014, the Agency launched an agricultural hot line. By the 
end of 2015, it had received about 6.5 million calls. It sends text messages and 
automated calls related to up- to-date information to 500,000 users. A combina-
tion of the two systems is likely to provide highly customized information to 
farmers.19
 
Green Dreams’ iCow helps farmers track and manage cows’ fertility cycles. It 
informs them about important days of cow gestation periods, collects and stores 
milk and breeding records, and ﬁnds the nearest veterinarian and other service 
providers. A simple system involving Google Docs is also used. If Green Dreams 
and the vet can’t answer a question, the question is uploaded to the iCow 
system and vets send messages among themselves to come up with the best 
answer, which is then forwarded to the farmer. As of 2012, 42,000 farmers were 
using iCow, which increased milk production by 2–3 liters per cow per day.20
 
A National Geographic article reported the story of a Farmer Thuo, who 
experienced substantial increase in his yields and improvement of his animals’ 
health thanks to the adoption of iCow. By applying the knowledge (e.g., fodder 
production, hygiene, and animal diseases) that he received from iCow, he was 
able to double the production of milk from his cows. The iCow system also 
helped him manage challenges such as food shortages that he had faced in the 
past. Before he started using iCow, Thuo lacked the knowledge and skills 
required to measure the cost per liter of milk. He started keeping records of his 
farming activities. Thanks to the conﬁdence that iCow gave him as a farmer and 
a businessman, he was considering to expand into pig farming.21
7.2.4 E- Business and E- Commerce
Cheki runs a cloud- based used- car classiﬁed business in numerous African coun-
tries, including Kenya, Nigeria, Malawi, and Ghana. As of 2012, it served 1 
million people and its website had approximately one billion page views per 
month.
 
In addition, Nigeria’s largest jobs and careers website, Jobberman, runs on 
Amazon Web Services (AWS). South Africa’s luxury goods company, 36Bou-
tiques, has also deployed AWS.
 
In July 2015, Nedbank became the ﬁrst South African bank to offer a data 
analytics tool, Market Edge, which records customers’ shopping behavior.22 The 

Sub-Saharan Africa  129
tool offers behavioral insights mined through BD on a platform that provides 
information about customers’ spending patterns, income segmentation, gender, 
and age demographics. Businesses can look at consumers’ transaction histories, 
which can be used to improve product development, and maximize engage-
ment, conversions, and loyalty. Market Edge can be used by Nedbank’s card- 
accepting businesses.23
7.2.5 Business Process and IT Outsourcing
South Africa’s call center agents and software developers are increasingly leaving 
dedicated facilities and embracing cloud- based systems, boosting productivity by 
20 percent. Because they don’t need to own and maintain equipment and can log 
in from anywhere using IP lines, they have lowered their capital investments.24
7.2.6 Banking and Finance
In South Africa, Nedbank has automated business processes through the cloud, 
and MTN offers SaaS applications for micro-ﬁnance institutions. Also, in 2011, 
Kenya’s Safaricom launched Safaricom Cloud and started hosting the Mpesa 
mobile money service locally.25 Furthermore, in early 2013, the Commercial 
Bank of Africa signed a cloud infrastructure deal with HP to increase its storage 
capacity by 50 terabytes. 
 
Nigeria’s consumer ﬁnance company One Credit uses a cloud- based core 
banking platform developed by Berlin- based Mambu in order to expand access 
to credit for the unbanked population. One Credit has also partnered with 
retailers to provide point- of-sale ﬁnancing to buy consumer goods and house-
hold appliances.26 Loans in the N50,000–500,000 (about US$300–3,000) range 
are provided for a six- month period. The loans are provided within twenty- 
four hours of document veriﬁcation and do not require collateral, salary 
account, guarantors, or deposit.27
 
InVenture Capital Corp uses BD to give loans to customers in SSA eco-
nomies such as Kenya and Tanzania that do not get credit from traditional 
banks.28 It offers loans via smartphones based on more than 10,000 data points 
per mobile user to determine their credit proﬁle.29
 
Some banks in SSA have expansion strategies that employ branchless banking 
relying on BD and the cloud. For instance, Ecobank Nigeria’s plan is to use the 
state-of-the-art technologies such as social media, BD analytics, and cloud to 
increase market penetration instead of building new branches.30
7.2.7 Health Care
An analysis of medical data of more than 350,000 African children by research-
ers of Radboud University Medical Center was carried out to study the effects 

130  Case Studies
of BCG vaccination (against tuberculosis), DTP vaccination (against diphtheria, 
tetanus and pertussis), and measles vaccination on growth and health of SSA 
children under ﬁve. The analysis indicated that timing of vaccination was 
among the most important factor. Early vaccination helps to achieve the best 
health results for children. Findings also indicated possible harmful effects of 
delayed vaccinations. In some way, the ﬁndings challenged the effectiveness of 
the present vaccination schedules. For instance, whereas the WHO recom-
mends administering BCG vaccine immediately after birth, BCG vaccination is 
often delayed. WHO also recommends administering the DTP1 vaccine after 
six weeks and measles vaccine after nine months.31
7.2.8 Environmental Monitoring and Protection
One estimate suggested that West African countries lose US$1.3 billion annu-
ally due to illegal ﬁshing. Overﬁshing’s impacts also include the reduction of 
ﬁsh stocks and local catches and the adverse impact on the marine environment. 
Local communities also lose opportunities to catch, process, and trade ﬁsh.32 
SSA economies such as Gabon, Guinea Bissau, Mauritius, and Mozambique 
have ratiﬁed the UN Port State Measures Agreement (PSMA), which is the 
world’s ﬁrst binding international accord targeting Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated (IUU) ﬁshing.33 The signatories of the PSMA are working on a 
comprehensive set of measures and instruments including the use of BD to ﬁght 
IUU ﬁshing. For instance, BD can help identify patterns of suspicious ﬁshing 
activity by analyzing data from AIS and other sources. Measures are being taken 
to collect data from seafood processors, distributors, and supply chain 
management.
 
An article published in the Hufﬁngton Post explains that drones are used to 
track and prevent elephant poaching in Burkina Faso and to prevent rhino 
poaching in Southern Africa.34 In 2013, scientists completed an unmanned aerial 
survey of wildlife in Burkina Faso’s Nazinga Game Ranch using drones. Since 
drones are cheaper and can be launched more easily compared to a plane, they 
provide tremendous opportunities for SSA economies.35 Kenya’s Ol Pejeta 
Conservancy has collaborated with San Francisco- based Airware to deploy 
drone systems to protect rhinos in its 90,000-acre reserve. Rangers at the base 
operate the drones. Rangers track ﬂight paths and the UAV’s point of view 
through high- deﬁnition cameras.36
7.3 BD and Cloud Deployment in Modern Versus Traditional 
Sectors
Table 7.1 compares BD and cloud deployments in traditional versus modern 
sectors. The case of Nedbank, which uses services provided by IBM, AWS, and 
others to cope with high demands,37 reﬂects the growing market for sophisticated 

Sub-Saharan Africa  131
applications. Nedbank teamed up with South Africa’s Entersect Technologies to 
develop a secure system based on digital certiﬁcates and push notiﬁcations. Users 
approve or deny transactions on phones by entering PINs.
 
However, ﬁnancial institutions such as Nedbank might face ﬂuctuations in 
demand. For example, the end of the month is a high transaction period, 
because that’s when employees are paid. Likewise, the end of the year and 
holiday shopping seasons face high demands. The system scales up during high 
transaction periods and scales down in slower periods.38
  Compared to the more traditional iCow application, Nedbank’s application 
is more costly. For example, digital certiﬁcates must be installed on the phone 
to authenticate transactions.
TABLE 7.1  Cloud Deployment in Traditional and Modern Sectors in SSA Economies: 
A Comparison of Green Dreams’ iCow and Nedbank’s E-Banking
Traditional Sector (iCow App) Modern Sector (Nedbank’s 
E-Banking)
User device
Low-priced/feature cell 
phones
PC or smartphones
Method for serving 
users
Text messages
Internet, text messages 
Use of BD solutions to deliver 
“right time right place 
propositions” to customers.
Roles of local cloud 
providers
Green Dreams envisioned 
and developed the system
The digital certiﬁcates placed on 
the phone and push 
notiﬁcations were developed 
by South Africa’s Entersect 
Technologies.
Roles of global cloud 
providers
It makes limited use of 
Google Docs
IBM Cognos platform is used for 
budgeting and forecasting. 
The system exploits AWS to 
handle massive amounts of 
mobile phone calls connecting 
to its infrastructure.
Bandwidth 
requirement
Low
High
Importance of security Low
High
Source: Adapted from N. Kshetri, Cloud Computing in Sub-Saharan Africa, IEEE IT Professional 
(2013) 15(6), November/December, 64–67.
Note
1  Fred Swanepoel and Philip Wessels, NEDBANK GROUP LIMITED: Renaissance Capital 
Banking IT Day, April 14, 2015.

132  Case Studies
7.4 Key Driving Factors of BD and Cloud Industry and Market 
The growth of SSA economies’ BD and cloud industry and market is driven by 
a number of factors, which include government initiatives, local entrepreneurial 
activities, foreign multinationals’ entry into the region’s cloud sector, improving 
international bandwidth, international agencies’ roles, and philanthropic and 
charitable causes.
7.4.1 Government Initiatives
Governments in SSA economies are making efforts to strengthen the BD and 
cloud ecosystem. In May 2016, the government of Rwanda announced its plans 
to make government data accessible online in order allow interested parties to 
use them for business, research, education, and other purposes. By doing so, 
Rwanda will be the fourth East African country after Kenya, Tanzania, and 
Uganda to have data portals. The National Institute of Statistics will implement 
the policy.39
 
Rwanda has also a plan to build a US$1.9 billion innovation city in the 
Kigali Special Economic Zone. The city will comprise key elements of a typical 
urban center such as corporate buildings, retail, leisure, sports, accommodation, 
and a healthcare center.40
7.4.2 Local Entrepreneurial Activities
Local entrepreneurial activities have helped cloud development. Innovation 
centers, such as Kenya’s iHub, have brought together software developers and 
entrepreneurs. South Africa’s Integr8 and MTN, and Zimbabwe’s Twenty 
Third Century Systems, have launched cloud offerings in Sub- Saharan Africa. 
MTN MyOfﬁce supports accounting, human resource, CRM, email and video 
conferencing, storage and back- up for SMEs in manufacturing, hospitality, 
micro- ﬁnance, and advertising.41
 
MTN Nigeria has developed a data center in Lagos with 500 m2 of colloca-
tion and hosting space.42 MTN offers cloud- based services to SMEs. Likewise, 
the Nigerian company Computer Warehouse Group (CWG) launched a Tier 3 
data center in the country.43 Note that Tier 3 facilities are often utilized by large 
businesses, which have 99.982 percent uptime, no longer than 1.6 hours of 
downtime per year and provide at least seventy- two-hour power outage protec-
tion.44 In 2014, MainOne reportedly completed a US$40 million data center 
facility in Lagos. In 2014, Rack Centre completed a Tier 3 data center with 
3,000 rack spaces.45 
 
MTN Nigeria, Globacom, Airtel Nigeria, and Etisalat Nigeria have also 
invested in data centers. These companies are deploying next-generation net-
works (NGN) and Business Intelligence (BI) software tools. For instance, 

Sub-Saharan Africa  133
 Globacom was reported to spend US$1.25 billion to build an Internet Protocol 
(IP) network. MTN is reported to spend over US$1 billion annually on its 
network. Likewise, Airtel and Etisalat spent over US$3 billion to improve their 
networks in order to make them useful for BD. As data volume expands, 
telecom operators can mine consumer data to enhance operational efﬁciency 
and increase revenue.46
 
In 2011, Safaricom launched the Safaricom Cloud, hosting platforms for 
government agencies and corporations and other offerings. By 2011, it had 
invested US$150 million and announced plans to invest another US$200 
million.47 Safaricom teamed up with Cisco (storage), EMC (security), and Seven 
Seas Technology (overseeing and training).
 
Safaricom has hired the Netherlands- based BD analytics ﬁrm Flytxt to help 
monetize mobile consumer data. BD analytics would help Safaricom to improve 
customer experience through personalization and better engagement with cus-
tomers. As of May 2016, Safaricom had twenty- ﬁve million customers in East 
Africa. Its products included voice, data, mobile money, and enterprise segments.48
7.4.3 Improving Bandwidth
Sub- Saharan Africa’s international bandwidth has increased dramatically. For 
instance, during 2011–2015, Africa’s bandwidth capacity grew by 51 percent, 
which was higher than any other world regions.49 In 2012, Kenya was con-
nected to SEACOM, The East African Marine System (TEAMS), and East 
African Submarine Cable System (EASSy) cables, and its bandwidth increased 
from 20 to 53 GBPS from 2010 to 2011. In Nigeria, Glo- 1 was launched in 
2009, and other cables in 2010 and 2012 broke Nitel’s SAT- 3/WASC 
monopoly.
 
Telecommunications providers have made heavy investment to accelerate 
the diffusion of ﬁber Internet in Africa. The ﬁrst phase of the African Coast to 
Europe (ACE) submarine communications cable started in 2012. It is a 
17,000 km- long ﬁber optic cable project, which aims to connect twenty- three 
countries.50 As of 2015, Mauritius- based Liquid Telecom was estimated to spend 
about US$500 million in more than 18,000 km of ﬁber cable in Africa.51 In July 
2015, China’s Huawei started work on a 4,000 km ﬁber optic cable project, 
which is expected to connect Guinea and other West African countries by 
2017. The cable will have seventy- seven exchange points.52
 
All these developments are likely to have a major impact on the use of BD 
and the cloud in SSA economies. SSA’s home- grown data center industry has 
been growing rapidly. Countries such as South Africa are reported to have some 
high- quality data centers. The director of the Ugandan Internet eXchange Point 
noted that while it was more attractive to host SSA- oriented data services in 
Europe or North America than in Africa in the past, it is becoming increasingly 
attractive to host the services in Africa.53

134  Case Studies
 
Nigeria’s government agencies and the private sector currently host their data 
in foreign locations. In May 2016, the country’s Communications Technology 
Minister noted that once the country’s data centers develop sufﬁcient capacity 
to handle data generated in the country, the Federal Government would stop 
hosting data overseas.54
7.4.4 International Agencies
The role of UNESCO and other international agencies deserves mention. In 
2006, the World Bank (WB) and the African Development Bank ﬁnanced a 
US$280 million cable project serving twenty- three countries. In 2007, the 
International Finance Corporation invested US$32.5 million in EASSy, con-
necting twenty- one countries.55 Likewise, Sierra Leone received US$31 million 
to connect to ACE cable through the WB- funded West Africa Regional Com-
munications Infrastructure Program.56 The WB also provided bandwidth sub-
sidies to many universities.57
 
Indirect links also exist through investment in BD companies focusing on the 
developing world’s cloud and BD markets. The IFC has invested in Silicon 
Valley- based cloud- based software company Ayla, the satellite company Planet 
Labs, and the online education company Coursera. Planet Labs focuses on satel-
lite imagery and BD in order to learn about the industry and its impact. The 
investment is then narrowed down to sub- industry or ﬁrm level (e.g., a drone 
service operator from a developing country).58 The IFC invested US$20 million 
in Planet Labs in 2015. It is argued that Planet Labs is having an immediate 
impact on the population at the bottom of the pyramid. Its small satellites gather 
unique data sets that offer insights such as ways to improve crop management in 
response to the effects of drought. Planet Labs was reported to have more than 
ﬁfty Driverless Operated Vehicle Environments (DOVEs) that orbit the earth 
every ninety minutes taking high- resolution photographs that cover most of the 
planet each day.59
 
FARM Limited was Planet Labs’ ﬁrst Africa- based customer. FARM aims to 
“boost sustainability and proﬁtability in agriculture by identifying the inherent 
risks along the agricultural value chain; and managing them with new technolo-
gies, including remote sensing.”60 
7.4.5 Foreign Multinationals’ Activities
Foreign multinationals’ activities are stimulating the growth of the BD and 
cloud markets in SSA economies. Google’s Project Link aims to bring faster and 
reliable Internet to Africa. As part of the Project Link, the company launched a 
metro ﬁber network in Uganda’s capital, Kampala.61
 
In addition to its Johannesburg data center, IBM built its 41st global innova-
tion center in Kenya in 2013. Other global providers, such as HP and VMware, 

Sub-Saharan Africa  135
have a signiﬁcant presence in Sub- Saharan Africa. Amazon’s customer-service 
center in South Africa opened in 2011 and employs 1,400 people, and in 2012, 
it launched the AWS Developer Support ofﬁce in Cape Town.
 
Specialized providers have also entered Sub- Saharan Africa. In 2012, 
Switzerland- based Sofgen launched the core banking platform, Temenos T24. 
It targets banks, micro- ﬁnance institutions, and savings and credit cooperatives 
and has built- in fraud detection capabilities. T24’s clients include Kenya’s Foun-
tain Credit Services and Uganda’s Tropical Bank.62
 
A non- African company that is aggressively pursuing BD and cloud in Africa 
is China’s Huawei Technologies. Huawei Technologies had laid over 50,000 km 
of ﬁber optic cables in Africa, which is expected to stimulate its data service 
business.63 In April 2016, a high- tech roadshow was launched in Zambia by 
China’s Huawei Technologies with a series of events related to cloud comput-
ing and BD.64 The roadshow’s theme was Smart Zambia: Smart Nation. Gov-
ernment employees and industry experts were able to see the developments and 
learn about BD and cloud application and beneﬁts. Likewise, in April 2016, the 
second Huawei Cloud Congress (HCC) West Africa was held in Lagos, Nigeria. 
The HCC was attended by more than 300 industry representatives from 
telecom carriers, ﬁnance, governments, and energy companies.65 Huawei also 
completed a US$40 million contract to help cities in Ghana to meet demand for 
BD users.66
7.4.6 Philanthropic and Charitable Causes
Funding from philanthropic and charitable sources have also helped enrich the 
BD and cloud ecosystems. One notable example of such activities is Vital 
Signs,67 which is a system that provides near real- time data and diagnostic tools 
in order to help relevant stakeholders inform agricultural decisions and monitor 
outcomes. The system was launched in Africa with a grant provided by the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation to Conservation International.68 This program is 
launched in several SSA economies in order to collect and integrate data on 
agriculture, ecosystems, and human well- being.
 
As of early 2016, Vital Signs research teams began collecting data in Tanza-
nia, Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, and Uganda. Some of the researchers conduct 
household surveys that deal with diver topics, such as nutrition, farming prac-
tices, and collection of water and fuelwood. Other researchers collect data on 
the landscape. For instance, soil samples are sent to Nairobi- based World Agro-
forestry Centre lab to analyze composition and measure organic carbon con-
tents. The diameter, height, and canopy of trees are measured in order to 
calculate the amount of above- ground carbon held by forests. Measurements 
from satellite imagery are used to study land- cover changes such as the conver-
sion of forest to farmland.69 Using a tablet, Vital Signs researchers upload the 
information to a cloud- based data management and analysis system. The raw 

136  Case Studies
data are then translated into indicators and maps for decision makers such as 
government agencies, civil society organizations, and farmer cooperatives.
 
Vital Signs and the Tanzania Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security and 
Cooperatives (MAFC) have formed a partnership to develop an implementation 
strategy for Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA).70 Note that CSA is deﬁned by 
the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) as agriculture 
that can lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) and an increase 
in agricultural adaptation and productivity. These measures can strengthen 
national food security and achieve various development goals.71
 
Likewise, the UK- based Indigo Trust funded over £65,000 (about 
US$100,000) to develop iCow. The fund helped to cover the core costs, legal 
fees, and customer care supports.72 
7.5 Major Constraints Limiting the Development of BD and 
Cloud Industry and Market
There are also major constraints facing the BD and cloud industry and market 
in SSA economies, which are related to a low degree of digitization, the lack of 
infrastructures and bandwidth, unaffordable prices, narrow local cloud offerings, 
and unfavorable regulatory/human development issues.
7.5.1 A Low Degree of Digitization
In 2012, the Internet’s contribution to Africa’s GDP was estimated at 1.1 
percent compared to emerging economies’ average of 1.9 percent and 
developed economies’ average of 3.7 percent.73 A wide variation exists across 
SSA economies in the extent to which the Internet is helping economic growth. 
For instance, in Senegal and Kenya, the Internet was estimated to contribute 
3.3 percent and 2.9 percent of GDP respectively. The corresponding contribu-
tions in Ethiopia and Angola were 0.6 percent and 0.5 percent of GDP 
respectively.
 
Unsurprisingly, most SSA economies have been unable to realize the beneﬁts 
of modern ICTs. For instance, being able to accurately count the number of 
children is the ﬁrst step towards realizing the beneﬁt of BD and the cloud in 
health care. Many SSA economies have a notoriously poor record, even in reg-
istering the children born. Estimates suggest that only 44 percent of children 
under ﬁve years of age in SSA economies have been registered. The proportions 
are even lower in rural areas. In Eastern and Southern Africa, the proportion is 
reported to be 38 percent and it is estimated to be as low as 3 percent in 
Somalia.74 Many people living in slums in countries such as Nigeria cannot 
provide birth certiﬁcates or utility bills required by banks. Financial institutions 
have imposed these oppressively burdensome requirements in order to prevent 
money laundering.75

Sub-Saharan Africa  137
 
The adverse effects of low digitization are felt across all economic activities, 
for instance, due to the low digital- payment penetration, only cash payments 
are accepted in most transactions. Consumers, banks, and governments in SSA 
economies thus suffer from the high costs associated with transactions on a cash 
basis. These include extra costs and inefﬁciencies that can result from manual 
acceptance of cash, record keeping, counting, storing, physical security, and 
transportation.76
7.5.2 Insufﬁcient Infrastructures and Bandwidth
In Sub- Saharan Africa, 53 percent of urban populations and 8 percent rural 
populations have electricity (compared to 99% and 88% in North Africa, respec-
tively). A signiﬁcant proportion of users access Internet resources over limited 
bandwidths. For example, Sierra Leone’s six million people had 155 MBPS 
available in 2011.77 In 2011, Africa’s international bandwidth was 801 GBPS.78 
However, North Africa (with a population of 200 million) had 433 GBPS, 
whereas SSA (with a population of 900 million) had 368 GBPS.
 
In 2011, Sierra Leone, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Guinea, Liberia, São Tomé, Príncipe, and Sey-
chelles had no ﬁber optic links and users relied on satellites. While the situation 
has improved since then, ﬁber optic links in the region have been mostly 
limited to big cities.79 Note that only 37 percent of Africa’s population live in 
urban areas. Moreover, the unavailability of landlines makes it difﬁcult to dis-
perse bandwidth.80 It is argued that the lack of ﬁber optic lines in most parts of 
Africa, especially in rural areas, makes the deployment of BD difﬁcult.81
7.5.3 High Prices
First, it is important to note that there has been a dramatic reduction in costs for 
telecommunication services and related equipment. International bandwidth 
cost in Africa fell by 90 percent from 2009 to 2013.82 The costs of drones used 
for anti- poaching are estimated to cost US$50,000–US$70,000 and higher- 
speciﬁcation long- range drones can cost over US$250,000.83
 
Despite this reduction, and despite the fact that Internet and mobile phones 
are diffusing rapidly in the region, bandwidth is prohibitively expensive for most 
users. For instance, in early 2015, a 25 MBPS connection in Kenya was estim-
ated to cost in the US$4,000–5,000 range per month in Kenya.84 As a point of 
comparison, a 25 MBPS connection in 2014 cost US$23.69 in London and 
US$28.12 in Seoul.85 According to the World Bank, bandwidth in Sierra Leone 
costs ten times more than in East Africa and twenty- ﬁve times higher than in 
the US Embassies’, banks’, and mining companies’ 2 MBPS VSAT connections 
costing US$8,000 per month plus installation. The 512 KBPS connections, pro-
vided by ISPs through wireless networks, cost US$570 per month (plus a 

138  Case Studies
modem charge of US$445). Mobile phone companies’ distribution of satellite 
bandwidths packaged in USB sticks, which are extremely slow and unusable at 
busy times, cost US$70/month.86
 
Electricity and other infrastructures are also costly. Electricity in Kenya costs 
US$0.20/KWH, which is 50 percent higher than in the USA. Excluding cooling 
and management, running a Kenyan server costs over US$1,800 per year.
 
We noted above that South Africa’s call center agents and software develop-
ers are increasingly using cloud- based systems to boost productivity. However, 
the high costs of telecom services have acted as a major barrier to the growth of 
South Africa’s outsourcing industry.87
7.5.4 Narrow Local Offerings
Transferring data from foreign servers results in a latency of hundreds of milli-
seconds. Moreover, foreign companies require users to pay with credit cards, 
which, as of 2013, only 3 percent of the Sub- Saharan African population had.88 
Although local ﬁrms are leveraging competencies in some segments, they lack 
capabilities to serve most sectors.
7.5.5 Regulatory and Human Resources
Regulatory barriers often act as an inhibitor in the diffusion of BD and the 
cloud in SSA economies. For instance, Liquid needed to negotiate for two years  
in order to receive the permits required for taking its cable South Africa’s 
Limpopo to Zimbabwe.89
 
According to the Business Software Alliance, South Africa ranked twentieth 
out of twenty- four economies analyzed in 2013 in cloud- related regulations. 
Other Sub- Saharan African economies are far behind. Only twenty- four coun-
tries were included in the study and South Africa was the only SSA economy 
included. Other Sub- Saharan African economies were not ranked in the study 
but they are further behind. Sub- Saharan Africa economies thus must strengthen 
regulations and train human resources.
7.6 Discussion and Concluding Comments
Factors such as low quality, the high cost of last- mile connections, the remoteness 
of many areas, and the unavailability of high- speed Internet pose opportunities and 
challenges to BD and cloud providers. The experiences of iCow and M2M indicate 
that less bandwidth- intensive interfaces and applications are appropriate for most 
Sub- Saharan African populations, which use the cloud for only a few activities.
 
We noted above that the entrepreneurial activities of large ﬁrms in the tele-
communications sectors have facilitated the diffusion of BD and the cloud in 
SSA economies. However, there are limited entrepreneurial activities by new 

Sub-Saharan Africa  139
ﬁrms in the ICT sector. For instance, according to the African Private Equity 
and Venture Capital Association (AVCA), ICT has accounted for only 10 
percent of seed investments across Africa since 2007.90 Likewise, there are a 
number of challenges to overcome for technology ﬁrms in SSA economies. For 
instance, according to GSMA’s “Digital Entrepreneurship” survey, at least 70 
percent of start- ups in Kenya were “not earning enough to maintain business 
and living expenses for a small team.”91 Government agencies, international 
organizations, the private sector, and other stakeholders need to team up to 
stimulate and facilitate entrepreneurial activities in BD and cloud sectors.
 
It would thus be unreasonable to expect that the cloud would allow Sub- 
Saharan Africa to catch up with the industrialized countries in one big leap. 
However, as the factors mentioned earlier improve, BD and cloud computing 
hold promise for bridging the digital divide.
Notes
 1 Ben Uzor, Rising Data Centre Deployments Reﬂects $1bn Cloud Service Potential, 
BusinessDay, January 6, 2015, www.businessdayonline.com/rising- data-centre-
 deployments-reﬂects- 1bn-cloud- service-potential/.
 2 IT News Africa, Should SMEs Turn to the Cloud to Avoid Data Loss? IT News 
Africa, November 28, 2014, www.itnewsafrica.com/2014/11/should- smes-turn- to-
the- cloud-to- avoid-data- loss/.
 3 Out- Law, More African Firms Using Cloud as “Fast Track” to Global Markets, 
May 16, 2014, www.out- law.com/en/articles/2014/may/more- african-ﬁrms- using-
cloud- as-fast- track-to- global-markets/.
 4 Tech Financials, The Big Data Challenge and How Africa Can Beneﬁt, Tech Financials, 
November 19, 2015, http://techﬁnancials.co.za/2015/11/the- big-data- challenge-
and- how-africa- can-beneﬁt/.
 5 Uzor, Rising Data Centre Deployments Reﬂects $1bn Cloud Service Potential.
 6 Hilary Heuler, The Need for Speed: Why Africa’s Datacenters are still trailing behind, 
ZDNet, June 2, 2014, www.zdnet.com/the- need-for- speed-why- africas-datacenters-
 are-still- trailing-behind- 7000030046/.
 7 Economist, Many Rivers to Cross: A Dogged Firm with Roots in Zimbabwe has 
Brought Fast Broadband to Landlocked Parts of Africa, the Continent That Infrastructure 
Forgot, The Economist, July 5, 2014, www.economist.com/news/business/21606270-
dogged- ﬁrm-roots- zimbabwe-has- brought-fast- broadband-landlocked- parts-africa.
 8 Heuler, The Need for Speed.
 9 Economist, Many Rivers to Cross.
10 Heuler, The Need for Speed.
11 Claudia Frittelli, African Universities: Ready for the Cloud?, The Chronicle of Higher 
Education, May 21, 2012, http://chronicle.com/blogs/worldwise/african- universities-
ready- for-the- cloud/29594.
12 Sharon Pian Chan, Ethiopia is Rolling Out 250,000 Laptops to Schoolteachers, 
Nazret, July 14, 2009, http://nazret.com/blog/index.php/2009/07/14/ethiopia_is_
rolling_out_250_000_laptops_.
13 See East Africa Forum, www.eastafricaforum.net.
14 The Flowminder Foundation, Case Study: Guiding Malaria Elimination Strategies 
in Namibia, Flowminder, 2015, www.ﬂowminder.org/case- studies/guiding- malaria-
elimination- strategies-in- namibia.

140  Case Studies
15 S. Jacobs, Big Data Comes to Africa, This is Africa, March 3, 2014, www.
thisisafricaonline.com/News/Big- Data-comes- to-Africa.
16 Economist, Harvest Moon: Artiﬁcial Satellites are Helping Farmers Boost Crop Yields, 
The Economist, November 5, 2009, www.economist.com/node/14793411.
17 Ibid.
18 M. Mumero, Spectroscopy Analysis of Soil to Help Farmers, African Farming and 
Food Processing, August 5, 2015, www.africanfarming.net/technology/machinery-
 equipment/spectroscopy- analysis-of- soil-to- help-farmers.
19 Koﬁ Annan and Sam Dryden Food and the Transformation of Africa: Getting 
Smallholders Connected, Foreign Affairs, November/December 2015, www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/africa/2015–10–16/food- and-transformation- africa.
20 ILRI News, Cows in the Cloud: Kenyans are Registering Their Cows, and Increasing 
Their Milk Yields, on Their Mobile Phones, ILRI News, December 18, 2012, www.
ilri.org/ilrinews/index.php/archives/10173. 
21 Ken Banks, Introducing iCow: The Virtual Mobile Midwife for Cows, National 
Geographic Emerging Explorer, May 13, 2014, http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.
com/2014/05/13/introducing- icow-the- virtual-mobile- midwife-for- cows/. 
22 Nir Kshetri, Big Data’s Big Potential in Developing Economies: Impact on Agriculture, 
Health and Environmental Security (Wallingford: Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences 
International [CABI] Publishing, 2016). 
23 S. Mungadze, Nedbank Rolls Out SA’s First Big Data Service, Business Day, July 16, 
2015, www.bdlive.co.za/business/ﬁnancial/2015/07/16/nedbank- rolls-out- sas-ﬁrst-
 big-data- service. 
24 R. Firth, Use the Cloud to Work from Home, ITWeb, August 13, 2009. www.itweb.
co.za/sections/techforum/2009/0908130807.asp?S=Virtualisation&A=VRT&O=go
ogle. 
25 Rebecca Wanjiku, Safaricom Offers Locally Hosted Cloud Service, TechAdvisor, 
November 1, 2011, http://tinyurl.com/ko5gfq6. 
26 Elliott Holley, African Start- Ups Opt for Cloud Based Core Banking Platform, 
Banking Technology, May 13, 2014, www.bankingtech.com/221032/african- start-ups-
 opt-for- cloud-based- core-banking- platform/.
27 Techmoran, Nigeria’s One Credit Taps the XYZ Show’s Pastor Chinedu to Launch 
Loans Service, Techmoran, May 28, 2013, http://techmoran.com/nigerias- one-credit-
 taps-the- xyz-showss- pastor-chinedu- to-launch- loans-service/#sthash.RGU9UefT.
dpbs. 
28 Emily Reynolds, How Big Data is Helping Small Businesses Get Finance, Fintech 
Ranking, June 8, 2016, http://ﬁntechranking.com/2016/06/08/how- big-data- is-
helping- small-businesses- get-ﬁnance/.
29 M. Sullivan, 50% of Telcos Lack a Clear Big Data Strategy, Finds TeleResearch Lab, 
April 10, 2016, www.pr.com/press- release/666337. 
30 Sunday Michael Ogwu, Nigeria: Ecobank to Drive Efﬁciency With Technology, 
Daily Trust (Abuja), April 11, 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/201604110658.html. 
31 Mike L.T. Berendsen, Jeroen Smits, Mihai G. Netea, and André van der Ven, Non-
 Speciﬁc Effects of Vaccines and Stunting: Timing May Be Essential, EBioMedicine (June 
2016), DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.05.010: Early Vaccination Might be Crucial for 
Growth, Health of African Children, Science Daily, May 19, 2016, www.sciencedaily.
com/releases/2016/05/160519082500.htm. 
32 C. Kende- Robb, Illegal Fishing is Robbing Africa of its Ocean Wealth, World Economic 
Forum, June 8, 2016, www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/06/illegal- ﬁshing-is- robbing-
africa- of-its- ocean-wealth/.
33 M. Damanaki, International Law Tightens Grip on Illegal Fishing, Hufﬁngton Post, 
May 
23, 
2016, 
www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/maria- damanaki/international- law-
tighten_b_10087934.html. 

Sub-Saharan Africa  141
34 A. Blum, Big Data, Villain or Change Agent? A Different Perspective, Hufﬁngton 
Post, May 18, 2016, www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/annette- blum/big- data-villain- or-
chang_b_10004434.html.
35 Jason Koebler, Drones Will Soon Monitor Endangered Animals in Africa: Belgian 
Research Team Says There are Still Kinks to Work Out Before Drones Replace 
Airplane Surveillance, US News, February 8, 2013, www.usnews.com/news/
articles/2013/02/08/drones- begin-monitoring- endangered-animals- in-africa. 
36 M. Wall, Can Drones Help Tackle Africa’s Wildlife Poaching Crisis?, BBC, July 21, 
2014, www.bbc.com/news/business- 28132521. 
37 Technology Banker, Amazon Web Services: Cloud Computing Pioneer, January 1, 
2013, http://tinyurl.com/kcyf5tu. 
38 Ibid. 
39 J. Afadhali, Rwanda: Coming Soon to Rwanda – Open Data Portals, The East African 
(Nairobi), May 28, 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/201605280207.html.
40 Ibid.
41 MTN Business, UN. Introducing MTN MyOfﬁce, www.mtnbusiness.com.ng/sme_
page.
42 Uzor, Rising Data Centre Deployments Reﬂects $1bn Cloud Service Potential.
43 Ibid. 
44 Colocation America, Tier Standards Overview, 2015, www.colocationamerica.com/
data- center/tier- standards-overview.htm.
45 Uzor, Rising Data Centre Deployments Reﬂects $1bn Cloud Service Potential.
46 Chima Akwaja, Big Data: Nigerian Operators Jostle For $200bn Opportunities, 
Leadership, May 19, 2014, http://leadership.ng/business/371431/big- data-nigerian-
 operators-jostle- 200bn-opportunities. 
47 Wanjiku, Safaricom Offers Locally Hosted Cloud Service.
48 J. Kariuki, Kenya: Safaricom Taps Big Data Analytics to Grow Revenues, The Nation 
(Nairobi), February 23, 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/201602231389.html. 
49 Sibusiso Tshabalala, Africa’s Internet May be Slow, but Bandwidth Capacity is 
Growing Faster Than Anywhere Else, Quartz Africa, August 28, 2015, http://
qz.com/490212/africas- internet-may- be-slow- but-bandwidth- capacity-is- growing-
faster- than-anywhere- else/.
50 Business Tech, MTN to link ACE undersea cable to SA, Business Tech, August 5, 2015, 
http://businesstech.co.za/news/mobile/95111/mtn- to-link- ace-undersea- cable-to- sa/.
51 Gabriella Mulligan, Is Fibre Optic Cable Key to Africa’s Economic Growth? BBC, 
March 31, 2015, www.bbc.com/news/business- 32079649.
52 Olusegun Abolaji Ogundeji, Huawei Starts Work on Guinea’s First Fiber- Optic 
Cable, PCWorld, July 28, 2015, www.pcworld.com/article/2953932/huawei- starts-
work- on-guineas- ﬁrst-ﬁberoptic- cable.html. 
53 Heuler, The Need for Speed.
54 The Nation, Local Content: Data Centres Boost Capacity, The Nation, May 30, 2016, 
http://thenationonlineng.net/local- content-data- centres-boost- capacity/.
55 R. Muller, US 32.7 Million Investment for EASSy, My Broadband, 2007, http://
mybroadband.co.za/news/telecoms/966-us- 32–7-million- investment-for- eassy.html. 
56 My Sierra Leone, The State of Internet Connectivity in Sierra Leone: Fibre Optic 
Cable and Electricity, My Sierra Leone, July 7, 2013, http://mysierraleoneonline.com/
sl_portal/site/news/detail/1481.
57 Rebecca Wanjiku, East Africa Universities Take Advantage of Google Cloud, IDG 
News, June 12, 2009, http://news.idg.no/cw/art.cfm?id=D3ED873F-1A64–6A71-
CE3B759E5A305061. 
58 Catherine Cheney, Why the World Bank’s Venture Capital Arm is Investing in 
Silicon Valley, Devex Impact, May 26, 2016, www.devex.com/news/why- the-world-
 bank-s- venture-capital- arm-is- investing-in- silicon-valley- 88177. 

142  Case Studies
59 J. Kearns, Satellite Images Show Economies Growing and Shrinking in Real Time, 
Bloomberg, July 8, 2015, www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2015–07–08/satellite-
 images-show- economies-growing- and-shrinking- in-real- time.
60 N. Vilaça, Meet FARM Limited, Our First Customer in Africa, Planet, August 26, 
2015, www.planet.com/pulse/farm/. 
61 Tom Jackson, Why US Tech Giants are Betting on Africa, The Next Web, June 29, 
2016, http://thenextweb.com/africa/2016/06/29/us- tech-giants- betting-africa/.
62 James Ratemo, Sofgen Implements New Banking System at Fountain Credit Services, 
Business Daily, November 4, 2012, http://tinyurl.com/jw9rzw7.
63 Kate Douglas, Chinese ICT Provider Huawei Eyes Angola and Mozambique, How We 
Made It in Africa, July 9, 2015, www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/chinese- ict-provider-
 huawei-eyes- angola-and- mozambique/. 
64 Manic, Huawei Brings BIG DATA Solutions to Zambia, Manic, April 17, 2016, www.
manic.co.zm/huawei- big-data- zambia/.
65 Mitchelle Okuku, Huawei Cloud Congress West Africa Opens in Nigeria, Naij, 2016, 
www.naij.com/820505-huawei- cloud-congress.html.
66 Li Kun, Huawei Keeps Connecting to Africa, CCTV, May 3, 2016, http://english.
cctv.com/2016/05/03/ARTIsixM8NFake5LQRKj7RFi160503.shtml. 
67 See Vital Signs, http://vitalsigns.org/. 
68 conservation.org, Vital Signs, 2016, www.conservation.org/projects/Pages/Vital-
 Signs.aspx.
69 M. Bergen, To Help African Farmers, Making Big Data Fit in Their Pockets, February 
16, 2016, http://blog.conservation.org/2016/02/to- help-african- farmers-making-
 big-data- ﬁt-in- their-pockets/.
70 Vital Signs, Policy Brieﬁng, 2015.
71 Food and Culture Organization of the UN, “Climate- Smart” Agriculture Policies, 
Practices and Financing for Food Securty, Adaptation and Mitigation, Rome, 2010, 
www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1881e/i1881e00.htm.
72 Dennis Mbuvi, Kenyan Dairy Farmers to Beneﬁt from Safaricom’s Partnership with 
iCow, CIO East Africa, June 26, 2013, http://tinyurl.com/plx4mpb. 
73 James Manyika, Armando Cabral, Lohini Moodley, Suraj Moraje, Safroadu Yeboah-
 Amankwah, Michael Chui, and Jerry Anthonyrajah, Lions Go Digital: The Internet’s 
Transformative Potential in Africa, McKinsey Global Institute, November, 2013, www.
mckinsey.com/industries/high- tech/our- insights/lions- go-digital- the-internets-
 transformative-potential- in-africa.
74 UNICEF, Birth Registration, 2016, www.unicef.org/esaro/5480_birth_registration.
html. 
75 Economist, A Phoneful of Dollars: The World’s Poor Need the STABILITY and 
Security That Banks have Traditionally Offered, But Increasingly They do not need 
Banks to Provide it, The Economist, November 15, 2014, www.economist.com/
news/briefing/21632441-worlds- poor-need- stability-and- security-banks- have-
traditionally- offered.
76 Jake Kendall, Robert Schiff, and Emmanuel Smadja, Sub- Saharan Africa: A Major 
Potential Revenue Opportunity for Digital Payments, McKinsey Global Institute, 
February, 2014, www.mckinsey.com/industries/ﬁnancial- services/our- insights/sub-
 saharan-africa- a-major- potential-revenue- opportunity-for- digital-payments. 
77 Economist, www.Africa.Slow: The Last Continent Without Fast, Easy and 
Cheap Internet Access, The Economist, August 25, 2011, www.economist.com/
node/21526937.
78 Africa Bandwidth Map, Africa’s International Bandwidth Approaches 1 Tbps Mark, 
Africa Bandwidth Maps, April 19, 2012, www.africabandwidthmaps.com/?p=2787.//.
79 Mulligan, Is Fibre Optic Cable Key to Africa’s Economic Growth?
80 Economist, www.Africa.Slow.

Sub-Saharan Africa  143
81 Monty Munford, The Little Black Book of Billionaire Secrets, Africa’s Future 
Challenge Is For Power To Fuel Its Data Revolution, Forbes, January 24, 2016, www.
forbes.com/sites/montymunford/2016/06/24/africas- future-challenge- is-for- power-
to- fuel-its- data-revolution/#3fed514f43ab.
82 Paul Budde, Africa’s Largest Telecom Market with More Than 110 million Subscribers, 
BuddeBlog, 2013, www.buddeblog.com.au/frompaulsdesk/africas- largest-telecom-
 market-with- more-than- 110-million- subscribers/.
83 Wall, Can Drones Help Tackle Africa’s Wildlife Poaching Crisis?.
84 Mulligan, Is Fibre Optic Cable Key to Africa’s Economic Growth?
85 Danielle Kehl, New Yorkers Get Worse Internet Service Than People in Bucharest, 
Slate, November 21, 2014, www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/11/21/cost_of_
connectivity_study_2014_Amer icans_pay_more_for_slower_internet_access.html.
86 Economist, www.Africa.Slow.
87 S. Overby, South Africa Outsourcing Scorecard: South Africa: A Rising Outsourcing 
Option, Though Its Telecom and Business Processes are Less Mature Than Other 
Countries, CIO, July 15, 2006, www.cio.com/article/2438503/outsourcing/south-
 africa-outsourcing- scorecard.html.
88 The Economist, Continent of Dreams: Across Africa, Banks are Expanding. Their 
Returns Aren’t, The Economist, February 28, 2013, http://tinyurl.com/c6nvs6t.
89 The Economist, Many Rivers to Cross: A Dogged Firm with Roots in Zimbabwe has 
Brought Fast Broadband to Landlocked Parts of Africa, the Continent that Infrastructure 
Forgot, The Economist, July 5, 2014, www.economist.com/news/business/21606270-
dogged- ﬁrm-roots- zimbabwe-has- brought-fast- broadband-landlocked- parts-africa.
90 N. Megaw, Smart Africa: Big- Data Tools Transform Business, Financial Times, 
January 26, 2016, www.ft.com/cms/s/0/6a55808c-c0ef-11e5–846f-79b0e3d20eaf.
html#axzz4AjJeaArj.
91 D. Jorgic, Kenya’s Technology Push Leaves Investors Cold, Reuters, December 31, 
2014, http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/12/31/uk- kenya-tech- idUKKBN0K908Q 
20141231.

8
INDIA
8.1 Introduction 
Some surveys have suggested that India’s digitization rate is faster than the world 
average. For instance, digital information in India was estimated at 40,000 peta-
bytes in the early 2010s, which is expected to grow to 2.3 million petabytes by 
the early 2020s. This growth rate that is twice as fast as the worldwide growth 
rate.1 Gartner also expects India to be the fastest growing cloud market in the 
world.2
 
India’s data center capacity was 1.3 million ft2 in 2007, which is expected to 
reach 6.6 million ft2 by the end of 2016.3 One major shift that can be seen 
among Indian enterprises is the discontinuation of their own on- site data centers 
maintained by outside IT companies to move towards public cloud services 
offered by multinationals such as Amazon and Microsoft due to ﬂexibility and 
cost- efﬁciency in data storage and processing services provided by the latter.4 
According to Gartner, India’s public cloud services market in was US$423 
million in 2013, which is expected to grow to US$1.3 billion in 2017,5 and 
US$2 billion in 2018.6 Similarly, according to a study conducted by the 
NASSCOM and Deloitte, titled “Deconstructing the Cloud: The New Growth 
Frontier for Indian IT BPO Sector,” which was released in December 2011, 
the Indian cloud market will reach US$16 billion by 2020. Likewise, India’s BD 
analytics industry is estimated at US$2 billion in 2016.7
 
Foreign CSPs are offering various incentives in order to attract customers 
and stimulate the growth of the cloud industry and market. Google has launched 
a program for start- ups, which provides qualiﬁed companies US$100,000 in 
cloud credits. Start- ups with revenue less than US$500,000 can apply for such 
credits.8 Similarly, Microsoft offers start- ups US$60,000 in Azure cloud credits 

India  145
and Microsoft Azure for BizSpark Plus Offer. Software start- ups which have 
revenues of less than US$1 million are eligible to apply. Likewise, IBM provides 
cloud credits to software start- ups based on their business plan.9
 
Local ﬁrms have also jumped on the cloud bandwagon. CRL, Zoho, and 
Tata Communications are high- proﬁle Indian cloud providers.10 Other big IT 
players such as TCS and Infosys have also entered the cloud market in India (see 
Table 8.1). In the same vein, Pressmart (based in Hyderabad) provides SaaS- 
based e- publishing and digitization services to the print industry. Pressmart can 
help ﬁrms deliver content across multiple platforms such as Web, mobile, RSS, 
podcasts, blogs, social networking sites, articles directories, and search engines.
 
Some Indian BD and cloud ﬁrms are acquiring foreign ﬁrms. For example, 
in early 2012, Bangalore- based Aditi Technologies acquired Cumulux, a US- 
based cloud start- up. Cumulux specialized in building, operating, and managing 
PaaS- based solutions. In September 2015, Snapdeal also acquired the Silicon 
Valley- based start- up Reduce Data, a display advertising platform. Reduce 
Data’s platform utilizes AI and real- time data to help brands deliver advertising 
to consumers across platforms and devices.11
 
Cloud- related venture capital (VC) and other investments are also ﬂowing. 
In February 2012, the Indian CSP Knowlarity announced an investment by the 
Silicon Valley- based VC ﬁrm Sequoia Capital. Knowlarity is a cloud telephony 
service provider, which offers communication tools such as interactive voice 
response (IVR), fax, and conferencing facilities to enterprises and individuals. 
The company’s ﬂagship products are SuperReceptionist and SmartIVR, which 
are reported to have capability to process over one million calls an hour.12 As of 
2012, Knowlarity had over 40,000 clients in India and Indonesia, including 
General Motors, Pepsi, and Procter & Gamble.13 Japan’s NTT Communications 
announced that it would buy a 74 percent stake in the Indian company Net-
magic Solutions, which has cloud computing as a major business.
 
On the regulatory front, India is among the major developing economies 
with favorable laws and regulations related to some aspects of BD and cloud 
computing. For instance, according to the 2013 BSA Global Cloud Computing 
Scorecard, among the developing economies, India was among the leading 
countries in international harmonization.14 Note that the lack of harmonization 
of international rules can hinder a smooth ﬂow of data between CSPs in differ-
ent countries.
 
Despite the encouraging achievements, the diffusion of BD and the cloud in 
India is being hindered by a number of factors, among which are regulatory 
issues, a lack of customized products, hosting location uncertainty, integration 
with various systems, unreliable power supply, and the quality, reach and reli-
ability of internet connectivity.15 On the regulatory front, for instance, the 
Indian government proposed a measure, which requires companies operating in 
the country to locate part of their IT infrastructure within the country. This 
requirement was aimed at providing law enforcement agencies with access to 

146  Case Studies
data on servers in India. This measure also prohibits businesses from moving 
data related to Indian citizens and government organizations out of the country. 
Failure to comply would be a criminal offence.16 Certain industry- speciﬁc 
restrictions also exist. For instance, RBI guidelines prohibit banks from storing 
customer data outside India, which may limit cloud adoption by ﬁnancial serv-
ices company.17
 
Just like in SSA economies (Chapter 7), India has a poor performance in data 
creation. For instance, many people living in slums in India cannot provide the 
birth certiﬁcates or utility bills required by banks.18 
8.2 The Current State of BD and Cloud Industry and Market in 
India: The General Environment
The development and diffusion of BD and cloud are tightly linked to supply 
and demand. Demand is being strengthened through the increased availability 
of e- governance services and solutions for businesses and citizens—such as 
health care and educational services, drivers’ licenses which have a propensity to 
switch to the cloud and online services for paying bills, receiving payments, 
obtaining land records, ﬁling tax returns, and registering for beneﬁts.
 
Among the key demand- side barriers to the diffusion of BD and the cloud 
are low Internet access and the lack of bandwidth. According to a BCG survey, 
in 2013, about 90 percent of SMEs in India had no access to the Internet, com-
pared to 22 percent in China and 5 percent in the USA.19
 
The supply side is improving through various cloud- related R&D activities 
and increased development of its supercomputer industry. As noted earlier in 
Chapter 5, CLR’s EKA supercomputer, which was the world’s fourth fastest in 
March 2009, was used for joint cloud research with Yahoo.
 
However, most BD and cloud services rely on bandwidth, which is the most 
glaring shortcoming of India, especially in the rural areas. According to the 
International Telecommunication Union’s World Telecommunication/ICT 
Indicators Database,20 as of 2015, India had 1.34 ﬁxed broadband subscriptions 
per 100 inhabitants. So although India is a heterogeneous cloud market with 
divergent demands, low cost rather than advanced performance is likely to be a 
driving force in the short run.
 
The lack of local data centers of some of the major foreign CSPs is another 
key barrier to the adoption of the cloud. For instance, India’s nationwide cab- 
booking service Getmecab uses Amazon servers. As of 2012, the closest servers 
were in Singapore.21 AWS Indian data centers were not operational until the 
mid- 2015. 
 
India’s BD- and cloud- related initiatives are also handicapped by the shortage 
of manpower. In 2016, India was estimated to have more than 90,000 analytics 
professionals working in diverse areas.22 India needs to deal with a talent deﬁcit 
in this area. The labor market faces challenges on two fronts. First, there are not 

India  147
sufﬁcient BD engineers and scientists that are able to perform analytics. Second, 
many analytics consultants tend to lack the capabilities to understand, interpret, 
and put the data to work. Some estimates suggest that India will soon experi-
ence a shortage of one million data consultants. India’s analytics professionals are 
reportedly paid 50 percent more than other IT workers.23 India is ﬁnding it dif-
ﬁcult to secure data due to technology and human resources constraints.24 For 
instance, in 2011, India’s Central Bank, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), intro-
duced a set of recommendations, which included the formation of separate 
information security groups within banks and the maintenance of adequate CS 
resources based on their size and scope of operation. In order to enforce the 
RBI guidelines, however, India requires a large number of CS auditors to 
evaluate the adequacy of controls in the management of project and business 
processes and validate banks’ CS practices.25 An estimate suggested that India 
had only sixty CS auditors in 2013.26
8.3 BD and Cloud Industry and Market in India
This section provides more detailed elaboration and analysis of demand and 
supply sides discussed in the previous section.
8.3.1 The Demand Side
According to NASSCOM and McKinsey, remote infrastructure management 
was a US$15 billion industry in 2013 in India. The 2011 NASSCOM and 
Deloitte report mentioned above noted that about two- thirds of the Indian 
cloud market would be new businesses and the rest would come from existing 
services. The NASDAQ- listed Indian IT company, SIFY Technology, 
announced that its revenue from cloud- based value- added services grew by 95 
percent in the third quarter of ﬁscal year 2011–2012.27 According to Zinnov 
Management Consulting’s July 2011 report titled, Private Cloud Landscape in 
India, the cloud accounted for 1.4 percent of total IT spending in India in 2010.
 
A survey released in early 2012 indicated that 68 percent of Indian ﬁrms 
were using, evaluating, or planning to use the cloud within the “next year.”28 
According to a survey conducted by the market research and advisory ﬁrm 
Current Analysis, which was released in September 2014, 68 percent of Indian 
enterprises with more than 100 employees were using the cloud.29 Especially 
large ﬁrms have beneﬁted from BD and the cloud. For instance, as of 2014, 
Reliance Entertainment, the motion picture arm of India’s Reliance, was 
reported to have 40 percent of total IT workload on AWS.30
 
Government agencies are among the biggest users of the cloud. The govern-
ment has launched projects such as Aadhar, National Population Register, 
National Rural Heath Mission, and the ﬂagship rural job scheme, Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA).31 These projects 

148  Case Studies
make extensive use of the cloud. For instance, India’s Unique Identiﬁcation Card 
project, which aims to provide a unique twelve- digit number to every resident in 
the country, is probably the most visible and sophisticated e- governance project 
from the cloud standpoint.32 Likewise, in order improve MNREGA’s implemen-
tation, the Indian government started a mobile monitoring system (MMS) in 
2015. The plan is to cover 35,000 gram panchayats, the village level administra-
tive bodies. The plan is to give a tablet to each gram panchayat. The initiative 
involves monitoring performance with real- time data from the worksites. The 
assets will be located with geo- tagging for veriﬁcation.33
8.3.1.1 Remote Infrastructure and Offshore Growth
Since India is considered to be an outsourcing capital of the world, the effects of 
BD and the cloud on India’s offshoring industry deserve special consideration. 
BD and the cloud computing should affect India’s offshoring industry. The 
demand for cloud services is especially high in the offshoring industry and tech-
nology hubs such as Bangalore and Delhi. Amazon noted that its Indian cus-
tomers, especially those serving international markets, were showing increased 
interest in its cloud services. The 2011 NASSCOM and Deloitte report men-
tioned above noted that cloud computing will have a signiﬁcant impact on the 
IT and BPO services industry. The cloud should help Indian ﬁrms diversify the 
services offered, and improve the business models and delivery mechanisms.
 
India’s software and outsourcing companies’ business models mainly rely on 
inexpensive Indian engineers, who visit Western clients’ sites in order to ﬁx 
problems. CSPs use external servers and sophisticated technologies to do the 
same using fewer employees. According to the management consulting ﬁrm 
Insight Sourcing Group (ISG), one employee can monitor up to 200 servers in 
traditional service providers such as those in India. CSPs, on the other hand, can 
use one employee to monitor as many as 10,000 servers. In recent years, CSPs 
such as AWS, Red Hat, and Rackspace Hosting are reducing prices, which has 
posed a signiﬁcant threat and challenge to the Indian software and outsourcing 
companies.34
8.3.2 The Supply Side
Foreign and local BD and cloud providers are operating under intense competi-
tion and low- average proﬁt margins in India. The activities of these players have 
enriched the Indian BD and cloud industry.
8.3.2.1 Global BD and Cloud Players
Given the rapid growth, it is not surprising that India has received considerable 
attention from global BD and cloud players, including IBM, Microsoft, 

India  149
VMware, Parallels, and Salesforce.com. In 2008, IBM opened a cloud center in 
Bangalore for mid- market vendors, universities, government bodies, and micro- 
ﬁnance and telecommunications companies. Then, in early 2012, it helped 
India- based Tulip Telecom construct a 900,000 ft2 data center—the largest in 
the country—which will provide cloud infrastructure services.35 The company 
expanded the operations and services by establishing its ﬁrst cloud data center in 
Airoli, on the outskirts of Mumbai. IBM’s Airoli data center is a 30,000 ft2 facil-
ity.36 IBM heavily spent on advertising to market its Softlayer cloud.37
 
In 2009, Microsoft started offering productivity apps on the cloud for 
approximately US$2 per month which included email, collaboration, and con-
ferencing services. In 2014, Microsoft Ofﬁce 365 was available for US$5.50/
month or US$55/year in India.38 In the beginning, while Indian companies 
used Microsoft’s cloud services, the data centers were located in foreign coun-
tries.39 In 2014, Microsoft announced plans to open local data centers in three 
Indian cities.40 In 2015, it started three cloud data centers in order to improve 
the performance of Azure services for Indian customers. The three centers were 
located in in Pune, Chennai, and Mumbai, serving Central India, South India, 
and West India respectively.41
 
As of August 2014, over 8,000 Indian companies had used AWS.42 Amazon 
completed the construction of its ﬁve data centers in Mumbai in the early 
2016.43 In June 2016, AWS launched the Asia- Paciﬁc (Mumbai) Region to 
serve its 75,000 India- based consumers.44
 
Salesforce.com started operations in 2005. It has many high- proﬁle clients in 
India, including Bharti, eBay India, SIFY Technology, Polaris, and the National 
Research Development Corporation. In September 2011, Salesforce.com 
acquired a social customer- service SaaS start- up, Assistly, for US$50 million. 
Assistly’s users can beneﬁt from metrics and analytics which include case 
volume, interaction volume across different channels, response time, service 
levels, agent performance. Assistly’s acquisition is expected to help attract SMEs 
in India and other countries.45
 
In August 2014, the US- based cloud solutions providers for price quote, 
e- commerce, contract management, and revenue management, Apttus, 
announced a US$15-million investment plan for India. The company had 
started India operations in 2012.46
 
In 2009, VMware opened a cloud center in Pune. VMware provides cloud 
and virtualization software and services. As of 2015, VMware had 3300 
employees in India. Its R&D division had 1,300 employees. VMware’s second 
largest R&D center after Atlanta is in India.47
 
The hosting software provider Parallels announced a plan in 2009 to establish 
cloud operations in India. Parallels reported that data services providers in India 
use Parallels Plesk Automation and Parallels Plesk Panel to manage customers.48
 
In February 2016, DigitalOcean announced plans to establish a data center in 
Bengaluru. DigitalOcean is a public cloud host, which specializes in Linux. In 

150  Case Studies
March 2016, Oracle announced the launch of “cloud machine,” which allows 
companies to bring public cloud in their on- premise data centers. Oracle also 
announced plans to set up its data center in India.49
 
It was reported in mid- 2016 that Alibaba is expected to open a data center in 
India. Its AliCloud public cloud services will compete with global CSPs such as 
AWS and Microsoft.50
 
Some foreign technology companies have engaged in R&D activities to 
generate new products for the local market. For instance, Novatium, which is 
partly owned by Ericsson, developed cloud- based mobile applications, mainly in 
its Indian R&D centers. In September 2011, Novatium services had over 
40,000 users in India. Ericsson’s principal target groups for the applications are 
emerging markets, where most consumers cannot afford a PC. In developed 
markets, the company aims to focus on young consumers.
8.3.2.2 BD- and Cloud- Related Local Entrepreneurship
Platforms developed by global players have provided developers in India with 
opportunities to build BD- and cloud- based applications. Indian ﬁrms have also 
engaged in higher- end entrepreneurial activities in BD and cloud sectors.
 
Table 8.1 presents BD- and cloud- related business and entrepreneurial activ-
ities in India. As of 2016, India was estimated to have over 600 analytical ﬁrms, 
including about 400 start- ups.51 Indian ﬁrms are playing an increasingly promi-
nent role in the global BD and cloud landscapes.
 
Some Indian BD and cloud players are also engaged in R&D activities in 
foreign locations. For instance, the Indian e- commerce giant Snapdeal has 
opened a Data Sciences Centre in California to focus on BD and advanced ana-
lytics to understand consumer behavior.52 As noted above, Snapdeal also 
acquired the Silicon Valley- based start- up Reduce Data.53
8.4 BD and Cloud Computing Apps in India
BD and cloud providers in India have developed products, services, and appli-
cations to meet diverse customer needs. Some have developed specialized appli-
cations to meet the demands of speciﬁc industries and sectors.
8.4.1 E- Commerce and CRM
India’s largest retailer, Future Group,54 uses the cloud to support data warehous-
ing and analytics for its retail chains. The retailer uses clouds to manage its cus-
tomer loyalty program, which involves storing and analyzing millions of 
gigabytes of data.55 In September 2014, Future Group announced measures to 
make shopping from online and brick- and-mortar stores a seamless experience, 
known as an omni- channel strategy.56

India  151
 
In February 2011, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories deployed Salesforce CRM to 
improve its deals pipeline, track sales cycle, and analyze sales funnel. Dr. 
Reddy’s expected cloud- led streamlining to increase revenue by over 30 
percent.57
8.4.2 Investment, Banking, Finance, and Insurance
BD helped India’s ICICI Bank to enhance operational efﬁciency by improving 
debt collection without alienating customers. The bank has digitized processes 
that used to be performed by agents in the ﬁeld. The bank’s BD system captures 
the details of delinquent cases. Parameters such as risk behavior and customer 
proﬁle are used in the model. It matches each case to the most appropriate col-
lection channel, such as email, phone calls, and letters, which are less intrusive. 
It was reported that in auto loans, the bank increased debt collections by 50 
percent. In some areas, manpower needs were reduced by up to 80 percent.58
 
Likewise, ICICI’s insurance arm has used Zoho’s web- based applications to 
develop innovative services such as a personalized insurance for diabetes.59 Pre-
miums are adjusted depending on how well the policyholder sticks to his or her 
ﬁtness plan.
 
The Central Bank of India, which as of mid- 2016 has served more than 
35,000,000 account holders through 4,400 branches, six extension counters, 
twenty- nine satellite ofﬁces, 2,413 ultra- small branches, and about 2,000 
ATMs,60 uses BD to enhance corporate performance management. BD allowed 
the bank to cut planning time by half and improve the accuracy of reporting. It 
tracks deposits and loans at its branches. It uses BD to reduce liquidity risk and 
understand the impact of changes in interest and foreign exchange rates.61
 
In October 2010, Intel announced an agreement with an alliance of seventy 
companies, including the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and CtrlS,62 to 
develop hardware and software for an open and interoperable cloud. The Open 
Data Center Alliance works to address security, energy efﬁciency, and inter-
operability. The BSE expected that the new trading platforms supported by 
mobile telephony and clouds would broaden participation by allowing real- time 
and seamless access to data across phones, laptops, and other devices. This 
approach would also deepen and widen asset classes traded by increasing the 
participation of younger Indians in pension, insurance, and mutual funds. The 
popularity of mobile- based cloud applications is particularly promising. As noted 
above, India has many times more mobile subscribers compared to Internet users.
 
Ekgaon, which provides agricultural information to farmers, has developed a 
cloud- based free software for micro- ﬁnance institutions (MFIs). Using a mobile 
app, MFIs can track transactions in real-time. MFIs’ use of the open- source 
software is expected to reduce operating costs by 25–30 percent. In order to 
serve rural customers, MFIs have typically relied on ﬁeld ofﬁcers, who use tra-
ditional paper- based recordkeeping. Transaction approvals and executions were 

TABLE 8.1 Big Data- and Cloud-Related Business and Entrepreneurial Activities in India
Company
BD- and Cloud-Related Activities
Infosys
s   )NFOSYS HAS PARTNERED WITH ITS MAJOR CLIENTS IN CLOUD RESEARCH AND IN  IT DEDICATED  ENGINEERS TO IDENTIFY POTENTIAL cloud-related applications (www.infosys.com/cloud/Pages/index.aspx).
s   !PRIL  TEAMED UP WITH !73 TO ENABLE CLIENTS TO MOVE ENTERPRISE WORKLOADS TO THE !73 #LOUD )NFOSYS WILL ALSO USE AWS’s BD analytics. Infosys will also support organizations’ transition from legacy technologies to the AWS Cloud.1
s   4HIS CLOUD SYSTEM INTEGRATOR PROVIDES CLOUDBASED SERVICES FOR THE AUTO SECTOR AND &INACLE ,ITE FOR RURAL AND SEMIURBAN banks (www.infosys.com/ﬁnacle/solutions/pages/lite.aspx).
Computational 
Research 
Laboratories (CRL)
s   )N  9AHOO SIGNED A RESEARCH PACT WITH #2, TO SUPPORT CLOUD RESEARCH2
s   #2, IS A LAB RUN BY THE 4ATA 'ROUP 9AHOO USED #2,S %+! SUPERCOMPUTER
Zoho
Corp (formerly 
AdventNet) 
s   :OHOS 7ORD PROCESSING SPREADSHEET PRESENTATION AND CHAT APPLICATIONS ARE FREE FOR PERSONAL USE )T ALSO OFFERS inexpensive accounting, invoicing, and recruiting tools for business.
s   :OHO OPERATES A POPULAR SUITE OF 7EBBASED PRODUCTIVITY BUSINESS AND COLLABORATION APPS
s   4HESE APPS HAD OVER  MILLION USERS IN 3EPTEMBER 3 ICICI bank’s insurance arm uses Zoho’s applications to develop 
personalized insurance for diabetes.
s   :OHO#2- IS A CLOUDBASED #2- SOFTWARE FOR MANAGING CUSTOMER RELATIONS )T HELPS MANAGE SALES MARKETING CUSTOMER support, and inventory management. As of 2013, the Enterprise version of ZohoCRM cost US$35 per month per user. A 
free version was available for less than three users. It is also referred to as “poor man’s Salesforce.com.”4
s   :OHO "OOKS IS 3AA3BASED ACCOUNTING AND BOOKKEEPING TOOL )N  IT COST 53MONTH FOR TWO USERS AND 53
month for each additional user.5
Tata Consultancy 
Services (TCS)
s   4#3 APPLICATIONS INCLUDE HUMAN RESOURCES lNANCE INVENTORY %20 SOLUTIONS EMAIL DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT AND website services. Helped Singapore Management University set up a lab focused on the cloud, committing US$6 million.
s   4#3 STARTED CLOUD PILOT PROJECTS IN  )T LAUNCHED THE I/. CLOUD NETWORK WWWTCSIONCOM	 EXCLUSIVELY FOR 3-%S which had 135 customers by February 2011. Its clients were expected to increase to 1,000 by 2011-end. As of the mid-
2011, TCS has a strong R&D backbone consisting of 20 cloud centers.
s    4#3 ACQUIRED #2, 4HE ACQUISITION IS EXPECTED TO HELP 4#3 TO OFFER INTEGRATED (IGH 0ERFORMANCE #OMPUTING (HPC) and cloud applications to its customers.6

Tata 
Communications
s   )TS INFRASTRUCTUREASASERVICE OFFERING )NSTA#OMPUTE HTTPINSTACOMPUTECOM	 AIMS TO RIVAL !MAZONCOMS 7EB services. As of March 2011, 40–45 percent of InstaCompute customers were from outside India.7
s   )NSTA#OMPUTE CAPITALIZES ON THE COMPANYS  FT2 data centers in India and Singapore. The company plans to expand 
to the UK and the USA.
s   -AY  LAUNCHED ):/ #LOUD 3TORAGE PLATFORM WHICH OFFERS STORAGE SOLUTIONS FOR ENTERPRISES 4HE PLATFORM IS supported by its subsea cable network.8
Wipro 
s   )TS "$ SOLUTION "IG $ATA 2EADY %NTERPRISE "$2%	 SIMPLIlES "$ ADOPTION9 BDRE is offered for both individuals and 
organizations.
s   "$2% IS AN OPEN PLATFORM WHICH MAKES EASIER TO CUSTOMIZE "$ SOLUTIONS FOR INDUSTRY VERTICALS AND DIFFERENT USE CASES10 
Wipro has partnered with Santa Clara, California-based business computer software company Hortonworks to open 
source its BD technology.11
Notes
 1 Info Sys, Press Releases: Infosys and Amazon Web Services Collaborate to Accelerate Cloud Migration, April 28, 2016, www.infosys.com/newsroom/press-
releases/Pages/AWS-accelerate-cloud-migration.aspx.
 2 C. McCarthy, Yahoo Taps India Supercomputer in Cloud-Computing Push, CNet, 2008, http://news.cnet.com/8301–10784_3–9901643–7.html?tag=head.
 3 C. DesMarais, Seven Free Alternatives to Microsoft Ofﬁce, Techlicious, 2011, www.techlicious.com/guide/seven-free-alternatives-to-microsoft-ofﬁce/#.
 4 G. Mark, 11 Terrible CRM Systems For Your Company, Forbes, July 1, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/quickerbettertech/2013/07/01/11-terrible-crm-systems-for-
your-company/#5ca254fe1260.
 5 M. Weinberger, Zoho Books: Zoho Launches Its Own SaaS Accounting Software, January 19, 2011, http://talkincloud.com/zoho-books-zoho-launches-its-own-
saas-accounting-software.
 6 Business Today, TCS Acquires 100 Per Cent Stake in Pune based CRL for Rs 188 Crore, Business Today, August 17, 2012, www.businesstoday.in/current/deals/
tcs-acquires-100-per-cent-stake-in-pune-based-crl/story/187285.html.
 7 L.Y. Qing, Tata Comms Launches Cloud Platform in S’pore, ZDNet Asia, 2011, www.zdnetasia.com/tata-comms-launches-cloud-platform-in-spore-62207561.htm.
 8 R. Niranjan, Tata Communications Launches IZO Cloud Services, International Business Times, June 1, 2016, www.ibtimes.co.in/tata-communications-launches-
izo-cloud-services-680951.
 9 Times of India, Wipro Open Sources its Big Data Solution, Times of India, June 2, 2016, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/it-services/Wipro-open-sources-
its-Big-Data-solution/articleshow/52559985.cms.
10 A. Cole, Big Data for the Small Enterprise, IT Business Edge, June 3, 2016, www.itbusinessedge.com/blogs/infrastructure/big-data-for-the-small-enterprise.html.
11 J. Singh, Wipro Partners with Hortonworks to Open Source Big Data Tech, June 8, 2016, http://opensourceforu.com/2016/06/wipro-partners-hortonworks-
open-source-big-data-tech/.

154  Case Studies
thus slow. Using Ekgaon, ﬁeld ofﬁcers can communicate loan requests, receive 
loan approvals, and record cash transactions via text message. The information is 
stored in a cloud server. The software also helps track transactions accurately 
and reduce frauds.63
8.4.3 Education
Indian universities, including the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, are 
banking on the cloud to develop innovative research and education activities.64 In 
January 2012, the Indian government launched the country’s ﬁrst cloud- based 
tablet, known as the E- tutor Tablet, targeting ﬁrst- through twelfth- grade students. 
The content for the US$150 tablet was developed by e- tutor and the technology 
was designed by Oztern Technology.65 In April 2012, Microsoft announced its 
biggest global cloud deal, which would provide free services to All India Council 
for Technical Education (AICTE). As part of Microsoft’s corporate social respons-
ibility (CSR) initiatives, the project will make resources on the cloud available to 
7.5 million students and 450,000 teachers in 11,000 AICTE- afﬁliated institutions.66
8.4.4 Health Care
An innovative application in the early phases of development aims to identify 
counterfeit or sub- standard drugs.67 When buying a drug at a pharmacy store, a 
customer can ﬁnd a twelve- digit code by scratching a sticker on the surface of 
the package and then send a text message to a given number. The code sent by 
the customer is matched with that registered by the pharmaceutical company in 
HP’s cloud database. The customer then receives a response back that tells them 
whether the drug is counterfeit or genuine.
 
Although this application provides obvious commercial beneﬁts to drug 
manufacturers and patients, one of the most important beneﬁts of this technique 
is that it helps save lives by enabling the customers to check the authenticity of 
life- saving drugs. This system was developed in Africa by the non- proﬁt organ-
ization, mPedigree, and HP Labs. The technology provider had launched a 
program to track and authenticate drugs in Nigeria and Ghana. As of September, 
HP was negotiating with Indian pharmaceutical companies such as Cipla, Tablet 
India, and CAMA. This application holds a special appeal for India, as the 
number of cellphone subscribers in the country is more than seven times higher 
than the number of Internet users.
 
The Medical Informatics Group of the Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing in India has made the Mercury Nimbus Suite available for 
healthcare service providers. This suite offers tele- medicine services to people in 
remote areas through public and private cloud.68
 
One application that has made health care accessible to the broad public is 
the US$600 cloud- based medical device called the Swasthya Slate.69 This small 

India  155
device performs thirty- three common medical tests. It measures blood pressure, 
blood sugar, heart rate, blood hemoglobin, urine protein, and glucose. It also 
tests for diseases such as malaria, dengue, hepatitis, HIV, and typhoid. Each test 
takes only a few minutes and the data is uploaded to a cloud- based medical- 
record management system, which can be accessed by the patient.70 In areas that 
lack Internet connection, the data can be stored on the Android phone or tablet. 
When connection is available, the data can be uploaded. The device can also 
use SMS to upload data.71 The device supports English, Hindi, Urdu, and 
Telegu languages. In March 2014, the Indian government launched a pilot 
project which involved the deployment of 4,250 Swasthya Slates in six districts 
of the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir. It is expected that the cost of the 
Swasthya Slate may reduce to US$150 per unit with a wider diffusion.72
8.4.5 Environmental Monitoring and Resource Protection
Bharat Light and Power (BLP), one of India’s largest clean energy companies, 
combines cloud computing, BD analytics, mobile phones, and social media 
technologies in order to improve efﬁciency. Using IBM’s SoftLayer technology, 
BLP has built a cloud infrastructure to manage and monitor its large number of 
wind farms across the country. Using the infrastructure, BLP stores, manages, 
and uses the huge amount of data produced by its power generation sources. 
BD analytics will help draw insights from the data in order to increase opera-
tional efﬁciency and production capacity. For instance, it is possible to pro-
actively identify defective equipment and causes related to capacity utilization 
problems. Using mobile phones, information can be provided to the ground 
staff on their handsets, who can take corrective actions before the problems 
occur. The future plan is to utilize social media to connect with customers and 
inform them about their power usage. It will also help them determine energy 
demand and improve energy distribution on its farms.73
 
India’s tiger poachers are familiar with the jungles so that they can easily 
move around and kill the animals. Poachers outnumber ofﬁcers by a big factor. 
BD can be used to pinpoint poaching hotspots, and direct more resources. 
Information could be collected from reports related to captured or killed tigers 
or the locations of traps that have been discovered. Analyzing information col-
lected this way over time would determine the areas where poaching activities 
are most likely to occur. Analytical process can also be used to determine the 
locations where tigers tend to travel throughout the year, and where they are 
likely to be attacked by poachers. Such information can be combined with 
environmental data to create models, which could help understand if poaching 
is more likely to occur at night, at dawn, when a full moon is out, or during the 
dry season.74
 
Tigers are being monitored with satellite tracking software that was originally 
developed for industrial use. The software is adapted to track tigers using 

156  Case Studies
crowdsourcing. For instance, with more than 6,000 tourist photos that were 
tagged with details of locations and times, Tiger Nation and the Born Free 
Foundation reportedly tracked about 300 tigers in six parks.75
 
In the capital city, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the Public Works 
Department use BD to improve lighting in the city.76 The city plans to replace 
18,500 street light poles with LED and install CCTV cameras on them in order 
to monitor crimes. The city also hopes to generate at least 4 MW of solar energy 
by optimally utilizing rooftops of government buildings.77
 
The cloud- based IGG (I Got Garbage) platform seeks to improve the way 
garbage is disposed of and recycled in India.78 It was developed by the global 
technology services company Mindtree in collaboration with the NGO Hasiru 
Dala, Waste Wise Trust, and seven other social businesses. It is expected to 
enhance the working conditions of waste pickers (also known as ragpickers) and 
integrate them into the formal economy. Currently the ragpickers go to the 
garbage piles, segregate items, and sell them to the waste collectors for recycling. 
The working conditions are hazardous and unsafe. Consequently a ragpicker’s 
average life expectancy is thirty- nine years with a one- in-three infant mortality 
rate. They also lack access to the mainstream supply chain of waste. The IGG 
was being tested on a limited basis in the early 2014 in Bangalore which has 
about 25,000 waste pickers. The app allows apartment buildings, NGOs 
involved in educating people about proper disposal of solid waste, scrap dealers, 
garbage contractors, ragpickers, and other relevant groups to coordinate efforts 
using centralized information in the cloud. The project expects to increase a 
ragpicker’s income from about US$65 to US$110/month.79
8.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments
Overall BD and cloud computing are yet in their infancy in India. The key 
problems include unpredictable power supplies, poor quality Internet connec-
tion, limited bandwidth, and unreliable optical ﬁber links connecting different 
parts of the country.80 Signiﬁcant regulatory barriers to BD and cloud com-
puting also remain. But, as is the case of other developing countries, as eco-
nomic and institutional factors improve, it could greatly accelerate India’s 
digitization and transform how cellphones and other technologies are used. If 
industry and the government adopt appropriate measures such as developing 
appropriate products that meet local needs (e.g., mobile cloud) and addressing 
issues such as the low bandwidth, communicating the cloud’s value proposi-
tion, addressing security issues, and enhancing trust in vendors, the cloud 
might serve as an important catalyst in driving economic and social progress 
and development in India. For instance, about 400 million residents lack elec-
tricity access in India. Using BD and the cloud, it is possible to reduce the gap 
between demand and supply. Companies such as BLP are taking measures on 
this front.81

India  157
 
BD- and cloud- based apps are likely to bring social and economic changes. 
In order to illustrate this point, we take examples related to the access to 
ﬁnance. In India, in 2014, over 400 million people borrowed money. However, 
less than one in seven were approved for a formal loan. Many individuals in 
developing countries are “invisible” to formal lenders as no data exists on 
them.82 BD has the potential to transform this landscape. Using BD, it is pos-
sible to expand the number of individuals in India who could gain access to 
formal credit by 100–160 million. In China, Brazil, India, Mexico, Indonesia, 
and Turkey, the six biggest developing economies, BD has the potential to help 
gain access to formal credit for 325 million and 580 million people.83
 
As is the case of most developing economies, for global technology com-
panies, affordability will be a key consideration to compete in India. A related 
point is that BD- and cloud- related products and services offered in India must 
recognize the local technological reality, such as low bandwidth and mobile- 
driven digitization.
 
Foreign companies could beneﬁt by collaborating with local cloud providers, 
characterized by lean cost structures and experienced in developing low- cost 
products. For Indian cloud providers, on the other hand, their ability to deliver 
value for money in the domestic market could give them a competitive 
advantage in foreign markets, especially if they are in a position to reconﬁgure 
their resources to operate effectively in emerging markets.
Notes
 1 EY, Big Data and Enterprise Mobility: Growing Relevance of Emerging Technology 
Themes: The India Perspective, 2013, www.ey.com/IN/en/Industries/Technology/
Big- data-and- enterprise-mobility- in-India. 
 2 V. Aggarwal, Microsoft May Become First MNC to Set Up Cloud Data Centre 
in India, Economic Times, August 6, 2014, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2014–08–06/news/52514307_1_cloud- services-data- centre-cloud- adoption.
 3 Nikhil Pahwa, Setting Up Data Centers in India Shouldn’t Be Mandatory – 
Amitabh Kant, CEO Niti Ayog, Medianama, May 26, 2016, www.medianama.
com/2016/05/223-data- centers-in- india-amitabh- kant/. 
 4 S. Mundy, Indian IT Services Groups Adjust to Cloud and Big Data: Wipro, Infosys 
and Tata Under Pressure to Adapt or be Left Behind, Financial Times, July 5, 2016, 
https://next.ft.com/content/9ad3b946–3d26–11e6–8716-a4a71e8140b0.
 5 Economic Times, IBM’s First Cloud Data Centre in India to Focus on Private 
Services for SMEs, Economic Times, October 27, 2014, http://articles.economictimes.
indiatimes.com/2014–10–27/news/55482991_1_public- cloud-services- market-
cloud- providers-cloud- computing. 
 6 Gartner, Gartner Says Indian Public Cloud Services Market Will Reach $638 Million 
in 2014, Gartner, October 9, 2014, www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2869417. 
 7 Business Standard, Nasscom Aims at Top 3 Position for India In Big Data Analytics by 
2025: Over 600 Analytical Firms in India, Out of Which Approximately 400 are Start-
 Ups, Form the Emerging Hub for Analytics Solutions for Industries, Business Standard, 
June 23, 2016, www.business- standard.com/article/companies/nasscom- aims-at- top-
3-position- for-india- in-big- data-analytics- by-2025–116062300709_1.html. 

158  Case Studies
 8 V. Aggarwal, Google, Microsoft, IBM Trying to Lure Startups with Goodies, 
Economic Times, September 18, 2014, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2014–09–18/news/54067955_1_public- cloud-indian- startups-cloud- market.
 9 Ibid. 
10 Caroline McCarthy, Yahoo Taps India Supercomputer in Cloud- Computing 
Push, CNet, March 24, 2008, http://news.cnet.com/8301–10784_3–9901643–7.
html?tag=head; Christina DesMarais, Seven Free Alternatives to Microsoft Ofﬁce, 
Techlicious, September 21, 2011, www.techlicious.com/guide/seven- free-alternatives-
 to-microsoft- ofﬁce/#; Liau Yun Qing, Tata Comms Launches Cloud Platform in 
S’pore, ZDNet, March 8, 2011, www.zdnetasia.com/tata- comms-launches- cloud-
platform- in-spore- 62207561.htm.
11 B. Gooptu, Snapdeal Establishes its US- Based Data Sciences Centre in California Economic 
Times, May 30, 2016, http://tech.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/internet/
snapdeal- establishes-its- us-based- data-sciences- centre-in- california/52501836. 
12 A. Choudhury, Cloud Telephony Firm Knowlarity Makes its Second Acquisition, 
Nabs Delhi- based Smartwards, 9 May, 2016, http://yourstory.com/2016/05/
knowlarity- acquires-smartwards/.
13 S. Biswas, Cloud Computing Startups Raise Big Money, CloudTweaks, 2012, www.
cloudtweaks.com/2012/02/cloud- computing-startups- raise-big- money-update- 6.
14 For the 2013 BSA Global Cloud Computing Scorecard, see http://cloudscorecard.
bsa.org/2013/index.html. 
15 idc.com, Cloud Computing — Changing Retail Landscape in India, 2013, www.idc.
com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=IN9891110V. 
16 Business Roundtable (BRT), Promoting Economic Growth through Smart Global 
Information Technology Policy: The Growing Threat of Local Data Server 
Requirements, 2012.
17 Aggarwal, Microsoft May Become First MNC to Set Up Cloud Data Centre in 
India. 
18 Economist, A Phoneful of Dollars: The World’s Poor Need the STABILITY and 
Security That Banks have Traditionally Offered, But Increasingly They do not need 
Banks to Provide it, The Economist, November 15, 2014, www.economist.com/
news/briefing/21632441-worlds- poor-need- stability-and- security-banks- have-
traditionally- offered.
19 Rediff, IT can Help Indian SMEs Boost Revenue by $56 bn: Microsoft, Rediff 
Business, October 8, 2013, www.rediff.com/money/report/tech- it-can- help-indian-
 smes-boost- revenue-by- 56-bn- microsoft/20131008.htm. 
20 See ICT Facts and Figures 2016, ITU, www.itu.int/ITU- D/ict/statistics.
21 Quentin Hardy, Cloud Computing for the Poorest Countries, New York Times, 
August 29, 2012, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/29/cloud- computing-for-
 the-poorest- countries/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0. 
22 Business Standard, NASSCOM Aims at Top 3 Position for India In Big Data Analytics 
by 2025. 
23 S. Rai, India’s High Demand for Big Data Workers Contrasts with Scarcity of Skilled 
Talent, Tech Republic, June 12, 2014, www.techrepublic.com/article/indias- high-
demand- for-big- data-workers- contrasts-with- scarcity-of- skilled-talent/.
24 Nir Kshetri, The Quest to Cyber Superiority: Cybersecurity Regulations, Frameworks, and 
Strategies of Major Economies (New York, Berlin, and Heidelberg: Springer- Verlag, 
2016). 
25 Danny Bradbury, India’s Cybersecurity Challenge, Info Security, September 17, 2013, 
www.infosecurity- magazine.com/view/34549/indias- cybersecurity-challenge/.
26 Pankaj Doval, Govt Orders Security Audit of IT Infrastructure, Times of India, July 
15, 2013, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/tech- news/Govt- orders-security-
 audit-of- IT-infrastructure/articleshow/38398644.cms. 

India  159
27 Sify Finance, Sify Reports Revenues of INR 1.80 Billion for Third Quarter of Fiscal 
Year 2011–12, January 31, 2012, www.sify.com/ﬁnance/sify- reports-revenues-
 of-inr- 1–80-billion- for-third- quarter-of- ﬁscal-year- 2011–12-news- press-releases-
 mb5oaddghjc.html. 
28 Ernst & Young. Cloud Adoption in India, 2010, http://twelvedot.com/blog/wp-
 content/uploads/2011/07/Cloud_computing_adoption_in_India.pdf. 
29 Business Standard, India High- Growth Market for Cloud Services: Study, Business 
Standard, September 6, 2014, www.business- standard.com/article/news- ians/india-
 high-growth- market-for- cloud-services- study-114090600634_1.html. 
30 V. Aggarwal and J. Mendonca, 2014. Amazon Links 8,000 Indian Firms to Cloud 
Services, The Economic Times, August 21, 2014, http://retail.economictimes.
indiatimes.com/news/e- commerce/e- tailing/amazon- links-8000-indian- ﬁrms-to-
 cloud-services/40558150. 
31 KPMG, The Indian Cloud Revolution, 2012. 
32 S. Murugesan, Cloud Computing Gives Emerging Markets a Lift, IT Professional 
(2011) 13(6), 60–62. 
33 Express Computer, eGovWatch: Government to Give Digital Boost to MGNREGA 
Scheme, Express Computer, February 27, 2015, http://computer.ﬁnancialexpress.
com/egov- watch/egovwatch- government-to- give-digital- boost-to- mgnrega-
scheme/9784/. 
34 Nicole Henderson, Parallels SMB Cloud Insights Report Finds Indian Market to Reach 
$839M by 2016, The Whir, May 28, 2013, www.thewhir.com/web- hosting-news/
parallels- smb-cloud- insights-report- ﬁnds-indian- market-to- reach-839m-by- 2016; 
Shire Ovide, A Price War Erupts in Cloud Services, Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2014, 
www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303887804579503713914245756; 
and 
D.A. Thoppil, Cloud Computing Set to Rain on Indian Outsourcers’ Parade, Wall 
Street Journal, November 18, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/indiarealtime/2014/11/18/
cloud- set-to- rain-on- indian-outsourcers- parade/. 
35 Patrick Thibodeau, India Builds a Mega Data Center, Computer World, February 7, 
2101, 
www.computerworld.com/s/article/9224022/India_builds_a_mega_data_
center.
36 Economic Times, IBM’s First Cloud Data Centre in India to Focus on Private Services 
for SMEs.
37 Aggarwal and Mendonca, Amazon Links 8,000 Indian Firms to Cloud Services.
38 Preetam Kaushik, The Cloud Is Calling, But is India Ready? Business Insider, May 
29, 2014, www.businessinsider.in/TheCloud- Is-Calling- But-Is- India-Ready/article 
show/35727267.cms. 
39 Aggarwal, Microsoft May Become First MNC To Set Up Cloud Data Centre in 
India.
40 L.S. Subramanian, What will Microsoft India Cloud do for India and Indians, 
Information Week, December 16, 2014, www.informationweek.in/informationweek/
perspective/298168/microsoft- india-cloud- india-indians.
41 Yevgeniy Sverdlik, Microsoft Launches Three Cloud Data Centers in India, 
Data Center Knowledge, September 29, 2015, www.datacenterknowledge.com/
archives/2015/09/29/microsoft- launches-three- cloud-data- centers-india/.
42 Aggarwal and Mendonca, Amazon Links 8,000 Indian Firms to Cloud Services.
43 Peter Judge, Amazon’s Mumbai Data Centers are Ready – Report, Data Centre 
Dynamics, February 5, 2016, www.datacenterdynamics.com/content- tracks/design-
 build/amazons- mumbai-data- centers-are- ready-report/95672.fullarticle. 
44 First Post, Amazon Web Services Cloud Computing Platform available from 
datacenters in India, First Post, June 28, 2016, http://tech.ﬁrstpost.com/news- analysis/
amazon- web-services- cloud-computing- platform-available- from-datacenters- in-
india- 322822.html. 

160  Case Studies
45 Small Enterprise India, Salesforce Acquires Assistly to attract SMEs, Small Enterprise 
India, September 22, 2011, http://smallenterpriseindia.com/index.php/technology/
software/677-salesforce- acquires-assistly- to-attract- smes.
46 The Hindu Business Line, Apttus Plans $15 mn Investment to Expand India Ops for 
Cloud Services, The Hindu Business Line, August 19, 2014, www.thehindubusinessline.
com/features/smartbuy/apttus- to-invest- 15mn-to- expand-india- ops-for- cloud-
services/article6331883.ece. 
47 V. Chawila, VMware Opens New Facility in Bangalore, will Hire 500 People in India 
This Year, Economic Times, April 14, 2015, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2015–04–14/news/61142247_1_vmware- pat-gelsinger- india-md. 
48 Henderson, Parallels SMB Cloud Insights Report Finds Indian Market to Reach 
$839M by 2016. 
49 A. Raval, India Becoming the New Battleﬁeld for Data Center Providers, Computer 
Financial Express, May 18, 2016, http://computer.ﬁnancialexpress.com/magazine/
india- becoming-the- new-battleﬁeld- for-data- center-providers/17540/.
50 B. Sullivan, Alibaba Takes on AWS in India with Data Centre, Tech Week Europe, 
May 24, 2016, www.techweekeurope.co.uk/cloud/datacenter/alibaba- takes-aws-
 battle-to- india-192756. 
51 Business Standard, NASSCOM Aims at Top 3 Position for India In Big Data Analytics 
by 2025.
52 I. Russell, India Digest: Freshdesk Opens Berlin Ofﬁce; Snapdeal Data Centre in 
California, Deal Street Asia, May 30, 2016, www.dealstreetasia.com/stories/india-
 digest-21–42594/.
53 Gooptu, Snapdeal Establishes its US- Based Data Sciences Centre in California.
54 For Future Group, see www.futuregroup.in.
55 Biswas, Cloud Computing Startups Raise Big Money.
56 Economic Times, Future Group’s Customers to Get Better Access to Products, 
Economic Times, September 4, 2014, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2014–09–04/news/53563664_1_future- group-kishore- biyani-big- bazaar. 
57 EFY Times, Dr. Reddy’s Sales Process with Salesforce.Com, February 3, 2011, www.
efytimes.com/e1/58149/fullnews.htm. 
58 Capgemini, Grabbing Value from Big Data: Mining for Diamonds in Financial 
Services, December 17, 2013, www.capgemini.com/resources/grabbing- value-from-
 big-data- mining-for- diamonds-in- ﬁnancial-services.
59 Economist, The Long Nimbus, The Economist, October 25, 2008, 389(8603), 15–17. 
60 Live Mint, CARE Revises Ratings to Central Bank of India’s Various Bonds, Live 
Mint, July 14, 2016, http://money.livemint.com/news/company/news/care- revises-
ratings- to-central- bank-of- india%22s-various- bonds-283137.aspx. 
61 Brian Browdie, IBM Software to Help Central Bank of India Manage “Big Data,” 
Amer ican Banker, May 14, 2013, www.Amer icanbanker.com/issues/178_93/ibm-
 software-to- help-central- bank-of- india-manage- big-data- 1059095–1.html.
62 CtrlS is the largest Tier 4 data center and managed services provider in the Asia 
Paciﬁc region, see CtrlS Annuity Crosses Rs.200 Crore, PR Newswire, February 
17, 
2015, 
www.prnewswire.co.in/news- releases/ctrls- annuity-crosses- rs-200-
crore- 292162141.html. 
63 Next Billion, Future Group’s Customers to get Better Access to Products, 2014, 
www.nextbillion.net/blogpost.aspx?blogid=2869. 
64 K., Raghu, IBM’s India Lab to Innovate Cloud Computing Solutions, Live Mint, 
September 24, 2008, www.livemint.com/2008/09/24222631/IBM8217s-India- lab-
to- innov.html.
65 Economic Times. E- Tutor Tablet: Cloud- Based Solution for Students Launched, The 
Economic Times, 2012, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/hardware/e- tutor-
tablet- cloud-based- solution-for- students-launched/articleshow/11630507.cms. 

India  161
66 Beryl Menezes, Microsoft Bags its Biggest Cloud Order—from AICTE, DNA, April 
14, 
2012, 
www.dnaindia.com/money/report_microsoft- bags-its- biggest-cloud-
 order-from- aicte_1675575. 
67 Chandu Gopalakrishnan, How Cloud Technology Can Help you Spot Fake Drugs, 
Times of India, September 29, 2011, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/
personal- tech/computing/How- cloud-technology- can-help- you-spot- fake-drugs/
articleshow/10168266.cms. 
68 India Launches Cloud- Based Telehealth Solution, September 16, 2013, http://tinyurl.
com/p2egsg7. 
69 See the Swasthya Slate, www.swasthyaslate.org/.
70 V. Wadhwa, What New Delhi’s Free Clinics can Teach America about Fixing its 
Broken Health Care System, Washington Post, March 11, 2016, www.washingtonpost.
com/news/innovations/wp/2016/03/11/what- new-delhis- free-clinics- can-teach-
 america-about- ﬁxing-its- broken-health- care-system/.
71 Arundhati Parmar, A New mHealth Device to Tackle Global Health, Medical Device 
& Diagnostic Industry, March 29, 2016, www.mddionline.com/blog/devicetalk/new-
 mhealth-device- tackle-global- health.
72 V. Wadhwa, This Indian Startup Could Disrupt Health Care with an Affordable 
Diagnostic Machine, Venture Beat, November 18, 2014, http://venturebeat.
com/2014/11/18/this- indian-startup- could-disrupt- health-care- with-an- affordable-
diagnostic- machine/. 
73 Ajoy Menon, How an Energy Company is Using the Cloud to Create a Greener 
India, Forbes, October 23, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/ibm/2014/10/23/how- an-
energy- company-is- using-the- cloud-to- create-a- greener-india/. 
74 Jonathan Buckley, Can Big Data Analytics Fight Poaching? Smart Data Collective, 
March 19, 2015, http://smartdatacollective.com/jonathanbuckley/304726/can- big-
data- analytics-ﬁght- poaching. 
75 All Africa, Africa: “The Final Frontier?”—Speech by Ibrahim Thiaw, UNEP 
Deputy Executive Director, All Africa, June 27, 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/ 
201606270376.html.
76 Adèle Charbonneau, Safer Cities for All, Hufﬁngton Post, June 28, 2016, www.
hufﬁngtonpost.com/josephine- dallant/safer- cities-for- all_b_10718774.html. 
77 Smart Cities of Tomorrow, New Delhi’s Smart City Transformation Has Begun; 
NDMC To Start 3D Mapping, Smart Cities of Tomorrow, March 26, 2015, www.
smartcitiesoftomorrow.com/new- delhis-smart- city-transformation- has-begun- ndmc-
to- start-3d-mapping/.
78 Wall Street Journal, I Got Garbage (IGG) – The Technology Platform for Waste 
Management is Now Open for Bangalore Citizens, Wall Street Journal, June 17, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com/article/PR- CO-20140617–902644.html.
79 R. Sharma, Using Cloud Computing to Solve Bangalore’s Garbage Problem, Reuters, 
February 
25, 
2014, 
http://blogs.reuters.com/india/2014/02/25/using- cloud-
computing- to-solve- bangalores-garbage- problem/.
80 Sullivan, Alibaba Takes On AWS In India With Data Centre.
81 Menon, How an Energy Company is Using the Cloud to Create a Greener India.
82 Arjuna Costa, Anamitra Deb, and Michael Kubzansky, Big Data, Small Credit: The 
Digital Revolution and Its Impact on Emerging Market Consumers, Omidyar Network, 
2015, www.omidyar.com/spotlight/what- big-data- small-credit. 
83 Ibid.

9
CHINA
9.1 Introduction 
China’s BD industry is expected to grow by 50 percent annually during 
2016–2020. Especially industries such as retail and manufacturing are rapidly 
embracing BD technologies. For instance, according to KPMG’s fourth annual 
“Global Consumer Executive Top of Mind Survey” released in mid- 2016, 
about two- thirds of executives in China and Hong Kong had plans to use data 
and analytics, telematics, geospatial or location- based technology, and virtual 
reality by 2018.1 With these and other developments, by 2020, China’s data 
volume is expected to make up about 20 percent of the global total.2
 
Likewise, according to the consultancy Bain & Co., the Chinese cloud com-
puting market in China was worth US$1.5 billion in 2013, which will increase 
to US$20 billion by 2020.3 According to the China Securities Journal, China’s 
cloud computing market is expected to reach US$6 billion in 2017.4 Likewise, 
the China Software Industry Association estimated that the country’s overall 
cloud- computing value chain will exceed US$122 billion by 2015.
 
China’s BD and cloud computing industry and market are a result of a number 
of contradictory and conﬂicting forces. On the one hand, the Chinese govern-
ment has viewed cloud computing and BD as a strategic industries.5 It has mobil-
ized massive resources to develop the country’s cloud computing and BD sectors. 
For instance, the government plans to spend billions of dollars in the cloud com-
puting industry in the 13th ﬁve- year plan between 2016 and 2020.6 In May 2016, 
the Chinese Ministry of Industry and Information Technology announced that it 
would release a national Big Data development blueprint in the second half of 
2016. The goal is to use BD analysis technologies and applications to create a 
revenue of seventeen billion yuan (US$2.6 billion) by 2017.7

China  163
 
On the other hand, thanks to a strong emphasis on cyber- control measures, 
most foreign CSPs have located their servers in neighboring countries. Requir-
ing foreign- originated trafﬁc to pass through China’s ﬁrewall often leads to long 
loading times for Chinese consumers. A study of the content delivery network 
provider CDNetworks indicated that China’s ﬁrewall leads to an increase in 
load time by 450 milliseconds or more for an object hosted on a server outside 
China. For a typical website hosted in Asian cities such as Hong Kong, Singa-
pore, or Tokyo, the ﬁrewall adds 10–15 seconds. The average time to load an 
object from a Hong Kong data center is 50 percent longer than in China. Web-
sites hosted in the USA take 20–40 seconds to load.8 Thus, accessing cloud serv-
ices provided by foreign vendors, such as Google Docs and Dropbox, is difﬁcult 
or impossible. Moreover, if a cloud provider’s contents are on a server that also 
hosts content objectionable to the Chinese government, they might be 
blocked.9
 
In the Asia Cloud Computing Association’s (ACCI) Cloud Readiness Index 
2016,10 China ranked thirteenth out of the fourteen economies analyzed. The 
ACCI noted that programs such as the 12th Five- Year Plan and the Chongqing 
cloud computing special zone have been major positive steps taken by China. 
Note that the country’s 12th Five- Year Plan (2011–2015) has targeted to spend 
US$308 billion for the telecommunications infrastructures. There are tax and 
other incentives for investments in the cloud industry.11 Likewise, in 2011, 
China announced an investment of US$154 million to develop a cloud center 
for high- tech and start- up ﬁrms in Chongqing. The cloud computing Special 
Administrative Region (SAR) would be free from censorship.12 The ACCI 
expressed concerns in issues such as data sovereignty, the stability and power 
quality of power grid, green energy and freedom of information access.13
 
In addition to the apparently paradoxical policy position of the Chinese gov-
ernment, the development of the Chinese BD and cloud industry and market 
also needs to be looked at in the context of contradictory economic dynamics. 
For instance, in 2013, China overtook Japan to become the world’s second 
largest IT market,14 which suggests a strong demand of BD analytics and cloud 
services in the country. Despite the potential attractiveness of China’s cloud 
market, Chinese ﬁrms have exhibited a lower propensity to adopt the cloud 
compared to industrialized countries. For instance, according to the market 
research ﬁrm, International Data Corporation, only about 4 percent of com-
panies in China were using the cloud in 2009 compared with 16 percent in 
Singapore.15 Likewise, by the end of 2013, only 5 percent of Chinese SMEs had 
used hosted servers.16 In the same vein, according to a July 2014 report of the 
McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), only about a ﬁfth of Chinese ﬁrms were 
using the cloud, which compared unfavorably with those of US peers, where 
about three- ﬁfths used the cloud. The report also noted that Chinese businesses 
in the average spend only 2 percent of revenues on IT, which is half as much as 
the global average.17 Slow and unstable broadband networks and poor customer 

164  Case Studies
service have also hindered the diffusion of the cloud in China. For instance, 
whereas download speeds averaged 17.4 MBPS in developed countries in 2013, 
it was only 4 MBPS in China.18
 
Institutional theorists have emphasized the importance of formal and informal 
institutions in shaping the developmental patterns, industries, and markets.19 
The idea here is that various policies, rules, laws (formal institutions), as well as 
cloud providers’ and cloud users’ norms of behavior, mental maps, and codes of 
conduct (informal institutions) are tightly linked to the diffusion pattern of the 
cloud in China. Formal and informal institutions in China have a number of 
interesting aspects from the standpoint of modern technologies such as BD and 
the cloud. In this chapter, we thus use the institutional angle to analyze the 
development of the Chinese BD and cloud industry and market.
 
Moreover, prior researchers have suggested that the developmental pattern of 
an industry is tightly linked to the forward linkages (demand), backward link-
ages (supply), and horizontal or inter- sectoral linkages.20 This means that cloud 
industries and markets are embedded in the broader economy and thus their 
development should not be viewed as a self- contained phenomenon with self- 
contained solutions.
9.2 The Current State of the Diffusion of BD and Cloud 
Computing in China
The development of China’s BD and cloud computing industry and market is 
associated with and facilitated by a rapid growth in its information economy. In 
2015, China’s information economy was estimated at 18 trillion yuan (US$2.8 
trillion) and its e- commerce transaction volume exceeded 20 trillion yuan 
(US$3.1 trillion).21
 
In 2013, there were more than forty public cloud projects in China. Beijing 
had received more than US$8 billion to support projects in constructing servers 
and other infrastructure.22 Even the rural and backward areas of the country are 
beneﬁting from BD and the cloud. In 2016, the Guizhou province, which is 
one of China’s poorest provinces, reported that its BD “industrial value” was 
200 billion yuan (US$31 billion).23
 
In 2011, China spent US$286 million on cloud computing infrastructure.24 
Due to the newness, the cloud computing industry’s growth will require a large 
amount of capital. Industry experts believe that cloud projects could also be 
funded through the capital market.25 One estimate suggested that Chinese com-
panies accounted for 10 percent of the global investment in cloud computing in 
2011. Many large companies have invested heavily in data centers. Local gov-
ernments have also announced cloud computing parks to support the data 
centers.26
 
According to Forrester, China’s public cloud market was US$1.8 billion in 
2015, which is expected to grow to US$3.8 billion in 2020.27 Some sample 

China  165
examples that can illustrate the cloud’s impact on businesses and consumers are 
shown in Table 9.1. The country is also planning the implementation of other 
cloud- based applications such as a food safety cloud to monitor food growers.28 
Cloud- related offerings of Chinese entrepreneurial ﬁrms are presented in 
Table 11.2.
 
Foreign CSPs have deepened their involvements in the Chinese market. 
Apple has started to store the personal data of some Chinese users in Chinese 
servers. Its ﬁrst iCloud data center in mainland China was built in collaboration 
with China Telecom.29
 
In December 2013, Amazon.com announced its entry into the Chinese 
market.30 In order to make AWS available in China, AWS has partnered with 
local technology companies. Under the arrangement, Amazon provides soft-
ware, whereas Chinese partners provide local data centers, bandwidth, and 
content delivery.31
 
IBM announced a deal with Chinese data center service provider 21Vianet 
Group to launch its Bluemix cloud computing platform in China.32 And 12 
IBM has invested US$1 billion in Bluemix, which supports more than 120 tools 
and services.33
9.2.1 BD- and Cloud- Related Entrepreneurship of Chinese IT 
Firms and Their Offerings
Chinese ﬁrms have engaged in substantial entrepreneurial ventures to serve the 
domestic and international markets. For instance, Huawei’s global sales of 
servers associated with the cloud increased by 130 percent in 2011.34 The com-
pany’s goal was to increase cloud businesses originating from outside of China 
from 25 percent in 2011 to 60–70 percent in 2012.35 Likewise, in 2012, Lenovo 
acquired the US software company Stoneware in order to strengthen its cloud 
computing.36
 
Cloud players in China are also gaining increasing prominence. For instance, 
China Life and the government- owned telecommunications company, China 
Unicom are represented in the Intel- backed cloud standards organization—the 
Open Data Center Alliance.37
9.2.2 Mega Projects and Investments Involving BD and 
the Cloud
Chinese IT players are involved in grand projects and investments. A highly 
visible example is the state- of-the- art 6.2 million ft2 Cloud Center in Lang-
fang city constructed by IBM and China’s Range Technology, which will be 
comparable to the Pentagon and 646,000 ft2 will be devoted for data center.38 
After its completion in 2016, the Center will be the largest of such facilities 
in Asia.39

TABLE 9.1 Big Data and Cloud Computing Applications and Their Impacts in China: A Sample of Examples
Cloud Application
Example
Explanation
Enhancing efﬁciency 
with e-commerce/ 
e-business
IBM’s Project Yun
2008: a pilot project was started to provide access to cloud-based business services: Project Yun 
(Chinese for “cloud”). It dynamically allocates storage, server and network resources. Wang Fu 
Jing Department Store, one of China’s largest retailers with more than 10 million customers, has 
beneﬁtted from Project Yun.1 It uses the cloud to share information with retail stores and 
implement B2B e-commerce with suppliers.
Reduction in capital 
expenditure
IBM Cloud Center 
Wuxi
Supports software developers across hundreds of companies.2 The tenants, mostly SMEs, have 
access to IT infrastructures and enterprise-ready environments.
Development of new 
or improved 
products/services
China Mobile
Expected to enhance mobile Internet and 3G experiences.
The city of Ningbo
Is working with IBM to develop a cloud-based Smart Logistics Center to streamline the port’s 
supply chain. The system will allow the 5,000 logistics companies to share data. Connecting 
every shipping vehicle with a GPS tracker has led to the reduction of the idle times of trucks. A 
trucking company reported an 80 percent decline in idle time.3
Extending market reach China Mobile
Expected to diversify demand.
E-health
Guang Dong Hospital
Implementation of a suite of healthcare data-sharing and analytics.
E-environment
Beijing municipal 
government
July 2014: the Beijing municipal government and IBM signed a deal to use the latter’s advanced 
weather forecasting and cloud technologies to solve the city’s pollution problem. IBM’s 
technologies will make optimizations and adjustments to make a better utilization of renewable 
energy sources. In a project implemented in Zhangbei in Hebei province, the deployment of 
IBM’s supply and demand management system led to a reduction of energy waste from 30%  
to 20%.4
Food safety
The province of 
Guizhou
Food Safety Cloud of the Guizhou Academy of Testing was established in 2014. As of the mid 
2016, it involved the participation of more than 20,000 enterprises and hundreds of testing 
agencies. It had data on 35,551 products. The plan is to include storage, transportation, and other 
data from “the farm to the dining table.” Consumers can access all the relevant information using 
the mobile app “Shi-An-Ce” (test for safe food). The app scans bar codes to show all the available 
data on food products. Guizhou is also developing BD platform for this purpose.5

Policing and law 
enforcement
The city of Guiyang
Guiyang Public Security Bureau (GPSB) uses BD and the cloud in law enforcement. Law 
enforcement personnel wear body cameras that record all activities. The system can help stop 
malicious behaviors such as tampering of test results, which were common in the past. For a 
drunk-driving test, as soon as the breath test begins, the results are uploaded in real-time on a 
cloud via 3G networks. In one year after the adoption of BD, there was a 50% reduction in 
trafﬁc-related cases. The system is also expected to reduce corrupt practices of police.6
Banking and ﬁnance 
Alibaba’s Sesame Credit 
It was launched in January 2015, which provides credit ratings of consumers and small 
businesses. Sesame mainly utilizes data from Alibaba’s huge online ecosystem. It also makes use 
of BD collected from Alibaba’s various partners, as well as the online and ofﬂine history of 
transactions. Sesame provides credit providers with more accurate and data-driven insights, 
which can help assess potential borrowers’ creditworthiness and offer loans and micro-ﬁnance 
and other credit-related services.7
Notes
1 E. Yujuico and B.D. Gelby, Marketing Technological Innovation to LDCs: Lessons from One Laptop Per Child, California Management Review (2011) 53(2), 50–68.
2 M. Cleverley, Viewpoints: Emerging Markets: How ICT Advances Might Help Developing Nations, Communications of the ACM (2009) 52(9), 30–32.
3  J. Shu, How One Chinese City is Using Cloud Computing to Modernize a Busy Port, Forbes, June 5, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/ibm/2014/06/05/how-one- 
chinese-city-is-using-cloud-computing-to-modernize-a-busy-port/.
4  China Tech News, Big Data used by Beijing Government to Alleviate Pollution, China Tech News, July 15, 2014, www.chinatechnews.com/2014/07/15/20725-
big-data-used-by-beijing-government-to-alleviate-pollution.
5 Xinhua, Insight: Big Data Could Make China’s Food Safer Xinhua, Xinhua Net, July 10, 2016, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016–07/10/c_135502440.htm.
6  China Daily, SW China City Uses Big Data for Smart Policing, China Daily, May 30, 2016, www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/tech/2016–05/30/content_25529658.htm.
7 N. Kshetri, Big Data’s Role in Expanding Access to Financial Services in China, International Journal of Information Management (2016) 36 (3), 297–308.

TABLE 9.2 Some Examples Big Data- and Cloud-Related Entrepreneurship of Chinese Firms
Example
Explanation
Offering for SMEs
s   )"- AND THE Wuxi National 
Software Park
s   ,AUNCHED 0ANGOO3KY PLATFORM FOR 3-%S1
s   !LIBABA 'ROUPS Aliyun
s    ANNOUNCED 53 MILLION INVESTMENT IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT MARKETING AND establishing cloud centers for customers, especially SMEs.2
s   )TS CLOUD BUSINESS !LIYUN HAD A REVENUE OF 53 MILLION IN 3
s   -ARCH  !LIBABA LAUNCHED ITS lRST 53 DATA CENTER IN 3ILICON 6ALLEY4
s   !UGUST  !LIYUN ANNOUNCED THE LAUNCH OF h#HINAS lRSTv "$ PLATFORM $4 0!) WHICH will allow app developers to better predict user behavior. The system studies huge amount of 
data to create forecasts.5
s   /CTOBER  !NNOUNCED AN INVESTMENT OF 53 BILLION IN ITS CLOUD COMPUTING BUSINESS globally to compete with AWS. Opened second data center in Silicon Valley.6
s   3HANDA
s   'RAND#LOUD
Offerings for large 
enterprises or specialized 
business needs
s   (UAWEI s   :4%
s   )AA3 SOLUTION FOR OPERATORS GOVERNMENTS AND ENTERPRISES WITH DATA CENTER )4 INFRASTRUCTURE
s   )NITIAL CUSTOMERS ARE TELECOM OPERATORS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND THE MILITARY
Offerings for foreign 
markets
s   (UAWAI
s   #LOUD AS A CRITICAL COMPONENT TO SERVE FOREIGN MARKETS
s   (AS  OUT OF THE WORLDS  BIGGEST TELECOMMUNICATIONS OPERATORS AS CUSTOMERS #HINA $AILY 2011).
s   !S OF THE MID COLLABORATED WITH  CUSTOMERS IN  COUNTRIES ON THE CLOUDS COMMERCIAL USE
s   #LOUD BASES IN 3OUTHEAST !SIA THE -IDDLE %AST 3OUTHERN %UROPE AND %ASTERN %UROPE7
s   !LIBABA
s   (AS OPENED A DATA CENTER IN 3ILICON 6ALLEY
s   *UNE  !LIBABABACKED MOBILE )NTERNET COMPANY 5#7EB LAUNCHED A "$BASED NEWS APP for India: UC News. The app uses BD to aggregate news for individual users. UCWeb’s UC 
Browser was reported to have 400 million monthly users worldwide.8
Offerings for individual 
consumers
s   4ENCENT
s    ,AUNCHED CLOUDBASED 11 MOBILE BROWSER 5SERS WOULD BE ABLE TO STORE PICTURES AND ﬁles. It also provides a seamless interface between mobile devices and PCs.

s   5BITUS AND #HINA Mobile
s    LAUNCHED MOBILE GAMING BASED ON "IG#LOUD
s   (UAWEI
s   #LOUD PLATFORM
s   "AIDU
s   (AS MADE HEAVY INVESTMENT ON !) ESPECIALLY AUTONOMOUS DRIVING )T HAS COLLABORATED WITH THE Wuhu city government in the province of Anhui for a dedicated unmanned car testing zone.9
s   !NNOUNCED THAT IT IS DEVELOPING UNMANNED BICYCLES CALLED A hSMARTBIKEv WHICH WILL USE advanced intelligent sensors and cloud-based BD analysis. The bicycle will know the owner’s 
requirements and health index and will be able to drive by itself. By 2013, China had 551 
million bicycles, of which 81 million were electric.10
s   /PERATES DATA CENTERS AROUND THE COUNTRY WHICH INCLUDES A  SQUARE METER FACILITY IN Shanxi province.11
s   $EPLOYED CLOUD APPLICATIONS SUCH AS "AIDU 7ENKU "AIDU "OOKS	12
Notes
 1 N. Peng, IBM, iPark Announce Launch of PangooSky, China Daily, July 29, 2009, www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/2009–07/29/content_8486819.htm.
 2 W. Xing, Alibaba to Pour 1b Yuan into Helping SMEs, China Daily, March 31, 2009, www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/2009–03/31/content_7634725.htm.
    1 (ARDY !LIBABA HAS A #OMPUTING #LOUD AND ITS 'ROWING 4OO New York Times, August 4, 2014, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/08/04/alibaba-has-a-
computing-cloud-and-its-growing-too/.
 4 Reuters, Now Alibaba is Moving in on Cloud Hosting in Silicon Valley, March 4, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/03/04/now-alibaba-is-moving-in-on-cloud-
hosting-in-silicon-valley/.
 5 A. MacGregor, Alibaba Leads Chinese Big Data Push with New AI Cloud Offering, The Stack, August 25, 2015, https://thestack.com/cloud/2015/08/25/alibaba-
chinese-big-data-ai-cloud/.
 6 Y.L. Chen, Alibaba Opens Second U.S. Data Center in $1 Billion Cloud Push, Bloomberg, October 9, 2015, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015–10–09/ 
alibaba-opens-second-u-s-data-center-in-1-billion-cloud-push.
 7 M. Chua, Huawei hinges cloud dreams on partners, Networks Asia, October 27, 2011, www.networksasia.net/content/huawei-hinges-cloud-dreams-partners.
 8 Times of India, UCWeb Launches UC News App Tailored for India, Times of India, June 6, 2016, http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/tech-news/UCWeb-
launches-UC-News-app-tailored-for-India/articleshow/52619891.cms.
 9 J. Liu, Tencent to Baidu, Chinese Internet Giants Big on Big Data, South China Morning Post, 26 May, 2016, www.scmp.com/tech/article/1954550/tencent-baidu-
chinese-internet-giants-big-big-data.
10 ECNS, Baidu Conﬁrms Unmanned Bicycles in Development, 2014, http://beijing.china.org.cn/2014–07/12/content_32931272.htm.
11 China Economic Review, Data Centers are the Digital Engine Rooms of China’s New Economy. China Economic Review, September 24, 2015, www.china 
economicreview.com/data-centers-are-digital-engine-rooms-chinas-new-economy.
12 L. Sun, Baidu (BIDU) Claims 75.5% of China’s Search Market as Google Continues to Slide, Investor Guide, 2011. www.investorguide.com/article/7667/baidu-
bidu-claims-75–5-of-chinas-search-market-as-google-continues-to-slide/.

170  Case Studies
 
In August 2015, China Mobile completed the ﬁrst phase of its data center in 
Hubei Province’s Xiangyang Hi- Tech Industry Development Zone. The 
Xiangyang data center is scheduled to be completed in four phases with a total 
ﬂoor area of 327,000 square meters. The construction started in March 2013. As 
of August 2015, the data center was offering data operation, storage, and trans-
mission services for twenty- three internet companies, enterprises, and municip-
alities.40 In September 2015, China Mobile announced plans to invest US$6.3 
billion by 2019 to expand its cloud computing facilities in central China’s Hubei 
province. China Mobile also signed a strategic agreement with the Hubei 
provincial government for the smart city project “Smart Hubei” during 
2016–2020.41
 
China’s three state- run telecommunications operators, China Telecom, 
China Unicom, and China Mobile, announced plans to invest US$47.4 billion 
in data centers in Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province, to create a cloud 
hub.42 China has also established Cloud Centers in Jinan, Shenzhen, and 
Changsha.43
9.2.3 Local–Local Collaborations and M&A Activities
There are a plethora of collaborations, co- operations, and partnerships between 
local players, which have helped stimulate the cloud industry. In China, 
Tencent shared a cloud security platform with Kingsoft.44 There are also M&A 
activities, which are likely to have long- term positive effects on the cloud.
9.2.4 Local–Foreign Collaborations and M&A Activities
There also collaborations in the BD and cloud industry that involve local and 
foreign technology ﬁrms. Such collaborations have led to the development of 
various novel, and revolutionary products and services, which have effectively 
transformed business models and processes, and promoted positive socio- 
economic changes. Among a high- proﬁle cloud project in China is a collabora-
tion of IBM and China’s information services provider Yi Lian Zhong (YLZ). 
IBM would build a cloud platform for YLZ to connect to networks consisting 
of citizens, government agencies, social service providers, medical institutions, 
private and public organizations, and educational institutions. The platform is 
expected to facilitate the sharing of public resources and information, support 
service integration, improve government efﬁciency, and ensure effective admin-
istration of citizen services. The services would cover 300 million people.45
 
Similarly, in July 2014, VMware announced that it had teamed up with 
China Telecom to build hybrid clouds. The CEO of VMware noted that the 
collaboration would allow China Telecom to sell products under the latter’s 
brand, which has made it easier to do business in the country. Note that China 
Telecom is a state- owned enterprise (SOE) and is China’s biggest CSP.46 As a 

China  171
further example, in August 2010, the Japanese electronics company NEC and 
China’s largest IT outsourcing provider Neusoft announced a joint venture (JV) 
to offer cloud- based services for manufacturers with global export business and 
SMEs.47 Another example is Microsoft and China Standard Software Compa-
ny’s (CS2C) collaboration, which involves the development of cloud- based 
solutions primarily targeted to large clients such as retailers, banks, and govern-
ment ministries.48 China is also seeking cloud- related cooperative ventures with 
manufacturers from Taiwan.49 Likewise, in October 2011, China’s IT leaders 
held a meeting with those of South Korea and Japan, which explored applica-
tions and development trends for cloud computing. Japan’s NEC and the 
Chongqing government have also signed an MoU to help develop Chongqing 
as a smart city and a cloud hub.40
 
In 2016, Dell signed an agreement deal with the Guizhou- based Wind 
Cloud to provide cloud services to SMEs. Dell has a plan to invest US$125 
billion in China during 2016–2020. Likewise, Microsoft signed a deal with 
Xiaomi on Microsoft Ofﬁces and other cloud- based services.51
 
In early 2016, China Unicom formed a joint venture partnership with the 
Spanish broadband and telecommunications provider Telefonica to offer BD 
services in China. The venture entails deploying Telefonica’s Smart Steps, 
which is used to deliver location- based insights by extrapolating and aggregating 
network data anonymously. Location- based applications in China are expected 
to be useful for diverse purposes such as urban planning, public security, trans-
portation, and retail and business consultancy.52
 
Huawei has established strategic partnerships with SAP, Accenture, and other 
companies for joint innovation in BD and cloud computing.53 As noted in 
Chapter 8, Huawei and India’s Infosys announced a partnership to jointly offer 
cloud, BD, and communication solutions. The partnership combines Huawei’s 
cloud infrastructure and Infosys’ IT service expertise.54
9.2.5 Venture Capital (VC) and Other Forms of Foreign 
Investments
Cloud- related entrepreneurship is also facilitated by the presence of VC ﬁrms. 
In 2011, Intel invested in United Information Technology, a cloud storage 
products and solutions provider, offering enterprise- class storage products and 
application software.55 In early 2012, Intel Capital invested in Beijing Cloud 
Union, an online gaming company, and Fashion Republic, an Internet fashion 
photo- sourcing platform.56 Cloud Union focuses on the design, development, 
and operation of cloud gaming platforms. With the cloud, it delivers high- 
quality games.57

172  Case Studies
9.2.6 Standardization Initiatives
A research report released by CCID Consulting in 2010 highlighted the 
importance of cloud standards, emphasizing that this together with cloud 
security are among the most urgent issues facing China’s cloud computing 
industry that should be dealt with by the government and other relevant 
actors.58 The MIIT has been guiding cloud standardization initiatives. A senior 
MIIT ofﬁcial noted that “an open attitude” will be adopted in standardization-
 related actions. The ofﬁcial also noted that Chinese companies will actively 
take part in the formulation of international cloud standards in order to raise 
China’s concerns.59 China has participated in various international level initia-
tives. As noted earlier, China Life and China Unicom are represented in the 
Open Data Center Alliance.60 Likewise, in July 2012, the Distributed Man-
agement Task Force (DMTF ) and the China Electronics Standardization Insti-
tute (CESI) announced that they had formed a partnership to drive the 
adoption of DMTF cloud management standards in China.61 According to the 
agreement, the DMTF will work to make its standards meet the requirements 
outlined by CESI. The CESI, on the other hand, will encourage Chinese 
companies, universities, and non- proﬁt organizations to adopt DMTF stand-
ards which include the Cloud Infrastructure Management Interface (CIMI) 
and the Open Virtualization Format (OVF ) as well as future DMTF standards 
for Cloud auditing and software license management.
9.3 Drivers of BD and Cloud Industry and Market
Prior research indicates that factors such as consumer preferences, income, avail-
ability and costs of input, infrastructures, trade policy, and other types of gov-
ernment regulations, technological economies of scope (a function of prior 
national experience with previous generations of technology), export orienta-
tion of the ﬁrms, and market size affect the development of an industry.62
9.3.1 Institutional Factors
First, we analyze the roles of formal and informal institutions in the cloud indus-
try. As noted above, institutionalists have emphasized the importance of formal 
and informal institutions in shaping the developmental pattern of an industry.63 
Institutions are the “rules of the game”64 and include “formal constraints (rules, 
laws, constitutions), informal constraints (norms of behavior, conventions, and 
self- imposed codes of conduct), and their enforcement characteristics.”65 Some 
speciﬁc examples of institutions identiﬁed in the prior literature include govern-
ment regulations, trade policy, the roles of non- governmental organizations 
such as trade associations and consumer preferences.66 Scott proposed three 
institutional pillars: (i) regulative; (ii) normative; and (iii) cognitive.67 These 

China  173
pillars relate to “legally sanctioned,” “morally governed,” and “recognizable, 
taken- for-granted” behaviors respectively.68 
9.3.2 Regulative Institutions
Regulative institutions consist of “explicit regulative processes: rule setting, 
monitoring, and sanctioning activities.”69 
9.3.2.1 State’s Mobilization of Resources in BD and the Cloud 
Industry
A distinguishing mark of China is that the strong state has been capable of 
mobilizing massive resources in the development of the cloud industry. Gov-
ernment supports have stimulated the diffusion of the cloud. As noted earlier, 
the 12th Five- Year Plan (2011–2015) has targeted to spend US$308 billion for 
the telecommunications infrastructures. In August 2013, the State Council 
released the “Broadband China” initiative, which aims to expand full broadband 
coverage across the country by 2020. By 2020, the speeds of urban and rural 
broadband accesses are expected to reach 50 MBPS and 12 MBPS respectively.70 
The broadband coverage in administrative villages is expected to reach 95 
percent by 2015 and 98 percent by 2020. The government announced plans to 
spend US$326 billion on the Broadband China strategy.71
 
There are tax and other incentives for investments in the cloud industry. In 
October 2011, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), 
the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), and the Ministry 
of Finance allocated US$236 million to support indigenous cloud computing. 
Many local governments, such as Chongqing, Ningxia, and Beijing, have tar-
geted cloud computing and data centers and have provided subsidies to attract 
businesses in these areas.72 The Guizhou province has offered tax breaks, grants, 
and housing allowances in order to attract ﬁrms in the BD and the cloud 
sector.73
 
In 2013, China released plans for building 103 smart cities, districts, and 
town.74 As of January 2013, over forty Chinese municipalities had expressed 
plans to build smart cities. As noted earlier, China also announced an invest-
ment to develop a cloud center for high- tech and start- up ﬁrms in Chongqing. 
Likewise, a planned high- proﬁle cloud project is the 100-hectare Jingbei Cloud 
Valley project at the Miaotan industrial park in the Zhangbei economic devel-
opment zone of the Hebei province. The government is planning to spend 
US$1.6 billion on the project. It will have twenty large data centers, power 
supplying centers, operation and management centers, and a BD center with 
500,000 servers.75
 
This does not mean that Chinese policies favor domestic and foreign cloud 
players equally. The Chinese government has expressed a desire to see the cloud 

174  Case Studies
industry dominated by local companies.76 It also wants Chinese companies to 
control a higher share of world cloud markets. To fulﬁll this desire, it has taken 
a number of measures. According to the NDRC, the government has viewed 
cloud computing as a strategic industry.77 It is worth noting that companies in 
other strategic sectors are eligible for market protection.
 
Due to concerns related to national security, currency control, and industrial 
policy, China has local data server requirements.78 It is encouraging state- run IT 
companies such as China Mobile and ZTE to expand BD and cloud services. In 
May 2014, the National Development and Reform Commission, the Ministry 
of Industry and Information Technology, and the Ministry of Finance rolled 
out a funding program designed to help Chinese companies with signiﬁcant 
cloud projects meeting certain criteria.79 China has classiﬁed cloud computing as 
a value-added telecom service (VATS). Under the Chinese regulatory regime, 
and in accordance with China’s WTO commitments, foreign- company owner-
ship is capped at 50 percent in VATS ventures and 49 percent for basic telecom 
services.80 This means that foreign CSPs are required to ﬁnd Chinese partners in 
order to operate in China. While the central government deﬁnes cloud com-
puting as a value- added service, there is no speciﬁc “cloud computing” category 
in the license list of value- added services. Microsoft Ofﬁce 365 in China is 
hosted by a Chinese domestic company by license requirement. Other foreign 
cloud providers such as Amazon, IBM, and SAP have followed similar models.81
9.3.2.2 Laws and Policy Related to Security, Privacy, and Control
The cloud- related legal system and enforcement mechanisms are evolving more 
slowly compared to the technological development.82 China lacks strong privacy 
and data protection laws. China’s strong state cuts both sides. China’s state strat-
egies towards ICTs have been to balance economic modernization and political 
control.83 While China’s support for the development of the cloud industry is 
encouraging, it is also using the technology to pursue political goals.
 
China has allegedly employed cyber- control measures involving the cloud. 
As noted earlier, the government’s cyber- control measures have led to an 
inability of businesses and consumers to realize the cloud’s potential. For 
instance, China’s ﬁltering system makes it difﬁcult or impossible to access cloud 
services provided by foreign vendors such as Google Docs and Dropbox, and 
causes signiﬁcant connectivity speed and capacity reduction. In July 2014, it was 
reported that Microsoft’s OneDrive cloud storage service and Yahoo’s Flickr 
were not accessible from China.84 A member of China- based anti- censorship 
site GreatFire.org speculated that these blocks were due to concerns about 
photo sharing in demonstrations in Hong Kong.85
 
Cyber- control measures have also discouraged foreign investments. Google’s 
2009 report indicated that it had discovered an attack on its infrastructures that 
originated in China. In 2008, Google’s CEO said that his company would work 

China  175
with Chinese universities, starting with Tsinghua University, on cloud- related 
academic programs. The country’s unfavorable environment from the security 
standpoint, however, led to Google’s withdrawal from China.
 
BD and the cloud have helped the Chinese government strengthen its sur-
veillance programs. The many initiatives that are being introduced include the 
new grid management system. Under this system, grid administrators aggregate 
reports into a surveillance database. It is then combined with data collected from 
video cameras and websites. Government agencies analyze that data to detect 
trends, which can help prevent social unrests before they start. Starting in 2011, 
the Chinese government has catalogued and divided the provinces into admin-
istrative blocks. Within an administrative block, each infrastructural and physical 
unit (skyscraper, manhole, and park bench) is assigned a fourteen- digit code and 
entered into the database. In order to gather data and monitor the grid, thou-
sands of employees have been hired, who enter data and manage speciﬁc popu-
lations. For instance, in the city of Guangzhou, there are about 12,000 
employees, who monitor 200 households each.86
9.3.3 Normative Institutions
Normative institutions introduce “a prescriptive, evaluative, and obligatory 
dimension.”87 The basis of compliance in the case of normative institutions 
derives from professional and social obligations.
9.3.3.1 Special Interest Groups and Non- Government 
Organizations’ Roles
Special interest groups and non- government entities are organized loosely and 
there is little room for these groups to inﬂuence national policymaking in 
China. We illustrate the China–India differences from the standpoint of security 
and privacy issues, which are tightly linked to the diffusion of the cloud.88 
Various ongoing efforts and activities initiated by the NASSCOM and the 
DSCI have played a key role in the cloud’s development in India.89 Trade asso-
ciations, which are an important component of normative institutions, have 
been notably absent in China. Nonetheless, there are some encouraging devel-
opments. The Chinese government has encouraged the cloud industry to estab-
lish a trade association, which can act as a platform to promote cloud 
development.90
9.3.4 Cognitive Institutions 
Cognitive institutions are “the shared conceptions that constitute the nature of 
social reality and the frames through which meaning is made.”91 These are built 
on the mental maps of decision makers.92

176  Case Studies
9.3.4.1 Price Sensitivity
Unlike in mature economies, SMEs in China tend to be price sensitive and are 
interested only in a simple online presence. For instance, a survey conducted 
among Chinese SMEs suggested that many believed that they were paying too 
much for telecoms services and 24 percent of the respondents were concerned 
about high prices.93 Chinese organizations primarily emphasize process improve-
ment, efﬁciency, and savings, rather than ﬁnding innovative ways to make use 
of the cloud’s enormous computing power, speed, and ﬂexibility.94 Most 
Chinese organizations’ BD and cloud adoption involves a simple and low- cost 
strategy.
9.3.4.2 Propensity to Outsource
Put simply, the cloud is about outsourcing IT functions. Due to concerns 
related to data security and overall beneﬁts, businesses are cautious in spending 
on cloud services.95 Adopting a cloud model results in a loss of control over 
these functions. However, for China’s state- owned enterprises (SOEs), the 
ability to control is important.96 SOEs also exhibit a higher level of concern 
regarding data security and have a tendency to distrust CSPs.97 In this regard, a 
barrier facing the Chinese cloud industry is that large SOEs are reluctant to out-
source IT needs and move to the cloud.98 Indeed, an article published in the 
New York Times suggested that until not long ago, SOEs were not allowed to 
use outsourced data center services.99
9.3.5 Linkages with the Economy 
As noted earlier, the developmental pattern of an industry is tightly linked to 
the forward linkages, backward linkages, and horizontal or inter- sectoral link-
ages.100 This section thus examines upstream and downstream linkage effects as 
well as the horizontal linkages.
9.3.6 Demand- Related Factors
9.3.6.1 BD and Cloud Adoption Propensity of Organizations and 
Industries
In the healthcare industry, while the investments in the past focused on hardware, 
a shift is occurring towards software and digital services with the increasing matu-
rity of the industry.101 The huge market for e- healthcare has created the demand 
for the cloud. B2B e- commerce, supply chain management, and others have been 
an important driving force behind the activities of foreign multinationals as well as 
local ﬁrms (Table 9.2). Online gaming, which generated US$6.8 billion in 2011, 
is an industry that has generated strong forward linkages in China. Gaming 

China  177
 companies are facing intense pressure to transform their processes and business 
models. The deployment of a cloud platform helped China’s second biggest 
gaming company, Shanda, to enhance the automatic management of the game 
operation business and reduce data center costs by 80 percent.102
 
Prior researchers have suggested that in most developing economies, govern-
ment agencies are often the biggest single users of hardware and software.103 
China’s SOEs, especially the ones owned by the central government, have 
increased their cloud investments.104 The nature of demand in low- tier cities 
and rural areas is however likely to be different from that in an advanced region.
9.3.6.2 SMEs’ Access to Technology
BD and cloud services give SMEs access to technologies they are not able to 
afford from other sources. According to a Parallels study released in 2011, 
China’s SMEs are likely to go directly to the cloud instead of taking the inter-
mediate step of installing in- house IT solutions. Twenty- eight percent of SMEs 
had plans to purchase IaaS services by 2014 and 24 percent had plans to adopt 
the cloud. The study estimated that cloud service market size for the Chinese 
SMEs would reach US$640 million in 2011. China considers the cloud as an 
opportunity to provide cost- effective Internet services to SMEs as a component 
of an ambitious virtualization program.
9.3.7 Input (Backward Linkage)
The development of industries which supply the various ingredients needed for 
the cloud offer strong backward linkages. In China, R&D activities in the cloud 
and development of the supercomputing industry have provided backward 
linkages.
9.3.7.1 Development of Supercomputing Industry and 
Economies of Agglomeration
The idea in economies of agglomeration is that a large number of ﬁrms in 
related industries beneﬁt from positive externalities by clustering together. 
Factors such as the presence of multiple suppliers, knowledge spillovers, the 
availability of intermediate inputs, and labor specialization lead to low costs of 
production. For instance, by locating close to other ﬁrms, they beneﬁt from 
positive spillovers from investment and economic activities that are already in 
place. Several mechanisms associated with economies of agglomeration include 
technology spillovers, advantages of thick markets for specialized skills, and the 
backward and forward linkages. Users and suppliers of intermediate inputs tend 
to cluster close to each other because the large market provides greater demand 
for goods and the supply of inputs.105

178  Case Studies
 
IDCs and the supercomputer industry provide economies of agglomeration 
for the cloud industry. As noted above, China has invested heavily in IDCs.106 
In the June 2011 list of the world’s top 500 supercomputers, two Chinese com-
puters were represented in the top 10: Tianhe- 1A China (No. 2) and Nebulae 
(No. 4).107 China’s approach to the development of the cloud industry has been 
to build cloud centers next to regional supercomputing sites. For instance, the 
Chengdu Cloud Computing Center, which was China’s ﬁrst major commer-
cially operated Cloud Center launched in December 2009, was built by the 
Chengdu Supercomputer Center and powered by the Dawning 5000 super-
computer. Likewise, the Shenzhen Cloud Computing Center, which completed 
testing in January 2012, is home to the Nebulae supercomputer. In the same 
vein, the Changsha Cloud Computing Center which opened in July 2011 is 
home to the Tianhe- 1 supercomputer built by the Chinese National University 
of Defense Technology (NUDT).108
 
In mid- 2016, a Chinese- made supercomputer, Sunway TaihuLight topped 
the list of the world’s most powerful computers. Sunway TaihuLight’s capacity 
is 93 petaﬂop at its peak, which means that it can perform up to 93,000 trillion 
calculations per second. It is installed at the National Supercomputing Centre in 
Wuxi. In the list of the world’s 500 most powerful computers, China had 167 
computers compared to 165 in the USA. It is the ﬁrst time since the list began 
that China has overtaken the USA. Sunway TaihuLight is expected to be used 
in advanced manufacturing, weather forecasting, and BD analytics.109
9.3.7.2 Local Skill and Technological Base
Foreign as well as local ﬁrms are involved in BD- and cloud- related R&D activ-
ities. ZTE’s 10,000 m2 global cloud center in Nanjing had about 3,000 R&D 
staff in 2011. As noted above, China Telecom and Cambridge University have 
teamed up to conduct research involving the M- health cloud. IBM’s Shanghai 
R&D facility has the cloud as a primary area. As noted earlier, IBM is also 
working on a research project, which involves statistical analyses to assess TCM 
treatments’ effectiveness. Overall, 490 of world’s top 500 companies have estab-
lished over 1,160 R&D centers in China. An issue is the availability of skilled 
manpower. Companies have faced difﬁculty in ﬁnding people with the appro-
priate skills to operate cloud services.110
9.3.8 Structures of Related Industries (Horizontal Linkage)
An inter-sectoral linkage is said to exist between two economic sectors if events 
in one provide a stimulus to another. For instance, a higher ICT penetration 
rate and bandwidth availability may lead to higher demands of cloud- related 
products and services. Conversely, ICT users are more likely to enjoy higher 
beneﬁts from the cloud.

China  179
9.3.8.1 ICT Penetration
The availability of a web- connected computer, cellphone, or other devices is a 
prerequisite to beneﬁt from the cloud. The role of the cloud is to change the 
delivery, pricing, and consumption of the IT functionality.111 The cloud can 
help leverage existing ICT investments, systems, and infrastructures. High and 
rapidly growing cellular penetration provide strong horizontal linkages due to 
the popularity of mobile clouds. While the majority of China’s population has 
no PC, by mid- 2015, China had about 1.3 billion mobile phone users, which is 
close to 100 percent of the population.112
9.3.8.2 Bandwidth Availability
The basic idea in the cloud model is that computation and storage concentrate 
on the clouds and high- performance machines are linked by high- bandwidth 
connections to manage resources.113 High bandwidth is thus required for a 
better and effective utilization of existing resources on the clouds. In 2011, 
China added 30 million ﬁxed broadband subscriptions, which was about half of 
the total subscriptions added worldwide. The country’s ﬁxed broadband pene-
tration reached 12 percent in 2011.114 At the same time, as in most developing 
countries, low bandwidth has been the most glaring shortcoming in rural areas, 
which has hampered the cloud’s growth. The Broadband China initiative is 
likely to address this shortcoming.
9.4 Discussion and Concluding Comments
The overriding reality is that only a small segment of the economy is currently 
beneﬁting from the cloud. Since most Chinese ﬁrms have not yet connected to 
the Internet, the cloud’s biggest impacts on the country’s economy have not yet 
materialized.115 That is, BD and the cloud is in the infant stage of development 
and cloud- based innovations and business models are yet far from inclusive of 
SMEs. However, as economic (e.g., connectivity and affordability) and institu-
tional factors improve, the cloud may certainly gain momentum and holds a 
promise to bridge the digital divide. On the upside, China is less likely to face 
barriers related to privacy and security regulations.
 
The entry of foreign CSPs has forced local ﬁrms to be more competitive. 
For instance, just before Amazon’s announcement of entry into the Chinese 
market, the cloud division of Alibaba, Aliyun, said that it would cut the price of 
its services by up to 35 percent.116 Chinese ﬁrms’ low- cost strategy and experi-
ences in serving the home market may allow them to develop value- creating 
strategies and realize a signiﬁcant share in the global cloud market, especially in 
the developing world. At the same time, while Chinese IT companies have 
undertaken successful entrepreneurial activities on the home front, they may 

180  Case Studies
face barriers in foreign countries. Cloud providers from China might experience 
a negative country- of-origin effect. As noted above, the institutional environ-
ment in China cannot guarantee data security and privacy. These concerns 
further increase if one takes into consideration the possibility of government 
control of China- based CSPs.
 
The above discussion also leads to some guidance for foreign CSPs in navig-
ating China’s tricky business landscape. As discussed above, global CSPs face a 
number of challenges in China. They include the underdeveloped ICT infra-
structure, a complex regulatory environment, skill unavailability, and China’s 
geopolitical tensions. Moreover, China has expressed a high degree of suspicion 
and distrust towards foreign CSPs. IT companies such as IBM and Cisco have 
reported declines in their China sales after revelations of alleged US spying. 
Foreign and local CSPs vary considerably in their cloud- related capabilities and 
focus on different market segments. According to a Gartner analyst, most 
Chinese CSPs have the capability to provide cloud services to SMEs or start- up 
companies. Global players such as AWS, on the other hand, have offerings 
appropriate for large enterprises or government organizations.117 According to 
an analyst at Forrester Research in Beijing, the key advantages of foreign CSPs 
concern the richness of product offerings, quality, and experience in servicing 
large- scale clients. For one thing, SOEs are not potential customers for foreign 
CSPs. SOEs are often expected to sign deals with Chinese CSPs. Foreign com-
panies are required to take measures to avoid hosting illegal contents (e.g., por-
nography and politically sensitive speech). They also need to be prepared to deal 
with the government’s overly forceful measures, such as occasional “lockdown.” 
On some occasions, IT companies are not allowed to move hardware to or 
from IDCs. Such lockdowns lasted for over three weeks in early 2014, when a 
big political meeting was being held in Beijing.118
 
Economies of scales have undoubtedly played a major role in attracting 
global and local players in the Chinese cloud industry. The breadth and depth 
of cloud offerings thus would continue to expand. Smaller developing eco-
nomies lack some of the favorable conditions enjoyed by China and are less 
attractive markets for cloud suppliers, and thus face more problems in the devel-
opment of the cloud industry.
 
Chinese policy makers have recognized the opportunity to tap this techno-
logy to slip into a higher gear. Due to China’s strong state and weak civil 
society, the private sector’s roles have been relatively less signiﬁcant. China has 
also shown a willingness to form an astonishing alliance with its traditional rival, 
Chinese Taipei, and relax cyber- control measures. While government purchases 
of products and services are expected to drive cloud diffusion, they would favor 
products that incorporate high levels of domestically developed technology.
 
Other developing economies are likely to beneﬁt from the lesson and experi-
ence of China’s cloud industry. Especially relevant and important in this regard 
are Chinese companies’ expertise and experience in healthcare IT. For instance, 

China  181
Huawei built China’s ﬁrst Healthcare Cloud deployed in the Zhabei District. 
Chinese companies such as Huawei and Alibaba can easily adapt the business 
models used in their domestic markets. Their capability to deliver value for 
money in the domestic market is likely to be an important source of their com-
petitive advantage to operate in other developing economies.
Notes
  1 Jing Daily, China’s Retailers Embrace Big Data Revolution, Jing Daily, July 14, 
2016, https://jingdaily.com/chinas- retailers-embrace- big-data- revolution/.
  2 Zhu Shenshen, So, What’s the Big Idea?, Shanghai Daily, June 6, 2016, www.
shanghaidaily.com/business/Benchmark/So- whats-the- big-idea/shdaily.shtml.
  3 C. Dougherty, China Clears Way for Cloud Computing Industry in Himalayan 
Plateau, Despite Immense Obstacles, International Business Times, June 12, 2016, 
www.ibtimes.com/china- clears-way- cloud-computing- industry-himalayan-
 plateau-despite- immense-obstacles- 2379198.
  4 China Daily, China’s Cloud Computing Market to Boom: Report (Xinhua), 
China Daily, May 23, 2014, www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/tech/2014–05/23/
content_17537219.htm.
  5 Eric Johnson, Alibaba, China Mobile Push for More of World Cloud Computing 
Market, The Street, June 5, 2014, www.thestreet.com/story/12735135/1/alibaba-
 china-mobile- push-for- more-of- world-cloud- computing-market.html. 
  6 China Times, 13th Five- Year Plan Sees Major Cloud Computing Base in Hebei, 2014, 
www.wantchinatimes.com/news- subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20140827000046&cid=1102. 
  7 Zhu Shenshen, China to Unveil Blueprint on Big Data in H2, Shanghai Daily, May 
4, 2016, www.shanghaidaily.com/business/it/China- to-unveil- blueprint-on- Big-
Data- in-H2/shdaily.shtml. 
  8 Jeff Kim, How to do Online Business with China, Tech Week Europe, February 22, 
2013, 
www.techweekeurope.co.uk/comment/how- to-do- online-business- with-
china- 108291. 
  9 R. MacKinnon, Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide Struggle for Internet Freedom 
(New York: Basic Books, 2012), 35; Nir Kshetri, China’s Data Privacy Regulations: 
A Tricky Trade- Off Between ICT’s Productive Utilization and Cyber- Contro, 
IEEE Security & Privacy (2014) 12(4), 38–45. 
 10 See Asia Cloud Computing Association’s (ACCI) Cloud Readiness Index 2016, 
www.asiacloudcomputing.org/research/cri2016. 
 11 K. Hille, NEC to Offer Cloud Computing in China, Financial Times, August 31, 
2010, www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/3775900e-b4c9–11df-b0a6–00144feabdc0.html# 
AXZZ:5SZ1  12 Jon Russell, China to Develop $154m Tech Centre Free of Web Restrictions, Asian 
Correspondent, June 25, 2011, http://asiancorrespondent.com/58249/china- to-
develop- 154m-tech- centre-free- of-web- restrictions/. 
 13 Johnson, Alibaba, China Mobile Push for More of World Cloud Computing 
Market.
 14 Patrick Thibodeau, China Passes Japan to Become World’s 2nd Largest IT Market, 
Computerworld, December 4, 2013, www.computerworld.com/article/2486456/it-
 management/china- passes-japan- to-become- world-s- 2nd-largest- it-market.html. 
 15 W. Arnold, Regulations and Security Concerns Hinder Asia’s Move to Cloud 
Computing, New York Times, October 11, 2010, www.nytimes.com/2010/10/11/
technology/11cloudasia.html. 
 16 Sophie Yu, Cloud Computing Takes Off Among Chinese SMEs, South China Morning 

182  Case Studies
Post, December 2, 2013, www.scmp.com/business/china- business/article/1370552/
cloud- computing-takes- among-chinese- smes.
 17 Economist, Unplugged and Unproductive, The Economist, July 24, 2014. www.
economist.com/news/business/21608639-chinese- business-has- been-slow-
 embrace-internet- it-does- productivity-should.
 18 Benjamin Carlson, Cloud Computing in China: On the Verge, Global Post, November 
22, 2013, www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/regions/asia- paciﬁc/china/131120/
cloud- computing-china.
 19 D.C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990); R. Scott, Institutions and Organizations (Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995 & 2001). 
 20 J.R. Markusen and A.J. Venables, Foreign Direct Investment as a Catalyst for 
Industrial Development, European Economic Review (1999) 43(2), 335–356. 
 21 Shenshen, So, What’s the Big Idea?
 22 C. Larson, Will Cloud Computing in China be a Boon or Peril for Business? Business 
Week, September 9, 2013, www.businessweek.com/articles/2013–09–10/will-
 cloud-computing- in-china- be-a- boon-or- peril-for- business.
 23 E. Dou, Chinese Province Aims to Lead Big Data Charge: China’s Premier Meets 
with Heads of High- Tech Companies in Bid to Lure Investment to Country’s 
Less- Developed Interior, Wall Street Journal, May 24, 2016, www.wsj.com/articles/
chinese- province-aims- to-lead- big-data- charge-1464106714. 
 24 R. Huang, VMware Taps China’s 5-Year Economic Plan, ZDNet, 2012, www.
zdnet.com/cn/vmware- taps-chinas- 5-year- economic-plan- 7000003375/.
 25 China Times, 13th Five- Year Plan Sees Major Cloud Computing Base in Hebei.
 26 Robert D. Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China: A Review, The Information 
Technology & Innovation Foundation, July 2014. 
 27 C. Shu, China’s Public Cloud Market will More Than Double to $3.8B by 2020, 
Says Forrester, Tech Crunch, October 19, 2015, http://techcrunch.com/2015/10/19/
chinas- cloud-market- to-double- by-2020/. 
 28 CNC World, China’s Healthcare Cloud, 2012, www.cncworld.tv/news/v_
show/26095_China_s_healthcare_cloud.shtml.
 29 Dan Heilman, Apple Opens iCloud Data Center in China, Top Tech News, August 
15, 2014, www.toptechnews.com/article/index.php?story_id=033000JP5BT0. 
 30 M. Jing, Amazon Brings its cloud Computing to China, China Daily, January 2, 
2014, http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2014–01/02/content_17210951.htm. 
 31 China Economic Review, Can Amazon and Microsoft Crack Cloud Computing in 
China?, China Economic Review, July 15, 2014, www.chinaeconomicreview.com/
china- cloud-computing- microsoft-azure- amazon-aws- ibm-aliyun. 
 32 S. Fadilpašić, IBM Lets China Review Its Source- Code, ITProPortal, October 19, 
2015, www.itproportal.com/2015/10/19/ibm- lets-china- review-its- source-code. 
 33 IBM Advances Hybrid Capabilities to China, Unveils Bluemix Local, The Financial, 
December 2, 2015, http://ﬁnchannel.com/index.php/technology/item/52442-
ibm- advances-hybrid- capabilities-to- china-unveils- bluemix-local.
 34 Huawei, Press Release: Huawei Receives Award for “Best Cloud Platform for 
Africa”, 2012, www.huawei.com/ilink/en/about- huawei/newsroom/press- release/
HW_142553. 
 35 Melissa Chua, Huawei Hinges Cloud Dreams on Partners, Networks Asia, October 
27, 2011, www.networksasia.net/content/huawei- hinges-cloud- dreams-partners. 
 36 K. Chan, China’s Lenovo Buys Cloud Computing Firm Stoneware, ABC News, 
September 
18, 
2012, 
http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/wireStory/chinas-
 lenovo-buys- cloud-computing- ﬁrm-stoneware- 17259568#.UFyvhK5RCil. 
 37 P. Thibodeau, The Race to Cloud Standards Gets Crowded, Computerworld (2011) 
45(15), 24–24. 

China  183
 38 D. Wilson, China Readies Cloud Computing City: IBM and 6.2 Million Square 
Feet, TechEye, February 7, 2011, www.techeye.net/hardware/china- readies-cloud-
 computing-city. 
 39 Phumeza Tontsi, IBM Partners with Chinese Vendor, IT Web, February 3, 2011, 
www.itweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=40717:ibm-
 partners-with- chinese-vendor&catid=69.
 40 Fiona Chau, China Mobile Launches New Data Center in Hubei, Telecomasia, 
August 19, 2015, www.telecomasia.net/content/china- mobile-launches- new-data-
 center-hubei. 
 41 Fiona Chau, China Mobile to Spend $6.3b on Cloud Infrastructure in Hubei, 
Computer World, September 23, 2015, http://cw.com.hk/news/china- mobile-
spend- 63b-cloud- infrastructure-hubei.
 42 Want China Times, Chinese Telcos Drive Chengdu Cloud Computing Hub, China 
Times, March 14, 2012, www.wantchinatimes.com/news- subclass-cnt.aspx?cid=110
2&MainCatID=&id=20120314000077.
 43 Tiffany Trader, China Supercharges Cloud Centers, HPC Wire, March 29, 2012, 
www.hpcinthecloud.com/hpccloud/2012–03–9/china_supercharges_cloud_
centers.html. 
 44 D. Tsuruoka, Tencent, Kingsoft to Run Online Games Together, March 13, 2012, 
http://news.investors.com/article/604133/201203131136/tencent- kingsoft-form-
 online-game- alliance.htm. 
 45 CBR Online, IBM to Build Cloud Computing Platform for Chinese Firm Yi Lian 
Zhong, September 7, 2011, http://appdev.cbronline.com/news/ibm- to-build-
 cloud-computing- platform-for- chinese-ﬁrm- yi-lian- zhong-070911. 
 46 Teppei Kasai, VMware to Form Cloud Computing Partnership with China Telecom, 
Reuters, July 15, 2014, http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/07/15/us- vmware-
china- idUKKBN0FK1CU20140715.
 47 Hille, NEC to Offer Cloud Computing in China.
 48 T.Y. Jones, Microsoft Partners with China Firm on Cloud- Computing, Reuters, 
August 
23, 
2011, 
www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/23/us- microsoft-china-
 idUSTRE77M0ND20110823.
 49 L. Wang, China Seeks to Work with Taiwan in Smart Devices and Cloud 
Computing, Taipei Times, June 18, 2011, www.taipeitimes.com/News/biz/
archives/2011/06/18/2003506036. 
 50 Asia Cloud Computing Association’s Cloud Readiness Index 2014.
 51 Shenshen, So, What’s the Big Idea?
 52 James Barton, Telefonica and China Mobile Partnering for Big Data Joint Venture, 
Developing Telecoms, January 6, 2016, www.developingtelecoms.com/tech/cloud-
 virtualisation/6233-telefonica- and-china- mobile-partnering- for-big- data-joint-
 venture.html.
 53 M. Ouma, Huawei’s Global Sales Revenues Expected to Hit $46.6 billion in 2014, 
CIO, January 14, 2015, www.cio.co.ke/news/main- stories/huawei%E2%80%99s-
global- sales-revenues- expected-to- hit-$-46.6-billion- in-2014.
 54 Infosys, Press Releases: Infosys and Huawei Announce Global Partnership to Offer 
Cloud, Big Data and Communication Solutions, September 18, 2014, www.infosys.
com/newsroom/press- releases/Pages/cloud- bigdata-communication- solutions.aspx.
 55 Intel, Press Release: Intel Capital Announces Two New Investments in China: 2011 
a Successful Year with 13 Chinese Investments, 2012, www.intel.com/pressroom/
capital/pdfs/PressReleaseChinaNewDealCloudUnionPeanutRepblic1112 
English.pdf. 
 56 D. Roberts, Private Equity Rushes into China Technology, Business Week, March 
30, 
2012, 
www.businessweek.com/articles/2012–03–30/private- equity-rushes-
 into-china- technology.

184  Case Studies
 57 Intel, Press Release: Intel Capital Announces Two New Investments in China.
 58 Reuters, CCID Consulting: China’s Cloud Computing Industry Looks to Soar, 
Reuters $ECEMBER   WWWREUTERSCOMARTICLEID53
$EC "7
 59 Tang Yuankai, The Coming of the Cloud, Beijing Review, April 14, 2014, www.
bjreview.com.cn/nation/txt/2014–04/14/content_613423.htm.
 60 Thibodeau, The Race to Cloud Standards Gets Crowded. 
 61 DMTF, DMTF and CESI to Promote Cloud Management Interoperability in China, 
Distributed Management Task Force, July 30, 2012, http://dmtf.org/news/pr/2012/7/
dmtf- and-cesi- promote-cloud- management-interoperability- china. 
 62 S.B. Linder, An Essay on Trade and Transformation (Uppsala: Almqvist and Wiksells, 
1961); Gavin Long, Do Chinese Cloud, Mobile Providers Pose a Threat?: Concern 
over Creating a Back Door for Espionage, Cybertheft, September 14, 2012, www.
healthcareinfosecurity.com/blogs/do- chinese-cloud- mobile-providers- pose-threat-
 p-1354; J.E. Tilton, International Diffusion of Technology: The Case of Semiconductors 
(Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1971); M. Beise, Lead Markets: Country-
 Speciﬁc Success Factors of the Global Diffusion of Innovations (Heidelberg: Physica- Verlag, 
2001). 
 63 North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance; Scott, Institutions and 
Organizations, 1995 and 2001.
 64 North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
 65 D.C. North, Epilogue: Economic Performance Through Time, in L.J. Alston, T. 
Eggertsson and D.C. North (Eds.), Empirical Studies in Institutional Change (Cambridge, 
MA: Cambridge University Press, 1996). 
 66 Nir Kshetri, Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing: The Role of 
Institutions and Institutional Evolution, Telecommunications Policy (May–June, 2013) 
37(4–5), 372–386; Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in the Global South: Drivers, 
Effects and Policy Measures, Third World Quarterly (2011) 32(6), 995–1012; R. 
Vernon, International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics (1966) 80, 190–207.
 67 R. Scott, Institutions and Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001). 
 68 W.R. Scott, M. Ruef, P.J. Mendel, and C.A. Caronna, Institutional Change and 
Healthcare Organizations: From Professional Dominance to Managed Care (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 2000). 
 69 R. Scott, Institutions and Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995).
    *4 1UIGLEY #HINA &ULL "ROADBAND #OVERAGE BY  'IGABIT )NTERNET FOR -AJOR Cities, The Diplomat, August 20, 2013, http://thediplomat.com/2013/08/china-
 full-broadband- coverage-by- 2020-gigabit- internet-for- major-cities/. 
 71 Johnson, Alibaba, China Mobile Push for More of World Cloud Computing 
Market.
 72 Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China.
 73 Dou, Chinese Province Aims to Lead Big Data Charge. 
 74 Dorsey, China: Smart Cities, September 16, 2013, www.dorsey.com/eu_cleantech_
china_smart_cities/. 
 75 China Times, 13th Five- Year Plan Sees Major Cloud Computing Base in Hebei.
 76 Nir Kshetri, Gambling with Source Code, IEEE Computer (2016) 49(2), 74–77. 
 77 Johnson, Alibaba, China Mobile Push for More of World Cloud Computing 
Market.
 78 Business Roundtable, Promoting Economic Growth Through Smart Global 
Information Technology Policy: The Growing Threat of Local Data Server 
Requirements, 2012.
 79 Johnson, Alibaba, China Mobile Push for More of World Cloud Computing 
Market. 

China  185
 80 Christine Kahler and Weizhen Li, The Value- Added Telecom Services Market 
Ripens, China Business Review, May 1, 2010, www.chinabusinessreview.com/the-
 value-added- telecom-services- market-ripens/. 
 81 Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China.
 82 Kshetri, Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing.
 83 S. Kalathil, China’s New Media Sector: Keeping the State in, Paciﬁc Review (2003) 
16(4), 489–501. 
 84 Josh Horwitz, Microsoft’s OneDrive and Yahoo’s Flickr not reachable in China, 
Tech in Asia, July 3, 2014, www.techinasia.com/microsofts- onedrive-yahoos- ﬂickr-
reachable- china-greatﬁreorg- blocked/. 
 85 Reuters, New Online Service Disruptions in China, IT Web, July 4, 2014. www.
itweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=135859.
 86 Stratfor, China: Where Big Brother Meets Big Data, Stratfor, April 18, 2016, www.
stratfor.com/analysis/china- where-big- brother-meets- big-data.
 87 R. Scott, Institutions and Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995.
 88 Kshetri, Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing.
 89 N. Kshetri, Cloud Computing in India, IEEE IT Professional (2012) 14(5), 5–8; 
Kshetri, Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing. 
 90 Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China.
 91 Scott, Institutions and Organizations (2001). 
 92 A.S. Huff, Mapping Strategic Thought, in A.S. Huff (Ed.), Mapping Strategic Thought 
(Chichester: Wiley, 1990). 
 93 C. Castelli, Ovum Comment: Why Mobility is Not Yet Reality in Chinese SMEs, 
January 11, 2008, http://enterpriseinnovator.com/index.php?articleID=14308&sect
ionID=13. 
 94 A.E. Alter, P. Yali, R. Lin, and G.H. Jeanne, China’s Pragmatic Path to Cloud 
Computing, May 2010, www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/
Accenture_Chinas_Pragmatic_Path_to_Cloud_Computing.pdf. 
 95 Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China.
 96 C. Ko, Chinese Cloud Vendors Scrutinized on Maturity Spectrum, Asia Cloud 
Forum, March 16, 2011, www.asiacloudforum.com/content/chinese- cloud-vendors-
 scrutinized-maturity- spectrum. 
 97 China Economic Review, Can Amazon and Microsoft Crack Cloud Computing in 
China?
 98 Hille, NEC to Offer Cloud Computing in China.
 99 Arnold, Regulations and Security Concerns Hinder Asia’s Move To Cloud 
Computing; China Economic Review, Can Amazon and Microsoft Crack Cloud 
Computing in China?
100 Markusen and Venables, Foreign Direct Investment as a Catalyst for Industrial 
Development.
101 Nir Kshetri, IT in the Chinese Healthcare Industry, IEEE IT Professional (2013) 
15(1), 12–15. 
102 Intel Corporation, Reducing Internet Data Center Costs with the Cloud, 2011, 
www.intel.fr/content/dam/doc/case- study/cloud- computing-xeon- 5600-shanda-
 data-center- study.pdf. 
103 A. Moussa and R. Schware, Informatics in Africa: Lessons from World Bank 
Experience, World Development (1992) 20(12), 1737–1752; S.R. Nidumolu, S.R. 
Goodman, D.R. Vogel, A.K. Danowitz, Information Technology for Local 
Administration Support: The Governorates Project in Egypt, MIS Quarterly (1996) 
20(2), 196–224. 
104 H. Shuhe, Together for Cities of Sustainable Development Remarks at the EU- China 
Smart City Forum, 2012, www.sasac.gov.cn/n2963340/n13933206/14078378.
html. 

186  Case Studies
105 P. Krugman, Increasing Returns and Economic Geography, Journal of Political 
Economy (1991) 99, 483–99. 
106 Atkinson, ICT Innovation Policy in China.
107 T. Geller, Supercomputing’s Exaﬂop Target, Communications of the ACM (2011) 54 
(8), 16–18. 
108 Trader, China Supercharges Cloud Centers.
109 BBC News, China Builds World’s Most Powerful Computer, BBC News, June 20, 
2016, www.bbc.com/news/technology- 36575947. 
110 China Economic Review, Can Amazon and Microsoft Crack Cloud Computing in 
China? 
111 Stefan Ried, Holger Kisker, and Pascal Matzke, The Evolution of Cloud Computing 
Markets, Forrester Research, July 6, 2010, http://fm.sap.com/data/upload/ﬁles/
forrester%20-%20the%20evolution%20of%20cloud%20computing%20markets.pdf. 
112 C. Custer, China has Almost 1.3 billion Mobile Users, and Half of Them are on 3G 
or 4G, Tech in Asia, May 19, 2015, www.techinasia.com/china- 13-billion- mobile-
users- 3g-4g. 
113 B. Hayes, Cloud Computing, Communications of the ACM (2008) 51(7), 11. 
114 ITU, Key Statistical Highlights: ITU Data Release, June 2012, www.itu.int/ITU-
 D/ict/statistics/material/pdf/2011%20Statistical%20highlights_June_2012.pdf. 
115 Economist, Unplugged and Unproductive.
116 Jing, Amazon Brings its Cloud Computing to China.
117 Ibid.
118 China Economic Review, Can Amazon and Microsoft Crack Cloud Computing in 
China?

10
BRAZIL
10.1 Introduction 
Brazil has emerged as a key global cloud market. According to a survey released 
by Cisco in 2010, the adoption of cloud computing in Brazilian companies had 
surpassed the levels in Germany and the USA.1 Frost & Sullivan’s survey indi-
cated that the size of the Brazilian cloud market was US$328.8 million in 2013, 
which is expected to reach US$1.11 billion in 2017.2 Likewise, the ICT consul-
tancy ﬁrm IDC predicted that the Brazilian cloud market would grow at a 74.3 
percent CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate) during 2013–2015 and 
would reach US$798 million in 2015. According to IDC, Brazil accounts for 
over half of the Latin Amer ican cloud market.3 The country also accounts for 
40 percent of all Latin America’s data centers4 and over three- quarters of Latin 
America’s bandwidth.5 The Brazilian data center networking market was estim-
ated at US$0.5 billion in 2013, which is expected to reach US$1.1 billion by 
2018.6 Likewise, as of 2013, Brazil had twenty- three Internet exchange points 
(IXPs), which put the country second only to the USA in the number of IXPs. 
Note that IXPs are the locations where Internet bandwidth is produced and 
about half of all countries produce no Internet bandwidth domestically.7
 
Some Brazilian companies have developed innovative BD and cloud- based 
solutions, taking into account unique local problems and opportunities. For 
instance, the cloud has promoted a more efﬁcient utilization of resources in 
households. Brazil’s Gol Group teamed up with the telephone companies Tele-
fonica and Vivo, the newspapers O Estado de São Paulo and O Globo, and the 
computer manufacturer Itautec to launch Nuvem de Livros (cloud of Books) in 
September 2013. When Nuvem de Livros was launched on October 1, 2013, it 
offered 3,000 titles from some twenty- ﬁve publishing houses and 1,500 video 

188  Case Studies
classes, which were provided by the Roberto Marinho Foundation. The books 
can be read on computers, digital readers, tablets, and cellphones. Gol’s propri-
etary DRM prevents unauthorized downloading. While Nuvem de Livros was 
designed primarily for schools, it also offers content for the whole family. Since 
the average size of an apartment is forty- ﬁve square meters, most lack the 
storage space for books.8 Nuvem de Livros is thus a perfect solution for most 
Brazilian households. 
 
The Brazilian Forest Service uses a traceability and information management 
system to track trees as they are logged and sawn into timber. It also uses remote 
sensing data to monitor forest management.9 The Rio de Janeiro, Brazil- based, 
BVRio’s Responsible Timber Exchange uses BD to assess potential sellers’ com-
pliance with US and European restrictions on illegal wood imports. BVRio’s 
database uses ofﬁcial documentation such as logging permits and sawmill operat-
ing licenses, the legal record of forest owners, loggers, and the forest engineers 
involved in a shipment to assess the risk of irregularities. Other categories of 
data include the average volumes of a given species of tree normally cut under a 
standard permit and satellite images. In the future, it will also employ ﬁeld 
checks.10 As of mid- 2016, Piracicaba, a São Paulo- based civil non- proﬁt associ-
ation, the Institute of Agricultural, and Forest Management and Certiﬁcation 
(The Instituto de Manejo e Certiﬁcação Florestal e Agrícola: IMAFLORA) 
have been in the process of creating a digital platform to organize information 
related to the production, transportation, and transactions of timbers in order to 
increase transparency and governance capacity.11
 
The Brazilian cloud computing industry and market possess unique and idio-
syncratic features, which are associated with the country’s economic, political, 
cultural, and social factors. Brazil is among the major economies with some of the 
strongest protectionist policies in the cloud sector. For instance, the Brazilian gov-
ernment has discontinued the use of foreign companies’ cloud applications such as 
Microsoft Outlook and developed its own system to replace them. In general, 
surveys and anecdotes have indicated that cloud security is likely to be especially 
salient, and perhaps contentious, for government agencies and SOEs in Brazil.
 
Likewise, the key ingredients of the cloud industry and market are hetero-
geneously developed in the country. For instance, on the plus side, Brazilian 
ﬁrms have exhibited a higher propensity to adopt the cloud compared to a 
number of industrialized countries. On the other hand, the Brazilian cloud 
industry has faced major difﬁculties and challenges on key issues such as skills 
availability and the costs of data centers and networks.
10.2 Key Features of the Brazilian BD and Cloud Industry 
and Market
As noted earlier, Brazilian ﬁrms are known to have a high propensity to adopt 
modern ICTs. In 2013, over half of Brazilian enterprises were reported to have 

Brazil  189
placed online orders.12 Brazilian ﬁrms have also exhibited a strong propensity to 
adopt cloud services. According to a survey conducted by Frost & Sullivan, 66 
percent of Brazilian CIOs planned to invest in cloud computing in 2012.13 
According to a survey conducted by the business to business market research 
company, Coleman Parkes Research, Brazilian SMEs had a cloud adoption rate 
of 77 percent, which was the highest among the ten countries surveyed. The 
survey also found that most SMEs in Brazil used only entry- level cloud services, 
which included free storage and back- up services such as Dropbox and Google 
Drive (87 percent), and paid services such as computer networks (54 percent).14 
Frost & Sullivan’s study also estimated that the Brazilian BD market will reach 
US$578 million in 2016.15
 
BD and cloud solution adoptions in Brazil are being driven by telecom oper-
ators and the ﬁnancial industry,16 as well as by ﬁrms in retail and health care.17 
In 2015, the credit information provider Experian, also known as Serasa Expe-
rian, announced a plan to invest US$8.2 million in BD initiatives in Brazil over 
the next ﬁve years. The plan includes a lab in São Paulo dedicated to data- 
related products and services. Brazil is Experian’s third biggest market in terms 
of revenue, behind the USA and the UK.18
 
In general, cloud adoption rates have been the fastest among verticals, which 
offer specialized products to an industry, trade, profession, or other group of cus-
tomers.19 The cloud has also been attractive among e- commerce ﬁrms, which 
exhibit big seasonal variations in demands.20 Likewise, SMEs are attracted towards 
IaaS services (e.g., storage and back- up) to manage IT needs with their growth.21
 
The huge and rapidly growing Brazilian cloud market has attracted foreign as 
well as local CSPs. AWS expanded the cloud to South America in 2011 by estab-
lishing data center infrastructure in São Paulo. In 2014, it added a second cloud 
center in Rio de Janeiro. Microsoft, Cisco, Equinix, Dimension Data, Verizon 
Terremark, and cloud and managed services provider Latisys are also present in 
Brazil.22 In 2013, the local ﬁrm Capgemini and EMC announced a plan to work 
collaboratively to deliver next- generation cloud solutions to businesses.23
 
Among the many beneﬁts of the cloud, cost saving has been the main attract-
ing feature for Brazilian ﬁrms. In a global survey of IT decision makers on cloud 
computing usage trends conducted by the research company TNS, 92 percent 
of Brazilian organizations reported saving money, which was the highest pro-
portion among the eight countries included in the survey: Australia, Brazil, 
France, Germany, Japan, Singapore, the UK, and the USA.24
 
According Frost & Sullivan, Brazil and other economies in the Latin Amer-
ican and Caribbean region were less affected by the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis. 
As a result, cloud- computing investments did not suffer in these economies. In 
recent years, the growing demand for ﬂexibility and scalability has driven the 
cloud market in these economies.25 Moreover, Brazil came under tremendous 
pressure to develop IT infrastructure and strengthen policies in order to success-
fully host the 2014 FIFA’s Soccer World Cup.

190  Case Studies
 
Brazil also came under tremendous pressure to develop IT infrastructures for 
the Olympics in 2016. The resulting developments are having a positive impact 
on the Brazilian BD and cloud industry and market.26 In order to support the 
FIFA’s Soccer World Cup event, Brazil earmarked over US$12 billion in 2012 
in IT infrastructure development funds.27 Thanks to these initiatives and others, 
in 2014, Brazil ranked seventh in terms of global IT investment, following the 
USA, Japan, China, UK, Germany, and France.28
 
Brazilian and foreign ﬁrms involved in the 2014 FIFA’s Soccer World Cup 
exhibited a sophisticated deployment of the cloud. For instance, fans could 
view, vote, and bet on a variety of devices. The chief executive of the football 
app developer Onefootball noted that in order to cope with high digital trafﬁc 
volumes, a huge content management system was built and the AWS was 
deployed for load balancing.29 The related knowledge, skills, and experiences 
are likely to play a key role in strengthening the Brazilian cloud ecosystem.
 
Government agencies and state- owned enterprises (SOEs) in Brazil have 
expressed serious concerns and reservations regarding cloud security. Brazil’s IT 
policy secretary discussed the possibility that the Brazilian government may store 
sensitive data locally rather than in the cloud.30 Likewise, Marcel José Kaskus, 
the IT software solutions general manager of Brazil’s state- owned oil giant 
Petrobras, noted that the company made some use of private clouds but not 
public clouds. He expressed concerns related to security of clouds. In general, 
Petrobras prefers to deploy proprietary systems and Brazilian- developed 
software.31
10.3 Economic and Infrastructural Factors Affecting the 
Development of the Brazilian Cloud Industry and Market
The World Economic Forum’s (WEF ) Global Information Technology Report 
2012 provides useful insights into the economic and infrastructural situations 
facing the Brazilian cloud industry and market. Overall, Brazil ranked sixty- ﬁfth 
(out of 142 economies analyzed) in the WEF ’s Networked Readiness Index. 
The country, however, ranked thirty- third in the beneﬁts from strong levels of 
business ICT usage, third in levels of technological capacity, twenty- ninth in 
the performance of ICT- enabled innovations, and thirty- fourth in the efﬁciency 
of processes.32 Likewise, Brazil is the best- performing economy in Latin 
America in terms of the maturity of ﬁber infrastructure and connectivity with 
the USA.33
 
High networking and related costs have exerted a major negative effect on 
the Brazilian cloud industry and market. The high costs are especially pertinent 
in public or hybrid models.34 The labor costs in Brazil are the highest in Latin 
America and higher than most emerging economies.35 Likewise, during 
2004–2014, the costs of industrial electricity doubled and that of natural gas 
increased by 60 percent.36 Despite the abundance of hydro power and the low 

Brazil  191
cost of generation, electricity is subject to price ﬂuctuation and there is a short-
age of supply in during the drought years.37 According to a survey of twenty- six 
countries conducted by FIRJAN System, which represents the industrial sectors 
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil’s energy cost was the highest among the BRIC eco-
nomies and the fourth highest worldwide.38
 
According to 451 Research’s Cloud Price Index report, Latin America is the 
world’s most expensive region to use the public cloud. The price of the cloud 
in the region is reported to be 38 percent higher than in the USA. The region 
arguably has the most limited selection of CSPs.39 Brazil is probably the most 
expensive Latin Amer ican countries for the cloud. The land for building data 
centers and hardware related to the cloud is also expensive.40 According to the 
BRASSCOM, the average cost for establishing a data center in Brazil is about 
US$61 million and the annual maintenance costs average US$100 million com-
pared to US$43 million and US$43 million respectively in the USA.41
 
The lack of affordability has also been a major hindrance. Before the PNBL 
implementation, for instance, an average Brazilian household spent about 4.5 
percent of their income on broadband services compared to the average of 0.5 
percent for developed countries.42 In the WEF ’s Global Information Techno-
logy Report 2016, Brazil ranked eighty- seventh in terms of mobile cellular 
tariffs. As of early 2014, a 1 MBPS connection cost about US$25 in Brazil com-
pared to US$0.63 in Sweden and US$0.27 in Japan.43 The tax rate for band-
width services is 40 percent in Brazil compared to 5 percent in Japan.44 It is also 
worth noting that the Japanese government has provided interest- free loans to 
broadband operators and the Swedish government covered half of the rural 
broadband construction costs.45
 
Another important barrier has centered on the lack of relevant skills. In the 
WEF ’s Global Information Technology Report 2012, Brazil ranked eighty- 
sixth in terms of skill availability.46 According to the Brazilian Agency for Pro-
motion and Export of Software (Softex), the Brazilian IT sector employed 
600,000 people in 2011. The Softex estimated a shortage of about 200,000 
skilled professionals in 2013 in the country.47
 
A 2012 report by the law ﬁrm Cushman and Wakeﬁeld and the engineering 
consultancy Hurley Palmer Flatt noted that high energy prices and shortage of 
skilled manpower increase risks in building data centers in Brazil.48 Some global 
CSPs have raised concerns related to the high costs of establishing data centers 
and the difﬁculty of ﬁnding local talents. In 2012, Google announced its plan to 
open its ﬁrst Latin America data center in Chile rather than in Brazil. Chile’s 
reliable infrastructure and skilled workforce played a key role in the decision.49
 
Finally, there is a wide rural–urban gap in the development and availability of 
ICT infrastructures. For instance, broadband Internet is not easily available in 
smaller towns and rural areas.50 The majority of data centers have been built in the 
region of São Paulo, which is South America’s largest data center market.51 São 
Paulo is estimated to account for 50 percent of the country’s data center capacity.52

192  Case Studies
10.4 Institutional- and Policy- Related Factors Affecting the 
Development of the Brazilian BD and Cloud Industry and 
Market
Regarding institutional- and policy- related factors from the cloud’s standpoint, 
it is notable and encouraging that highly motivated federal and local govern-
ments have focused on policies aimed at transforming Brazil into a world- class 
data center hub. In 2012, the federal government announced a plan to hire a 
consulting ﬁrm to study how Brazil’s competitiveness on the cloud front can be 
increased.53 The government has also taken initiatives to facilitate the diffusion 
of the cloud and related technologies. The national broadband plan, Plano 
National de Banda Larga (PNBL), which is the federal government initiative to 
provide broadband access to low- income population, deserves mention.54 As of 
early 2012, the number of Brazilian municipalities covered by the PNBL 
reached 692. The goal has been to extend broadband coverage to 4,424 cities 
by 2017.55
 
Brazil’s ofﬁcial position on cloud computing has been to provide “an ade-
quate regulatory environment—which doesn’t isolate the country, but offers 
security to citizens, enterprises and the government.”56 The country views that 
these measures could help the growth of the Brazilian cloud industry and 
market, attract foreign investments, and support the development of Brazilian 
CSPs and their international expansions. Policy measures have also been under-
taken to protect consumer privacy. An article published in the New York Times 
explained that the new Internet Bill of Rights requires technology companies to 
obtain users’ permission before their data is shared with online advertisers and 
marketers.57
 
However, among foreign ICT companies, there is widespread and growing 
disenchantment with the adequacy of the Brazilian regulatory system for the 
cloud industry. A big concern is that Brazil lacks an appropriate framework for 
the development of ICT standards, and that it gives domestic service providers 
preferential treatment in public procurement.58
 
There are also concerns about the frequent changes in regulatory and com-
pliance requirements. For example, in 2013, the Brazilian government raised 
import duties for uninterruptible power supplies (UPS) coming outside Merco-
sur countries (Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela, Bolivia, Paraguay, and Uruguay) 
from 16 to 20 percent.59
 
Of greatest relevance here is the Business Software Alliance’s (BSA) Global 
Cloud Computing Scorecard which considers factors such as Data Privacy, 
Security, Cybercrime, Intellectual Property Rights, Support for Industry- Led 
Standards, and International Harmonization of Rules Promoting Free Trade and 
ICT Readiness. In the BSA’s 2012 ranking of twenty- four countries’ cloud 
environments, Brazil ﬁnished last. In the 2013 BSA Scorecard, Brazil improved 
slightly and ranked twenty- second of the twenty- four economies considered.60 

Brazil  193
The rank remained unchanged at #22 in 2016. In the 2013 Scorecard, Brazil 
ranked at the bottom in terms of international harmonization.61 The lack of 
harmonization of international rules is likely to hinder a smooth ﬂow of data 
between CSPs in different countries. Likewise, an inappropriate standardization 
may act as a barrier to ensure data portability. Similarly, Brazil has not signed 
the WIPO Copyright Treaty, which means a lack of strong regulations to 
protect a new technology.
 
The NSA scandal marked an important turning point in Brazil’s cloud policy 
and strategy. The then Brazilian President Rousseff has been one of the most 
vocal critics of the PRISM program. In order to avoid possible security risks 
and compromises, Brazil is trying to keep itself away from US- based data 
centers, equipment, and technologies. In September 2013, Rousseff asked the 
Congress to introduce regulations to require foreign companies to store data 
generated inside the country on local servers.62
 
The proposed regulation, however, faced strong resistance and criticism from 
foreign technology companies. Foreign companies warned that the requirement 
of data localization may lead to closure and divestment of their facilities and 
operations. For instance, Google criticized and opposed the legislation on the 
grounds that data is likely to be more secure if it is stored in multiple locations. 
The company argued that storing data in one location slows down the services 
and increases customer inconvenience. Google’s director of law enforcement 
and information security Richard Salgado argued that Brazil’s proposed law to 
require all the data of Brazilian citizens and companies to be stored within the 
country would be too difﬁcult to comply with and noted that Google “could 
be barred from doing business” in Brazil.63
 
In October 2013, forty- seven organizations representing diverse industries 
worldwide sent a letter to selected Brazilian Congress members pointing out several 
unintended consequences of the proposed data center localization. Their criticism 
focused on four main points: decreased security (data security depends on how data 
is protected and a focus on physical location may distract from the reality), higher 
costs (not being able to enjoy economies of scale, which would increase costs for 
end- users), decreased competitiveness (isolation from the world’s innovative and 
efﬁcient cloud services and strong computing power around the world), and harm 
to consumers (denial of cloud services available around the world).
 
Due to these criticisms and other challenges, when the Internet Bill of Rights 
known as “Marco Civil da Internet” was passed by the Brazilian Senate in April 
2014, the government agreed to withdraw a provision, which would have 
required foreign Internet companies to host the data of Brazilians within the 
country.64 The withdrawal of the provision was necessary in order to get the 
opposition support. There was a fear among many Brazilian politicians that data 
localization may negatively affect Brazil’s national competitiveness.
 
Nonetheless, according to the new provisions, CSPs may not disclose log 
data and private communications without a Brazilian court order. CSPs are 

194  Case Studies
required to follow the new law even if the data is stored outside its jurisdiction 
if collection, storage, or processing of data takes place in Brazil or one end of a 
personal communication is in Brazil.65 Due to the new regulations, foreign 
CSPs serving the Brazilian market may face conﬂicting demands and pressures. 
For instance, if Brazilian consumers’ data is stored in the USA, the Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) requires user consent to disclose the 
content to a foreign (in this case, Brazilian) government. Moreover, if data 
stored in the USA is subject to the Brazilian law requiring that data can be only 
disclosed pursuant to an order of a Brazilian court, disclosing the content to the 
US government may violate the Brazilian law.
 
Overall, there are some signs that Brazilian cloud regulations are working 
against foreign IT ﬁrms. For instance, Microsoft lost the government of Brazil 
as its customer. Brazil announced plans to discontinue the use of Microsoft 
Outlook and replace it with its own email system that uses Brazilian data 
centers.66 Brazil has replaced the Microsoft Outlook by a custom- made system, 
Expresso V3. Expresso V3 was developed by the Federal Service of Data 
Processing (SERPRO), which is a company that offers Information Technology 
and Communication Services to the public sector. Expresso V3 runs on the 
cloud platform maintained by the SERPRO and aims to protect ofﬁcial emails 
from all types of surveillance. As of September 2013, SERPRO had spent about 
US$3.9 million to purchase network equipment, new servers, security systems, 
and a data link of 10 GBPS to connect the organization’s three data centers.67 
Likewise, in April 2014, the Ministry of Defense started the installation of a 
secure digital communication network for federal government ofﬁces. The 
system, which was expected to be fully installed throughout federal government 
ofﬁces by the end of 2014, includes instant messaging, web conferencing, and 
other functions.68
 
The above said, there are a number of encouraging signs. For instance, Brazil 
was among the countries showing the most improvement in the infrastructure 
score in 2013. Brazil is also making signiﬁcant progress in combating software 
piracy. According to Business Software Alliance (BSA), the proportion of soft-
ware products without original licenses decreased from about 59 percent in 
2007 to about 50 percent in 2014.69 A related point is that the diffusion of more 
accessible cloud tools such as Google Docs could help reduce piracy.
10.5 Discussion and Concluding Comments
Brazil has made a remarkable progress on the cloud front in a short time. A 
complete understanding the country’s emergent cloud market necessitates a 
consideration of the interplay of contradictory forces that are working to shape 
the market. For instance, while the government has exhibited an exceptionally 
high degree of motivation to develop Brazil as a global cloud hub, it has also 
expressed a high degree of suspicion and distrust of foreign CSPs. These factors 

Brazil  195
are likely to play an important role in inﬂuencing the costs, quality, and availa-
bility of cloud- related services. Some experts have noted the cloud security- 
related measures announced following revelation of the NSA monitoring 
scandal are more emotional, rather than rational, responses and will do little to 
strengthen cybersecurity. They also argue that Brazil’s protectionist measures 
work against the economics of cloud computing. Efforts are also needed to 
promote openness and interoperability. It is also important for the government 
to work with the industry to develop standards and minimize conﬂicting legal 
obligations on CSPs.
 
Regarding data localization, a point that needs to be emphasized is users’ 
preferences. Observers note that users in Brazil prefer to keep their data locally 
due to fear of interception by foreign intelligence agencies such the US NSA.70
 
Despite the attractiveness of the Brazilian cloud market, the country lacks 
international competitiveness in the development of data centers. Likewise, as 
noted earlier, the digital divide between big cities and rural areas has been a key 
concern. In this regard, the infrastructure development funds that were allocated 
to the 2014 FIFA’s Soccer World Cup event helped bridge the rural–urban 
divide. The matches were played in twelve Brazilian cities. Likewise, initiatives 
such as PNBL are likely to contribute to a further development of the Brazilian 
cloud industry and market, and bridge the rural–urban divide. For instance, 
PNBL has promised lower prices for broadband services.
Notes
 1 Latin America Monitor Brazil, Latin America Monitor: Brazil Monitor. (2014) 31 
(5), 1–8.
 2 Frost & Sullivan, Frost & Sullivan: Advanced Comprehension of Cloud Computing in 
Brazil will Propel the Market to $1.1 Billion in 2017, Frost & Sullivan, April 1, 2014, 
www.frost.com/prod/servlet/press- release.pag?docid=290158089.
 3 Transfer: Latin Business Consultancy, Brazil: Cloud Computing Sales to Grow 74.3% 
Until 2016, Transfer: Latin Business Consultancy, March 21, 2013, http://transfer- lbc.
com/en/1140/brazil- cloud-computing- sales-to- grow-743-until- 2016.html.
 4 Penny Jones, Brazil Accounts for 40% of All Data Center Space in Latin America, 
Data Centre Dynamics, December 6, 2013, www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/
archive/2013/12/brazil- accounts-40-all- data-center- space-latin- america.
 5 Bill Woodcock, On Internet, Brazil is Beating US at its Own Game, AlJazeera, 
September 
20, 
2013, 
http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2013/9/20/brazil-
 internet-dilmarousseffnsa.html. 
 6 Micromarket Monitor, Latin America – Brazil Data Center Networking (ICT) 
Market, 2015, www.micromarketmonitor.com/market/latin- america-brazil- data-
center- networking-ict- 2729260577.html.
 7 Woodcock, On Internet, Brazil is Beating US at its Own Game.
 8 Maria Fernanda Rodrigues, Brazilian Cloud Library Offers e- Books for 99-cent 
Subscription, Publish News Brazil, November 1, 2011, http://publishnewsbrazil.
com/2011/11/brazilian- cloud-library- offers-e- books-for- 99-cent- subscription/.
 9 Ruth Nogueron and Loretta Cheung, 5 Tech Tools Designed to Thwart Illegal 
Logging, GreenBiz, June 1, 2016, www.greenbiz.com/article/5-tech- tools-designed-
 thwart-illegal- logging. 

196  Case Studies
10 J. Leahy, New Timber Exchange Seeks to Tackle Illegal Logging, Financial Times, 
November 
24, 
2015, 
www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/8361d0c6–9250–11e5–9e3e-
eb48769cecab.html#axzz3sQ2fL1fR. 
11 Marcos Planello, Wood Flow Monitoring: Imaﬂora’s Digital Platform, Imaﬂora, 2016, 
www.imaﬂora.org/.
12 Torbjörn Fredriksson, E- Commerce and Development Key Trends and Issues, 
Workshop on e- Commerce, Development and SMEs, April 8–9, 2013, WTO, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
13 Frost & Sullivan, Doing Business in Brazil.
14 Amdocs, Cloud Adoption in Small- to Medium- Sized Businesses, 2014, www.
amdocs.com/Solutions/Documents/amdocs- cloud-adoption- WP.pdf.
15 Frost & Sullivan, Doing Business in Brazil. 
16 R. Prescott, LatAm: Brazil Telcos Jump into Big Data; Netﬂix at 4.8 M Subs, RCR 
Wireless News, December 4, 2014, www.rcrwireless.com/20141204/americas/latam-
 telcos-jumping- big-data- netﬂix-4–8-million- subs-region- tag5. 
17 Latin America Monitor Brazil, Latin America Monitor: Brazil Monitor. 
18 Angelica Mari, Experian to Invest R$25m in Big Data in Brazil, ZDNet, April 9, 
2015, www.zdnet.com/article/experian- to-invest- r25m-in- big-data- in-brazil/.
19 Angelica Mari, Brazilian Cloud Computing Market to Reach $1.1bn by 2017, 
ZDNet, 2014, www.zdnet.com/brazilian- cloud-computing- market-to- reach-1–1bn-
by- 2017–7000028158/. 
20 Ibid.
21 Frost & Sullivan, Frost & Sullivan: Advanced Comprehension of Cloud Computing 
in Brazil will Propel the Market to $1.1 Billion in 2017.
22 J. Verge, Microsoft Azure Cloud’s Brazil South Region Goes Live, Data Centre 
Knowledge, June 5, 2014, www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2014/06/05/
microsoft- azure-clouds- brazil-south- region-goes- live/.
23 Brandon Butler, The Cloud goes Global, Network World, May 29, 2013, 30 
(10), 6–6.
24 Accounting Web, New CSC Survey of More Than 3,500 Cloud Computing Users, 
Accounting Web, February 9, 2012, www.accountingweb.com/topic/technology/
new- csc-cloud- survey-more- 3500-cloud- computing-users.
25 Newteck Technology Solutions, Cloud Computing on the Rise Amongst Businesses 
in Brazil, Newteck Technology Solutions, July 10, 2013, http://webservices.thesba.
com/2013/07/10/cloud- computing-on- the-rise- amongst-businesses- in-brazil/.
26 Ricardo Geromel, Hackers Stole $1billion in Brazil, the Worst Prepared Nation 
to Adopt Cloud Technology, Forbes, March 2, 2012, www.forbes.com/sites/
ricardogeromel/2012/03/02/hackers- stole-1billion-in- brazil-the- worst-prepared-
 nation-to- adopt-cloud- technology/2/. 
27 Transfer: Latin Business Consultancy, Brazil: Cloud Computing Sales to Grow 74.3% 
Until 2016.
28 Verge, Microsoft Azure Cloud’s Brazil South Region goes Live.
29 Ian Irwin, Brazilian Cloud Computing Market Set for World Cup Kick- Off, No 
Blue, June 12, 2014, http://noblue.co.uk/blog/brazilian- cloud-computing- market-
set- world-cup- kick/.
30 BBC, Brazil Data Plan Aims to Keep US Spies at Bay, BBC, September 18, 2013, 
www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology- 24145662. 
31 Pedro Ozores, Petrobras on Cloud: “We are Conservative,” BNAmericas, September 
20, 
2013, 
www.bnamericas.com/news/technology/petrobras- on-cloud- we-are-
 conservative.
32 World Economic Forum, The Global Information Technology Report 2012: Living 
in a Hyperconnected World.
33 Cushman & Wakeﬁeld, Cushman & Wakeﬁeld Report Takes a Deeper Look at 

Brazil  197
the Brazilian Data Center Market, May 6, 2014, www.cushmanwakeﬁeld.com/en/
news/2014/05/marketbytes/. 
34 Pedro Ozores, Telecoms Network Costs Still Hinderance for Cloud in Brazil – HP, 
BNAmericas, August 21, 2014, www.bnamericas.com/news/technology/telecoms-
 network-costs- still-hinderance- for-cloud- in-brazil- hp.
35 Andrew Nusca, Taking the Pulse of Brazil’s ICT Sector, ZDNet, October 26, 2012, 
www.zdnet.com/taking- the-pulse- of-brazils- ict-sector- 7000006448/.
36 H.L. Sirkin, M. Zinser, and J.R. Rose, The Shifting Economics of Global 
Manufacturing, BCG, August 2014.
37 Cushman & Wakeﬁeld, Cushman & Wakeﬁeld Report Takes a Deeper Look at the 
Brazilian Data Center Market. 
38 Henrique Barbosa, Philipe Moura, and Ricardo Tavares, Cloud Computing in Brazil, 
(February 2014) TechPolis Research Note No. 2.
39 Networks Asia, Study Shows APAC is the Third Most Expensive Region to Use 
Public Cloud, March 14, 2016, www.networksasia.net/article/study- shows-apac-
 third-most- expensive-region- use-public- cloud.1457964686.
40 Sooraj Shah, Cost of Building a Data Centre in Brazil is “40 Per Cent More Than the 
US,” Computing, September 20, 2013, www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/2295802/
cost- of-building- a-data- centre-in- brazil-is- 40-per- cent-more- than-the- us.
41 Barbosa et al., Cloud Computing in Brazil.
42 The Brazil Business, Plano Nacional de Banda Larga in Brazil, The Brazil Business, 
2013, http://thebrazilbusiness.com/article/plano- nacional-de- banda-larga- in-brazil.
43 Barbosa et al., Cloud Computing in Brazil. 
44 Ibid.
45 E. Lee, Chinese Gov Aims to Realize Full Broadband Coverage By 2020, Tech Node, 
August 19, 2013, http://technode.com/2013/08/19/chinese- gov-aims- to-realize-
 full-broadband- coverage-by- 2020/.
46 World Economic Forum, The Global Information Technology Report 2012, Living 
in a Hyperconnected World.
47 Angelica Mari, IT’s Brazil: The Technology Skills Gap, IT Decisions, August 2014, 
http://itdecs.com/2011/08/its- brazil-the- technology-skills- gap/.
48 Angelica Mari, Brazil May Introduce Cloud Computing Regulations, ZDNet, 
June 
4, 
2013, 
www.zdnet.com/brazil- may-introduce- cloud-computing-
 regulations-7000016365/. 
49 BBC, Google to Open First Latin America Data Centre in Chile, BBC, September 7, 
2012, www.bbc.com/news/technology- 19518307.
50 J. Lynch, A View of the Cloud from Brazil, Tech Soup Canada, October 4, 2011, 
www.techsoupcanada.ca/community/blog/view_of_cloud_from_brazil.
51 Transfer: Latin Business Consultancy, Brazil: Cloud Computing Sales to Grow 74.3% 
Until 2016.
52 Cushman & Wakeﬁeld, Cushman & Wakeﬁeld Report Takes a Deeper Look at the 
Brazilian Data Center Market.
53 Geromel, Hackers Stole $1billion in Brazil, the Worst Prepared Nation to Adopt 
Cloud Technology.
54 Latin America Monitor Brazil. Latin America Monitor: Brazil Monitor.
55 ITU, PNBL Reaches 692 Municipalities (Brazil), ICT Statistics Newslog, January 27, 
2012, www.itu.int/ITU- D/ict/newslog/PNBL+Reaches+692+Municipalities+Braz
il.aspx.
56 M. Kalyani, Setting Standards for the Murky Cloud Market, 2013, https://spideroak.
com/privacypost/business- the-cloud/cloud- computing-regulations- on-the- rise/.
57 M. Scott, Where Tech Giants Protect Privacy, New York Times, December 14, 2014, 
www.nytimes.com/2014/12/14/sunday- review/where- tech-giants- protect-privacy.
html. 

198  Case Studies
58 ITU, Demystifying Regulation in the Cloud: Opportunities and Challenges for Cloud 
Computing, GSR 2012 Discussion Paper.
59 S. Paulo, Doing Data Center Business in Latin America’s Economic Powerhouse, Data 
Centre Dynamics, April, 2013, www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2013/04/
brazil%E2%80%99s-it- boom.
60 For the 2013 BSA Global Cloud Computing Scorecard, see http://cloudscorecard.
bsa.org/2013/index.html. 
61 Ibid.
62 B. Brooks and F. Bajak, Brazil Looks to Break from US- Centric Internet over Spying 
Online, September 2013, www.sfgate.com/news/world/article/Brazil- looks-to-
 break-from- US-centric- Internet-4819946.php. 
63 C.C. Miller, Google Pushes Back Against Data Localization, New York Times, August 
25, 2014, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/01/24/google- pushes-back- against-
data- localization/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=1.
64 John Ribeiro, Brazil to Drop Requirement that Internet Firms Store Data Locally, 
Network World, March 20, 2014, www.networkworld.com/article/2175352/data-
 center/brazil- to-drop- requirement-that- internet-ﬁrms- store-data- locally.html.
65 Elizabeth Banker, New Brazil “Bill of Rights” Takes Effect at End of June, ZwillGen, 
June 17, 2014, http://blog.zwillgen.com/2014/06/17/going- brazil-just- world-cup/.
66 C.C. Miller, Revelations of N.S.A. Spying Cost U.S. Tech Companies, New York 
Times, March 22, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/03/22/business/fallout- from-
snowden- hurting-bottom- line-of- tech-companies.html?_r=0.
67 Angelica Mari, Brazilian Government Launches Own Cloud Offering, ZDNet, 
August 22, 2013, www.zdnet.com/brazilian- government-launches- own-cloud-
 offering-7000020738/.
68 Arab Today, Brazil Installs Spy- Proof Email Network, August 22, 2014, www.
arabtoday.net/~arabtode/internet/brazil- installs-spy- proof-email- network.html.
69 Angelica Mari, Software Piracy Still Rife in Brazil, ZDNet, 2014, www.zdnet.com/
software- piracy-still- rife-in- brazil-7000030966/.
70 Peter Judge, Oracle Delays Brazil Cloud Launch, Data Centre Dynamics, October 8, 
2014, 
www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2014/10/oracle- delays-brazil-
 cloud-launch.

PART IV
Lessons Learned, 
Implications, and the 
Way Forward


11
DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, 
AND CONCLUSION
11.1 Introduction
The analysis provided in the earlier chapters of this book suggests that BD and 
the cloud have a disruptive and transformative potential for developing coun-
tries. It has pointed to a large number of applications that in different ways can 
support the implementation of many Sustainable Development Goals. At the 
same time, beneﬁts cannot be taken for granted and various risks will also 
emerge as more and more economic activities shift online. For developing 
countries to seize the full beneﬁts from BD and the cloud, they therefore need 
to address a range of policy challenges, and effective support will be required 
from the international community. 
 
The development and deployment of BD and cloud computing solutions 
across key industries and economies in the global South show strikingly diverse 
patterns. Some organizations such as China’s Alibaba have developed and 
deployed sophisticated and well- engineered BD and cloud systems. However, 
the majority of the uses in the developing world need low- cost solutions that ﬁt 
their speciﬁc needs as well as economic and infrastructural contexts.
 
The uses of BD and the cloud in most developing countries have so far 
focused on only a few economic sectors. Put differently, the adoption of BD 
and cloud tools in these economies is far from widespread and from being 
effectively integrated into the broader economic sectors. For instance, in China, 
the three Internet giants Alibaba, Baidu, and Tencent are believed to have the 
same level of caliber and skills in BD as Western technology companies. 
However, many of China’s other industries are lagging behind. Observers have 
noted that telecommunications, banks, governments, and medical institutions 
are far from harnessing the full power of BD.1

202  Lessons and Implications
 
The integration of BD, the cloud, and mobile computing technologies offers 
particular promise for facilitating economic productivity and social development 
in developing economies. The Mifapro and other cases highlighted in this book 
show that they can play a key role in promoting the well- being of disadvan-
taged groups, improve the functioning of markets for agricultural produce, and 
affect the allocation of resources. Enhanced availability of information can also 
help to better evaluate the risks and uncertainties for various market 
participants.
11.2 BD and the Cloud in Developing Countries in Relation to 
Innovation and Technological Progress
A number of business and government policy initiatives directed towards 
improving innovation performance in BD and the cloud areas have been 
launched by the private sector and national governments in developing eco-
nomies. As a result some emerging economies are already evolving as hotbeds of 
innovation in these areas, perhaps most notably in China.
 
But excellence is also visible elsewhere. Some SSA- based ﬁrms are impressive 
in their ability to bring together innovations involving local capacity building. 
In a 2011 survey of the world’s top experts on Internet- related innovations, 7 
percent viewed Africa as “the most innovative place for Internet- related tech-
nology.” The corresponding proportions for other regions and economies were: 
Europe: 4 percent; China: 4 percent; India: 7 percent; and the Paciﬁc Rim: 5 
percent. The experts viewed Africa’s Internet- related innovations as: “On- the-
ground solutions designed by communities for communities.”2 India’s relatively 
poor R&D and innovation performance has led some experts to argue that 
entrepreneurial activities in the Indian ICT and offshoring industry have a 
“hollow ring.” An Economist article notes: “India makes drugs, but copies almost 
all of the compounds; it writes software, but rarely owns the result . . . [it has] 
ﬂourished, but mostly on the back of other countries’ technology.”3 In view of 
the prominent roles of some Indian technology ﬁrms in the global arena, they 
have showed less impressive performance in generating innovative solutions to 
solve local problems. This points to a general observation made by the United 
Nations, that developing countries should give due attention to leverage their 
indigenous ICT and especially software industries to serve local development 
needs and demands.4
 
Foreign multinationals are also helping to stimulate and facilitate innovation 
in developing countries. For example, IBM built its forty- ﬁrst global Innovation 
Center in Kenya’s Nairobi in 2013, which is ﬁrst such Center in East Africa. A 
key focus of the Center is on mobile and cloud technologies to solve local and 
global challenges, such as trafﬁc congestion and better energy management.5 As 
of early 2016, IBM Research Africa had about thirty- ﬁve specialists in Kenya in 
diverse ﬁelds such as computer sciences, engineering, and environmental 

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion  203
science. In addition, the Nairobi lab had thirty- ﬁve software developers and 
trainees from local universities.6
 
Innovations in privacy and security are focusing on smartphones and wear-
able devices. For instance, HID Global, which manufactures access control cards 
that are used to open doors in ofﬁces and hotel rooms, has teamed up with 
chipmaker NXP Semiconductors to expand the technology to work with 
smartphones and wearables (e.g., Apple Watches and Android Wear). Due to 
privacy concerns, HID’s platform will allow individuals to decide the amount of 
information shared. For example, a police ofﬁcer can be given access to more 
detailed data than a liquor store worker that merely wants to verify a customer’s 
age. The owner sends it from his/her smartphone. The company is pushing 
several BD projects including digitization of Nigeria’s entire vehicle ownership 
system. The goal is to put the country’s more than ﬁfty million cars onto a data-
base that is accessible by a smartphone.7
 
BD- and cloud- based tools such as Sproxil’s MPA system can realize eco-
nomies of scope by providing services in other sectors. For instance, manufac-
turers have started using Sproxil’s MPA system to eliminate counterfeit 
products. A survey conducted by Schneider Electric showed that counterfeit 
electrical products account for 40–80 percent of their markets in African coun-
tries. Some of the most counterfeited electrical products include sockets, cables, 
switches, and extension cords. In 2012, Nigeria’s hair- and skin- care product 
manufacturers and the Swiss company O’tentika started a collaboration with 
Sproxil,8 and East African Cables also employs Sproxil’s systems to ﬁght 
counterfeits.9
11.3 Challenges and Obstacles Associated with BD and 
the Cloud
There are a number of challenges to overcome in the deployment of BD and 
the cloud in the developing world.
11.3.1 Changing Skills Requirement
A major concern for harnessing the full potential of BD and the cloud is the 
lack of relevant skills, knowledge, expertise, and experience. In a survey con-
ducted by the online recruitment website Monster.com, 68 percent of employ-
ers in the Middle East and India believed that it was “extremely difﬁcult” or 
“difﬁcult” to hire talent for technology.10
 
In another survey by Accenture among Indian enterprises, 53 percent of the 
respondents cited the lack of talent to be a key challenge in BD and cloud 
deployment.11 McKinsey estimates that India will need 200,000 data scientists in 
the near future.12 Snapdeal.com said that the company has not been able to ﬁnd 
the coders and other BD manpower it needs. The company recognizes the need 

204  Lessons and Implications
for world- wide recruitment for experienced programmers dealing with BD, 
cloud computing, and the software for interacting with customers and suppliers. 
Snapdeal was hiring cloud specialists from the United States as well as consider-
ing establishing a software development center in the USA, and buying ﬁrms 
there in order to capture the needed manpower.13 According to the Internet & 
Mobile Association of India, there were 50,000–70,000 mobile developers in 
India in 2015. It is estimated that twenty million developers will be needed by 
2020.14
 
Skill deﬁcits for BD and the cloud often reﬂect broader problems of low 
educational quality, achievement, and standards. For instance, the inability of 
Vietnamese universities to train the next generation of highly- skilled workers 
has been a signiﬁcant roadblock in this context.15 Likewise, according to the 
UNESCO, only 6 percent of Africa’s young people are enrolled in higher 
educational institutions compared to the global average of 26 percent.16 A large 
number of organizations in Africa have had limited experience in data cleansing 
or standardization. There is thus a general lack of skills in the advanced tech-
niques and technologies required for BD.17 South Arica is estimated to require 
at least 200 data scientists to participate in the SKA alone.18
11.3.2 High Data Creation and Data Access Costs
High costs are a major obstacle for consumers to engage in activities that 
generate data. Consider South Africa. Consumers with an income of R3,000 
(US$225) a month, which is signiﬁcantly above the national minimum wage, 
needed to work around eighteen hours in order to afford a 500 MB data plan. 
Thus, even if consumers can afford smartphones, they often cannot afford to use 
them other than like “dumb” phones.19 At the 2016 price level, only a quarter 
of Indonesians and 22 percent of Chinese could afford data consumption of 
500 MB per month.20 From a pure cost perspective, in order to get everyone 
online, data prices need to fall by 90 percent or more. As of 2016, developing 
economies had only seventy- seven Internet exchange points compared to 134 
in the developed economies. North America with a population of 350 million 
had eighty- ﬁve IXPs compared to eight in South Asia with a population of 
1,760 million.21
11.3.3 Resistance from Vested Interests
Resistance from some powerful actors, who derive their market position and 
authority by controlling or selectively sharing access to information, can be a 
huge obstacle. Increasing access to data and information can threaten such 
actors’ current sense of power and authority. Consider the lack of disclosure of 
data related to soil pollution in China. Between 2006 and 2010, China’s Minis-
try of Environmental Protection (MEP) and the Ministry of Land and Resources 

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion  205
(MLR) conducted surveys of soil pollution in China. A 2014 report indicated 
that 16 percent of about 10,000 testing points failed to meet the speciﬁed stand-
ards. Analysts argued that there are signiﬁcantly more polluted sites than the 
testing points covered by the surveys. One estimate suggested that China has 
between 300,000 and 500,000 polluted sites, or thirty to ﬁfty times higher than 
the number of testing points covered in the surveys.22
11.4 Implications for Technology Marketers
There are a number of implications for technology marketers and technology 
entrepreneurs.
11.4.1 Involving Relevant Stakeholders
It is important to identify broader relevant stakeholders, especially users, and 
increase their involvement in the design process. For instance, the experiences 
of mobile cloud- based e- learning in SSA economies indicate that teachers can 
play a crucial role in designing, developing, and implementing education- related 
technologies.23 Likewise, in the development of healthcare applications, collab-
oration with end- users such as health facility staff, community health workers, 
or community leaders is essential to inform program design and improve imple-
mentation in the local context.24
11.4.2 Considering Technologically Unsavvy and Less 
Savvy Users
In formulating policies and designing BD- and cloud- based mobile computing 
solutions tailored to the needs of developing countries, it is helpful to consider 
the extent to which end- users are technologically savvy or less savvy. The 
cloud- based systems used in developing countries need to be technically as 
simple as possible. In the MADEX system, for instance, pressing the send button 
is the only action that is required to be taken by midwives in order to send 
monthly reports.25 Likewise, an entrepreneur making a sale using Lula is 
required to press only a few buttons.26
11.4.3 Involvement and Mobilization of Local Talent and 
Resources
The successful initiatives in BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions 
in developing countries are mainly indigenously triggered, albeit often with 
involvement of foreign companies. They are also oriented towards the active 
involvement of local communities and the mobilization of local entrepreneurial 
resources. For instance, Nomanini’s success can be largely attributed to the 

206  Lessons and Implications
founders’ expertise in ICTs and an in- depth and intimate understanding of the 
African market. The founders noted that Lula is a uniquely “South African 
born- and-bred solution” that targets the needs and interests of the local 
population.27
 
It was a team of programmers in Kenya who developed the EpiSurveyor 
system.28 The Farmforce platform was developed in 2011 by a team based in 
Switzerland with inputs from a team based in Kenya.29 Likewise, Kenya- based 
Safaricom in partnership with the local organization Green Dreams envisioned 
and developed the iCow system.
 
In 2011, Safaricom launched Safaricom Cloud, arguably Africa’s “largest 
native cloud deployment.”30 It started hosting Mpesa mobile money services 
locally and launched new cloud offerings, including hosting platforms for gov-
ernment agencies and corporations. As of 2011, the company had invested 
US$150 million in clouds and announced plans to invest additional US$200 
million.31 Safaricom teamed up with Cisco for storage facilities, EMC for 
security, and Seven Seas Technology for training managers.
11.4.4 Consideration of Affordability, Open Source, and 
Other Related Aspects
For global IT providers, affordability and customization to meet the local 
requirements will be a key consideration to compete in developing countries. 
Regarding the beneﬁts of Android phones over low- cost feature phones, the 
director of ICT innovation at the Grameen Foundation noted that the open 
source nature of Android allowed Grameen to hire its own developers to cus-
tomize the phones. The customization enabled an improved use of power and 
to make applications usable when the phones are not connected to a network.32
 
A related point is that BD- and cloud- related products and services offered in 
developing markets must recognize—at least in the short run—the local techno-
logical reality, such as low bandwidth and mobile- driven digitization. Finally, 
the diffusion of BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions is an issue 
that has policy implications for enhancing agricultural productivity and food 
security, creating rural employment and reducing poverty.
11.4.5 BD- and Cloud- Related Innovations from the South 
for the South
Some innovations in BD- and cloud- based mobile computing are from the 
South (developing countries) for the South, an encouraging trend in the new 
geography of global innovations. As discussed earlier, a number of developing 
world- based technology companies such as Alibaba, Tencent, Green Dreams, 
and DataDyne have developed unique BD- and cloud- based apps for the devel-
oping world. As discussed in Chapter 8, Novatium developed cloud- based 

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion  207
mobile applications, mainly in its Indian R&D centers. In September 2011, 
Novatium services had over 40,000 users in India. Ericsson’s principal target 
groups for the applications are emerging markets, where most consumers cannot 
afford a PC. In developed markets, the company focuses mainly on young 
consumers.33
 
As mentioned, BD- and cloud- based mobile computing solutions hold a 
special appeal for developing countries. Such solutions provide the best oppor-
tunity to overcome barriers related to ICT infrastructures and level the playing 
ﬁeld for MSMEs. A number of philanthropic foundations’ support to these 
technologies have facilitated the diffusion of BD- and cloud- based mobile com-
puting solutions in developing economies.
11.5 Policy Implications
Governments have a critical role to play in order to overcome barriers related to 
skills shortages, information gaps, poorly functioning markets, and inadequate 
infrastructures by adopting and implementing relevant policies, laws, and regu-
lations.34 Such mechanisms are also needed to accelerate the development of the 
BD and cloud industry and market.
 
Investor- friendly policies such as tax incentives, subsidized credits, infrastruc-
ture investment, market deregulation, and special start- up programs can help 
attract BD and cloud companies. The Internet & Mobile Association of India 
(IAMAI) called for new tax incentives for locating data centers in a country: 
direct corporate tax rates and indirect sales taxes.35 China’s Guizhou province 
(Chapter 1) also illustrates this point. Favorable policies are elevating Guizhou 
from being one of the most backward provinces to a prominent BD hub. The 
province’s per capita GDP in 2015 was less than two- thirds of the national 
average.36 Guizhou offers various tax breaks and grants to technology ﬁrms. BD 
enterprises that meet certain requirements are exempt from corporate income 
tax for the ﬁrst two years and beneﬁt from a 50 percent corporate income tax 
reduction for the following three years.37 The province also offers housing 
allowances to attract BD talent. Companies can register in the Guizhou prov-
ince, without setting up physical facilities. In 2014, the governments of Guizhou 
province, Guiyang City, and Gui’an New District agreed to work together to 
allocate at least 100 million CNY annually during 2014–2016 to develop the 
BD industry.38 In 2016, the Guizhou province announced plans to invest a 
further 100 billion yuan to develop the BD and cloud sectors.39
 
What is viewed as a disadvantage for an economy can actually be an 
advantage in the BD era. For instance, the Taiwanese manufacturer Foxconn 
took advantage of Guizhou’s cool weather to establish an air- conditioning-free 
data center inside a cave located on a mountain in the province.40
 
In light of rapid technological change, developing countries need to manage 
privacy and security matters in BD and the cloud by issuing forward- looking 

208  Lessons and Implications
regulations that manage risks associated with the evolution of new technologies. 
For instance, an estimate by Gartner suggested that IoT security will account for 
20 percent of annual security budgets by 2020 compared to less than 1 percent 
in 2015.41 As was highlighted above, many governments in developing coun-
tries need to strengthen their legal and regulatory framework in the ﬁeld of data 
protection and privacy.
11.6 What Do We Know About BD and the Cloud in the 
Developing World?
In Chapter 1, we posed three questions: (1) What factors drive the diffusion of 
BD and the cloud in developing countries? (2) What are the potential eco-
nomic, social, and political impacts of these technologies in these countries? and 
(3) What roles can businesses and policy makers play to facilitate the adoption 
and effective utilization of BD and the cloud?
 
In this book, we have attempted to answer these questions. Table 11.1 
presents the situations in the developing economies regarding the drivers and 
effects of BD and the cloud, and the implications for businesses and policy 
makers. The analysis of the book shows that BD and the cloud have the poten-
tial to change the competitive landscape of some industries. To illustrate this 
point, consider the case of e- commerce. Upfront investment and economies of 
scale hinder small businesses’ implementation of advanced e- commerce applica-
tions. As discussed earlier, BD and cloud computing have helped Chinese soft-
ware start- ups access infrastructures and data centers, which would not be 
possible in traditional models.
 
Our points about exports of BD- and cloud- related services (Table 11.1) 
warrant elaboration. In this regard, Bhagwati’s theory of kaleidoscopic com-
parative advantage argues:
[W]hat we are facing now is a new and steadily encroaching economic 
universe in which the nature of comparative advantage is becoming thin, 
volatile, and kaleidoscopic and is creating vulnerabilities for industries, 
ﬁrms and workers. . . . The margins of competitive advantage have . . . 
become thinner: a small shift in costs somewhere can now be deadly to 
your competitiveness. We used to call such industries “footloose.” . . . In 
the old days, few considered such industries to be the norm. Today, they 
are the norm.42
An obvious example to illustrate how the cloud- led revolution may erode com-
parative advantage of some industrialized world- based companies is the market 
for productivity tools, in which Zoho is ﬂexing its muscles.
 
Chinese companies such as Huawei, Alibaba Group, and ZTE have emerged 
as challengers to global cloud providers such as IBM, Amazon, and HP, initially 

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion  209
in their domestic market but also internationally.43 This phenomenon ﬁts well 
with the theory of kaleidoscopic comparative advantage, which argues that “the 
nature of comparative advantage is becoming thin, volatile, and kaleidoscopic 
and is creating vulnerabilities for industries, ﬁrms and workers.”44 
 
In least developed economies, the potential opportunities and beneﬁts have 
been limited by weak forward and backward linkages. Unsurprisingly, global 
IT companies have been slow to enter into these economies. When they enter 
and intensify their activities, however, mechanisms such as labor mobility and 
stimulation of knowledge and technology transfer and other spillover effects 
may help local ﬁrms develop their capabilities—if they have a certain basic 
level of absorptive capacity. Some applications of BD and the cloud can help 
create a virtuous circle, which can act to positively reinforce the further 
development of the cloud industry. In Vietnam, cloud computing is being 
used to develop education programs, which would help further strengthen 
backward linkages.
 
Nonetheless, the overriding reality is that in developing economies, only a 
small proportion of organizations and ﬁrms are currently positioned to take 
advantage of advanced technologies such as BD and the cloud. IT- intensive 
industries (e.g., software development in China) or those dealing with IT- 
enabled processes (e.g., offshoring sectors in South Africa) are beneﬁting more 
from BD and the cloud than most other economic sectors. With improved con-
nectivity and awareness, however, BD and the cloud are likely to gain momen-
tum in the developing world.
 
BD- and cloud- based business models are still evolving. For local and global 
cloud providers, success in developing economies hinges on having business 
models that focus on affordability and consider the unique needs and capabilities 
of small- scale consumers (including MSMEs). Governments in the developing 
world can collaborate with domestic and foreign cloud players to support the 
development of software and other products appropriate for the local needs.
 
Cloud- related innovations and business models that leverage existing infra-
structure and technologies in novel ways undoubtedly have potential beneﬁts. 
Perhaps the greatest barrier for the adoption and effective utilization of the 
cloud in the developing world is the low PC penetration and a limited as well 
as expensive bandwidth. This will favor the mobile- based cloud solutions in 
low- income countries. First, a cellphone capable of running a browser can 
already access mobile clouds. Low- cost phone users can thus tap into applica-
tions that are currently accessible only through smartphones. Second, consumers 
in the developing world are using increasingly sophisticated devices.
 
Not long ago, there were very few applications available for developing 
world- based users such as China Mobile’s BigCloud platform and Salesforce’s 
“ofﬂine PDA.”45 Now, cloud- based mobile applications are becoming increas-
ingly pervasive, which are set to transform the way mobile phones are used in 
the developing world.

210  Lessons and Implications
 
BD and the cloud in most developing countries are still at an early stage of 
development. Rather than viewing these technologies as a self- contained phe-
nomenon, they must be seen against the backdrop of economic and institutional 
realities. In theory, there are many possible uses of BD and the cloud and several 
channels and mechanisms through which developing economies may beneﬁt. In 
practice, however, serious problems stand in the way of implementation and 
practical gains. BD- and cloud- based innovations and business models are yet far 
from inclusive of SMEs in the global South, especially in the least developed, 
small nations.
 
Currently, BD and cloud usage has been shallow, narrow, and vanishingly 
small in most developing economies. Small developing economies lack the 
infrastructure and economies of scale for wide and deep cloud adoption. It 
would thus be unreasonable to expect that the cloud would help the developing 
world catch up with the West in one big leap. However, as economic and insti-
tutional factors improve, BD and the cloud offer a possible avenue towards 
bridging the digital divide. The developing world thus should seek to exploit 
the opportunities afforded by the cloud while minimizing the associated risks to 
allow access to advanced IT infrastructure, data centers, and applications, and 
protect sensitive information.
 
Some potential impacts of the cloud in the developing world include produc-
tivity gains, the development of innovative services (e.g., personalized insurance), 
efﬁcient supply chain management, implementation of B2B e- commerce, and the 
development of a skilled workforce. We argued that the cloud might erode the 
comparative advantage of incumbents. While some developing world- based com-
panies such as Alibaba and Zoho have challenged industrialized world- based 
multinational companies, in the present context, cases like those are extreme.
11.7 Future Research Implications
Before concluding, we suggest several potentially fruitful avenues for future 
research. First, in terms of geographic focus, we limited our analysis to a few 
major economies. For instance, some of the most high- proﬁle and interesting 
BD projects in the primary sector are being undertaken in Vietnam.46 In the 
future, conceptual and empirical work scholars need to compare and contrast 
the cloud and BD development processes in developing economies not con-
sidered in this book.
 
In this book, we reviewed several BD- and cloud- based solutions that have 
been developed locally as well as in the developed world. A second area of 
future research might be to compare locally developed BD and cloud solutions 
with those developed in the industrialized world in terms of a number of 
parameters such as costs and performance. Such research should also consider 
how technology transfer within developing economies might compare with 
North–South transfers.

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion  211
TABLE 11.1 Key Findings and Implications
Situation in the Developing Economies and Implications
Drivers of the BD and 
cloud industry in the 
developing world
s   $EVELOPMENT AND STRUCTURE OF RELATED INDUSTRIES THAT produce forward, backward, and horizontal or inter-
sectoral linkages are tightly linked to the development 
and diffusion of BD and cloud computing.
s   ,OCAL lRMS TECHNOLOGICAL CAPABILITIES GENERATE POSITIVE externalities for the development of BD and the cloud 
industry.
s   )NSTITUTIONAL LEGITIMACY ISSUES SUCH AS THE GOVERNMENTS support and institutional preferences affect the 
development of the cloud industry.
Potential impacts
s   "$ AND THE CLOUD HELP IMPROVE PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURES	 and economic (lower price) access.
s   #HANGING THE COMPETITIVE LANDSCAPE OF SOME INDUSTRIES upfront investment and economies of scale hinder small 
businesses’ implementation of advanced e-commerce 
applications. The cloud has helped Chinese software start-
ups access infrastructures and data centers, which would 
not be possible in traditional models.
s   0ERFORMANCE INDICATORS RELATED TO EXPORT ACTIVITIES EG cloud-related entrepreneurship) point to developing 
world-based technology ﬁrms’ shift into a higher gear, 
which may erode the industrialized world’s comparative 
advantages.
s   -ARKET FOR PRODUCTIVITY TOOLS CURRENTLY 7ESTERN multinationals such as AWS, IBM, and Microsoft 
dominates this market in the USA as well as in the 
developing world. Developing world-based companies 
such as Alibaba and Zoho can emerge as strong 
challengers, mainly by emphasizing lower price and 
broader accessibility.
Roles of businesses and 
policy makers
s   3TRENGTHEN FORWARD AND BACKWARD LINKAGES HELPS ATTRACT global cloud players and maximize the beneﬁts of the 
cloud computing to the local economy.
s   -EASURES TO CREATE A VIRTUOUS CIRCLE 6IETNAM THE CLOUD IS being used to develop education programs, which would 
help further strengthen backward linkage.
s   -EASURES TO INCREASE AWARENESS AMONG POTENTIAL USERS would help create a strong forward linkage.
s   0ROMOTION OF BUSINESS MODELS THAT LEVERAGE EXISTING infrastructure (e.g., cellular phones): cellular phones are 
the primary computing device and means for accessing 
the Internet for a large proportion of population in 
developing economies.

212  Lessons and Implications
 
The IoT is evolving as a key force that is transforming economic, social, and 
political institutions in the developing economies. A third area of future research 
concerns the analysis of the IoT as a key source of BD in these economies. 
Future research needs to analyze how data from IoT can be used in the devel-
oping world to bring positive economic, social, and political outcomes. It also 
needs to consider in greater detail the implications of IoT for data protection 
and privacy as well as data security.
11.8 Final Thought
A key favorable condition is the emergence of some economies in developing 
economies as hotbeds of innovations in BD- and cloud- based solutions. Locally 
created innovations and solutions such as iCow have particularly promising 
opportunities to improve the living standards and welfare of the poorest 
members of society.
 
The case of China’s Guizhou province suggests that it is possible to use BD 
and the cloud to transform underdeveloped regions. However, economically dis-
advantaged groups such as smallholder farmers and low- income populations may 
not be in a position to take actions on their own to beneﬁt from these advanced 
and modern technologies. The case of Guizhou province and other similar eco-
nomies also suggests that motivated and forward- looking politicians, governments, 
and interest groups can take actions and make decisions to bring economic and 
social transformations even to the most backward and economically weak areas.
Notes
 1 Ana Swanson, How Baidu, Tencent and Alibaba are Leading the Way in China’s 
Big Data Revolution, South China Morning Post, August 25, 2015, www.scmp.com/
tech/innovation/article/1852141/how- baidu-tencent- and-alibaba- are-leading- way-
chinas- big-data. 
 2 Foreign Policy, The FP Survey: The Internet, Foreign Policy (September/October 
2011) 188, 1–9. 
 3 Economist, Imitate or Die: Technology in China and India, The Economist (2007) 
385(8554), 9.
 4 See UNCTAD, Information Economy Report 2012: The Software Industry and Developing 
Countries (New York and Geneva: United Nations, 2012).
 5 Hayden Richards, IBM Invests in Kenya Creating One of Africa’s Key Innovation 
Center Ecosystem, IntelligentHQ, May 15, 2013, www.intelligenthq.com/innovation-
 management/ibm- helps-build- africas-innovation- ecosystem/.
 6 J. Bright, In Africa, Watson’s Sister Lucy is Growing Up with the Help of IBM’s 
Research Team, Tech Crunch, March 16, 2016, https://techcrunch.com/2016/03/16/
in- africa-watsons- sister-lucy- is-growing- up-with- the-help- of-ibms- research-team/.
 7 Joe Jackson, Replacing Guards and Gates with Biometrics and Big Data, Newsweek, 
May 6, 2016, www.newsweek.com/security- technology-innovation- 466353. 
 8 Andrew Bowman, Scratching Out Africa’s Counterfeit Medicines, Financial Times, 
August 28, 2012, http://blogs.ft.com/beyond- brics/2012/08/28/scratching- out-
africas- counterfeit-medicines/. 

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusion  213
 9 A. Ukoh, Dealing with Counterfeit Electrical Products Sproxil, March 27, 2015, 
www.sproxil.com/blog/tag/anti- counterfeit/.
10 Saudi Gazette, Saudi Cloud Computing Market to Surge 44.5%, Saudi Gazette, 
February 2, 2016, http://saudigazette.com.sa/business/saudi- cloud-computing-
 market-to- surge-44–5/.
11 Abhishek Raval, Big Data Talent Shortage: How to Bridge the Gap?, Express Computer, 
May 29, 2015, http://computer.expressbpd.com/magazine/big-data-talent-shortage-
how-to-bridge-the-gap/12133/.
12 Ibid.
13 Dhanya Ann Thoppil, India’s Snapdeal Says the Country Doesn’t have the Programmers It 
Needs, May 28, 2015, Wall Street Journal, http://blogs.wsj.com/indiarealtime/2015/05/28/
snapdeal- says-india- doesnt-have- the-programmers- it-needs/.
14 Paul Sawers, Flipkart and Udacity want a World Without Job Interviews, Venture Beat, 
January 28, 2016, http://venturebeat.com/2016/01/28/ﬂipkart- and-udacity- want-a-
 world-without- job-interviews/.
15 Kate Hoagland, Communiqué: Vietnam: Avoiding the “Middle Income Trap,” Harvard 
Kennedy School Ash Center, Communiqué (Spring 2010) 6, May 28, 2010, http://ash.
harvard.edu/news/communiqu%C3%A9-vietnam- avoiding-%E2%80%98middle-
income- trap%E2%80%99.
16 A. Kajunju and J. Crozier, Closing Africa’s Skills Gap and Fostering Innovation 
Through Technology, Hufﬁngton Post, September 23, 2015, www.hufﬁngtonpost.
com/amini- kajunju/closing- africas-skills- ga_b_8180370.html.
17 African Business Review, Big Data in Africa: IBM Dissects a Developing Trend 
in a Developing Market, African Business Review, November 20, 2014, www.
africanbusinessreview.co.za/technology/1783/Big- Data-in- Africa:-IBM- Dissects-a-
 Developing-Trend- in-a- Developing-Market. 
18 Jacquelene Friedenthal, Human Capital Development for Big Data in South 
Africa, Global Statement, Embassy of Switzerland, September 23, 2015, https://
globalstatement2015.wordpress.com/2015/09/23/big- data-in- south-africa/.
19 Stuart Thomas, Getting the Next Billion Online: Why Emerging Markets Need a 
Lighter Internet [Tech4Africa], Memeburn, October 7, 2015, http://memeburn.
com/2015/10/getting- the-next- billion-online- why-emerging- markets-need- a-
lighter- internet-tech4africa/.
20 B. El- Darwiche, Mathias Herzog, and Rawia Abdel Samad, We Need to Change 
How We Think About the Internet in the Developing World, Forbes, June 8, 2016, 
www.forbes.com/sites/strategyand/2016/06/08/we- need-to- change-how- we-
think- about-the- internet-in- the-developing- world/#13812f9722fc.
21 Ibid.
22 Zhang Chun, Lack of Data, Openness Could Obstruct Soil Clean Up, China Dialogue, 
June 14, 2016, www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/9009-Lack- of-data-
 openness-could- obstruct-soil- clean-up.
23 Niall Winters, African Teachers Must Play a Central Role in the Mobile Phone 
Revolution, Guardian, October 23, 2013, www.theguardian.com/global- development/
poverty- matters/2013/oct/23/african- teachers-role- mobile-revolution.
24 USAID, Using Mobile Technology to Improve Family Planning and Health Programs 
Meeting Report, Dares Salaam, Tanzania, November 12–16, 2012.
25 Ibid.
26 Google Ofﬁcial Blog, Cloud Computing Enabling Entrepreneurship in Africa, 
December 20, 2012, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012/12/cloud- computing-
enabling.html.
27 R. Grant, Startup Spotlight: Nomanini’s Orange Box Helps Poor South Africans 
see More Green, February 7, 2013, http://venturebeat.com/2013/02/07/startup-
 spotlight-nomaninis- orange-box- helps-poor- south-africans- see-more- green/.

214  Lessons and Implications
28 Stephen Goldstein, Mobile Data Collection: A Leapfrog Technology for Health 
Improvement, K4Health, January 26, 2012, www.k4health.org/blog/post/mobile-
 data-collection- leapfrog-technology- health-improvement. 
29 Jocelyne Sambira, Simple Invention Brokers Peace Between Humans and Wildlife, Africa 
Renewal, August 2013, www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/august- 2013/africa- wired. 
30 Dennis Mbuvi, Safaricom Launches Africa’s Largest Native Cloud, CIO East Africa, 
October 27, 2011, http://news.idg.no/cw/art.cfm?id=B8F54E5E-1A64–67EA-
E4A7382D8CDA5A69. 
31 Rebecca Wanjiku, Safaricom Offers Locally Hosted Cloud Service: Plans to Run 
its Mpesa Pan- African Mobile Money Offering on New Platform, Computerworld 
Kenya, Computer World, November 1, 2011, www.pcadvisor.co.uk/news/mobile-
 phone/3314899/safaricom- offers-locally- hosted-cloud- service/.
32 Nancy Gohring, Android Phones Help Poor Farmers in Uganda, PCWorld, July 20, 
2011, www.pcworld.com/article/236194/article.html. 
33 Nir Kshetri, Cloud Computing in India, IEEE IT Professional (2012) 14(5), 5–8. 
34 J.L. King, V. Gurbaxani, K.L. Kraemer, F.W. McFarlan, K.S. Raman, and C.S. 
Yap, Institutional Factors in Information Technology Innovation, Information Systems 
Research (1994) 5(2), 139–169.
35 Nikhil Pahwa, Setting Up Data Centers in India Shouldn’t be Mandatory – 
Amitabh Kant, CEO Niti Ayog, Medianama, May 26, 2016, www.medianama.
com/2016/05/223-data- centers-in- india-amitabh- kant/. 
36 E. Dou, Chinese Province Aims to Lead Big Data Charge: China’s Premier Meets 
with Heads of High- Tech Companies in Bid to Lure Investment to Country’s Less-
 Developed Interior, Wall Street Journal, May 24, 2016, www.wsj.com/articles/chinese-
 province-aims- to-lead- big-data- charge-1464106714. 
37 Penny Jones, China’s New Big Data Hub, Data Centre Dynamics, March 21, 2014, 
www.datacenterdynamics.com/news/chinas- new-big- data-hub/85687.fullarticle.
38 Ibid.
39 Fan Feifei and Jun Yang, National Big Data Pilot Zone to Open in Guizhou, 
China Daily, March 3, 2016, www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2016–03/03/
content_23716867.htm.
40 Sami Ghanmi, Guizhou Province: A Look at China’s Rising Star in the Tech Industry, 
China Topix, May 28, 2016, www.chinatopix.com/articles/89121/20160528/
guizhou- province-look- chinas-rising- star-tech- industry.htm.
41 S. Ranger, Internet of Things: Finding a Way Out of The Security Nightmare: 
The Internet of Things will Bring Many Beneﬁts, But it’s also Creating a Security 
Nightmare for Which Few are Prepared, ZDNet, March 1, 2016, www.zdnet.com/
article/internet- of-things- ﬁnding-a- way-out- of-the- security-nightmare/.
42 J. Bhagwati, A New Epoch: A Stream of Windows (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 
20–21.
43 Gavin Long, Do Chinese Cloud, Mobile Providers Pose a Threat?: Concern over 
Creating a Back Door for Espionage, Cybertheft, Healthcare Info Security, September 14, 
2012, www.healthcareinfosecurity.com/blogs/do- chinese-cloud- mobile-providers-
 pose-threat- p-1354. 
44 Bhagwati, A New Epoch; Business Roundtable, Promoting Economic Growth through 
Smart Global Information Technology Policy: The Growing Threat of Local Data 
Server Requirements, 2012.
45 A. Etengoff, Salesforce to Offer Cloud Computing in India: The Next Stage of SaaS, 
IT Examiner, November 26, 2008, www.itexaminer.com/salesforce- to-offer- cloud-
computing- in-india.aspx.
46 Nir Kshetri, Big Data’s Big Potential in Developing Economies: Impact on Agriculture, 
Health and Environmental Security (Wallingford, Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences 
International [CABI] Publishing, 2016).

36Boutiques 128
3G coverage 114
A Large Ion Collider Experiment 
(ALICE) 96
Aadhar 147
Academy Manager 90
Accenture 203
ACE 133; II 95
Aditi Technologies 145
Adobe 103
Advance Learning Interactive Systems 
Online 91
AdventNet 11
advertiser 7
advertising 107
Africa Medical and Research Foundation 
95
Africa Soil Information Service 127–8
AfricaConnect 96
African Coast to Europe see ACE
African Development Bank 134
African Private Equity and Venture 
Capital Association 139
African Union Convention on Cyber 
Security and Personal Data Protection 
66
African Wildlife Foundation 88
AgFunder 81
agricultural productivity 127
agricultural technology see agtech
Agriculture and Climate Risk Enterprise 
Ltd 47
AgriLife 34, 45, 48, 50, 79, 83
agtech 81
AI 145
AIDS 4, 33, 40–1, 87, 126
Airoli data center 149
Airtel 110, 132–3
Airware 130
Alibaba 11, 12–15, 16, 22, 25, 102, 103, 
104, 106, 107, 150, 201, 206, 211; Ant 
Check Later 59; Group 16, 208
AliCloud 103, 106, 150
Alipay 103, 107, 111; Wallet 107, 111; 
Wallet virtual storefronts 107
Aliyun 11, 16, 68; Search 107
All India Council for Technical Education 
154
Alvaro Colom 38
Amazon 103, 114, 115, 144, 148, 165, 208
Amazon Web Services see AWS
American Chamber of Commerce in 
China 59
Andhra Pradesh 89
Android 155; Nanodegree 92; Wear 203
Angola 125, 136
Apeejay Stya, India 110
APIs 107
Apple Watches 203
INDEX
Page numbers in italics denote tables, those in bold denote ﬁgures.

216  Index
Apps4Africa 43
Asia Cloud Computing Association 163
Asia-Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation 66
Assistly 149
AWS 47, 68, 104, 110, 130, 135, 148–50, 
152, 165, 180, 189–90, 211; Developer 
Support 135
Ayla 134
Azure 144–5, 149
Azure platform, Microsoft’s 104–5
B2B 106, 108
B2C 107–8
Babban Gona 45
back-end e-commerce merchant services 
106
Baidu 14–15, 201
Bajaj Finserv 105
Bangalore 148; see also Bengaluru
Bank of Africa 129
Banking 2.0 24
BCG 130, 146
Bengaluru 149; see also Bangalore
Betaout 108
Bharat Light and Power 155–6
Bharti 149
Big Data Read Enterprise 153
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 135
biNu 35, 47
Bluemix cloud computing platform 165
Bombay Stock Exchange see BSE
Bookmyshow.com103
Born Free Foundation 156
BRASSCOM 191
Brazil 8, 10, 14, 17, 25, 33, 58–9, 92, 109, 
112–13, 115, 157, 187–95
Brazilian Agency for Promotion and 
Export of Software (Softex) 191
Brazilian research and education network 
(Rede Nacional de Ensino e Pesquisa 
[RNP]) 92
BRCK 88, 94, 96
BRIC economies 191
Bridge 89
Bridge International Academy 87
Broadband China 173, 179
Broadband Deployment 115
BSA 192, 194; Global Cloud Computing 
Scorecard 115
BSE 40, 151
Bureau of Educational and Cultural 
Affairs, US Department of State 91
Burkina Faso 130; Nazinga Game Ranch 
130
Business Intelligence 132
Business Software Alliance 138, 192; see 
also BSA
CAMA 43, 154
Cambridge University 96
Capacity Kenya 95
Cape Town 135
Capgemini 189
cash on delivery see CoD
CDC 89
CDNetworks 163
Central Bank of India 150
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) 67
Centre for Developing of Advanced 
Computing 154
Chad 137
ChannelAdvisor 102
Chennai 149
Chevron Technology Ventures 81
Chile 191
China 162–86
China Electronics Standardization Institute 
172
China Mobile 11, 14–15, 170; BigCloud 
platform 209
China National Cardiovascular Data 
Repository 95
China Standard Software Company 171
China Telecom 96, 170
China Unicom 170
Chinese Society of Cardiology 95
Cipla 43, 154
Cisco 125, 133, 189
Citibank 17
civil liberties 65
Clarins 105, 112
Climate Smart Agriculture 136
Cloud computing infrastructure 164
Cloud Service Providers see CSPs
cloud-based applications 165
CLR 15, 96
CoD 109, 111
cognitive barriers 109, 112, 113
cognitive institutions 115
Colombia 127
Commonwealth 66
Community Based Maternal and Neonatal 
Care 41
community knowledge workers 44
complexity 60, 61, 64
Computational Intelligence Research 
Group, University of Pretoria 18
Computer Sciences Corporation 10, 95

Index  217
Computer Warehouse Group 132
conditional cash transfer 38
Connect to Learn 47
Conseil Européen pour la Recherche 
Nucléaire 96
Conservation International 135
Convention 108; see also Council of 
Europe Data Protection Convention of 
1981
Corporate social responsibility 154
Council of Europe Data Protection 
Convention of 1981 66; see also 
Convention
Counterfeit 42
Coursera 91, 134
CRL 11, 145, 152
CRM 132
CSPs 7, 8, 60–3, 68, 102–5, 110–12, 113, 
115–16, 145, 149–50, 180, 189, 191–5
CtrlS 40, 151
Cumulux 145
CUOs 68
Current Analysis 147
Cybercrime 115
Data Privacy 115
Data Sciences Center 150
Data Security Council of India see DSCI
DataDyne 206
Delivery Science 108
Dell 103, 171; PowerEdge 103
Deloitte 144, 147–8
Demandware 105, 112
Democratic Republic of Congo 126, 137
Digify Bytes 95
Digify Pro 95
digifyafrica.com 95
digital oilﬁelds 81
DigitalOcean 149
Dimension Data 189
Distributed Management Task Force 172
Diwali festival 105
DNV GL 78, 80, 81
Draper Fisher Jurveston 11
DreamBox 90
Driverless Operated Vehicle Environment 
134
Dropbox 189
DSCI Certiﬁed Privacy Professional 68, 
175
DTP 130
Dundee Precious Metals 78
EASSy 133
East African Cables 203
East African Marine System 133
East African Submarine Cable System 133
Eastern and Southern Africa Higher 
Education Centers of Excellence 
Project 95
eBay 149
Ecobank 129
e-commerce apps 104
Economic Barriers 108, 110, 113
Education 2, 0, 24
Educational Tech of the Year, Stuff 
Magazine’s 88
efﬁciency gains 16
EKA supercomputer 96, 146
Ekgaon 154
eKitabu 88
Elastic Compute Cloud 5
electrical supply 109
Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
(ECPA) 194
electronic health records (EHRs) 42
electronic medical records (EMRs) 42
eLimu 88
EMC 58, 133, 189, 206
Endurance 112
Eneza 90–1, 97
Enterprise Knowledge Graph 79, 81
Entersect Technologies 131
EpiSurveyor 38, 92, 206
Equinix 189
e-retailers 102
Ericsson 150, 207
Eritrea 137
ETao 107
e-tax ﬁle return 21
e-tendering 21
Ethiopia 126, 128, 136; Agricultural 
Transformation Agency 128
Ethiopian Soil Information System 128
Etisalat 60, 65–6, 69, 132–3
E-tutor tablet 154
Europe 16, 66, 88, 93, 96, 133, 168, 188, 
202
European Council of International 
Schools 88
European Organization for Nuclear 
Research see Conseil Européen pour la 
Recherche Nucléaire
European Union 66
Expresso V3, 194
externalities 21, 23; Jacobs 21, 22, 23; 
MAR 21, 22, 23
externality 17

218  Index
Facebook 9, 65, 92
Fair Information Practices see FIPs
FARM Limited 134
Farmers Centre 45
Farmforce 44–5, 48, 206
Fast Data 61
Federal Service of Data Processing see 
SERPRO
Federal Trade Commission see FTC
feedback systems 108; cognitive 108; 
economic 108; socio-political 108
Field Level Operations Water 4
FIFA’s Soccer World Cup 189–90, 195
FIPs 60, 61, 62, 64
FIRJAN System 191
Flipkart 92, 97, 103; see also Flipkart.com
Flipkart.com 103; see also Flipkart
Flybird Agri Innovations 79
Flytxt 133
Forrester 112
Fountain Credit Services 135
Free Basics 65
FTC 60, 62
FullArmor 126
Future Group 150
Gabon 130
Gartner 60
GCC 8, 58, 69
Geant 96
General Motors 145
General Packet Radio Service 41
Getmecab 114, 146
Ghana 126, 128, 135, 154
Girls Around Me 62
GitHub 104
Globacom 132–3
Global Cloud Computing Scorecard  
145
Global Fishing Watch 80
Global IT investment 190
Goa Medical College 87
Google 9, 65, 80–1, 92–4, 103–4, 112, 
113, 126, 128, 134, 144, 191, 193; 
AdWords 105; Docs 194; Drive 189; 
Earth Engine 9; My Business 112
Grameen Foundation 206
Green Dream 128, 206
greenhouse gas emissions 136
GSMA 139
Guinea Bissau 130, 133, 137
Guiyang City 207
Guizhou province 207, 212
Gulf Cooperation Council see GCC
Haiti 82–3; Ministry of Agriculture 82
Hasiru Dala 156
HCL Technologies 11
HDFC 17
Health Care 2, 0, 24
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act 42
Health Surveillance Assistants 41
Hebei province 173; Zhangbei economic 
development zone 173
Hewlett-Packard 95; see also HP
HID Global 203
high bandwidth 179
Higher Education Alliance for Leadership 
through Health 126
HIV 40, 48, 87
hollow diffusion 18
HomeShop18, 103
HP 95, 134, 208; Labs 154
Huawei 5, 15–16, 133, 135, 165, 168–71, 
174, 178, 181, 208; Cloud Congress 
135
Hufﬁngton Post 130
Human Heredity and Health in Africa 96
Human Rights First 66
IaaS 5, 6, 35, 36, 37, 177, 189
IAMAI 68, 207
IBM 5, 10, 19, 22, 33, 37, 94–5, 115, 
125, 130–1, 134–5, 145, 148–9, 155, 
165, 202, 208, 211; Africa Technical 
Academy 95; Africa University Program 
95; Cloud Academy 95; PureFlex 
System 95; Research Africa 202; Tivoli 
Service Delivery Manager 95; 
Workload Deployer 95
ICICI 12–15, 17, 151–2
iCow 34, 43–4, 48, 79, 83, 128, 131, 136, 
138, 206, 212
ICT 4, 9, 25, 108–10, 115, 136, 139; 
Readiness 115
IDC 8, 125, 178, 125, 180, 187
IFC 134
I-Free 62
IGF 64, 65
IGG 156
iHub 132
illegal, unreported, or unregulated (IUU) 
80, 130
index insurance 45
Indian cotton seed market 82
Indian Institute of Technology 154; 
Madras 87
Indian School of Business 91

Index  219
Indigo Trust 136
Indonesia 145, 157
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China 
23
Industrial Revolution 3
Industrial value 164
Industry-Led Standards 115
Infosys 11, 15, 23, 145, 152, 171; IT 
service expertise 171
infrared spectroscopy 127
infrastructural factors 109
Infrastructure as a Service see IaaS
ING Vysya Bank 17
Insight Sourcing Group 148
InstaCompute 153
Institutional Legitimacy 23
institutional trust 109
Instituto de Manejo e Certiﬁcação 
Florestal e Agrícola 188
Integr8, 132
Intel 8, 40, 151, 165, 168–9, 171
Intellectual Property Rights 115
Interactive Voice Response 145
International Centre for Tropical 
Agriculture 127
International Data Corporation 8, 163; see 
also IDC
International Finance Corporation 134
International Harmonization of Rules 
Promoting Free Trade 115
Internet & Mobile Association of India 68, 
204, 207
Internet Bill of Rights 192, 193; see also 
Marco Civil da Internet
Internet exchange points see IXPs
Internet Governance Forum see IGF
Internet Leased Port 110
InVenture Capital Corp 129
IoT 81, 208, 212
IP 129
IPO 104
IT 144
IXPs 187, 204
IZO Cloud Storage 153
Jammu 155
Japan 16, 145
JD.com 59, 107
Jingdong Mall 59; see also JD.com
Jobberman 128
Johannesburg 134
Joy Link platform 107
kaleidoscopic comparative advantage 208
Kampala 134
Kanpur 154
Karnataka 79
Kashmir 155
Kazakhstan 81
Kenya 125–9, 132–9; Education Network 
95
Kenya Medical Training College 95
Khan Academy 88
Kigali Special Economic Zone 132
Kilimo Salama 46
Kingsoft 170
Kio Kit 88, 94, 97
Kio Tablets 88
Knowlarity 145
Kotak Mahindra Bank 17
KPMG 162
Lagos 132, 135
Large Hadron Collider ATLAS (A 
Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) 96
Latisys 189
Lazada 16
leaky pipes 33
Learn Capital LLC 89
Lefeng.com 104, 106
Lenovo 165
Liberia 51, 89, 137
Limpopo 138
Linda Jamii 43
linkages; backward 17, 20, 21, 22; forward 
17, 20, 21, 22; horizontal 20, 21, 22; 
inter-sectoral 20, 21, 22
Liquid 125, 133, 138
Livity Africa 95
location-based technology 162; see also 
real-time geo-location technologies
London 137
Lula 206
M2M 4, 40, 48, 126, 138
Maana 79, 81
MADEX 41, 205
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act 147
Mail.Ru 65, 66
MainOne 125, 132
MakeMyTrip.com 103
Malaria 41–3, 87, 127, 155
Malaria transmission cycle 127
Malawi 128
Marco Civil da Internet 193; see also 
Internet Bill of Rights
Market Edge 128–9

220  Index
Markets and Markets 86
massive online open courses see MOOCs 
90
Mauritius 126, 130, 133
McKinsey 147
Mediae 88
Mercosur 192
Mercury Nimbus Suite 154
Mercy Corps 45
Mexico 8, 58, 157
M-health 96; cloud 178
Mi Familia Progresa 38
micro-ﬁnance institutions 46, 151
Microsoft 9, 10, 103, 126, 144–5, 148, 
150, 154, 188–9, 194, 211; Azure 82, 
106; Outlook 188
Middle East 16
Mifapro 38, 202
Mindtree 156
mining industry competence center 81
Ministry of Education, South Korea 86
Ministry of Environmental Protection, 
China 204
Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology 173
Ministry of Land and Resources, China 
204
Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action 41
Mobile Application Data Exchange 41
Mobile monitoring system 148
Mobile Product Authentication 43
Mobile Telecommunications Limited 127
Monsanto 82
Monster.com 203
MOOCs 90–1
Mother Infant Pair 41
mothers2mothers see M2M
Mozambique 130
Mozilla 38
mPedigree 154
Mpesa 129
MSMEs 207, 209
MTN 65, 129, 132–3
Mumbai 149
Delhi 148; Municipal Corporation of 156
Myntra 68
MyOfﬁce 132
Nairobi 89, 127, 135, 202–3
Namibia 127
Namibia Ministry of Health 127
NASA 9
NASSCOM 113, 115, 147–8, 175
National Association of Soft ware and 
Services Companies 112; see also 
NASSCOM
National Cyber Security Policy (NCSP), 
India 67
National Development and Reform 
Commission see NDRC
National Geographic 128
National Institute of Statistics 132
National Population Register 147
National Rural Health Mission 147
National Supercomputing Centre in Wuxi 
178
Nazinga Game Ranch 130
NDRC 114, 173–4
NEA-IndoUS Ventures 11
Nedbank 128–31
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University 
93
Netherlands 133
Net-magic Solutions 16, 145
next generation mining 78
Next Generation Networks 132
NextDrop 4
Nigeria 125–6, 128, 132–6, 154
Nitel 133
Nomanini 205
Nook tablets, Barnes & Noble’s 89
North America 204
Novatium 150, 206
NPD Group 38
NSA 192, 195
NSE 89
NTT Communications 145
Nuvem de Livros 187
NXP Semiconductors 203
O’tentika 203
Oceana 80
ODCA 40
Ofﬁce 365 82, 94, 115
oil and gas sector 77
Ol Pejeta Conservancy 130
Olympics 190
omni-channel 108
One Credit 129
one laptop per child 9
online marketplaces 106
Open Data Center Alliance 40, 151, 165, 
172
Open Data Processing Service 106
OpenMRS 42
operational efﬁciency 16, 17
Oracle 103, 150
Orange 66

Index  221
Oztern Technology 154
PaaS 5, 6, 34, 36, 145
Parallels 10, 149
Pearson 88
Pearson VUE 68
Pepsi 145
Philips 95
PII 64
Piracicaba 188
Planet Labs 134
Plano National de Banda Larga see PNBL
Platform as a Service see PaaS
PNBL 191–2, 194, 195
Polaris 149
Port State Measures Agreement 130
POS 116; software 106
Pressmart 11, 145
Príncipe 137
PRISM program 193
Procter & Gamble 145
productivity 16
Professional and Trade Associations 67
Project Link 134
Public Works Department 156
public–private partnership 67
Pune 149
Rack Centre 132
Rackspace Hosting 148
Radbound University Medical Center 129
Ranking Digital Rights 65
RasGas 69
RBI 146
real-time geo-location technologies 65; see 
also location-based technology
Red Hat 148
Redbus 68
Reduce Data 145, 150
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 114, 147
RFID 64
rule of laws 109
Rwanda 126, 132, 135; Development 
Board 67; Government of 95; National 
Police 67; one digital ID per child 
program 94; Utilities Regulatory 
Authority 67
SaaS 5–6, 10–11, 14, 25, 34, 36, 44, 105, 
108, 129, 145, 149
Safaricom 46, 129, 133, 206
Salesforce 10, 105, 149; ofﬂine PDA 209
Salgado, Richard 193
San Francisco 130
Santa Clara 153
São Paulo 191
Sao Tome 137
SAP 115
SAS 60
SB Cloud Corp 16
science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics 89
SDGs 3, 43; see also Sustainable 
Development Goals
Seacom 125, 133
search engine optimization 106
SEC 104
Security and Personal Data Protection 66, 
69
Senegal 136
Seoul 137
Sequoia Capital 145
SERPRO 194
Seven Seas Technology 133
Seychelles 137
Shell Technology Ventures 81
Shenzhen Cloud Computing Center 178
Shop Delivery106
Shopify 106, 110
Sierra Leone 134, 137
SIFI Technology 147, 149
Silicon Valley 134, 145, 150
Singapore 106, 146, 153; SingTel 106
SiteOnMobile 111, 113
SkyTruth 80
Smart Hubei 170
SMEs 7, 25, 102, 106, 109, 112, 116, 132, 
163, 166, 168–9, 171, 176–7, 179–80, 
189, 210
SMS 46, 62, 111
Snapdeal 145, 150, 203
Socio-political barriers 109, 113
SOEs 115, 176, 190
Sofgen 135
SoftBank Group 16
SoftLayer 149, 155
Software as a Service see SaaS
SoilCares 79, 83
Somalia 136
South Africa 126, 128–9, 131–3, 138; 
Centre for High Performance 
Computing, South Africa 93; 
Department of Science and Technology 
93
South African Research Network 93
South Asia 204
Southeast Asia 16
South–South economic relations 79

222  Index
Spreadtrum Communications 38
Springg 79
Sproxil 43, 203
SQL Server 105
Square Kilometre Array 93
SSA 125–36, 138–9, 146; see also Sub-
Saharan Africa
start-up 144, 150
state-owned enterprises see SOEs
stock keeping unit 103
structured data 60
Sub-Saharan Africa 108, 126, 132–3, 
135–6, 138–9; see also SSA
supercomputer 21
Superzonda 64
surveillance 64, 65
Sustainable Development Goals 3, 201; see 
also SDGs
Svran Group, India 110
Swasthya Slate 154–5
Switzerland 135
Syngenta 82; Foundation for Sustainable 
Agriculture 46
Tablet India 43, 154
Tanzania 126, 128–9, 132, 135; 
Commission for Science and 
Technology 91; Ministry of 
Agriculture, Food Security and 
Cooperatives 136; Ubongo Media 88
Taobao 107
task-based widgets 111
Tasklets 111
Tata Communications 114, 145, 153
Tata Consultancy Services see TCS
TCS 11, 145, 152
TED-Ed 88
teledensity 109
Temenos T24, 135
Tencent 65, 107, 201, 206
Tertiary Education Research Network of 
South Africa 93
Tiger Nation 156
TIME 9
Transnational Companies 94; see also 
Transnational Corporations
Transnational Corporations 82; see also 
Transnational Companies
Tropical Bank 135
Tropical diseases 87
Tshwane 33
tuberculosis 87
Tulip Telecom 149
Turkey 157
Twenty Third Century Systems 132
uAfrica.com 108
UAP Insurance 46
UbuntuNet Alliance 96
Udacity 92, 97
Uganda 126, 132–5
UN Food and Culture Organization 136
UN Port State Measures Agreement 130
UNESCO 95, 134, 204
Unique Identiﬁcation Card Project 148
United Nations Educational, Sci entiﬁc, 
and Cultural Organization see 
UNESCO
United Nations Foundation 39
University of Information Technology 95
University of Washington’s Center for 
Infectious Disease Research 87
unstructured data 60
US Geological Survey 9
USAID 95
uShop.co.za 108
value-added telecom service 114, 174
Variability 61, 63
Variety 60, 61, 63
VC 10, 11, 20, 83
Velocity 61, 62
venture capital see VC
Verizon Terremark 189
Viber 66
Vietnam 10; First Consulting Group 95; 
Ministry of Education and Training 10; 
Ministry of Information and 
Communications 10; Ministry of 
Science and Technology 10
Vietnam National University see VNU
Vietnam Technology and 
Telecommunication 10
Vital Signs 135–6
VMware 10, 134, 149
VNU 10, 12
Vodafone 66; Foundation 39
Volume 60–1
Vormetric Data Threat Report 58
WalMart 111
Waste Wise Trust 156
Water Watchers 33
Wearables 203
WeChat 107
Western pharmaceutical companies 87
WHO 33, 130
Wikipedia 90

Index  223
WIPO Copyright Treaty 193
Wipro 11, 18, 23, 108, 153
WISE Awards 89
World Agroforestry Center 127, 135
World Bank 95, 134, 137; Development 
Marketplace 39; New Economy Skills 
for Africa Program 91
World Health Organization see WHO
World Wide Worx 125
Worldreader 47
WTO 114
Xiaomi 171
Xiu.com 104, 106
Yahoo 14–15, 87, 96, 107, 146, 152, 174
Yihaodian 111
Youth Employment Accelerator Program 
Initiative 91
Zambia 33, 45, 51, 95, 126, 135; Smart 
135
Zimbabwe 125, 132, 138
Zinnov Management Consulting 147
Zoho Corp 11, 12–15, 18, 19, 145, 150, 
152, 208, 210–11
Zovi 104
ZTE 168–9, 174, 178, 208
Zulu language 34

