Big Data BasicsBIG DATA BASICS
An Introduction to Big Data and How It Is 
Changing Business
James Higginbotham
LAUNCHANY.COM

Big Data BasicsINTRODUCTION
Amazingly, 90% of the data in the world today has been created only in the last two 
years. With the increase of mobile devices, social media networks, and the sharing 
of digital photos and videos, we are continuing to grow the world’s data at an 
astounding pace. 
However, big data is more than just the data itself. It is a combination of factors 
that require a new way of collecting, analyzing, visualizing, and sharing data. These 
factors are forcing software companies to re-think the ways that they manage and 
offer their data, from new insights to completely new revenue streams.
2
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsABOUT THIS BOOK
This book addresses the confusion around big data and what it means for your 
software business. Whether you are an executive, a product manager for an existing 
product, or a startup founder, this book will help you:

Define big data and the factors involved when moving to the scale of big 
data

Review case studies of recent big data projects

Learn how the big data process works

Understand big data architectures and the technology landscape

Identify new business opportunities and revenue streams
3
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsABOUT THE AUTHOR
James Higginbotham is the founder of LaunchAny, an Austin-
based firm that specializes in launching software products. 
James has launched over 50 products in his career. He enjoys 
working with companies on their technology and product 
strategy. James has experience in architecting, developing, and 
deploying SaaS and big data applications to the cloud. 
James serves on the advisory board of a non-profit organization 
that focuses on helping people become advocates and activists 
for their charities and causes. When not writing or consulting, 
he enjoys landscape photography. 
James can be reached at james@launchany.com
4
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsWHAT IS TODAY’S DATA VOLUME? 
In what units do we express the size of the world’s information today? 
A) Megabyte (10^6)
B) Petabyte (10^15)
C) Yottabyte (10^24) 
5
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTODAY’S DATA VOLUME
The answer: C) Yottabyte. 
A Yottabyte is the equivalent of ~250 trillion DVDs worth of information, 90% of 
which was generated in only the last 2 years. In the future, we will likely see the 
amount of available data double every 2 years.
6
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTODAY’S DATA GROWTH
The amount of data growth today is astounding. 
Every 60 seconds:
•
98,000 tweets are created on Twitter
•
695,000 status updates are generated on Facebook
•
11 million instant messages are sent
•
698,445 Google searches are conducted
•
168 million emails are sent
•
1,820 TB of data is created
•
217 new mobile web users added
7
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE CHALLENGE OF TODAY’S  DATA
Today’s volume and growth of data creates a huge challenge when it comes to 
collecting, storing, and analyzing the data to find important metrics and trends. 
And this challenge is extending beyond Facebook, Twitter, and Google:
“…through 2018, big data requirements will gradually evolve from differentiation to 
'table stakes' in information management practices and technology. By 2020, big 
data features and functionality will be non-differentiating and routinely expected…” 
– Gartner on Big Data (2012)
8
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE DRIVERS OF BIG DATAHOW WE GOT HERE
9
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTODAY’SBUSINESS ANALITICS
Today’s business analytics explores past business performance (data) to gain 
insight and drive business planning  (action). The data sets used have historically 
been limited to what we can capture within standard business processes:
1. Transactions
2. Surveys/sentiment
3. Click-logs
While data sets were large, they were often predictable and allowed for manageable 
data analytics.
10
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE NEW FACE OFBUSINESS ANALITICS
We now have the Internet of Things:
1. Multiple devices (e.g. mobile phones, tables, GPS, RFID)
2. Streams of data from each device
3. Consumer-driven content (e.g. social networks and social collaboration)
4. Online marketing and detailed click tracking
5. Advertising
The amount of data being generated from these new sources exceeds our previous 
analytic capabilities. A new strategy is required to accommodate these new 
requirements. 
11
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsHYPE OR A GAME-CHANGER?
Big data is disruptive to everything businesses must manage:
1. More data sources (web, mobile, third-party)
2. More generated data
3. Batch or real-time processing
4. Right-time business insights
This is placing a heavier burden on technology solutions to deal with these new 
processes. IT can no longer solve these upcoming issues with a database and 
reporting tools. Big data solutions are now required.
12
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsGARTNER ON BIG DATA
Big data will drive $28 billion of worldwide IT spending in 2012, according to 
Gartner, Inc. In 2013, big data is forecast to drive $34 billion of IT spending.
"Despite the hype, big data is not a distinct, stand-alone market, it but represents an 
industrywide market force which must be addressed in products, practices and 
solution delivery," said Mark Beyer, research vice president at Gartner. "In 2011, big 
data formed a new driver in almost every category of IT spending. However, through 
2018, big data requirements will gradually evolve from differentiation to 'table 
stakes' in information management practices and technology. By 2020, big data 
features and functionality will be non-differentiating and routinely expected from 
traditional enterprise vendors and part of their product offerings."
13
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsDEFINING BIG DATAWHAT MAKES DATA BIG?
14
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsGARTNER SAYS:
“Big data in general is defined as high volume, velocity and variety information 
assets that demand cost-effective, innovative forms of information processing for 
enhanced insight and decision making.” 
Source: Gartner
15
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA DEFINED
We prefer to simplify the definition, focusing on the key differentiators of big data:
“Big Data Is Right-Time Business Insight and Decision Making At Extreme Scale”
16
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE 5 V’s OF BIG DATA:VOLUME
Big data may involve large amounts of data, from Terabytes to Petabytes and 
beyond. 
It exceeds the vertical scaling capabilities of a single instance or storage cluster. 
Examples include:
•
Device measurements across millions of devices every 15 minutes (e.g. 
smart grid)
•
User-generated content (e.g. Twitter/Facebook)
•
Historical market transaction data (e.g. Netflix/Amazon)
17
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE 5 V’s OF BIG DATA:VELOCITY
Big data may also include the speed of incoming data. Even if the data itself is 
small (e.g. temperature from a sensor), the speed in which it arrives combined with 
the quantity of devices can exceed current capabilities. Velocity may also involve 
the speed in which analysis and insight is needed. 
Examples include:
•
Fraud detection
•
Predicting Trends
•
Real-time analytics
18
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE 5 V’s OF BIG DATA:VARIETY
Big data often involves combining multiple data types together in the processing, 
generating new insights previously not available.  This may require multiple stages 
of data conversion and aggregation, prior to incorporation with other data sets. The 
larger the data set, the more involved this process may become.
Examples of sources that may be combined to provide greater insight:
•
Transactions, click streams, and content for trend analysis
•
Multiple real-time medical devices for patient assessment
19
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE 5 V’s OF BIG DATA:VERACITY
Not all data is considered equal. Determining the trust level of data by validating it 
against multiple data sources is often necessary. This may require additional levels 
of processing or filtering prior to data inclusion, adding complexity.
Examples include:
•
Filtering spam
•
Normalizing data/Master Data Management
•
Audit trails/data lineage
20
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE 5 V’s OF BIG DATA:VALUE
The end result of applying big data solutions to your data is to drive business value. 
This value can create new stories or even new opportunities previously hidden in 
the data. 
Examples include:
•
Identifying new markets or demographics
•
Netflix determining that the series House of Cards would succeed based on 
the viewing habits of their viewers
•
Political campaigns using data to steer conversation with voters in near 
real-time
21
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE 5 V’s OF BIG DATA:PUTTING IT TOGETHER
“Big Data Is Right-Time Business Insight and Decision Making At Extreme Scale”
22
Volume
Velocity
Veracity
Variety
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC
Value

Big Data BasicsTECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES OF BIG DATAWHY IS BIG DATA A BIG DEAL?
23
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsHARDWARE LIMITATIONS
Today’s hardware is amazingly fast. A consumer desktop may have up to 8 CPU 
cores, each clocked at approx 3.4 Ghz. Compare that to only 10 years ago, when 
desktop CPUs had only one core and clocked at a peak of 1.8 Ghz. 
Even with these advances, today’s hardware can’t keep up with the speed of data 
generation. Plus, CPU speed isn’t the only limitation. 
24
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsMODERN HARDWARE FACTS
Memory (RAM) - Fast & Expensive 
•
Max per computer – 256 GB 
Hard Disk (HDD) - Slow & Cheap 
•
Read speed - 30MB/sec (typical) to 100MB/sec (burst)
•
Max local storage per computer - 24 TB 
Network - Slow 
•
Max speed 1.5Gb/s (typical) up to 10 Gb/s (max)
Processor - Speeds Flattening 
•
Individual core speeds remain at 3.4 – 4.0Ghz
•
Number of cores per processor are increasing
25
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsOVERCOMING HARDWARE LIMITS
To overcome these modern limitations, a method of fast, cost-effective storage is 
needed. Currently, the approach is to utilize multiple machines to spread data out, 
increasing the maximum speed of reading data. This is often called “sharding”:
1 Hard drive = maximum of 100MB/Sec
10000 Hard drives x 100MB/Sec = maximum of 100 GB/sec (102,400 MB/Sec)
Each machine, or “node”, stores part of the data. Nodes may have extra copies of 
data to ensure data is not lost in the case of node failure.
26
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsDATA STORAGE LIMITATIONS
Beyond the hardware limitations, there are also storage limitations. Today, most 
structured data storage is managed in a relational database. Most relational 
databases enforce a set of rules to ensure that data is consistent (CAP Theorem). 
They also ensure transactions are atomic – they either succeeded or failed (ACID). 
With these rules in place, it becomes much harder to spread data out to multiple 
nodes to increase retrieval speed and therefore processing speed. 
Newer databases are offering different approaches to the CAP Theorem and ACID 
compliance to overcome these limitations.
27
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsCAP THEOREM
CAP stands for Consistency, Availability, and Partition Tolerance. CAP determines 
how your data storage will operate when data is written and the availability of the 
data when you go to retrieve it later (even under failure). You cannot have 
everything from all three categories, so each database must choose what they will 
implement and what they will sacrifice. In general:
1.
Relational databases choose Consistency and Availability (CA), ensuring writes 
are consistent and immediately available across all instances
2.
Many new database vendors are opting for Availability and Partition Tolerance 
(AP), accepting new/updated records without immediate confirmation 
(“eventually consistent”)
3.
Other database vendors are opting for Consistency and Partition Tolerance (CP), 
allowing arbitrary loss of messages to some instances, while the system 
continues to be available
Many vendors are experimenting with various combinations to satisfy specific use 
cases, and are also choosing to require specific infrastructure/architecture to 
support their implementation. 
28
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTECHNOLOGY LIMITATIONSREDUCE SCALABILITY
By understanding the CAP theorem, we can see that traditional relational databases 
generally require slower performance to ensure transaction consistency across one 
or more database servers. This is due to the requirement that the storage of data 
must occur on each database server, limiting vertical scaling to the speed of the 
slowest server’s speed of storage. 
While transaction consistency may be critical for some systems, when datasets 
reach extreme scale, traditional databases often cannot keep up and require 
alternative approaches to data storage and retrieval. 
The result: big data architectures are required to overcome these limitations as our 
data grows beyond the reach of a single server or database cluster.
29
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA CASE STUDIESWHO IS USING BIG DATA?
30
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsCASE STUDY:PROGRESSIVE INSURANCE
Progressive Casualty Insurance Company, uses big data as part of its “pay as you 
drive” program, offering drivers the chance to lower their insurance premiums based 
on real-time analysis of their driving habits. Data is collected from a “black box” 
installed into the car, then pushed to their servers for analysis. The results are then 
used to analyze a driver’s habits, make recommendations, and adjust their 
insurance rates.
Source: McKinsey
31
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsCASE STUDY:FRAUD DETECTION
Amazon and PayPal use a big data architecture for fraud detection for their secure 
e-commerce and payment platforms. They identify and flag potential fraud quickly 
by performing real-time analytics of transaction data. Prior to big data architectures, 
the identification of fraud was only available after days or months of analyzing 
transaction patterns. 
Source: McKinsey
32
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsCASE STUDY:HEALTHCARE
Seton Healthcare needed a way to reduce the occurrence of high cost Congestive 
Heart Failure (CHF) readmissions. By proactively identifying patients likely to be 
readmitted on an emergent basis, they applied predictive models and examined 
analytics through which providers can intuitively navigate, interpret and take action. 
The benefit: For Seton, a reduction in costs and risks associated with complying 
with Federal readmission targets. For Seton’s patients, fewer visits to the hospital 
and overall improved patient care. 
33
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsCASE STUDY:IMPROVING CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
Hertz needed a way to determine customer satisfaction by collating information 
from surveys. By applying advanced analytics solutions, the company was able to 
process the information much faster. The results are now half the time it previously 
took, while at the same time providing a level of insight previously unavailable to the 
company. 
34
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsCASE STUDY:US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
The Obama campaign set out to create, as Chris Wegrzyn (director of data 
architecture for the DNC) described it, "an analyst-driven organization by providing 
an environment for smart people to freely pursue their ideas." 
The project combined a SQL-friendly platform for analytics, rather than requiring a 
knowledge of Java or statistical analysis. In addition, the platform provided enough 
horsepower to enable analysis "at the speed of thought." The result was a friction-
free analytic environment that combined data from a variety of sources and 
provided just-in-time results that fed directly to the campaign.
35
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE PROCESS OF BIG DATAHOW DOES IT WORK?
36
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data Basics
37THE BIG DATA CYCLE:OVERVIEW
The big data cycle is comprised of four steps that result in insight and action. The results of 
each cycle are often used for the next cycle, creating a continuous insight loop.
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE BIG DATA CYCLE:COLLECT
Data is first collected from devices, log files, click-tracking, third-party data sources. 
This may include traditional ETL processing but typically on a much larger scale. If 
data streams generate large bursts of data, it is quickly stored and processed later.
Storage strategies are critical, as the processing cycle (step 2) often needs fast 
access to the data. Therefore, data storage should be in close to the processing 
nodes to reduce network I/O issues.
38
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE BIG DATA CYCLE:PROCESS
The process step includes all computational tasks required to process the data. 
MapReduce is the most widely known pattern to processing big data. It works by 
processing subsets of the data across machines and then combining the results. It 
is often used in batch-based processing, meaning that operations occur on a known 
snapshot of data.
Demands for real-time processing are emerging, requiring the evaluation of data as 
it becomes available rather than when it all has been received. However, most big 
data problems can be managed in batch, as real-time processing is often difficult to 
maintain without falling behind when data velocity is high.
39
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE BIG DATA CYCLE:INSIGHT
The third step is to perform queries and analytics over processed data to find 
metrics and KPIs. The insight stage may require multiple passes of processing and 
analytics to obtain the desired metrics. 
Analytics may be pre-calculated or adhoc. Adhoc query support over big data may 
yield results in seconds to hours (or even days) instead of sub-second as we may 
see today with data sets stored in relational systems. 
Real-time analytics are complex but are beginning to emerge in big data. This 
allows for more immediate actions when patterns emerge prior to all data becoming 
available. This is also being applied to healthcare, particularly in hospitals and 
emergency rooms where multiple devices are capturing data about a patient all in 
real-time.
40
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE BIG DATA CYCLE:ACTION
Once insight has been gained, action may be taken. This may take the shape of 
manual or software-driven adjustments to systems and processes. Action taken 
often starts the cycle over again, allowing for analyzing trends as a result of the 
changes or the availability of new data points. 
41
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE BIG DATALANDSCAPETECHNOLOGIES, PLATFORMS, AND SOLUTIONS
42
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA ARCHITECTURE
A big data architecture is generally composed of five layers, with each layer 
requiring one or more technologies:
43
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA ARCHITECTURE:INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure refers to the compute resources necessary to perform calculations 
and analytics across big data sets. It may be comprised of:
•
“Bare metal” hardware (i.e. racked servers)
•
A virtualized, private cloud
•
A virtualized, public cloud
While virtualization isn’t a requirement to support a big data architecture, it is 
common as it allows hardware to be more fully utilized. It also allows for the elastic 
growth or reduction of assigned resources to running big data analytics, based on 
internal priorities and overall hardware availability. 
44
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA ARCHITECTURE:STORAGE
As discussed previously, data storage and performance is often considered the 
biggest bottleneck in big data processing. Big data architectures often combine a 
number of storage options, based on processing and reporting requirements. This 
may include:
•
Clustered and/or distributed file storage for unstructured data
•
Semi-structure data stores such as NoSQL databases
•
Structured data stores, such as relational databases and data warehouses
The goal of the storage layer is to ensure that data is as close as possible to 
compute nodes, reducing the network impact of data transfer and node wait time. 
45
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA ARCHITECTURE:PROCESSING
The processing layer provides query, analytics, and workflow support on top of the 
infrastructure and storage. Often, the processing layer will consist of one or more of 
the following solutions:
•
Custom query/analytics code (e.g. MapReduce)
•
Data pipeline processing frameworks that offer SQL or alternative scripting of 
queries/analytics
•
Workflow frameworks that coordinate multiple jobs and data source integrations 
into a single workflow solution for one-time or scheduled execution
Each of these solutions require varying degrees of programming experience. For 
example, MapReduce often requires a more low-level understand of programming , 
while other tools may only require an understanding of the available data and basic 
SQL skills. 
The processing layer is often where most of the exploration and analysis occurs, 
commonly generating data sets that are used by other processing jobs to perform 
further analysis. 
46
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA ARCHITECTURE:INTERACTIVE ANALYTICS
While the processing layer is commonly managed by developers and data 
scientists, the interactive analytics layer exposes analytics data to end-users. While 
not a complete solution in itself, this layer offers one or more advantages:
•
Adhoc queries of analytics data
•
Visualization of analyzed data sets
•
Export of data sets into alternative data stores (e.g. relational databases, data 
warehouses, etc)
This layer is optional and commonly made available to information systems users 
that are comfortable with manipulating raw data sets and familiar with 
query/analysis tools.
47
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBIG DATA ARCHITECTURE:APPLICATIONS
For users that are not comfortable with interactive analytics, applications may be 
provided to visualize and view big data processing results. Commonly, applications 
contain:
•
Information dashboards
•
High-level exploration tools
•
Visualizations, such as charts, graphs, and tables
•
Summarized and detailed reports
Applications may be custom built for in-house consumption, purchased from 
commercial vendors, or offered in a multi-tenant, SaaS-based product.
48
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsUNDERSTANDING HADOOPWHY HADOOP IS EVERYWHERE
49
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsWHAT IS HADOOP?
The Hadoop is a software framework that allows for the processing of large data 
sets across clusters of computers using simple programming models. It offers local 
computation and storage on each machine, detects and handles failures, and can 
scale to thousands of machines.
Hadoop is licensed as open source using a Apache v2 license. As a result, there is 
an ecosystem of additional projects that can be used to customize and extend 
Hadoop for a variety of situations. 
Several commercial vendors have licensed Hadoop and offer a custom distribution, 
tailored to specific uses and/or hardware.
50
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsHOW HADOOP WORKS
51
Hadoop is composed of several components, including:
•
HDFS, which stores the data, both pre and post-processed
•
MapReduce, the engine that processes the data across multiple nodes
HDFS allows very large files to be split across server nodes, allowing the data to be 
both available and a manageable size for MapReduce processing.
MapReduce works by taking a big job and splitting it into smaller jobs. A good 
example of this is counting the words in a 600 page book. If it takes someone 10 
hours to count the number of words in a book, it might take only 1 hour if the book 
were split evenly between 10 people. The “map” step is responsible for counting the 
words for each portion of the data, while the “reduce” step combines the results 
from each map step to determine the final result. Hadoop allows this process to be 
performed on data sets too large to be managed on a single machine, and often 
much faster as well. 
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsBEYOND HADOOPBIG DATA ALTERNATIVES 
52
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsIN-MEMORY PROCESSING
Some big data processing can be built to operate strictly in memory, without the 
need for slower storage devices such as hard drives. This has the advantage of very 
fast data access and processing, but often requires more advanced programmer 
expertise than a simple MapReduce job. It also has hardware limitations due to the 
maximum amount of memory that a single server may have installed, as well as the 
cost limitations of the additional server hardware.
This approach is often used a first step to work out processing algorithms on 
smaller data sets, before the need to manage the hundreds or thousands of Hadoop 
nodes commonly required for extremely large data sets. It may also be used with 
larger compute clusters, when the speed of analysis outweighs the additional 
hardware cost.
53
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsELASTIC MAP/REDUCE
EMR is a solution from Amazon that offers Hadoop-as-a-Service. Data is first loaded 
into their Simple Storage Service (S3). Then a job is defined and executed, with the 
results being stored back into S3. 
Amazon EMR reduces the setup, configuration, and management of a custom 
Hadoop cluster and is a great alternative for quickly getting up-and-running with 
Hadoop. In addition, Amazon’s Data Pipeline can be used to define, schedule, and 
execute workflows that involve EMR. 
However, customization options are limited and many Hadoop extensions are not 
available to Amazon EMR. It is a great alternative when the jobs or the data set is 
limited but MapReduce is the preferred method for processing.
54
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsUNDERSTANDING NOSQLIS SQL GOING AWAY?
55
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsWHAT IS NOSQL?
NoSQL is a relatively new term in software architecture. It generally means the use 
of databases that do not require or offer SQL data structures and queries. 
While NoSQL is a recent term, the concept of using databases other than those 
adhering to the SQL standard isn’t new. In fact, there have been a variety of 
database options available for some time, include LDAP directory services, object 
databases, and XML databases. These alternative data stores provide different 
performance capabilities and storage options to traditional SQL-based data stores. 
56
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsNOSQL + BIG DATA
While many NoSQL databases offer different methods of data storage and retrieval, 
some were designed to address the issues commonly found with big data: large 
data sets, high read/write demands, and distributed processing support. 
Vendors targeting big data architectures often integrate with frameworks such as 
Hadoop, while others offer drop-in replacements to the HDFS storage component of 
Hadoop.
Before you select a NoSQL vendor, determine how you plan to use it, including how 
it integrates with your big data architecture. Otherwise, the solution may just 
become another ETL import/export process with little-to-no added value.
57
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE API OBSESSIONHOW DO BIG DATA AND API GO TOGETHER?
58
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsThe Recent API Obsession
There has been a good deal of discussion, both positive and negative, about the 
recent obsession of APIs. Some say that it is ushering the next wave of product 
companies, while others are asking, “What’s the big deal?”
To the non-technical, APIs might be a bit of mystery and magic – build an API, sell 
your company for lots of money. To the technical, it offers a way to build and share 
your work with other developers, making money along the way.
APIs themselves are nothing special. That’s right, I said it…and I’m not taking it 
back.
59
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsSo, what is an API, anyway?
An application programming interface (API ) specifies how software components 
should interact with one another. 
Traditionally APIs were used to build a standalone application. Now web APIs 
enable applications to talk to other applications across the Internet using the 
standards of the web.
If you have done any of the following, you have experienced an application that 
used APIs without you even knowing it:
• Published a tweet using a Twitter web or mobile interface
• Viewed the weather on your mobile phone or tablet
• Shared files between your desktop and a mobile device (e.g. Box, Dropbox, etc)
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC
60

Big Data BasicsA little API history
You may not have realized it, but APIs have been around for a long time.
Before the current incarnation, the most popular way to distribute APIs were through 
SDKs. They were commonly used to integrate new functionality into applications, or to 
construct an entire application (e.g. the Windows Mobile or Android SDKs).
SDKs define APIs that developers build their code against for a specific programming 
language (e.g. Java, Ruby, or C/C++). They do this by providing a contract with the 
developer on what they will do, how to call the code, and what the result will be. The 
developer then builds code on top of the SDK to get the functionality they desire.
After the SDK came the initial attempt at web services. Many of these early web services 
used technologies such as SOAP, WSDL, and a number of other acronyms. These 
technologies required a deep understanding of their specifications before the web 
services could be used. Additionally, the high cost to develop and deploy these services 
prevented many companies from offering them in the early stages of the company.
61
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsWhat changed?
Simplicity
The newest web service APIs speak a simple language: HTTP, the language of the 
web. Combined with other common usage patterns such as REST and HATEOAS, 
web APIs promote easy integration from any programming language – no SDK 
required!
Lower Cost
In addition, the cost of infrastructure has decreased with the introduction of cloud 
computing, allowing for rapid provisioning of a data center with only a credit card. 
Compare that to just 10 years ago when hardware had to be purchased and 
installed in a co-location facility before the API was ever deployed.
New Business Models
Finally, the market that was previously accustomed to the SDK business model 
started to accept new ways of paying for access to web APIs. The pay-per-use or 
subscription models are the most common that we see today. This market shift has 
even opened an amazing 20 new API business models available to product 
companies today.
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC
62

Big Data BasicsAPIs, everywhere
The API market has been hot for several years and doesn’t show signs of slowing 
down. In fact, more than 85% of Enterprises will have an API program by 2018
(Layer 7 survey). Here are just a few companies using APIs to their advantage:
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC
63
Best Buy is using APIs to make their product data and reviews 
available to mobile applications. This helps their customers price 
compare and make more informed decisions at purchase time.
Amazon Web Services allows anyone with a credit card to design 
and provision their own data center. AWS APIs offer servers,
databases, and data analytics engines to anyone that needs 
them. 
Netflix gained significant market adoption by enabling any device 
that has Internet access to stream movies and shows. Now, 
anything that connects to a TV likely offers Netflix streaming.

Big Data BasicsAPI + Big Data = New Opportunity
Combining what we just learned about APIs with our new understanding of Big 
Data, we can now move our data from inside knowledge to revenue-generating 
services. How? There are several ways to accomplish this:
1.
Creating private APIs to extend additional insight to your existing partners
2.
Marketing your services to developers through public APIs
3.
Generating new product revenue through commercial APIs
4.
Increasing internal product value and intelligence with Big Data analytics 
services wrapped in APIs
5.
Offering an API to your raw or analyzed datasets (Data-as-a-Service)
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC
64

Big Data BasicsIN SUMMARYFIVE BIG DATA FACTS
65
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsReview: FIVE BIG DATA FACTS
1.
Big Data Is Right-Time Business Insight and Decision Making At Extreme Scale
2.
Big Data is here to stay and will be commonplace by 2018 (Gartner)
3.
Big Data offers new business model and business transformations
4.
Big Data architectures require a different approach than traditional IT
5.
Big Data moves organizations from “Data is an Asset” to “Data is Revenue”
66
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsTHE BIG DATA CHALLENGEHOW DO I GET STARTED?
67
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsFIVE STEPS TO LAUNCHINGA BIG DATA ARCHITECTURE
1.
Size the opportunities and threats. Your opportunities may range from 
improving core operations to creating new lines of business
2.
Identify your internal data sources and gaps. Knowing what you have, what you 
need, and how you plan to combine them is important to create insight
3.
Define insights and goals. By determining your goals and the insights required, 
it helps provide a single-mindedness that will avoid the “analysis paralysis” 
common with big data projects
4.
Align organizational priorities. Without organizational alignment, big data 
projects risk being pushed to the side or reprioritized by other concerns
5.
Create a hiring and execution plan. The skills and execution required for big data 
is different than traditional information systems. Partner with a service provider 
to find the right skills and internal talent necessary to execute your big data 
project
68
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsLET’S TALK BIG DATA and YOUR BUSINESS.
LaunchAny has a passion for leveraging proven and emerging technologies to 
launch the next generation of business software and services. We can help you to 
develop and implement your big data strategy. 
Our services include:
–
Big data architecture and infrastructure
–
Cloud strategy and implementation
–
Custom API and application development
Contact us to find out more about how we can help you launch your next project.
Telephone: +1.512.537.8493
Email: info@launchany.com 
Web: launchany.com
Twitter: @launchany
69
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

Big Data BasicsABOUT THE AUTHOR
James Higginbotham is the founder of LaunchAny, an Austin-
based firm that specializes in launching software products. 
James has launched over 50 products in his career. He enjoys 
working with companies on their technology and product 
strategy. James has experience in architecting, developing, and 
deploying SaaS and APIs to the cloud. 
James serves on the advisory board of a non-profit organization 
that focuses on helping people become advocates and activists 
for their charities and causes. When not writing or consulting, 
he enjoys landscape photography. 
James can be reached at james@launchany.com
70
© Copyright 2014, Launch Press, LLC

