CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York
Bio-MEMS
Technologies and Applications
EDITED BY
Wanjun Wang • Steven A. Soper
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-8493-3532-9 (Hardcover)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-8493-3532-7 (Hardcover)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted 
material is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are 
listed. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author 
and the publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the conse-
quences of their use. 
No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any 
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written 
permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that 
provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a 
photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and 
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
BioMEMS : technologies and applications / edited by Wanjun Wang and Steven 
A. Soper.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8493-3532-9 (alk. paper)
1. BioMEMS. I. Wang, Wanjun, 1958- II. Soper, Steven A.
TP248.25.B54B56 2006
660.6--dc22
2006045665
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Table of Contents
Preface....................................................................................................... v
About the Editors ................................................................................. vii
Contributors ............................................................................................ix
1
Introduction..................................................................................... 1
Wanjun Wang and Steven A. Soper
Part I
Basic Bio-MEMS Fabrication Technologies
2
UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8 for Microfabrication
of High-Aspect-Ratio Microstructures and Applications
in Microﬂuidic and Optical Components .................................. 11
Ren Yang and Wanjun Wang
3
The LIGA Process: A Fabrication Process for High-Aspect-Ratio 
Microstructures in Polymers, Metals, and Ceramics................ 43
Jost Goettert
4
Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications ....... 93
Sunggook Park and Helmut Schift
5
Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications .....................117
Ian Papautsky
Part II
Microﬂuidic Devices and Components
for Bio-MEMS
6
Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS .................................. 143
Jeffrey D. Zahn
7
Micromixers ................................................................................. 177
Dimitris E. Nikitopoulos and A. Maha
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

8
Microfabricated Devices for Sample Extraction, Concentrations, 
and Related Sample Processing Technologies ........................ 213
Gang Chen and Yuehe Lin
9
Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation: Microﬂow Cytometry 
and Applications......................................................................... 237
Choongho Yu and Li Shi
Part III
Sensing Technologies for Bio-MEMS Applications
10
Coupling Electrochemical Detection with Microchip
Capillary Electrophoresis........................................................... 265
Carlos D. García and Charles S. Henry
11
Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection
of Environmental Mycobacteria................................................ 299
Ian Papautsky and Daniel Oerther
12
MEMS for Drug Delivery .......................................................... 325
Kabseog Kim and Jeong-Bong Lee
13
Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems
for DNA Analysis ....................................................................... 349
Ryan T. Kelly and Adam T. Woolley
14
Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics .......................................... 363
Justin S. Mecomber, Wendy D. Dominick, Lianji Jin,
and Patrick A. Limbach
15
Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses
Using Microﬂuidic Devices ....................................................... 391
Malgorzata A. Witek, Mateusz L. Hupert, and Steven A. Soper
16
Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS............................. 443
Celeste Frankenfeld and Susan Lunte
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Preface
Applications of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and microfabrica-
tion have spread to different ﬁelds of engineering and science in recent years.
Perhaps the most exciting development in the application of MEMS technol-
ogy has occurred in the biological and biomedical areas. In addition to key
ﬂuidic components, such as microvalves, pumps, and all kinds of novel
sensors that can be used for biological and biomedical analysis and mea-
surements, many other types of so-called micro total analysis systems (TAS)
have been developed. The advantages of such systems are that microvolumes
of biological or biomedical samples can be delivered and processed for
testing and analysis in an integrated fashion, thereby dramatically reducing
the required human involvement in many steps of sample handling and
processing. This helps to reduce the overall cost of measurement and time,
while improving the sensitivity in most cases.
Many books have been published on these subjects in recent years, but
most of them have focused primarily on various fabrication technologies
with a few application areas highlighted. Unfortunately, in this burgeoning
area, only a couple of books have been directed speciﬁcally toward biomed-
ical MEMS. As MEMS applications spread to all corners of science and
engineering, more and more universities and colleges are offering courses
in the bio-MEMS area. In comparison with other MEMS areas, which typi-
cally involve different engineering disciplines, such as the mechanical, elec-
trical, and optical ﬁelds, the development of bio-MEMS devices and systems
involves a truly interdisciplinary integration of basic sciences, medical sci-
ences, and engineering. This is the primary reason bio-MEMS is still in the
earliest stages of development in comparison with electrical and mechanical
sensing devices and systems. Due to the complexity and interdisciplinary
nature of bio-MEMS, it is critical to include a diverse range of expertise in
the composition of a book that attempts to cover the bio-MEMS area from
both a fabrication and application point of view. This is the reason we have
assembled a large group of leading researchers actively working in basic
science, engineering, and biomedical areas to contribute to this book. Bio-
MEMS: Technologies and Applications is divided into three sections:
1. Basic Bio-MEMS Fabrication Technologies
2. Microﬂuidic Devices and Components for Bio-MEMS
3. Sensing Technologies and Bio-MEMS Applications
The book targets audiences in the basic sciences and engineering, both indus-
trial engineers and academic researchers. Efforts have been made to ensure
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

that while enough topics on the cutting edge of bio-MEMS research are
covered, the book is still easy to read. In addition to structurally organizing
the book from basic materials to advanced topics, we have made sure that
each chapter and subject area are covered beginning with basic principles
and fundamentals. Because of the shortage of suitable textbooks in this area,
this collection is designed to be reasonable for graduate education as well
as working application engineers who are interested in getting into this
exciting new ﬁeld.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

About the Editors
Wanjun Wang received his B.S. in mechanical engineering from Xian Jiao-
tong University of China in 1982. He received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
mechanical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin in 1986 and
1989, respectively. He joined the faculty of the mechanical engineering
department of Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, in 1994 and has been
teaching and doing research in microfabrication and MEMS for more than
13 years. His main research specialty has been in UV-LIGA microfabrication
technology, especially in the UV lithography of ultra-thick SU-8 resist and
applications in microﬂuidics, micro-optics, and micro-sensors/actuators. In
the last 10 years, he has received research funding in MEMS and microfab-
rication from many state and federal agencies, such as the National Science
Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and the Board of Regents of
Louisiana. Dr. Wang has authored or co-authored more than seventy papers
in technical journals and proceedings of conferences. Dr. Wang has also
received ﬁve patents for sensors and actuators, as well as for microﬂuidic
and micro-optic components. He has also taught courses in the areas of
sensors and actuators, instrumentations, MEMS and microfabrication tech-
nologies for many years. He is currently a senior member of IEEE, and a
member of ASME and SPIE.
Prof. Steven A. Soper received his Ph.D. in bioanalytical chemistry from
the University of Kansas (KU) in 1989. While at KU, he received several
awards, such as the Huguchi Distinguished Doctoral Candidate Award and
the American Chemical Society Award for research in analytical chemistry
(sponsored by the Pittsburgh Conference). Following graduation, Dr. Soper
accepted a postdoctoral fellowship at Los Alamos National Laboratory,
where he worked on single molecule detection methods for the high-speed
sequencing of the human genome. As a result of this work, he received an
R&D 100 award in 1991.
Dr. Soper joined the faculty at Louisiana State University (LSU) in the fall
of 1991 as an assistant professor. He was promoted to associate professor
in 1997 and to full professor in 2000. In 2002, Steven received a chaired
professorship in chemistry at LSU (William L. & Patricia Senn, Jr. Chair).
His research interests include micro- and nanofabrication of integrated sys-
tems for biomedicine, chemical modiﬁcation of thermoplastic materials,
ultra-sensitive ﬂuorescence spectroscopy (time-resolved and steady-state),
high-resolution electrophoresis, sample preparation methods for clinical
analyses, and microﬂuidics. As a result of his efforts, he has secured extra-
mural funding from such agencies as the National Institutes of Health,
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Whitaker Foundation, American Chemical Society, Department of Energy,
and the National Science Foundation. Steven has published over 160 manu-
scripts in various research publications and is the author of three patents.
In addition, Steven has given approximately 165 technical presentations at
national/international meetings and universities since 1995. Steven is now
the director of a major multi-disciplinary research center at LSU, which is
funded through the NSF. 
Prof. Soper has received several awards for his research accomplishments
while at LSU, including the Outstanding Untenured Researcher (Physical
Sciences, Louisiana State University, 1995) presented by Phi Kappa Phi;
Outstanding Researcher in the College of Basic Sciences (Louisiana State
University, 1996); and Outstanding Science/Engineering Research in the
state of Louisiana (2001). In 2006, Dr. Soper was awarded the Benedetti-
Pichler Award in Microchemistry. 
Prof. Soper is also involved in various national activities, such as serving
on review panels for the National Institutes of Health, the Department of
Energy, and the National Science Foundation.  In addition, he serves on the
advisory board for several technical journals including Analytical Chemistry
(A-page editorial board), Journal of Fluorescence, and The Analyst.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Contributors
Gang Chen 
Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Wendy D. Dominick
Rieveschl Laboratories for Mass Spectrometry, 
Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Celeste Frankenfeld
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, U.S.A.
Carlos D. García
Department of Chemistry, The University of Texas at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, U.S.A.
Jost Goettert
The J. Bennett Johnston, Sr. Center for Advanced 
Microstructures and Devices, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana, U.S.A.
Charles S. Henry
Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, Colorado, U.S.A.
Mateusz L. Hupert 
Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Lianji Jin
Rieveschl Laboratories for Mass Spectrometry, Department of 
Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Ryan T. Kelly 
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Paciﬁc 
Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, U.S.A.
Kabseog Kim
HT MicroAnalytical, Inc., Albuquerque, New Mexico, U.S.A.
Jeong-Bong (J-B.) Lee
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of 
Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, U.S.A.
Patrick A. Limbach
Rieveschl Laboratories for Mass Spectrometry, 
Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Yuehe Lin
Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, 
U.S.A.
Susan Lunte
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The University of 
Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, U.S.A.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

A. Maha
Mechanical Engineering Department, Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Justin S. Mecomber
Rieveschl Laboratories for Mass Spectrometry, 
Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, 
U.S.A.
Dimitris E. Nikitopoulos
Professor, Mechanical Engineering Department, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Daniel Oerther
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Ian Papautsky
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Sunggook Park
Mechanical Engineering Department, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Helmut Schift
Laboratory for Micro- and Nanotechnology, Paul Scherrer 
Institut, Villigen, Switzerland
Li Shi
Mechanical Engineering Department, The University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin, Texas, U.S.A.
Steven A. Soper
Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Wanjun Wang
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Malgorzata. A. Witek
Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Adam T. Woolley
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham 
Young University, Provo, Utah, U.S.A.
Ren Yang 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.A.
Choongho Yu
Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, California, U.S.A.
Jeffrey D. Zahn
Department of Bioengineering, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

1
1
Introduction
Wanjun Wang and Steven A. Soper
CONTENTS
1.1
Main Contents and Organization of the Book ......................................... 4
1.1.1
Microfabrication Technologies ........................................................ 4
1.1.2
Microﬂuidic Devices and Components for Bio-MEMS .............. 5
1.1.3
Sensing Technologies and Bio-MEMS Applications.................... 6
1.2
Suggestions for Using This Book as a Textbook ...................................... 7
The last decade has been an exciting period for people working in the ﬁelds
of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and microfabrication technol-
ogies. Starting from the earliest devices in electromechanical transducers,
such as accelerometers and pressure sensors, which are among the most
commercially successful MEMS devices and systems, the technologies have
observed a rapid expansion into many different ﬁelds of engineering,
physical sciences, and biomedicine. MEMS technologies are assisting in
bridging the gap between computers, which work in the digital domain,
with the analog world in which we live. For example, various sensors and
actuators may be produced using MEMS technologies, and these sensors
and actuators can then be used as interfaces between computers and the
physical environment for the purposes of information processing and intel-
ligent control.
In recent years, one of the most exciting progresses in MEMS applications
is the rapid evolution of biological-microelectromechanical systems (bio-
MEMS). In addition to basic components, such as microchannels, microv-
alves, micropumps, micromixers and microreactors for ﬂow management at
microscopic volumes, various novel sensor and detection platforms have
been reported in the microﬂuidic and bio-MEMS ﬁelds. Many of the so-called
micro total analysis systems (µTAS), or lab-on-a-chip systems have also been
reported, and will offer new paradigms in biomedicine and biology, in par-
ticular the ability to perform point-of-care measurements. The advantages
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
of such systems are the microvolumes of biological or biomedical samples
that can be delivered and processed for testing and analysis in an integrated
fashion, therefore dramatically reducing the required human involvement
in many steps of sample handling and processing, and improving data
quality and quantitative capabilities. This format also helps to reduce the
overall cost and time of the measurement and at the same time improves
the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the analysis.
Though it is believed that the long-term impact of MEMS technologies on
our life will be similar to that made by the microelectronics industry, the
market for MEMS products has grown at a much slower pace than many
people had expected. In comparison with the market development history
associated with the microelectronics and computer industries, the market for
MEMS is much more diversiﬁed with highly specialized, individual catego-
ries of products with speciﬁcally targeted applications. The research and
development efforts are therefore very diversiﬁed, often requiring multidis-
ciplinary teams to work collaboratively to build effectively operating sys-
tems. In addition, it is often desired that the researchers and product
development engineers also possess multidisciplinary backgrounds—a
requirement that is often extremely hard to meet. This may be particularly
true for the ﬁeld of bio-MEMS. In comparison with other MEMS subareas,
which typically involve only different engineering disciplines such as
mechanical, electrical, and optical engineers, the development of bio-MEMS
involves a truly interdisciplinary integration of basic sciences, medical sci-
ences, material sciences, and engineering. Functioning in an interdisciplinary
endeavor requires researchers to possess the ability to cross-communicate,
work in a team-directed fashion, and compartmentalize research tasks. This
is a primary reason why bio-MEMS science and engineering, as well as the
systems they produce, are evolving at a relatively slow rate of development
in comparison with electrical and mechanical sensing devices and systems,
whose developments primarily depended upon a speciﬁc discipline.
There have been many high-quality books published in the general areas
of design and fabrication technologies of MEMS devices and systems. Most
of these books have focused on silicon-based technologies, such as surface
micromachining, and wet and dry etching technologies (RIE and DRIE pro-
cesses). As bio-MEMS technologies develop and many educational institu-
tions begin to offer courses on this subject matter, textbooks covering both
the fundamental fabrication technologies in a variety of different substrates
(Si, thermoplastics, ceramics, etc.), metrology, and device characterization as
well as the latest technology applications are needed. While there are a
number of seminal books covering conventional MEMS-based technologies,
there are very few that focus on the design and fabrication of bio-MEMS
devices and systems. There are several reasons for this phenomenon. The
ﬁrst is that bio-MEMS technology is still in a much earlier stage of develop-
ment in comparison to other MEMS technologies. The second, and perhaps
the most important one, is that the topics to be covered in a bio-MEMS
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Introduction
3
textbook are so widely diversiﬁed that it is virtually impossible for a single
author to fully understand or become expert in all of the relevant areas of
expertise required to build effective bio-MEMS devices and systems. This is
also the main reason why an edited book that includes contributions on
different subjects from specialized researchers who work on the frontiers of
bio-MEMS from both the basic science and engineering realms is highly
desirable.  As editors, we were fortunate enough to have a group of well-
recognized researchers and educators as contributors in their speciﬁc areas
of expertise, and to cover both fundamental knowledge and the latest
research progresses in various areas of importance to bio-MEMS. 
This book was prepared with the intent of targeting two main areas. First,
we wanted to cover enough fundamental materials so that it could be used
as a textbook for classes at either the graduate or senior undergraduate levels.
This book may also be suitable for those people who are not currently in the
bio-MEMS ﬁeld and may need to learn the fundamentals in order to enter
the ﬁeld. Second, with enough application examples covered and the latest
research progress presented, the book may also be used as a reference for
scientists or engineers who work in the bio-MEMS ﬁeld to provide a guide
as to what has been accomplished in many related areas to date.
Because the materials to be covered in a bio-MEMS book are so widely
diversiﬁed, to be able to cover all the key contents in a limited space is
deﬁnitely a challenge. Some compromises and balances were obviously
needed in compiling the contents of this book in order to cover relevant areas
in bio-MEMS, but also to make it manageable for the reader. In this book,
topics on microfabrication technologies focus primarily on nonsilicon-based
methods.  There are two reasons for this decision. First, there are already
numerous books available on silicon-based microfabrication technologies
and interested readers can always refer to these books. Secondly, the current
trends in bio-MEMS seem to be in the direction of using nonsilicon-based
fabrication technologies and materials. Because biologists and chemists have
long used nonsilicon materials, such as glasses and polymers (PMMA, poly-
carbonate, etc.), various surface treatment technologies have been developed
and processes are well understood. Micro- and nanoreplication using mold-
ing, imprinting or hot-embossing technologies also help to reduce the batch
fabrication cost, making these substrates very appealing for bio-MEMS-
related application areas.
Because the potential readers of this book may have various educational
backgrounds, it was also necessary to balance the fundamental fabrication
principles with the advanced contents, as well as the scientiﬁc and engi-
neering materials. To be able to serve readers who are interested in learning
the fundamentals of bio-MEMS technologies as well as researchers who
work in the ﬁeld and need a good reference book, efforts were made by
the contributors of this book to balance fundamental knowledge with the
latest advancements in related subject areas. In addition, the readers with
engineering backgrounds may have difﬁculty in fully understanding the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

4
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
biological or biomedical aspects of the materials covered in these chapters.
The same may hold true for readers with basic science or life science back-
grounds when reading the engineering sections of this book. The authors of
each chapter have tried to include some basic introduction references to allow
readers to obtain relevant background materials to augment those that are
presented herein. 
1.1
Main Contents and Organization of the Book
The contents in this book can be generally divided into three basic sections:
1.
2.
3.
1.1.1
Microfabrication Technologies
In this section, we focused on nonsilicon-based micro- and nanofabrication
technologies, such as LIGA—a combination of deep-etch x-ray lithography
with synchrotron radiation (LI), electroforming (G = Galvanoformung [Ger-
man]), and molding (A = Abformung [German]), or UV-LIGA (using ultra
violet lithography instead of x-ray lithography), hot-embossing, nano-
imprinting, and so forth. Because UV lithography of SU-8 has become a
popular choice for a lot of researchers in recent years, this topic is covered
in Chapter 2. In addition to the basic lithography processing steps and
optimal processing conditions, example applications in microﬂuidic devices
and micro-optic devices are also presented. Chapter 3 provides a very
detailed presentation on the LIGA process. Applications of LIGA technol-
ogies in fabricating polymer bio-MEMS are also introduced. Nanoimprint
lithography (NIL) is a low cost and ﬂexible patterning technique particularly
suitable for fabrication of nanoscale components for biological applications.
Its unique advantages are that both topological and chemical surface pat-
terns can be generated at the micro- and nanometer scales. Chapter 4 pre-
sents an overview of NIL technology with the focus on the compatibility of
materials and processes used for biological applications. Examples are also
presented to demonstrate how NIL technology can be employed to fabricate
devices used to understand and manipulate biological events. Hot emboss-
ing is another reasonably fast and moderately inexpensive technique used
to replicate microﬂuidic elements in thermoplastics. In the hot-embossing
process, polymer and the prefabricated master containing the prerequisite
Basic Bio-MEMS Fabrication Technologies (Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5); 
Microﬂuidic Devices and Components for Bio-MEMS (Chapters 6,
7, 8, and 9); 
Sensing Technologies and Bio-MEMS Applications (Chapters 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, and 16).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Introduction
5
structural elements are heated above the glass transition temperature (or
softening point) of the thermoplastic, then a controlled force is applied under
vacuum. The assembly is cooled below the glass transition temperatures and
de-embossed. The technology offers the advantage of a relatively simpler
replication process with few variable parameters and high structural accu-
Following an introduction to polymer characteristics, fabrication of masters
for hot embossing and the process itself will be examined in detail.
1.1.2
Microﬂuidic Devices and Components for Bio-MEMS
In most bio-MEMS, it is commonly required to prepare, deliver, or manipu-
late microscopic amounts of biosamples or reagents in either microchannels
and/or microchambers. Fluid behavior at the microscale is often different
from those at macroscales. For example, factors such as surface tension may
become dominant in microﬂuidic devices and systems. When the size of
biological samples, such as cells, are close to those of the ﬂow channels
through which the samples are delivered, the dynamics of the ﬂow may not
be readily predicted based on conventional ﬂuid dynamics. Signiﬁcant
research efforts have been made in the last decade in the area of microﬂudics,
basic components, and fabrication technologies. Many novel devices and
systems have been reported in the ﬁeld. In this book, conventional ﬂuid
dynamics was not presented because the topic has been covered in numerous
textbooks. Instead, we have focused on the fundamental principles, the
design and fabrication of basic microﬂuidic components such as micro-
pumps, micromixers, ﬂow cytometers, and so forth, for sample extraction,
preparation, and manipulations. Information on microﬂuidics and sample
Micropumps are used for sample delivery and manipulation. They are
among the most important components in most microﬂuidic devices and
are presented, analyzed, and compared. Representative fabrication proce-
dures are also presented and discussed. Mixing is of signiﬁcant importance
to realizing lab-on-a-chip microscale reactors and bioanalysis systems because
the reactions carried out on the micro- or even nanoscale in such devices
require the on-chip mixing of samples and reagents. Unfortunately, to mix
microvolumes of ﬂuids in microﬂuidic systems is always a very difﬁcult task
due to diffusional constraints. The topic of mixing on the microscale has been
at the forefront of research and developmental efforts over roughly the last
ﬁfteen years because the technological thrust toward miniaturization of ﬂu-
on the microscale. This chapter also presents a detailed review of various
micromixers reported in the ﬁeld. In order to produce lab-on-a-chip devices,
racy, and is well suited for a wide range of microﬂuidic applications from
introduction to hot embossing for microﬂuidic lab-on-a-chip applications.
rapid prototyping to high-volume mass fabrication. Chapter 5 presents an
systems. In Chapter 6, operation principles of commonly used micropumps
preparation is presented in Chapters 6 through 9.
idic systems began. Chapter 7 covers the basic principles of mixing techniques
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

6
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
it is necessary to integrate all of the components for sample preparation
(including sample extraction, sample preconcentration, and sample deriva-
tization), sample introduction, separation, and detection onto a single micro-
chip made from either glass, silica, or polymers. In most bio-MEMS, the
sample usually undergoes some kind of sample preparation or pretreatment
steps prior to being submitted to the actual analysis. This step may involve
extracting the sample from its matrix, removing large matrix components
from the sample that may mask the analysis or removing interfering species,
derivatizing the sample to make it detectable, or performing a sample pre-
ments in this ﬁeld. Another commonly used technology for manipulations
(sorting and counting) of biological particles is ﬂow cytometry. A complete
microcytometer would require an integrated microﬂuidic unit for either
hydrodynamic or dielectrophoretic focusing of biological entities undergoing
sorting, and the optical measurement unit to count the number of sorted
species. There are many research reports in the literature detailing advance-
of ﬂow cytometry and a review of the state-of-the-art in this ﬁeld.
1.1.3
Sensing Technologies and Bio-MEMS Applications
(Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16)
Because of the enormous variations in biological and biomedical samples,
the processing and detection principles required for the analysis of targets
are often completely different. There have been numerous bio-MEMS either
in commercial applications or reported in the literature that have described
the integrated processing of biosamples in a microﬂuidic platform. It is
virtually impossible to cover all of them in the limited space of this book. In
addition, bio-MEMS technologies are still in their early stages of develop-
ment and as such new and novel technologies are constantly evolving with
the potential for integration into bio-MEMS. The seven chapters in this
section cover some of the representative technologies in this rapidly devel-
oping area.
detection of environmental mycobacteria. Because much of the research
work in µTAS devices has focused on the use of capillary electrophoresis
(CE), materials related to the applications of capillary electrophoresis have
duces microchip capillary electrophoresis systems for DNA analysis. Bio-
MEMS technologies have lead to some breakthroughs in both on-spot and
controlled drug delivery as well as new technologies for drug development.
concentration step. Chapter 8 provides a thorough overview of the develop-
ments in this area. Chapter 9 covers an introduction to the basic principles
Chapter 11 focuses on the topic of culture-based microchips for the rapid
been presented in two chapters. Chapter 10 covers an introduction to micro-
chip CE with electrochemical detection (CE-ECD), while Chapter 13 intro-
Two chapters cover the progress in this area. Chapter 12 provides a complete
review of bio-MEMS technologies for drug delivery. Chapter 16 presents
studies on pharmaceutical analyses using bio-MEMS. Chapter 14 discusses
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Introduction
7
the recent advances of bio-MEMS applications in assay development,
improved separation performance, and enhanced detection strategies. As
the dimensions of processing bio-MEMS elements is reduced, the analysis
and detection of the basic building blocks of biology, such as single cells
overview of novel technologies for single-cell and single-molecule analyses
using microﬂuidic devices.
1.2
Suggestions for Using This Book as a Textbook
Because this book is well organized and covers three major aspects of bio-
MEMS technology—fabrication and microﬂuidics, detection and analysis
technologies, and applications—it is suitable as a textbook for either senior-
level technical elective courses or graduate courses. However, with ﬁfteen
chapters (excluding this chapter) the book is most likely too much to be
covered in a typical semester of fourteen to ﬁfteen weeks (45 plus hours for
a three-credit-hour course). It is therefore necessary to omit some chapters.
Based on the interests and foci of the particular class, it is suggested that one
third of the instruction be spent on the microfabrication technologies pre-
of selected topics on speciﬁc devices and systems for different applications,
and single molecules, becomes necessary to consider. Chapter 15 offers an
sented in Chapters 2 through 5, another third devoted to microﬂuidics
offered in Chapters 6 through 9, and the remaining third used for coverage
which is encompassed in Chapters 10 through 16.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Part I
Basic Bio-MEMS Fabrication 
Technologies
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11
2
UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
for Microfabrication of High-Aspect-Ratio 
Microstructures and Applications
in Microﬂuidic and Optical Components
Ren Yang and Wanjun Wang
CONTENTS
2.1
Introduction.................................................................................................. 12
2.2
Numerical Study of Diffraction Compensation
and Wavelength Selection .......................................................................... 13
2.2.1
Diffraction Caused by Air Gap and Wavelength
Dependence of the UV Absorption Rate of SU-8...................... 13
2.2.2
Numerical Analysis of Diffraction and the Absorption
Spectrum on UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8 Resist......... 15
2.2.3 
Development with One-Direction Agitation Force ................... 20
2.3
Experimental Results Using Filtered Light Source and Air Gap
Compensation for Diffraction.................................................................... 21
2.4
Basic Steps for UV Lithography of SU-8 and Some
Processing Tips............................................................................................. 25
2.4.1
Pretreat for the Substrate............................................................... 25
2.4.2
Spin-Coating SU-8........................................................................... 26
2.4.3
Soft Bake........................................................................................... 27
2.4.4
Exposure ........................................................................................... 28
2.4.5
Postexposure Bake (PEB)............................................................... 29
2.4.6
Development.................................................................................... 29
2.5
Tilted Lithography of SU-8 and Its Application .................................... 30
2.5.1
Micromixer/Reactor ....................................................................... 32
2.5.2
Three-Dimensional Hydrofocus Component
for Microcytometer ......................................................................... 34
2.5.3
Out-of-Plane Polymer Refractive Microlens,
Microlens Array, Fiber Bundle Aligner ....................................... 37
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

12
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
2.6
Conclusions................................................................................................... 40
References ............................................................................................... 40
2.1
Introduction
Ultraviolet (UV) lithography of ultrathick photoresist with high-aspect-
ratio, high sidewall quality, and good dimensional control is very important
for microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and micro-optoelectrome-
chanical systems (MOEMS). Although x-ray lithography of methyl meth-
acrylate (PMMA) can meet these requirements, the expensive beamlines
are not readily available to many researchers. The high cost of x-ray lithog-
raphy also made it impractical for many applications. As a cheaper alter-
native, UV lithography of SU-8 has received wide attention in the last few
years. As the obtainable results with UV lithography of SU-8 get better and
better, ever more applications have been found for the technology in MEMS
and MOEMS.
SU-8 resist is a negative tone, epoxy-type photoresist based on EPON™ SU-
8 (also called EPIKOTE™ 157) epoxy resin from Shell Chemical, and originally
developed by IBM [1–5]. It is commercially available from MicroChem Corp.,
Newton, Massachusetts. Mixed with a photoinitiator, SU-8 epoxy is dissolved
in a standard gamma-butyrolactone (GBL) solvent, which can be replaced by
cyclopentanone, and has improved properties. Due to its low optical absorp-
tion in the near-UV range, SU-8 can be lithographed in thicknesses of hundreds
or thousands of micrometers with very high aspect ratios by standard contact
equipment. SU-8 can also be patterned using x-ray or e-beam. Cross-linked
SU-8 also has good chemical and physical properties and can serve as excellent
structural material for many applications [6–13]. For SU-8s near-UV contact
printing, normally broadband near UV light between 320 nm and approxi-
mately 450 nm is used for the exposure. With well-controlled lithography
conditions, with pressure contact exposure or vacuum contact exposure, cross-
linked polymer microstructures with high aspect ratios could be obtained at
heights of more than 1000 micrometers [14–20]. Chang and Kim obtained a
1 µm feature size with 25 µm thickness [14]. Ling et al. obtained 360 µm–thick
structures with a 14 µm feature size [15]. With the help of a well-collimated
proximity ultraviolet source, Dentinger et al. obtained aspect ratios exceeding
20:1 for ﬁlm thicknesses of 200 to approximately 700 µm [19]. Williams and
Wang obtained a 65:1 high-aspect-ratio structure up to 1 µm high with a Quntel
aligner [20]. Yang and Wang reported a work covering both numerical simu-
lations and an experimental study of the air gap effect and compensation, with
optimal wavelengths of the light source for UV lithography of ultrathick SU-
8 resist for high-aspect-ratio microstructures with an aspect ratio of more than
100 and thickness of the resist to more than 2 µm [21].
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
13
In this chapter, recent developments in SU-8 lithography of ultrathick SU-8
resist will be presented ﬁrst, followed by a summary of UV lithography con-
ditions and some processing tips. Finally, some applications of UV lithography
of ultrathick SU-8 resist in microﬂuidics and micro-optics will be demonstrated.
2.2
Numerical Study of Diffraction Compensation
and Wavelength Selection 
For ultrathick SU-8 lithography, several important parameters need to be
carefully controlled: temperature in prebake and postbake, Fresnel diffrac-
tion and wavelength-dependent absorption in exposure, and agitated devel-
opment. Among these parameters, the effects of the absorption spectrum
and diffraction on lithography quality are two key factors limiting the side-
wall quality of UV lithography of ultrathick SU-8 resist; these will be the
topics of this chapter.
2.2.1
Diffraction Caused by Air Gap and Wavelength Dependence
of the UV Absorption Rate of SU-8
SU-8 in general has excellent surface planarizing properties. However, as the
thickness of SU-8 resist increases, the nonuniformity of the resist can become
a serious issue. To fabricate ultrathick, high-aspect-ratio microstructures com-
monly requires spin-coat resist layers ranging from several hundreds to thou-
sands of micrometers. In such cases, high viscosity SU-8, such as SU-8 50 or
SU-8 100, is always preferred. The surface ﬂatness can be a very severe prob-
lem, with typical ﬂatness errors of 10 µm to 100 µm. Other factors, such as
unintentional tilt in the baking process, dirt particles, curvatures of the sub-
strate or mask, and so forth, may also contribute to reduced surface ﬂatness.
The ﬂatness error then forms air gaps between the mask and resist surface,
and results in serious diffraction, aerial image distortion, and printing errors. 
For the ultrathick photoresist, the absorption of the resist with respect to
the light source also greatly affects the lithography quality. As the light beam
penetrates the SU-8 resist layer from the top to the bottom, the light intensity
drops gradually as the light is absorbed. The top part of the SU-8 resist
therefore absorbs more than the bottom part does. There is, therefore, over-
dosage at the top and underdosage at the bottom. This is one of the major
reasons that inexperienced operators often produce mushroom types of
microstructures in UV lithography of SU-8. It is also one of the reasons x-
ray lithography is normally preferred for high-quality vertical sidewall and
high-aspect-ratio structures. The extremely high transmission of the x-ray
beam line helps to provide about the same absorption across the entire
thickness of the photoresist.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The absorption spectrum of unexposed SU-8 resist shows much higher
absorbance at shorter wavelengths than at long wavelengths. Figure 2.1a
shows the transmission spectrum of 1 mm–thick unexposed SU-8 100, a
thickness close to that used in our experimental study as will be presented
in the later sections. The absorption coefﬁcient of unexposed SU-8 at 365 nm
(where the photoresist is the most sensitive) is about 4 times that of the
absorption coefﬁcient at 405 nm. The shorter wavelength components of light
are primarily absorbed by the surface layer, while the longer wavelength
components penetrate farther down and expose the bottom part. It is there-
fore desirable to ﬁlter out the wavelengths shorter than (or near) 365 nm to
avoid overexposure at the top layer. Longer wavelengths (either h line or g
line) with much lower absorbance are used to permit more energy to reach
the bottom part of the thick SU-8 resist layer and to achieve better sidewall
proﬁles. Figure 2.1b shows the measured refractive index of SU-8 as a func-
tion of the wavelength.
FIGURE 2.1
Properties of SU-8 resist: (a) transmission of 1 mm–thick unexposed SU-8 ﬁlm; (b) SU-8 refrac-
tive index vs. wavelength. (Courtesy of Mark Shaw, MicroChem Corp., Newton, MA.)
Cured vs. uncured refractive index vs. wavelength
1.57
1.575
1.58
1.585
1.59
1.595
1.6
550
650
750
850
950
1050
1150
1250
1350
1450
1550
1650
Wavelength (nm)
Refractive index
Cauchy coeﬃcients (uncured)
A = 1.51000
B = 0.04440
C = –0.00190
Uncured
Cured
(b)
(a)
100
80
60
40
20
300
350
400
Wavelength (nm)
450
500
0
Transmission (%)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
15
The absorption coefﬁcient of unexposed SU-8 at 436 nm is about 1/3 of
that at 405 nm and 1/12 of that at 365 nm. A light source with primarily g-
line components may therefore be suitable to expose ultrathick SU-8 resist;
sidewall quality may also be much better than using 365 nm or 405 nm as
a lithography source. Of course, the diffraction effect may become more
serious with longer wavelengths. 
For ultrathick SU-8 lithography, there are several important parameters to
be carefully controlled: temperature in prebake and postbake, Fresnel dif-
fraction and wavelength-dependent absorption in exposure, development
processing, and so forth. Normally, optimization of the temperature control
in prebake and postbake can minimize the stress of the SU-8 and reduce the
possibility of debonding; the Fresnel diffraction and photoresist’s absorption
cause the aerial image shape to be degraded and the light intensity distri-
bution changed in the cross-section of the light beam in the propagation
direction; optimization of the exposure dosage helps to obtain enough dos-
age for the bottom part of the SU-8 to improve the adhesion and avoid
overexposure for the top part. 
Fresnel diffraction of the micropatterns on the mask degrades the geometry
of the aerial images and reduces the sidewall qualities of the printed micro-
structures. With increased thickness of the photoresist layers and the
mask–photoresist gaps, effects of Fresnel diffraction become more severe and
the pattern aerial image distortion more signiﬁcantly. Full understanding of
the Fresnel diffraction is therefore very important to obtaining a high-quality,
ultra-high-aspect ratio in UV lithography of thick SU-8 resist. 
2.2.2
Numerical Analysis of Diffraction and the Absorption Spectrum
on UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8 Resist
As collimated light passes through an aperture on the mask in UV exposure,
diffraction happens because of the mask patterns’ limitation for light wave-
front. In lithography, the collimated light source can be considered as inﬁ-
nitely far away, but the mask patterns (i.e., diffracting apertures) are so close
to the photoresist (observing screen) that the curvature of the wavefront
becomes signiﬁcant. 
Based on Huygens’ principle, the diffraction produced by an aperture with
an arbitrary shape in an otherwise opaque partition can be stated by the
Fresnel-Kirchhoff integral formula:
,
(2.1)
where k = 2π, i is the incident light wavelength, U0 represents spherical
monochromatic source waves, r and r0 stand for positions of a point on the
aperture relative to the screen and the source, respectively, (n, r) and (n, r0)
U
ikU e
e
rr
n r
n
p
i t
ik r r
= −
−
−
+
0
0
4
0
ω
π
(
)
[cos( , )
cos( , r
ds
0)]
∫∫
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

16
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
denote the angles between the vectors and the normal to the surface of
integration, and ds represents the integration on the surface of the aperture.
For a rectangular pattern on the mask, the diffraction distribution at an
arbitrary plane z will be:
,
(2.2)
where 
and 
are Fresnel numbers, z is the vertical distance to the photomask pattern, and
x and y are the horizontal distance-to-pattern edges. The integrals in Equa-
tion (2.2) are evaluated in terms of the integral known as the Fresnel integral:
.
(2.3)
Patterns such as slit, straightedges, and so forth, can be treated mathemat-
ically as modiﬁed cases of a rectangular aperture. For other arbitrary pattern
shapes in UV lithography, the same method can be used to obtain the aerial
light distribution caused by diffraction based on Equation (2.1). 
A commercial software called ZEMAX EE (ZEMAX Development Corpo-
ration, San Diego, CA), based on the principles as stated in Equations (2.1)
through (2.3) were used to simulate Fresnel diffraction in UV lithography of
SU-8. Light intensity distribution data were exported from ZEMAX and
imported to Excel or Sigma Plot. The effect of the substrate reﬂectivity (such
as silicon substrate, about 0.575 for vertical incident light with a wavelength
of 365 nm, and 0.473 for a wavelength of 405 nm) was considered in the
numerical simulations.
Using ZEMAX EE software, numerical simulations were conducted for
two different cases: (1) with an air gap between the mask and wafer and no
compensation; (2) using glycerin liquid compensation. In all the simulations,
the slot on the mask was assumed to be 20 µm wide and inﬁnitely long, as
diffraction effect (entering the slot) is plotted as uniformly distributed.
Numerical simulations were conducted to study the effects of diffraction
caused by the air gap, and the diffraction compensation effects using an
optical liquid, such as glycerin. In the simulations, the gaps between the
mask and resist surface were assumed to be 50 µm, and the slot was assumed
U
x y z
e
i z
e
du
e
dv
p
ikz
i u
u
u
i v
v
v
( , , ) =
∫
∫
λ
π
π
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
u
z x
x
=
−
2
0
λ (
)
v
z y
y
=
−
2
0
λ (
)
e
d
d
i
d
i
a
a
a
πξ
ξ
πξ
ξ
πξ
ξ
2
2
2
0
2
0
0
2
2
=
+
∫
∫
∫
cos(
)
sin(
)
shown in Figure 2.2. The ideal distribution of the light intensity without any
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
17
to be at 20 µm. The simulation results show that with gap compensation,
using glycerin produced improved intensity distribution as compared with
the air gap.
Because SU-8 is a negative tone resist, the pattern proﬁle is deﬁned by
light intensity higher than the threshold energy to cure SU-8 within the
targeted region. With the attenuation of intensity in SU-8 in the vertical
direction (Z direction) and diffraction caused by the micropatterns, the aerial
dimension of the projection image is varied. The edges of the aerial image
are deﬁned as the edges of the Fresnel diffraction pattern with energy higher
than the cross-link dosage.
The light intensity in the vertical direction is
,
(2.4)
where a is the absorption coefﬁcient, and Z is the distance in vertical direction
from the ﬁlm’s surface. The transmission is then 
.
(2.5)
ferent thickness. As can be seen from the results in Figure 2.3, the intensity of
i-line light decayed much faster than h-line as light penetrated deeper into the
resist. The absorption coefﬁcient a is found to be about 0.0031 for the i-line
and about 0.0005 for the h-line. The measured data presented in Figure 2.3 was
used in numerical simulations for the combined effects of wavelength depen-
dence of the absorption of unexposed SU-8 and the diffraction. Similarly, a 20
mm opening slot on the mask is assumed. Two different wavelengths, i-line
and h-line, were considered separately. Numerical simulations were conducted
to obtain the Fresnel diffraction pattern at the bottom of the resist layer.
After using ZEMAX EE to obtain the light energy distribution at the dif-
ferent depth of the SU-8 resist based on the transmission of SU-8 thick ﬁlm
FIGURE 2.2
A slot pattern on a photomask exposed to a collimated UV light source.
Photomask
Gap
Thick photoresist
UV light source
0
Z = 0
Z = thickness
X
Z
O
w/2
–w/2
Substrate
Mask glass
slot
I
I
e aZ
=
⋅
−
0
T
I
I
e aZ
=
=
−
/
0
Figure 2.3 shows a measured transmission for unexposed SU-8 with a dif-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

18
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
FIGURE 2.3
Measured transmissions for both the i-line and h-line for different thicknesses of SU-8.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.4
(a) Fresnel diffraction pattern in the bottom of the resist layer as projected by the i-line light
source. (b) Fresnel diffraction pattern in the bottom of the resist layer as projected by the h-line
light source.
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
500
1000
Thickness (µm)
1500
2000
Transmission (%)
365 nm
405 nm
Expon. (365 nm)
Expon. (405 nm)
y = e–0.0005x
y = e–0.0031x
R2 = 0.9959
R2 = 0.9951
Ideal light intensity
distribution (0 µm
thick SU-8)
1000 µm thick SU-8
500 µm thick SU-8
200 µm thick SU-8
100 µm thick SU-8
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–20
–10
0
Position (µm)
10
20
1
Light intensity (normalized to 1)
Ideal light intensity
distribution (0 µm
thick SU-8)
1000 µm thick SU-8
500 µm thick SU-8
200 µm thick SU-8
100 µm thick SU-8
1.5
1
0.5
0
–20
–10
0
Position (µm)
10
20
Light intensity (normalized to 1)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
19
simulation results for the h-line light source at different resist thicknesses.
Two observations can be made from the results shown in Figure 2.4. First, as
the resist thickness increases, the nonuniformity of light intensity caused by
diffraction becomes more serious. Second, shorter wavelength light (i-line)
has less of a problem in diffraction, but the light intensity drops quickly with
depth and may have difﬁculty cross-linking SU-8 resist at the bottom region. 
Figure 2.5 shows the simulated sidewall proﬁles when a 20 µm–wide slot
pattern is exposed using i-line and h-line light sources, respectively [15]. The
sidewall proﬁle is deﬁned by the threshold exposure dosage of lithography.
The resist in the left side of the threshold boundary line received enough
exposure dosage to fully cross-link the resist. The lithography dosage in the
resist on the right side of the boundary line is below the required threshold
dosage and is removed in the development process. Because of the symmetry
of the exposed pattern, only the right half of the exposed region is shown in
are for the exposure with a zero gap and 50 µm gap between mask and SU-8
resist, respectively. Several different situations have been examined: h-line or i-
line exposure, air gap, or with glycerin. The simulation results show that glyc-
erin reduces the Fresnel diffraction. With wavelength selection (for example,
(a)
FIGURE 2.5a
The simulated sidewall proﬁles for a 20 µm–wide slot on the mask. On the left side of these
proﬁle lines, the exposure dosage is enough to cross-link the resist. The gap between the mask
and SU-8 is assumed to be zero.
Sidewall of
1 mm SU-8 with
h-line exposure
Sidewall of 1 mm SU-8
with i-line exposure
Edge of ideal
slot pattern
0
5
10
15
1000
800
600
Vertical position (µm)
400
200
0
as shown in Figure 2.3, a Fresnel diffraction pattern was numerically obtained
and is shown in Figure 2.4. Figure 2.4a shows the simulated results for the i-
line light source and four different resist thicknesses. Figure 2.4b shows the
simulated results in Figure 2.5. The sidewall proﬁles in Figures 2.5a and 2.5b
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

20
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
using an h-line-dominated light source), the lithography quality may be fur-
ther improved. From the foregoing analyses, it can be seen that the wave-
length selection played the most important role in optimal lithography of
ultrathick SU-8, while the air gap compensation played a secondary role. In
comparison with the air gap, glycerin compensation is proved to be margin-
ally better in producing better sidewall proﬁles.
2.2.3 Development with One-Direction Agitation Force
Development of thick SU-8 ﬁlm is another challenge in fabrication of high-
aspect-ratio microstructures. The SU-8 developer cannot effectively work in
ultradeep and narrow structures by simple diffusion and conventional stirring
mechanisms. The development may last hours, damage the ﬁne structures,
and often is incomplete. Strong agitation is normally used to completely
develop the SU-8. However, the strong stirring process or supersonic vibration
often produce vibrations in random directions and cause severe vibrations of
the microstructures. They may also reduce the sidewall quality, deform or
debond some ﬁne patterns, and destroy the high-aspect-ratio microstructures.
(b)
FIGURE 2.5b
The simulated sidewall proﬁles for a 20 µm–wide slot on the mask with a 50 µm gap between
the mask and SU-8. On the left side of these proﬁle lines, the exposure dosage is enough to
cross-link the resist.
SU-8 resist
200 µm
5 µm
10 µm
i-line exposure
with glycerin
i-line exposure
with no air gap
compensation
Edge of deal
slot pattern
Air gap with
h-line exposure
400 µm
600 µm
800 µm
1000 µm
0
Glycerin with
h-line exposure
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
21
In contact lithography, the light source is projected perpendicular to the
substrate. With no external agitation, the unexposed SU-8 is developed from
the top layer to the bottom layer and is based on diffusion of the SU-8
developer solution. If the direction of the agitation force is perpendicular to
the substrate (parallel with the sidewall of the microstructures), the agitation
would accelerate the development but not affect the sidewall quality or
minimize the possibility of damaging the microstructures. There are two
methods of accelerating the development process. One is to immerse the
sample in a face-down orientation to take advantage of the gravity force for
better convective transport. Another method is to use a megasonics agitation
perpendicular to the substrate.
The mechanism of SU-8 development should be understood in the follow-
ing way: when the SU-8 developer enters the uncross-linked SU-8, a por-
ridgelike region is produced between the SU-8 and the developer. Inside this
porridgelike region, as the developer diffuses, the uncross-linked SU-8 dis-
solves into the SU-8 developer. The concentration of uncross-linked SU-8 is
nonuniformly distributed. The concentration decreases closer to the bound-
ary line between the dissolved and the solid sections of the uncross-linked
SU-8. With the sample positioned in a face-down orientation, the diffusion
and removal of the dissolved SU-8 from the boundary region of the developer
and the uncross-linked SU-8 were accelerated by gravity force. This may
help to achieve a much higher development rate based on our experience.
Our experiments have proved that the development rate for face-down-
oriented samples can be at least two times that obtained when the samples
were placed in a face-up orientation. SU-8 microstructure edges and trenches
were also found to be much cleaner after the development. 
With megasonic agitation, when the wave propagates perpendicular to the
substrate, much faster development rates can also be achieved. Our experi-
ments found that excellent uniformity of development can also be realized.
This technique is commonly used in x-ray Lithographie, Galvahoformung,
Abformung (LIGA) processes and has been reported to work well with SU-
8. In megasonic agitated development, the range of frequencies is normally
several MHz. This reduced wavelength helps to agitate the ﬂuids in the
porridgelike region between the uncross-linking SU-8 and the SU-8 devel-
oper. This leads to higher dissolved speed and faster development.
2.3
Experimental Results Using Filtered Light Source
and Air Gap Compensation for Diffraction
To demonstrate the superiority of the proposed optimal lithography of a
ﬁltered light source and gap compensation, we will show three different
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

22
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
groups of experiments in this section: (1) a broadband light source without
gap compensation, (2) a broadband light source using glycerin for gap com-
pensation; and (3) a ﬁltered light source with PMMA sheet (i-line eliminated)
and gap compensation using glycerin as suggested here.
A broadband light source was used in a lithography process and a thick
plate of PMMA used as an optical ﬁlter to eliminate the short wavelength
components. The broadband spectra of an Oriel UV station before and after
the PMMA ﬁlter are shown in Figure 2.6, which were measured using an
Ocean Optics S2000 spectrometer. The UV light source has three major
spectrum lines: the i-line, h-line, and g-line. A 4.538 mm–thick PMMA plate
(not annealed) was used as a ﬁlter to eliminate the short wavelength com-
ponents of the light source of the Oriel UV station. The optical transmission
spectrum of a 4.538 mm–thick PMMA sheet without anneal is also shown
in Figure 2.6. The transmission of this PMMA sheet is about 0.3% at the i-
line, 82% at the h-line, and 82% at the g-line. The PMMA sheet ﬁlters out
most of the light with a wavelength less than or equal to 365 nm. The
spectrum of the Oriel UV station used in this study after ﬁltering with this
PMMA sheet was measured and shown in Figure 2.6 where the i-line is
removed, and the h-line and g-line are reduced. It was found that light
intensity at 365 nm dropped from 15.08 mJ/cm2 to 0.47 mJ/cm2, and at 405
nm dropped from 42.08 mJ/cm2 to 34.15 mJ/cm2. This result is consistent
with that expected from the transmission spectrum of PMMA measured
using a spectrometer. Because the absorbance of unexposed SU-8 around
the g-line (λ = 436 nm) is only about one-third of that around h-line
(λ = 404.7 nm), and total exposure dosage from the light source as shown
in Figure 2.6 after PMMA ﬁlter is dominated by the h-line, the effect of the
g-line in the lithography of SU-8 will therefore be neglected under such
conditions. 
The detailed processing conditions for 1150 µm–thick SU-8 100 ﬁlm are as
follows:
FIGURE 2.6
Light intensity before and after ﬁlter for the Oriel UV station at 200 W output.
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Light intensity (a.u.)
Transmission (%)
300
350
400
Wavelength (nm)
450
100
80
60
40
20
0
Light intensity of light
source
i-line
h-line g-line
Light intensity after
PMMA ﬁlter
Transmission of 4.538 mm
thick PMMA ﬁlter
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
23
1. Clean Si wafer with acetone, IPA (isopropyl alcohol), and DI (deion-
ized) water. 
2. Spin coat SU-8 100 at 400 rpm. 
3. Level hot plate, bake 10 hours at 110°C, cool down to 60°C inside 1
hour, dwell at 55°C (uncross-linked SU-8’s glass temperature is 50°C
to approximately 60°C) for 4 hours, cool down to room temperature
inside 3 hours.
4. Expose the sample using a broadband light source (with spectrum
total exposure dosage of 2 J/cm2, for PMMA ﬁlter wavelength selec-
tion exposure (with spectrum as shown in Figure 2.6; includes the
h-line and g-line) with total exposure dosage 12 J/cm2. 
5. Postbake at 110°C for 20 minutes, cool down as in step 3. 
6. Develop sample using SU-8 developer at 32°C with SONOSYS
megasonic actuator driven with a 250 W power supply for 2 hours.
The megasonic transducer was placed in a water bath supporting a
quartz tank in which the developer and substrate were located.
Wafers were facing the megasonic actuator. 
7. Rinse sample with IPA several times, dry naturally.
To measure the sidewall quality of the microstructures fabricated using
ﬁltered a light source and gap compensation, a 20 µm feature-sized micro-
structure with a ﬂat edge was removed from the substrate and placed on the
measurement stage of the Veeco optical proﬁler. The Rs (roughness of stan-
dard deviation) was then measured along the 1150 µm length. It was found
that the roughness of standard deviation (in the light incident direction) was
2.72 µm over the entire length of 1150 µm.
tions: (a) broadband light source with no air gap compensation, (b) broad-
band light source and air gap compensation using a glycerin solution, (c)
the ﬁltered light source (i-line eliminated) with no air gap compensation,
and (d) ﬁltered light source with gap compensation using a glycerin solution. 
The minimum designed thicknesses of the crosses achieved are 20 µm for
the air gap and 8 µm for the glycerin gap compensation. The dark region in
Figure 2.7a was due to the residuals of the development.
The theoretical optical resolution of the line and space of the width b can
be estimated by the following equation:
where b is the width of line or space, λ is the wavelength of the lithography
light, s is the air gap between the mask and the photoresist, and d is the
b
s
d
min
(
)
=
+
3
2
1
2
λ
as shown in Figure 2.6; includes the i-line, h-line, and g-line) with
Figure 2.7 shows a group of microcrosses produced with different condi-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

24
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
resist thickness. For 1150 µm–thick SU-8 resist, and assuming no air gap,
the optical resolution can be estimated at 21.7 µm for the i-line and 22.9 µm
for the h-line. Because of the low absorption in the g-line, the lithography
processes in broadband lithography were dominated by the combined effect
of the i-line and h-line, especially the i-line. These calculated results are very
consistent with what was observed in the experiments for broadband lithog-
raphy without air gap compensation or using glycerin compensation. The
lithography quality of comb structures with a broadband light source
becomes quite bad as the feature sizes dropped to about a width of 20 µm
and a height of 1150 µm, with some improvement after gap compensation
light source and gap compensation with glycerin. It can be seen that the
comb structures obtained using the suggested ﬁltered light source and gap
FIGURE 2.7
Cross-patterns made using a ﬁltered light source and three different UV lithography processing
conditions. (a) Broadband exposure with no air gap compensation. Crosses with designed
thickness of 20 µm and height of 1150 µm. (b) Crosses with designed thickness of 8 µm and
height of 1150 µm. Processing conditions: broadband exposure and air gap compensation using
glycerin. (c) Crosses with designed thickness of 9 µm and height of 1150 µm. Processing
conditions: ﬁltered light source and no air gap compensation. (d) Crosses with designed thick-
ness of 9 µm and height of 1150 µm. Processing conditions: ﬁltered light source and air gap
compensation using glycerin.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
using glycerin. Figure 2.8 shows a comb structure made using a ﬁltered
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
25
compensation with glycerin have excellent sidewall quality and resolutions.
Both structures were developed all through and clearly separated. The top
ﬁngers are removed together by the liquid surface tension in the drying
process.
2.4
Basic Steps for UV Lithography of SU-8 and Some 
Processing Tips
The standard lithography processing procedures of SU-8 include: (1) pretreat
the substrate, spin-coat SU-8; (2) preexposure bake, UV exposure (320 to 450
nm); (3) postexposure bake; and (4) development. The process parameters
determine the ﬁnal quality of the microstructures. The curing process of SU-
8 is completed in two steps: formation of acid during optical exposure and
thermal epoxy cross-linking during the postexposure bake. A ﬂood exposure
or controlled hard bake is recommended to further cross-link the exposed
SU-8 microstructures if they are going to be used as parts of the ﬁnal prod-
ucts. Because most of the publications in the ﬁeld do not provide detailed
lithography conditions, beginners often have to learn from their own expe-
riences and the learning curve can sometimes be exceptionally long. Some
basic lithography conditions are provided here as guidelines for those read-
ers who may need something to start from [21–24].
2.4.1
Pretreat for the Substrate
To obtain good adhesion for SU-8 on a substrates, the substrate needs to be
cleaned with acetone, IPA, and DI water sequentially, and then dehydrated
FIGURE 2.8
Comb structures made using ﬁltered light source and gap compensation with glycerin.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

26
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
at 120°C for 5 to approximately 10 minutes on a hotplate. The substrate may
also be primed using plasma asher immediately before spin-coating the
resist. In addition, an adhesion promoter may be used as needed. For the
applications involving electroplating metals and alloys and stripping of
cured SU-8, the vendor of SU-8, MicroChem, recommends using OmniCoat
before coating of SU-8.
2.4.2
Spin-Coating SU-8
The thickness of SU-8 ﬁlm is dependent on several factors: the viscosity of
the SU-8 used, the spin speed, and the total number of turns. The vendor of
SU-8, MicroChem, provides some spin-coating curves for different SU-8
formulations, such as SU-8 5, SU-8 50, and SU-8 100. Some research labs have
also developed their own spin-coat curves based on the particular equipment
used. Figure 2.9 shows some typical spin-coating curves of SU-8.
FIGURE 2.9
Selective SU-8 spin-speed vs. ﬁlm thickness curve. (Courtesy of Mark Shaw, MicroChem Corp.,
Newton, MA.)
SU-8 spin speed curves
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
750 
1000 
1250 
1500 
1750 
2000 
2250 
2500 
2750 
3000 
3250 
Spin speed (rpm) 
Film thickness (microns) 
SU-8-2
SU-8-5
SU-8-10
SU-8-25
SU-8 spin speed curves
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
750 
1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500 2750 3000 3250 
Spin speed (rpm) 
SU-8-50
SU-8-100
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
27
Bubbles formed during the spin-coating step may lead to reduced lithogra-
phy quality. To eliminate bubbles in resist ﬁlm, the substrate should be placed
on a ﬂat and horizontal plate for 2 to approximately 10 hours before prebake.
This is an especially critical step for obtaining good quality of thick SU-8 ﬁlm. 
2.4.3
Soft Bake
The spin-coated sample needs to be soft baked to evaporate the solvent on
a leveled hotplate or in convection ovens. The heat transfer condition and
ventilation are different for the hotplate and the convection ovens, and the
preferred soft baking times are therefore different as shown by the curves
for measured soft baking times in Figure 2.10. Ramping and stepping the
soft bake temperature is often recommended for better lithography results.
The glass temperature of the unexposed SU-8 photoresist is about 50 to
approximately 60°C. Figure 2.11 shows a typical soft-baking temperature
curve used in our laboratory. This soft-bake process consists of multiple steps
of ramping up, dwell, and ramping down. The total cooling time is about 8
FIGURE 2.10
Soft bake time vs. SU-8 thickness.
FIGURE 2.11
A selected soft bake proﬁle for 1100 mm–thick SU-8 ﬁlm.
10
8
6
Bake time (hours)
4
2
0
0
200
Thickness (µm)
Soft bake time vs. thickness
400
600
800
1000
Bake in oven
Bake on hot-plate
Dwell at 50°C/4 hrs 
Ramp to 50°C in 40 m
Dwell at 75°C/15 ms
Ramp to 75°C in 40 m
Ramp to 110°C in 30 m
Dwell at 75°C/15 ms
Ramp to 75°C in 30 m
20°C/1~2 hrs 
Ramp to 20°C in 3 hrs
Dwell at 110°C/10 hrs
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

28
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
to approximately 10 hours for a 1000 µm–thick SU-8 resist. For ultrathick
SU-8 ﬁlm (more than 1000 µm thick), a baking temperature of 110°C is used
coated with Cr/Au ﬁlm (as commonly used in the UV-LIGA process as the
plating seed layer), a 110°C bake temperature is suggested instead of 96°C. At
the same time, the bake time should be slightly reduced.
2.4.4
Exposure
A near UV (320 to 450 nm) light source is normally used for lithography of
SU-8. As the wavelength of the light source increases, the absorbance of the
light reduces and the transmission increases signiﬁcantly. The transmission
increases from 6% at λ = 365 nm to about 58% as the wavelength increases to
405 nm. SU-8 has high actinic absorption for wavelengths less than 350 nm,
but is almost transparent and insensitive for above 400 nm wavelengths.
Because of the high absorption of SU-8 for light with shorter wavelengths, a
light source dominated by shorter wavelength components often results in
overexposure at the surface of the resist and underexposure at the bottom part
of the resist layer. This is the main reason that UV lithography of SU using an
i-line-dominated light source tend to produce microstructures with T-topping
geometric distortions. Thickness of the resist is another key parameter that
dictates the required dosage of the exposure. Figure 2.12 shows two curves
of required exposure dosage and the thickness of SU-8. MicroChem, the
vendor of SU-8, advises that the user ﬁlter out the light with a wavelength
lower than 350 nm to improve lithography quality. After ﬁltering the light
components with wavelengths shorter than 350 nm from the light source of
the Oriel UV station used in our laboratory, with its spectrum as shown in
kept in a range of 1:7 to approximately 1:10 to achieve perfect vertical side-
walls, especially for the SU-8 resist with thickness around 1 mm. For lithog-
raphy of a very thick resist, multiple exposures are required to avoid
FIGURE 2.12
Exposure dosage vs. ﬁlm thickness: the preferred exposure dosage should fall between the top
and bottom curves. (Courtesy of Mark Shaw, MicroChem Corp., Newton, MA.)
800
600
400
Esposure energy (mJ/cmˆ2)
200
0
0
25
50
75
100 125
Film thickness (µm)
150 175 200 225 250
as shown in Figure 2.11. To improve the adhesion of the SU-8 ﬁlm on substrate
Figure 2.6, the total exposure dosage ratio between the i-line and h-line are
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
29
overheating, scattering, and diffusion on the surface of the resist. Typically,
exposures need to be separated in 20-second (or less than 400 mJ/cm2 per
time) intervals with 60-second waiting periods in between. For a highly
reﬂective substrate, the effect of the reﬂection needs to be taken into account
in estimating the total exposure time.
2.4.5
Postexposure Bake (PEB)
Postexposure bake (PEB) is performed to cross-link the exposed regions of
the SU-8 resist. The cross-link, or the curing step of SU-8, can be achieved
at room temperature. Postbaking at a raised temperature helps accelerate
proﬁle. For resist thickness up to a few hundred micrometers, postbake at
96°C for 15 to approximately 20 minutes is required either on a hotplate or
in a convection oven. SU-8’s cross-link process may cause signiﬁcant residual
stress, which may cause cracks or debonding. In order to minimize possible
residual stresses, wafer bowing, and cracking, rapid cooling from the PEB
temperature should be avoided. For resist ﬁlms with thicknesses more than
1000 micrometers, ramping the PEB temperature down from 96°C should
take more than 8 hours. Another possible way to reduce postbake stress is
to use lower PEB temperatures, such as 50°C or 55°C, but longer baking
times. This method would result in much lower thermal stress in comparison
with using a PEB temperature of 96°C.
2.4.6
Development
After exposure and postbake, the sample is then developed by SU-8 devel-
oper. Recommended development times can be found in the catalog pro-
vided by vendor of SU-8 or your lab’s experiment data. The development
process can be optimized based on the experiment’s agitation rate, develop-
ment temperature, and SU-8 resist processing conditions. After the sample
is developed by SU-8 developer, it is sometimes dipped into a fresh SU-8
developer to rinse, then rinsed with isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 3 to 5 min-
utes. If white spots can be observed in the IPA, the SU-8 is underdeveloped.
FIGURE 2.13
A possible temperature proﬁle to be followed in PEB for 1100 µm–thick SU-8 ﬁlm.
Dwell at 50°C/4 hr
Ramp to 50°C in 30 m
Dwell at 75°C/10 m
Ramp to 75°C in 30 m
Ramp to 96°C in 20 m
Dwell at 75°C/10 m
Ramp to 75°C in 30 m
Ramp to 20°C in 3 hr
Dwell at 96°C/20 m
the polymerization process [20]. Figure 2.13 shows a typical PEB temperature
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

30
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The sample needs to be immersed into SU-8 developer or rinsed with fresh
SU-8 developer to further development. After the sample is completely
developed, it needs to be rinsed using fresh IPA. If possible, avoiding a
deionized (DI) water rinse is preferred. Finally, the sample is dried naturally
or by nitrogen gas blow.
2.5
Tilted Lithography of SU-8 and Its Application
SU-8 is well suited for the fabrication of three-dimensional microstructures
using tilted exposure. A variety of SU-8 resist structures, such as slope,
trapezoids, dovetails, as well as various conical shapes, can be fabricated
using tilted lithography. In recent years, we have fabricated micromixers
[25], out-of-plane microlens [26–28], out-of-plane microlens arrays [30], ﬁber
bundle couplers [31], and three-dimensional hydrofocus components [31].
Because of the refraction of light at the surface of the SU-8 resist, a light
beam projected on the resist at an incident angle may propagate at a reduced
refraction angle. Based on the refraction index of the SU-8 (n = 1.668 at λ =
365 nm, n = 1.650 at λ = 405 nm), the refraction angle can be approximately
calculated to be 25.08° for the i-line with a 45° incident angle as shown in
Figure 2.14. The critical angle is about 36.8° at 365 nm. If a larger refractive
angle is needed, optical liquid and a coupling prism are used to compensate
for the light refraction.
The working principle to achieve a bigger refraction angle for SU-8 lithog-
the substrate are as shown in Figure 2.15.
FIGURE 2.14
The refraction of the SU-8 resist may cause the projected light beam to bend over and therefore
leading to reduce angle of the light projection. SU-8’s refraction and the critical angle (critical
angle is about 36.8° at 365 nm).
45°
90°
45°
37.3°
Incident
light
Incident
light
SU-8
SU-8
Air
Air
Refracted light
Refracted light
raphy is shown in Figure 2.15. The positions of the prism, mask, SU-8, and
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
31
If the angle at which the light enters SU-8 resist needs to be θ1, from
Snell’s law,
,
(2.6)
θ5 can be obtained as
.
(2.7)
From the geometry relationship, we know
.
(2.8)
From Snell’s law, θ7 can be obtained:
.
(2.9)
FIGURE 2.15
The working principle to obtain a bigger refraction angle inside SU-8.
Lithography
light
Substrate
n = 1.650
n = 1.45
n = 1.52
n = 1.45
n = 1.00
45°
SU-8
Refraction light
Glycerin
Glycerin
Prism
n5 = 1.53
θ7
θ5
θ4
θ4
θ6
θ3
θ3
θ2
θ2
θ1
Mask
(soda lime)
θ
n
n
n
n
n
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
=
=
=
θ
θ
5
1
1
1
5
=
−
sin (
sin
)
n
n
θ
θ
θ
6
5
1
1
1
5
45
45
=
−
° =
−
°
−
sin (
sin
)
n
n
θ
θ
7
1
6
6
7
1
6
7
1
=
⋅
=
⋅
−
−
−
sin (
sin
)
sin {
sin[sin (
n
n
n
n
n1
1
5
45
sin
)
]}
θ
n
−
°
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

32
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
(2.10)
The substrate therefore needs to be kept at θ = 45° + θ7 with the horizontal
level (because the light beam in the UV station is always in the vertical
direction) to completely compensate for the refraction at the interface to
obtain a 45° refractive angle inside the SU-8 photoresist.
2.5.1
Micromixer/Reactor
As an example of tilted lithography of SU-8, we present a novel passive
micromixer/reactor based on arrays of spatially impinging microjets, which
takes a three-dimensional approach in design and is based on a fabrication
process using UV lithography SU-8 photoresist [25]. 
To mix microvolumes of ﬂuid samples in microﬂuidic systems is always
a challenging task. Because the ﬂow in all microﬂuidic systems is laminar
and has a low Reynolds number, diffusion is the dominant mechanism.
Various efforts have been made to improve the mixing process by introduc-
ing geometric irregularities in inﬂow channels to create localized eddies and
turbulent ﬂows. Efforts have also been made to use special actuation mech-
anisms to disturb the ﬂow with such noncontact measures as ultrasound
waves. Because it is very difﬁcult to obtain high mixing efﬁciency with a
diffusion mechanism, some reported efforts used active disturbance to create
turbulence in the microﬂuidic systems. An obvious approach to increased
diffusion efﬁciency is to maximize the effective interfacial areas of the two
samples to be mixed. According to the scaling law, the most effective way
to maximize the effective surface area of liquid is to convert it into plumes
of stream. This is the approach we have adopted in our design of the micro-
mixer. The micromixer/reactor has a simple structure and signiﬁcantly
boosts the mixing efﬁciency by increasing the interfacial contact with the
impinging plumes from two opposite arrays of more, but smaller-sized,
micronozzles. 
The micromixer/reactor is based on large arrays of spatially impinged
microjets mixing. The schematic design for the micromixer/reactor is shown
micronozzles are parallel with the substrate plane. There are two possible ways
to arrange the opposite arrays of nozzles: directly opposite orientations or with
a designed offset. The two sample ﬂuids are delivered to inlet A and inlet B,
respectively. Then they are converted into plumes of streams by the large
micronozzle array and driven into the mixing chamber. The mixing processing
is three-dimensional with multiplayer spatially impinged jet arrays. This helps
to enhance the Reynolds number; increase the effective interfacial areas; con-
vert a higher percentage of the kinetic energy into microscopic molecular
θ
θ
=
° +
45
7
in Figure 2.16. Two arrays of micronozzles are in opposite directions. The
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
33
motion, thereby effectively boosting the eddies; increase the Reynolds number
in the micromixer chamber; and improve the diffusion effects for mixing.
The Reynolds number at the input channels just before the liquid enters
the nozzles is at a very low level (about 0.0002), the micromixer/reactor
based on a spatially impinged jet array with an offset can still locally mix
the two ﬂows in less than one second. The pressure drop of this micromixer/
reactor is about 200 Pa. By increasing ﬂow eddies generated and increased
interfacial contacts, the mixers based on arrays of impinging jets with offset
have better mixing efﬁciency. A higher possibility of microjets traveling to
the opposite side of the chamber to achieve better interfacial contact with
the incoming jets to be mixed gives the mixer with a narrow mixing chamber
a higher mixing efﬁciency. This micromixer/reactor can be easily integrated
with other microﬂuidic components or microﬂuidic channels for various
biochemical, biological, and chemical applications.
The micromixer was fabricated using UV lithography of SU-8. Two optical
masks were used: one was used to fabricate the large arrays of micronozzles
by tilted exposure; the other was used to form the inlet and outlet channels
beams are projected on the photoresist, the intersection forms an array of
micronozzle channels. Conventional contact exposure was used to fabricate
the inlet and outlet ﬂow channel sidewalls.
In the fabrication process, the substrates were spin-coated with SU-8 100
negative photoresist at 400 rpm for 1100 µm thickness and baked at 110°C
for 10 hours, then cooled down to room temperature over an 8-hour time
interval. Following exposure, the substrates were postbaked at 96°C for 25
minutes and cooled down to room temperature again over another 8-hour
interval. Then samples were developed with megasonic agitation. Figure
2.17b shows a SEM image of the bottom part of a prototype mixer.
A top cover glass was then bonded to it and the inlet and outlet with ﬂow
mixing a ﬂuorescent dye solution and DI water, shows the high mixing
efﬁciency. The micromixer with offset can locally mix the two test solutions
in less than one second.
FIGURE 2.16
Schematic design diagram of the micromixer/reactor.
Inlet A 
Outlet: Mixed
ﬂuid ﬂows out
Inlet B 
Mixing chamber 
Array of
micro nozzle 
Substrate
and sidewalls. As shown in Figure 2.17a, when two arrays of narrow light
connectors were sealed. The experiment, as shown in Figure 2.18, tested by
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

34
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
2.5.2
Three-Dimensional Hydrofocus Component for Microcytometer
Flow cytometric devices are very important for biomedical research and
clinical diagnostics. The labeled cell is driven to ﬂow through a nozzle so
that light scattering or ﬂuorescence measurements can be used for analyses.
Many research efforts have been made to develop microcytometers to reduce
the device and sample sizes, develop low-cost and single-use disposable
devices, and to improve device portability along with low consumption of
sample and buffer ﬂuids, and to reduce the biohazard risk level.
The principle of hydrofocusing in a microchannel is based on laminating
cells with sheath ﬂow [31]. A small volume of sample ﬂow is injected into
a much larger volume of sheath ﬂuid. Both the sheath ﬂow and sample ﬂow
require a small Reynolds number. Most of the reported hydrofocusing units
for microcytometers based on sheath ﬂow are two-dimensional, which only
focuses the samples in the same plane as the substrate. A truly three-dimen-
sional hydrofocusing component can focus the cells along the core stream
to ﬂow with an almost uniform velocity. 
Based on the three-dimensional hydrofocusing requirements and the
microfabrication limitations of SU-8 UV lithography, a three-dimensional
hydrofocusing unit for microﬂow cytometry was designed as shown by the
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.17
Schematic fabrication diagram and SEM image of the fabricated micromixer/reactor. (a) Li-
thography principle. (b) SEM image of the prototype mixer.
Array of light beams
Array of light beams
schematic diagram in Figure 2.19. There are three inlets for the hydrofocusing
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
35
microﬂuidic unit. Left-side and right-side inlets are for the sheath ﬂow, while
the center inlet is for the sample ﬂow. In the center of the end of this sample
ﬂow inlet, there is a diamond-shaped nozzle with a width of 100 µm. There
are three slopes formed by tilt-exposed, cross-linked SU-8 polymer in which
the center slope conﬁgured to a 30° angle with the substrate. The ﬂat covering
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.18
Test results for two types of micromixer. (a) Micro-mixer with direct opposition: photography
taken 2 mm downstream along the outlet channel. (b) Micro-mixer with offset: 5/6 second
locally mixed.
FIGURE 2.19
A schematic diagram of the three-dimensional hydrofocusing unit.
Center slope 
Sidewall
Substrate
Left-side inlet
for sheath ﬂow
Right-side inlet 
for sheath ﬂow
Sample injector nozzle
Substrate
Cover glass 
Outlet
Right-side slope 
Center inlet for
sample ﬂow 
Left-side slope
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

36
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
glass and sloped bottom help focus the ﬂow upward to a central region in
the direction perpendicular to the substrate. The left-side slope, right-side
slope, and the two sloped sidewalls perpendicular to the substrate assist in
achieving ﬂow to the central region in a horizontal direction [31].
In the fabrication process, all the slopes and the sample injection holes
were fabricated using tilted exposure. A total of three exposures were
required: (1) a 60° angle tilt exposure to achieve slopes having a 30° angle
with the substrate, (2) a 45° angle tilt exposure to obtain a suspended sample
injection nozzle in the center position of the sample inlet end, and (3) a
conventional contact exposure to produce all of the SU-8 sidewalls. 
The fabrication procedures were as follows: clean the Si or glass substrate;
spin-coat SU-8 100 photoresist to obtain a 500 µm–thick resist layer; soft
bake the sample; conduct a 60° tilted exposure of SU-8 with the help of a
prism and optical liquid for refraction compensation to obtain slopes tilted
at 30° with the substrate; postbake the sample; spin-coat SU-8 100 photore-
sist to obtain the second 500 µm–thick resist layer; prebake the sample; use
a 45° angle tilted exposure of the SU-8 with a correction prism and optical
liquid to obtain a suspended sample injector nozzle in the center of the
sample inlet end; expose all of the SU-8 sidewalls; postbake the sample;
develop with SU-8 developer; bond cover glass, seal inlet and outlet tubes.
Figure 2.20 shows three SEM images of a prototype hydrofocusing unit
fabricated using the tilted lithography method.
The three-dimensional focusing function of the prototype hydrofocusing
show experimental results that clearly demonstrated the three-dimensional
hydrofocusing function. The main advantages of this polymer hydrofocusing
FIGURE 2.20
SEM pictures for the three-dimensional hydrofocusing components.
Sheath
ﬂow inlet
Sample 
ﬂow inlet  
Sample 
injection 
nozzle 
Sloped 
sidewall 
Center 
slope 
Outlet 
Sample 
injection 
nozzle 
unit was tested using a ﬂuorescent dye solution. The images in Figure 2.21
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
37
microstructure include its easy fabrication and its ease of integration with
other polymer microﬂuidic and micro-optical components and subsystems. 
2.5.3
Out-of-Plane Polymer Refractive Microlens, Microlens Array,
Fiber Bundle Aligner
Integrated free-space optical benches are widely used in military, telecom-
munications, metrology, biochemistry, and so forth. Microlens and microlens
arrays are the important components in the integrated micro-optical system.
There are two kinds of conventional methods for fabricating the microlens or
microlens array. One is based on the surface tension needed to form the micro-
lens, such as reﬂow photolithographyed photoresist, inject polymer drop, and
press polymer through micro holes. Another is based on chemical or physical
removal of materials, such as ion-milling, dry-etching, and wet-etching.
The optical axis of microlens arrays fabricated with conventional approaches
is normally in the same plane as the substrate because the fabrication process
FIGURE 2.21
Three-dimensional hydrofocus function. (a) Top-view image showing the hydrofocusing func-
tion in horizontal plane. (b) Side-view image showing the focusing function in vertical direction.
Sheath ﬂow
Sample ﬂow
Sheath ﬂow
Epoxy glue used for
bonding covering glass
Sidewall
Cover glass
Focused sample ﬂow
Sidewall
Epoxy glue used for
bonding covering glass
(a)
Sheath ﬂow 
Cover glass 
Image of epoxy glue 
Epoxy glue 
Substrate 
First layer of SU-8 
Focused sample ﬂow 
Transparent SU-8
sidewalls the
outlet channel
Sample ﬂow 
Bottom slope 
Sheath ﬂow 
Sample ﬂow 
Sheath ﬂow 
(b) 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

38
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
is based on regular lithography and surface technologies. Integrated optical
systems often require the lenses’ principal planes to be perpendicular to the
substrate on which the system is constructed. One approach is to use a ﬂexible
hinge [32,33]. Another is using microstereolithography [34,35].
We reported a method to obtain a quasiparabolic surface for an out-of-
plane prealigned polymer microlens [25–29]. This out-of-plane polymer
microlens can be easily prealigned with other optical components with no
additional adjustment and assembly required, and dramatically reduce the
running cost and improve the quality and performance of the optical system.
The other optical components also can be fabricated by direct lithography
of SU-8. All of the optical components are prealigned with the same optical
axis in mask design, and no changes and adjustments between the mask and
the photoresist are needed during lithography. 
The basic fabrication principle for out-of-plane, prealigned polymer refrac-
tive microlenses and microlens arrays can be explained using the schematic
diagrams shown in Figure 2.22. The intersection region as shown in Figure
2.22a was double exposed and formed the lens base. The intersected region
included four pieces of cylindrical surface with sharp edge lines as shown in
Figure 2.22b. The development rate for the unexposed SU-8, single-exposed
SU-8, and double-exposed SU-8 are different. By careful control of the expo-
sure dosage and the optimized development time, the double-exposed region
formed the microlens or microlens array as shown in Figure 2.22c. 
using this method. Figure 2.23b shows the focus function of the out-of-plane
microlens and microlens array.
A simple application of the out-of-plane prealigned microlens and micro-
lens array [29] is to design and fabricate an integrated ﬁber coupler and ﬁber
bundle couplers. The substrate coated with 1100 µm–thick SU-8 100 was soft
FIGURE 2.22
Combining microstereolithography and thick resist UV lithography for 3D microfabrication.
(a) Two cylindrical beams used to expose the negative resist. Exposed regions are kept and the
unexposed regions removed in development. (b) The intersection region formed by two cylin-
drical beams is doubled-exposed and formed the lens base. (c) After development, the sharp
edges were rounded and a smoother surface proﬁle is obtained.
Unexposed
SU-8
Exposed
SU-8
Ellipse open
Sharp edges
Single-exposed
SU-8 cylinders
Edges
smoothed
Substrate
Double-exposed
region formed
the microlens
Substrate
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.23a shows an SEM image of a sample microlens array fabricated
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
39
baked and tilt exposed for the biconvex microlens or microlens array with
optimized exposure dosage. After the exposure for the biconvex microlens or
microlens array, a shield mask was placed on the optical mask to cover the
regions for the biconvex microlens or microlens array, and exposure for ﬁber
ﬁxing grooves with different exposure dosage was conducted. The sample was
then postbaked and developed. The exposed regions of SU-8 formed the micro-
shows a photograph of the ﬁber coupler with just one pair of ﬁbers inserted and
light from a laser diode (wavelength of 635 nm) supplied to the ﬁber pair [30].
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.23
(a) SEM image of an out-of-plane microlens array. (b) Microlens array and measured focus pads
of the out-of-plane microlens and microlens array.
FIGURE 2.24
SEM images of ﬁber bundle coupler. Each pixel of the microlens array and ﬁber-ﬁxing grooves
are pre-aligned together.
FIGURE 2.25
.(a) SEM image showing one pair of optical ﬁbers inserted in a prototype ﬁber bundle coupler;
(b) optical image of the ﬁber coupler with light supplied.
Fiber through 
the ﬁber ﬁxing 
groove 
Each
pixel is aligned
with the ﬁber 
Fiber through 
the ﬁber ﬁxing
grooves 
(a)
(b)
Input ﬁber
Output ﬁber
lens array and ﬁber-ﬁxing grooves as shown in Figure 2.24 [30]. Figure 2.25
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

40
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
2.6
Conclusions
In this chapter, we have presented some detailed discussions on optical
lithography of SU-8. Detailed processing tips have been provided. In addi-
tion, we have also presented some theoretical and experimental studies on
air gap effects on the lithography quality of ultrathick SU-8 resist and the
method to compensate for it. The combination effect of diffraction compen-
sation, wavelength selection, and one-direction agitation development is
present by ultra-high-aspect-ratio SU-8 microstructures. SU-8 tilted lithog-
raphy and its application are also presented. Some representative applica-
tions of UV lithography of SU-8 in microﬂuidics and micro-optics have also
been presented.
The polymer out-of-plane microlens can be fabricated using direct tilted-
lithography of SU-8 resist. The microlens array fabricated this way is perpen-
dicular to the substrate without requiring any assembly or adjustment, and
can be designed to any prealigned positions. With optical components pre-
aligned in mask design, it is possible to have all components integrated onto
a single platform for an optical bench without any assembly or adjustment
required. Unique microﬂuidic components and systems can also be made
using the direct lithography method as demonstrated by the micromixer and
the hydrofocusing unit for the microﬂow cytometer presented in this chapter.
References
[1] N. LaBianca, and J. Delorme, High aspect ratio resist for thick ﬁlm applications,
in Proceedings of the International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE), 2438,
846–852, 1998.
[2] H. Lorenz, M. Despont, P. Vettiger, and P. Renaud, Fabrication of photoplastic
high-aspect ratio microparts and micromolds using SU-8 UV resist, Microsyst.
Technol. 4, 143–146, 1998. 
[3] K. Lee, N. LaBianca, S. Rishton, and S. Zohlgharnain, Micromachining appli-
cations for a high resolution ultrathick photoresist, J. Vac. Scien. Technol. B 13,
3012–3016, 1995. 
[4] H. Lorenz, M. Despont, N. Fahrni, N. Labianca, P. Vettiger, and P. Renaud,
EPON SU-8: A low-cost negative resist for MEMS, in Proc. of Micro Mechanics
Europe '96, Barcelona, 32–35, 1996. 
[5] H. Lorenz, M. Laudon, and P. Renaud, Mechanical characterization of a new
high-aspect-ratio near UV-photoresist, Microelec. Engin. 41/42, 371–374, 1998. 
[6] J. Williams and W. Wang, UV-LIGA fabrication of electromagnetic power micro-
relays, presented at the International Symposium on Test and Measurement
(ISTM/2001), Shanghai, China, June 2001.
[7] C. Oropeza, K. Lian, and W. Wang, “Fracture toughness study on LIGA fabri-
cated microstructures,” presented in Micromachining and Microfabrication, Pho-
tonics West, San Jose, California, January 2003.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

UV Lithography of Ultrathick SU-8
41
[8] D. E. Lee, H.-P. Chen, S. Soper, and W. Wang, An Electrochemical Micropump
and Its application in a DNA Mixing and Analysis System, presented in
Micromachining and Microfabrication, Photonics West, San Jose, California, Jan-
uary 2003.
[9] R. Yang, S. J. Jeong, and W. Wang, UV-LIGA microfabrication of a power relay
based on electrostatic actuation, presented in Micromachining and Microfabrica-
tion, Photonics West, San Jose, California, January 2003.
[10] K.-H. Hang, W. Wang, M. C. Murphy, and K. Lian UV-LIGA microfabrication
and test of an AC type micropump based on magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
principle, in Proceedings of the SPIE Symposium on Microfabrication, Santa Clara,
CA, 20–22 September, 2000.
[11] Y. Konaka and Mark G. Allen, Single and multi-layer electroplated microaccel-
erometers, in Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS),
168–173, 1996.
[12] H. Lorenz, M. Despont, N. Fahrni, J. Brugger. P. Renaud, and P. Vettiger, High
aspect ratio ultrathick, negative-tone near-UV photoresist and its applications
for MEMS, Sensors and Actuators A, A 64, 33–39, 1998.
[13] L. Dellmann, S. Roth, C. Beuret, L. Paratte, G.-A. Racine, H. Lorenz, M. Despont,
P. Renaud, P. Vettiger, and N. de Rooij, Two steps micromoulding and photo-
polymer high-aspect ratio structuring for applications in piezoelectric motor
components, Microsyst. Technol. 4, 147–150, 1998.
[14] H. Chang and Y. Kim, UV-LIGA process for high aspect ratio structure using
stress barrier and C-shaped etch hole, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 84,
342–350, 2000.
[15] Z. Ling, K. Lian, and L. Jian, Improved patterning quality of SU-8 microstruc-
tures by optimizing the exposure parameters, Proceedings of the International
Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE), 3999, P1019–1027, 2000.
[16] J. O’Brien, P. J. Hughes, M. Brunent, et al., Advanced photoresist technologies
for microsystems, J. Micromech. Microeng., 11, 353–358, 2001.
[17] J. Zhang, K. L. Tan, G. D. Hong, L. J. Yang, and H. Q. Gong, Polymerization
optimization of SU-8 photoresist and its applications in microﬂuidic systems
and MEMS, J. Micromech. Microeng., 11, 20–26, 2001.
[18] C. Lin, G. Lee, B. Chang, and G. Chang, A new fabrication process for ultrathick
microﬂuidic microstructures utilizing SU-8 photoresist, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
12, 590–597, 2002.
[19] P. M. Dentinger, K. L. Krafcik, K. L. Simison, R. P. Janek, and J. Hachman, High
aspect ratio patterning with a proximity ultraviolet source, Microelectronic En-
gineering, 61–62, P1001–1007, 2002.
[20] J. Williams and W. Wang, Study on the postbaking process and the effects on
UV lithography of high aspect ratio SU-8 microstructure,” J. Microlith., Micro-
fab., Microsyt., in press.
[21] R. Yang and W. Wang, Application of optical refractive index liquid and wave-
length selection for ultra-high-aspect-ratio UV-lithography of thick SU-8 re-
sist,” Sensor and Actuator B: Chemical, 110/2, 279–288, 2005.
[22] Y. J. Chuang, T. G. Tseng, and W. K. Lin, Reduction of diffraction effect of UV
exposure on SU-8 negative thick photoresist by air gap elimination, Microsystem
Technologies, 8, 308–313, 2002.
[23] E. Reznikova, V. Namov, and J. Mour, Deep photo-lithography characterization
of SU-8 resist layers, Microsystem Technologies, 11, 4–5, 282–291, 2005.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

42
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[24] S.J. Lee, W. Shi, P. Maciel, and S.W. Cha, Top-edge proﬁle control for SU-8
structural photoresist, in Proceedings of 15th Biennial University/Government/In-
dustry Microelectronics Symposium, 389–390, June 30–July 2, 2003, Boise, ID.
[25] R. Yang, J. D. Williams, and W. Wang, A rapid micro-mixer/reactor based on
arrays of spatially impinging micro-jets, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengi-
neering, 14, 10, 1345–1351, October 2004.
[26] R. Yang and W. Wang, Fabrication of out-of-plane SU-8 refractive microlens
using directly lithography method, SPIE Photonics West, San Jose, CA., Pro-
ceedings of the International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE), 5346, 2004,
151–159, 2004.
[27] R. Yang and W. Wang, Out-of-plane polymer refractive microlens fabricated
based on direct lithography of SU-8, Sensor and Actuators A: Physical, 113, 1,
P71–77, June 15, 2004.
[28] R. Yang and W. Wang, Numerical and experimental study on an out-of-plane
pre-aligned refractive microlens fabricated using UV lithography method, Op-
tical Engineering, 43, 12, 3096–3103, December 2004. 
[29] R. Yang, S. Soper, and W. Wang, Out-of-plane microlens array fabricated using
ultraviolet lithography,” Applied Physics Letter, 86, 16, 161110-1–161110-3, April
2005.
[30] R. Yang, S. A. Soper, and W. Wang, Microfabrication of pre-aligned ﬁber bundle
couplers using ultraviolet lithography of SU-8, Sensors and Actuators, A, 127, 1,
123–130, February 28, 2006.
[31] R. Yang, D. L. Feeback, and W. Wang, Microfabrication and test of three-
dimensional polymer hydro-focusing unit for ﬂow cytometry applications,
Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 118, 2, 259–267, February 2005.
[32] C.R. King, L.Y. Lin, and M.C. Wu, Out-of-plane refractive microlens fabricated
by surface micromachining, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 8, 10, 1349–1351,
October 1996.
[33] Yong W. Yi and Chang Liu, Assembly of micro optical components using
magnetic actuation, Sensors and Actuators A, 78, P205–211, 1999.
[34] K. Ikuta, S. Maruo, and S. Kojima, New micro stereo lithography for freely
movable 3D micro structure, Proceedings of MEMS98, Heidelberg, Germany.
1998.
[35] A. Bertsch, H. Lorenz, and P. Renaud, 3D microfabrication by combining mi-
crostereolithography and thick resist UV lithography, Sensors and Actuators: A-
Physical, 73, 1–2, 14–23, 1999.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

43
3
The LIGA Process: A Fabrication Process
for High-Aspect-Ratio Microstructures
in Polymers, Metals, and Ceramics
Jost Goettert
CONTENTS
3.1
The LIGA Process: A Brief History........................................................... 44
3.2
The LIGA Process: A Brief Introduction.................................................. 45
3.3
Deep X-Ray Lithography Process............................................................. 46
3.3.1
Synchrotron Light, Beamlines, and Scanner............................... 46
3.3.2
X-Ray Mask...................................................................................... 49
3.3.3
Resist Application and X-Ray Exposure ..................................... 52
3.4
High-Aspect-Ratio LIGA Structures......................................................... 56
3.4.1
Electroplating of DXRL Microstructures..................................... 59
3.4.1.1
Basic Principle of Electrodeposition.............................. 59
3.4.1.1.1
Galvanostatic and Potentiostatic
Plating............................................................... 60
3.4.1.2
Electroplating Rate and Calculation of the
Deposition Thickness ....................................................... 61
3.4.1.2.1
Surface Uniformity of Electroplated
Metals ............................................................... 62
3.4.2
Nickel Electroplating and Solutions ............................................ 63
3.4.3
Electroplating Quality and Inﬂuential Factors........................... 64
3.4.3.1
Internal Stress.................................................................... 64
3.4.3.1.1
Current Density .............................................. 64
3.4.3.1.2
Temperature..................................................... 65
3.4.3.1.3
pH Value .......................................................... 65
3.4.3.1.4
Agitation .......................................................... 65
3.4.3.1.5
Filtration........................................................... 65
3.5
Molding of LIGA Microstructures............................................................ 66
3.6
Application of LIGA Microstructures ...................................................... 70
3.6.1
Mold Insert Fabrication.................................................................. 71
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

44
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
3.6.2
Precision Parts by Direct LIGA..................................................... 72
3.6.2.1
Safety-and-Arming Switch.............................................. 72
3.6.2.2
Nanobarcodes.................................................................... 74
3.6.2.3
Harmonic Drive® Microgears ......................................... 75
3.6.2.4
Polymer Chips for Bio-MEMS Applications ................ 76
3.6.2.5
Regenerators for Cryocoolers and Stirling Cycle
Heat Engines...................................................................... 77
3.6.2.6
Examples of Precision Parts (HT Micro) ...................... 79
3.7
Summary....................................................................................................... 82
Acknowledgment.................................................................................................. 83
References ............................................................................................... 84
3.1
The LIGA Process: A Brief History
The LIGA process was initially developed in the late 1970s at the Forschung-
szentrum Karlsruhe (FZK) as an alternative way to produce very small
slotted nozzles for uranium isotope separation [1,2]. These separation noz-
zles were to be made from metal, with small lateral dimensions of a few
micrometers, and several hundred micrometers tall. A large number of them
had to be arranged in a cascaded array in order to achieve a high separation
yield. While silicon-based MEMS technologies allow batch production of
structures with small lateral dimensions, it is the LIGA process—a combi-
nation of deep-etch x-ray lithography with synchrotron radiation (LI), elec-
troforming (G = Galvanoformung [German]), and molding (A = Abformung
[German])—that was proposed and developed to build these structures. 
From its beginning LIGA was in competition with, but also used comple-
mentary to, commonly practiced micropatterning techniques such as wet-
chemical etching of single-crystalline silicon [3], or dry-etching processes by
means of low-pressure plasma [4]. Typical structure geometries are similar,
but material choices, including polymers, metals, and ceramics, as well as
production methods, are signiﬁcantly different. Materials for LIGA micro-
structures can meet a broad range of application requirements, for example,
optical transparency, mechanical stiffness and hardness, electrical conduc-
tivity, and magnetic properties, and offer additional design freedom to
MEMS system engineers [5]. As a consequence, hybrid systems such as
millirotational motors, linear motors, micropumps, photonic systems, and
various analytical devices assembled with high-precision LIGA components,
are currently being developed and introduced into the marketplace [6–12]. 
The goal of this text is to brieﬂy introduce the reader to the technology
basics of the three main LIGA process steps, demonstrate the properties of
LIGA microstructures, and provide some examples used in various MEMS
applications.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
45
3.2
The LIGA Process: A Brief Introduction
The three main steps of the LIGA process are:
•
Deep x-ray lithography (DXRL) typically using x-ray photons emitted
from a synchrotron source to shadow print microstructures from an
x-ray mask in an extremely precise manner into thick resist layers;
the actual pattern is produced in a subsequent wet-chemical devel-
oping process.
•
Electroplating is employed to fabricate complementary metal micro-
structures used either as an end product or mold insert.
•
Molding techniques such as injection or reaction molding and hot
embossing are used to replicate the microstructures in a cost-effective
way suitable for mass production in a great variety of materials.
A typical fabrication sequence is illustrated in Figure 3.1 and described in
the following text. The absorber pattern of an x-ray mask is transferred into
a thick resist layer by shadow printing with synchrotron radiation (step 1).
The thick resist layer is applied onto a conductive substrate used as a cathode
in the electroplating process. Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) or Plexiglas®,
a positive resist, and SU-8 [13], an epoxy-based negative resist are commonly
used as x-ray resists. Within the irradiated sections, the x-ray photons are
absorbed and lead to radiation-induced changes of the resist materials. For
example, in PMMA resist, main-chain scissions occur reducing the molecular
FIGURE 3.1
Typical sequence for the production of microstructures using the LIGA process. The primary
pattern is generated by deep x-ray lithography using synchrotron radiation (1) and wet chemical
development (2). Next, electroplating typically manufactures metal microstructures as a mold
insert (3). Replication techniques (4) such as injection molding or hot embossing enable cost-
effective mass production of LIGA parts (5) in a variety of materials.
4
3
2
1
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

46
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
weight of the irradiated material so that it can be selectively removed in an
appropriate developer (step 2). By means of electroplating of metals, includ-
ing copper, nickel, and nickel alloys, the complementary microstructure
pattern is grown from the conductive substrate (step 3). This process can
be terminated at the height of the resist template resulting in metal micro-
structures, or continued up to several millimeters in height forming a mas-
sive metal block. After stripping the remaining PMMA resist and further
polishing and machining, this block can be used as mold insert for repli-
cating the microstructures into polymers or ceramic materials by employing
replication techniques including reaction injection molding, injection mold-
ing, or hot embossing (step 4) resulting in a replicated microchip as the ﬁnal
product (step 5).
3.3
Deep X-Ray Lithography Process
Employing x-ray photons for patterning microstructures is, in principle,
similar to the use of UV light. However, light source, mask, and resist mate-
rials, as well as light–matter interaction are signiﬁcantly different and will
be brieﬂy discussed in the following paragraphs.
3.3.1
Synchrotron Light, Beamlines, and Scanner
In order to cost-effectively use x-rays for patterning of microstructures, a
suitable light source like a synchrotron is required. In a synchrotron, charged
particles forced onto a circular orbit and traveling nearly at the speed of light
are generating a continuous radiation spectrum, so-called synchrotron radi-
ation, ranging from the infrared to the hard x-ray regime [14]. Synchrotron
radiation forms a homogeneous narrow fan in the direction of propagation
with a Gaussian-shaped proﬁle perpendicular to it. 
Synchrotron radiation is a powerful tool for many ﬁelds in basic and
applied science including physics, chemistry, and biology as well as in
microengineering, and a number of dedicated synchrotron light sources have
been built and are operated serving the growing demands of the scientiﬁc
community [15].
interested reader will ﬁnd further information about this powerful scientiﬁc
tool in [14].
The spectrum and total emitted power are deﬁned by the characteristics
of the source, such as maximum electron energy (E) and electron current (I),
radius of curvature (r0) of the bending magnets, and distance of the experi-
ment to the source point. The spectrum of a synchrotron light source can be
qualiﬁed by the characteristic energy (Ec) or corresponding wavelength (λc)
Table 3.1 summarizes the basic synchrotron radiation properties and the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
47
that describes the photon energy at which the power spectrum is divided in
half. The basic properties of the light source can be calculated from Equations
3.1 through 3.3 [16]:
Total energy loss per revolution
(3.1)
Characteristic energy and wavelength, respectively, of the emitted synchro-
tron spectrum
, 
(3.2)
Vertical opening angle of the emitted light cone
(3.3)
For example, using Equation 3.3 the vertical beam width for the CAMD
(Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices at Louisiana State Univer-
sity (LSU) in Baton Rouge, Louisiana) storage ring (electron energy = 1.3 GeV)
is calculated to approximately 0.4 mrad resulting in a typical vertical Gaussian
intensity distribution of 4 mm full width half maximum (FWHM) at the mask-
resist plan at a distance of approximately 10 m from the source point.
In the 1970s, the use of synchrotron radiation as a short wavelength light
source was already being intensively discussed for lithographic patterning
of small microelectronic circuits [17,18]. X-ray lithography was a serious
contender for the next generation lithography (NGL) and dedicated compact
synchrotron light sources like HELIOS 1 [19] designed by Oxford Instru-
ments were built and operated successfully [17]. In the early 1980s a second
property of x-rays—their large penetration depth into matter—was then
TABLE 3.1
Important Properties of Synchrotron Radiation
Continuous light spectrum ranging from the infrared to the hard x-rays
High intensity
High degree of collimation (nearly parallel light)
Clean environment—light is generated inside an ultrahigh vacuum system
High stability of intensity and source position ensuring predictable experimental parameters
Long beam lifetime (more than 10 hours) allowing experiments with quasi-constant conditions
Well-deﬁned structure enabling time-resolved spectroscopy and imaging experiments
P kW
E GeV
r m
I A
[
]
.
[
]
[
]
[ ]
= 88 5
4
0
E eV
E GeV
r m
c[
]
[
]
[
]
= 2218
3
0
λc
GeV
[
[
]
Å]
5.59
r [m]
E
0
3
=
Ψ ~
.
[
]
1
5 1 10
1
0
2
4
γ =
=
−
m c
E
x
E GeV
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

48
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
considered for patterning of tall structures using deep x-ray lithography
(DXRL) shadow printing [20]. This initial effort grew to the point that today
a number of dedicated synchrotron radiation facilities worldwide provide
easy access and sufﬁcient beamtime for many users from academia and
industry, enabling continuous process improvement and commercial use
[21–24].
CAMD at LSU in Baton Rouge, LA, is one of these dedicated synchrotron
radiation facilities with a strong program in LIGA technology [25]. The ring
delivers light from 8 bending magnets as well as one insertion device—a 7-
Tesla superconductive wiggler—to its users, and four microfabrication
beamlines offer a large variety of patterning opportunities using soft and
hard x-rays. The exposure spectra for the bending magnet and wiggler
sources are shown in Figure 3.2, representing typical light spectra used for
x-ray lithography.
line at a synchrotron light source. The ultrahigh vacuum x-ray beamline is
directly attached to the vacuum system of the electron storage ring. A number
of safety components including gate valves, a fast-closing shutter, and pho-
ton- and Bremsstrahlungs-shutters ensure both a vacuum- and radiation-safe
operation of the beamline. The beamline is terminated by an exposure station
or x-ray scanner. The x-ray scanner in its simplest design consists of a vacuum
chamber and houses a linear motion stage that moves the mask or substrate
assembly vertically across the narrow, collimated synchrotron beam. By using
FIGURE 3.2
Power output for an average current of 100 mA as a function of photon energy for different
CAMD source points and wiggler operating conditions. The low energy part of the “white
spectra” is typically absorbed by a vacuum window made from beryllium resulting in photon
energies of the exposure spectrum ranging from 2 keV to 40 keV.
100
1000
10000
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Power (mW/mrad/100 mA)
Photon energy (eV)
Bending magnet
Wiggler, 5T
Wiggler, 7T
Figure 3.3 illustrates the schematic setup of an x-ray micromachining beam-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
49
this scanning method, a uniform dose deposition across the entire mask ﬁeld
of up to 100 mm is ensured. Typically, the ultrahigh vacuum beamline is
terminated by a beryllium foil, so-called window, separating the beamline
vacuum system from the vacuum system of the scanner. A ﬁlter unit either
located in an additional vacuum chamber in front of the exposure station or
inside the scanner chamber accommodates different ﬁlter materials, which
can be inserted into the beam in order to adapt the synchrotron spectrum to
the resist thickness.
As an example, commercial scanners operated at CAMD are shown in
also provide more advanced exposure techniques including aligned, tilt, and
tilt-and-rotate exposures (DEX 2) as well as large-format exposures (DEX 3),
More information about the scanners is available from Jenoptik Mikrotechnik
GmbH, Germany. 
3.3.2
X-Ray Mask
A critical tool for x-ray lithography is the x-ray mask, which contains the
structure design information. Compared with quartz glass masks used in
conventional optical and UV lithography, architecture and commercial avail-
ability of x-ray masks is signiﬁcantly different. 
While glass is transparent for UV and visible photons, x-ray transparent
mask substrates typically consist of low-atomic-number materials. Beryl-
lium, carbon (amorphous or glassy graphite), and polyimide are suitable
substrates with acceptable thicknesses ranging from 50 to 1000 µm, while
a few micrometer-thin membrane masks from silicon, silicon-nitride, dia-
mond, or titanium offer an alternative option. Mask contrast is achieved
FIGURE 3.3
Schematic of an x-ray beamline attached to an electron storage ring. At the end of the beamline,
an exposure station or x-ray scanner houses a linear motion stage carrying the mask and
substrate assembly perpendicular or at a desired angle across the synchrotron beam.
Figures 3.4a and b. Besides regular normal incident exposures, these scanners
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

50
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
using high-atomic-number material, typically gold, forming the absorber
pattern. The thickness of the gold absorber ranges from a few micrometers
when using soft x-ray photons (1 to 4 keV photon energy) up to 50 µm and
more when using hard x-ray photons (50 keV) [26]. Due to this wide range
of photon energies as well as different speciﬁcations regarding resist thick-
ness, resolution, and structure tolerances, no standard mask fabrication pro-
cess exists, but individual solutions are used [27–32].
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.4
(a) DEX 03 scanner inside the radiation hutch at the CAMD XRLM 4 beamline. (b) DEX 02
scanner inside the radiation hutch at the CAMD XRLM 1 beamline.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
51
Mask fabrication combines a number of techniques starting with electron
or photon or laser beam writing of the initial design onto a chromium or
optical mask substrate. The optical mask will then be transferred into a thick
optical resist, for example up to 70 µm–thick SU-8, using optical lithography
(Figure 3.5a) [32]. After exposure, baking, and development, the resist struc-
ture is used as a template and the open areas are ﬁlled with gold by electro-
plating. Resist removal and mask mounting onto a support ring completes
the process. Masks fabricated with this rapid prototyping approach have,
typically, the smallest feature sizes of 8 µm for a 15 µm–thick resist, which
will increase with thicker resist layers. Short mask fabrication times of
approximately 3 days is attractive for performing initial exposure tests and
is commonly practiced when exploring new designs.
For designs with smaller critical dimensions, the optical lithography is
done into a thinner, positive resist (3 to 10 µm thick) and after development
approximately 2 to 6 µm–thick gold is electroplated into this template (Figure
3.5b) resulting in the so-called x-ray intermediate mask. Using soft x-rays
from a mirror beamline, the pattern is then transferred into a thicker positive
resist, for example, 10 to 80 µm PMMA. After development and gold elec-
troplating, a so-called x-ray working mask is completed containing very ﬁne,
micrometer-sized structures. Typical fabrication time for working masks is
2 weeks with signiﬁcantly higher costs compared to the rapid prototyping
approach but also superior critical dimensions.
For even smaller, submicrometer critical dimensions, high energy electron
beam lithography (100 keV) has to be employed directly into 2 to 3 µm–thick
electron beam resist. After development, this pattern serves as a template
for gold electroplating resulting in the x-ray intermediate mask, which will
then be transferred with soft x-ray into the ﬁnal working mask, similar to
FIGURE 3.5
(a) Optical lithography and gold plating used to fabricate x-ray masks with critical dimensions
down to 10 µm. (b) A combination of optical and soft x-ray lithography with subsequent gold
plating is used to fabricate x-ray masks with critical dimensions down to 2 µm.
Optical mask
Intermediate
x-ray
mask
 Working x-ray mask 
Soft x-ray lithography
(a)
(b)
the process scheme illustrated in Figure 3.5b. Figures 3.6a through 3.6c show
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

52
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
different examples of x-ray masks illustrating the wide range of technical
small features on an electron-beam-written x-ray intermediate mask [33]
(mask fabricated by the Institut für Mikrostrukturtechnik, Forschungszen-
trum Karlsruhe) and a successful soft x-ray lithography copy into approxi-
mately 6 µm–thick PMMA resist performed at the CAMD XRLM 1 mirror
beamline (grazing angle of the Cr-coated silicon mirror was 1°).
Typically, the pattern of an x-ray mask can cover an area of up to 85 mm
on a 100 mm–wide substrate. However, when using thin membrane masks,
a free-standing membrane size with this dimension cannot be fabricated
reliably. Instead, smaller open areas are etched into the silicon wafer as
illustrated in Figure 3.6b. A third example, an x-ray working mask made on
a beryllium substrate, is shown in Figure 3.6c. This mask was copied from
an x-ray intermediate mask resulting in a gold height of approximately 30
µm with accurate control of dimensions down to 2 µm.
3.3.3
Resist Application and X-Ray Exposure
PMMA and SU-8 are commonly used x-ray resists, with most of the initial
work in LIGA being done in PMMA because of its high resolution and good
availability. One challenge is to apply uniform resist layers over a wide range
of thickness from micrometers to millimeters. For PMMA, a number of
methods including casting and in-situ polymerization [34] as well as gluing
or solvent bonding of PMMA [35] sheets have been invented and are rou-
tinely applied for substrate coating. A main advantage of the latter methods
is the use of well-deﬁned, high-molecular-weight PMMA sheets that will be
bound to the substrate in a press at room temperature. Uniform resist per-
formance across the entire substrate with minimum stress in the glue layer
are unique properties of these methods. The adjustment of the resist height
is achieved by ﬂy-cutting the initial PMMA sheet to the desired height within
attached to a silicon substrate and ready for exposure using the solvent
bonding method [35]. Substrates suitable for the x-ray lithography process
include silicon and ceramic wafers as well as steel and copper blanks. Various
methods of surface treatment are employed to ensure good adhesion of the
PMMA resist to the substrate surface. The commonly used seed layer on
silicon and ceramic wafers is sputter-deposited titanium, which is wet-chem-
ically etched prior to applying the PMMA resist [34]. Best adhesion results
on substrates with a titanium surface are achieved through a combined
chemical bonding and mechanical locking due to the surface porosity of the
wet-etched titanium [34].
In the case of SU-8 resist, single and multiple spin-coating as well as casting
are commonly used methods allowing to resist layers to build up to several
millimeters in thickness [36,37]. While controlling the solvent contents of
solutions available today. Figure 3.6a demonstrates approximately 1 µm
a ± 5 µm tolerance. Figure 3.7a shows an example of a PMMA sheet ﬁrmly
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
53
FIGURE 3.6
(a) Approximately 1 µm–diameter gold post on intermediate mask (top) and copy into approx-
imately 6 µm–thick PMMA resist (bottom). (b) 2 µm–thick silicon nitride mask covering a 4"
wafer with seven exposure ﬁelds. (c) Be mask with gears and a patterned ﬁeld of 85 mm ø
(top) and detail of Au absorber of test structures (bottom).
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

54
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
spin-coated SU-8 layers is possible up to a height of approximately 500 µm,
thicker layers show a nonuniformity of the solvent contents over the height,
and consequently nonuniform lithography performance compromising the
structure quality [36].
Although hard x-ray photons easily penetrate through matter, in particular
organic materials like resists, photon absorption and energy transfer into the
polymer [38] has to be considered when choosing the right exposure condi-
tions. Consequently, the amount of absorbed energy in units of J/cm3 is a
measure for dose instead of the incident power per area commonly used in
optical lithography [39]. Furthermore, two dose values are commonly
used—the top dose deﬁning the amount of energy absorbed at the resist
surface, and the bottom dose indicating the minimum dose required at the
not exceed a value of 5 for PMMA resist. This ratio further decreases for
thicker resist layers in order to prevent foaming of the surface layer. A third
dose is related to the dose that is absorbed underneath the gold absorber.
This dose, the so-called critical dose, determines the minimum gold absorber
thickness needed to sufﬁciently absorb the synchrotron radiation.
Dose calculation and optimizing exposure conditions beneﬁt from the
properties of synchrotron radiation, namely, that the incident power spec-
trum can be precisely calculated from the machine and operating parameters.
FIGURE 3.7
(a) Three millimeter–thick PMMA sheet solvent bonded to a silicon substrate. (b) Four milli-
meter–thick SU-8 layer applied to a silicon substrate using the double-dry chip casting method.
(b)
(a)
resist–substrate interface to fully destroy the resist and make it soluble (see
 In order to properly expose the resist, the top to bottom dose ratio should
Figure 3.8).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
55
Beamline properties as well as absorption coefﬁcients from window, mask,
ﬁlter, and resist materials are included in a program named DOSESIM [40]
and offer a convenient way to perform the calculation. The basic equation
for dose calculation is presented in Equation 3.4 [41].
(3.4)
where:
FIGURE 3.8
Exposure doses used in x-ray lithography. Critical dose: maximum dose underneath absorber
to avoid development. Top dose: maximum dose allowed at the top of the resist before foaming
or bubble formation occurs. Bottom dose: minimum dose required at the resist–substrate interface
to completely dissolve the resist.
D(z)
Absorbed dose [J/cm3] in depth z
E
Electron energy [GeV]
E0
Rest mass electron [GeV]
r0
Radius of curvature of bending magnet [m]
R
Distance source to scanner [m]
I
Electron current [A]
H
Scanning height [mm]
G3
Universal spectral distribution function 
λc
Characteristic wavelength of the source
µi(λ) 
Linear absorption coefﬁcient of i-th material [1/µm]
di
Thickness of i-th absorber [µm]
Mask 
Resist 
Substrate 
Critical Dose
Top Dose
Bottom Dose
D z J
cm
E
E r
R m H mm
( )[ /
]
.
[ ]
[
]
3
16
7
0
7
0
1 421 10
1
1
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
−
G
e
e
c
resist
z
d
resist
i
3(
)
( )
( )
( )
λ
λ
µ
λ
µ
λ
µ λ
⋅
⋅
⋅
−
⋅
−
i
i
d
nm
∑
∫
λ
λ
λ
[
]
min
max
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

56
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Besides resist performance, exposure costs are another critical factor, espe-
cially for commercial applications. Systematic studies have been performed
comparing PMMA and SU-8 resist for x-ray lithography applications [42–44].
While key structure features, such as sidewall verticality and roughness are
comparable, SU-8 is of superior sensitivity allowing patterning of millime-
ter–thick resist layers in only a few minutes (see Table 3.2).
It should be mentioned, however, that the extreme sensitivity of SU-8 requires
thicker gold absorber structures to more completely block the radiation.
Another critical issue of fully cross-linked SU-8 resist is the inability to
fully remove the cross-linked material [45], limiting the use of this resist
predominantly to applications where the ﬁnal product is made from SU-8.
3.4
High-Aspect-Ratio LIGA Structures
Examples of high-aspect structures made from PMMA and SU-8 are shown
properties such as smooth and vertical sidewalls, and arbitrary, two-dimen-
sional geometry.
Besides the increased sensitivity, SU-8 also offers the option of building
multilevel microstructures by performing the basic SU-8 process multiple
combined optical lithography and x-ray lithography, respectively.
An important feature of LIGA resist structures are vertical, smooth side-
walls. Early work performed at the Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe/Insitut
für Mikrostrukturtechnik showed that LIGA sidewalls are nearly perfectly
vertical, showing a slope error of only 0.04 µm per 100 µm of resist height
[34]. This value has been conﬁrmed in later experiments by other groups
[46–48]. When using harder x-ray photons, for example from the CAMD
wiggler source, this value has to be slightly corrected, to approximately 1µm
per 100 µm of resist height [49], due to increased dose deposition from
secondary radiation [50,51] in the shadowed resist areas, primarily due to
larger penetration depth of high-energy x-ray photons and photoelectrons.
TABLE 3.2
Comparison of Typical Exposure Dose Values for PMMA and 
SU-8 Resists
Property
PMMA Resist
SU-8 Resist
Top Dose [J/ccm3]
Maximum 20,000
Less than 100
Bottom Dose [J/ccm3]
Minimum 4,000
Minimum 15
Dose Ratio
< 5
< 7
Critical Dose [J/ccm3]
< 100
< 0.05
in Figures 3.9a through g. The examples also demonstrate typical LIGA
times. Figure 3.9g shows an example of a three-layer structure fabricated by
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
57
The contributions to any measured deviation from a perfectly vertical
sidewall are manifold and include engineering as well as fundamental effects
[52]. Inaccuracies in scanner motion during x-ray exposure, high but not
perfect selectivity of the developer, or a sloped absorber sidewall proﬁle are
engineering effects related to the performance of the process and as such can
be more readily controlled. The more fundamental limits are related to pri-
mary effects including natural divergence of the synchrotron light source,
Fresnel diffraction at the absorber pattern and penetration depth of photo
electrons into shaded areas [53] as well as secondary effects from ﬂuorescence
light produced by the mask and the substrate materials [54,55] and thermal
effects [56] in the mask and resist [57].
FIGURE 3.9
(a) Approximately 2.5 mm–tall gear patterned into PMMA. (b) Approximately 1.5 mm–tall free-
standing PMMA mesh with approximately 150 µm–thick ridges. (c) Approximately 3 mm–tall
posts in SU-8. The gap between adjacent posts is approximately 300 µm.
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

58
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
By combining x-ray lithography with other microfabrication processes,
multilevel and quasi-three-dimensional microstructures [58] are possible.
One example involves using a sacriﬁcial layer (titanium) and aligned x-ray
lithography exposure to build acceleration sensors that are partly anchored
to the substrate and partly released [59]. By performing this process on a
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) substrate, very compact
acceleration sensors with minimum length of conductive wires connecting
the sensor electrode with the underlying CMOS circuit have been built and
successfully tested [60].
Development of tall, narrow microstructures is a challenging task. With
developing times for millimeter-tall PMMA microstructures of several days,
developer, developing procedures, and parameters have to be carefully cho-
sen to ensure excellent structure properties, and systematic results are
reported in a number of publications [61–64].
FIGURE 3.9 (continued)
(d) 20 µm grating pattern in SU-8 in 400 µm height; close-up illustrates high patterning accuracy
at the substrate–resist interface.13 (e) Fluid channel structure with approximately 5 µm–wide
post pattern on a graphite substrate to provide a densely packed column. (f) 1 mm–tall conical
posts in SU-8, achieved with 6x tilt-and-rotate exposures as an example for tapered sidewalls.
(g) 3-level SU-8 structure fabricated by combined optical and x-ray lithography, total height is
1.5 mm, of a microengine.
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
59
3.4.1
Electroplating of DXRL Microstructures
The electrodeposition of metals and alloys plays an important role in the
fabrication of LIGA or UV-LIGA microstructures, for example, electrolytic
gold deposition in the mask fabrication technology or nickel deposition for
the production of mold inserts. Among metals and alloys, nickel and copper
are two of the most commonly used in microfabrication. In this section, a
very brief introduction to electroplating technology, speciﬁcally for plating
of Ni, is given. Interested readers are encouraged to read the book by
Schlesinger and Paunovic [65] and various publications in the LIGA ﬁeld
[66–68] for further information.
Electrodeposition, or electroplating, is a technology that deposits a functional
surface layer on metals or metalized, nonconducting materials, for example, to
enhance corrosion resistance or for decorative applications. In this process a
solid metal surface is grown on a conductive cathode when a potential is
applied between the anode and cathode inserted into a bath of metal salts [65].
The process requires strict control of several parameters, including the salt and
buffer concentrations, pH, and temperature of the bath, to deposit the metal.
Other conditions, such as the applied potential, bath current, pattern geometry,
and rate of mixing in the bath, also affect the uniformity of the deposition. 
3.4.1.1
Basic Principle of Electrodeposition
Electroplating is basically an electrochemical reaction induced by the current
(or potential) applied between the two electrodes. The metal salts are dis-
solved into the electroplating solution (electrolyte). The current ﬂowing
through the plating tank is a ﬂow of positive ions (electron in opposite
direction), and it can be used to measure the reaction rate. 
The anodic process is oxidation,
,
(3.5)
while a reduction reaction happens at the cathode:
.
(3.6)
If the current efﬁciencies at both the anode and cathode are assumed to be the
schematically a basic setup for electroplating. It consists of electrodes (anode
cathode, and sometimes a reference, too), an aqueous-metal solution, and a
DC or AC power supply.
To keep the plating solution clean, some type of ﬁltration mechanism is
occasionally used. Mechanical mixing of the solution enhancing plating uni-
formity is typically employed, too.
M
M
ne
n
→
+
+
−
M
ne
M
n+
−
+
→
same, there would be no change in mass of the metal ions. Figure 3.10 shows
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

60
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The plating seed layer, which is normally a thin metal ﬁlm deposited on
the substrate, serves as the cathode. The anode is the metal from the plating
ions. An electrical potential is applied across the electrodes, which are
inserted into the tank ﬁlled with the electrolyte (salt plating solution with
the targeted metal ions). A current ﬂow is formed between the cathode and
the anode and through the electrolyte solution. When the metal ions in the
electrolyte obtain electrons from the cathode, they are reduced to nano-sized
metal particles and deposit on the surface of the metal ﬁlm coated on the
substrate.
In LIGA or UV-LIGA, Ni is commonly electroplated because it has excellent
electroplating properties. The aqueous-metal solution is made of nickel
(Ni2+), hydrogen (H+), sulfate ions (SO4
2–), and additives such as sodium
lauryl sulfate (CH3(CH2)11OSO3Na). With an external electric ﬁeld applied,
nickel ions are attracted to the negatively biased cathode. The nickel ions
that reach the cathode receive free electrons and are converted to metallic
nickel at the cathode surface forming the electrodeposits. Simultaneously,
nickel anodes produce ions in the plating solution by the electrochemical
etching process. Hydrogen ions, which also gain electrons from the cathode,
form bubbles of hydrogen gas. The formation of hydrogen gas is undesirable
because it lowers the plating efﬁciency and the bubbles can obstruct the
deposition of the intended electrodeposit [69].
3.4.1.1.1
Galvanostatic and Potentiostatic Plating
Galvanostatic plating is the process in which a constant current is supplied
across the bath with no direct control of the bath potential. Potentiostatic
plating is the process in which the potential across the electrodes is controlled
at a required level. The galvanostatic plating technique is commonly used
for electroplating processes with an established relationship between the
current and overpotential. The advantage of this method is that it does not
require complex electronics, such as an electrochemical potentiostat or a
reference electrode. It is typically carried out using a heated bath, standard
cathode, and a constant current power supply. Potentiostatic electroplating
FIGURE 3.10
Schematic setup of an electroplating experiment.
Mixer
e
Cathode
(plating sample)
–reduction
Current supply
(or potential supply)
V
–
+
Water bath with
temperature control
Anode
–reduction
+
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
61
is sometimes preferred in electroplating alloys or multilayer structures such
as giant-magnetoresistive (GMR) ﬁlm because mixed plating baths are com-
monly used and selective electroplating is achieved with controlled poten-
tials across electrodes.
3.4.1.2
Electroplating Rate and Calculation of the Deposition Thickness
Theoretical calculation of electroplating rate and thickness could be per-
formed using Faraday’s law.
(3.7)
where w is the amount of metal deposited at the cathode or dissolved at the
anode in grams, Aw is the atomic weight of the metal to be plated, nel is the
number of electrons involved in the reaction, F = 96487 (C/mol) is Faraday’s
constant, I is the current ﬂowing through the plating tank, and t is the
electroplating time.
This calculation assumes that all of the current is effectively used in the
deposition or dissolution of the metal. In practice, secondary electrochemical
reactions may occur such as the reduction of hydrogen, which consume a
small percentage of the current. 
Therefore, the previous equation needs to be modiﬁed as:
,
(3.8)
where η is plating efﬁciency.
The thickness of electroplated metal can be calculated by considering the
volume and density of the electroplated metals as follows,
(3.9)
where ρ is the density of plated metal, A is the area being electroplated, and
h is the thickness of deposition. The deposit thickness can be determined as
follows,
.
(3.10)
and the electroplating rate can therefore be derived as,
,
(3.11)
w
A
F n
I t
w
el
=
⋅
⋅
w
A
F n
I t
practical
w
el
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
η
w
A h
=
⋅
⋅
ρ
h
A
I t
A F n
w
el
=
⋅
⋅⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
η ρ
dh
dt
A
I
A F n
A
J
F n
w
el
w
el
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
η ρ
η ρ
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

62
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
where J is the current density. One of the most commonly electroplated
metals is nickel. We therefore will use nickel as an example in our calculation
here. The atomic weight of nickel is 58.69 g/mol, the number of electrons
involved nel = 2, and its mass density ρ = 8.9g/cm3. Using Faraday’s constant,
the thickness of electroplated nickel can be calculated as,
,
(3.12)
where the unit for the current density J is Amperes per unit square centimeter
and the time unit t is in seconds. If we assume cathode efﬁciency to be 95.5%
and the current density chosen to be 10 mA/cm2, the time to electroplate a
thickness of 5 µm can be calculated to be about 25.5 minutes, and the time
required for electroplating 50 µm of nickel ﬁlm is about 255.4 minutes. If the
electroplating current density is increased to about 50 mA/cm2, then the time
required to plate 50 µm–thick nickel ﬁlm is about 51 minutes.
3.4.1.2.1
Surface Uniformity of Electroplated Metals
In general, the deposit thickness will not be perfectly uniform across the entire
plated area. The electroplating uniformity is affected by factors such as non-
uniform current distribution, the geometric factor, and the throwing power of
the plating solution. The local current density affects the deposition rate and
therefore the thickness of the metal deposition at that point.
There are several factors that affect the current density distribution on the
plating base: (1) geometries of the plating base, (2) the location and orienta-
tion of the particular part relative to the anode, (3) and the position and the
orientation in the plating bath. If a particular part of the sample is closer to
the anode, the equivalent electrical resistance is obviously smaller, and the
current density will be larger. The nonuniform current density consequently
results in thicker deposition in prominences and less thick depositions in
recessed areas. To obtain uniform electroplating, it is therefore critical to
maintain a uniform current density across the entire seed layer. In microfab-
rication processes such as LIGA and UV-LIGA, microsized plating molds are
normally prepared on the substrate so that only selected portions of the seed
layer on the substrate are exposed to the electroplating solution as illustrated
size and geometry, it is inevitable that there will be nonuniform current
distributions across the sample surface. This results in nonuniform electro-
plating across the sample surface. This has always been a challenging issue
in microfabrication [70]. Frequently, shields are adopted to improve the
uniformity of current density.
The throwing power of the plating solution also affects the electroplating
uniformity. Metal distribution is inﬂuenced by cathode polarization, the cath-
ode efﬁciency–current density relationship, and the electrical conductivity of
h cm
A
I t
A F n
w
el
[
]
.
.
=
⋅
⋅⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
×
×
⋅
η
ρ
η
58 69
8 9
96487
2
I
A t
J t
⋅=
⋅⋅
η
29263
in Figure 3.11. As the template cavities on the substrate tend to have different
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
63
the solution [71]. Throwing power can be determined experimentally. A
solution with high-throwing power is capable of depositing almost equal
thicknesses on both recessed and prominent areas. In addition the throwing
power can also be slightly improved by lowering the current density, increas-
ing the electrical conductivity of the solution, increasing the anode-to-cath-
ode distance, and raising the pH value and temperature.
3.4.2
Nickel Electroplating and Solutions
Because nickel is one of the most commonly electroplated metals in MEMS,
especially in the LIGA fabrication process, we will again use it as the exam-
ple. Generally, nickel sulfate solution (Watts solution) and nickel sulfamate
solution are used for nickel plating. Typical composition of the solutions and
plating parameters are summarized in Table 3.3.
Sulfate solution is most commonly used for decorative plating. Nickel
sulfamate solution is used for electroplating in engineering applications. It
offers high deposition rates, low residual stress, and good ductility. The
disadvantage is the relatively higher cost in comparison with nickel sulfate
solution. It is important to carefully maintain the solutions and continuously
treat them for impurities.
FIGURE 3.11
Nonuniform current density by masking material.
TABLE 3.3
A Typical Composition and Operating Conditions for Nickel Sulfamate Solution
NiSO4⋅6H2O (Nickel Sulfate)
Ni(SO3NH2)2 (Nickel Sulfamate)
300–450 g/L
NiCl2⋅6H2O (Nickel Chloride)
0–30 g/L
B(OH)3 (Boric Acid)
30–45 g/L
CH3(CH2)11OSO3Na (Sodium Lauryl Sulfate)
1 g/L
Temperature
40–60 
Agitation rate
200 rpm
pH
3.5–4.5
Current density 
20–150 mA/cm2
Deposition rate 
25–85 µm/hr
Substrate
Plating
mold
Plating base/
seed layer 
Lines of constant current
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

64
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
For most of the MEMS applications, sulfamate solution is preferred. The
nickel sulfamate is the primary source of nickel ions (Ni2+). A potential problem
with this solution is hydrolysis of nickel sulfamate, which produces sulfate and
ammonium ions. These greatly increase the tensile stress of the deposit. To
avoid hydrolysis of the nickel sulfamate it is important to maintain the tem-
perature below 65°C and the pH above 3.0. Nickel chloride has a pronounced
effect on stress and also causes anode corrosion. However, it also increases
conductivity, thereby reducing voltage requirements, throwing power, and uni-
formity of coating thickness distribution. The major concern, however, is that
chloride increases the internal stress of the electroplated nickel, which may have
serious consequences for microfabricated structures. Low chloride content
should be maintained for the minimum residual stress. A low concentration of
nickel chloride, however, is still needed for satisfactory anode performance.
Boric acid in the bath serves as a buffer and helps to control the pH of the
solution. Because the cathode efﬁciency (90 to 97%) is generally lower than
the anode efﬁciency (close to 100%), the nickel ion concentration and the pH
of the solution will slowly rise during the electroplating process. Regular
additions of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) are therefore required to adjust the pH.
Low boric acid concentrations may result in cracks in plated ﬁlm. The rec-
ommended concentration depends on temperature, ranging from 30 g/L at
20°C to over 4 5g/L at 52°C [72]. High boric acid tends to salt out of solution
at lower temperatures and is difﬁcult to redissolve [73]. Surfactant (sodium
lauryl sulfate) may also be added to lower the surface tension of the plating
solution to avoid air and hydrogen bubbles clinging to the sample being
plated. It may also affect corrosion performance [74].
3.4.3
Electroplating Quality and Inﬂuential Factors 
Process quality control involves maintaining the concentrations of the main
constituents within speciﬁed limits, and controlling current density, temper-
ature, pH, agitation, and the purity of plating solutions.
3.4.3.1
Internal Stress
Existence of residual or internal stresses is a common problem with electro-
plated metals and alloys due to the effect of the electrocrystallization process
or the codeposition of impurities (hydrogen, sulfur, etc.) [75], especially when
thick layers of metal are plated as in fabrication of high-aspect-ratio micro-
structures (HARM). Lower residual stress can be achieved with sulfamate
nickel solution in comparison with using nickel sulfate solution, which is
more commonly used for decorative electroplating applications [76].
3.4.3.1.1
Current Density
As is evident from Equation 3.7, the current density J determines the elec-
troplating rate. Higher current density produces a higher plating rate, but
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
65
has the disadvantage of higher residual stress and nonuniform electroplating
thickness. Research has found that 20 to 50 mA/cm2 can be a reasonably
good plating current density. When the current density becomes higher than
approximately 100 mA/cm2, nonuniformity will appear. Electroplating with
controlled pulse current is also widely used to reduce residual stresses.
Within normal operating limits (20 to 150 mA/cm2), it has been reported
that current density and temperature have little effect on the hardness and
the structure of the deposits. On the other hand, current density has varying
effects on stress. It may ﬂuctuate from compressive to tensile, and the prop-
erties and characteristics of the deposit are also affected by current density.
Increasing current density may cause a minor increase in tensile stress in a
bath that is free of chloride.
3.4.3.1.2
Temperature
Temperature can inﬂuence the brightness range, throwing power, ductility,
hardness, internal stress, and burning characteristics. Stress has a pro-
nounced minimum at 50°C with value of about 13.8 MPa in tensile, increasing
uniformly above and below 50°C. In general, ductility of the plated metals
decreases rapidly as the bath temperature increases.
3.4.3.1.3
pH Value
The pH of the plating solutions signiﬁcantly inﬂuences bath performance
[77]. The pH can affect the bright plating range, cathode efﬁciency, effects of
impurities, throwing power, stress, and the physical properties of the plated
metal. In a sulfamate solution for nickel electroplating, the stress increases
rapidly at pH values above 5.0 because of the codeposition of basic nickel
salts. Hardness in the sulfamate solution is also affected by pH. If pH rises
above pH 5.0, hardness increases and ductility decreases through codeposi-
tion of small amounts of basic nickel salts. It is therefore suggested that a
pH range of around 4.0 (3.9 to 4.1) be maintained. In normal operating
conditions the pH tended to rise and this was counteracted by the addition
of dilute sulfuric acid. 
3.4.3.1.4
Agitation
Agitation is important to dislodge hydrogen or air bubbles from the cathode
surface, which might otherwise cause pitting. It is especially important for
electroplating into small holes or microfeatures as commonly needed in
microfabrication to enhance the movement of ions. Some researchers also
have reported dramatically improved electroplating results in MEMS using
megasonic agitation [77a]. Agitation also helps to maintain a uniform tem-
perature in the plating bath. 
3.4.3.1.5
Filtration
Continuous ﬁltration is often needed to keep the plating solutions free of
insoluble particles. They may be introduced through solid particles adhering
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

66
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
to the sample, additions of impure chemicals, corrosion of bath components,
airborne particles, and so forth. 
3.5
Molding of LIGA Microstructures
In the acronym LIGA, the A stands for Abformung, which is the German word
for molding. It was foreseen from the very beginning of LIGA that replication
via a molding process was the most viable means of commercialization and
mass production. Besides being a fast, highly automated production process,
molding also offers the advantage of a wide choice of materials including
polymers, ceramics, and metals. 
Replication of parts by molding is an “old” technology. There are a number
of methods that come under the umbrella of molding. The processes most
applicable to molding of high-aspect-ratio microstructures discussed in the
course of this chapter are hot embossing (or thermoforming) and injection
molding. Information regarding other common molding processes can be
found in any modern plastic or polymer processing handbook [78].
Injection molding and hot embossing are thermal processes in which a ther-
moplastic polymer material is heated sufﬁciently beyond its softening temper-
ature to effectively change its shape to that of the mold. In the case of injection
molding, the polymer is melted from granular raw material and injected into
injection molding machine consists of a heated barrel (3) equipped with a
reciprocating screw (2) usually driven by a hydraulic motor (6), which feeds
the molten polymer from a hopper (1) into a temperature-controlled split cavity
containing the micromold insert (5). Heated injection nozzles and distribution
plates (4) enable optimized injection of the molded plastic into the cavity. The
screw melts the polymer and also acts as a ram during the injection phase. The
polymer melt is typically injected at several hundred atmospheres into the
cavity with overall ﬁlling times of less than one second [79].
For hot embossing, preformed polymer sheets are compressed using a
heated mold causing locally softening and deformation of the polymer sheet
(see Figure 3.12b). The hot embossing or stamping process uses a heated press
(platens (1) and (2) with guiding pistons (3)), into which an assembly of mold
insert (4) and polymer sheet (5) is placed. Ramping up the temperature above
the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer and closing the press will
allow pattern transfer from the mold insert into the polymer. Cooling down
below Tg, opening the press, and taking out the structured polymer sheet,
completes the fabrication cycle, which typically takes several minutes. 
Both processes require a vacuum when molding tall, high-aspect-ratio
microstructures, which enables proper ﬁlling of the mold with polymer and
also prevents “burning” of the polymer with air compressed in the micro-
cavities during the ﬁlling process.
a chamber containing the mold insert as shown in Figure 3.12a. Typically, the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
67
There are a number of thermoplastic polymers that are routinely molded
either by injection molding or hot embossing; however, the process for mold-
ing microstructures and especially high-aspect-ratio microstructures is quite
different from conventional “macromolding.” For most macroscale molding,
the mold inserts are held at a constant temperature (isothermal process),
usually below the glass transition temperature of the polymer. Micromolding
almost always involves a variothermal process [80], in which the molds are
also heated above the Tg of the polymer during the mold ﬁll step and have
to be cooled to below the glass transition temperature prior to the demolding
step. High-quality transfer of a pattern into polymer sheets is contingent on
choosing the correct set of embossing parameters, including molding tem-
perature, molding force, molding rate (the rate of displacement of the mold-
ing tool during the compression stage), hold time, demolding temperature,
and demolding rate. While all these parameters affect the quality of the
molding, molding temperature and force are the two most signiﬁcant ones
as they ensure complete mold ﬁlling without excessive thermal or mechan-
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.12
(a) Schematic of injection molding equipment and process (see text for details). (b) Schematic
of the hot embossing process (see text for details).
1
3
5
4
2
6
Injection unit
Clamping unit 
3
2
5
4
1
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

68
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
ical load on the mold insert or molded part. Advanced processing equipment
like the HEX 02 hot embossing machine from Jenoptik Mikrotechnik (Jenop-
tik Mikrotechnik, Jena, Germany) allows continuous control and measure-
ment of all the above parameters during the molding process, thus resulting
the open vacuum chamber of the HEX 02 machine at CAMD and Figure
3.13b represents a typical displacement-versus-temperature curve measured
during the embossing cycle of a PMMA sample [81,82].
This representation also provides good insight into the occurrences taking
place during the embossing process. In the region marked T <<Tg, the curve
slopes downward because the expansion of the material and machine column
displaces the force unit in the negative direction. The curve levels out in the
region marked T ~ Tg, and starts rising as the polymer begins to soften
slightly and starts conforming to the mold insert face. When T > Tg, the curve
starts sloping upward as the polymer loses viscosity and is beginning to ﬂow
to the sides. This is the ideal zone for embossing the polymer because the
polymer is sufﬁciently viscous to ﬂow, but does not ﬂow too freely yet. When
T >> Tg, the polymer has almost liqueﬁed and hence the curve slopes up
sharply. At this point the polymer ﬂows too freely and embossing in this
zone yields poor results.
Both injection molding and hot embossing have their advantages and
disadvantages, and a decision as to which process is used is often determined
by the application and microstructure details. Injection molding is better
suited for mass production of microparts as processing time is shorter and
the process can be easily fully automated. However, aspect ratios are limited
to somewhere around 20 [83] and features that are too small (< 50 µm) tend
to break in the demolding step. Hot embossing is suitable for prototyping
and small series fabrication of replicated microstructures with typical cycle
times of 15 min [84], and smallest structures less than 10 µm wide have been
successfully replicated [85]. As hot embossing is a relatively gentle process
with low material ﬂow and very slow processing rates, the produced parts
exhibit lower internal stress, making them ideal for optical components
[86–92] and molding of very high-aspect-ratio microstructures (up to 50 [83]). 
Hot embossing is an additive process, in that the structure-forming mate-
rial is deposited only in those areas constituting the microdevice structure.
This is in contrast to bulk and surface micromachining where feature blanket
deposition of the structural material is followed by an etching, subtractive
process to realize the ﬁnal device geometry. Similar to the silicon-based
micromachining processes, hot embossing can also be combined with pre-
structured, fragile substrates like CMOS wafers using an aligned hot emboss-
ing process. The ﬁnal result is an integrated, compact mechanical sensing
and actuating device on top of signal controlling microelectronics [93–95]. 
Injection molding and hot embossing are well suited to combining pro-
duction capability with a wide choice of engineering materials to meet the
future demands of a variety of MEMS applications. While polymers are
commonly used in research and are the preferred material for many bio-MEMS
in a high degree of repeatability between process runs. Figure 3.13a shows
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
69
applications for producing cheap, disposable microﬂuidic chips [96–98],
replicated microstructures in ceramic and metal for generally harsh envi-
ronment applications or for devices with speciﬁc material properties, for
example, piezoelectric functions [99], are also in demand [100,101]. Shaping
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.13
(a) Open vacuum chamber of the HEX 02 hot embossing machine at CAMD. (b) Displacement
versus temperature curve measured during an embossing cycle (see text for details).
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
–0.5
Position (mm)
200
180
160
140
Temperature (celsius)
120
100
80
Displacement vs. temperature
T>>Tg
T<<Tg
T>Tg
T~Tg
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

70
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
of metal microstructures typically uses the lost mold approach commonly
applied for dental applications [102]. The process starts with a molded
plastic part, which is embedded in a ceramic matrix. During the ceramic
sintering process the polymer is evaporated (pyrolisis) and completely
removed from the form. The cavity formed in the hard ceramic material is
then heated and evacuated, followed by injection of the melted metal mate-
rial, for example, using metal injection molding or centrifugal casting. In
the ﬁnal step the ceramic material is dissolved (lost mold) releasing the
metallic microparts.
Patterning of ceramic microparts starts with making a ﬁne, ideally nano-
sized ceramic powder of the desired ceramic material and thoroughly mix-
ing it with a polymeric binder forming the so-called feedstock. The feedstock
becomes the raw material for the subsequent replication process. The vis-
cosity of the feedstock is determined by the particle load as well as the
requirements of the replication process. For injection molding it has to be
low enough to allow sufﬁcient ﬂow through the injection channels, while
in hot embossing sheet material, so-called green tape allows the use of solid
material with a high particle load, which will only ﬂow into the mold
cavities at elevated temperatures and high applied pressures during the
embossing step. After shaping the feedstock, the polymeric binder material
has to be removed at high temperatures (debinding) and the ceramic pow-
der will be compacted in a ﬁnal sinter step typically achieving 98% of the
theoretical density. Along with this step goes material shrinkage of around
20% making it difﬁcult to control the actual dimensions of the micrometer
scale features [83].
3.6
Application of LIGA Microstructures
Since the early 1990s, precision LIGA microstructures have been designed
and fabricated targeting applications in micro-optics, microﬂuidics, actua-
tors, and sensors [103]. Some of these early ideas have matured to the point
that commercial products have become available today. However, for many
of these potential products, small volume production of only a few hundred
or thousand parts is common practice, and scaling up of production volume
remains a key challenge. Today’s applications focus on life science and bio-
MEMS [104], thermal management [105], microreactor technology [106],
precision mechanics [6,107] and micro-optics [108,109]. Products developed
beneﬁt from both a wide range of available materials and extremely small
and precise feature properties. The examples presented in the following
paragraphs illustrate ongoing efforts at CAMD and collaborating partners,
while other examples can be found in the literature [110–113].
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
71
3.6.1
Mold Insert Fabrication
One of the main applications is the fabrication of robust, high-quality mold
inserts using an x-ray lithography–fabricated microstructure as a template.
Two different approaches are realized as illustrated in Figures 3.14a and 3.14b
[114]. Modiﬁcation of these approaches, for example by using a prestructured
substrate before performing the LIGA lithography process, are also commonly
practiced and allow the fabrication of multilevel mold inserts [104,112].
approaches, and indicates that there is no standard process, but different
choices taking into account the design and requirements of the application.
LIGA–fabricated mold inserts are typically made of electroplated nickel or
nickel-iron alloys. These tools are very robust compared to silicon tools,
however their quality and strength is largely dependent on the level of process
the plated nickel “disc” still attached to the silicon substrate, while Figure
3.15b shows the front side after release from the silicon carrier.
Major challenges have been the overplating of large resist areas into which
narrow ﬂuidic channels have been patterned, and to reduce stress in the
plated nickel to avoid or minimize bending of the substrate and the mold
insert. While the latter aspect has been achieved through bath optimization
as well as plating parameter adjustments, the uniform overplating is realized
FIGURE 3.14
(Left) Fabrication of a steel-nickel mold insert suitable for larger LIGA structures. (Right)
Fabrication of a nickel mold insert using the overplating approach also suitable for submi-
crometer LIGA structures.
Resist on stainless steel substrate patterned by X-ray lithography  
Resist 
Nickel 
Stainless steel 
Final mold insert 
Plate nickel and 
polish structures 
down to desired 
height 
Overplate nickel
and polish back down
to down to ﬂatness 
Release structure 
from steel plate and 
dissolve resist  
Dissolve 
resist 
Steel plate forms 
mold base   
Overplated nickel
forms mold base
Table 3.4 brieﬂy summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of both
control that is maintained during the electroforming step. Figure 3.15a shows
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

72
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
by depositing a thin gold ﬁlm onto the structured resist providing a con-
ducting surface once the plating up of the HARM pattern is completed.
The growing interest in replicating nanometer-sized structures commonly
referred to as nano-imprint-lithography (NIL) has initiated research into the
molding of HAR submicrometer structures [115]. Figures 3.15c and 3.15d
show an early example of CAMD efforts. In this case the insert was fabri-
cated from an intermediate x-ray mask patterning an approximately 2
µm–thick PMMA resist applied onto a silicon substrate. The mold insert
has been electroplated into these structures using the overplating approach.
The ﬁnal thickness of the insert is approximately 0.5 mm, similar to the
shims used for CD/DVD molding. Successful replication using a HEX 02
hot embossing machine (Jenoptik GmbH, Germany) is demonstrated in
Figure 3.15d showing the master structures on the insert (hexagon mesh)
and the corresponding hexagonal posts replicated in PMMA.
3.6.2
Precision Parts by Direct LIGA
3.6.2.1
Safety-and-Arming Switch
In the United States, the MEMS Exchange [116] offers a large suite of MEMS
fabrication services available through a number of providers. The CAMD
service group is providing LIGA services for the MEMS Exchange and had
the opportunity to fabricate prototype safe-and-arm switches for munitions.
This project uses a direct LIGA approach combining x-ray lithography and
µm–wide spring structure on a graphite x-ray mask, while Figure 3.16b shows
a total of 16 wafers with approximately 300 µm–tall nickel parts. Fabrication
steps include x-ray lithography, electroplating of nickel, polishing of the
TABLE 3.4
Advantages and Disadvantages of Mold Insert Fabrication Approaches
Plated-on Mold Insert
Overplated Mold Insert
Superior ﬂatness because ﬂatness is a function 
of the machined substrate
Flatness is dependent on stresses induced due 
to electroplating conditions
Lower robustness as the interface between the 
electroformed part and the substrate is 
typically a weak interface; this also limits the 
smallest feature size
Higher robustness because microscale 
features and mold base are formed 
monolithically; submicrometer structures 
can be successfully replicated from these 
mold inserts
Machined substrate serves the dual purpose 
of a ﬁxture for attaching mold to molding 
machine
Separate ﬁxture must be fabricated and 
machining is necessary in order to attach the 
electroformed mold to molding machine
Shorter electroplating time
Longer electroplating time; especially for 
large polymer areas, additional deposition of 
a seed layer is required to ensure somewhat 
uniform overplating
Figure 3.15b shows the thin gold ﬁlm still on the actual nickel insert.
nickel electroplating. Figure 3.16a shows details of the pattern including a 10
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
73
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 3.15
(a) Ni mold insert electroplated on a silicon substrate with microﬂuidic pattern. (b) Ni mold
insert after release from the silicon substrate. (c) Overview of a nickel shim/mold insert with
submicrometer features, (d) Hexagonal structures on mold insert (left) with smallest lateral
dimensions of 1 µm and 2 µm height; molded posts in PMMA (right) [114a].
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

74
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
nickel surface, and resist removal. This semiproduction run illustrates that
high-yield production using direct LIGA is viable.
3.6.2.2
Nanobarcodes
For biorecognition applications, Nanoplex [117] is interested in patterning 5
to 10 µm–thick PMMA resist templates with submicrometer, densely packed
holes. These holes are used as templates to electrodeposit metal bar codes
consisting of alternating thin metal layers of discrete height. In collaboration
with the Institut für Mikrostruktur-technik/Forschungstram Karlsruhe
(IMT/FZK), an intermediate x-ray mask was directly patterned on a silicon
nitride membrane mask using a 100 keV electron beam writer. SEM images
imately 8 µm–tall PMMA posts patterned by soft x-ray lithography.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.16
An x-ray mask and 16 identical 100 mm silicon wafers with 300 µm nickel structures still
embedded in the PMMA template. (a) SEM picture of an x-ray mask showing a component
with 10 µm critical dimension. (b) 16 wafers exposed under the same conditions with identically
high yield results.
for these microstructures. Figure 3.17c shows a reversed pattern of approx-
in Figures 3.17a through 3.17c illustrate the current fabrication capabilities
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
75
3.6.2.3
Harmonic Drive® Microgears
Micromotion [118] is interested in receiving x-ray lithography–patterned
resist templates in 550 µm and 1050 µm heights, respectively, for nickel-iron
alloy electroplating and further assembly of Harmonic Drive® microgears.
Harmonic Drive gear assemblies are perfectly suited for precision position-
ing applications. The backslash-free microgear trains consist of only six
toothed wheels and are of interest for actuators in industrial robots, lens
adjustment and optical switches in micro-optics, and microdosing pumps
and surgical equipment in medicine [119]. In order to achieve the highest
levels of performance, the gears have to be fabricated in nickel-iron alloy
with very tight tolerances, nearly perfect vertical sidewalls (deviation from
a perfect sidewall of less than 1 µm for a 1 millimeter–tall structure), good
control of absolute dimensions (better than 1 µm), no defects, and in large
numbers in a batch process.
In a close collaboration among BESSY [120], CAMD, and MRT GmbH [121]
efforts have been focused on fabricating these gears with high yield and in
high quality in PMMA and SU-8 resist. While achieving all requirements at
the same time remains a major challenge and still requires process research
and optimization, the current status is encouraging and sufﬁcient to deliver
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.17
Gold mask structure and copied PMMA pattern for nanobarcode application. (a) Approximately
1 µm–wide gold posts in ~2-µm thick gold on intermediate x-ray mask. (b) Examples of test
arrays of submicrometer holes patterned onto ~6-µm thick PMMA using soft x-ray lithography
(left), close-up view of test ﬁeld with ~0.6-µm wide holes (right). 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

76
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
prototype structures to different customers. Figures 3.18 illustrate the actual
accomplishments. The ﬁgure on the left shows x-ray lithography–patterned
SU-8 structures (approximately 100 gear assemblies covering an area of 85 mm
on a 100 mm silicon wafer) in 550 µm and 1050 µm thicknesses, respectively,
ready for electroplating. The SEM picture to the right shows a completely
assembled drive made from electroplated nickel-iron parts. A remaining chal-
lenge to achieving high-yield production involves tiny defects on the mask
absorber structure resulting in imperfect gear and ﬂexspline structures. The
main reason for the defects is imperfections on the surface of the beryllium
mask substrate and difﬁculties in performing the electroplating step there.
3.6.2.4
Polymer Chips for Bio-MEMS Applications
Replication techniques such as injection molding or hot embossing are crucial
for many applications in bio-MEMS where cost and large numbers of fabri-
cated devices are important. There are a number of groups and companies
that have specialized in producing polymeric microﬂuidic chips with stan-
dard designs as well as supporting the fabrication of chips with customer-
speciﬁc features [104,122–124]. Commonly used polymers include polyme-
thyl-methacrylate (PMMA), polycarbonate (PC), polypropylene (PP), and
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.18
(a) Resist templates of SU-8 microgears ready for electroplating. (b) Assembled Harmonic Drive
gear train from nickel-iron parts. (Photos courtesy of Micromotion.)
Flex spline
Planet gears
Dynamic spline 
1 mm
00046222
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
77
recently cyclic-oleﬁne copolymer (COC). In collaboration with LSU’s Center
for BioModular Multi-Scale Systems [125] (CBM2), the CAMD service staff
routinely fabricates ﬂuidic chips for bio-MEMS applications. Depending
upon the needs, mold inserts are fabricated using micromachining, LIGA,
or a combination of both processes (see Figures 3.19a and b). Replication of
typical high-aspect-ratio structures is done by hot embossing, which is very
suitable for these geometries and also best meets the demand for fast turn-
around and the moderate number of chips typically needed for initial tests
of a given design. One focus of the joint research efforts is combining multiple
chips in a vertical stack [126] where each chip performs one speciﬁc operation
only. Passive alignment of sealed chips and optimized ﬂuid interconnects
between them make execution of complex bioanalysis protocols easily pos-
sible (see Figures 3.19c and d).
3.6.2.5
Regenerators for Cryocoolers and Stirling Cycle Heat Engines
LIGA offers the possibility of producing small, well-deﬁned features in tall
structures, an important advantage for heat exchanger and cooling device
applications. One example is a cryo-cooler, a device that removes heat from
FIGURE 3.19
(a) Brass (left) and LIGA Ni (right) mold inserts with microﬂuidic structures. (c–d) Vertical
ﬂuidic stack concept (left) and molded ﬂuidic chips in glass slide (1" × 3") format (right).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
6"
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

78
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
an environment that needs to be maintained at cryogenic temperature.
Regenerative heat engines and cryo-coolers use a regenerator to absorb and
release energy at appropriate times within a process cycle. An example of a
heat engine with a regenerator is a Stirling heat engine (described in any
thermodynamics text [127]), which is basically a Stirling heat engine running
in reverse. The regenerator typically consists of a porous solid matrix through
which a gas ﬂows cyclically back and forth. In one direction, energy is
transferred from the gas into the solid matrix, while in the other direction
the gas absorbs energy from the solid matrix. A regenerator functions best
when the temperature difference between the solid and the gas at any posi-
tion within the regenerator is minimal, the pressure drop of the gas across
the regenerator is minimal, the axial conduction within the solid matrix in
the ﬂow direction is minimal, and the dead space (total volume associated
with the pores in the regenerator) is small. In addition to these thermody-
namic parameters, the regenerator should be made from a material that is
strong and tough and resistant to damage from shock loads, compression,
and other factors.
device is basically a well-aligned stack of disks with each disk perforated
with an array of tightly packed microchannels providing high porosity with
minimized ﬂow resistance and an extremely high heat transfer-to-volume
ratio. In addition, alignment holes for pins are included in the design allow-
ing for simple assembly of a stack of disks. Figure 3.20b shows a close-up
view of a nickel regenerator with a unique involute design that minimizes
axial conduction. The individual webs of each disk are about 14 µm wide,
and each web is separated by a gap of 90 µm. The disks are around 250 µm
thick and the regenerator consisted of a stack of 45 such disks. The disks are
fabricated using a direct LIGA process combining x-ray lithography and
electroplating of nickel. One complete disk is shown in Figure 3.20c together
with a mounting jig. Currently, cooling tests are being conducted and initial
results indicate improved performance.
In some very low temperature cryo-coolers (below 10 K), an additional
parameter becomes important: the speciﬁc heat of the solid matrix [128]. At
higher temperatures, the heat capacity of the solid is usually much greater
than the heat capacity of the gas slug, which cycles back and forth within
the regenerator. However, at extremely low temperatures, the speciﬁc heat
of many materials asymptotically approaches a value of zero. In such a case,
it is important to fabricate the solid matrix from a material with a nonzero
shows a nickel regenerator for another cryo-cooler design. In this case, each
disk is approximately 200 µm thick. A close-up view of the hexagonal holes
is shown in Figure 3.21b near one of the alignment holes. The hexagonal
pores are 40 µm wide from ﬂat to ﬂat. Using the inverse pattern made from
nickel or copper as a tool in an electric discharge machining (EDM) process,
this design can also be transferred into rare earth material, such as erbium
A typical regenerator design is shown in Figure 3.20a. The assembled
heat capacity, for example, lead or a variety of rare earth metals. Figure 3.21a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
79
very low-temperature cryo-cooler.
3.6.2.6
Examples of Precision Parts (HT Micro)
Commercial applications for deep x-ray lithography–based processing
include several broad categories such as microﬂuidics, micromechanics, and
micro-optics. Common to all the applications is the demand to mass produce
precision, high-aspect-ratio geometries of millimeter-scale components with
micrometer-sized features, while maintaining dimensional tolerances down
to the submicrometer range and using materials suited for and compatible
with a given application.
FIGURE 3.20
(a) A regenerator consisting of a stack of aligned, porous disks using pins. (b) Detail of a nickel
regenerator disk; channel walls are 14 µm wide and 250 µm tall. (c) Single disk (approximately
1"Ø) and mounting jig. (Courtesy of International Mezzo Technologies, Inc., Baton Rouge, LA.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(see Figure 3.21c). A stack of such disks can be used on the cold end of a
As an example, many bioﬂuidic interfaces share these requirements. Figure
fabricated with deep x-ray lithography. Within this component are 12 channels
3.22a shows a 4-layer plastic component comprised entirely of PMMA and
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

80
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
that feed 12 reservoirs caged in by PMMA pillars, as shown in the detailed
30 µm–diameter cylindrical pillars with a height of 300 µm, which reside on
33 µm centers resulting in rows of 3 × 300 µm gaps. Another similar milli-
meter-sized biointerface structure with micron precision features is exhibited
in Figure 3.22c. This particular component, also constructed with multilayer
PMMA chips, contains features interfacing with three optical ﬁbers (center)
and intended to be used as an optical biosensor.
Another set of components, springs, combines precision patterning using
deep x-ray lithography and electroplating of high-yield strength materials,
such as NiFe alloys [129]. By precisely controlling the structure features, a
simple spring-mass acceleration switch may be realized as shown in Figure
3.22d. The spiral spring supports a ring, which when accelerated, will contact
the outer rim or top (not shown) and bottom shoulder at a predeﬁned
acceleration threshold.
The ability to maintain tolerances between high-aspect-ratio structures also
aids considerably in the ability to batch fabricate microactuators where a
small, micrometer-wide working gap can be maintained through a relatively
FIGURE 3.21
(a) Regenerator assembled from nickel disks; (b) close-up view of the pore structure of the
nickel disk, and (c) disk patterned in erbium using micro-EDM. (Courtesy of International
Mezzo Technologies, Inc., Baton Rouge, LA.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
photographs in Figure 3.22b. The PMMA cage structures consist of rows of
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
81
much larger thickness and overlap stroke dimensions of several hundred
micrometers. Coupled with compliant springs, low frequency (20 Hz) res-
onators with several hundred-micrometers amplitudes may be fabricated.
Such resonant actuators have been applied to generate structured light
microscope developed at the University of Arizona that uses a deep x-ray
lithography–deﬁned “optical bench” for alignment and support of minia-
ture optics as well as a resonant amplitude grating, which allows structured
light into the microscope when illuminated from a light source [130]. The
amplitude grating is shown supported by the center of the resonant actu-
ator in Figure 3.23b, which also shows the electrostatic comb drive, which
is capable of resonating the grating at a plus or minus 100 µm amplitude
with 10 volts with quality factors at atmosphere of over 50. Figure 3.23c
reveals a view of the left side of the microscope in Figure 3.23a where a
conventional 1 mm–diameter glass objective lens is supported and clamped
to the optical bench.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 3.22
(a) and (b) PMMA ﬂuidic chips with ﬂow ﬁlter structures. (c) Optical biosensor with ﬁbers. (d)
Acceleration switch made in NiFe alloy. (Photos courtesy of HT MicroAnalytical, Inc.)
sources for use in miniature con-focal microscopes. Figure 3.23a shows a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

82
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
3.7
Summary
In the past several years a number of prototype microsystems using LIGA
microstructures have been fabricated, tested, and become ready for commer-
cial use. While direct LIGA fabricated parts still struggle with high yield, high
reproducibility production molding is a proven manufacturing process and
higher volume, low-cost production is feasible and progressing. The main
areas of application of LIGA microstructures include micro-optics, microﬂu-
idic, microactuators and sensors, chemical and biochemical processing, and
precision microtools. Common to these areas is a need for high-aspect-ratio
microstructures with arbitrary two-dimensional shape, extremely high preci-
sion, submicrometer structural details, smallest dimensions in the micrometer
range, and structure heights ranging from some 10 µm up to several milli-
meters. The choice of a variety of engineering materials and the availability
of suitable manufacturing processes offer unique advantages over silicon-
based MEMS products, and will be a driving factor for future polymer, metal,
and ceramic microparts.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 3.23
(a–c) Examples of a micro-optical bench with integrated electrostatic actuator (see text for details).
(Photos courtesy of HT MicroAnalytical, Inc.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
83
Key advantages of LIGA-made microstructures are the inherent precision
and the ability to cover lateral dimensions from submicrometer to millimeter
sizes. These features make LIGA microstructures valuable for integrating
assembly and packaging features into MEMS devices, and drastically mini-
mizing the overall packaging effort, a huge cost factor in MEMS devices.
The molding process especially can be ﬂexibly combined, for example with
Si-based microelectronics on the batch/wafer level, further improving sys-
tem integration and high-yield production and reducing overall device
assembly efforts. Research in LIGA is an ongoing, active ﬁeld and a number
of new ideas combined with novel materials prove that LIGA technologies
still spark the interest and excitement of the research community. These
efforts are often driven by concrete requirements for new MEMS applications
from industrial partners. A remaining challenge for LIGA is the lack of
standardized processes demanding reevaluation and optimization of process
details for nearly every new microstructure. This also slows down the tran-
sition into commercial manufacturing.
In conclusion, LIGA technology has matured to the point that commercial
applications have become possible and are being pursued. Applications
including bio-MEMS and microﬂuidics have moderate structure require-
ments but need cost-effective production and dedicated materials to meet
market demands. A number of alternative microfabrication technologies,
including precision micromachining and micro-EDM are employed for mold
insert fabrication, and molding becomes the manufacturing technology of
choice for the microparts. A direct-LIGA approach combining x-ray lithog-
raphy and electroplating is used for applications for microstructures with
extreme precision and very high aspect ratios. Prototype fabrication of these
structures can be satisﬁed but scaling-up production with high yield and
high quality remains a challenge for the future.
Acknowledgment
Thank you to Prof. Wanjun Wang (LSU-ME department) for his support with
the electroplating section and editing of the overall text, Proyag Datta
(research associate at CAMD) for contributions to the molding chapter, and
Jens Hammacher for his assistance in preparing some of the ﬁgures. I also
appreciate contributions from Professor Kevin Kelly (LSU-ME department
and founder, Mezzo International, Inc.) on LIGA applications for the regen-
erator and heat exchanger, and Dr. Todd Christenson, HT Micro Analytical,
Inc., for commercial examples of LIGA structures in precision engineering
and micro-optics. Last, but not least, I would like to acknowledge the many
publications written by former and current colleagues and friends who are
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

84
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
using LIGA technologies in their MEMS research and whose work I have
included in this chapter.
References
[1] Becker, E.W., Ehrfeld, W., Münchmeyer, D., Belz, H., Heuberger, A., Pongratz,
S., Glashauser, W., Michel, H.J., and Siemens, R., Production of separation-
nozzle systems for uranium enrichment by a combination of x-ray lithography
and galvanoplastics, Naturwissenscahften 69 (1982), 520–523.
[2] Becker, E.W., Ehrfeld, W., Münchmeyer, D., Hagmann, P., and Maner, A.. Fab-
rication of microstructures with high aspect ratios and great structural heights
by synchrotron radiation lithography, galvanoforming and plastic moulding
(LIGA process), Microelectronic Engineering 4, (1986), 35–56.
[3] Kendall, D.L. and Shoultz, R.A., in SPIE Handbook of Microlithography, Micro-
machining, and Microfabrication, Vol. II, Rai-Choudhury, P., Ed. (1997), 41–98.
[4] Pang, S.W., in SPIE Handbook of Microlithography, Micromachining, and Microfab-
rication, Vol. II, Rai-Choudhury, P., Ed. (1997), 99–152.
[5] Hormes, J., Goettert, J., Lian, K., Desta, Y.M., and Jian, L., Materials for LiGA
and LiGA-based Microsystems, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re-
search, B 199 (2003), 332–341.
[6]
[7] Friedrich, C., Warrington, R., Bacher, W., Bauer, W., Coane, P., Göttert, J., Hane-
mann, T., Hausselt, J., Heckele, M., Knitter, R., Mohr, J., Piotter, V., Ritzhaupt-
Kleissl, H.-J., and Ruprecht, R., in SPIE Handbook of Microlithography, Microma-
chining, and Microfabrication, Vol. II, Rai-Choudhury, P., Ed. (1997), 299–377.
[8] Hruby, J., LIGA technologies and applications, MRS Bulletin 26, 4 (2001),
337–340.
[9] Arendt, M., Meyer, P., Saile, V., and Schulz, J., Launching into a golden age
(1)—marketing strategy for distributed LIGA-fabrication, Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Commercialization of Micro and Nano Systems (COMS
2005), Baden-Baden, August 21–25, 2005, MANCEF, Albuquerque, NM.
[10] Hahn, L., Meyer, P., Bade, K., Hein, H., Schulz, J., Löchel, B., Scheunemann,
H.U., Schondelmaier, D., and Singleton, L. MODULIGA: The LIGA process as
a modular production method-current standardization status in Germany, Mi-
crosystems Technologies 11 (2005) S.240–245.
[11] Malek, C.K. and Saile, V., Applications of LIGA technology to precision man-
ufacturing of high-aspect-ratio micro-components and -systems: A review, Mi-
croelectronics Journal 35 (2004), S.131–143.
[12] Hruby, J.M., LIGA technologies and applications, MRS Bulletin 26, 4 (2001),
337–340.
[13] Jian, L., Desta, Y.M., Aigeldinger, G., Bednarzik, M., Goettert, J., Loechel, B.,
Jin, Y., Singh, V., Ahrens, G., Gruetzner, G., Ruhmann, R., and Degen, R., SU-
8 based deep x-ray lithography/LIGA, Proc. SPIE (International Society for
Optical Engineering) 4979 (2003), 394–401.
[14] Koch, E.E., Ed., Handbook on Synchrotron Radiation, Vols. 1–3, North-Holland,
Amsterdam (1983).
HT Micro, http://www.htmicro.com. Accessed August 14, 2006.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
85
[15]
[16] More details on the properties of synchrotron radiation are available in the
following sources: Saile, V., Properties of synchrotron radiation, in Vorlesungs-
manuskript of the 23. IFF-Ferienkurs, Forschungszentrum Jülich (1992), 1.1–28;
Handbook on Synchrotron Radiation, Vol. 1, edited by E.E. Koch, North-Holland,
Amsterdam (1983).
[17] A good summary of the history of x-ray lithography for VLSI application is
presented in the IBM Journal of Research and Development 37, 3 (1993), 287–474.
[18] Cerrina, F., X-ray lithography, in SPIE Handbook of Microlithography, Microma-
chining, and Microfabrication, Vol. I, Rai-Choudhury, P., Ed. (1997), 251–319.
[19] Kempson, V.C. et al., Experience of routine operation of Helios 1, EPAC (1994),
594–596.
[20] Ehrfeld, W.; Bley, P., Goetz, F., Mohr, J., Muechnmeyer, D., and Schelb,
W., Progress in deep-etch synchrotron radiation lithography, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.
B 6, 1 (1988), 178–182.
[21] Christenson, T., X-ray based fabrication, Micro/Nano R&D Magazine 10, 10
(2005), 1–2.
[22]
14, 1996.
[23]
August 14, 1996.
[24]
gust 14, 1996.
[25]
tails about the LIGA activities are summarized under “Microfabrication”; tech-
nical details on beamlines and scanners are discussed under “Beamlines.”
[26] Grifﬁths, S., Hruby, J., and Ting, A., The inﬂuence of feature sidewall tolerance
on minimum absorber thickness for LIGA x-ray masks, J. Micromech. Microeng.
9 (1999), 353–361.
[27] Chen, Y., Kupka, R.K., Rousseaux, F., Carcenac, F., Decanini, D., Ravet, M.F.,
and Launois, H., 50 nm x-ray lithography using synchrotron radiation, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. B 12, 6 (1994), 3959–3964.
[28] Schomburg, W.K., Baving, H.J., and Bley, P., Ti-and Be-x-ray masks with align-
ment windows for the LIGA process, Microelectronic Engineering 13 (1991),
323–326.
[29] Klein, J., Guckel, H., Siddons, D.P., and Johnson, E.D., X-ray masks for very
deep x-ray lithography, Microsystems Technologies 4 (1998), 70–73.
[30] Coane, P., Giasolli, R., Ledger, S., Lian. K., Ling, Z., and Göttert, J., Fabrication
of HARM structures by deep x-ray lithography using graphite mask techno-
logy, Microsystem Technologies 6 (2000), 94–98.
[31] Desta, Y. et al., Fabrication of graphite masks for deep and ultra-deep x-ray
lithography, Proc. SPIE (International Society for Optical Engineering) 4175,
(2000).
[32] Desta, Y. et. al., X-ray masks for the LIGA process, HARMST 2003, Monterey,
CA, June 2003.
[33] Wang, L., Desta, Y.M., Fettig, R.K., Goettert, J., Hein, H., Jakobs, P., and Schulz,
J.. High resolution x-ray mask fabrication by a 100 keV electron-beam lithog-
raphy system, J. Micromech. Microeng. 14 (2004), S.722–726.
Advanced Light Source, list of synchrotron sources, http://www-als.lbl.gov/
als/synchrotron_sources.html. Accessed August 14, 2006.
BESSY Anwenderzentrum, http://www.graphilox.de/azm/. Accessed August
ANKA GmbH, http://www.anka-online.de/english/index.html. Accessed
IMT at Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, http://www.fzk.de/imt/. Accessed Au-
For more details visit the CAMD homepage http://www.camd.lsu.edu/. De-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

86
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[34] Mohr, J., Ehrfeld, W., and Münchmeyer, D., Analyse de Defektursachen und
der strukturvebertragung bei der Roentgentiefenlithographie mit synchrotron-
strahlung, KfK Report 4414, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe (1988).
[35] Guckel, H. et al., U.S. patent # 5378583 (1995).
[36] Bernhardt, D., Fabrication and structure-analysis of ultra-tall HARM made in
SU-8 and PMMA, master’s thesis, Fachhochschule Gelsenkirchen, February 2004.
[37] Becnel, C., Desta, Y., and Kelly, K., Ultra-deep x-ray lithography of densely
packed SU-8 features (parts I & II), J. Micromech. Microeng. 6 (2005), 1242.
[38] Schnabel, W., Polymer Degradation—Principles and Practical Applications,
Hanser, Munich (1981).
[39] Levinson, H.J. and Arnold, W.H. Optical lithography, in SPIE Handbook of
Microlithography, Micromachining, and Microfabrication, Vol. I Rai-Choudhury, P.,
Ed., (1997), 11–138, SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA.
[40] Meyer, P., Schulz, J., and Hahn L., DoseSim: Microsoft-Windows graphical user
interface for using synchrotron x-ray exposure and subsequent development
in the LIGA process, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 74 (2003), S.1113–1119.
[41] Maid, B., Ehrfeld, W., Hormes, J., Mohr, J., and Muechmeyer, D., Adaptation of
Spectral Distribution of Synchrotron Radiation to x-ray Depth Lithography, KfK
Report 4579 (1988), Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[42] Jian, L., Desta, Y.M., Goettert, J., Multi-level microstructures and mold inserts
fabricated with planar and oblique x-ray lithography of SU-8 negative photo-
resist, Proc. SPIE (International Society for Optical Engineering) 4557 (2001),
69–76.
[43] Reznikova, E.F., Mohr, J., and Hein, H. Deep photo-lithography characteriza-
tion of SU-8 resist layers, Microsystems Technologies 11 (2005), 282–291.
[44] Goettert, J., Ahrens, G., Bednarzik, M., Degen, R., Desta, Y.M., Gruetzner, G.,
Jian, L., Loechel, B., Ruhmann, R., and Jin, Y., Cost effective fabrication of high
precision microstructures using a direct-LIGA approach, Proc. COMS (2002),
Ypsilanti, Michigan, September 2002.
[45] Dentinger, P.M., Clift, W.M., and Goods, S.H., Removal of SU-8 Photoresist for
thick ﬁlm application, Microelectronic Engineering 61–62 (2002), 993–1000.
[46] Feiertag, G., VDI Report 242, Röntgenticfenlithographische Mikrostruktur-fer-
tigung, Düsseldorf (1996).
[47] Feiertag G., Ehrfeld, W., Lehr, H., Schmidt, A., and Schmidt, M., Accuracy of
structure transfer in deep x-ray lithography, J. Microelectronic Eng. 35 (1997),
557–560.
[48] Feiertag, G., Ehrfeld, W., Lehr, H., Schmidt, A., and Schmidt, M., Calculation
and experimental determination of the structure transfer accuracy in deep x-
ray lithography, J. Micromech. Microeng. 7 (1998), 323–331.
[49] Aigeldinger, G., Implementation of an ultra deep x-ray lithography system at
CAMD, Ph.D. thesis, University of Freiburg, 2001.
[50] Münchmeyer, D., Ehrfeld, W., and Becker, E.W., KfK Report 3732, Untersuchun-
gen zur Abbildungenauigket der Röntgentiefen lithograﬁe mit synchrotron-
strah-lung bei der Hersellung Technischer Trennduesen, Forschungszentrum
Karlsruhe (1984).
[51] Pantenburg, F.J. and Mohr, J., Inﬂuence of secondary effects on the structure
quality in deep x-ray lithography, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research B 97 (1995), 551–556.
[52] Grifﬁths, S.K., Fundamental limitations of LIGA x-ray lithography: Sidewall off-
set, slope and minimum feature size, J. Micromech. Microeng. 14 (2004), 999–1011.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
87
[53] Zumaqué Diaz, H., Zur auﬂösungsreduzierenden sekundärstrahlung in der
Röntgentiefenlithographie, Ph.D. thesis, University of Bonn BONN-IR-98-N,
(1998).
[54] Pantenburg, F.J., Chlebek, J., El-Kholi, A., Huber, H.-L., Mohr, J., Oertel, H.K.,
and Schulz, J., Adhesion problems in deep-etch x-ray lithography by ﬂuores-
cence radiation from the plating base; Microelectronic Engineering 23 (1994),
223–226.
[55] Grifﬁths, S.K. and Ting, A., The inﬂuence of x-ray ﬂuorescence on LIGA side-
wall tolerances, Microsystems Technologies 8 (2002), 120–128.
[56] Achenbach, S., Pantenburg, F.J., and Mohr, J., Numerical simulation of thermal
distortions in deep and ultra deep x-ray lithography, Microsystems Technologies
9 (2003), 220–224.
[57] Achenbach, S., Pantenburg, F.J., and Mohr, J., Optimization of the Process Condi-
tions for the Fabrication of Microstructures by Ultra Dep X-Ray Lithography
(UDXRL), FZKA Report 6576 (2000), Forschungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[58] Tabata, O., You, H., Matsuzuka, N., Yamaji, T., Uemura, S., and Dama, I.,
Moving mask deep x-ray lithography system with multi stage for 3-D micro-
fabrication, Microsystem Technologies 8 (2002), 93–98.
[59] Burbaum, C. and Mohr, J., Herstellung von mikromechanischen Beschleunigungs-
sensoren in LIGA-Technik, KfK Report 4859 (1991), Forschungszentrum, Karlsru-
he, Germany.
[60] Strohrmann, M., Mohr, J., and Schulz, J., Intelligent Microsystem for Acceleration
Measurement Based on LIGA Micromechanics, FZKA Report 5561 (1995), Fors-
chungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[61] Zanghellini, J., El-Kholi, A., and Mohr, J., Development behavior of irradiated
microstructures, Microelectronic Engineering 35 (1997), 409–412.
[62] Zanghellini, J., Achenbach, S., El-Kholi, A., Mohr, J., and Pantenburg, F.J., New
development strategies for high aspect microstructures, Microsystems Technol-
ogies 4 (1998), 94–97.
[63] Nilson, R.H., Grifﬁths, S.K., and Ting, A., Modeling acoustic agitation for en-
hanced development of LIGA resists, Microsystems Technologies 9 (2002),
113–118.
[64] Grifﬁths, S.K., Crowell, J.A.W., Kistler, B.L., and Dryden, A.S., Dimensional
errors in LIGA-produced metal structures due to thermal expansion and swell-
ing of PMMA, J. Micromech. Microeng., 8 (2004), 1548–1557.
[65] Schlesinger, M. and Paunovic, M., Eds., Modern Electroplating, John Wiley &
Sons, New York (2000).
[66] Bacher, W., Bade, K., Leyendecker, K., Menz, W., Stark, W., and Thomes, A.,
Electrodeposition of microstructures: An important process in microsystem
technology, in Electrochemical Technology: Innovations and New Developments,
Masuko, N., Osaka, T., and Ito, Y., Eds., Kodansha, Tokio (1996), 159–189.
[67] Cho, H.S., Hemker, K.J., Lian, K., Goettert, J., and Dirras, G., Measured me-
chanical properties of LIGA Ni structures, J. of Sensors and Actuators A 103
(2003), 59–63.
[68] Yang, N.Y.C., Headley, T.J., Kelly, J.J., and Hruby, J.H., Metallurgy of high
strength Ni-Mn microsystems fabricated by electrodeposition, Scripta Materialia
51 (2004), 761–766.
[69] Dukovic, J. and Tobias, C.W., Inﬂuence of attached bubbles on potential drop
and current distribution at gas-evolving electrodes, Journal of the Electrochemical
Society 134 (1987), 331–343.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

88
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[70] Romankiw, L.T. and O’Sullivan, E.J.M., Plating techniques, in SPIE Handbook
of Microlithography, Micromachining, and Microfabrication, Vol. II, Rai-Choudhury,
P., Ed. (1997), 197–298.
[71] Okinaka, Y. and Wolowodiuk, C., Cyanoaurate(III) formation and its effect on
current efﬁciency in gold plating, Journal of the Electrochemical Society 128 (1981),
288–294.
[72] Baudrand, D.W. and Mandich, N.V., Troubleshooting electroplating installa-
tions: Nickel sulfamate plating system, Plating and Surface Finishing 89 (2002),
68–76.
[73] Tsuru, Y., Nomura, M., and Foulkes, F.R., Effects of boric acid on hydrogen
evolution and internal stress in ﬁlms deposited from a nickel sulfamate bath,
Journal of Applied Electrochemistry 32 (2002), 629–634.
[74] Saito, T., Sato, E., Matsuoka, M., and Iwakura, C., Electroless deposition of Ni-
B, Co-B and Ni-Co-B alloys using dimethylamineborane as a reducing agent,
Journal of Applied Electrochemistry 28 (1998), 559–563.
[75] Okinaka, Y., Koch, F.B., Wolowodiuk, C., and Blessington, D.R., Left double
quote polymer right double quote inclusions in cobalt-hardened electroplated
gold, Journal of the Electrochemical Society 125 (1978), 1745–1750.
[76] Schlesinger, M. and Paunovic, M., Electrochemical Engineering Principles, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (1991).
[77] Mandich, N.V., pH, hydrogen evolution and their signiﬁcance in electroplating
operations, Plating and Surface Finishing 89 (2002), 54–58.
[78] Harper, C.A., Ed., Modern Plastics Handbook, McGraw Hill, New Delhi (2000).
[79] Matthew, H. and Naitove, M.H., Close up on Technology: Mold simulation
[80] Heckele, M. and Schomburg, K.W., Review on micro molding of thermoplastic
polymers, J. Micromech. Microeng., 14 (2004), R1–R14.
[81] Rowland, H.D., Polymer deformation and ﬁlling modes during microemboss-
ing, J. Micromech. Microeng. 14 (2004), 1625–1632.
[82] Schift, H. et al., Pattern formation in hot embossing of thin polymer ﬁlms,
Nanotechnology 12, 2 (2001), 173–177.
[83] Rupreccht, R., Bade, K., Bauer, W., Baumeister, G., Hanemann, T., Heckele, M.,
Holstein, N., Merz, L., Piotter, V., and Truckenmueller, R., Micro Replication in
Polymers, Metals, and Ceramics, FZKA Report 6990 (2004), 95–102, Forschung-
szentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[84] Worgull, M. and Heckele, M., New aspects of simulation in hot embossing,
Microsystem Technologies 10, 5 (2004), 432–437.
[85] Michel, A., Ruprecht, R., Harmening, M., and Bacher, W., Abformung von Mik-
rostrukturen auf prozessierten Wafern, KfK Report 5171 (1993), Forschungszen-
trum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[86] Otto, T. et al., Fabrication of micro optical components by high precision em-
bossing, Proc. SPIE (International Society for Optical Engineering) 4179 (2000),
96–106.
[87] Heckele, M. and Bacher, W., FZKA Report 6080 (1998), 89–94, Forschungszen-
trum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[88] Müller, A., Göttert, J., Mohr, J., and Rogner, A., Microsystem Technologies 2 (1996),
40–45.
[89] Larsson, O., Ohman, O., Billman, A., Lundbladh, L., Lindell, C., and Palmskog, G.,
Proc. Transducer ’97 (1997), 1415–1418, Forschungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
mold analysis gets faster, easier, smarter, Plastics Technology, http://www
.plasticstechnology.com/articles/200602cu1.html.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
89
[90] Ruther, P., Gerlach, B., Göttert, J., Ilie, M., Mohr, J., Müller, A., and Ossmann,
C., Pure and Applied Optics 6 (1997), 643–653.
[91] Kim, J.-H. and Neyer, A., J. Opt. Commun. 17 (1996), 172–178, Forschungszen-
trum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[92] Müller, C. and Mohr, J., FZKA Report 5609, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe
(1995), Forschungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[93] Both, A., Bacher, W., Heckele, M., and Ruprecht, R., Herstellung beweglicher
LIGA-Mikrostrukturen durch positionierte Abformung, FZKA Report 5671 (1995),
Forschungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[94] Müller, K.-D., FZKA Report 6254, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe (1999), Fors-
chungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany.
[95] Strohrmann, M., Bley, P., Fromheim, O., and Mohr, J., Sensors & Actuators A
41–42 (1994), 426ff.
[96] Guber, A.E. et al., Microﬂuidic lab-on-a-chip systems based on polymers—fab-
rication and application, Chemical Engineering Journal 101, 1–3 (2004), 447–453.
[97] Kricka, L.J. et al., Fabrication of plastic microchips by hot embossing, Lab on a
Chip 2, 1 (2002), 1–4.
[98] One example of a commercial microﬂuidic lab chip is the Caliper LabCardTM.
[99] Fatikow, S., Microrobots take on microassembly tasks, MST News 22 (1997), 20–26.
[100] Woellmer, H., Precision casting of metal microparts, FZKA Nachrichten, 3–4
(1998), 237–242.
[101] Bauer, W. and Knitter, R., Shaping of ceramic microcomponents, FZKA Nach-
richten 3–4 (1998), 243–250.
[102] Caesar, H.H., Dental-Labor 2 (1988), 189–193.
[103] Management Project Microsystems Technologies (PMT), FZK Karlsruhe, FZKA
Report 6080 (1998).
[104] Products for microﬂuidic, micro-optics, and life science applications are devel-
oped by Boehringer-Ingelheim within their microtechnology department (for-
[105] Products for thermal management applications including heat exchangers,
regenerators, and microreactor systems are developed by International Mezzo
[106] Products for microreactor technology, life sciences, and micro-optics are devel-
[107] Micromotion GmbH uses direct LIGA technology for fabricating miniaturized
®
gust 14, 2006.
[108] Axsun Technologies offers LIGA services and produces miniaturized optical
14, 2006.
[109] Polymicro represents a group of research institutes and industry members
offering micro-optics components and systems made by replication techniques
[110] Bley, P., Goettert, J., Harmening, M., Himmelhaus, M., Menz, W., Mohr, J.,
Müller, C., and Wallrabe, U., The LIGA process for the fabrication of microme-
chanical and micro-optical vomponents, in Micro System Technologies 91, Reichl,
H., Ed., Springer, Berlin (1991).
For more details see http://www.calipertech.com/.
merly microParts GmbH), http://www.boehringer-ingelheim.de/produkte/
mikrosystemtechnik/microtechnology/index.jsp. Accessed August 14, 2006.
Systems, http://www.mezzotech.biz/about.html. Accessed August 14, 2006.
oped and commercialized at the Institut fuer Mikrotechnik Mainz, http://
www.imm-mainz.de/. Accessed August 14, 2006.
Harmonic Drive  Gear systems, http://www.mikrogetriebe.de/. Accessed Au-
systems for sensor applications, http://www.axsun.com/. Accessed August
in polymers. http://www.polymicro-cc.com/site/. Accessed August 14, 2006.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

90
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[111] Mohr, J., Goettert, J., Müller, A., Ruther, P., and Wengeling, K., Micro-optical
and optomechanical systems fabricated by the LIGA technique, Photonics West
’97, Proc. SPIE (International Society for Optical Engineering) 3008 (1997),
273–278.
[112] Müller, A., Goettert, J., and Mohr, J., LIGA microstructures on top of microma-
chined silicon wafers used to fabricate a micro-optical switch, J. Micromech.
Mircoeng. 3 (1993), 158–160.
[113] Qi, S.Z., Liu, X.Z., Ford, S., Barrows, J., Thomas, G., Kelly, K., McCandless, A.,
Lian, K., Goettert, J., and Soper, S.A., Microﬂuidic devices fabricated in
poly(methyl methacrylate) using hot-embossing with integrated sampling cap-
illary and ﬁber optics for ﬂuorescence detection, Lab on a Chip 2 (2002), 88–95.
[114] Bacher, W. et al., Fabrication of LIGA mold inserts, Microsystem Technologies 4,
3 (1998), 117–119.
[115] Datta, P. and Goettert, J., Methods for polymer hot embossing process devel-
opment, in Book of Abstracts, HARMST05, June 10–13, 2005, Gyeongju, Korea,
[116]
[117]
[118]
®
gust 14, 2006.
119. Degen, R. and Slatter, R., Hollow shaft micro servo actuators realized with the
Micro†Harmonic†Drive®, Proceedings ACTUATOR2002, Bremen, June 2002.
[120]
14, 1996.
[121]
[122] Solutions for lab-on-a-chip applications using COC polymer chips are offered
[123]
[124] Fluidic chips (LabCard) and ﬂuidic handling system for analytical applications
[125]
2
[126] Datta, P., Hammacher, J., Pease, M., Gurung, S., and Goettert, J., Development
of an integrated polymer microﬂuidic stack, to be published in Proc. iMEMS
2006, Singapore, May 2006.
[127] Ackerman, R., Cryogenic Regenerative Heat Exchangers, Plenum Press, New York
(1997).
[128] Radebaugh, R. Foundations of Cryocoolers, Short course presented at the 12th
International Cryocooler Conference, MIT, Cambridge, MA, June 17, 2002.
[129] Schlossmacher, P., Yamasaki, T., Ehrlich, K., Bade, K., and Bacher, W., Produc-
tion and characterization of Ni-based alloys for applications in microsystems
technology, FZKA Nachrichten 30 Karlsruhe (1998), 207–214.
MEMS Exchange, http://www.mems-exchange.org. Accessed August 14, 2006.
Micromotion GmbH uses direct LIGA technology for fabricating miniaturized
256–257, accepted for publication in Microsystem Technologies.
Nanoplex, http://www.nanoplextech.com/.
Harmonic Drive  Gear systems, http://www.mikrogetriebe.de/. Accessed Au-
BESSY Anwenderzentrum, http://www.graphilox.de/azm/. Accessed August
MRT GmbH, http://www.microresist.de/. Accessed August 14, 2006.
by Thinxxs, Germany; for more information visit their webpage at http://www
Solutions for microﬂuidic chips are available from microﬂuidic ChipShop; for
.thinxxs.com/.
details see their catalog at http://www.microﬂuidic-chipshop.com/index
.php?pre_cat_open=209.
are offered by Micronics Inc; for more details see their webpage at http://www
.micronics.net/. Accessed August 14, 2006.
Homepage CBM  at http://www.lsu.edu/cbmm. Accessed August 14, 2006.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The LIGA Process
91
[130] Tkaczyk, T.S., Rogers, J.D., Rahman, M., Christenson, T.C., Gaalema, S., Dere-
niak, E.L., Richards-Kortum, R., and Descour, M.R., Multi-modal miniature
microscope: 4M device for bio-imaging applications—an overview of the sys-
tem, Proc. SPIE (International Society for Optical Engineering) 5959 (2005),
138–146.
[131] Rogers, J.D., Kärkkäinen, A., Tkaczyk, T.S., Rantala, J., and Descour, M.R.,
Realization of refractive micro-optics through grayscale lithographic patterning
of photosensitive hybrid glass, Opt. Express 12 (2004), 1294–1303. http://
www.opticsinfobase.org/abstarct.cfm?URI=oe-12-7-1294.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

93
4
Nanoimprinting Technology
for Biological Applications
Sunggook Park and Helmut Schift
CONTENTS
4.1
Introduction.................................................................................................. 94
4.2
Overview of NIL Technology .................................................................... 95
4.2.1
NIL Process ...................................................................................... 95
4.2.2
Polymer Flow during NIL............................................................. 97
4.2.3
Biocompatibility of the Resist ..................................................... 100
4.2.4
Stamps with Nanostructures....................................................... 101
4.2.5
Antiadhesive Layer Coating........................................................ 102
4.3
NIL in Biological Applications ................................................................ 103
4.3.1
Nanoﬂuidic Devices...................................................................... 103
4.3.2
Engineering Nanopores ............................................................... 105
4.3.3
Chemical Nanopatterning ........................................................... 107
4.3.4
Protein Nanopatterning ............................................................... 109
4.4
Outlook.........................................................................................................111
Acknowledgment................................................................................................ 112
References ..............................................................................................112
Nanoimprint lithography (NIL) is a low-cost and ﬂexible patterning tech-
nique, which is particularly suitable to fabricating components for biological
applications. Its unique advantage is that both topological and chemical
surface patterns can be generated at the micro- and nanometer scale. This
chapter presents an overview of NIL technology with the focus on the com-
patibility of materials and processes used for biological applications. Some
examples will be given, such as how NIL can be employed to fabricate
biodevices used to understand and manipulate biological events.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

94
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
4.1
Introduction
Microsystem technologies opened up the development of a variety of biomi-
crosystems such as bio-MEMS, biochips, and lab-on-a-chip devices, and
nanotechnologies are now attracting the interest of the research community
as future key technologies in biological applications. They enable us to
understand and manipulate fundamental biological processes and to
improve the performance of modern medical devices [1,2]. This is because
most biological events begin at the nanometer scale and thus control of the
phenomena at this characteristic scale could lead to new devices with inno-
vative and unprecedented properties, such as increased speed and sensitiv-
ity of assays. Several advanced patterning techniques allow production of
arbitrary or periodic patterns with nanometer resolution,(such as electron
beam lithography [EBL] and scanning probe lithography [SPM]); these have
been used to study biological events occurring on the nanometer scale, such
as the adhesion and signaling of cells on nanostructured substrates [3,4].
However, those techniques are serial methods with low throughput and do
not meet the demands necessary for implementation in the development of
new nanoscale medical devices because a large number of identical devices,
often with large patterned areas, are needed for well-controlled experi-
ments. This will allow screening and statistics that will reduce fatal errors
in the functioning of the device, and hence in diagnoses and treatment of
a certain disease [5]. Thus, the need to develop a high throughput and
parallel patterning technique with nanometer resolution has emerged, and
one of the most promising technologies, which is both ﬂexible and easily
accessible for patterning nanometer-scale features is nanoimprint lithogra-
phy (NIL) [6–11].
NIL is a low-cost, scalable lithographic technique with sub–10 nm lateral
resolution, which is able to pattern large-area micro- and nanostructures in
one step. It is based on conformal molding of a mold (stamp) with a nano-
structured relief into a resist ﬁlm, instead of exposure using an optical mask,
and was ﬁrst proposed in 1995 by S.Y. Chou [6,7]. He demonstrated patterning
of holes of 25 nm diameters in a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) ﬁlm and
subsequent fabrication of metal dots by metal deposition and lift-off, indicat-
ing the capability of this conformal molding technique in the production of
patterns with lateral resolution far beyond the diffraction limit of optical
lithography. Following his initiative, considerable efforts have been devoted
to overcome the many challenges of NIL technology with the ultimate aim
of implementing this technique in the semiconductor industry. Such efforts
involve understanding of fundamentals related to the process, such as poly-
mer ﬂow behavior [12–20]; developing new and optimal material systems
applicable to the NIL process [21,22]; overcoming the overlay issue [23,24];
fabricating reliable stamps with sub–100 nm features [25–28]; improving anti-
sticking coating methods [29–31]; and commercializing NIL equipment with
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
95
full automation. New applications of the NIL technology have been
exploited, mostly in areas where less stringent conditions than those for
semiconductor production are required, as can be seen in optics and biolog-
ical applications [32–56]. Progress in NIL technology is rapid. Readers who
are interested in various aspects of NIL technology are referred to recent
review papers and books [8–11]. This chapter will focus on NIL technology
as a tool for identifying, locating, and manipulating events with biofunc-
tional effects.
This chapter will be organized as follows: In Section 4.2, a general overview
of NIL technology will be given, which includes an introduction to the NIL
process, resist materials, polymer rheology during NIL, NIL stamp fabrica-
tion, and antisticking layer coating techniques. The focus in all cases will be
on the applicability of those NIL components to biological applications.
Then, some of recent research efforts on the fabrication of topological and
chemical nanopatterns, whose main targets are in biological applications,
will be presented in Section 4.3. Examples of topological nanopatterns and
fabrication of elements in nanoﬂuidic channels and engineering nanopores
will be given, followed by examples of chemical patterning via NIL and its
use in biofunctionalizing substrate surfaces. Finally, we will provide con-
cluding remarks on the future development of NIL technology in conjunction
with biological applications in Section 4.4.
4.2
Overview of NIL Technology
4.2.1
NIL Process
NIL is a simple method of patterning nanostructures by deforming a resist
process originally reported by Chou et al. have been developed, all of them
have a common feature. First, a resist is cast on a substrate. A hard stamp
with desired nanostructures on its surface is then pressed into the resist,
which forces the resist to ﬂow into the cavities of the stamp. After conformal
molding, the stamp is detached from the substrate. The pattern transfer is
performed by homogeneously thinning down the residual resist using aniso-
tropic reactive ion etching (RIE) until the compressed areas of the pattern
are exposed to the substrate surface.
In selecting an adequate process among the NIL variants, it is necessary
to consider all the requirements and restrictions imposed on materials, in-
lab process capabilities, pre- and postprocesses, and compatibility with pur-
suing applications. The resist can be a thermoplastic, UV-curable polymer,
or any other deformable materials. In case of a thermoplastic resist, the resist
is heated above its glass transition temperature (Tg), and during imprinting
a pressure in the range of 50 to 100 bars is applied against the thin polymer
with a hard stamp (Figure 4.1). Even though several variations from the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

96
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
ﬁlm for a few minutes. Then the resist is hardened before demolding by
cooling down below Tg. In case of a UV-curable polymer, a low viscous
photo-curable organosilicon liquid is imprinted with a transparent mold and
then hardened by curing upon UV irradiation through the mold (UV-NIL).
The process takes place at room temperature and relatively low pressure.
New process variants and hybrid approaches have also been developed. One
example is the room-temperature NIL, in which a vapor of appropriate
solvent is added during the process to reduce the Tg of the applied polymers
allowing imprinting at or near room temperature [57]. In the laser-assisted
direct imprint (LADI) process, a single excimer laser pulse is irradiated
through a transparent mold and melts a thin surface layer of silicon during
imprinting, which offers a rapid technique for patterning nanostructures in
Si that does not require subsequent RIE [58]. 
NIL has proven to be very successful in patterning structures at the nanom-
eter scale. Using NIL, the fabrication of an array of dots with 10 nm diameter
5 nm line width and 14 nm pitch were fabricated using UV-NIL with a stamp
made by selectively wet-etching Al0.7Ga0.3As from a cleaved edge of a GaAs/
Al0.7Ga0.3As superlattice grown by molecular beam epitaxy [60]. As demon-
strated, the ultimate resolution of NIL technology seems to be determined
by the minimum feature size in the stamp, which is the driving force of the
growing efforts in the area of biological and medical application because the
length scale of sub–10 nm now attainable via NIL is on the same order as
the size of molecules of current biological interest. 
FIGURE 4.1
Process scheme of nanoimprint lithography including the window-opening process as the ﬁrst
step to subsequent pattern transfer.
Stamp
Resist
Substrate
Resist
coating
Imprinting
Demolding
RIE etching
and 40 nm pitch was demonstrated (Figure 4.2) [59], while line gratings of
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
97
4.2.2
Polymer Flow during NIL
The ﬂow behavior of a resist during NIL is determined by the interplay of
thermal and mechanical properties of the resist, the process parameters, and
the geometries of the stamp structures. The most important thermal and
mechanical properties of a resist are Tg, viscosity, and modulus. Basically,
resists suitable for NIL are those that allow sufﬁcient ﬂow for conformal
molding at the process temperature and pressure while during demolding
a high modulus is desirable to ensure that the deformed polymer patterns
sustain the detachment of the stamp without damage. During NIL, the
temperature is normally held some 50 to 100°C above its Tg, which will
allow the resist to easily ﬂow into cavities of stamp structures due to
decreased polymer viscosity. The viscosity of a resist is a strong function of
the temperature, and the imprint time to the completion of the molding is
proportional to the viscosity (t ~ h) [11]. In contrast to this, the pressure is
a less important process parameter. Practically, a range of pressure that is
high enough for the resist to ﬂow but low enough to prevent any damage
of the substrate and stamp is used without any complicated optimization.
The reason is that most thermal and mechanical properties of resists are
weak functions of pressure, and that it is difﬁcult to control the pressure
accurately because it varies with the geometries of the stamp. More impor-
tant is its even distribution over the stamp surface, which determines how
homogeneously the resist ﬁlling can take place. This is often achieved using
an equilibration mechanism behind the stamp, such as an air cushion or an
elastic stamp mattress.
FIGURE 4.2
SEM micrographs of (a) a SiO2 mold with 10 nm minimum diameter pillars with a 40 nm
period, (b) 60 nm–deep holes imprinted into PMMA using the mold shown in (a), (c) metal
dots formed by NIL and a lift-off process. (Reprinted with permission from S.Y. Chou, P.R.
Krauss, W. Zhang, L. Guo, and L. Zhuang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 15, 6 (1997) 2897, American
Institute of Physics.)
(a)
(b)
10 nm
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

98
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The other important process parameter is the initial thickness of the resist
[11,15]. The process time to mold a thin polymer layer can be reduced to a
few seconds by using a high initial layer thickness. For thicker ﬁlms, the
squeezed polymer can ﬂow more freely in the central plane of the ﬁlm
unaffected by the friction at the boundaries. However, the use of a high initial
thickness usually results in an unacceptable residual layer thickness, which
makes the pattern transfer extremely difﬁcult. Ideally, no residual layer is
desired for pattern transfer. On the other hand, an extremely thin initial resist
might not be able to provide enough material to ﬁll cavities in the stamp,
not alone an impractically long imprinting time up to several tens of minutes.
Finally, in optimizing the initial resist thickness, requirements with regard
to the target application of the patterned surface need to be considered.
Stamp geometry, that is, the distribution of stamp cavities and protrusions
on a stamp surface, also plays a signiﬁcant role in the polymer deformation
during NIL and thus should be considered in designing the stamp and the
NIL process [11–15,19,20]. To date, only a few studies have been performed
on polymer ﬂow during NIL, and precise design rules concerning feature
geometries are not known. However, one general rule on polymer ﬁlling is
still available: The transport distances of the resist result in a remarkable
difference in the ﬁlling of cavities according to their size and arrangement.
The shorter the distances, the faster the ﬁlling of the stamp cavities under
identical imprinting conditions. Thus, large, isolated features or gratings sur-
rounded by a large space, as is often the case, are very challenging with respect
to a complete ﬁlling. Even worse is that in such a case the stamp sinks down
quickly in the center of the grating, whereas due to the slow squeeze ﬂow in
FIGURE 4.3
(a) Schematics representing bending of the stamp during NIL, which results from different sinking
velocities due to the stamp geometry. (b) Optical micrograph of a grating with 400 nm period
imprinted in PMMA. The structural area of 5 mm × 3 mm is located in the center of a full 4 inch
Si wafer. Proﬁlometric height measurement of a cross-section schematically represented in nm
indicates large resist thickness variations near and within the grating due to the wafer bending.
360
420
360
250
300
310
390
Fast
Slow
Slow
310
250
300
420
390
Large
unstructured
surrounding
Large
structured
area
Large
unstructured
surrounding
(a)
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
99
the surrounding area, the polymer thickness stays almost constant. The
different sinking velocities result in a local bending of the stamp during NIL,
during the removal of the residual layer in order to ensure complete transfer
of the structures.
The actual mechanism of the squeeze ﬂow of a resist into a stamp cavity
is a complex function of imprinting conditions [11,15,19,20]. The initial stage
of the ﬁlling could occur in two different ways: the ﬁrst beginning from the
borders of the stamp cavity and the second ﬁlling from the center. Different
initial ﬁlling behaviors were experimentally observed. A simulation study
by Jeong et al. clearly indicates that the capillary force, surface tension, and
width of the stamp groove are important factors determining the initial ﬁlling
behavior (Figure 4.4) [19]. For large width, the resist initially ﬁlls the stamp
cavity from the borders. When the feature width decreases, the deformation
mode also changes. The simulation correctly predicts the ﬂow behavior
reported by Heyderman et al., which was attributed to capillary-driven ﬂow
rather than shear-thinning phenomena [15].
FIGURE 4.4
(a) The geometry of computation domain, and (b) simulated free surface shapes during the
initial state of NIL for different geometries (W = 10 µm, 1 µm, and 100 nm), surface energy,
and embossing velocities. (Courtesy of J.-H. Jeong, J.-H. Jeong, Y.-S. Choi, Y.-J Shin, J.-J. Lee,
K.-T. Park, E.-S. Lee, and S.-R. Lee, Fibers and Polymers 3, 3 (2002) 113.)
Resist
Stamp cavity
Embossing
velocity, Ve
W
Stamp
Substrate
(a)
s = 29.7 mN/m
Ve = 0
 at t = 2.44 sec  
s = 0
Ve = 7.31 nm/s
at t = 2.46 sec  
s = 29.7 mN/m
Ve = 7.31 nm/s
at t = 2.41 sec  
W = 10 µm
W = 1 µm
W = 100 nm
s = 29.7 mN/m
Ve = 0
 at t = 0.276 sec  
s = 0
Ve = 10.2 nm/s
at t = 0.236 sec  
s = 29.7 mN/m
Ve = 10.2 nm/s
at t = 0.220 sec  
s = 29.7 mN/m
Ve = 0
 at t = 0.0288 sec   
s = 29.7 mN/m
Ve = 10.6 nm/s
 at t = 0.0275 sec  
s = 0
Ve = 10.6 nm/s
at t = 0.0259 sec   
(b)
producing a residual layer with inhomogeneous thickness distribution (Fig-
ure 4.3). Thus, care must be taken with the amount of resist thinned down
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

100
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
4.2.3
Biocompatibility of the Resist
A variety of materials are applicable to the NIL process. NIL was initially
developed as a patterning method in a thin ﬁlm of thermoplastic polymer
resist such as PMMA, a standard resist for high-resolution EBL. However,
it has also proven to be a suitable method for patterning of thermo- and
UV-curable polymers, small organic semiconducting materials, sol-gel mate-
rials, and even direct patterning into inorganic materials such as Si
[6–17,22,36,37,58]. Thus, there is a relatively large degree of freedom in
selecting appropriate resist materials applicable to the NIL process. Resists
specially designed for NIL are also available. Those resists have been devel-
oped to improve performance of the molding process while still being suit-
able for microelectronics and MEMS systems, as well as for large-area
patterning and electroplating processes. The requirements of resist for
improving the molding process include a short response time either by heat
or UV irradiation, lower molding temperature and pressure, increased
mechanical strength once patterns are formed, higher uniformity, and better
etch resistance for pattern transfer.
Apart from the abilities of conformal molding, another important criterion
for biological applications is biocompatibility, particularly when the fabri-
cated structures in the device are in direct contact with biological molecules
that are diagnosed and manipulated. This is because the success of many
medical devices is limited by the interaction of the device materials with the
contacting biological molecules. Most of the NIL resists are known to be
biocompatible. However, when a resist is used in a medical device, testing
and evaluation of the device with speciﬁcally applied molecules has to be
conducted. One example is a study performed by Bunk et al., where motilities
of actin ﬁlament on various NIL resists and substrate materials were inves-
tigated after incubation with heavy meromyosin [4]. One group of resists
(mrL-6000.1XP from Micro Resist and ZEP-520, an EBL resist) consistently
exhibited high-quality motility of the actin ﬁlaments, while a second group
(PMMA-200 and PMMA-950 with a molecular weight of 200 and 950 kg/
mol, respectively, and mrI-9030 from Micro Resist) showed a low quality of
motility with only a few smoothly moving ﬁlaments. Such information is
very useful in the design of medical devices; the ﬁrst set of resists are suitable
polymers for the creation of myosin-binding tracks for motility, whereas
resists in the second set would be useful for padding of areas where motility
is unwanted. Based on these ﬁndings, grooves fabricated in a bilayer resist
system with PMMA-950 and mrL-6000.1XP were found to be effective in
prohibiting U-turns of the ﬁlaments, and to exhibit 20 times higher density
of moving ﬁlaments in the grooves made of mrL-6000.1XP than on the
surrounding PMMA.
Despite the importance of biocompatibility, information on the interactions
between numerous biological molecules and NIL resists is still lacking and
more efforts need to be devoted to this task. An alternative to overcome the
problem related to this interaction is to modify the resist surface with a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
101
molecule containing functionalities that give rise to desirable surface prop-
erties. This method of modifying surfaces is preferential because materials
and process parameters for a standard NIL process can still be used while
providing surface functionalities. However, compared to silicate or gold
surfaces, chemical modiﬁcation of polymer surfaces has not been well estab-
lished and needs to be studied further.
4.2.4
Stamps with Nanostructures
As in any other molding-based technology, one of the most important
requirements for NIL is to obtain reliable stamps with desired structures that
can be repeatedly used without damage during demolding. Most stamps
with nanoscale features have been fabricated via EBL in a resist, followed
by RIE of the Si substrate by using the resist as a masking layer. With this
method, single lines, small arrays of dots, or sparsely distributed structures
as small as 10 nm can be made. EUV-Interference Lithography (EUV-IL) is
another potential tool for fabricating NIL stamps with extremely small, peri-
odic nanopatterns when combined with appropriate pattern transfer pro-
cesses (Figure 4.5) [26,61]. Using a spatially coherent beam in the EUV energy
range, high density, periodic patterns down to 32 nm pitch have been dem-
onstrated [62]. When large-area diffraction gratings and small coherent EUV
beams are used, patterning as large as 5 mm × 5 mm is possible. In particular,
the stamp fabrication via EUV-IL has drawn interest in biological applica-
tions because an array of periodic patterns with sizes in the range of mac-
romolecules, such as proteins, is very often required for purposes of sensing
and isolating bioentities.
FIGURE 4.5
Dark ﬁeld optical microscope, SEM, and AFM images: (a) for EUV-IL exposed PMMA, (b) after
transferring the pattern into Si to be used as a NIL stamp, and (c) imprinted PMMA using the
stamp shown in (b). The half pitch of the pattern is 50 nm and the area of patterns is 1 mm ×
1 mm. (Reprinted with permission from S. Park, H. Schift, H.H. Solak, and J. Gobrecht, J. of
Vac. Sci. Technol. B 22, 6 (2004) 3246, American Institute of Physics.)
EUV-IL exposed PMMA
(a)
(b)
(c)
NIL stamp on Si
Imprinted PMMA
1 mm
200 nm
200 nm
200 nm
100 nm
108 nm
–100 nm
50 nm
56 nm
–50 nm
50 nm
55 nm
–50 nm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

102
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
While the ultimate lateral resolution of NIL depends on the minimum
feature size in the stamp [8], actual success of imprinting often relies on
stamp characteristics such as the geometry and aspect ratio of features, size
of patterned areas, sidewall proﬁle, and surface roughness. Those factors
also have a signiﬁcant role in determining the ﬂow behavior of the resist.
Thus all of them have to be taken into account beginning with stamp design
and need to be controlled by carefully optimizing process parameters during
stamp fabrication.
As stamp materials, Si wafers are well suited and most widely used
because the thermal expansion coefﬁcient of the stamp is often identical to
the substrates to be structured, so that pattern distortion generated by a
mismatch of the thermal expansion of stamp and substrate can be minimized.
Another reason is the ease of access to standard semiconductor processing
equipment in a cleanroom environment. Other materials, such as Ni, SiC,
diamond, quartz, and even cross-linked polymers have been demonstrated
as potential stamp materials [25,63–65]. Consideration in selecting appropri-
ate stamp materials includes ﬂexibility and mechanical strength, process
temperature and pressure, and compatibility with other materials and appli-
cations. For example, when ﬂexibility and robustness higher than those of
Si is needed, Ni stamps fabricated using electroplating are more favorable.
If the thermomechanical replication process does not exert high forces on
the relief structure, then polymer resist hardened by light, heat, or by chem-
ical initiation may support high temperatures and can be repeatedly used
as NIL stamps [25]. However, the lifetime of polymeric molds is still low
and good solutions for antisticking coatings have to be found.
4.2.5
Antiadhesive Layer Coating
An increase in the effective surface area by the presence of nanostructures
increases adhesion between the stamp surface and the molded resist. This
effect becomes signiﬁcant as structures become complex and the aspect ratio
increases. A low surface energy release layer on the stamp helps to improve
the imprint quality, and it also increases the stamp’s lifetime signiﬁcantly by
preventing surface contamination. Low adhesion and friction at structure
sidewalls can only be assured if the stamp is fully covered with a durable
antiadhesive layer that can resist the high temperatures and pressures of the
NIL process.
Fluorinated trichlorosilanes are often used as antiadhesive layers for Si
stamps due to its stable covalent anchoring to hydrated Si surfaces. Surfaces
with extremely low surface energy can be achieved by the formation of a
dense and fully bound ﬁlm of silanes, cross-linked between the molecules
by the formation of Si–O–Si bonds, which provide satisfactory results in
many cases. Use of codeposition of ﬂuorinated mono- and trichlorosilanes
was reported to further improve the coating density by self-organization
between the two silanes by end-capping the reactive trichloro-group by the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
103
monochlorosilane [30,31]. The silane coating can be applied either in solution
or in the gas phase. However, it should be noted that for stamps with features
of the nanometer scale, the gas phase deposition is preferred to the solution-
dipping method in order to prevent issues related to wetting into the small
sized cavities.
A ﬂuorinated silane coating can also be applied to stamp materials other
than Si where silane chemistry is no longer valid. This possibility would
greatly enhance the versatility of NIL technology. For Ni stamps, a preferred
mold material for MEMS and microembossing applications, sputtered or
plasma-polymerized teﬂon-like coatings have been used as release agents.
However, such coatings are still less effective and less stable in the long term
than Si stamps coated with ﬂuorinated silanes. Recently it was found that the
surface energy of a Ni surface coated with ﬂuorinated silane molecules can
be lowered dramatically by introducing a very thin layer of SiO2 (approxi-
mately 10 nm) before the coating [29]. Because x-ray photoelectron spectros-
copy on the differently treated surfaces indicates a similar amount of the
silane molecules attached on the substrates, the decrease in the surface energy
was attributed to the increase in the number of the silane molecules covalently
bound to Ni surfaces by the deposition of a thin SiO2 layer. This is also
supported by simultaneous imprint tests with sinusoidal gratings of different
coatings, where no failure appears for the coating with a SiO2 interlayer.
4.3
NIL in Biological Applications
In the following we will present some examples of recent developments,
where patterns fabricated via NIL were used in biological applications. The
use of imprinted patterns can be divided into two categories: the use of
surface topologies as a three-dimensional template and chemical contrast on
the substrate surface. Surface topologies provide structures that allow inte-
gration of components in biomedical devices, such as channels in ﬂuidic
devices, detection components, and electrodes in biosensors. Surface rough-
ness and increased adhesive area caused by the presence of surface topolo-
gies can also be used to constrain and control motion and growth of
biological molecules. On the other hand, the chemical contrast points to an
opportunity to control the functionalities of biorelevant events that include
transmembrane and intracellular molecules, as well as protein distributions. 
4.3.1
Nanoﬂuidic Devices
Microﬂuidic devices have wide applications in liquid handling in biology
and chemistry for manipulating samples in small quantities. The goals of
further miniaturization of the ﬂuidic channels are to increase speed and
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

104
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
sensitivity of assays and to enable studies of ﬂuid transport and molecular
behavior at extremely small dimensions [4,5,40,42]. For this purpose, NIL is
a ready method of deﬁning ﬂuidic channels of the micro- and nanoscales at
low cost. Apart from the formation of channels, there are also other aspects
that need to be considered in designing a nanoﬂuidic device, which include
modifying surface functionalities, sealing of the channels, integration with
other microstructures for feeding and detection of ﬂuids, and so forth. 
Modifying surface functionalities in the channels is an essential process in
the realization of functioning micro- and nanoﬂuidic devices. For example, in
order to transport biological molecules within a device, it is necessary to conﬁne
their motion along the channel while the molecule should not be adsorbed by
the channel walls or escape from the channels. In this regard, it is sometimes
necessary to have surface functionalities of the channel walls be different from
those on the channel track. Recently, Cheng et al. developed an effective method
of achieving highly efﬁcient guiding of microtubules transported by kinesin
motors that are immobilized within polymer nanotracks created by NIL [41].
The nanoscale protein tracks constrained by polymer barriers made of a
cyclized perﬂuoropolymer called CYTOP, prevent the gliding microtubules
from swaying and compel them to approach the track edge at glancing angles,
thus restraining them from moving out of the track. Furthermore, the surface
of the CYTOP barriers are chemically modiﬁed to have protein-nonadhesive
properties, which effectively prevent microtubules from either climbing up the
barriers or randomly gliding over the top surface of the barriers.
The fabrication of nanoﬂuidic channels is completed by sealing of the
channel using either rigid or soft materials following NIL to produce high-
resolution nanoscale templates. Despite the relative ease of constructing
nanoscale structures via NIL, the sealing of these structures into functional
nanoﬂuidic devices presents great technical challenges. Taking advantage of
the ﬁlling behavior of resist during NIL, Guo et al. developed a simple
method of fabricating enclosed nanoﬂuidic channels [10,40]. If a very thin
polymer layer is used during imprinting, the displaced polymer will not be
able to ﬁll the trenches on the mold completely, therefore creating enclosed
controlled to give a predictable channel width and height. The channel width
is determined by the feature sizes on the channel template used for imprint-
ing. The channel height can be controlled by the depth of the template and
the initial thickness of the polymer layer, as well as by adjusting the ratio of
the ridge width to the trench width on the channel template. One of the
biological applications has been illustrated by stretching genomic DNA in
such nanochannel arrays. Over 90% stretching has been observed in
nanochannels with a cross-section size of approximately 120 nm × 75 nm
as well as the dynamic behavior of DNA molecules in conﬁned geometries. 
Nanoﬂuidics reduces the size of ﬂuidic systems dramatically. However, it
is not simply a matter of shrinking components. Another challenge is how
to integrate those nanostructures with other components of micro- or even
nanochannel features (Figure 4.6). The fabrication process can also be well
(Figure 4.7). Thus, nanoﬂuidic channels could be used for studying the static
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
105
macroscales that operate functions such as mixing, valving, reagent storage
and reconstitution, thermal processing, and so forth. Although NIL has
proven to be very successful in nanopatterning, especially in replicating
periodic nanoscale features with uniform sizes, it still has limitations in
producing both large and small features in various combinations and distri-
butions, which is attributed to the rheological behavior of resists during NIL
[10,11,13,15]. Several strategies have been developed to overcome this prob-
lem, such as an addition of auxiliary structures around the important pat-
terns, lowering the process temperature and pressure, and combining NIL
with photolithography [10,13,15]. However, due to the complexity of the
rheological behavior during NIL, an individual strategy needs to be found
depending on the geometries of the applied patterns and applications. 
4.3.2
Engineering Nanopores
High-volume fabrication of perforated membranes has potential for any
applications that require templates with nanoscale openings accessible from
both sides. By placing biomembranes onto the artiﬁcial pores, actions such
as separation, sensing, and drug delivery can be performed. Such membrane
FIGURE 4.6
SEM micrographs of imprinted nanoﬂuidic channels of various cross-sections. (a) 300 nm
(width) × 500 nm (height) channels; inset shows a close-up view. (b) 300 nm × 140 nm channels.
(c) 75 nm × 120 nm channels. (Reprinted with permission from L.J. Guo, X. Cheng, and C.-F.
Chou, Nano Letters 4, 1 (2004) 69, American Chemical Society.)
PMMA
Template
(a)
(b)
(c)
100 nm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

106
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
structures can be found everywhere in nature, in particular in biological
systems, as can be exempliﬁed in transmembrane proteins. 
A schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure for nanopore mem-
in PMMA spin-coated on a Si3N4/Si/Si3N4/Cr substrate. The Si3N4 on the
reverse side of the substrate is prestructured with a square opening to be
used as a mask for the ﬁnal membrane production step. The Si3N4 on the
front side of the substrate includes alignment marks to align the NIL stamps,
so that the nanopores coincide with the membranes. Following imprinting,
FIGURE 4.7
Fluorescent images showing the stretching of 103 kb–long T5 phage DNA in the imprinted
nanoﬂuidic channels. (a) In 300 nm wide and 700 nm height channels, DNA is stretched but
to a lesser degree (approximately 15%). (b) In 300 nm × 500 nm channels, DNA is more stretched
(30%). In 75 nm × 120 nm channels, DNA stretching reaches about 95%. The scale bar is 20 µm
in (a) and (b), 50 µm in (c). (Reprinted with permission from L.J. Guo, X. Cheng, and C.-F.
Chou, Nano Letters 4, 1 (2004) 69, American Chemical Society.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
branes is given in Figure 4.8a [53]. First, the nanopores are replicated by NIL
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
107
the PMMA residual layer is removed using an O2 RIE and the pores transferred
into the Cr layer, which is again transferred into the Si3N4 using a CHF3/O2
plasma. The Si is etched in a KOH bath to reveal the Si3N4 membranes. Figures
4.8b and 4.8c show the NIL stamps and the fabricated nanopore membrane
structures, respectively. Pores with diameters down to approximately 140 nm
were achieved with this method. The pore diameter is basically deﬁned by the
size of the nanopillars in the stamp, which were generated using EBL. The
slight difference in diameter between the stamp pillars and the resulting nan-
opores is in the range of 35 to 50 nm. This is surprisingly low considering any
lateral movement during imprinting and any widening of the nanopores during
the postprocesses. The wall slope can be changed from perpendicular to neg-
ative by changing the etch parameters, so allowing tailoring of the pore proﬁle.
The membranes were found to be stable. However, more work must be done
before implementing those nanopore membrane structures in biological appli-
cations, such as load tests, liquid compatibility, biocompatibility, and function-
alization of surfaces. For separation processes, it is also important to study the
permeation rate and investigate methods for creating force gradients, such as
pressure, concentration, electrical potential, and temperature differences.
4.3.3
Chemical Nanopatterning
In addition to the application of topological patterns, NIL may also play an
important role in spatially controlling chemical functionality on a surface,
FIGURE 4.8
(a) Process scheme for the fabrication of Si3N4 nanopores using NIL. SEM micrographs (b) of
the NIL stamps used for the nanopore fabrication and (c) of the corresponding nanopores.
(Reprinted from L.J. Heyderman, B. Ketterer, D. Bächle, F. Glaus, B. Haas, H. Schift, K. Vogel-
sang, J. Gobrecht L. Tiefenauer, O. Dubochet, P. Surbled, and T. Hessler, Microelectron. Eng. 67–68
(2003) 208, with permission from Elsevier.) 
NIL stamp
PMMA
Cr
Si3N4
Si
Si3N4
1 µm
5 µm
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

108
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
which has become a major challenge for electronic, optoelectronic, biological,
and sensing applications [1–4,51,52]. In general, local modiﬁcation of surface
chemistry requires the process sequence of nanofabrication via a suitable
patterning method, followed by selective localization of a molecule using
chemistry known for its immobilization.
A simple method of fabricating chemical nanopatterns using NIL is based
on its pattern transfer ability, which has shown sub–10 nm resolution in the
generation of metal lift-off [59]. The process is schematically shown in Figure
4.9a. After the window opening by O2 RIE, selective chemical modiﬁcation
of the substrate surface is achieved by deposition of a molecule with certain
functionalities that need to be imposed on the local substrate surface areas.
Finally, the chemical patterning will be completed by lift-off of the remaining
resist using a solvent. The chemical modiﬁcation can be performed either in
the gas phase or by dipping in the solution. Figure 4.9b shows atomic/lateral
force microscopy (AFM/LFM) images for chemical patterns with a mixture
of ﬂuorinated mono- and trichlorosilanes fabricated by the method described
in Figure 4.9a. Periodic contrasts in topology, as well as friction force between
areas of the silane molecules and the background, are clearly distinguished
in the images. The smallest width for SiO2 lines was 15 nm. The results clearly
demonstrate the capability of NIL as a tool for the local modiﬁcation of
chemical functionalities on a surface in an unprecedented lateral resolution
by combining with an appropriate surface chemistry. 
FIGURE 4.9
(a) Process schemes of fabricating chemical patterns via NIL and (b) AFM/LFM images for
chemically patterned surfaces modiﬁed with a mixture of ﬂuorinated mono- and trichlorosi-
lanes.
Stamp
(a)
(b)
PMMA
Deposit
Deposit
HP = 25 nm
100 nm
100 nm
0 nm
0 nm
3 nm
0.15 V
0.15 V
0 V
0 V
3 nm
Fluorinated silane
– 35 nm
Fluorinated silane
– 50 nm
SiO2 –20 nm
SiO –15 nm
Surface
modiﬁcation
Lift-oﬀ
RIE etching
Demolding
Imprinting
SiO2
Si or SiO2
AFM
LFM
HP = 35.5 nm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
109
Integrated biological applications often require a sequence of additional
chemical bindings to the modiﬁed local surface functionalities. In such cases,
a small amount of contamination could seriously damage the following pro-
cess, and thus pure chemical contrast needs to be achieved to implement
chemical nanopatterns in integrated devices. In order to reduce the level of
impurities and inhomogeneities, care should be taken for each process
involved. As the pattern size becomes smaller, and thus a smaller resist height
is used, it is more difﬁcult to achieve homogeneous thinning of the patterned
resist for the window opening process due to inhomogeneous distribution of
the residual layer thickness over the patterned areas. In addition, the possible
diffusion of the molecules used for the surface modiﬁcation into the resist
necessitates additional topological contrast. Thus, in order to ensure homo-
geneous window opening and selective surface modiﬁcation, the aspect ratio
for the patterns has to be increased. In addition, a complete removal of resist
during the lift-off, which is required to achieve clean chemical contrast, is not
an easy task [7]. All the problems mentioned must be solved in order to
implement NIL as a practical fabrication technology for high-resolution chem-
ical patterns for various applications.
4.3.4
Protein Nanopatterning
For the development of integrated biodevices, such as biosensors and biochips,
it is crucial to be capable of organizing bioactive materials on glass or semicon-
ductor surfaces with micro- and nanometer resolution [1,2]. In particular, pat-
terning of protein layers has been extensively investigated because integrated
biodevices rely on the selectivity and sensitivity of receptor molecules, which
bind selected analytes. The strategy of improving sensitivity goes toward min-
iaturization of the pattern size because it will help to improve the detection limits
in those devices by increasing the density of the receptor elements [2].
be used to create nanoscale patterns of various biological molecules. How-
ever, deﬁning patterns of such molecules on surfaces is not a simple task
considering the complex and fragile nature of those molecules. A critical
requirement is the ability to avoid nonspeciﬁc bindings of proteins (or bio-
molecules in general). The uncontrolled presence of proteins on an array will
most likely affect the outcome of the assay and thus bias the results. There-
fore, the noninteractive areas of the pattern require special attention through
designed surface chemistry in order to ensure a very low background signal. 
Recently, two independent studies have demonstrated the patterning of
bioactive proteins with nanoscale resolutions via NIL and local chemical
modiﬁcation using different methods of suppressing nonspeciﬁc protein
bindings. The method exploited by Falconnet et al. combines NIL and
molecular assembly patterning by lift-off (MAPL) [56]. The MAPL process
was recently introduced as a technique for producing micropatterns via
conventional photolithography and assembly of biofunctional PEG-graft
The process of chemical patterning based on NIL (Figure 4.9a) can directly
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

110
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
polyelectrolyte copolymers, such as cationic poly(L-lysine)-graft-poly(ethyl-
ene glycol) (PLL-g-PEG) on transparent negatively charged niobium oxide
(Nb2O5)–coated glass slides. After achieving chemical contrast of PLL-g-
PEG/PEG-biotin and Nb2O5, the Nb2O5 areas were rendered nonfouling by
spontaneous adsorption of the nonfunctionalized PLL-g-PEG from an aque-
ous solution to inhibit nonspeciﬁc protein adsorption in the background
(Figure 4.10a). In the ﬁnal step, ﬂuorescence-labeled alexa-488-conjugated
streptavidin was adsorbed onto the biotin functionalized patterned surfaces.
Scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy (SNOM) was used to image the pro-
tein adsorption onto the 100 nm PLL-g-PEG/PEG-biotin stripes. Even
though the ﬂuorescent-labeled lines appear broader than the actual line
width of the PLL-g-PEG/PEG-biotin stripes due to the resolution limit of
SNOM of approximately 100 nm, the regular line pattern of 400 nm–period-
icity is clearly recognized, verifying selective adsorption of the streptavidin.
The second approach developed by Guo et al. consists of nanoscale pat-
terning via NIL and a ﬂuoropolymer surface passivation [10,40]. In contrast
to prevent nonspeciﬁc adsorption of biological molecules was done using
CHF3 RIE immediately after the window-opening step. In their study, pat-
terns of selectively passivated Si surfaces are created using NIL, O2 RIE, and
deposition of a passivating (CFx)n polymer, which prevents nonspeciﬁc
adsorption of the biological molecules in the unpatterned regions. The tem-
plate surface was then processed with a sequence of chemical modiﬁcation
steps, and an aminosilane monolayer, biotin, streptavidin, and ultimately a
FIGURE 4.10
(a) AFM image for the chemical pattern of PLL-g-PEG/PEG-biotin after backﬁlling with PLL-
g-PEG. (b) Scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscope (SNOM) image after adsorption of a ﬂuores-
cent labeled protein, alexa-488-streptavidin on the chemical pattern shown in (a). (Modiﬁed
from D. Falconnet, D. Pasqui, S. Park, R. Eckert, H. Schift, J. Gobrecht, R. Barbucci, and Marcus
Textor, Nano Letters 4, 19 (2004) 1909.)
AFM
5 nm
0 nm
400 nm
400 nm
PLL-g-PEG
PLL-g-PEG/PEG-biotin
SNOM
Adsorption of
alexa-488-
streptavidin
PLL-g-PEG/PEG-biotin
alexa-4BB-streptavidin
PLL-g-PEG
to the chemical patterning process shown in Figure 4.9a, the local passivation
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
111
protein target were bound subsequently. This technique results in a highly
speciﬁc immobilization of a monolayer of biofunctional target protein in
patterned areas, and less than 0.1% of a monolayer in surrounding regions.
Successful patterning at the nanometer scale was veriﬁed using epiﬂuores-
cence microscopy. In addition, the nanopatterned proteins processed using
this method retained their biological functionality, as demonstrated by sub-
sequent antigen binding on patterned antibodies.
4.4
Outlook
In many biological applications, surface patterns with topological or chemical
contrast are required, and combinations thereof. Topological structures are
fabricated in the form of channels, pillars, and pores for micro- and nanoﬂuidic
devices and nanoarrays. Biological active surface structures can be generated
by chemical patterning. The patterning of nanostructures on a hard substrate
material can be realized using NIL with relative ease, by using the imprinted
polymer as a masking layer for pattern transfer. The direct chemical patterning
of polymers, however, is more challenging because materials have to be found
that allow both good processability and a stable binding of biofunctional
molecules. Furthermore, the integration of the nanostructures into other larger-
sized components remains to be solved. In microﬂuidic devices, for example,
the integration of a sieve made from nanopillars into a ﬂuidic microchannel
requires a high-aspect-ratio nanostructuring capability. For this, several pro-
cess aspects have to be improved—the ability to fabricate high-aspect ratio
structures requires optimization of each process step including fabrication of
high-quality stamps, improving antisticking layer coatings, controlled
demolding, and so forth. Another challenge lies in in-plane alignment, which
is practically limited to approximately 1 µm with commercially available NIL
equipment. For example, in a sieve structure, a slight misalignment of the
nanopillar pattern with respect to the microchannel could damage the overall
device functioning dramatically. For that, efforts are needed to improve the
alignment resolution as well as to ﬁnd alternatives to conventional stamp
fabrication, such as using nanoparticles and block copolymers as templates.
The driving force for new nanopatterning methods is the huge demand
for low-cost disposable devices and fast prototyping of a large variety of
assays. The NIL technology provides a ﬂexible, low-cost, and biocompatible
method for fabricating nanostructures and is still evolving very quickly. Its
capability to pattern substrates by molding, without changing the chemical
properties of the polymer, makes it possible to use a wide range of new
materials with tailored chemical and biological properties. Even though there
are still many key issues to be solved, NIL technology will play an important
role in any biological applications that require topological and chemical
patterns at the micro- and nanometer scale. 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

112
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Acknowledgment
It is our great pleasure to thank many colleagues at the Paul Scherrer Institut
(PSI) and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETHZ) for their intensive
collaboration and contribution to the results presented here. Particularly,
thanks go to C. Padeste, H.H. Solak, L.J. Heyderman, K. Vogelsang, Professor
J. Gobrecht (PSI), D. Falconnet, D. Pasqui, and Professor M. Textor (ETHZ).
We would also like to thank Professor S.Y. Chou (Princeton University),
Professor L.J. Guo (University of Michigan, Ann Harbor) and Dr. J.-H. Jeong
(Korea Institute of Machinery & Materials) for allowing us to use their results
for this chapter. 
References
[1] C.M. Niemeyer and C.A. Mirkin, Eds., Nanobiotechnology—Concepts, Applica-
tions and Perspectives, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Weinheim, 2004.
[2] A.S. Blawas and W.M. Reichert, Protein patterning, Biomaterials 19 (1998) 595.
[3] K.B. Lee, S.J. Park, C.A. Mirkin, J.C. Smith, and M. Mrksich, Protein nanoarrays
generated by dip-pen nanolithography, Science 295 (2002) 1702.
[4] R. Bunk, J. Klinth, L. Montelius, I.A. Nicholls, R. Omling, S. Tagerud, and A.
Mansson, Actomyosin motility on nanostructured surfaces, Biochem. and Bio-
phys. Res. Comm. 301 (2003) 783.
[5] J.O. Tegenfeldt, C. Prinz, H. Cao, R.L. Huang, R.H. Austin, S.Y. Chou, E.C. Cox,
and J. C. Sturm, Micro- and nanoﬂuidics for DNA analysis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem.
378 (2004) 1678.
[6] S.Y. Chou, P.R. Krauss, and P.J. Renstrom, Imprint of sub-25 nm vias and
trenches in polymers, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 21, (1995) 3114.
[7] S.Y. Chou, P.R. Krauss, and P.J. Renstrom, Imprint lithography with 25-nanom-
eter resolution, Science 272 (1996) 85.
[8] C.M. Sotomayor Torres, S. Zankovych, J. Seekamp, A.P. Kam, C. Clavijo Cede-
no, T. Hoffmann, J. Ahopelto, F. Reuther, K. Pfeiffer, G. Bleidiessel, G. Gruetzner,
M.V. Maximov, and B. Heidari, Nanoimprint lithography: an alternative nano-
fabrication approach, Mater. Sci. and Eng. C23 (2003) 23.
[9] S. Zankovych, T. Hoffmann, J. Seekamp, J.-U. Bruch, and C.M. Sotomayor
Torres, Nanoimprint lithography: challenges and prospects, Nanotechnology 12
(2001) 91.
[10] L.J. Guo, Recent progress in nanoimprint technology and its applications, J.
Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 37 (2004) R123.
[11] C.M. Sotomayor Torres, Ed., Alternative Lithography: Unleashing the Potentials of
Nanotechnology, Kluwer, Boston, MA, 2003.
[12] H. Schift, L.J. Heyderman, and J. Gobrecht, Efﬁcient replication of nanostruc-
tured surfaces, Chimia 56 (2002) 543.
[13] H. Schift, S. Park, and J. Gobrecht, Nano-imprint—molding resists for lithog-
raphy, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol. 16, 3 (2003) 435.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
113
[14] H. Schift, L .J. Heyderman, M. Auf der Maur, and J. Gobrecht, Pattern formation
in hot embossing of thin polymer ﬁlms, Nanotechnology 12 (2001) 173.
[15] L. J. Heyderman, H. Schift, C. David, J. Gobrecht, and T. Schweizer, Flow
behaviour of thin polymer ﬁlms used for hot embossing lithography, Micro-
electron. Eng. 54 (2000) 229.
[16] H. Schift, C. David, M. Gabriel, J. Gobrecht, L.J. Heyderman, W. Kaiser, S.
Köppel, and L. Scandella, Nanoreplication in polymers using hot embossing
and injection molding, Microelectron. Eng. 53 (2000) 171.
[17] H. Schift, C. David, J. Gobrecht, A. D’Amore, D. Simoneta, W. Kaiser, and M.
Gabriel, Quantitative analysis of the molding of nanostructures, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. B 18 (2000) 3564.
[18] H.-C. Scheer and H. Schulz, A contribution to the ﬂow behaviour of thin
polymer ﬁlms during hot embossing lithography, Microelectron. Eng. 56 (2001)
311–332.
[19] J.-H. Jeong, Y.-S. Choi, Y.-J Shin, J.-J. Lee, K.-T. Park, E.-S. Lee, and S.-R. Lee,
Flow behavior at the embossing stage of nanoimprint lithography, Fibers and
Polymers 3, 3 (2002) 113.
[20] H.D. Rowland and W.P. King, Polymer deformation and ﬁlling modes during
microembossing, J. Micromech. Microeng. 14 (2004) 1625.
[21] K. Pfeiffer, G. Bleidiessel, G. Gruetzner, H. Schulz, T. Hoffmann, H.-C. Scheer,
C. M. Sotomayor Torres, and J. Ahopelto, Suitability of new polymer materials
with adjustable glass temperature for nano-imprinting, Microelectron. Eng. 46
(1999) 431.
[22] K. Pfeiffer, F. Reuther, M. Fink, G. Gruetzner, P. Carlberg, I. Maximov, L.
Montelius, J. Seekamp, S. Zankovych, C. M. Sotomayor-Torres, H. Schulz, and
H.-C. Scheer, A comparison of thermally and photochemically cross-linked
polymers for nanoimprinting, Microelectron. Eng. 67–68 (2003) 266.
[23] W. Zhang and S.Y. Chou, Multilevel nanoimprint lithography with submicron
alignment over 4 in. Si wafers, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 6 (2001) 845.
[24] A. Lebib, Y. Chen, J. Bourneix, F. Carcenac, E. Cambril, L. Couraud, and H.
Launois, Nanoimprint lithography for a large area pattern replication, Micro-
electron. Eng. 46 (1999) 431. 
[25] K. Pfeiffer, M. Fink, G. Ahrens, G. Gruetzner, F. Reuther, J. Seekamp, S. Zank-
ovych, C. M. Sotomayor Torres, I. Maximov, M. Beck, M. Graczyk, L. Montelius,
H. Schulz, H. -C. Scheer, and F. Steingrueber, Polymer stamps for nanoimprint-
ing, Microelectron. Eng. 61–62 (2002) 393.
[26] S. Park, H. Schift, H.H. Solak, and J. Gobrecht, Stamps for nanoimprint lithog-
raphy by EUV interference lithography, J. of Vac. Sci. Technol. B 22, 6 (2004) 3246.
[27] Z. Yu and S.Y. Chou, Triangular proﬁle imprint molds in nanograting fabrica-
tion, Nano Letters 4, 2 (2004) 341.
[28] Z. Yu, L. Chen, W. Wu, H. Ge, and S.Y. Chou, Fabrication of nanoscale gratings
with reduced line edge roughness using nanoimprint lithography, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. B 21, 5 (2003) 2089.
[29] S. Park, H. Schift, C. Padeste, B. Schnyder, R. Kötz, and J. Gobrecht, Anti-
adhesive layers on nickel stamps for nanoimprint lithography, Microelectron.
Eng. 73–74 (2004) 196.
[30] S. Park, H. Schift, C. Padeste, A. Scheybal, T. Jung, B. Schnyder, R. Kötz, and
J. Gobrecht, Improved anti-adhesive coating for nanoimprint lithography by
co-evaporation of tri- and monochlorosilanes, Mat. Res. Soc. Proc. EXS-2
(2004) 37.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

114
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[31] H. Schift, S. Saxer, S. Park, C. Padeste, U. Pieles, and J. Gobrecht, Controlled
co-evaporation of silanes for nanoimprint stamps, Nanotechnology 16 (2005)
S171–175.
[32] W. Wu, B. Cui, X. Sun, W. Zhang, L. Zhuang, L. Kong, and S.Y. Chou, Large
area high density quantized magnetic disks fabricated using nanoimprint li-
thography, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 16, 6 (1998) 3825.
[33] J. Wang, S. Schablitsky, Z. Yu, W. Wu, and S.Y. Chou, Fabrication of a new
broadband waveguide polarizer with a double-layer 190 nm period metal-
gratings using nanoimprint lithography, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 17, 6 (1999) 2957.
[34] Z. Yu, S.J. Schablitsky, and S.Y. Chou, Nanoscale GaAs metal-semiconductor-
metal photodetectors fabricated using nanoimprint lithography, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 74, 16 (1999) 2381.
[35] L. Guo, P.R. Krauss, and S.Y. Chou, Nanoscale silicon ﬁeld effect transistors
fabricated using imprint lithography, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 13 (1997) 1881.
[36] J. Wang, X. Sun, L. Chen, and S.Y. Chou, Direct nanoimprint of submicron
organic light-emitting structures, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 18 (1999) 2767.
[37] M.D. Austin and S.Y. Chou, Fabrication of 70 nm channel length polymer
organic thin-ﬁlm transistors using nanoimprint lithography, Appl. Phys. Lett.
81, 23 (2002) 4431.
[38] C. Chao and L.J. Guo, Polymer microring resonators fabricated by nanoimprint
technique, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 20, 6 (2002) 2862.
[39] J.D. Hoff, L.-J. Cheng, E. Meyhofer, L.J. Guo, and A.J. Hunt, Nanoscale protein
patterning by imprint lithography, Nano Letters 4, 5 (2004) 853.
[40] L.J. Guo, X. Cheng, and C.-F. Chou, Fabrication of size-controllable nanoﬂuidic
channels by nanoimprinting and its application for DNA stretching, Nano
Letters 4, 1 (2004) 69.
[41] L.-J. Cheng, M.-T. Kao, E. Meyhofer, and L.J. Guo, Highly efﬁcient guiding of
microtubule transport with imprinted CYTOP nanotracks, Small 1, 4 (2005) 409.
[42] J.O. Tegenfeldt, C. Prinz, H. Cao, R.L. Huang, R.H. Austin, S.Y. Chou, E.C. Cox,
and J.C. Sturm, Micro- and nanoﬂuidics for DNA analysis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem.
378 (2004) 1678.
[43] T. Martensson, P. Carlberg, M. Borgstrom, L. Montelius, W. Seifert, and L.
Samuelson, Nanowire arrays deﬁned by nanoimprint lithography, Nano Letters
4, 4 (2004) 699.
[44] M. Behl, J. Seekamp, S. Zankovych, C.M. Sotomayor Torres, R. Zentel, and J.
Ahopelto, Towards plastic electronics: patterning semiconducting polymers by
nanoimprint lithography, Adv. Mater. 14, 8 (2002) 588.
[45] I. Martini, J. Dechow, M. Kamp, A. Forchel, and J. Koeth, GaAs ﬁeld effect tran-
sistors fabricated by imprint lithography, Microelectron. Eng. 60, 3–4 (2002) 451.
[46] A. P. Kam, J. Seekamp, V. Solovyev, C. Clavijo Cedeño, A. Goldschmidt, and
C. M. Sotomayor Torres, Nanoimprinted organic ﬁeld-effect transistors: fabri-
cation, transfer mechanism and solvent effects on device characteristics, Micro-
electron. Eng. 73–74 (2004) 809.
[47] N. Kehagias, S. Zankovych, A. Goldschmidt, R. Kian, M. Zelsmann, C.M.
Sotomayor Torres, K. Pfeiffer, G. Ahrens, and G. Gruetzner, Embedded polymer
waveguides: design and fabrication approaches, Superlattices and Microstruc-
tures 36, 1–3 (2004) 201.
[48] N. Bogdanski, H. Schulz, M. Wissen, H.-C. Scheer, J. Zajadacz, and K. Zimmer,
3D-Hot embossing of undercut structures—an approach to micro-zippers, Mi-
croelectron. Eng. 73–74 (2004) 190.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Nanoimprinting Technology for Biological Applications
115
[49] M. Beck, F. Persson, P. Carlberg, M. Graczyk, I. Maximov, T. G. I. Ling, and L.
Montelius, Nanoelectrochemical transducers for (bio-) chemical sensor applica-
tions fabricated by nanoimprint lithography, Microelectron. Eng. 73–74 (2004) 837. 
[50] H. Schift, R.W. Jaszewski, C. David, and J. Gobrecht, Nanostructuring of poly-
mers and fabrication of interdigitated electrodes by hot embossing lithography,
Microelectron. Eng. 46 (1999) 121.
[51] H. Schift, L.J. Heyderman, C. Padeste, and J. Gobrecht, Chemical nano-pattern-
ing using hot embossing lithography, Microelectron. Eng. 61–62 (2002) 423.
[52] S. Park, H. Schift, C. Padeste, and J. Gobrecht, Nanostructuring of anti-adhesive
layer by hot embossing lithography, Microelectron. Eng. 67–68 (2003) 252.
[53] L.J. Heyderman, B. Ketterer, D. Bächle, F. Glaus, B. Haas, H. Schift, K. Vogel-
sang, J. Gobrecht L. Tiefenauer, O. Dubochet, P. Surbled, and T. Hessler, High
volume fabrication of customised nanopore membrane chips, Microelectron.
Eng. 67–68 (2003) 208.
[54] L. J. Heyderman, H. Schift, C. David, B. Ketterer, M. Auf der Maur, and J.
Gobrecht, Nanofabrication using hot embossing lithography and electroform-
ing, Microelectron. Eng. 57–58 (2001) 375.
[55] H. Schift, J. Söchtig, M. Rossi, and S. Westenhöfer, Replicated high precision
micro-optical insert elements for optical bench arrangements, SPIE Proc. (In-
ternational Society for Optical Engineering) 3513 (1998) 122.
[56] D. Falconnet, D. Pasqui, S. Park, R. Eckert, H. Schift, J. Gobrecht, R. Barbucci,
and Marcus Textor, A novel approach to produce protein nanopatterns by
combining nanoimprint lithography and molecular self-assembly, Nano Letters
4, 19 (2004) 1909.
[57] D.-Y. Khang, H. Yoon, and H.H. Lee, Room temperature imprint lithography,
Advanced Materials 13, 10 (2001) 749.
[58] S.Y. Chou, C. Keimel, and J. Gu, Ultrafast and direct imprint of nanostructures
in silicon, Nature 417 (2002) 835.
[59] S.Y. Chou, P.R. Krauss, W. Zhang, L. Guo, and L. Zhuang, Sub-10 nm imprint
lithography and applications, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 15, 6 (1997) 2897.
[60] M.D. Austin, H. Ge, W. Wu, M. Li, Z. Yu, D. Wasserman, S.A. Lyon, and S.Y.
Chou, Fabrication of 5 nm linewidth and 14 nm pitch features by nanoimprint
lithography, Appl. Phys. Lett 84, 26 (2004) 5299.
[61] H.H. Solak, C. David, J. Gobrecht, V. Golovkina, F. Cerrina, S.O. Kim, and P.F.
Nealey, Sub-50 nm period patterns with EUV interference lithography, Micro-
electron. Eng. 67–68 (2003) 56. 
[62] H.H. Solak, Nanolithography with coherent extreme ultraviolet light, J. Phys.D:
Appl. Phys. 39 (2006) R171.
[63] Y. Hirai, S. Harada, S. Isaka, M. Kobayash, and Y. Tananka, Nano-imprint
lithography using replicated mold by electroforming, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 1
41, 6B (2002) 4186.
[64] Y. Hirai, S. Yoshida, N. Takagi, Y. Tanaka, H. Yabe, K. Sasaki, H. Sumitani, and
K. Yamamoto, High aspect pattern fabrication by nano imprint lithography
using ﬁne diamond mold, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 1 42, 6B (2003) 3863.
[65] S.W. Pang, T. Tamamura, M. Nakao, A. Ozawa, and H. Masuda, Direct nano-
printing on Al substrate using SiC mold, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 16 (1998) 1145.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

117
5
Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip 
Applications
Ian Papautsky
CONTENTS
5.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 117
5.2
Polymers...................................................................................................... 120
5.2.1
Material Properties........................................................................ 120
5.2.2
Polymethylmethacrylate and Polycarbonate............................ 121
5.2.3
Cyclic Oleﬁn Copolymer ............................................................. 122
5.3
Master Fabrication..................................................................................... 124
5.3.1
Micromachining Methods............................................................ 124
5.3.2
Bulk Micromachining................................................................... 125
5.3.3
Surface Micromachining .............................................................. 127
5.4
Hot Embossing........................................................................................... 130
5.4.1
Conventional Hot Embossing Process....................................... 130
5.4.2
Examples of Embossed Structures ............................................. 132
5.4.3
Hot Embossing with Polymer Masters ..................................... 134
5.5
Conclusions................................................................................................. 137
References ............................................................................................. 138
5.1
Introduction
Polymer microfabrication has become a popular alternative to the established
silicon and glass-based microelectromechanical system (MEMS) fabrication
technologies, particularly for microﬂuidic and lab-on-a-chip applications [1].
MEMS technologies are revolutionizing chemical and biomedical applica-
tions, and have enabled the fabrication of biochips with microchannels for
applications such as electrophoresis [2–4], polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
[5,6], electrical ﬁeld ﬂow fractionation [7,8], gas chromatography [9,10], liquid
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

118
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
chromatography [11,12], and DNA separation techniques [13,14]. Such micro-
scale total analysis systems (µTAS) or lab-on-a-chip (LOC) [15] perform func-
tions of large analytical devices in small, often disposable units. They rely pri-
marily on microscale ﬂuid ﬂow as these systems must contain elements for the
acquisition, pretreatment, separation, posttreatment, and detection of samples.
Earlier biochips were fabricated in either silicon [6,9–12] or glass [2–4]
using technologies developed primarily in the microelectronics industry. A
number of microﬂuidic devices for various applications, especially in bio-
technology, were fabricated by deﬁning the features using standard photo-
lithography. This was followed by etching the substrates using chemicals or
plasma and then sealing with a cover plate. Glass and oxidized silicon
possess a negative charge and support electroosmotic ﬂow, which is a desir-
able surface characteristic. Glass systems have proven to be successful espe-
cially when applied to separating and sequencing DNA [16]. Silicon and
glass were popular as substrate materials primarily because of the existing
and established microfabrication methods for microelectronic devices. 
However, established silicon and glass processing methods exhibit limita-
tions due to the complex fabrication procedures, geometrical design restric-
tions, and costs involved. The need for high-aspect-ratio features for various
life science applications also posed a serious problem with the existing micro-
fabrication technologies in silicon and glass. Polymers as substrate material
offer a solution to these challenges and lend themselves to the mass fabri-
cation of microﬂuidic devices.
Polymers offer several major advantages that are not immediately avail-
able in silicon and glass, including a wide range of material characteristics,
biochemical compatibility, ease of processing and prototyping, and lower
costs [29]. These characteristics make polymers the most promising substrate
materials for applications in the life sciences. Replication technologies (hot
embossing, injection molding, and casting) are well suited for these appli-
cations because the principles behind these processes are already well estab-
lished in the macroscale world. A number of microﬂuidic systems have been
recently demonstrated in polymers for biomedical applications, including
miniaturized electrophoresis chips [16–18], microﬂuidic mixers [19–21],
pumps and valves [22], devices for cell or protein patterning [23,24], and
microﬂuidic switches [25]. Becker et al. [29] summarized the advantages of
using polymers for microﬂuidics to include: (a) a wide range of available
material properties and surface chemistries that permit application-speciﬁc
substrate optimization; (b) suitable microfabrication technologies for a large
variety of geometries (rectangular, rounded, high aspect ratio, etc.); (c) low
conductivity for electrokinetic pumping or electrophoretic applications; (d)
low material cost, which is key for disposable devices or high-volume pro-
duction; and (e) ease of manufacturing due to replication-based fabrication.
In addition to the inherent material properties, the rapid growth of poly-
mers in applications involving chemistry and biology is also due to the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
119
application of established replication technologies. These include hot
embossing [1,17,18,29,36], injection molding [29,36,54], and methods of rapid
prototyping like casting [15,16,19,20,29] and laser micromachining
[24,26–29]. Injection molding is one of the most well known technologies
where polymer pellets are melted in a heated screw and injected at high
pressure against the tool to replicate features. The process can be automated
and used to rapidly fabricate LOCs, but is limited by the tool materials and
the availability of appropriate substrate polymers. Casting is an inexpensive
but slower technique for fabricating microﬂuidic LOCs in elastomers, where
the elastomer precursor and the curing agent are mixed at a ﬁxed ratio and
poured over the template. The system is thermally cured, allowing the elas-
tomer to be peeled off once it sets. The most prominent elastomer is poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and the casting template can be fabricated by
conventional micromachining techniques [16]. Laser ablation is a direct tech-
nique in which the energy of a laser pulse is used to break bonds in a polymer
molecule and to remove the decomposed polymer fragments from the abla-
tion region [24,29,30]. However, the interaction of the laser light and the
polymer material induces surface modiﬁcations compared to the untreated
material [29,30].
Hot embossing is a reasonably fast and moderately expensive technique
used to replicate microﬂuidic LOCs in thermoplastics. It is a straightfor-
ward process, schematically represented in Figure 5.1, where the polymer
and the master are heated above the glass transition temperature (or soft-
ening point) of the thermoplastic and a controlled force is applied under
vacuum. The assembly is then cooled below the glass transition tempera-
tures and they are de-embossed. Though the process cannot be fully auto-
mated, it is widely used to replicate microstructures on thermoplastics due
to low startup costs and ease of fabrication. Hot embossing offers the
advantage of a relatively simpler replication process with few variable
parameters and high structural accuracy, and is therefore well suited for a
wide range of microﬂuidic LOC applications from rapid prototyping to
high-volume mass fabrication [17].
In this chapter, we will limit ourselves to hot embossing for microﬂuidic
lab-on-a-chip applications. Other microﬂuidic devices, such as pumps and
valves, have been purposefully omitted. The same holds true for a number
of other polymer microfabrication technologies that have also been applied
to fabrication of microﬂuidic devices, such as injection molding, casting,
and laser ablation.
FIGURE 5.1
Hot embossing process ﬂow.
Design
Master
Embossing
Packaging
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

120
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
5.2
Polymers
5.2.1
Material Properties
Polymers are macromolecular substances comprised of thousands of mono-
meric units. Polymers are formed from either only one monomer or a variety
of monomers (copolymers). In most cases, polymers are amorphous with chain
lengths varying throughout the bulk material. Thus, polymers do not have an
exactly deﬁned melting temperature. Instead, a melting interval exists referred
to as the glass transition temperature (Tg), in which the viscosity changes
substantially and the material becomes a viscous mass. Many polymers solid-
ify after cooling under the Tg, resulting in a solid phase that is hard and brittle.
In hot embossing, Tg is one the most critical parameters. If the temperature
is increased above Tg, the material becomes viscous and can be molded or
embossed. For demolding or de-embossing, the material is cooled below Tg.
This is an important step because geometric stability of the embossed com-
ponent can suffer due to relaxation during the demolding and the resulting
entropy elasticity. Softeners can be added to polymers to lower the glass
transition temperature, but this decreases hardness and increases elasticity
and impact strength of the material. Plasticizers added during the polymer-
ization process increase the Tg. 
Polymers can be broadly classiﬁed into three groups according to the inter-
connection of the monomer units in the polymer chain, which will substan-
tially affect their properties and thus the embossing behavior. The ﬁrst group
is the thermoplastic polymers, which consist of unlinked or weakly linked linear
chain molecules. Above the glass transition temperature, these materials
become plastic and can be molded into speciﬁc shapes, which they retain once
cooled below Tg. Thermoplastics are commonly used in hot embossing; poly-
methylmethacrylate (PMMA) and polycarbonate (PC) are the most commonly
used thermoplastics. The second group is the elastomeric polymers, which also
contain weakly cross-linked polymer chains. Under an applied stress, molec-
ular chains can be stretched to a high extent, but relax and return to the original
state once the external force is removed. Elastomers do not melt before reach-
ing the decomposition temperature and are typically processed by casting.
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is one of the most popular elastomers. The third
category is the duroplastic polymers (also known as thermoset polymers), which
contain heavily cross-linked polymer chains and therefore do not easily change
shape. These materials have to be cast into the ﬁnal shape, and are harder and
more brittle than thermoplastics.
Hot embossing has very speciﬁc constraints with regard to the material
properties of polymers. Glass transition temperature and thermal expansion
coefﬁcient are the most critical parameters to successful replication. As
already mentioned, the glass transition temperature is the temperature range
where a rigid glassy polymer material softens. Thermoplastics that contain
very long polymer chains with strong intermolecular interactions do not melt
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
121
and ﬂow, but remain soft until they decompose. Thermal expansion coefﬁcient
refers to a change in length or volume resulting from a speciﬁed change in
temperature. This parameter is important not only in hot embossing fabrica-
tion, but also in the microchannel sealing process where different materials
are thermally bonded. Other parameters that must be considered include
adsorption and transparency at desired wavelengths and autoﬂuorescence
when using optical detection; gas permeability when working with cells;
chemical resistance when using nonaqueous solutions; electrical insulating
properties and thermal dissipation when working with electroosmotic ﬂows;
and analyte adsorption, surface properties, and biocompatibility.
5.2.2
Polymethylmethacrylate and Polycarbonate
The majority of the hot embossing work to date, particularly in microﬂuidic
and bio-MEMS applications, has been performed in PMMA (also known as
Plexiglas or Lucite). PC (also known as Lexan, GE or Makrolon, Bayer) is
another popular polymer material. Both of these materials offer high optical
clarity above 400 nm [38] and have a long history as biomedical materials.
PMMA is available in a broad range of molecular weights and is a well-
known e-beam resist. It is a thermoplastic polymer with a relatively low Tg
of 106°C, which makes it better suited for hot embossing than PC (Tg =
150°C). Other physical properties of the two materials, such as the density,
elasticity modulus, thermal conductivity, and water absorption, are quite
similar. The refractive index of PC is 1.586 [31], higher than that of PMMA,
making PC a good material for applications that use optical detection. Mate-
rial properties of PMMA and PC are summarized in Table 5.1. Both materials
exhibit excellent chemical resistance to weak acids, but suffer from poor
TABLE 5.1
Basic Material Properties of Embossing Polymer Materials
Property
PMMA
PC
PS
PP
COC
Density (g m–3)
1.17–1.20
1.20
1.05
0.896–0.915
1.01–1.02
Glass Transition
Temperature, Tg (°C)
106
150
80–100
0–10
138
Elasticity Modulus (GPa)
3.1–3.3
2.0–2.4
3
1.1–1.6
3.1
Linear Thermal Expansion
Coefﬁcient (10–6 K–1)
70–90
65
70
100–200
60
Thermal Conductivity 
(W m–1 K–1)
0.186
0.192–0.21
0.18
0.22
0.16
Tensile strength (MPa)
48–76
62.1–65.5
40
40
66
Water absorption (%)
0.3–0.4
0.35
0.05
0.02
<0.01
Refractive Index
1.49
1.586
1.51
1.51
1.53
Source: Data compiled from Mark, J.E., Polymer Data Handbook, Oxford University Press, New
York, 1999; Harper, C.A., Modern Plastics Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000; Becker, H.
and Gartner, C., Electrophoresis, 21, 12, 2000; Becker, H. and Heim, U., Sensors and Actuators A,
83, 130–135, 2000; Topas Grade 5013 data sheet; and Ticona Inc., www.ticona.com.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

122
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
resistance to strong acids, strong and weak bases, and most organic solvents.
Chemical resistances of these polymers are summarized in Table 5.2.
Other thermoplastic materials have been used in hot embossing due to
the interest in developing microdevices that offer higher operating temper-
atures, superior chemical resistance, or enhanced optical properties. In many
microﬂuidic applications, the polymer material forms the window of detec-
tion, and thus potential changes in refractive index of different plastics may
be important. Other polymer materials that have been used in hot emboss-
ing include polystyrene (PS), polyamide (PA), polybutyleneterephthalate
(PBT), polyoxymethylene (POM), polypropylene (PP), polyphenylene ether
material properties of some common polymers that are critical in hot
embossing [32,33], while chemical resistances of these polymers are given
in Table 5.2 [34].
5.2.3
Cyclic Oleﬁn Copolymer
Cyclic oleﬁn copolymer (COC) or Topas by Ticona [35] is a relatively new
polymer material that has been gaining popularity due to its excellent physical
TABLE 5.2
Chemical Resistance of Common Embossing Polymer Materials
PMMA 
PC
PS
PP
COC
Aldehydes
0
–
+
+
Alcohols, aliphatic
–
+
+
+
Esters
–
–
–
0
Ethers
–
–
-
Ketones
–
–
–
0
+
Aliphatic Hydrocarbons
0
–
–
+
Aromatic Hydrocarbons
0
–
–
0
Halogenated Hydrocarbons
–
–
0
Acids, weak/diluted
+
+
+
+
+
Acids, strong/concentrated
–
–
+
(except HNO3)
+
+
Acids, oxidizing
0
–
–
0
Bases weak
+
–
+
+
+
Bases strong
–
–
+
+
+
+ = excellent chemical resistance; plastic not damaged after continuous contact with the sub-
stance. The plastic may remain resistant for years.
0 = good/limited chemical resistance; continuous contact causes slight damage, which may be
partially reversible (softening, swelling, reduction of mechanical strength, discoloration).
– = low chemical resistance; continuous contact causes immediate damage to the plastic
(reduction of mechanical strength, deformation, discoloration, cracks, dissolution, risk of
breakage). 
Source: Compiled from Mark, J.E., Polymer Data Handbook, Oxford University Press, New York, 1999;
Becker, H. and Gartner, C., Electrophoresis, 21, 12, 2000; Weast, R. C. and Astle, M. J., CRC Handbook
of Chemistry and Physics, 60th ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1979; Becker, H. and Locascia, L. E.,
Talanta, 56, 267, 2002; and Topas
(PPE), and polysulfone (PSU), and polyetherketone (PEEK). Table 5.1 lists
 Grade 5013 data sheet, Ticona Inc., www.ticona.com.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
123
and chemical properties [29,36,37]. COC is a thermoplastic copolymer con-
sisting of ethylene and bicyclic oleﬁn (norbornene) monomers. Due to the
oleﬁnic characteristics, COC has a good chemical resistance to hydrolysis,
acids and bases, and most organic polar solvents such as acetone, methanol,
and isopropyl alcohol. However, it is soluble in nonpolar organic solvents
including toluene and naphtha.
COC is transparent to light with wavelengths above 300 nm and has higher
transparency in visible and near ultraviolet regions than PMMA [37,38].
Figure 5.2 compares the UV transmittance characteristics of COC with
PMMA and PC. Further, the refractive index of COC is 1.53 at 589 nm, higher
than that of PMMA. Thus, COC has excellent optical properties, making
COC ideally suited for ﬂuorescence-based biochemical analysis and bio-
optical applications.
The water absorption of COC is less than 0.01%, and for comparison the
water absorption of PMMA is 0.3 to 0.4%, an order of magnitude higher [29].
COC has the elasticity modulus of 3.1 GPa and density of 1.01 to 1.02 g/m3
[31], which are comparable to the properties of PMMA (E = 3.1 to 3.3 GPa
and ρ = 1.17 to 1.20 g/m3 [29,31]). By having lower density than PMMA,
FIGURE 5.2
Transmission spectra of COC, PMMA, PC, PDMS, and glass. Top: A, 0.25-mm thick PMMA; B,
3-mm thick PMMA; C, 5-mm thick PMMA. Bottom: D, 1-mm thick BoroFloat glass; E, 1-mm
thick COC; F, 0.25-mm thick PC; G, 2-mm thick PC; H, 1-mm thick PDMS. (From Piruska, A.
et al., Lab on a Chip, 5, 1348, 2005. With permission.)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
200
0
20
40
60
80
Transmission (%)
100
400
600
800
1000
Wavelength/nm
200
0
20
40
60
80
Transmission (%)
100
400
600
800
1000
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

124
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
COC is easier to emboss. Overall, based on its material properties, COC is
ideally suited for hot embossing fabrication of microﬂuidic chips and
devices, especially if signal detection is performed spectroscopically [35–37].
5.3
Master Fabrication
The underlying principle of hot embossing is the replication of a microfabri-
cated master, which represents the negative (inverse) structure of the desired
polymer structure. Thus, microfabrication is only necessary one time for the
fabrication of this master structure, which then can be replicated many times
into the polymer substrate. This offers substantial cost advantages and freedom
of design because the master can be fabricated with a large number of
different microfabrication technologies.
The success of hot embossing is completely dependent on the master, also
called the tool, because any surface defect will be replicated faithfully in the
polymer. Thus, hot embossing has speciﬁc constraints with regard to masters
that must be considered. First, because the master needs to be removed from
the desired polymer structure, undercuts cannot be tolerated. Second, ﬁdelity
of the replication and master lifetime depend strongly on the surface quality
of the master. Generally, smoother master surfaces result in lower frictional
forces during de-embossing. Roughness values below 100 nm RMS are nec-
essary for reliable, high-quality replication [29].
The tool material should not form any kind of chemical or physical bond
during replication. Release agents, which are commonly used on the mac-
roscale to help release molds of complex structures, are typically not suitable
for microﬂuidic devices. This is because such agents may modify the polymer
surface or diffuse into the polymer matrix, and thus adversely affect biolog-
ical samples. Further, release agents tend to increase the autoﬂuorescence of
the polymer, making the device less compatible with ﬂuorescent-based detec-
tion schemes commonly employed in microﬂuidic devices.
There are a number of methods used to fabricate tools. These methods can
be broadly classiﬁed into four categories: traditional micromachining meth-
ods (e.g., milling), bulk micromachining (e.g., wet or dry etching of Si),
surface micromachining (e.g., nickel electroplating of photoresist or LIGA
molds), and mold micromachining (e.g., PDMS or polyester tools). Surface
morphology, adhesion properties to the thermoplastic, lifetime, feature sizes,
and costs are the critical factors to be considered in master fabrication. 
5.3.1
Micromachining Methods
Modern micromachining technologies, such as sawing, cutting, and comput-
erized numerically controlled (CNC) milling, are capable of producing tools
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
125
with structures on the order of a few tens of micrometers. One key advantage
of these techniques is the wide range of materials that can be machined,
particularly stainless steel, which cannot be processed with other microfab-
rication techniques but offers excellent tool lifetimes. Another advantage lies
in the fact that there is no photolithography step, which in turn eliminates
the need to fabricate a mask and thus can substantially shorten the tool
development time. Relatively simple geometries with straight walls are a
good ﬁt for these techniques.
However, high-aspect structures (height vs. width ratio greater than 2),
very deep holes, or very small structures (less than 10 µm) cannot be fabri-
cated. Further, with surface roughness around several µm, these techniques
typically do not produce smooth surface ﬁnish. CNC machining of materials
such as stainless steel yields tools with a very long lifetime. However, it is
mostly used for large features, often greater than 50 µm, with tolerances
around 10 µm [1], and is limited by difﬁculties in machining complex
designs. Because the entire tool is fabricated in the same material, any adhe-
sion problem between the substrate and features is entirely avoided. How-
ever, results in a long lifetime, but all of these prototyping fabrication
processes are labor intensive and slow.
5.3.2
Bulk Micromachining
In bulk micromachining, the master is created by etching the substrate wafer,
typically silicon. Silicon is a very good material for use as an embossing tool
[29,39]. It has a high modulus of elasticity and high thermal conductiv-
ity—two material properties that are highly desirable in a hot embossing
tool. In addition, there is a large variety of silicon microfabrication tech-
niques. To make a silicon master, a drawing of the microﬂuidic channels is
ﬁrst created using CAD software, and the image is transferred to a photo-
mask. A silicon wafer is coated with a masking material such as silicon
dioxide or silicon nitride, and then coated with a layer of photoresist. The
the photoresist is developed revealing the transferred image. The image is
then transferred to the exposed masking layer by etching in a solution of
hydroﬂuoric acid (HF). The exposed silicon is then etched anisotropically
using potassium hydroxide (KOH), tetramethylammonium hydroxide
(TMAH), or ethylenediaminepyrocatechol (EDP). If silicon with a crystallo-
graphic orientation of <100> is used, the resulting microstructure has a
trapezoidal shape, with wall angle off 54.74°. The slant in the wall allows a
good mold release and the surface roughness of well-oriented wet-etched
silicon wafers is excellent [40–42]. The height and the width of the tool
features are controlled by the amount of time the wafer is etched. In the ﬁnal
step, the mask layer is stripped using an HF solution.
Dry etching methods, such as reactive ion etching (RIE) and the Bosch
process is schematically illustrated in Figure 5.3. Following UV exposure,
process (for a review, see [43]) can be used to fabricate deep structures with
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

126
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
vertical sidewalls. However, scalloping or high surface roughness due to non-
optimized or fast etches can limit the desirable depth of structures resulting
in poor de-embossing characteristics. Typical depths range from 10 to 40 µm.
Although silicon masters are simple to fabricate and offer good resolution
and surface properties, they suffer from a number of disadvantages. A com-
mon problem of these masters is that they may be too fragile for typical hot
embossing pressures and may need some form of reinforcement. Silicon wafers
can be reinforced by anodic bonding to glass wafers [44]. A sample silicon
master reinforced with a 5 mm–thick glass wafer is shown in Figure 5.4.
FIGURE 5.3
Bulk micromachining of silicon masters.
FIGURE 5.4
Photograph of a silicon master anodically bonded to a glass wafer. (From Alonso-Amigo, M.G.,
J. Assoc. Lab. Auto., 5, 96, 2000.)
Isotropic wet etching
Mask layer
removal
Etching of the
master pattern
Patterning of
mask layer
Patterning of
photoresist
Wafer with
mask layer
Anisotropic wet etching
Dry etching
Photoresist
Si wafer
Mask layer
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
127
However, such masters suffer from reductions in durability and lifetime.
Silicon masters may also potentially adhere to polymers due to their surface
chemistry, which would reduce the number of possible replication cycles.
Finally, to fabricate some silicon masters, specialized equipment is necessary
to perform DRIE (deep reactive ion etching), which may not be available at
all research laboratories. For greater master durability and replication per-
formance, the surface micromachined masters are used.
5.3.3
Surface Micromachining
In surface micromachining, the master is created by ﬁrst patterning a mold
on the wafer surface, followed by electroplating nickel, and ﬁnally removing
the mold producing the nickel master. This is the most commonly used
method for making masters in hot embossing. It is popular because nickel
tools offer high surface smoothness, long lifetimes, and the ability to replicate
small- and high-aspect-ratio features.
There are two reincarnations of this method. The ﬁrst method uses a silicon
or glass wafer as a substrate material [45,46], while the second method uses
conducting electroplating seed layer (approximately 100 nm) such as Ni or
Cu or Au. A thin layer (approximately 50 nm) of Ti or Cr is used to enhance
adhesion of the conducting layer to the silicon substrate. The wafer is then
coated with a layer of photoresist, which is subsequently exposed to UV
light. The photoresist is then developed so that the areas to be electroplated
are free of resist. The wafer is placed into a nickel galvanic bath, where due
to the migration of metal ions between the electrolyte and the seed layer,
nickel is deposited in the photoresist structure.
Low-stress nickel ﬁlms can be deposited from a nickel sulfamate galvanic
solution. Such solutions are commercially available (e.g., Technics, Inc.) or
can be mixed (e.g., 375 g of nickel sulfamate, 7.5 g nickel bromide, and 37.5 g
boric acid per 1 L of deionized water [51,52]). Electrodeposition is performed
at around 50°C to reduce stress, with current density on the order of 20 mA/
cm2 [51,52]. Plating is allowed to proceed long enough for the metal to grow
higher than the resist and form the master base. To ensure that the plating
takes place on top of the photoresist, a thin layer of seed metal can be
sputtered on the top surface. Following metal deposition, the resist and seed
layers can be dissolved and the resulting metal structure can be used for hot
embossing.
In the second method, schematically illustrated in Figure 5.5b, photoresist
is deposited and patterned on a nickel plate instead of a silicon wafer.
Electroplating is performed using the same conditions as described above
until nickel completely ﬁlls all microstructures and grows above the photo-
resist. In this method, it is necessary to mechanically machine the nickel
a nickel plate [37,49]. The ﬁrst process is schematically illustrated in Figure
5.5a. A silicon or glass wafer is coated by evaporation or sputtering with a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

128
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
FIGURE 5.5
Fabrication of surface micromachined masters by photolithography and nickel electroplating
using a silicon wafer as a substrate (a) and a nickel plate as a substrate (b).
Seed layer 
Si wafer 
Photoresist 
Nickel 
Wafer with 
seed layer 
Patterning of 
photoresist 
Electroplating 
of nickel 
micropatterns 
and base 
Photoresist 
removal and 
etching of seed 
layer 
(a)
Electroplated 
Nickel 
Nickel plate 
Photoresist 
Nickel plate with 
photoresist 
Electroplating 
of nickel 
Planarization 
Photoresist 
removal 
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
129
microstructures to the desired height and polish prior to embossing. The
photoresist is stripped off to complete the fabrication process.
The height of the metal structure depends on the height of the photoresist
mold. Positive thick photoresists allow structural heights on the order of 10 to
40 µm (e.g., Clariant AZ P4620). Thicker structures, up to 1 mm, can be obtained
using negative thick photoresist (MicroChem SU-8). X-ray LIGA (German for
Lithographie, Glavanoformung, Abformnung) [47] is a well-established tech-
nique, where PMMA resist layers are exposed with synchrotron radiation, and
can yield high-aspect-ratio structures and molds thicker than 1 mm.
The electroplating method produces master surfaces with very low rough-
ness (about 10 nm RMS for LIGA). Further, nickel tools have good surface
chemistry for most polymers. However, there are a number of drawbacks.
One is the slow growth rate of nickel in the electroplating process, typically
between 10 and 100 µm/hr. Another is the high stress levels in thick nickel
ﬁlms, which tend to deform the master. Electroplating baths can also exhibit
a radial dependency of the growth rate, which can result in a different height
of the nickel structure in the middle and at the rim of a nickel wafer. Finally,
electroplating features of substantially different dimensions may be challeng-
ing. Smaller features will have a higher current density and thus will exhibit
a higher growth rate, resulting in a different height of smaller and larger
nickel structures.
Smoothness of the wall surface depends strongly on the quality of the
mask used during photolithography. A high-resolution transparency can be
used as an alternative to the traditional chrome-coated glass, if the features
made by UV lithography of SU-8. The one developed from a chromium-
coated mask shows much better feature shape and surface smoothness com-
pared to that developed from a transparency mask. The latter, however, is
much less expensive.
Conventional lithography, x-ray, or UV LIGA followed by electroplating
nickel or nickel alloys on silicon or nickel substrates are common techniques
of fabricating tools with very small and complex features [1,17,29,50]. The
electroplated nickel surface can be very smooth and can have good surface
chemistry with many polymers [29]. However, electroplating of tall, high-
aspect-ratio structures has to be done for a very long time [51,52], and
increasing the current density to speed up the process typically increases
stress levels.
In addition to stress, poor adhesion to the substrate seed layers and non-
uniform deposition are the other issues to be considered in electroplating.
X-ray LIGA offers a potential solution in fabricating tools with very small,
complex features and high-aspect-ratio structures [29,53], but is highly lim-
ited by the restricted availability and high cost associated with the synchro-
tron radiation sources. Replication tools with aspect ratios of some ten to
600 can be fabricated using LIGA, and the lifetime of these mold inserts was
reported to be as high as 1000 cycles [54]. The surface roughness of the tools
was reported to be as low as 10 nm [29].
are greater than 20 µm [48,49,60]. Figure 5.6 compares structural features
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

130
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
5.4
Hot Embossing
The microfabrication process of hot embossing is rather straightforward [55].
Once an embossing master is fabricated, it is mounted inside the embossing
system together with a planar polymer substrate. An embossing machine,
delivers the embossing force. The embossing tool and the planar polymer
substrate are mounted on heating plates, which are used for thermal cycling.
The plates may also contain cooling channels, which are used to reticulate
high heat–capacity oil during the cooling phase to permit rapid active cooling.
5.4.1
Conventional Hot Embossing Process
There are three basic steps in hot embossing, schematically represented in
FIGURE 5.6
SEMs of SU-8 structural features developed from a chromium-coated mask (a) and sidewall
close-up (b) and a transparency mask (c) and sidewall close-up (d). (From Lee, L.J. et al.,
Biomedical Microdevices, 3, 339, 2001.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
schematically illustrated in Figure 5.7, mainly consists of a force frame that
Figure 5.8. At the beginning of the embossing cycle, the master and polymer
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
131
substrate are heated independently in a vacuum chamber at approximately 75
mTorr to a temperature just above the Tg of the polymer. For most thermo-
remove water vapor driven out from the polymer substrate during the process.
The vacuum also increases the lifetime of metal masters by preventing corro-
sion at elevated temperatures. For most applications, the master and the sub-
strate are heated to the same temperature. However, it is possible to
independently control each heating plate to attain optimum embossing results.
In the second step, the master is brought into contact with the substrate
and then embossed with a controlled force. Typical embossing pressures are
on the order of 0.5 to 2 kN/cm2. While applying the embossing pressure,
FIGURE 5.7
Schematic diagram of the hot embossing machine. (Adapted from Becker, H. and Gartner, C.,
Electrophoresis, 21, 12, 2000.)
FIGURE 5.8
Graphical representation of the temperature and force program in a typical hot embossing
process.
Heating and
cooling
Embossing
force
Master
Plastic
substrate
Temperature 
Tg 
45°C
2 mins
5 mins
Pressure 
Naturally 
cooling 
down 
2 kN/cm2 
0.2 kN/cm2 
5 mins 
1KN/min 
Time 
100°C/min
plastics, this temperature is typically on the order of 100 to 180°C (see Table
5.1). A vacuum is needed to prevent trapping of air in microstructures and to
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

132
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
the master-substrate sandwich is cooled to just below Tg. In order to minimize
thermally induced stress in the material and replication errors due to mis-
match in thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the master and the substrate, the
temperature differential in the thermal cycle should be as small as possible.
Typical values of the thermal expansion coefﬁcient of polymers are on the
order of 7 × 105 K–1, while silicon is approximately 2.5 × 106 K–1 and nickel is
around 1.3 × 105 K–1. 
In the ﬁnal step, the embossed substrate is cooled to a temperature below
the Tg, where the plastic material transitions back to the rigid state. After
reaching this lower cycle temperature, the embossing master is mechanically
separated from the polymer substrate, which now contains the desired
microfeatures. This is usually the most critical step due to the large forces
that act on the polymer structure. This is particularly true for microstructures
with vertical sidewalls and high aspect ratios. The overall cycle time of the
embossing process is typically 1 to 10 min.
For every design, however, the process conditions vary slightly. Geometry
of the structures is an important factor that includes feature size, aspect ratio,
radius of curvature, and whether the structure is freestanding or connected,
and can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the process parameters. Layout properties of
the design, such as the distribution of large and small features over the wafer
area and the total wafer area to be processed, also must be considered. 
5.4.2
Examples of Embossed Structures
An example of a microchannel structure fabricated in PMMA using hot
embossing is shown in Figure 5.9. The microchannels are 50 µm wide and
FIGURE 5.9
SEM of an intersection of two 50 µm–wide and 11 µm–deep microchannels embossed in PMMA.
(From Studer, V., Pepin, A., and Chen, Y., Appl. Phys. Lett., 80, 3614, 2002.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
133
11 µm deep [56]. The fabricated microﬂuidic structure shows excellent rep-
lication capabilities and well-deﬁned shapes, exhibiting very low surface
roughness of less than 5 nm. The microchannel intersection illustrates the
high surface quality and vertical sidewalls of an RIE etched silicon master.
Microstructures can be replicated in a wide range of shapes and aspect
ratios. An SEM of a microchannel array of a ﬂow cytometry system embossed
in PC using an RIE etched silicon master [65] is shown in Figure 5.10a. Small
micrometer sized channels (50 µm × 50 µm in cross-section) and large hun-
dreds of micrometers reservoirs can be replicated equally well. Figure 5.10b
illustrates the high aspect ratio capabilities of the process. The test structure
was embossed in PC using a master fabricated with LIGA and nickel elec-
troplating [57,65]. Channel in the circular middle structure has an aspect
ration of 7, and is 20 µm wide and 140 µm deep. An advanced silicon etch
process can also be used to generate high aspect ratio masters [65]. Figure
5.10c illustrates a silicon tool for a two-dimensional channel array for 2D-
capillary electrophoresis. The ridges are 0.8 µm wide and 5 µm high with a
5 µm pitch. The resulting sub-micrometer channel array pattern replicated
in PMMA is shown in Figure 5.10d.
FIGURE 5.10
Examples of embossing tools and structures. SEMs of (a) a microchannel array of a ﬂow
cytometry system in PC fabricated with a silicon RIE-tool, (b) a high aspect ratio test structure
embossed in PC using a master fabricated with LIGA and nickel electroplating, (c) a silicon
tool for a two-dimensional channel array for 2D-capillary electrophoresis, and (d) the replicated
PMMA structure. (From Becker, H. and Heim, U., Sensors and Actuators A, 83, 130–135, 2000.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

134
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
High structural resolution and density are achievable with hot embossing.
Figure 5.11 shows SEM images of a grid pattern of approximately 150 nm-
wide trenches spaced at 1 µm [56]. Depth of the silicon master fabricated
with the advanced silicon etch process and height of the resulting PMMA
structures is 200 nm.
5.4.3
Hot Embossing with Polymer Masters
Recently, polymer masters have been demonstrated for embossing plastics.
Microstructures formed in negative resist SU-8 on silicon can be used directly
as a tool for replicating parts in PC and PP [59]. However, the lifetime of these
tools was very short, only a few replications, due to the poor adhesion of SU-
8 to the underlying base substrate during de-embossing. Alternatively, photo-
resist (AZP 4620 or SU-8) can be used to deﬁne a template for casting poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to form the embossing tool. The process is
PDMS masters and the embossed microstructures in PMMA and COC [60–62].
Both large and small features can be replicated using this technique. For exam-
ple, the PDMS master in Figure 5.13 is 90 µm thick with an array of 150
µm–wide features at 250 µm center-to-center spacing. The PMMA structure is
250 µm deep, containing an array of 600 µm–wide microchannels at 1 mm
center-to-center spacing. Figure 5.13 also shows a 5 µm–thick PDMS master
with 10 µm–wide ridges at 10 µm side-to-side spacing, and a 20 µm–deep COC
pattern with 30 µm–wide channels at 10 µm side-to-side spacing.
The use of PDMS tools can also be extended to fabrication of multilayered
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 5.11
SEMs of (a) a silicon master and (b) the resulting PMMA structure. Features are 150 nm wide
and 200 nm deep at 1 µm spacing. (From Studer, V., Pepin, A., and Chen, Y., Appl. Phys. Lett.,
80, 3614, 2002.)
schematically illustrated in Figure 5.12. Figure 5.13 shows examples of such
structures. This is schematically shown in Figure 5.14. The process involves
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
135
FIGURE 5.12
Schematic diagram illustrating hot embossing using a PDMS tool: (a) photolithographically
deﬁne AZP 4620 layer on a silicon substrate, (b) cast PDMS, (c) use PDMS tool to emboss COC,
and (d) embossed COC substrate.
FIGURE 5.13
SEM images of PDMS masters and embossed structures. (a) A 90 µm–thick PDMS master
containing an array of 150 µm–wide features with 250 µm center-to-center spacing. (b) A 250
µm–deep PMMA structure containing an array of 600 µm–wide microchannels with 1 mm
center-to-center spacing. (c) A 5 µm–thick PDMS master containing 10 µm–wide ridges with
10 µm side-to-side spacing. (d) A 20 µm–deep COC pattern containing 30 µm–wide channels
with 10 µm side-to-side spacing.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

136
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
an additional lithography step using AZP 4620 photoresist. A passive
micromixer fabricated using this process is shown in Figure 5.15. The
mixing channel width is 200 µm at the widest point and 100 µm at the
narrowest, with diamond obstructions 100 µm in width. Channel height is
55 µm with 15 µm–high obstructions. Although this process can be suc-
cessfully used to fabricate multilayered structures, the greatest difﬁculty
is the patterning of AZP 4620 diamonds within the existing SU-8 channels.
FIGURE 5.14
Schematic diagram illustrating fabrication of a multilayered structure: (a) pattern SU-8 layer
on a silicon substrate to deﬁne the outer strucure, (b) pattern AZP 4620 layer to deﬁne the inner
structure, (c) cast PDMS, (d) use PDMS tool to emboss COC, (e) embossed COC substrate.
FIGURE 5.15
SEM images of the micromixer embossed in COC, illustrating the (a) input and (b) channel
regions. The 55 µm–high mixing channel is 200 µm at the widest point and 100 µm at the
narrowest. The diamond obstructions are 15 µm in height and 100 µm in width.
Silicon
(a)
Silicon
(b)
Silicon
PDMS
PDMS
(c)
COC
(d)
COC
(e)
(a)
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
137
When depositing a second layer of photoresist over the channels, a menis-
cus forms between the channel walls, leaving a concave surface. This
rounded surface causes the UV light to diffract away from the features
causing an uneven exposure, leading to sloped sidewalls on the features.
Further, adhesion of the AZP 4620 to the preprocessed silicon surface is
very poor following SU-8 processing.
Mechanical properties of PDMS affect the hot embossing process. PDMS
masters are not as strong as those of nickel or silicon discussed earlier,
and have a much lower Young’s modulus [63,64] (Table 5.3). Thus, emboss-
ing pressure is very important. PDMS has a higher thermal expansion,
and will expand and deform considerably more than conventional tools.
Thus optimizing temperature is equally important in order to reduce
discrepancies in replication. Overall, the use of PDMS masters can sub-
stantially reduce the time, complexity, and costs involved in fabricating
prototype microﬂuidic chips, but limits the master lifetime to approxi-
mately 20 cycles.
5.5
Conclusions
Polymer fabrication of microﬂuidic devices using hot embossing is a young
ﬁled that shows enormous growth. One of the driving forces behind this
ﬁeld is the commercialization of microﬂuidics with medical and pharmaceu-
tical applications, which demand a high number of low-cost, disposable
devices. Further, the ﬁeld of bio-MEMS is moving away from its fabrication
roots in microelectronics, and is developing fabrication technologies better
suited for applications in the life sciences [65,66].
TABLE 5.3
Comparison of Embossing Tool Properties
Property
Nickel
Silicon
PDMS
(Sylgard
 184)
Density (g m–3)
8.90
2.32
0.970
Young’s Modulus (MPa)
200,000
47,000
0.36–0.87
Thermal Expansion Coefﬁcient 
at 25°C (106 K–1)
13.4
2.49
310
Thermal Conductivity (W m–1 K–1)
90.7
124
0.18
Poisson’s Ratio
0.31
0.28
for (100) plane
0.5
Source: Data for nickel and silicon are from Lide, D.R. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2003. Data for PDMS are from Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer data
sheet, Dow Corning, Inc., 2003, www.dowcorning.com.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

138
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
References
1. Becker, H., Heim, U., and Rotting, O., The fabrication of polymer high aspect
ratio structures with hot embossing for microﬂuidic applications, Proc. SPIE
(International Society for Optical Engineering), 3877, 74, 1999.
2. Nakanishi, H., et al., Fabrication of Electrophoresis devices on quartz and glass
substrates using a bonding with HF solution, in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems, Nagoya, Japan, January 26–30, 1997, 299–304.
3. Effenhauser, C.S., Manz, A., and Widmer, M.H. Glass chips for high speed
capillary electrophoresis separation with submicrometer plate heights, Anal.
Chem., 65, 2637, 1993.
4. Fan, Z.H. and Harrison, D.J., Micromachining of capillary electrophoresis in-
jectors and separators on glass chips and evaluation of ﬂow at capillary inter-
connections, Anal. Chem., 66, 177, 1994.
5. Northrup, M.A., et al., A MEMS-based miniature DNA analysis system, in Proc.
Transducers ’95, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, 764–767.
6. Wilding, P., Shoffner, M.A. and Kircka, L.J., Manipulation and ﬂow of biological
ﬂuids in straight channels micromachined in silicon, Clin. Chem., 40, 1815, 1994.
7. Gale, B.K., Caldwell, K.D. and Frazier, A.B., A micromachined electrical ﬁeld
ﬂow fractionation system, Trans. Biomed. Eng., 45, 1459, 1998.
8. Edwards, T.L., Gale, B.K., and Frazier, A.B., Micromachined thermal ﬁeld ﬂow
fractionation system, in Proc. Transducers ’99, Sendai, Japan, June 7–10, 1999,
742–745.
9. Terry, S.C., Jerman, J.H. and Angell, J.B. A gas chromatographic air analyzer
fabricated on a silicone wafer, Trans. Electron Devices, ED-26, 1880, 1979.
10. Reston R.R. and Kolesar, E.S. Silicon-micromachined gas chromatography sys-
tem used to separate and detect ammonia and nitrogen dioxide—part I: design,
fabrication, and integration of gas chromatography system, J. Microelectrome-
chanics. Syst., 3, 134, 1994.
11. Ocvirk, G. et al., Integration of a micro liquid chromatography onto a silicon
chip, in Proc. Transducers ’95, Stockholm Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, 756–759.
12. Manz, A., et al., Design of an open-tubular column liquid chromatograph using
silicon chip technology, Sensors and Actuators, B1, 249, 1990.
13. Clark, S.M. and Mathies, R.A., High-speed parallel separation of DNA restric-
tion fragments using capillary array electrophoresis, Anal. Biochem., 215, 163,
1993.
14. Han, J. and Craighead, H.G., Entropic trapping and sieving of long DNA
molecules in a nanoﬂuidic channel, J. Vac. Sci. Tech., 17, 2142, 1999.
15. Duffy, D.C. et al., Rapid prototyping of microﬂuidic systems in poly(dimeth-
ylsiloxane), Anal. Chem., 70, 4974, 1998.
16. McDonald, J.C. et al., Fabrication of microﬂuidic systems in poly(dimethylsi-
loxane), Electrophoresis, 21, 27, 2000.
17. Becker, H. and Dietz, W., Microﬂuidic devices for µ-TAS applications fabricated
by polymer hot embossing, Proc. SPIE, 3515, 177, 1998.
18. Wabuyele, M.B. et al., Single molecule detection of double-stranded DNA in
polymethylmethacrylate and polycarbonate microﬂuidic devices, Electrophore-
sis, 22, 3939, 2001.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Hot Embossing for Lab-on-a-Chip Applications
139
19. Beebe, D.J. et al., Passive mixing in microchannels: fabrication and ﬂow exper-
iments, Mec. Ind., 2, 343, 2001.
20. Stroock, A.D. et al., Chaotic mixers for microchannels, Science, 295, 647, 2002.
21. Rohr, T. et al., Porous polymer monoliths: simple and efﬁcient mixers prepared
by direct polymerization in the channels of microﬂuidic chips, Electrophoresis,
22, 3959, 2001.
22. Tamanaha, C.R., Whitman, L.J., and Colton, R.J., Hybrid macro-micro ﬂuidics
system for a chip-based biosensor, J. Micromech. Microeng., 12, N7, 2002.
23. Delamarche, E. et al., Patterned delivery of immunoglobulins to surfaces using
microﬂuidic networks, Science, 276, 779, 1997.
24. Duncan, A.C. et al., Laser microfabricated model surfaces for controlled cell
growth, Biosensors & Bioelectronics, 17, 413, 2002.
25. Duffy, D.C. et al., Rapid prototyping of microﬂuidic switches in poly(dimethyl
siloxane) and their actuation by electro-osmotic ﬂow, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
9, 211, 1999.
26. Klank, H., Kutter, J.P., and Geschke, O., CO2-laser micromachining and back-
end processing for rapid production of PMMA-based microﬂuidic systems, Lab
on a Chip, 2, 242, 2002.
27. Zhang, Y. et al., High aspect ratio micromachining of polymers with an ultrafast
laser, Appl. Surface Sci., 186, 345–351, 2002.
28. Kancharla V.J. and Chen, S., Fabrication of biodegradable polymeric micro-
devices using laser micromachining, Biomedical Microdevices, 4, 105–109, 2002.
29. Becker, H. and Gartner, C., Polymer microfabrication methods for microﬂuidic
analytical applications, Electrophoresis, 21, 12, 2000.
30. Roberts, M.A., UV laser machined polymer substrates for the development of
microdiagnostic systems, Anal. Chem., 69, 2035, 1997.
31. Mark, J.E., Polymer Data Handbook, Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.
32. Kaplan, W.A., Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998.
33. Harper, C.A., Modern Plastics Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.
34. Weast, R.C. and Astle, M.J., CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 60th ed.,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1979.
35.

36. Rotting, O. et al., Polymer microfabrication technologies, Microsyst. Technol., 8,
32, 2002.
37. Ahn, C.H. et al., Disposable smart lab on a chip for point of care clinical
diagnostics, Proc. IEEE, 92, 154, 2004.
38. Piruska, A. et al., The autoﬂuorescence of plastic materials and chips under
laser irradiation, Lab on a Chip, 5, 1348, 2005.
39. Lin, L., Shia, T.K., and Chiu, C.-J., Silicon-processed plastic micropyramids for
brightness enhancement applications, J. Micromech. Microeng., 10, 395, 2000.
40. Martynova, L. et al., Fabrication of plastic microﬂuid channels by imprinting
methods, Anal. Chem., 69, 4783, 1997.
41. McComrick, R.M. et al., Microchannel electrophoretic separations of DNA in
injection molded plastic substrates,Anal. Chem., 69, 2626, 1997.
42. Becker H. and Heim U., Silicon as tool material for polymer hot embossing,
Proc. MEMS ’99, Orlando, FL 1999, 228–231.
43. Jansen, H.V. et al., A survey on the reactive ion etching of silicon in microtech-
nology, J. Micromech. Microeng., 6, 14, 1996.
44. Alonso-Amigo, M.G., Polymer microfabrication for microarrays, microreactors,
and microﬂuidics, J. Assoc. Lab. Auto., 5, 96, 2000.
Topas  Grade 5013 data sheet, Ticona Inc., www.ticona.com.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

140
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
45. Lorenz, H. et al., SU-8: A low-cost negative resist for MEMS, J. Micromech.
Microeng., 7, 121, 1997.
46. Bifano, T.G., Fawcett, H.E., and Brierden, P.A., Precision manufacture of optical
disc master stampers, Precision Engineering, 20, 53, 1997.
47. Becker, E.W. et al., Fabrication of microstructures with high aspect ratios and
great structural heights by synchrotron radiation lithography, galvanoforming
and plastic moulding (LIGA process), Microelectronics Engineering, 4, 35, 1986.
48. Becker, H. and Locascio, L.E., Polymer microﬂuidic devices, Talanta, 56, 267,
2002.
49. Lee, L.J. et al., Design and fabrication of CD-like microﬂuidic platform for diag-
nostics: polymer-based microfabrication, Biomedical Microdevices, 3, 339, 2001.
50. Puntambekar, A. et al., Fixed-volume metering microdispenser module, Lab on
a Chip, 2, 213, 2002.
51. Brazzle, J.D., Papautsky, I., and Frazier, A.B., Hollow metallic micromachined
needle arrays, Biomedical Microdevices, 2, 197, 2000.
52. Papautsky, I. et al., Low temperature IC compatible process for fabricating
surface-micromachined metallic microchannels, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 7, 267,
1998.
53. van Kan, J.A. et al., Micromachining using focused high energy ion beams:
deep ion beam lithography, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics B, 148,
1085, 1999.
54. Piotter V. et al., Injection molding and related techniques for fabrication of
microstructures, Microsyst. Techn. 3, 129–133, 1997.
55. Heckele, M., Bacher, W., and Muller, K.D., Hot embossing—the molding tech-
nique for plastic microstructures, Microsystem Techol., 4, 122, 1998.
56. Studer, V., Pepin, A., and Chen, Y., Nanoembossing of thermoplastic polymers
for microﬂuidic applications, Appl. Phys. Lett., 80, 3614, 2002.
57. Becker, H., Heim, U., and Rotting, O., The fabrication of polymer high aspect
ratio structures with hot embossing for microﬂuidic applications, Proc. SPIE
(International Society for Optical Engineering), 3877, 74, 1999.
58. Wabuyele, M.B., et al., Single molecule detection of double-stranded DNA in
poly(methylmethacrylate) and polycarbonate microﬂuidic devices, Electro-
phoresis, 22, 3939, 2001.
59. Edwards, T.L. et al., Rapid micromold tooling for injection molding microﬂu-
idic components, Sensors and Materials, 14, 167, 2002.
60. Narasimhan, J. and Papautsky, I., Polymer embossing tools for rapid prototyp-
ing of plastic microﬂuidic devices, J. Micromech. Microeng., 14, 96, 2004.
61. Narasimhan, J., Polymer embossing tools for rapid prototyping of plastic mi-
croﬂuidic devices, M.S. Thesis, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 2003.
62. Lee, J.-H. et al., Rapid prototyping of plastic microﬂuidic devices in COC, Proc.
SPIE (International Society for Optical Engineering), 5718, 82, 2005.
63. Lide, D.R. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
2003.
64.
65.
polymer high aspect ratio structures, Sensors and Actuators A, 83, 130–135, 2000.
66.
by polymer hot embossing, Proc. SPIE (International Society for Optical Engi-
neering), 3515, 177, 1998.
Becker, H. and Deitz, W., Microﬂuidic devices for µ-TAS applications fabricated
Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer data sheet, Dow Corning, Inc., 2003, www.dow-
Becker, H. and Heim, U., Hot embossing as a method for the fabrication of
corning.com.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Part II
Microﬂuidic Devices and 
Components for Bio-MEMS
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

143
6
Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
Jeffrey D. Zahn
CONTENTS
6.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 144
6.2
Background................................................................................................. 145
6.3
Fabrication Processes ................................................................................ 148
6.4
Mechanical Micropumps.......................................................................... 150
6.4.1
Actuation Sources ......................................................................... 150
6.4.1.1
External Actuators .......................................................... 150
6.4.1.2
Electromagnetic Actuation ............................................ 150
6.4.1.3
Piezoelectric Actuation .................................................. 151
6.4.1.4
Pneumatic Actuation...................................................... 153
6.4.1.5
Shape Memory Alloy ..................................................... 153
6.4.1.6
Integrated Actuators....................................................... 153
6.4.1.7
Electrostatic Actuation ................................................... 153
6.4.1.8
Thermopneumatic Actuation........................................ 153
6.4.1.9
Bimetallic Thermal Actuation....................................... 154
6.4.2
Positive Displacement Pumps .................................................... 154
6.4.2.1
Positive Displacement Pumps with Integrated
Check Valves.................................................................... 155
6.4.3
Fixed-Geometry Rectiﬁcation Micropumps.............................. 156
6.4.4
Peristaltic Pumps........................................................................... 162
6.4.5
Acoustic Streaming....................................................................... 164
6.5
Nonmechanical Micropumps .................................................................. 166
6.5.1
Electroosmotic Flow Micropumps ............................................. 166
6.5.2
Electrowetting................................................................................ 168
6.5.3
Marangoni Pumps......................................................................... 169
6.5.4
Buoyancy-Driven Flows............................................................... 171
6.6
Conclusions................................................................................................. 172
References ............................................................................................. 172
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

144
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
6.1
Introduction
Batch-fabricated microﬂuidic platforms that can mimic conventional sample
handling techniques performed in hospitals and laboratories hold great
potential to enable both research and healthcare advances. Such miniaturized
diagnostic devices have been termed micro total analysis systems (µTAS) or
biochips, and combine sensing mechanisms (physical, optical, electrical, or
chemical) with microﬂuidics. Such autonomous platforms have attracted
considerable research interest due to the opportunity for fabricating a highly
integrated system able to perform all necessary processing steps required
for the speciﬁc application. While microﬂuidics promises to have an impact
in many research ﬁelds, one of the more attractive applications of microﬂu-
idics has been in biomedical and life science diagnostics [1]. µTAS applica-
tions are attractive because of the potential of such systems to allow faster
analysis of biological material, as well as reducing the amount of reagent
required for processing steps. In addition, miniaturization of such systems
can result in higher repeatability and precision of analysis, lower power
consumption, and the potential to create portable diagnostic tools for on-site
analysis. These advantages result not only in time and cost savings for
diagnostic tests, but can also be life saving in time-critical environments such
as critical medical diagnostics or biowarfare pathogen detection. A major
research thrust in microﬂuidics has been the development of autonomous
platforms for allowing controlled microscale ﬂuid transport allowing ﬂuid
ﬂow rates ranging from nl/hrs to µl/min within compact ﬂuid-handling and
delivery systems—micropumps [2,3]. 
Micropumps are a desired component of bio-MEMS and microﬂuidic
devices because of their wide application in surgery, drug delivery, drug
discovery, and rapid diagnosis and treatment of disease. Micropumps may
be coupled with other microﬂuidic devices such as microﬁlters for particle
[4] or molecular ﬁltration [5], microﬂow sensors for ﬂow measurements [6],
micromixers [7] for analyte and reactant dosing and reaction engineering,
microneedles [8] and microdispensers [9] for precise ﬂuid delivery, and
microseparators [10] for biological component separations. 
Micropumps have been the focus of extensive research efforts and a large
variety of micropumps have been realized. These pumps have been designed
from an array of operating principles, which will be discussed below. The
most commonly exploited principles are mechanical actuation (piezoelectric,
electrostatic, pneumatic, thermopneumatic) or nonmechanical actuation
(electrokinetic, surface tension driven). Because most biological processes
occur in a saline environment, the micropumps presented here will be pri-
marily concerned with liquid micropumps capable of handling biological
ﬂuids even though other types of micropumps (gaseous, low dielectric mate-
rial, etc.) have also been developed.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
145
6.2
Background
In order to design and fabricate micropumps it is necessary to understand
how ﬂuids behave on the microscale [11]. The basic physics of transport
phenomena do not change as the transition from macroscale to microscale
systems is made because the continuum hypothesis is still valid at the size
scales of these devices. However, a different realm of the physics becomes
important as surface forces dominate over body and inertial forces. As char-
acteristic length scales decrease (such as the width of a ﬂuid ﬂow channel),
the surface forces decrease proportional to the square of the length scale.
The body forces, however, decrease as the cube of the characteristic length.
Therefore, a tenfold decrease in channel dimensions leads to a tenfold
increase in the surface-to-volume ratio of the channel. This means that
although surface forces decrease by one hundredfold, the volume forces
decrease a full one thousandfold. Therefore, the surface forces become 10
times more important relative to the body forces. The main consequence of
miniaturization is that surface forces, such as friction and surface tension,
become proportionally more signiﬁcant than body forces, such as inertial
and gravitational forces. Thus in this region, pressure forces are equally
dissipated by drag forces on the ﬂuid with relatively little inertia. Due to the
unique planar processing techniques utilized in microfabrication, ﬂows are
generally constrained in a microchannel so that ﬂuid ﬂows within the plane
of the channel.
The Reynolds number illustrates the relative importance of the inertial to
the viscous forces of the ﬂow and is deﬁned as
Re = 
(6.1)
where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, U is the mean ﬂow velocity, L is the
characteristic length scale of the ﬂow, and µ is the viscosity of the ﬂuid. As
the characteristic length scale of the device decreases, so does the Reynolds
number.
For an incompressible Newtonian ﬂuid, the conservation of mass may be
written as
(6.2)
It is useful to nondimensionalize the ﬂow parameter to illustrate the impor-
tance of the Reynolds number in determining the ﬂow regime. Here the
velocity, u, is nondimensionalized to a characteristic velocity, UC, such as the
ρ
µ
UL
∇•
=
u
0
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

146
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
mean ﬂow velocity; lengths are nondimensionalized to a characteristic
length, LC, such as a channel hydraulic diameter; time is nondimensionalized
to a characteristic time scale of the ﬂow, TC; and pressure is nondimension-
alized to a characteristic pressure
.
The nondimensional Navier-Stokes equation may be written as follows
Re 
(6.3)
where St is the Strouhal number
(6.4)
where Tc is a characteristic time scale of the transient ﬂuid behavior.
In the case of microscale phenomena related to ﬂuid ﬂows, the character-
istic length scale is on the order of microns. Thus, the Reynolds number is
usually on the order of 1 or less.1 For most microﬂuidic problems, the ﬂow
is assumed to be in a quasi-steady state, so that the ﬂow is either steady or
slowly changing so that the Strouhal is equal to 1. Then as the Reynolds
number becomes small (Re <<1, Re/St <<1), the inertial terms become neg-
ligible compared to the viscous forces. 
Thus, the left-hand terms of Equation 6.3 disappear relative to the right-
hand terms, and the viscous force balances the pressure force, which is
known as the creeping ﬂow limit [12].
(6.5)
A physical interpretation of Equation 6.3 is that the left-hand terms corre-
spond to body or inertial forces of the ﬂuid and the right-most term is a
surface viscous term through which the ﬂuid transmits shear on a boundary.
As the characteristic length scale of a ﬂow decreases, the volume of the ﬂuid
in the channel decreases so there is less mass through which body forces
may act. At the same time, the relative surface area of the ﬂow geometry
increases leading to greater surface forces, which become more dominant in
1  Water-ﬁlled (ρ = 1000 Kg/m3, µ = 0.001 Pa-s) channel with a hydraulic diameter (L) of
0.0001 m, traveling at an average velocity (U) of 0.01 m/s).
µU
L
c
C




1
2
St
u
t
u
u
p
u
∂
∂+
• ∇



= −∇+ ∇
St
T
L
U
C
C
C
= (
)
/
∇= ∇
p
u
2
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
147
determining the ﬂow mechanics. Equation 6.5 is merely a mathematical rep-
resentation of this effect.
A few interesting conclusions may be drawn from Equation 6.5. Because
it is a linear equation, all ﬂows in the creeping ﬂow limit are kinematically
reversible. This means that if ﬂuid is displaced by some forward actuation
stroke, such as a moving piston in a micropump, and the reverse stroke is
in exactly the opposite direction, then all ﬂuid will return to its original
position at the end of the cycle with zero net ﬂuid motion. Thus, one of the
challenges in designing micropumps is designing a ﬂow asymmetry in order
to produce a net pumping motion.
Equation 6.5 may be analytically solved for a wide variety of ﬂow geom-
etries. Because most microchannels are etched into a substrate, the ﬂuid
channels run within the plane of the wafer. One common type of geometry
that is fabricated is the rectangular microchannel. Here fully developed ﬂow
in the laminar regime for an x-directed velocity proﬁle in a rectangular duct
with y and z cross-sections is considered. The simplest geometry is plane
Poiseuille ﬂow. In this case, the channel width, 2b, is much larger than the
channel depth, 2a. With b>>a, the x-directed velocity proﬁle may be taken
as independent of the channel width. The ﬂow proﬁle may then be approx-
imated by plane Poiseuille ﬂow [13].
.
(6.6)
Integrating over the cross-sectional area gives the approximate ﬂow rate
.
(6.7)
If the width and depth are approximately the same size, (a ≈ b), then the
ﬂow proﬁle may be solved by separation of the variables
(6.8)
(6.8)
where 2a is the length of one of the walls and 2b is the length of the other
wall. Integrating this proﬁle across y and z gives the average ﬂow rate, Q as
v
a
dP
dx
y
a
x =
−




−











2
2
2
1
µ
Q
ba
dP
dx
=
−




4
3
3
µ
v
a
dP
dx
i z
x
i
=
−




−(
)
−
−
(
)
16
1
1
2
2
3
1
2
µπ
π
/
cosh
/ a
i b
a
i y
a
i
i
(
)
(
)








(
)
=
cosh
/
cos
/
, ,
π
π
2
2
3
1 3 55...
∞
∑
−≤
≤
−≤
≤
a
y
a
b
z
b
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

148
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
.
(6.9)
The average velocity, U, is Q/(4ab).
Many micropumps are fabricated as stacked, bonded substrates and ﬂuid
may ﬂow through the different layers. In this case, the ﬂow proﬁles may be
very complex and may only be solved using computational methods.
6.3
Fabrication Processes
The devices discussed in this chapter are all fabricated using techniques
adapted from the electronic circuit processing industry. Each step in produc-
ing a device requires either material addition, removal, or substrate bonding.
However, to discuss these techniques in depth is beyond the scope of this
work, and is the basis of many stand-alone texts [14,15] and may be refer-
enced as needed. Therefore, this discussion will provide a summary over-
view of the most commonly employed techniques.
The ﬁrst step in producing a micropump is patterning a substrate (usually
silicon, glass, or plastic) using photolithography. Here, a photosensitive
material, photoresist, is added onto a substrate and patterned by optical
lithography. By shining long-wavelength ultraviolet (LWUV) light through
a patterned photomask, the photoresist is selectively exposed and developed
to transfer a pattern from the mask onto the substrate. This procedure is
analogous to printing a photograph with the photomask serving as the
negative and the photoresist serving as photographic paper. This technique
can reproducibly pattern features smaller than one micron. The major advan-
tages of optical lithography are the ability to miniaturize devices and produce
many identical devices in parallel at tremendous cost savings per device.
Material addition using adaptive techniques may be accomplished by a
variety of methods. The most common methods for depositing thin ﬁlms
onto a substrate are by chemical vapor deposition or physical vapor depo-
sition. In addition, polymeric materials may be deposited by spin casting in
a manner similar to spinning photoresist onto a substrate.
Chemical vapor deposition requires gaseous reactants to be introduced
into a reactor system. Once in the reactor, a chemical reaction occurs leaving
a solid ﬁlm on the substrate. Common CVD reactors utilize low-pressure
chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) systems in which silicon-containing
gases are introduced into a heated reaction tube to produce thin ﬁlms of
polycrystalline silicon, silicon dioxide, and silicon nitride. Films may also be
deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), in
which reactions are promoted by ionizing reactant gases in a plasma, so
Q
ba
dP
dx
a
b
i b
a
i
i
=
−




−
(
)
4
3
1
192
2
3
5
5
µ
π
π
tanh
/
=
∞
∑








1 3 5
, , ...
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
149
lower deposition temperatures are usually required. PECVD may also be
used for depositing polymer ﬁlms from ﬂuorocarbon precursors.
Physical vapor deposition refers to the direct physical addition of material
from a source. Direct evaporation of material under a vacuum produces a
uniform material layer on a substrate. Thermal evaporation is used in mate-
rials with a low melting temperature, while e-beam evaporation is used for
materials with higher melting temperatures. Sputtering is achieved by bom-
barding a target material with energetic inert gas atoms within a plasma.
The target atoms are sputtered off the surface by momentum transfer and
pass through the chamber until they deposit on the substrate surface.
Material removal is accomplished by etching processes. This is the most
common way of producing microchannels as a lithographically deﬁned pat-
tern is etched into a substrate. Thus, most microchannels are three-dimen-
sional projections of a two-dimensional lithographically deﬁned pattern,
which is why most microchannels are deﬁned within the plane of the sub-
strate. The most commonly employed etching processes are wet etching and
plasma etching. In wet etching the patterned substrate is placed in a chemical
etch bath. Wet etching is usually isotropic (i.e., the etch rate is the same in
all directions) and produces curved sidewalls. However, there are etchants,
such as potassium hydroxide (KOH), ethylene diamine pyrocatechol (EDP),
and tetra-methyl ammonium-hydroxide (TMAH), which selectively etch
along silicon crystal planes to produce anisotropic etched proﬁles. 
Plasma or dry etching may also be isotropic or anisotropic depending on
the plasma source and reactor conﬁguration. One of the more popular dry
etching techniques is deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) [16]. In DRIE a
directed etch step is cycled with a sidewall passivation step to produce very-
high-aspect sidewall structures in silicon. The advantages of DRIE over other
etching techniques is very good sidewall and dimensional control, fast etch
rates, and good etch repeatability. 
Polymer microchannel fabrication is often accomplished by molding or
embossing techniques. A popular technique for prototyping is the use of
soft lithography [17,18] or molding of poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
against a thick photoresist master. A photoresist master is created by stan-
dard lithographic techniques and a liquid PDMS precursor solution with a
curing agent is poured over the master. Due to the low surface tension of
the PDMS solution, it readily ﬂows and takes the shape of the master. The
PDMS then cures and is peeled off as a negative impression of the master
pattern. Other polymeric materials such as polyurethane, polycarbonate,
PMMA, and so forth may also be micromachined by hot embossing against
a negative master.
One of the critical fabrication processes for creating micropumps is bond-
ing and sealing of devices. Direct silicon wafer bonding may be accomplished
by high-temperature fusion bonding techniques, while glass–silicon bonding
may be accomplished by anodic bonding [19], in which a high potential is
placed across the wafer stack at an elevated temperature. Glass–glass [10]
and polymeric bonding may be accomplished by heating the materials to
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

150
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
their glass transition temperature and allowing the material to reﬂow and
bond. Polymeric materials, especially PDMS, may also be bonded to glass
or to itself by exposing the surface to an oxygen plasma [20] or corona
discharge. This treatment causes the surface to become reactive, promoting
covalent bonding of substrates.
Due to the planar processing and wafer bonding techniques utilized to
create micropumps, most devices are shown as cross-sectional diagrams.
These types of diagrams illustrate the different wafer layers and any speciﬁc
features along the depth of the device. This cutaway view allows individual
pump components (actuation membranes, valves, etc.) to be highlighted and
shows how the components work together to create the ﬁnal micropump.
6.4
Mechanical Micropumps
6.4.1
Actuation Sources
All mechanical micropumps require an actuation source to provide a mechan-
ical stroke cycle. Mechanical actuation usually involves coupling mechanical
deformation of a moving boundary to an increase or decrease in the ﬂuid
pressure to drive ﬂow. Actuators that perform this function may be classiﬁed
mechanical pumps requiring an actuation source are positive displacement
pumps, ﬁxed-geometry rectiﬁcation pumps, and peristaltic pumps.
6.4.1.1
External Actuators
External actuators are classiﬁed as such because they are not integrated into
the device by micromachining. They require either external components or
coupling to the micropump. Because these actuators tend to be larger than
the microﬂuidic components, they increase the total size of the micropump.
However, these actuators have the advantage of being capable of producing
large forces and stroke displacement. 
6.4.1.2
Electromagnetic Actuation 
Electromagnetic actuation works in a similar manner to a solenoid valve in
duces a magnetic ﬁeld, which produces a force on a ferromagnetic plunger.
The plunger is coupled to a membrane so that when the coil is de-energized
the plunger returns to its original position. This is a fairly large structure
due to the size of the solenoid coil. However, large strokes can be achieved
and may be tailored by the coil current and number of wire turns within
the coil.
as either external or integrated actuators (Figure 6.1). Some examples of
the form of an electromagnet (Figure 6.1a). An energized solenoid coil pro-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
151
6.4.1.3
Piezoelectric Actuation
Piezoelectric actuation has been accomplished by coupling the displacement
generated in a piezoelectric material to pump membrane displacement
(Figure 6.1b). In a piezoelectric material such as lead zirconate titanate (PZT),
an applied voltage produces a strain and mechanical deformation. The piezo-
electric element may be a piezoelectric disk which is glued directly onto the
pump membrane. A disk-style actuator has a fast response time and large
FIGURE 6.1
Actuation sources based upon (a) electromagnetic actuation, (b) piezoelectric actuation, (c)
pneumatic actuation.
Coil
Plunger
Electromagnetic
(a)
Piezoelectric stack 
Disk type piezoelectric bimorph
Piezoelectric disk
(b)
Valve
Pressure
Leak
Pressure
chamber
Pneumatic
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

152
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
stroke displacement but the pump pressure is relatively small. Greater pres-
sure may be obtained by using a piezoelectric stack actuator with a tradeoff
in stroke displacement and response time. 
FIGURE 6.1 (CONTINUED)
Actuation sources based upon (d) shape memory alloy (SMA), (e) electrostatic actuation, (f)
thermopneumatic actuation, and (g) bimetallic thermal actuation. (Adapted from Shoji, S. and
Esashi, M., Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 4, 157–171, 1994.)
(d)
Shape memory alloy
with bias spring
SMA coil
Bias spring
(e)
Electrostatic
Electrode
Spacer
(f)
Thermopneumatic
Pressure
chamber
Heater
Heater
Bimetal
Bimetallic
(g)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS 
153
6.4.1.4 
Pneumatic Actuation
Pneumatic actuation uses a high-pressure gas source that is coupled to the
is controlled through the use of two solenoid valves, which may either open
to pressurize or close to depressurize the pump chamber. The advantage of
pneumatic actuation is that very large pressures may be generated. The dis-
advantages are the requirement of a pressurized gas source, and the response
time is limited by the speed at which the solenoid valves open and close.
6.4.1.5 
Shape Memory Alloy 
Shape memory alloys (SMA) may be used as actuation sources by coupling
the SMA with a bias spring (Figure 6.1d). The SMA is initially shaped and
memorized into an expanded coil. The coil is compressed when placed into
the actuator. When the SMA temperature is raised to the critical memory
temperature by running a current through the coil, the coil expands and
produces a force on the actuation membrane. As the coil cools, a bias spring
produces an opposite force, which compresses the coil back to its initial state.
By cycling coil expansion and compression a pump stroke is obtained.
6.4.1.6
Integrated Actuators
Integrated actuators are micromachined as a pump component during the
microfabrication process. Because they are produced during the fabrication
process, integrated actuators usually exhibit a fast response time and better
force coupling to the pump. However, producing integrated actuators usu-
ally adds complexity to the microfabrication process.
6.4.1.7
Electrostatic Actuation
Electrostatic actuation is based on capacitive charging of two parallel elec-
trodes; a ﬁxed electrode and a movable electrode in an electric ﬁeld (Figure
6.1e). As the electrodes charge, a force pulls on the moveable electrode to
deform the pumping membrane. This actuation method generally has very
low power consumption, but the electrode displacement is usually very small
because with constant applied voltage, the force is inversely proportional to
the square of the electrode spacing.
6.4.1.8
Thermopneumatic Actuation
Thermopneumatic actuation is based on gas expansion within a sealed actu-
ation chamber (Figure 6.1f) to deform a pump membrane. Thermopneumatic
actuation may be produced either by gas expansion or liquid-vapor phase
change (boiling) due to resistive heating or direct electrolysis of water to
produce oxygen and hydrogen gas bubbles. Thermal bubble generation may
also be used directly within a microchannel as bubble expansion acts as a
pump membrane (Figure 6.1c). Within a pneumatic chamber the gas pressure
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

154
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
piston to displace ﬂuid. This actuation mechanism produces very large forces
and stroke volumes. However, resistive heating for thermopneumatic actu-
ation requires a large amount of energy. 
6.4.1.9
Bimetallic Thermal Actuation
Bimetallic actuation is based on thermomechanical actuation due to differ-
material causes expansion and the difference in expansion in the two mate-
rials causes deformation. The actuator displacement depends, in an approx-
imately linear manner, on the temperature change, which may be well
controlled by the power dissipated within the structure.
6.4.2
Positive Displacement Pumps
Positive displacement micropumps move ﬂuid through the use of a mechan-
ical actuation source. They are designed to maximize pump pressure and
stroke volume, and minimize dead volume. In addition, it is desirable for
the pumps to be self-priming and bubble purging [21].
The actuation source is usually placed within a pump chamber with a
moving membrane boundary [22]. The actuator usually acts to deform a
membrane causing a stroke-volume change, ∆V, within the pumping cham-
ber, with an initial volume, VO. This may be considered a cycling between a
supply phase, where the diaphragm stroke increases the pump chamber
volume and a pump phase where the diaphragm reduces the chamber vol-
ume. The compression ratio of the pump is deﬁned as 
(6.10)
and most positive displacement micropumps function at high pressure with
a small compression ratio due to the small membrane displacements
obtained from the actuation source.
The deformation of the pump membrane is usually a reversible stroke due
to cyclic actuation between the supply and pump phases. Due to the kinematic
reversibility of viscous-dominated ﬂows, it is necessary to rectify the ﬂow in
Check valves are designed to have a smaller ﬂow resistance in the forward ﬂow
direction than the reverse ﬂow direction. Thus by cycling pump actuation within
a pump stroke, a net pumping action is achieved. When the pump membrane
is displaced upward (supply mode) it creates a negative pressure within the
pump chamber. This draws ﬂuid in through an inlet check valve, and ﬂow is
restricted from entering the pump chamber from the outlet by the outlet check
valve. When the pump membrane is relaxed (pump mode) it creates a positive
ε = ∆V
VO
ences in the thermal expansion coefﬁcient of two layers of material (Figure
6.1g). When the structure is heated by resistive power, dissipation in each
one direction by integrating check valves into the micropump (Figure 6.2).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
155
pressure within the pump chamber, which now opens the outlet check valve
and closes the inlet check valve so within one pump stroke, a ﬂuid volume of
∆V would be displaced if the check valves have 100% ﬂow rectiﬁcation.
6.4.2.1
Positive Displacement Pumps with Integrated Check Valves
In order to achieve a fast pumping rate, passive check valves are used within
the pump structure to limit the pump response time, thus allowing a high
FIGURE 6.2
(a) Structure of a positive displacement pump consisting of a pump chamber with a pump
membrane and two check valves. Schematic of one pump cycle during the pump (b) upstroke
and (c) downstroke. (From Richter, M., Linnemann, R., and Woias, P., Sensors and Actuators A
68, 480–486, 1998.)
Actuation membrane
Stroke volume  ∆V
Inlet check valve
Outlet check valve
Inlet
Outlet
Pumping chamber
Dead volumeVO
Net ﬂow
(a)
Supply mode
Pump chamber at
negative pressure
(b)
High ﬂow into
pump chamber
Low leakage
backﬂow
Pump mode
Pump chamber at
positive pressure
(c)
Low leakage
backﬂow
High ﬂow out of
pump chamber
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

156
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
stroke frequency. In order to design an appropriate check valve, the com-
pression ratio must be
(6.11)
where κ is the compressibility of the liquid (0.5 × 108 m2/N for water) and
∆Pvalve is the pressure required to open the valve. Most liquid micropumps
can easily meet this requirement. However, it is also preferable to design
check-valves that require very little pressure to open the valve. The valve
performance may be further characterized by its ability to rectify ﬂow given
by the rectiﬁcation factor
(6.12)
where Q is the ﬂow rate and the subscript refers to the open (forward) and
closed (backward) valve states. 
Several design examples of positive displacement micropumps with inte-
thermopneumatic micropump where the pressure generated by the growth
and collapse of a bubble acts as a piston to drive ﬂow. These pumps are
realized using a variety of check-valve designs including ring diaphragm
tilevered check valves (Figures 6.3e and 6.3g). 
6.4.3
Fixed-Geometry Rectiﬁcation Micropumps
One of the drawbacks to positive displacement pumps with integrated check
valves is the complicated fabrication protocols required to produce them.
Fixed-geometry pumps are much simpler to produce because they require no
moving check valves. They achieve ﬂow rectiﬁcation by proper microchannel
design in order to rectify ﬂow in one direction. They are based upon either
diffuser or nozzle pumps [34,35,36] or the use of Tesla-type [37,38] ﬁxed-
ﬂow resistance asymmetry so the physical structure of the microchannel
rectiﬁes the ﬂow. A diffuser valve consists of a diverging geometry, while the
nozzle geometry consists of a converging geometry. The ﬁxed-geometry valve
acts as both a diffuser and nozzle element due to the reversible actuation
stroke. In the case of a diffuser- or nozzle-type ﬁxed-geometry valve, ﬂow
through the expansion during the positive actuation stroke has a smaller
resistance than the backﬂow through the nozzle during the negative stroke.
ε
κ
>
∆Pvalve
R
Q
Q
forward
backward
=
grated check valves are shown in Figure 6.3. Figure 6.3g shows a planar
valves (Figures 6.3a, 6.3f), disc valves (Figures 6.3b, 6.3c, and 6.3d), and can-
geometry valves (Figure 6.4). Proper microchannel design adds a geometric
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
157
FIGURE 6.3
Schematic of positive displacement check valve pumps. (a) Piezoelectric actuation with a ring
mesa check valve. (Adapted from Van Lintel, H.T.G., van den Pol, F.C.M., and Bouwstra, S.A.,
Sensors and Actuators 15, 153–167, 1988.) (b) Piezoelectric stack actuation with disc valves in
pump and supply mode. (Adapted from Shoji, S., Nakagawa, S., and Eashi, M., Sensors and
Actuators A 21–23, 189–192, 1990.) (c) Piezoelectric actuation with disc valves. (Adapted from
Maillefer, D. et al., Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical
Systems MEMS ’99, Orlando, FL, January, 17–21, 541–546, 1999; and Maillefer, D. et al., Pro-
ceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’01,
Interlaken, Switzerland, January, 21–25, 413–417, 2001.)
(a)
Inlet
Pump chamber
piezo disc 
Valve 1 
Valve 2 
Glass
Outlet
Glass
Si
Diaphragm
Piezoelectric
stack actuator 
Glass
Silicon
Glass
Inlet
Valve 2
(closed) 
Valve 1
(open)
Supply phase 
Outlet
Outlet
Valve 2
(open)
Valve 1
(closed) 
Pump
chamber
Inlet
Pump phase 
(b)
(c)
Piezo disc 
Pump diaphragm
Inlet check valve 
Pump chamber
Outlet check valve 
Silicon
Silicon
Glass
Glass
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

158
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
FIGURE 6.3 (CONTINUED)
Schematic of positive displacement check valve pumps. (d) Pneumatic actuation with disc
valves. (Adapted from Rapp, R. et al., Sensors and Actuators A 40, 57–61, 1994.) (e) Electrostatic
actuation with cantilever valves. (Adapted from Zengerle, R., Richter, A., and Sandmaier, H.,
Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’92,
Travemünde, Germany, February, 4–7, 19–24, 1992.) (f) Thermopneumatic actuation with ring
mesa valves. (Adapted from Lammerink, T.S.J., Elwenspock, M., and Fluitman, J.H.J., Proceed-
ings of the 6th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’93, Ft.
Lauderdale, FL, February, 7–10, 254–259, 1993.)
(d)
Polyimide
disc valve 
Pumping
membrane
Polyimide
disc valve 
Gold
Titanium
membrane
Leak
Pressure
Valve
Pneumatic drive
(e)
Upper electrode
Lower electrode
Insulating spacer
Supply phase 
Pump phase 
Pressure chamber
Membrane
Inlet check
valve 
Outlet check
valve
Heater
Air chamber 
Pump
chamber
Valve 2 
Valve 1 
Outlet
Inlet
Glass
Silicon
Glass
(f)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
159
FIGURE 6.3 (CONTINUED)
Schematic of positive displacement check valve pumps. (g) Planar thermopneumatic actuation
with cantilever valves. (From Zimmermann, S. et al., Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International
Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’04, Maastricht, The Netherlands, January,
25–29, 462–465, 2004.)
FIGURE 6.4
Fixed-geometry positive displacement pumps. (a) Diffuser or nozzle micropump. (Adapted
from Stemme, E. and Stemme, G., Sensors and Actuators A 39, 159–167, 1993.)
In-plane ﬂap valve
(pump outlet)
Bond
pad
Buﬀer
channel
Heater
In-plane ﬂap valve
(pump inlet)
Flow
direction
2 mm
Capillary
tubes
(g)
Piezo discs
Silicon
Glass
Converging wall direction 
Diverging wall direction 
(a) 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

160
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
FIGURE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Fixed-geometry positive displacement pumps. (b) Double pump chamber operated in an
antiphase (push–pull) mode. (Adapted from Olsson, A. et al., Journal of Micro Electromechanical
Systems 6, 2, 161–166, 1997.) (c) Diffuser or nozzle micropump utilizing thermopneumatic
actuation. (Adapted from Tsai, J.H. and Lin, L., Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International
Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’01, Interlaken, Switzerland, January, 21–25,
135–140, 2001.) (d) Tesla-style ﬁxed-geometry valves. (Adapted from Forster, F. et al., Design,
Proceedings of the ASME Fluids Engineering Division, IMECE ’95, San Francisco, CA, November
12–17, 234, 39–44, 1995.) 
Outlet
Inlet
Decreasing
chamber
volume
Increasing
chamber
volume
Supply phase
Pump phase
(b)
Shrinking
bubble 
Inlet
Expanding
bubble 
Outlet
Outlet
Inlet
Pump phase 
Pump phase 
(c)
Recirculation
Reverse ﬂow direction 
Forward ﬂow direction 
(d)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
161
This is because ﬂow through the expansion causes the ﬂow to decelerate
with a resulting increase in pressure. This in turn promotes a turbulent
boundary layer between a central jet and the sidewall. Flow in the opposite
direction through the nozzle element will remain laminar and thus have a
higher ﬂow resistance. As a result, ﬂow out of the diffuser element will have
less pressure loss than ﬂow back through the nozzle element. When the
actuation membrane is pulsed, a net forward ﬂow is produced.
A Tesla valve acts in a similar manner. The Tesla valve consists of a
bifurcating loop that connects two parts of a microchannel. As ﬂuid ﬂows
in the forward direction, most of the ﬂuid ﬂow is through the main micro-
channel. In the opposite ﬂow direction, the bifurcating geometry of the loop
region causes ﬂuid ﬂow in the loop region instead of through the main
channel. This extra ﬂow through the loop region increases the pressure drop
in the backﬂow mode.
A measure of the efﬁciency of ﬁxed-valve micropumps is based on the
ﬂuid diodicity, η, deﬁned as [37]
(6.13)
where
(6.14)
and ζ is the loss coefﬁcient and u is the characteristic velocity of the ﬂow.
The loss coefﬁcient is different depending on whether the ﬂow is in the
forward or reverse direction. Once the diodicity of the ﬁxed-geometry valve
is known, the pump ﬂow rate may be estimated as [33]
(6.15)
where f is the membrane actuation frequency and ∆V is the pump stroke
volume. Diffuser or nozzle elements have been reported to have diodicities
ranging from 1 to 5, while Tesla valves have been reported to have a diodicity
of 1.2 at a Reynolds number of 130 [37]. 
One of the drawbacks to ﬁxed-valve micropumps is that they rely on strong
inertial forces in very small channels where viscosity makes obtaining high
Reynolds numbers difﬁcult. A relatively high Reynolds number and ﬂow
rate are required to obtain a high level of ﬂuid diodicity. For example, the
η = ∆
∆
P
P
forward
reverse
∆P
u
= ζ ρ
2
2
Q
Vf
=
−
+
2
1
1
∆
η
η
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

162
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
ﬂuid diodicity of a Tesla type microvalve drops to 1.02 as the Reynolds
number is decreased to 60.
6.4.4
Peristaltic Pumps
Peristaltic pumps are based upon using a series of actuation membranes to
displace volume in the desired ﬂow direction. By cycling membrane dis-
placement, a peristaltic motion and volume displacement may be achieved.
Each actuation membrane acts to displace volume for forward pumping and
as a valve to rectify ﬂow. Because the actuation membranes act with both
volume displacement and valving functions, it is desirable to design peri-
staltic pumps with a compression ratio as close to 1 as possible so that each
actuation membrane acts digitally to either completely open or completely
block the microchannel.
Peristaltic micropumps therefore require at least three actuation mem-
branes in series to obtain a nonreversible pump stroke. One advantage of
peristaltic micropumping is that the ﬂow direction is based upon the
sequence of membrane actuation. Therefore, peristaltic micropumps are
bidirectional pumps producing ﬂow in either a forward direction using
one actuation sequence or reversing the ﬂow direction by reversing the
actuation sequence. 
piezoelectric-actuated peristaltic pump. The actuation membranes are
labeled 1, 2, and 3 referring to the actuation membranes from the right to
the left. The actuation membranes are normally closed and actuation of the
piezoelectric disc causes the actuation membrane to lift. Thus, the membrane
can be in one of two positions where the 0 position is the nonactuated (closed)
membrane position and the 1 position is the open position. A convention is
chosen so each membrane is individually referenced from membranes 1
through 3 so the sequence (1,0,1) refers to membrane 1 and 3 in the open
sequence and membrane 2 in the closed sequence. A six-stage peristaltic
motion is required to displace one actuation membrane stroke volume, ∆V.
Initially, all three membranes are in the closed position (0,0,0). The ﬁrst step
in the sequence is to actuate membrane one to pull a stroke volume ∆V into
the number one position (1,0,0). Next the number two membrane is actuated
to displace the stroke volume forward one position (1,1,0). At this point, two
stroke volumes, 2 ∆V, have been displaced forward. The number 1 membrane
is allowed to relax causing backﬂow of one stroke volume (0,1,0). Now
membrane 3 is actuated pulling in one stroke volume from the outlet (0,1,1).
Membrane two is allowed to relax displacing the ﬂuid forward (0,0,1).
Finally, membrane 3 is relaxed (0,0,0) and ﬂuid is displaced forward. At the
end of this sequence the net effect is that one stroke volume,  ∆V, has been
propelled through the device. The ﬂow rate through this pump depends on
A typical actuation sequence is shown in Figure 6.5a [39] for a three-stage
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
163
the stroke volume as well as the frequency at which the membrane sequence
is produced.
(6.16)
Using this sequencing, bidirectional ﬂuid ﬂow rates up to 500 µl/min have
been achieved at an actuation rate of 100 Hz.
FIGURE 6.5
(a) Piezoelectric actuated peristaltic micropump and pump sequence for displacing one stroke
volume ∆V. For reverse pumping the actuation sequence should be reversed. (Adapted from
Husband, B. et al., Microelectronic Engineering 73–74, 858–863, 2004.)
Q
Vf
= ∆
(a)
Glass
Silicon
Piezodiscs
Connection channels
PZT
Disc 3 
PZT
Disc 2 
PZT
Disc 1 
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 1, 1)
(0, 0, 1)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 0)
(1, 1, 0)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

164
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
In addition to piezoelectric actuation [39], peristaltic pumps have been
realized with similar actuation sequencing using thermopneumatic actuation
where liquid boiling displaces a silicone rubber membrane (Figure 6.5b [40])
and pneumatic actuation (Figure 6.5c [41,42]) where compressed air is used
to compress a silicone rubber microchannel.
6.4.5
Acoustic Streaming
Acoustic streaming has also been utilized for micropump applications.
Pumping is achieved by using interdigitated piezoelectric transducers (IDT)
to produce a mechanical traveling wave such as a ﬂexural plate wave (FPW)
FIGURE 6.5 (CONTINUED)
(b) Thermopneumatic actuated peristaltic micropump. (Adapted from Grosjean, C. and Tai,
Y.C., Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Transducers
’99, Sendai, Japan, June, 7–10, 1776–1779, 1999.) (c) Pneumatic actuated peristaltic micropump.
(Adapted from Unger, M.A. et al., Science 288, 113–116, 2000.)
Heaters
(b)
Glass
Flow direction
Thermopneumatic
pumping chambers
Silicon
Silicon rubber membrane
Silicon
Silicon
Compressed air
in/out 
Fluid in 
Flow direction 
Fluid out 
(c)
(Figure 6.6a) [4,43–45]. Pumping is achieved by using two sinusoidal electric
drives, which are 90° out of phase with each other (Figure 6.6b, c). The offset
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
165
of the ﬁngers determines the FPW wavelength and constructive and destruc-
tive interference cause the acoustic wave to stream in one direction. This
mechanical wave produces a directional shear at the boundary with ﬂow
produced from momentum transport into the bulk ﬂuid.
FIGURE 6.6
(a) Cross-sectional view of a ﬂexural plate wave micropump based on interdigitated transducers.
(Adapted from Moroney, R. M., White, R.M., and Howe, R.T., App. Phys. Letters 59, 774–776, 1991;
Moroney, R. M., White, R.M., and Howe, R.T., Proceedings of IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, Honolulu,
HI, December, 4–7, 355–358, 1990; and Bradley, C.E., Bustillo, J.M., and White, R.M., Proceedings
of IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, Seattle, WA, November, 7–10, 505–510, 1995.) (b) Unidirectional
wave generation using two sinusoidal inputs 90° out of phase. (c) Tension and compression of
the FPW device at time t4. The arrows show the electrodes under tension or compression.
Direction of wave
propagation and ﬂuid
movement  
Aluminum interdigitated
transducers
Silicon nitride
Metal ground plate 
Piezoelectric zinc oxide
Silicon
RF drive
voltage
Interdigitated
transducers
(a)
Voltage
Time
Drive A 
Drive B 
0 V
t0
t1
t2
t3
t4
(b)
Compression
Device wavelength 
Tension
Tension
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

166
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
6.5
Nonmechanical Micropumps
Nonmechanical micropumps convert nonmechanical energy into kinetic energy
of the ﬂuid. Nonmechanical micropumps based upon electrokinetic pumping,
electrowetting, and surface tension gradients have been demonstrated.
6.5.1
Electroosmotic Flow Micropumps
Electroosmotic ﬂow (EOF) pumping is a subset of electrokinetic phenomena
related to the movement of electric charges in an applied electric ﬁeld. Charge
movement, in turn, produces a shear on the surrounding ﬂuid to produce ﬂow
[46–48]. Electroosmotic pumps are used in small channels without a need for
high pressures and may be combined with electrophoresis in bioanalytical
separations. Most solid surfaces develop a spontaneous electrical double layer
(EDL) when immersed in an electrolyte solution [49,50]. When an electrolyte
is brought into contact with a solid surface, the surface develops an electric
charge. Countercharges from the electrolyte associate with these surface charges
to form a strongly associated charge layer known as the Stern layer. However,
the Stern layer does not completely shield the surface charge and so a more
weakly associated diffuse layer of countercharges forms adjacent to the Stern
layer. The Stern layer is relatively immobile while the charges in the diffuse
layer are free to move. These two features are know as the electrical double
layer, which is a local region close to the solid surface where charge neutrality
is not maintained. The electric double layer is modeled by a Boltzmann distri-
bution where the potential close to the wall is approximately given as
(6.17)
where φw is the wall potential, z is the coordinate perpendicular to the wall,
and LD is the electrical double layer (Debye length) length given by
(6.18)
where q is the electric charge, ε is the medium permittivity, k is Boltzmann’s
constant, T is the absolute temperature, zi is the valence of species I, and Cibulk
is the bulk concentration of species i. In practice, the EDL thickness may
range from approximately 1 µm in pure water down to 0.3 nm in a 1 molar
salt solution.
φ
φ
=
−






−
w
z
L
e
D
1
L
kT
q
z C
D
i
ibulk
=
(
)
∑
ε
2
2
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
167
When a microchannel is produced from an insulating material such as glass
or plastic, the surface becomes negatively charged when ﬁlled with an aque-
ous solution. Because the microchannel is insulating, a tangential electric ﬁeld
may be applied down the length of the channel to produce an electroosmotic
ﬂow. In the presence of the electric ﬁeld, positively charged ions will move
toward the negatively charged cathode, and the negatively charge ions will
move toward the positively charged anode. In the bulk region of the micro-
channel, charge neutrality is maintained so there is no net charge movement.
However, in the electric double layer, the diffuse layer will move within the
electric ﬁeld. These ions in turn will drag ﬂuid with them and produce a
shear. Thus in the absence of a pressure gradient, electroosmotic ﬂows may
be modeled by modifying the Navier-Stokes equation to reﬂect the balance
of the coulombic force density and viscous dissipation. The coulombic force
density may be further modiﬁed by applying Poisson’s equation.
.
(6.19)
Here 
 is the total free charge density, φ is the scalar electric
potential and E is the applied electric ﬁeld along the channel. It may also be
approximately shown that 
(6.20)
where σw is the wall charge per unit area. Combining Equations 6.17, 6.19,
and 6.20 and applying a no-slip boundary condition, the velocity proﬁle in
.
(6.21)
If the Debye length is small compared to the channel diameter, a plug ﬂow
proﬁle is obtained.
(6.22)
It should be noted that the free ﬂow velocity is proportional to the wall
surface charge and Debye length. Because σw is a property of the micro-
channel material it must be experimentally determined. However, the free
ﬂow velocity may be tailored by controlling wall charge per unit area (deter-
mined by microchannel material selection), Debye length (determined by
solution components and ionic strength), and applied electric ﬁeld.
µ
ρ
ε
φ
∇
= −
=
∇
2
2
u
E
E
E
ρ
ε φ
f = −∇
φ
σ
ε
w
w
D
L
=
U
L E
e
w
D
z
LD
=
−






−
σ
µ
1
U
L E
w
D
≅σ
µ
an electroosmotic ﬂow (Figure 6.7) is 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

168
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
6.5.2
Electrowetting
On the microscale, surface tension may be used as an effective actuator for
micropump applications. Surface tension–driven pumps require the move-
ment along a ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface to produce a shear in order to drive ﬂow.
Electrowetting is based upon a change in the liquid–solid surface tension by
charging the electrical double layer at an electrode surface. The change in
surface tension may be related by Lippman’s equation [51]
(6.23)
where γo is the surface tension when no potential is applied and C is the
capacitance per unit area charged to voltage V. The water contact angle may
modeled as a function of the bias using Young’s equation and Lippman-
Young’s equation.
(6.24)
(6.25)
FIGURE 6.7
(a) Charge distribution with surface charge on the microchannel boundary. (b) Electroosmotic
ﬂow ﬁeld. (Adapted from Manz, A. et al., J. Micromach. Microeng. 4, 257–265, 1994; Chen, C.H.
et al., Proceedings of the ASME Fluids Engineering Division, IMECE ’00, Orlando, FL, November,
5–10, 523–528, 2000; and Chen, C.H. and Santiago, J.G., Journal of Micro Electromechanical Systems
11, 6, 672–683, 2002.)
+
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
+
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
+ + + + + + + + + + + +
+
+ +
+ +
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
– 
Cathode
+ 
Anode
(a) 
–
Cathode
+ 
Anode
(b)
γ
γ
=
−
o
CV
1
2
2
γ
γ
γ
θ
SA
SG
AG
=
−
cos
cos
cos
θ
θ
γ
=
+
o
AG
CV
1
1
2
2
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
169
where γSA is the surface tension between the solid and aqueous phases, γSG
is the surface tension between the solid and gas phases, γAG is the tension
between the aqueous and gas phases, is the contact angle, and θ is the contact
angle with no bias voltage. If a dielectric covers the electrode, as the electrode
is biased the aqueous phase will induce an electric double layer to charge a
capacitor. A pressure can be generated as the change in contact angle
(6.26)
where d is the diameter of the ﬂuid channel. Substituting Equation 6.25 into
6.26 yields
(6.27)
where k is the aqueous dielectric constant of the insulator and t is the thickness
of the dielectric. Thus, as the electrode is biased, a double layer will initially
charge at the gas–liquid interface. This will provide a force so that the aqueous
layer will displace the gaseous phase to move to the surface of the electrode.
Electrowetting phenomena have been used extensively for droplet manipula-
tion [51–52] (Figure 6.8) with droplet splitting and merging for controlled
chemical reactions recently demonstrated [53]. It has also been used as an
actuation mechanism for a positive displacement pump [54].
6.5.3
Marangoni Pumps
The Marangoni effect is based on producing a nonuniform surface tension at
a gas–liquid interface. The interfacial stress condition at an interface is given by
(6.28)
FIGURE 6.8
Droplet manipulation using electrowetting. (a) Schematic of an electrowetting on insulator
device. (Adapted from Lee, J. et al., Sensors and Actuators A 9, 259–268, 2002.)
∆P
P
P
d
A
G
AG
o
=
−
=
−
(
)
γ
θ
θ
cos
cos
∆P
d CV
k
V
dt
o
=
=
1
2
2
2
2
ε
T n
n n
ij
j
i
+
∇⋅
(
)
+ ∇=
γ
γ
I
0
Ground
Control electrodes
Insulation
Glass
Droplet
(a)
Hydrophobic
surface 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

170
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
where Tij is the stress tensor and γ is the space varying interfacial tension
between the phases. When the surface tension varies along the interface, a
force is exerted parallel to the interface toward the larger surface tension.
This interfacial motion produces a shear on the interface, which pumps liquid
FIGURE 6.8 (CONTINUED)
Droplet manipulation using electrowetting. (b) A rotary liquid micromotor. (From Lee, J. and
Kim, C.J., Surface Tension Driven Microactuation Based on Continuous Electrowetting (CEW),
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 9, 2, 171–180, 2000.) (c) Schematic of a positive displace-
ment pump using electrowetting as an actuation source. (Adapted from Yun, K.S. et al., Pro-
ceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’01,
Interlaken, Switzerland, January, 21–25, 487–490, 2001.)
Channel loop
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Electrode
(b)
Silicone tubing 
Inlet
Outlet
Glass
Check valve 
Platinum electrode Electrolyte 
(c)
Mercury droplet 
Silicone rubber
membrane 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
171
through momentum transport. Because surface tension is a strong function
of temperature, decreasing as temperature rises, a surface tension gradient
may be produced by placing a bubble in a temperature gradient to produce
ﬂow. The temperature gradient is produced using three heaters; a central
heater that creates a vapor bubble through resistive dissipation and two side
heaters whose heat ﬂuxes (resistive dissipation rate) differ to produce a
temperature gradient across the vapor bubble. Flow is then induced toward
the cooler side (higher surface tension side) of the vapor bubble [55]. This is
also known as the thermocapillary effect (Figure 6.9).
6.5.4
Buoyancy-Driven Flows
Fluid density differences may also use the gravitational body force to drive
ﬂuid ﬂows. This has been accomplished by constructing a microﬂuidic cir-
culation loop with integrated heaters along the channels (Figure 6.10). Each
heater maintains a leg of the channel at a different temperature. Because
ﬂuid density is a strong function of temperature, when the loop is aligned
within the gravitational ﬁeld, ﬂuid circulation occurs [56,57] with the warm-
est (least dense) ﬂuid rising to the top of the loop and the coolest (most
FIGURE 6.9
Surface tension–driven Marangoni micropump. (Adapted from Debar, M. and Liepmann, D.,
Proceedings of the 15th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’02,
Las Vegas, NV, January, 20–24, 109–112, 2002; and Chen, Z. et al., Analytical Chemistry 76,
3707–3715, 2004.)
FIGURE 6.10
A buoyancy–driven thermocycling loop. (Adapted from Chen, Z. et al. ASME Fluids Engineering
Division IMECE ’04, CD-ROM IMECE 2004–62303, ASME, New York, NY.)
Flow direction 
Channel height
Liquid phase 
Vapor
bubble
Gradient
generating heater
Gradient
generating heater
Cold side
Hot side
Vaporizing
heater
Annealing
55°C
Extension
72°C
Gravitational
force
72°C
50–55°C
90–94°C
Flow
Denaturation
94°C 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

172
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
dense) ﬂuid settling, setting up a thermosyphon. This is analogous to free
convection currents occurring in a heated house. By constraining the channel
temperatures at 94°C, 72°C, and 55°C, continuous thermocycling of ﬂuid
temperatures used to drive polymerase chain reaction DNA ampliﬁcation
was demonstrated [55].
6.6
Conclusions
Miniaturized ﬂuid handling and analysis systems propel ﬂuids through a
variety of methods. Although, many different varieties of micropumps have
been designed, fabricated, and tested utilizing mechanical actuations or
deriving ﬂow from unique ﬂuid physical properties, micropumps have only
begun to penetrate the industrial market. There are still opportunities for
micropump optimization, closer integration with biological assays, and par-
allelization of micropumps for multiplexed assays. Combined with advances
in biosensors, µTAS will drive biological research, healthcare advances, and
biological discoveries over the coming decades.
References
[1] Manz, A., Graber, N., and Widmer, H.M., Miniaturized Total Chemical Analysis
Systems: A Novel Concept for Chemical Sensing, Sensors and Actuators B, 1,
244–248 1990.
[2] Shoji, S. and Esashi, M., Microﬂow Devices and Systems, Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microengineering, 4, 157–171, 1994.
[3] Gravesen, P., Brandebjerg, J., and Jensen, O.S., Microﬂuidics—A Review, Journal
of Micromechanics and Microengineering 3, 168–182, 1993.
[4] Caton, P.F. and White, R.M., MEMS Microﬁlter with Acoustic Cleaning, Pro-
ceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Sys-
tems MEMS ’01, Interlaken Switzerland, January 21–25, 479–482, 2001. IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ.
[5] Desai, T.A. et al., Nanopore Technology for Biomedical Applications, Biomedical
Microdevices 2, 1, 11–40, 1999.
[6] Nguyen, N.T. et al., Integrated Thermal Flow Sensor for In-Situ Measurement
and Control of Acoustic Streaming in Flexural-Plate-Wave Pumps, Sensors and
Actuators A 79, 2, 115–121, 2000.
[7] Deshmukh, A.A., Liepmann, D., and Pisano A.P., Continuous Micromixer with
Pusatile Micropumps, Proceedings 2000 Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop,
Hilton Head, SC., June 4–8, 73–76, 2000. Transducers Research Foundation, San
Diego, CA.
[8] Zahn, J.D. et al., Continuous on Chip Micropumping for Microneedle Enhanced
Drug Delivery, Biomedical Microdevices 6, 3, 183–190 2004.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
173
[9] Luginbuhl, P. et al., Micromachined Injector for DNA Mass Spectrometry, Pro-
ceedings of Transducers ’99 The 10th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors
and Actuators, Sendai Japan, June 7–10, 1130–1133, 1999. Institute of Physics
Publ., Philadelphia, PA.
[10] Simpson, P.C., Woolley, A.T., and Mathies, R.T., Microfabrication Technology
for the Production of Capillary Array Electrophoresis Chips, Biomedical Microde-
vices 1, 1, 7–25, 1998.
[11] Brody, J.P. et al., Biotechnology at Low Reynolds Numbers, Biophysical Journal
71, 3430–3441, 1996.
[12] Leal, G., Laminar Flow and Convective Transport Processes. Scaling Principles and
Asymptotic Analysis, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, MA, 1992. 
[13] White, F.M., Viscous Fluid Flow, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 1991.
[14] Madou, M.J., Fundamentals of Microfabrication: The Science of Miniaturization, 2nd
ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
[15] Jaeger, R.C., Modular Series on Solid State Devices Volume V. Introduction to Mi-
croelectronic Fabrication, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, MA, 1993.
[16] Bhardwaj, J. K. and Ashraf, H., Advanced Silicon Etching Using High Density
Plasmas, Proceedings of the Micromachining and Microfabrication Technology of the
International SPIE, Austin, TX, October 23–24, V. 2639, 224–233, 1995. SPIE,
Bellingham, WA.
[17] Xia, Y. and Whitesides, G.M., Soft Lithography. Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 28,
153–184, 1998.
[18] Duffy, D. et. al., Rapid Prototyping of Microﬂuidic Systems in Poly(dimethyl-
siloxane), Analytical Chemistry 70, 23, 4974–4984, 1998.
[19] Wallis G.D. and Pomerantz D.I., Field Assisted Glass–Metal Sealing, J. Appl.
Phys. 40 3946–3948, 1969.
[20] Mittal, L.K., Polymer Surface Modiﬁcation: Relevance to Adhesion, VSP, Uthrecht,
The Netherlands, 1996.
[21] Linnemann, R. et. al., A Self-Priming and Bubble-Tolerant Silicon Micropump
for Liquids and Gases, Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Workshop on
Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’98, Heidelberg, Germany, January,
25–29, 532–537, 1998. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[22] Richter, M., Linnemann, R., and Woias, P., Robust Design of Gas and Liquid
Micropumps, Sensors and Actuators A 68, 480–486, 1998.
[23] Van Lintel, H.T.G., van den Pol, F.C.M., and Bouwstra, S., A Piezoelectric
Micropump Based on Micromachining in Silicon, Sensors and Actuators 15,
153–167, 1988.
[24] Shoji, S., Nakagawa, S., and Eashi, M., Micropump and Sample Injector for
Integrated Chemical Analyzing Systems, Sensors and Actuators A 21–23,
189–192, 1990.
[25] Maillefer, D. et al., A High-Performance Silicon Micropump for an Implantable
Drug Delivery System, Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International Workshop on
Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’99, Orlando, FL, January, 17–21,
541–546, 1999. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[26] Maillefer, D. et al., A High-Performance Silicon Micropump for Disposable
Drug Delivery Systems, Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshop on
Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’01, Interlaken, Switzerland, January,
21–25, 413–417, 2001. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

174
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[27] Schabmueller, C.G.J. et al., Self-Aligning Gas/Liquid Micropump, J. Micromech.
Microeng. 12, 420–424, 2002.
[28] Rapp, R. et al., LIGA Micropump for Gases and Liquids, Sensors and Actuators
A 40, 57–61, 1994.
[29] Zengerle, R., Richter, A., and Sandmaier, H., A Micro Membrane Pump with
Electrostatic Actuation, Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Workshop on
Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’92, Travemünde, Germany, February,
4–7, 19–24, 1992. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[30] Bourouina, T., Bosseboeuf, A., and Grandchamp, J.P., Design and Simulation
of an Electrostatic Micropump for Drug Delivery Applications, J. Micromech.
Microeng. 7, 186–188, 1997.
[31] Lammerink, T.S.J., Elwenspock, M., and Fluitman, J.H.J., Integrated Micro-
Liquid Dosing System, Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Workshop on
Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’93, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, February, 7–10,
254–259, 1993. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[32] Zimmermann, S. et al., A Planar Micropump Utilizing Thermopneumatic Ac-
tuation and In-Plane Flap Valves, Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International
Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’04, Maastricht, The Neth-
erlands, January, 25–29, 462–465, 2004. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[33] Bustgens, B. et al., Micropump Manufactured by Thermoplastic Molding, Pro-
ceedings of the 7th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems
MEMS ’94, Oiso, Japan, January, 25–28, 18–21, 1994. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[34] Stemme, E. and Stemme, G., A Valveless Diffuser/Nozzle Based Fluid Pump,
Sensors and Actuators A 39, 159–167, 1993.
[35] Olsson, A. et al., Micromachined Flat Walled Valveless Diffuser Pumps, Journal
of Micro Electromechanical Systems 6, 2, 161–166, 1997. 
[36] Tsai, J.H. and Lin, L., A Thermal Bubble Actuated Micro Nozzle-Diffuser Pump,
Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical
Systems MEMS ’01, Interlaken, Switzerland, January, 21–25, 135–140, 2001.
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[37] Forster, F. et al., Design, Fabrication and Testing of Fixed Valve Micropumps,
Proceedings of the ASME Fluids Engineering Division, IMECE ’95, San Francisco,
CA, November 12–17, 234, 39–44, 1995. ASME, New York, NY.
[38] Bardell, R.L. et al., Designing High Performance Micropumps Based on No
Moving Parts Valves, Proceedings of the Microelectromechanical Systems Division,
IMECE, ’97, Dallas, TX, November, 16–21, 47–53, 1997. ASME, New York, NY.
[39] Husband, B. et al., Novel Actuation of an Integrated Peristaltic Micropump,
Microelectronic Engineering 73–74, 858–863, 2004. 
[40] Grosjean, C. and Tai, Y.C., A Thermopneumatic Peristaltic Micropump, Proceed-
ings of the 10th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Trans-
ducers ’99, Sendai, Japan, June, 7–10, 1776–1779, 1999. Institute of Physics Publ.,
Philadelphia, PA.
[41] Unger, M.A. et al., Monolithic Microfabricated Valves and Pumps by Multilayer
Soft Lithography, Science 288, 113–116, 2000.
[42] Hong, J. W. et al., A Nanoliter Scale Nucleic Acid Processors with Parallel
Architecture, Nature Biotechnology 22, 435–439, 2004.
[43] Moroney, R. M., White, R.M., and Howe, R.T., Microtransport Induced by
Ultrasonic Lamb Waves, App. Phys. Letters 59, 774–776, 1991.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micropump Applications in Bio-MEMS
175
[44] Moroney, R. M., White, R.M., and Howe, R.T., Fluid Motion Produced by
Ultrasonic Lamb Waves, Proceedings of IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, Honolulu,
HI, December, 4–7, 355–358, 1990. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[45] Bradley, C.E., Bustillo, J.M., and White, R.M., Flow Measurements in a Micro-
machined Flow System with Integral Acoustic Pumping, Proceedings of IEEE
Ultrasonics Symposium, Seattle, WA, November, 7–10, 505–510, 1995. IEEE, Pis-
cataway, NJ.
[46] Manz, A. et al., Electroosmotic Pumping and Electrophoretic Separations for Min-
iaturized Chemical Analysis Systems, J. Micromach. Microeng. 4, 257–265, 1994.
[47] Chen, C.H. et al., Development of a Planar Electrokinetic Micropump, Proceed-
ings of the ASME Fluids Engineering Division, IMECE ’00, Orlando, FL, Novem-
ber, 5–10, 523–528, 2000. ASME, New York, NY.
[48] Chen, C.H. and Santiago, J.G., A Planar Electroosmotic Micropump, Journal of
Micro Electromechanical Systems 11, 6, 672–683, 2002.
[49] Probstein, R.F., Physicochemical Hydrodynamics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1994.
[50] Senturia, S.D., Microsystem Design, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA,
2001.
[51] Lee, J. et al., Electrowetting and Electrowetting-on-Insulator for Microscale
Liquid Handling, Sensors and Actuators A 9, 259–268, 2002.
[52] Lee, J. and Kim, C.J., Surface Tension Driven Microactuation Based on Contin-
uous Electrowetting (CEW), Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 9, 2,
171–180, 2000.
[53] Cho, S.K., Moon, H., and Kim, C.J., Creating, Transporting, Cutting and Merg-
ing Liquid Droplets by Electrowetting-Based Actuation for Digital Microﬂuidic
Circuits, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 12, 1, 70–80, 2003.
[54] Yun, K.S. et al., A Micropump Driven by Continuous Electrowetting Actuation
for Low Voltage and Low Power Operations, Proceedings of the 14th IEEE Inter-
national Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’01, Interlaken,
Switzerland, January, 21–25, 487–490, 2001. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
[55] Debar, M. and Liepmann, D., Fabrication and Performance Testing of a Steady
Thermocapillary Pump with No Moving Parts, Proceedings of the 15th IEEE
International Workshop on Micro-Electromechanical Systems MEMS ’02, Las Vegas,
NV, January, 20–24, 109–112, 2002.
[56] Chen, Z. et al., Thermosyphon-Based PCR Reactor: Experiment and Modeling,
Analytical Chemistry 76, 3707–3715, 2004.
[57] Chen, Z. et al., Buoyancy Driven Microﬂuidics, Proceedings of the ASME Fluids
Engineering Division IMECE ’04, CDROM IMECE2004-62303, 2004. ASME, New
York, NY.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

177
7
Micromixers
D. E. Nikitopoulos and A. Maha
CONTENTS
7.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 177
7.2
Some Basic Considerations ...................................................................... 178
7.3
Passive Micromixers.................................................................................. 181
7.3.1
Pressure-Driven Passive Micromixers ....................................... 181
7.3.2
Electrically Driven Passive Micromixers................................... 185
7.4
Active Micromixers ................................................................................... 188
7.5
Multiphase Micromixers........................................................................... 191
7.6
Performance Metrics for Microscale Mixer Design
and Evaluation........................................................................................... 192
7.7
Design Methodology for Optimal Diffusion-Based, Micromixers
for Batch Production Applications ......................................................... 195
References ............................................................................................. 206
7.1
Introduction
The topic of mixing on the microscale has been at the forefront of research
and development efforts over roughly the last ﬁfteen years since the tech-
nological thrust toward miniaturization of ﬂuidic systems began. Mixing is
of signiﬁcant importance to realizing lab-on-a-chip microscale reactors and
bioanalysis systems because the reactions carried out on the micro- or even
nanoscale in such devices require the on-chip mixing of samples and
reagents. Typical application class examples are thermal-cycling reactors for
the popular polymerization chain reaction (PCR)1,2 and the Ligase chain
reaction (LCR)3 as well as other similar applications. Fully integrated microf-
luidic chips performing such reactions require modestly fast mixing in batch
mode, should the mixing be performed on-chip. This is so because the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

178
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
bottleneck in terms of temporal performance usually lies with the thermal
cycling reactions themselves, and because a speciﬁc volume of mixture is
usually needed to be produced. In such an application, the emphasis would
be shifted toward low levels of the resource used to drive the chip, that is,
low pressure if the device is pressure driven or low voltage if the device is
electrokinetically driven. This requirement can be critical for reactions such
as PCR and LDR sequences where several levels of on-chip mixing are
necessary, and even more so if the chips are multiplexed. A second example
application area of microscale mixers is to perform continuous ﬂow fast-
reaction kinetics experiments. In this case mixing must be faster than reaction
rates with timescales down to microseconds. In contrast with the previous
application area, the emphasis is on localized mixing with very small times-
cales and batch volume delivery is not a necessity. Low levels of the driving
force to operate the chip are desired, but can be sacriﬁced in exchange for
speed, so long as the chip is not structurally compromised. Yet another
possible performance requirement of microscale mixers could demand
longer-term continuous production, in which case the emphasis would be
on maximizing the mixture ﬂow rate delivered, while keeping the driving
force for delivery at low levels. An application that would require such
performance would be in situ, designer drug delivery, whereby a particular
drug cocktail would be synthesized on-chip from constituents at proportions
speciﬁc to a particular patient, and directly delivered at the point of care.
The primary concentration of this chapter is going to be on pressure-driven
batch micromixers for applications such as the ﬁrst example above and
possibly the third one. Nevertheless, we will review micromixers developed
for the second application class as well as others. After discussing the basics
and providing an overview of the micromixing literature, we will discuss
the important performance parameters of micromixers, which are meant to
be integrated on microﬂuidic chips such as those used to perform thermal-
cycling reactions (e.g., PCR, LDR). We will then outline a methodology for
designing optimized, simple, passive, batch-production, pressure-driven
micromixers for such applications.
7.2
Some Basic Considerations
It is very well known from the most fundamental considerations that on the
microscale mixing is driven by diffusion, and that diffusion processes are
inherently slow. This is particularly true in the applications of interest where
binary mass diffusion coefﬁcients are signiﬁcantly low on the order of D12 =
1010–1011 m2/s or less. On a macroscale, mixing can be made more effective
through turbulent transport, which reduces transport timescales by orders
of magnitude relative to diffusive ones, and is commonplace in many systems
of everyday and industrial use (e.g., internal combustion engines, gas turbine
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
179
combustion systems, chemical reactors, etc.). Turbulent ﬂows are character-
ized by large Reynolds numbers, Re = UD/ν, where, U, is a velocity scale
representative of the process, D is a length scale and, ν is the kinematic
viscosity (or momentum diffusion coefﬁcient) of the ﬂuid. In microﬂuidic
systems the length scales are of micron order (e.g., ranging from 1 mm to
500 mm), and because in bioanalytical applications the ﬂuids are predomi-
nantly aqueous solutions, the kinematic viscosity is on the order of 106 m2/s.
The transition Reynolds number from laminar to turbulent ﬂow is approxi-
mately 2300 for ducts and channels, so in order to have the beneﬁt of fully
developed turbulent ﬂow, the Reynolds number ought to be higher than
that. The critical Reynolds numbers for other ﬂows, such as jets and free
shear layers, are also on the order of several hundreds. If one wishes to
generate turbulent ﬂow (e.g., Re = 5000) in a microchannel 100 µm by 100 µm
in cross-section, one requires a velocity of approximately 48m/s. At this
velocity the pressure drop in the channel is more than 4 atmospheres per
millimeter of length, which is prohibitive. Other than examining the feasi-
bility of turbulent microﬂow, the example brings forth the fact that in addi-
tion to the requirement of rapid and effective mixing, one has to be vigilant
with respect to the required pressure to drive the microﬂuidic chip. High
pressure requirements are undesirable because they require on-chip, micro-
pumping devices able of sustaining them, which at present do not exist. In
addition they impose higher loads on microﬂuidic chip components and
make it more prone to leakage if not breakage and/or debonding of bonded
surfaces. Increasing the microchannel cross-section alleviates the high pres-
sure requirement, but increases the volume of the device. Nevertheless, in
the above example, if one uses a 500 µm by 500 µm channel, the pressure
drop per unit length of channel for the same Reynolds number is reduced
by two orders of magnitude, but the volume of the channel is increased by
a factor of 25. Larger chip volume translates into larger amounts of samples
and reagents and to some extent negates part of the advantage of reducing
bioanalytical processes to the microscale. The example highlights the fact
that chip volume is yet another parameter one needs to be vigilant about.
In conclusion, turbulent ﬂow on the microscale for the beneﬁt of achieving
effective mixing is not out of the question, but its usefulness is limited
because of pressure drop and chip-volume constraints. It is perhaps not
surprising that to the extent of the author’s awareness, the highest Reynolds
number reported for the operation of a micromixer in the micromixing
literature is laminar (500),4 well below the transition to turbulence value,
with still a rather high pressure drop of approximately 0.47 atmospheres
per millimeter of length. This mixer was a simple T-junction type fabricated
in silicon and covered by Pyrex glass. It should be noted that in Wong et
al.,4 very fast mixing was demonstrated at this value of the Reynolds number
caused by instability in the shear layer formed at the interface of the mixed
streams in a low-aspect-ratio channel (0.5) with a hydraulic diameter of
67 µm, but required a pressure of almost 5.5 atmospheres, which is its major
operational drawback.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

180
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
In the absence of turbulent transport, the only recourse to achieving effec-
tive mixing is the reduction of the molecular diffusion length. This follows
from basic dimensional considerations because the time required to achieve
full mixing is the diffusive time, tD = δD
2/D12, necessary for the concentration
signal to traverse a length, δD. When the mass diffusion coefﬁcient is very
small (<O [10–10 m2/s]) the only way to cut down on the mixing time is to
reduce this diffusion length. Almost all efforts to improve mixing perfor-
mance on the microscale strive to achieve this by employing a wide variety
of means. For example, the so-called lamination micromixers5 pursue the
creation of several alternating narrow layers of the compounds to be mixed,
so as to cut down on the diffusion length; micromixers based on chaotic
advection (chaotic stirring)6,7,8 pursue the same goal by kinematically folding
the interfaces between the compounds multiple times; a broad variety of
micromixers achieve the same through the use of time-varying external
perturbations or exploiting instability mechanisms.
Much like other devices, micromixers are traditionally classiﬁed as
active or passive depending on whether or not an external energy source
is used other than that driving the ﬂow through the device. Although
active mixers may effectively provide rapid mixing, it cannot be denied
that the additional mechanical and electronic devices, both on- and off-
chip, often add undesirable complexity. These additional devices need
extra energy, space, and if on-chip, may also be difﬁcult to fabricate and
integrate to form a cost-effective and compact lab-on-a-chip. Additionally,
electrical ﬁelds and heat sometimes generated by active control may dam-
age biological samples.9 Different methods and substrates have been used
to fabricate both active and passive micromixers, but it is generally agreed
that passive mixers are most often easier to fabricate and simpler in design
than active mixers. This is more so for pressure-driven devices than elec-
trically driven ones.
Several reviews of micromixers have appeared, especially during recent
years, and we will mention a few. A brief review of passive and active
micromixers can be found in Campbell and Grzybowski10 who also provide
a tabulated assessment of performance and manufacturing complexity of a
few mixers, but focus their discussion on self-assembled magnetic micromix-
ers. Passive micromixers were recently reviewed in Hardt et al.11 A more
comprehensive and nicely illustrated review of a broad variety of both pas-
sive and active mixers available in the literature is presented in Nguyen and
Wu5 and will not be duplicated herein. However, an overview with repre-
sentative examples of micromixers from each class will be given here for the
beneﬁt of the reader. An overview will be given for passive, active and
multiphase ﬂow mixers, the former organized in terms of the driving force
used to generate the main ﬂow through the device, as appropriate. The last
category (multiphase) is discussed separately, although it contains micro-
mixers from both of the other categories, in order to emphasize that the
related devices involve an auxiliary passive ﬂuid and moving interfaces.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
181
7.3
Passive Micromixers
In passive mixers, no external energy source is required as an input for
enhancing the mixing mechanism. We will discuss these micromixers divid-
ing them into two groups based on the driving force: pressure driven and
electrically driven.
7.3.1
Pressure-Driven Passive Micromixers
It is worth mentioning a few mixers that are not identiﬁed as veritable
micromixers because they were not realized on microchips, but used con-
centric capillaries combined with a microsphere blockage to force the mixed
ﬂuids through an annular gap on the order of 10 mm. Such are those of
Regenfuss et al.12 and the later improvement upon it by Shastry et al.,13 who
achieved full mixing in continuous ﬂow after a few decades of microseconds
operating at high Reynolds numbers (Re of approximately 1000 to 1700) and
pressures on the order of 5 atmospheres.
One of the earliest efforts to achieve rapid mixing on the microscale for
the purpose of emulsifying immiscible ﬂuids was reported by Schwesinger
et al.14 and revisited with improvements by Mahe et al.15 In the original work,
Schwesinger et al.14 designed and demonstrated a two-layer microchip mixer
in silicon, which successfully produced emulsions by successively layering
the ﬂuids in microchannels of a triangular cross-section and typical size of
150 to 200 µm. This was achieved by splitting and recombining the mixing
channels several times on two levels, so as to proliferate alternating layers
of the different ﬂuids in the channel cross-section. This concept and design
can also be effectively used for mixing rather than emulsiﬁcation, and in
such application the layering succeeds in reducing the diffusion length by a
factor of 2n if the original stream is split and recombined n times. This early
design is a good candidate for integration with other microﬂuidic devices.
The main complexity in the micromanufacturing process, other than what
is standard when utilizing silicon technology, is the need for alignment of
the two chip layers.
In one of the pioneering works on microscale on-chip mixers, Knight et
al.16 demonstrated very rapid local mixing on a silicon chip taking advantage
of hydrodynamic focusing through the use of a single 10 µm–wide mixing
channel of unitary aspect ratio fed by three tributaries in a cross (Ψ) conﬁg-
uration. The middle one was shaped as a nozzle terminating in a 5:1 aspect
ratio exit, with the intent of further facilitating the rapid formation of a
narrower middle diffusion layer. Satisfying requirements imposed for stud-
ies of chemical kinetics, the hydrodynamic focusing, Ψ-junction, mixer of
Knight et al.16 generated very rapid (O[µs]) local mixing of very small vol-
umes (O[nL]) at supply pressures as high as 3 atmospheres. The authors
examined in detail the effect of the supply pressure ratio, the optimum value
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

182
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
of which is speciﬁc to their mixer conﬁguration, and reduced dead time by
a factor of approximately eight relative to the previously mentioned capil-
lary-based mixers, by optimizing focusing. The hydrodynamic focusing con-
cept was used with equal success by Pabit and Hagen,17 who employed
coaxial, UV-transparent, fused silica capillaries (20 µm ID in 100 mm ID) to
achieve off-chip rapid mixing for fast kinetic studies using UV-excited ﬂuo-
rescence probes. The hydrodynamic focusing effect also contributed to efﬁ-
cient solvent extraction by Hibara et al.,18 who generated a multilayer ﬂow
of miscible and immiscible ﬂuids in 70 µm–wide channels of low aspect ratio
(0.43) using a focusing Ψ-junction conﬁguration in combination with a down-
stream Ψ-junction one. Although achieving rapid mixing was not their objec-
tive, their simple, single-manufacturing-layer, glass device, could be
operated as a micromixer. A Ψ-junction mixer realized in silicon and featuring
a contraction upstream and an expansion downstream of the mixing channel
was developed by Veenstra et al.19 With a modest aspect ratio (2), they
achieved improved mixing at a low Reynolds number (0.23) and essentially
provided an indication of how an increased aspect ratio can reduce mixing
time or reduce pressure drop. Y-junction micromixers have been successfully
employed by Wu et al.20 to study nonlinear diffusive mixing in microchan-
nels. Interested in gas mixing, Gobby et al.21 performed numerical simula-
tions at low Reynolds numbers studying the characteristics of Ψ- and T-
junction micromixers with and without throttling downstream of the mixing
point. They concluded that mixing in gases is improved with throttling and
with modest increases in mixing channel aspect ratio (3). A two-wafer, mul-
tistream (10) mixer with a contraction into a high-aspect-ratio (8) mixing
channel was developed by Floyd et al.22 on a silicon chip through the use of
deep reactive ion etching (DRIE). This mixer, which was integrated with a
heat exchanger and a probing region to perform infrared transmission kinet-
ics studies of liquid reactions, yielded fully mixed product in a few tens of
milliseconds at a modestly high Reynolds number (97). Considering that
the estimated pressure drop is very modest, this type of mixer is promising
for bio-analytical applications, although the two-wafer alignment and costly
DRIE requirement in its manufacture cannot be overlooked. Various two-
and three-stream high-aspect-ratio (6) micromixers were evaluated through
numerical simulations by Maha et al.23 in terms of pressure drop and mixing
performance for batch operation. It was shown that a combination of high-
aspect-ratio narrow channels combined with hydrodynamic focusing and
an optimization design scheme for batch mixture production can reduce
mixture production time by an order of magnitude for a ﬁxed pressure drop
requirement, or reduce pressure drop by several orders of magnitude for a
ﬁxed mixture production time relative to unitary aspect ratio counterpart
mixers. This was demonstrated experimentally by Maha24 for such micro-
mixers hot embossed on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and polycarbon-
ate (PC) polymers using micromilled brass mold inserts. The simple
manufacturing process, capacity for inexpensive mass production and inte-
grability of such polymer mixers make them very good candidates for
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
183
integration into disposable polymer microchips to perform a variety of bio-
assays. A very low aspect ratio (0.012), Ψ-junction glass micromixer was
developed by Holden et al.25 to simultaneously produce mixtures of quasi-
continuously varying concentrations. This was elegantly achieved by an
array of exit channels connected with their entrances arranged diagonally
over the span of the mixing channel. Up to eleven discretely different con-
centrations were produced simultaneously. A tilted UV lithography tech-
nique was used by Yang et al.26 to fabricate a micromixer on SU-8 incorpo-
rating opposing arrays of staggered spatially distributed impinging microjets
in a T-junction mixer channel. This novel and rare three-dimensional mixer
on a single layer is readily integrable on SU-8 chips.
A number of micromixers have been designed and realized incorporating
passive elements, which can generate secondary ﬂows, to fold the ﬂuid
interfaces and improve local diffusional mixing by cutting down the diffu-
sion length. Introduction of such elements also results in a pressure drop
overhead because of increased dissipation. So it is useful to put the relevant
designs in this perspective when evaluating their performance, if pressure
drop information is available, which is rarely the case. Most of the micro-
mixers incorporating secondary ﬂow–generating elements can be viewed as
stirring devices often involving chaotic advection mechanisms.
It is well known that bends in channels generate secondary ﬂows at mod-
estly high, to high Reynolds numbers in the laminar regime. This has been
employed by several investigators and mixers with bends have been used
in integrated chips.27 The same principle, augmented by elastic-ﬂuid insta-
bilities, was also demonstrated to be effective in improving mixing on the
microscale by Pathak et al.28 for non-Newtonian ﬂuids in low-aspect-ratio
serpentine microchannels. Arrays of modest-aspect-ratio (2) single-level, ser-
pentine (zigzag) microchannels combined with simple Ψ-junction mixers
were introduced and used by Kamidate et al.,29 and more recently by Lin et
al.,30 to successfully generate, in a predictable manner, dynamically con-
trolled spatial and temporal concentration gradients on glass-covered poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microchips embossed using silicon mold inserts.
A numerical study by Mengeaud et al.31 indicates that successive bends in
serpentine (zigzag) channels improve mixing at high Reynolds numbers
(O[102]), and that increasing the number of bends per unit length of channel
while holding its width constant, can be detrimental to the mixing enhance-
ment. Their results should be put in perspective of the fact that their simu-
lations were two-dimensional, while in such ﬂows 3-dimensional effects
could be substantial. A passive, single-layer micromixer incorporating com-
plex Tesla structures has been demonstrated by Hong et al.32 in a cyclo-oleﬁn-
copolymer (COC), low-aspect-ratio (0.45) microchannel fed by a T-junction.
The structures are essentially a combination of a serpentine channel with
curved walls and wedgelike obstacles. Improved mixing was realized with
this device and attributed to Coanda effects in the curved parts of the channel
requiring a modest Reynolds number (6), which is the lowest among the
single-layer passive microchannel mixers with bends.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

184
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Three-dimensional (two-level), serpentine, microchannels of low aspect
ratio (0.5) fed by a T-junction were introduced by Liu et al.,33 who demon-
strated faster and more complete mixing at modestly high Reynolds numbers
(up to 75) compared to single-level serpentine and straight channel counter-
parts. Standard silicon manufacturing technology was used to realize the 3-
dimensional design, which required a two-wafer process and resulted in
channels of trapezoidal cross-sections. A similar 3-dimensional two-layer
design, realized in PDMS by Park et al.,34 also incorporated rounded channel
walls to induce rotation in addition to the bend-induced secondary ﬂows
and a splitting and recombination scheme similar to that of Schwesinger et
al.14 This design realized improved mixing performance for Reynolds num-
bers in the 1 to 50 range. A multilevel 3-dimensional micromixing device of
vascular tortuosity was developed and demonstrated by Therriault et al.35
incorporated the effects of bends and ﬂow splitting and recombination on
numerous levels, and displayed signiﬁcant mixing effectiveness improve-
ment over a broad Reynolds number range (greater than 1). This improve-
ment was shown to increase almost exponentially with the Reynolds number.
Putting the added complexity of a multiple layer process aside and the
potentially increased dead volume, the two- and multilayer designs men-
tioned in this paragraph could be good candidates for batch production
micromixers.
Improved mixing has also been realized through the use of grooved  chan-
nels as generators of secondary ﬂows. In one of the earliest works, Stroock
et al.36 took advantage of chaotic advection generated by secondary ﬂows in
low-aspect-ratio (0.35) microchannels bearing angled or herringbone-pat-
terned grooves on the bottom surface and demonstrated signiﬁcant mixing
improvement relative to the ungrooved channel baseline. Their glass-cov-
ered, Y-junction mixer microchannels were embossed in PDMS using a mold
insert fabricated by a two-layer photolithography process on SU-8. About
the same time, Johnson et al.37 also demonstrated mixing improvements in
low-aspect-ratio (0.43) T-junction mixer microchannels stamped in polycar-
bonate (PC) with laser-ablated angled grooves on their bottom surface. A
computational parametric study was conducted by Wang et al.38 on the
performance of grooved mixing channels; they concluded that the minimum
length to generate a single recirculation in the channel depends exponentially
on the groove aspect ratio and is relative independent of velocity. In an other
numerical study,  Liu et al.39 revealed that at low Reynolds numbers (1), both
the 3-dimensional serpentine channel mixer (e.g., as in Liu et al.33) and the
one employing a herringbone groove pattern on the channel wall (e.g., as in
Stroock et al.36) perform comparably, while at a higher Reynolds number (10)
the serpentine design maintains its performance while the one with the
herringbone grooves does not. Nevertheless, added manufacturing complex-
ity and added dead volume notwithstanding, grooved channels have been
proven to be effective means for enhancing mixing on the microscale in low-
aspect-ratio microchannels at low to modest Reynolds numbers. They could
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
185
be promising for integration into multifunction biochips especially if man-
ufactured successfully on various biocompatible materials.
The potential of attaining improved mixing by placing obstacles in micro-
channels has also been explored. While it is well known that at very low
Reynolds numbers obstacles cannot generate secondary ﬂows such as recir-
culations, it is possible to achieve this at higher Reynolds numbers. This was
also shown in a numerical study by Wang et al.,40 who investigated the effect
on mixing due to various arrangements of cylindrical obstacles in a micro-
channel. An effective micromixer incorporating staggered cylindrical obsta-
cles in a mixing chamber was demonstrated by Lin et al.41 on a silicon chip
generating ﬂuid streams of high Reynolds numbers (approximately 380). A
ceramic cross-junction microchannel mixer with sidewall obstacles was dem-
onstrated also at high Reynolds numbers (greater than 100) by Wong et al.42
This conﬁguration produces essentially a serpentine channel and the beneﬁts
are predominantly due to the successive bends. Micromixers employing
obstacles can be realized with relative ease using single-layer or wafer man-
ufacturing processes, yet the high Reynolds number requirements imply
high operating pressures, which is the major drawback of this approach.
Swirl chambers have also been employed on the microscale to achieve
effective mixing. The multi-inlet design of Böhm et al,43 realized in a glass-
covered silicon chip using two wafers and DRIE is an early example of this
type. It was a very effective mixing device, but required very high pressures
(15 atmospheres) and a costly manufacturing process. Recently Lin et al.44
simulated and demonstrated a multi-inlet swirl-chamber micromixer with
performance at low Reynolds numbers (less than 20) realized in a multilayer
silicon chip. Swirl-chamber mixers can be effective micromixing devices, but
in general they require multilayer manufacturing, high pressures, and
increased volume.
A combination of a microvalve and chamber design was realized by Vold-
man et al.45 to provide both mixing and valving action on a glass-covered
silicone chip. This was micromanufactured in two silicon wafers, one of
which incorporated a cantilevered ﬂap-valve element, and required DRIE.
This dual-function device, which performed reasonably well in terms of
mixing time for batch applications, could also be used as an active mixer
with improved performance by pulsing the supply of the valved ﬂuid.
7.3.2
Electrically Driven Passive Micromixers
In addition to pressure-driven ﬂows, electrically driven ﬂows are very well
suited for application in microﬂuidic devices that handle biological samples
and perform biological assays. A number of such passive micromixing devices
have been realized thus far. A design combining the effects of electroosmotic
ﬂow, convective effects due to bends, and ﬂow-stream splitting and recom-
bination has been realized on a quartz wafer by He et al.46 Voltages on the
order of KVolts were applied to produce velocities of order 0.3 mm/s and
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

186
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
mixing performance was improved by approximately an order of magnitude
relative to a reference Y-junction electroosmotically driven mixing channel.
A variety of chamber-based electroosmotic mixers were proposed by Yager
et al.47 relying on recirculations generated by pressure gradients imposed by
the conservation of mass. The simplest realization of the device involves a
microscale mixing channel with electrodes (A and B) at each end as in Figure
7.1a. When a potential difference is applied between electrodes A and B, the
ﬂuid will be set into motion near the wall region with a velocity in proportion
to the electroosmotic mobility of the wall material. Because the ends of the
mixing channel (between A and B) cannot be penetrated by the ﬂow, con-
servation of mass will dictate a ﬂow inside the core of the cross-section in
the opposite direction to that near the walls. Thus a recirculating ﬂow will
be established within the mixing channel with shear layers in the proximity
of the walls. This is shown in the numerical simulation results of Figure 7.148
for a channel incorporating material nonhomogeneity. The upper part of the
channel has a different elecroosmotic mobility than the lower part. The
resulting recirculating ﬂow ﬁeld is shown in Figure 7.1 where it is clearly
visible that the ﬂuid is moving in one direction in the proximity of the wall,
while it is moving in the opposite direction in the core. Because of the unequal
mobility of the top and bottom parts of the channel, ﬂow is not symmetrical
with respect to all the geometrical axes of symmetry. The near wall velocity
is higher on the top half compared to the bottom half, and as a result the
return velocity is higher in the lower part of the core. Consequently, the shear
layers on the top half and bottom half are of unequal strengths. The top-to-
bottom asymmetry will be absent if the channel has homogeneous mobility.
This ﬂow is effective in mixing because it folds material lines multiple times
in a short period of time, depending on the potential difference level (88
material lines caused by the recirculating ﬂow, which is responsible for the
effective mixing function. A plug of liquid with a substantially low mass
diffusion coefﬁcient (1.2 10–10 m2/sec) is mixed with a second liquid to form
approximately 40 nL of a 2.78% mixture in less than one second. This illus-
trates the effectiveness of this type mixer.
FIGURE 7.1
Main velocity component contours in chamber electroosmotic micromixer (a) streamwise mid-
plane, x = 0 µm; (b) cross-ﬂow midplane, y = 0 µm.
z
y
x
–2000
–11000
(a)
(b)
–9000 –7000 –5000 –3000 –1000 1000 3000 5000 7000 9000 11000 13000
–1000
0
y (mic)
1000
2000
0
150
A
B
100
z (mic)
50
z
x
y
–20
0
20
y = 0 mic
0
50
z (mic)
x (mic)
100
150
volts in this example). Figure 7.2 illustrates this stretching and folding of
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
187
Based on the analytical work of Ajdari,49 recent technological advances in
microfabrication have enabled the development of a variety of complex
50).
This ability has motivated a number of efforts to explore electroosmotic
passive micromixers based on inhomogeneous surface-charge distribution
in microchannels. These generate secondary ﬂows much like geometrical
nonhomogeneous patterns do in pressure-driven ﬂows. Numerical predic-
tions by Erickson and Li51 on an electroosmotically driven T-junction micro-
channel mixer with alternating surface-charge (or zeta potential) sign on its
side walls demonstrated that mixing can indeed be improved in this manner.
Similar simulations on a broader variety of surface-charge patterns were
conducted by Qian and Bau,52 who also demonstrated how chaotic advec-
tion and associated mixing beneﬁts can be generated in such heteroge-
neously charged devices. Another numerical study by Hong et al.53
demonstrated improved mixing using angled and herringbone patterns of
FIGURE 7.2
Concentration contours in chamber electroosmotic micromixer on streamwise midplane, x =
0 µm (a) t = 10 µs, (b) t = 200 µs, (c) t = 500 µs, (d) t = 780 ms; mass diffusion coefﬁcient is 1.2
10–6 cm2/s and 2.78% mixture.
0
50
z (mic)
100
150
(a)
0
50
z (mic)
100
150
(b)
0
50
z (mic)
100
150
(c)
0 
50 
z (mic) 
100 
150 
y (mic)
(d)
2000 
1000 
0 
0.05 0.075 0.1 0.125 0.15 0.175 0.2 
–2000 
–1000 
0.225 0.25 
y 
z 
x 
microscale charge patterns on material surfaces (e.g., see Stroock et al.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

188
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
inhomogeneous surface-charge distributions based on the grooved channel
conﬁgurations used by Stroock et al.36 in a counterpart pressure-driven ﬂow.
T-junction mixers with inhomogeneous surface-charge distributions have
been successfully demonstrated on a microchip by Wu and Liu54 in a low-
aspect-ratio (0.3) PDMS microchannel on a silicon substrate by implanting
patterned electrodes into the silicon substrate. Applying voltage of alternating
signs to successive electrodes generated a nonuniform charge distribution on
the bottom wall of the channel, resulting in secondary ﬂows during operation
and improved mixing performance. Glass T-junction micromixers with vari-
ous heterogeneous zeta potential patterns in very low aspect- ratio micro-
channels (0.04) have been manufactured by Biddiss et al.55 They used soft
lithography techniques to chemically pattern the glass microchannel bottom
surface. Both physical realizations54,55 of this very interesting concept achieved
signiﬁcant mixing enhancement relative to their homogeneous counterparts.
Widespread practical usage in integrated chips of these types of enhanced
micromixers may be hampered by the manufacturing process complexity and
the durability and shelf life of surface modiﬁcation when the latter is the
chosen method of introducing surface-charge nonuniformity. Much like many
electrokinetically driven devices, these micromixers are limited to very low
ﬂow rates dictated by the requirement of keeping the driving voltages low.
Secondary ﬂows associated with electrohydrodynamic (EHD) instability
generated by conductivity gradients in the working ﬂuid have also been
shown through simulation and experimentation to enhance mixing by Lin
et al.56 and could be promising for a practical mixing device of ﬂuids with
inherent or imposed conductivity gradients in the practical environment.
Coupled electrorotation of latex microspheres has been proposed and dem-
onstrated by Wilson et al.57 on a glass chip with two electrodes separated by
a PDMS wedge, and although intrusive, may be promising for inducing fast
local mixing in microﬂuidic environments.
7.4
Active Micromixers
Active micromixers can be classiﬁed according to the type of external force or
energy used to actively improve the mixing process. A broad variety of exci-
tation forces have been used, including pressure pulsations, electrical, mag-
netic, capillary, thermal, and acoustic. The earliest pulsed-ﬂow/pressure
micromixer was introduced by Evans et al.58 It was a chamber design realized
on silicon with a quartz cover. The actuation was provided by thermally driven
bubble valves/pumps powered by integrated polysilicon heaters. Although
complex and with a sizeable dead volume, this device is the ﬁrst to incor-
porate the idea of improved mixing through chaotic-advection-inducing ﬂow
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
189
pulsations. The same idea has since been considered in a variety of micro-
channel mixers. An early example was that of Volpert et al.59 Following their
work, pressure pulsations were also used by Deshmukh et al.,60 who
employed a low-aspect-ratio (approximately 0.2) mixer microchannel with
a T-junction fabricated in silicon using DRIE. An integrated planar micro-
pump was used to pulse the ﬂow in the mixing channel dividing the mixed
liquids into small serial segments and making the mixing process indepen-
dent of convection. A similar device, with a cross-junction and without
integrated pumping, was presented by Lee et al.61 and was also fabricated
in silicon using DRIE.
The chaotic-advection behavior and associated mixing enhancement of
pulsed ﬂow cross-junction mixers have been studied theoretically by Lee,62
while Niu and Lee63 analyzed a multi-cross-junction variant. Pulsations are
in general introduced through the side channels of the cross-junction(s).
Glasgow and Aubry64 demonstrated numerically and experimentally the
merits of ﬂow pulsation in a T-junction microchannel mixer. Analysis and
realization of pulsed ﬂow T-junction micromixers has been presented more
recently by Tabeling et al.65 Their micromixer was realized with glass and
PDMS technology and utilized an on-chip microhydraulic actuation system
based on microvalves introduced by Unger et al.,66 fabricated using their soft
lithography technique. A multi-side-channel (as in Unger et al.66), pulsed
ﬂow T-junction mixer was analyzed and evaluated by Bottausci et al.67 They
concluded that the multiple side-channel design performs better than the
single side-channel one when the pulsations introduced through the side chan-
nels are out of phase. A swirl-chamber mixer micromilled in PMMA was
proposed by Chung et al.9 in which the swirling of the ﬂuids was achieved by
forward and backward pumping. The mixing chamber was ﬁtted with two
opposing channels of unit aspect ratio tangent to the circular chamber. Simu-
lation indicated up to a twofold mixing improvement compared to that in a
straight channel at rather high, yet laminar, Reynolds numbers (20 to 400). In
general, the majority of the pulsed ﬂow and pressure micromixers are contin-
uous-ﬂow devices and have been shown to improve mixing compared to their
steady-state counterparts leading to shorter mixing-channel lengths for Rey-
nolds numbers of order one or less. When considering such micromixers for
applications, this improvement should be put in perspective of the added
complexity, not so much in terms of manufacturing processes, but that result-
ing from the need for pressure actuation.
Electrical excitation has also been used as an alternative to pressure pulsa-
tions toward improving mixing on the microscale by inducing unsteady sec-
ondary ﬂows and chaotic advection. One of the earliest micromixers utilizing
unsteady electrical ﬁelds was that of Lee et al.61 They demonstrated a pressure-
driven, continuous-ﬂow device with periodic electrical excitation introduced
in a chamber on the ﬂow path. They used a combination of silicon and SU-8
technology to manufacture this low-aspect-ratio (approximately 0.13) active
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

190
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
mixer. They took advantage of dielectophoretic forces induced by the inho-
mogeneous electrical ﬁeld to improve mixing of dielectric microparticles.
Shortly after, Oddy et al.68 presented electrical active mixers based on electro-
kinetic instability excited by sinusoidal oscillations of the electrical ﬁled. They
evaluated a glass-covered PDMS cross-junction mixer and a chamber cross-
junction one very similar to that of Lee et al.61 in Boroﬂoat glass. The main
ﬂow in both these low-aspect-ratio (0.1 to 0.33) micromixers could be either
pressure or electrically driven. Their measurements proved the concept that
substantial improvement in mixing can be achieved through the exploitation
of electrokinetic instability by applying AC voltages of a few kVolts at frequen-
cies of a few Hz. A T-junction active mixer with an array of electrodes installed
on either side of a unit aspect ratio, mixing channel was successfully demon-
strated by El Moctar et al.69 Unsteady mixing-enhancing ﬂow is generated due
to EHD instability under the application of steady electrical ﬁelds for ﬂuids
that have different electrical properties. This pressure-driven device can also
be operated as an active one by applying an unsteady electrical ﬁeld, which
further improves mixing performance at low Reynolds numbers (approxi-
mately 0.02). A Ψ-junction and ring-chamber combination active mixer has
been simulated by Chen et al.,70 and realized by Zhang et al.,71 on a silicon
chip with integrated heavily doped silicon electrodes. Unsteady electrical
ﬁelds imposed in the ring chamber generate secondary ﬂows, which improve
mixing as shown in the simulation results. The device can be pressure or
electrokinetically driven. More recently, Shin et al.72 conducted an experimental
study of an electrically driven and actuated cross-junction, microchannel mixer
realized on glass. Under a steady driving voltage of a few hundred volts, they
observed instability developing along the focused middle stream with a fre-
quency of a few Hz. Under unsteady conditions with tens of volts peak-to-
peak amplitude, they showed modest mixing enhancement at frequencies
around the ﬁrst harmonic of the natural instability mode. Active electrically
excited micromixers are attractive for low-ﬂow-rate applications and do not
involve fabrication and operational technological complexity superior to that
required for their passive counterparts, other than an AC generator. Indeed,
they are easier to manufacture than passive mixers employing nonhomoge-
neous charge distributions on microchannel walls. They have the standard
operational drawbacks of electrically driven microﬂuidic devices.
Magnetic actuation has also been exploited to produce better micromixing
performance. The principle of using magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) forcing to
improve mixing on the microscale was nicely demonstrated by Solomon et al.73
They performed experiments comparing long-range chaotic mixing of miscible
and immiscible impurities in a time-periodic ﬂow by producing an alternating
magnetic ﬁeld that generated alternating vortex structures due to MHD insta-
bility. Chaotic advection created by magnetic forces inducing mixing on ﬂows
carrying magnetic microbeads has been demonstrated by Suzuki and Ho74 and
Suzuki et al.75 on a low-aspect-ratio serpentine microchannel with a T-junction
and an integrated array of copper electrodes normal to the channel length. A
glass-covered SU-8 channel was created on a silicon substrate in which the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
191
conductors were embedded. This design succeeded in rapidly dispersing mag-
netic microbeads at very low Reynolds numbers (approximately 0.01). Very
good performance in mixing using magnetic microbeads was achieved by Rida
et al.76 on a micromixer realized in polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) with
integrated ferromagnetic permalloy layers to focus the magnetic ﬁeld generated
by an external electromagnet. In a rather rare design involving moving parts,
Lu et al.77 and Ryu et al.78 developed micromixer chips with PDMS or Parylene
Ψ-junction microchannels with an integrated permalloy bar rotor on a silicon
substrate. When the microrotor was rotated by an external rotating magnetic
ﬁeld, it could act both as a mechanical stirrer and a pumping impeller.
7.5
Multiphase Micromixers
Multiphase ﬂow has also been considered to improve mixing performance.
The main advantage emanating from the use of two or more phases is the
reduction of the volume of the working ﬂuid through the use of an immiscible
gas or liquid buffer. Smaller mixed volumes imply smaller diffusion lengths
and therefore faster mixing. One of the earliest two-phase micromixers was
developed by Hosokawa et al.,79,80 who succeeded in manipulating and mixing
very small (pL-nL) droplets of liquids on a microﬂuidic chip through pneu-
matic action. To achieve this they utilized an array of venting microchannels
with ultrahydrophobic surfaces to contain the liquid through capillary pres-
sure. A series of elegant and well-documented parametric studies (e.g., Song
et al.81 and Bringer et al.82) demonstrated the advantages of effectively mixing
small volumes of several reagents by chaotic advection generated in a pres-
sure-driven, liquid–liquid periodic plug/slug two-phase ﬂow in microchan-
nels with and without bends. Chaotic advection was generated by secondary
ﬂows, which develop due to shear in droplets when they are pushed through
low-aspect-ratio microchannels. This effect was enhanced by the presence of
randomly placed bends in the microchannels. This method requires an auxil-
iary immiscible and inert ﬂuid in order to create and transport the plugs of
mixture; it has reported mixing times as low as submillisecond and utilizes a
relatively simple and easy-to-manufacture chip. It is well suited for chemical
kinetics and biochemical assays provided that the auxiliary ﬂuid does not
affect them. Integration with reactor and thermal cycler modules could be
challenging because of the utilization of a two-phase ﬂow system.
Small droplet manipulation through the exploitation of electrowetting phe-
nomena was used to achieve fast mixing by Fowler et al.83 They demonstrated
the potential of this concept to perform fast mixing on a glass chip requiring
a multilayer manufacturing process. Other than the reduced size of the drop-
lets, the mechanisms responsible for mixing enhancement are the secondary
ﬂows generated inside the droplet as it is moved (rolled) in the chip chamber
by capillary forces generated by periodically varied electrowetting actuation.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

192 
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The same electrowetting principles were used in a more recent experimental
study by Paik et al.,84 who illustrated the ﬂow patterns and enhanced mixing
inside millimeter-sized droplets and used an immiscible liquid (silicone oil)
rather than a gas buffer between droplets. Small-volume liquid manipulation
and enhanced mixing using electrowetting phenomena is restricted to polar-
izable or conductive liquids only. Thermocapillary phenomena have also
been considered recently for both active and passive mixing microdevices
requiring chemical patterning of substrates to control surface energy for
containment of the liquids  and the embedding of microheating elements.
For a review and theoretical aspects of this still nascent approach we refer
the reader to Darhuber et al.85
7.6
Performance Metrics for Microscale Mixer Design
and Evaluation
A plethora of micromixer designs has been demonstrated and to various
degrees evaluated in the literature in terms of performance. The majority of
the relevant works have given emphasis on the extent of mixing, or mixing
efﬁciency, deﬁned in various ways; the mixing time; and the associated
volume. The latter two often depend on the accepted value of the former,
and this is often a source of inconsistency for the performance evaluation
bottom line. For example, if the extent of mixing or mixing efﬁciency decided
as a base is shifted from 70% with respect to the fully mixed composition to
a 90% value, the resulting mixing time for a diffusion-driven channel mixer
could easily be tripled. Furthermore, the mixing time may have a different
signiﬁcance depending on the mixer function for a given application. For
example, if kinetic studies are the object (e.g., as in Knight et al.16 and Bringer
et al.82), where local very rapid mixing is required for very small volumes,
the mixing time would be the time required to attain the desired mixing
efﬁciency for the desired small volume locally, measured from the moment
the compounds come in contact. For a batch-production micromixer as
needed for a PCR1,2,86 or LDR3 application, the mixing time is that required
for the production of a speciﬁed batch volume mixed to the desired extent.
The difference between these two applications is subtle but important in
deﬁning this very important metric. So, in evaluating micromixing solutions,
consistency in the deﬁnition of performance metrics and target values as
they pertain to a speciﬁc application class is very important in deciding
which solution is best suited for the application needs.
One of the primary performance metrics, which as pointed out above
relates to others, is one that indicates the extent of mixing or mixing efﬁ-
ciency. While there are various ways in which this has been deﬁned in the
literature, we will introduce one of the more popular deﬁnitions as intro-
duced by Erickson and Li51 and is given in Equation 7.1:
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
193
(7.1)
where Ae is the area of the exit, or a relevant segment of it; Ai is the area of
the inlet of the mixing region; c is the local value of the concentration; ci is the
concentration of the the ith incoming stream inside the mixing channel; and c∞
is the mixture steady-state concentration. This deﬁnition of efﬁciency is most
adequate when applied locally. For a batch or continuous production micro-
mixer, what really matters is the rate at which the mixed product is produced
at the delivery end of the mixer. Thus, for such mixers, it is important to
evaluate the mixing efﬁciencies in terms of mass ﬂuxes instead of concentra-
tions. This is necessary because it is possible to have two different mixers with
the same inlet conditions and exit average concentrations, yet with different
velocity proﬁles across the exit. In such cases, these mixers will produce mixed
product at different rates depending on the distribution of the concentration
relative to the distribution of the velocity. Therefore, it would be more appro-
priate to evaluate the mixing efﬁciency on the basis of the following deﬁnition
introduced by Maha et al.23:
(7.2)
where U and r are the local velocity and density, respectively, of the mixture,
and Ui and ri are the velocity and density of the ﬂuid of the ith layer. Both of
these deﬁnitions can obviously be easily used in numerical simulations of micro-
mixers. The same is not true when carrying out experimental performance
evaluations of micromixers, especially if three-dimensional effects are involved.
The ﬁrst one can be implemented in an experiment at steady state, or nearly so,
16 
36) to
conduct the evaluation. If three-dimensional effects are not strong, then line-of-
sight averaging observations, such as those obtained from standard ﬂuorescence
microscopy, can also be validly used by replacing the area average in Equation
7.1 by a line average.38 The deﬁnition of Equation 7.2 also requires velocity
measurement over the mixer cross-section, which is a more challenging propo-
sition. The differences between the deﬁnition of Equation 7.1 and Equation 7.2
are discussed for diffusion-driven, passive mixers of various types in Maha et
al.23,24
are observed, which, as expected, are gradually eliminated as the mixture
ε =
−
−
−












∞
∞
∫
∫
∑
1
c
c
dA
c
c
dA
A
i
A
i
e
i
η
ρ
ρ
=
−
−
−












∞
∞
∫
∫
∑
1
U c
c
dA
U c
c
dA
A
i
i
i
A
i
e
i
 and illustrated in Figure 7.3. Differences on the order of 5 percentage points
if confocal microscopy is used (see, e.g., Knight et al. and Stroock et al.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

194
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
approaches a fully mixed state. Such differences can be more substantial in
mixers with either passively or actively induced secondary ﬂows. In the case of
diffusion-driven mixing discussed here, the use of the deﬁnition of Equation 7.1
provides conservative estimates (see Figure 7.3), and thus lends credibility to
experimental evaluations of such mixers, which have made use of it.
The above deﬁnitions are given for steady ﬂows but also apply for unsteady
ﬂows with the understanding that the integrals would then be over time as
well as area elements. In the case of unsteady ﬂows, an efﬁciency in terms of
time-averaged quantities would not be sufﬁcient and a measure of the second
moment, for example of the concentration, would also be necessary to reﬂect
the intensity of the ﬂuctuations about the time-averaged values.
When the appropriate deﬁnition of mixing efﬁciency is used, and subject
to the speciﬁc requirement regarding its value, the mixing time (also appro-
priately deﬁned for the application as mentioned previously), the pressure
drop and the volume of the device are important metrics of performance
for a microscale mixer. Of these, only the ﬁrst is speciﬁc to the micromixer,
while the other two are, in general, metrics of performance for any micro-
ﬂuidic device. The pressure drop in combination with the volumetric ﬂow
rate of the ﬂuid in the device reﬂects on the magnitude of the power required
to drive the ﬂow in the device, and it is speciﬁc to pressure-driven, micro-
ﬂuidic chips. In the laminar microﬂuidic environment, the pressure drop
along a microchannel is a linear function of the volumetric ﬂow rate, and
thus the power requirement is in general quadratic with ﬂow rate. A large
variety of microﬂuidic devices and microscale mixers are driven electroki-
netically. In this case, the power input to drive the device is electrical with
the applied potential (voltage) difference and the electrical current drawn
determining its magnitude. Theoretically, the magnitude of the required
voltage to sustain a desired mean velocity of ﬂuid or charged species is
proportional to the length of the channel, just like pressure drop is in
pressure-driven ﬂows. So, long channels in electrokinetically driven ﬂow
FIGURE 7.3
Comparison of two mixing efﬁciency deﬁnitions obtained through numerical simulations in a
standard Y-junction microchannel mixer at 1:1 volumetric ﬂow rate ratio. (Adapted from Maha,
A. et al., Proceedings of SPIE, 2004, 5345, 183–193.)
Y-mixer (η)
Y-mixer (ε)
Z (µm)
ε, η (%)
0
5000
10000
15000
0
20
40
60
80
100
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
195
translate into high voltages, which are undesirable, just as high pressures
are in pressure-driven ﬂow.
Other metrics of signiﬁcant practical relevance are manufacturing and oper-
ational complexity, which ultimately translate to cost, biocompatibility of mate-
rials and process residuals, shelf life (particularly when surface treatments are
applied), potential of clogging during operation, and integrability. The last one
is important because micromixers are more likely to be needed as an integral
part of a microﬂuidic biochip, whose primary function is other than mixing,
and ought to be designed with that in mind. Some of these practically impor-
tant attributes understandably tend to be overlooked in individual scientiﬁc
articles in terms of detailed and comparative assessment. Naturally it is up to
the designer and the user to decide what tradeoffs to accept.
In addition to high efﬁciency, minimal mixing time, low pressure loss, and
small volume, it is obviously desirable that the microscale mixer of choice
involve a low level of manufacturing complexity, low manufacturing cost, easy
mass production, excellent biocompatibility of materials used, and a point-and-
shoot operational complexity with low fowling propensity. Many of these
attributes are coupled and their tolerated levels are application dependent. In
general, simplicity in the manufacturing process implies low cost. So, when
evaluating mixer concepts for integrated devices, multistep or multilayer pro-
cesses and associated alignment and assembly are less desirable. This criterion
often places active devices in a dimmer light because these require in general
more complex manufacturing processes as well as additional excitation input,
even though in many cases other performance metrics are substantially
improved. The same can be said for passive mixers requiring multilevel man-
ufacturing processes. Because of these and other similar considerations, it
would be useful if a baseline of a readily feasible and simple micromixer could
be established against which other more complex ones can be compared and
put in perspective. This could facilitate both the designer and the user in
deciding if added complexity is warranted. Few will argue that a microchan-
nel-based, diffusion-driven mixer is one of the simplest. In the following sec-
tion, an easy-to-use design and optimization procedure will be given for such
a mixer with batch production speciﬁcally in mind. Although a pressure-
driven mixer will be considered, extension to an electroosmotically driven one
can be easily made. A somewhat more general case will be considered involv-
ing multiple layers of ﬂuids to be mixed and an assessment of the inﬂuence
of design parameters on performance will be made.
7.7
Design Methodology for Optimal Diffusion-Based 
Micromixers for Batch Production Applications
As discussed in previous sections, if batch delivery of mixed product is
required at the outlet port of the mixer, the relevant mixture production time
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

196
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
is not the raw diffusion time but the time it takes for the mixer to deliver
the required volume of ﬂuid and is still measured from the moment the
constituents come in contact with each other. It should be noted that there
might be time overhead associated with the delivery of the mixture constit-
uents to the point of contact, and in a batch delivery micromixer it ought to
be taken into account. Although this time overhead could be inﬂuenced by
the particular microscale mixer design, it is reasonable not to include it in
the tally because it may be constrained by other aspects of the microﬂuidic
chip functionality and the macro–micro interface.
So, for a simple two-compound, batch delivery, microscale mixer consist-
ing of a channel with a width, w, height, H, and length, L, (see Figure 7.4)
the estimate of the mixture production time, tM, will have two contributions.
One is 
, the diffusion time associated with an appropriate diffu-
sion length, δD, and the other is the time, tP, required to produce the desired
volume, V, of mixture. The latter is then dictated by the total volumetric ﬂow
rate, Q, since 
. Thus the estimate of the mixture production time is:
(7.3)
In a microchannel mixer where two or more alternating ﬂow stream layers
are introduced into the mixing channel by means of tributary channels, such
as in Knight et al.16 (3 tributaries or layers), Hibara et al.18 (2 and 3 tributaries
or layers), or Floyd et al.22 (10 tributaries or layers), the relevant diffusion
length is a fraction of the total width of the mixer channel and also depends
on the ﬂow rate of each merging stream. In general, it is safe to select
, where wsmax, is the width of the widest internal stream layer
or twice the width of the widest wall-bounded layer, whichever two is
largest. Consequently, the estimate of the mixture production time becomes:
,
(7.4)
where 
 is deﬁned as the diffusion width fraction.
FIGURE 7.4
Two-layer mixing channel.
Q1
H
L
W
Q2
Q
t
D
D
D
= δ2
12
t
V Q
P =
t
t
t
D
V
Q
w
w
D
V
Q
M
D
P
D
D
=
+
=
+
= 



+
δ
δ
2
12
2
2
12
δD
s
w
=
max 2
t
w
D
V
Q
M =
+
1
4
2
2
12
φ
φ = w
w
smax
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
197
The constituents must be fully mixed by the time they reach the exit of the
mixing channel, therefore the diffusion time, tD, together with the volumetric
ﬂow rate, Q, deﬁne the estimate of the necessary length of the mixer channel:
,
(7.5)
where AR is the channel aspect ratio deﬁned as the ratio of its height (depth)
over its width, AR = H/w. In terms of the mixer application here, we will
operate under the premise that the layers of the ﬂuids are parallel to the
height (depth) of the channel. In general, the aspect ratio is going to be
viewed as the ratio of the rectangular channel cross-section dimension in a
direction parallel to the mixed ﬂuids layer, over the dimension normal to
It is worth pointing out that wsmax is not necessarily the geometrical width
of a tributary channel. In fact, the widths of the tributary channels are
relatively irrelevant, as is the average velocity of the ﬂuids in these tributar-
ies. If the ﬂow is steady and laminar, the initial widths of ﬂuid streams in
the mixing channel are solely determined by the ﬂow rates in the tributaries.
This is so for two reasons. The ﬁrst has to do with the fact that in most cases
of pressure-driven microﬂuidic devices, the ﬂow Reynolds number is low
and the ﬂows are laminar without instabilities. For low Reynolds numbers
where viscosity is a dominant or at least a signiﬁcant factor, momentum
discontinuities, such as those created when streams from tributary channels
merge into one, are smoothed out fairly quickly, that is, the length over which
the resulting ﬂow assumes a fully developed velocity proﬁle (known as the
entrance or development length) is short. For example, in the case of ﬂow
entering a tube with an initially uniform (or nearly so) velocity proﬁle, the
87) to be, to a very good approximation,
0.06ReDh, with, Dh, the hydraulic diameter deﬁned as 
, where A,
is the channel cross-sectional area and P the wetted perimeter. Thus, it is
evident that for modest Reynolds numbers (say less than 10) the entrance
length is a fraction of the hydraulic diameter, or by extension, any length
scale associated with the cross-section of the channel. The second reason has
to do with the fact that mass diffusion in the applications of interest here is
substantially lower than momentum diffusion as reﬂected by the Schmidt
number, 
, which is usually on the order of 103 to 105. This means
that momentum discontinuities are smoothed out by molecular action much
faster than concentration discontinuities. Thus in steady laminar ﬂow, the
ﬂow of multiple merging streams fed into a single channel by tributaries
becomes fully developed while the ﬂuid streams themselves are for all prac-
tical purposes still unmixed. Therefore, the widths of the various streams in
the mixing channel are determined by the initial ﬂow rate of each distinct
L
t
Q
Hw
D
Q
Hw
w
Q
AR D
Q
AR D
D
D
D
=
=
= 



=
δ
δ
φ
2
12
2
12
2
1
4
12
D
A P
h = 4
Sc
D
= ν
12
the ﬂuid layers as portrayed in Figure 7.4.
ﬂuid in the original tributary. This fact is simply illustrated in Figure 7.5,
entrance length is known (see White
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

198
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
where the merging of two aqueous solution streams (blue and red) originat-
ing from tributary channels of unequal widths, with unequal average veloc-
ities but equal ﬂow rates, merge into a single channel. It is evident in Figure
7.5 that in spite of the initially different average velocities and tributary
channel widths, the width of each ﬂuid stream in the mixing channel after
the development region is equal to one-half of the mixing channel width as
dictated by the equality of the merging stream ﬂow rates and the symmetry
of the velocity proﬁle for fully developed laminar ﬂow in a rectangular duct.
It can also be seen that the ﬂow development length is a fraction of the
mixing channel width and that the interface between streams is still relatively
sharp by the end of the ﬂow development region.
This illustration assumes that the ﬂuids mixed have equal viscosities and
densities, which is approximately the case in many bioanalytical applica-
tions utilizing dilute aqueous solutions. If the ﬂuids mixed have disparate
properties, the above illustration and the estimates that will follow can still
be made, but the applicable solutions are somewhat more complicated. The
above observation facilitates the estimation of the value of, φ, which is
necessary for the design of a multistream or multilayer, diffusion-driven,
microchannel mixer. For a two-stream or two-layer mixer with the constit-
uents fed at equal ﬂow rates, the value of φ is obviously unity and corre-
sponds to the optimum operating point of this type of mixer in terms of the
proportion between the incoming ﬂow rates, which is 1:1. Any other pro-
portion would increase φ and by virtue of Equation 7.4 and Equation 7.5
would also increase the mixture production time and mixing channel length,
respectively. This indicates that in order to attain optimum performance, a
layered mixer must be operated at ﬂow rates with speciﬁc proportions. For
multistream layered mixers that mix two ﬂuids, A and B, it is easy to see
that in order to best exploit the reduction of the diffusion length through
layering, the minimum value of φ must be 
, where n is the
number of layers. The ratio of volumetric ﬂow rates of the two compounds
can then be written as
FIGURE 7.5
Merging of two streams of miscible ﬂuids in a mixing channel 42.5 µm wide and 150 µm high.
The upper ﬂuid channel has an entrance width of 25, while the lower ﬂuid channel has a 12.5-
µm entrance width. The ﬂow rate of each stream is equal to 37.5 nL/s. The binary mass diffusion
coefﬁcient is D12 = 1.2 10–10 m2/s, the Schmidt number is Sc = 8300 and the Reynolds number
in the mixing channel is Re = 0.78.
X (µm)
0
–10
0
10
20
φmin
(
)
=
−
1
1
n
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
199
,
(7.6)
where the even-indexed ﬂow rates are of ﬂuid A and the odd-indexed ones
of ﬂuid B. The magnitude of each ﬂow rate, Qk, of layer k must be appro-
priate in order for the thickness of the layer to be equal to the optimum
value, φmin = 1/(n – 1), if the layer is not wall-bound and φmin /2= 1/2(n – 1),
if the layer is wall-bound. Also, because of the symmetry of the velocity
proﬁle in the channel, it is obvious that if the number of tributaries feeding
the mixing channel is even, the optimum ﬂow rate ratio will always be
ψo2k = 1. For an odd number of tributaries (and layers) the ﬂow rate ratio is
going to be a function of the channel aspect ratio ψo2k–1(AR). The optimum
individual ﬂow rates and ﬂow rate ratio can be estimated using the semi-
analytical theoretical solution for laminar ﬂow in rectangular channels (e.g.,
89). In order to facilitate the design of multistream channel-based
diffusional mixers, the dependence of the optimum ﬂow rate ratio, ψo, on
the channel aspect ratio for various multistream or multilayer microchannel
mixers is shown in Figure 7.6. As the number of streams is increased, the
sensitivity of ψo to aspect ratio is reduced and its value moves toward unity.
Starting at modest channel aspect ratios, ψo approaches an almost ﬁxed
value. For a 3-layer mixer, which has appeared frequently in the literature,
the optimum value of ψo for channels with aspect ratios 3 and above is
approximately 2.2.
Also as a design aid, tabulated values of the individual stream ﬂow rates,
FIGURE 7.6
Flow rate ratios for optimum performance of some multistream layer microchannel mixers as
function of channel aspect ratio. For an even number of streams or layers ψo = 1.
ψ n
A
B
j
j
even
i
i
odd
Q
Q
Q
Q
=
= ∑
∑
2
1.5
1
10–2
10–1
100
101
AR
Ψo
Ψ1 3-layer
Ψ5 5-layer
Ψ7 7-layer
Ψ9 9-layer
as percentages of the total produced mixture ﬂow rate, are given in Table
7.1 for 3-, 4-, and 5-layer channel mixers and for various channel aspect
see White
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

200
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
ratios. The aspect-ratio dependence of these ﬂow rates is also weakened at
higher aspect ratios.
These theoretical optimum volumetric ﬂow-rate proportions for various
multistream and multilayer microchannel mixers are needed for the appro-
priate selection and design of such devices for a given application. As men-
tioned previously, in order to complete the design of a diffusion-driven
micromixer of this type, one needs to also specify its dimensions, the oper-
ating ﬂow rate, and the pressure drop. There are two ways to approach the
design issue:
1. Determine a design that will produce the desired volume, V, with a
minimum mixture production time for a speciﬁed acceptable pres-
sure loss in the device, or
2. Determine a design that will produce the desired volume, V, while
incurring a minimum pressure loss for a speciﬁed acceptable mixture
production time.
Equation 7.4 and Equation 7.5 provide the simple basis for identifying the
appropriate design together with the relationship between pressure loss
TABLE 7.1
Individual Stream or Layer Volumetric Flow Rates in % of Total Mixture Volumetric 
Flow Rate for Optimum Performance of Some Multistream Layer Microchannel 
Mixers and Their Dependence on Channel Aspect Ratio
Type
ψo
AR
Q1(%)
Q2(%)
Q3(%)
Q4(%)
Q5(%)
3-layer
1.14
1/10
23.3
53.4
23.3
N/A
N/A
1.41
1/4
20.7
58.5
20.7
N/A
N/A
1.76
1/2
18.1
63.8
18.1
N/A
N/A
2.03
1
16.5
67
16.5
N/A
N/A
2.14
2
15.9
68.1
15.9
N/A
N/A
2.18
4
15.7
68.5
15.7
N/A
N/A
2.19
10
15.7
68.7
15.7
N/A
N/A
4-layer
1.00
1/10
14.4
35.6
35.6
14.4
N/A
1.00
1/4
11.6
38.4
38.4
11.6
N/A
1.00
1/2
9.3
40.7
40.7
9.3
N/A
1.00
1
8.1
41.9
41.9
8.1
N/A
1.00
2
7.6
42.4
42.4
7.6
N/A
1.00
4
7.5
42.5
42.5
7.5
N/A
1.00
10
7.4
42.6
42.6
7.4
N/A
5-layer
1.14
1/10
10
26.6
26.7
26.6
10
1.25
1/4
7.4
27.8
29.5
27.8
7.4
1.26
1/2
5.7
27.8
33
27.8
5.7
1.23
1
4.8
27.5
35.4
27.5
4.8
1.21
2
4.5
27.4
36.3
27.4
4.5
1.21
4
4.4
27.4
36.5
27.4
4.4
1.21
10
4.3
27.4
36.6
27.4
4.3
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
201
(–∆p) and total mixture ﬂow rate, Q, for the ﬂow in the mixing channel. This
relationship can be simply expressed as:
,
(7.7)
where g(AR) is a function of the aspect ratio alone.
In order to cast the analysis in a more general context, it is useful to identify
the relevant scales for all the variables. These are given in Table 7.2.
In the pressure scale, ρ is the density of the ﬂuid(s). The length scale can
be viewed as the side of a cube whose volume is the desired mixture volume
while the time scale represents the order of magnitude of the diffusion time
necessary to mix statically in a cubic chamber with the prescribed volume.
For example, if the volume of an aqueous mixture is 10 nL and the binary
mass diffusion coefﬁcient of the compounds is on the order of 10–10 m2/s,
the length scale would be 215 µm and the time scale 464 s. The diffusive
time scale is actually one quarter of this. The scales for the volumetric ﬂow
rate and pressure would be 21.5 pL and 0.02 Pa, respectively.
Applying this scaling to Equation 7.4, Equation 7.5, and Equation 7.7 and
eliminating the mixing length, L, from the last one we obtain:
(7.8)
(7.9)
(7.10)
TABLE 7.2
Deﬁnition of Scales
Quantity
Scale
Length
Time
Volumetric Flow Rate
Pressure
Q
p w
L
g AR
M
=
−(
)
∆
4
12
µ
(
)
t
w
Q
M =
+
φ2
2
4
1
L
Q
AR
= 1
4
2
φ
Q
Sc
p w
AR g AR
2
4
2
3
=
−(
)
∆
φ
(
)
V
3
V
D
2
3
12
D
V
12
3
ρ ν
(
)
V
3
2
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

202
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The optimization condition that satisﬁes both approaches (1 and 2) above is:
(7.11)
In physical terms, this states that the optimum mixer design and operating
point is that for which the diffusion time is equal to the production time.
This applies for both possible usages where either the mixture is delivered
to an interconnected module (e.g., incubator, thermocycler, etc.) or that for
which the mixing channel itself also accommodates the next process (e.g.,
incubation, thermocycling, etc.). The latter usage, when applicable, substan-
tially reduces the volume of the microﬂuidic chip, which is highly desirable.
The volume for the optimum mixing channel is identical with the volume
of mixture desired. If the mixer is not operated at the optimum volumetric
ﬂow ratio and stream volumetric ﬂow rate proportions, the factor φ will be
other than the ideal one (1/(n-1)) and can be estimated from the chosen values
of these operational parameters. Based on the above optimum condition
(Equation 7.11) and Equation 7.8, Equation 7.9, and Equation 7.10, one can
calculate all geometric (wo, Lo) and operational (Qo, tMo or [–∆po]) parameters
for the multilayer, batch production, microchannel diffusion mixer for an
aspect ratio of choice.
Summarizing at this point, the reader is reminded that there are optimum
choices to be made on two levels:
1. in terms of the optimum volumetric ﬂow rate ratio(s), and then
2. in terms of the geometry and the other operational parameters.
As an example, results are presented as a design guide here for the popular
3-layer mixer (Ψ-junction or cross-junction), including off-optimum opera-
tion in terms of volumetric ﬂow rate ratio(s) in the range of 0.1<Ψ<10. The
so that the effect of the aspect ratio is scaled out for AR ≥ 0.5, as evidenced
by the almost common trend for all aspect ratios for which results are shown.
Results for AR = 0.1 are also included in each ﬁgure to illustrate that this
scaling does not hold as one moves to lower aspect ratios. Subject to this
constraint, the effect of the aspect ratio is carried by the factor, fAR, which
can be looked up from Figure 7.11. Then, for a chosen channel aspect ratio,
Figure 7.7 can be used to determine the optimum (minimum) mixture pro-
duction time in case of approach (1) or the optimum (minimum) mixer
pressure loss in case of approach (1). Having done that, one can use the
remaining ﬁgures to determine the corresponding length of the mixing chan-
nel, Lo, from Figure 7.8, the appropriate mixture ﬂow rate, Qo, from Figure
7.9, and the appropriate mixing channel width, wo, from Figure 7.10. The
Q
w
=
4
2
2
φ
optimum mixer parameters can be read from the series of Figures 7.7, 7.8,
7.9, and 7.10, with the aid of Figures 7.11 and 7.6. The former have been built
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
203
physical values of these variables are obtained by reversing the scaling, using
In terms of the optimum mixture production time, Figure 7.7 indicates that
the departure from optimum performance caused by a nonoptimum value
of the volumetric ﬂow rate ratio, ψ, is less signiﬁcant if this value is larger
than the optimum one. This corresponds to a higher ﬂow rate than optimum
for the middle stream of the 3-layer mixer, and it is so because the ﬂow
velocities are higher in the core of the cross-section and an increase in ﬂow
rate does not cause as strong a change in the width of the stream. The
signiﬁcant effect of the aspect ratio is illustrated if we consider the variation
of the factor, fAR. To put it in perspective, one is reminded that most micro-
mixers in the literature are demonstrated in channels with low aspect ratios,
very often less than 0.5. This is so because the overwhelming majority of the
FIGURE 7.7
Scaled optimum mixture production time as a function of the ﬂow rate ratio for the cross-
junction or Ψ-junction (3 tributaries) microchannel mixer.
FIGURE 7.8
Scaled optimum mixing-channel length as a function of the ﬂow rate ratio for the cross-junction
or Ψ-junction (3 tributaries) microchannel mixer.
AR = 0.1 
AR = 0.5 
AR = 1 
AR = 2 
AR = 20 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
tMofAR (–ΔpoSc)1/4
ψ/ψo
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
AR = 0.1 
AR = 0.5 
AR = 1 
AR = 2 
AR = 20 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
0.25 
LofAR (–ΔpoSc)–1/4
ψ/ψo
0.3 
0.35 
–1 
the scales in Table 7.2.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

204
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
mixers in the literature that are manufactured on a single wafer, and most
of those manufactured with multiple wafers, have been realized using either
silicon and glass technology or soft lithography and PDMS. Neither of these
easily accommodates high aspect ratios, while other polymer-based technol-
ogies do. So, at the reference aspect ratio value of 0.5, fAR is approximately
0.5. In contrast, the value of fAR corresponding to an aspect ratio of 8 is
production time can be reduced by more than half an order of magnitude
simply by moving to a higher channel aspect ratio. The value of aspect ratio
8 for this comparison was chosen because it has been used in a multilayer
mixer manufactured in silicon using DRIE.22 For applications where the
pressure loss is the critical factor rather than the mixture production time,
the advantage of using high-aspect-ratio channels is more spectacular
FIGURE 7.9
Scaled optimum operating volumetric ﬂow rate as a function of the ﬂow rate ratio for the cross-
junction or Ψ-junction (3 tributaries) microchannel mixer.
FIGURE 7.10
Scaled optimum mixing-channel width as a function of the ﬂow rate ratio for the cross-junction
or Ψ-junction (3 tributaries) microchannel mixer.
AR = 0.1
AR = 0.5
AR = 1
AR = 2
AR = 20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1.5
QOfAR (–∆poSc)−1/4
ψ/ψo
3
2.5
2
4.5
4
3.5
–1
AR = 0.1
AR = 0.5
AR = 1
AR = 2
AR = 20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1.6
ψ/ψo
1.7
2
1.8
1.9
WOfAR (–∆poSc)1/8
1/2
approximately 2.75 (see Figure 7.11). This indicates that the optimum mixture
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
205
optimum solution decreases with a factor fAR
4
So, in terms of the previous example, the optimum mixer realized in a readily
achievable channel of aspect ratio 8 involves a pressure loss that is three
orders of magnitude lower than that corresponding to the equivalent opti-
mum mixer realized in a channel of aspect ratio 0.5.
Although higher aspect ratios (as high as 50) are possible in silicon, based
on the depths achieved through DRIE at channel widths as small as 5 µm
(see, for example, McAuley et al.88). In polymers such as polymethyl-
methacrylate (PMMA), polycarbonate (PC), or cyclo-oleﬁn-copolymer
(COC), even higher aspect ratios can be achieved via LIGA at widths of order
10 to 15 at widths of order 10 mm are routinely achievable using either LIGA,
24) in poly-
mers. Therefore, the improvements from the use of high-aspect-ratio chan-
nels can be signiﬁcantly more substantial than the above example indicates.
To better illustrate the beneﬁts of using high-aspect-ratio microchannels in
diffusion-driven mixers, some representative estimates of parameters are
present capabilities with presently available micromanufacturing technolo-
gies. One observation that can be made by looking at these numbers is that
there is a point of diminishing returns in terms of the potential beneﬁts of
increasing the channel aspect ratio, which is indicated by the trend of the
factor, fAR, in Figure 7.11, which at high aspect ratio values increases only
with the square root of this parameter. It should also be noted that these
estimates are based on simple theory and are probably conservative in terms
of mixture production time or pressure loss because the implicit assumption
was that mixing is “complete.” In practice, an acceptable mixing efﬁciency
for most applications can be 90% and the values of these parameters would
FIGURE 7.11
Aspect ratio factor based on analytical solution for laminar ﬂow in channels of rectangular
cross-section (White89).
fAR
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
0
fAR
AR
3
1.5
0.5
1
4
3.5
2.5
2
given in Table 7.3 with the highest aspect ratios chosen to be well within
 as the aspect ratio is increased.
because, as seen in the abscissa of Figure 7.7, the pressure loss for the
10 µm (see Chapter 3 by J. Goettert in this book), while aspect ratios of order
UV-LIGA, or micromilling with hot embossing (see Maha et al.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

206
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
be lower than those indicated by this simple calculation. It should be noted
that the simple methodology used here ignores three-dimensional effects and
related local Peclet number variations. Therefore, quantitative results may
be less than accurate when strong three-dimensional effects are present (e.g.,
in the mixing channel entrance region). Nevertheless, the methodology is
adequate for ﬁrst “back-of-the-envelope” estimates.
The three-stream layer, channel-based, diffusion-driven, two-ﬂuid, micro-
mixer, the optimum design of which was addressed here as an example, is
the simplest possible conﬁguration that can be realized on a single wafer (be
it silicon, glass, or polymer) with two inlets and one outlet. If it is manufac-
tured taking advantage of state-of-the-art capabilities in combining high
aspect ratios and reduced channel width, it can perform signiﬁcantly well
in terms of mixture production time and/or pressure losses for batch mixture
production. It can be considered as a baseline to assess the relative beneﬁts
of using more complex passive or active designs. Furthermore, many passive
and active schemes applied to microchannels are also applicable at high
aspect ratios, in which case the baseline optimum performance can naturally
be improved. The methodology presented here can also be easily extended
to electroosmotically driven micromixers of the same type as the pressure
driven one dealt with herein.
References
1. Hashimoto, M., Chen, P.-C., Mitchell, M.W., Nikitopoulos, D.E., Soper, S.A.,
and Murphy, M.C., 2004, Rapid PCR in a continuous ﬂow device, Lab on a Chip,
4(6), 638–645.
2. Chen, J., Wabuyele, M., Chen, H., Patterson, D., Hupert, M., Shadpour, H.,
Nikitopoulos, D. E., and Soper, S.A., 2005, Electrokinetically synchronized poly-
merase chain reaction microchip fabricated in polycarbonate, Journal of Analyt-
ical Chemistry, 77, 658–666.
TABLE 7.3
Various Theoretical Optimal 3-Stream Layer Mixer Geometries and Operating 
Conditions
#
V
(nL)
AR
–Dp
(kPa)
tM
(s)
w
(mm)
L
(mm)
Q
(nL/s)
1
50
15
10
0.42
20
8.4
240
2
50
10
10
0.51
22
10.2
195
3
50
6
10
0.67
25
13
149
4
50
2
10
1.24
34
21
81
5
50
1
10
1.98
43
26
51
6
50
0.5
10
3.5
58
30
29
7
50
0.2
10
8.2
89
32
12
8
50
10
4.5 10–3
3.5
58
1.5
28
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
207
3. Barrett, D.O., Maha, A., Wang, Y., Soper, S.A., Nikitopoulos, D.E., and Murphy,
M.C., 2004, Design of a microfabricated device for the Ligase detection reaction
(LDR), Paper IMECE2004-62111, ASME International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and RD&D Expo.
4. Wong, S. H., Ward, M.C.L., and Wharton, C.W., 2004, Micro T-mixer as a rapid
mixing micromixer, Sensors Actuators B, 100, 365–385.
5. Nguyen, N.-T. and Wu, Z., 2005, Micromixers—a review, Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microengineering, 15, R1–R16.
6. Aref, H., 1984, Stirring by chaotic advection, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 143,
1–21.
7. Ottino, J. M., 1989, The Kinematics of Mixing: Stretching, Chaos, and Transport,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
8. Streamler, M.A., Haselton, F.R., and Aref, H., 2004, Designing for chaos: appli-
cations of chaotic advection at the microscale, Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London A, 362, 1019–1036.
9. Chung, Y.C., Hsu, Y.L., Jen, C.P., Lu, M.C., and Lin, Y.C., 2004, Design of passive
mixers utilizing microﬂuidic self-circulation in the mixing chamber, Lab on a
Chip, 4(1), 70–77.
10. Campbell, C.J. and Grzybowski, B.A., 2003, Microﬂuidic mixers: from micro-
fabricated to self-assembling devices, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety of London A, 362, 1069–1086.
11. Hardt, S., Drese, K.S., Hesse, V., and Schönfeld, F., 2005, Review: passive mi-
cromixers for applications in the microreactor and µTAS ﬁelds, Microﬂuidics
and Nanoﬂuidics, 1(2), 108–118.
12. Regenfuss, P., Clegg, R.M., Fulwyler, M.J., Barrantes, F.J., and Jovin, T.M., 1985,
Mixing liquids in microseconds, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 56, 283–290.
13. Shastry, M.C.R., Luck, S.D., and Roder, H., 1998, A continuous-ﬂow capillary
Mixing method to monitor reactions on the microsecond time scale, Biophysical
Journal, 74, 2714–2721.
14. Schwesinger, N., Frank, T., and Wurmus, H., 1996, A modular microﬂuid sys-
tem with an integrated micromixer, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineer-
ing, 6, 99–102.
15. Mahe, C., Tranchant, J.F., Tromeur, M., and Schwesinger, N., 2003, Emulsions
on demand using microstructured devices, Proceedings of SPIE, 4982, 290–296.
16. Knight, J.B., Vishwanath A., Brody, J.P., and Austin, R.H., 1998, Hydrodynamic
focusing on a silicon chip: mixing nanoliters in microseconds, Physical Review
Letters, 80(17), 3863–3866.
17. Pabit, A. and Hagen, S.J., 2002, Laminar-ﬂow ﬂuid mixer for fast ﬂuorescence
kinetics studies, Biophysical Journal, 83, 2872–2878.
18. Hibara, A., Tokesh, M., Uchiyama, K., Hasimoto, H., and Kitamori, T., 2001,
Integrated multilayer ﬂow system on a microchip, The Japan Society for Ana-
lytical Chemistry, Analytical Sciences, 17, 89–93.
19. Veenstra, T.T., Lammerink, T.S.J., Elwenspoek, M.C., and Berg, A.V.D., 1999, Char-
acterization method for a new diffusion mixer applicable in micro ﬂow injection
analysis systems, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 9, 199–202.
20. Wu, Z., Nguyen, N.T., and Huang, X.Y., 2004, Non-linear diffusive mixing in
microchannels: theory and experiments, Journal of Micromechanics and Mi-
croengineering, 14, 604–611.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

208
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
21. Gobby, D., Angeli, P., and Gavriilidis, A., 2001, Mixing characteristics of T-type
microﬂuidic mixers, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 11, 126–132.
22. Floyd, T.M., Schmidt, M.A., and Jensen, K.F., 2001, A silicon microchip for
infrared transmission kinetics studies of rapid homogeneous liquid reactions,
in Micro Total Analysis Systems, Ramsey, J.M. et al., Eds., 277–279.
23. Maha, A., Barrett, D.O., Nikitopoulos, D.E., Soper, S.A., and Murphy, M.C.,
Simulation and design of micro-mixers for microﬂuidic devices, Proceedings of
SPIE, 24–29 January 2004, San Jose, CA, Vol. 5345, 183–193.
24. Maha, A., 2005, Simulations and experimental analysis of high-aspect-ratio
diffusive micromixers, MSc thesis, Louisiana State University.
25. Holden, M., Kumar, S., and Castellana, E.T., 2003, Generating ﬁxed concentra-
tion arrays in a microﬂuidic device, Sensors and Actuators B, 92, 199–207.
26. Yang, R., Williams, J.D., and Wang, W., 2004, A rapid micro-mixer/reactor
based on arrays of spatially impinging micro-jets, Journal of Micromechanics and.
Microengineering, 14, 1345–1351.
27. Kamidate, T., Kaide, T., Tani, H., Makino, E., and Shibata, T., 2001, Effect of
mixing modes on chemiluminiscent detection of epinephrine with lucigenin
by an FIA system fabricated on a microchip, Analytical Sciences, 17, 951–955.
28. Pathak, J.A., Ross, D., and Migler, K.B., 2004, Elastic ﬂow instability, curved
streamlines, and mixing in microﬂuidic ﬂows, Physics of Fluids, 16(11),
4028–4034.
29. Jeon, N.L., Dertinger, S.K.W., Chiu, D.T., Choi, I.S., Stroock, A.D., and White-
sides, G.M., 2000, Generation of solution and surface gradients using microf-
luidic systems, Langmuir, 16, 8311–8316.
30. Lin, F., Saadi, W., Rhee, S.W., Wang, S-J, Mittal, S., and Jeon, N.L., 2004, Gen-
eration of dynamic temporal and spatial concentration gradients using microf-
luidic devices, Lab on a Chip, 4, 164–167.
31. Mengeaud, V., Josserand, J., and Girault, H., 2002, Mixing processes in a zigzag
microchannel: ﬁnite element simulations and optical study, Analytical Chemistry,
74, 4279–4286.
32. Hong, C.C., Choi, J.W., and Ahn, C. H., 2004, A novel in-plane microﬂuidic
mixer with modiﬁed Tesla structure, Lab on a Chip, 4, 109–113.
33. Liu, R.H., Stremler, M.A., Sharp, K.V., Olsen, M.G., Santiago, J.G., Adrian, R.J.,
Aref, H., and Beebe, D.J., 2000, Passive mixing in a three-dimensional serpen-
tine microchannel, Journal of Micro-Electromechanical Systems, 9(2), 190–197.
34. Park, S.J., Kim, J.K., Park, J., Chung, S., Chung, C. and Chang, J.K., 2004, Rapid
three-dimensional passive rotation micromixer using the breakup process, Jour-
nal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 14, 6–14.
35. Therriault, D., White, S.R., and Lewis, J.A., 2003, Chaotic mixing in three-
dimensional micro vascular networks fabricated by direct-write assembly, Na-
ture Materials, 2, 265–271.
36. Stroock, A.D., Dertinger, S.K.W., Ajdari, A., Mezic, I., Stone, H.A., and White-
sides, G.M., 2002, Chaotic mixer for microchannels, Science, 295, 647–651.
37. Johnson, T.J., Ross, D., and Lacascio, L.E., 2002, Rapid microﬂuidic mixing,
Analytical Chemistry, 74, 45–51.
38. Wang, H., Iovenitti, P., Harvey, E., and Masood, S., 2003, Numerical investiga-
tion of mixing in microchannels with patterned grooves, Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microengineering, 13, 801–808.
39. Liu, Y.Z., Kim, B.J., and Sung, H.J., 2004, Two-ﬂuid mixing in a microchannel,
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 25(6), 986–995.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
209
40. Wang, H., Iovenetti, P., Harvey, E. and Masood, S., 2002, Optimizing layout of
obstacles for enhanced mixing in microchannels, Smart Materials and Structures,
11, 662–667.
41. Lin, Y., Gerfen, G.J., Rousseau, D.L., and Yeh, S.R., 2003, Ultrafast microﬂuidic
mixer and freeze-quenching device, Analytical Chemistry, 75(20), 5381–5386.
42. Wong, S.H., Bryant, P., Ward, M.C.L., and Wharton, C., 2003, Investigation of
mixing in a cross-shaped micromixer with static mixing elements for reaction
kinetics studies, Sensors Actuators B, 95, 414–424.
43. Böhm, S., Greiner, K., Schlautmann, S., de Vries, S., and van den Berg, A., 2001,
A rapid vortex micromixer for studying high-speed chemical reactions, Pro-
ceedings Micro Total Analysis Systems (µTAS), 25–27.
44. Lin, C-H, Tsai, C-H, Fu, L-M, 2005, A rapid three-dimensional vortex micro-
mixer utilizing self-rotating effects under low Reynolds number conditions,
Journal of Micromechanics and. Microengineering, 15, 935–943.
45. Voldman, J., Gray, M.L., and Schmidt, M.A., 2000, An integrated liquid mixer/
valve, Journal of Micro-Electromechanical Systems, 9(3), 295–302.
46. He, B., Burke, B.J., Zhang, X., Zhang, R., and Regnier, F.E., 2001, A picoliter-
volume mixer for microﬂuidic analytical systems, Analytical Chemistry, 73(9),
1942–1947.
47. Yager, P., Holl, M.R., Kamholz, A., Cabrera, C., and Macounova, K., 2002, Meso-
and microﬂuidic continuous ﬂow and stopped ﬂow electroosmotic mixer, U.S.
Patent No. US6,482,306B1.
48. Rani, S. and Nikitopoulos, D.E., 2006, Numerical simulation of electroosmoti-
cally driven chamber mixers, manuscript in progress.
49. Ajdari, A., 1995, Electro-osmosis on inhomogeneously charged surfaces, Phys-
ical Review Letters, 75, 755–758.
50. Stroock, A.D., Weck, M., Chiu, D.T., Huck, W.T.S., Kenis, P.J.A., Ismagilov, R.F.,
and Whitesides, G.M. 2000, Patterning electro-osmotic ﬂow with patterned
surface charge, Physical Review Letters, 84(15), 3314–3317.
51. Erickson, D. and Li, D., 2002, Inﬂuence of surface heterogeneity on electroki-
netically driven microﬂuidic mixing, Langmuir, 18, 1883–1892.
52. Qian, S. and Bau, H.H., 2002, A chaotic electroosmotic stirrer, Analytical Chem-
istry, 74, 3616–3625.
53. Hong, S., Thiffeault, J. L., Frechette, L., and Modi, V., 2003, Numerical study
of mixing in microchannels with patterned zeta potential surfaces, ASME Paper
IMECE2003-41912.
54. Wu, H-Y. and Liu, C-H., 2003, A novel electrokinetic micromixer, IEEE Trans-
ducers ’03, Proceedings 12th International Conference on Solid State Sensors,
Actuators and Microsystems, Boston.
55. Biddiss, E., Erickson, D., and Li, D., 2004, Heterogeneous surface charge en-
hanced micromixing for electrokinetic ﬂows, Analytical Chemistry, 76, 3208–3213.
56. Lin, H., Storey, B.D., Oddy, M.C., Chen, C-H., and Santiago, J., 2004, Instability
of electrokinetic ﬂows with conductivity gradients, Physics of Fluids, 16(6),
1922–1935.
57. Wilson, C.F., Wallace, M.I., Morishima K., Simpson, G.J., and Zare. R.N., 2002,
Coupled electrorotation of polymer microspheres for microﬂuidic sensing and
mixing, Analytical Chemistry, 74, 5099–5104.
58. Evans, J., Liepmann, D., and Pisano, A.P., 1997, Planar laminar mixer, Proceed-
ings IEEE 1997, 96–101.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

210
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
59. Volpert, M., Meinhart, C.D., Mezic, I., and Dahleh, M., 1999, An actively con-
trolled micromixer, Proceedings ASME International Mechanical Engineering Con-
gress & Exposition, Nashville, TN, 483–487.
60. Deshmukh, A.A., Liepmann, D., and Pisano, A.P., 2001, Characterization of a
micro-mixing, pumping, and valving system, Proceedings Transducers 2001, 11th
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Munich, Germany,
779–782.
61. Lee, Y.K., Deval, J., Tabeling, P., and Ho, C.H., 2001, Chaotic mixing in electro-
kinetically and pressure driven microﬂows, MEMS 2001 IEEE International
Conference, 483–486.
62. Lee, Y-K, 2002, Lyapunov exponents of a micro chaotic mixer, International
Journal of Nonlinear Sciences and Numerical Simulation, 3(3–4), 561–564.
63. Niu, X. and Lee, Y.K., 2003, Efﬁcient spatial-temporal chaotic mixing in micro-
channels, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 13, 454–462.
64. Glasgow, I. and Aubry, N., 2003, Enhancement of microﬂuidic mixing using
time pulsing, Lab on a Chip, 3, 114–120.
65. Tabeling, P., Chabert, M., Dodge, A., Jullien, C., and Okkels, F., 2004, Chaotic
mixing in cross-channel micromixers, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety of London A, 362, 987–1000.
66. Unger,  M.A.,  Chou,  H.P.,  Thorsen,  T.,  Scherer,  A.,  and Quake,  S.R., 2000,
Monolithic  microfabricated  valves  and  pumps  by multilayer  soft lithogra-
phy, Science, 288, 113–116.
67. Bottausci, F., Mezic, I., Meinhart, C.D., and Cardonne, C., 2004, Mixing in the
shear superposition micromixer: three-dimensional analysis, Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London A, 362, 1001–1018.
68. Oddy, M.H., Santiago, J.G., and Mikkelsen, J.C., 2001, Electrokinetic instability
micromixing, Analytical Chemistry, 73, 5822–5832.
69. El Moctar, A.O., Aubry, N., and Batton, J., 2003, Electro–hydrodynamic micro-
ﬂuidic mixer, Lab on a Chip, 3, 273–280.
70. Chen, H., Zhang, Y., Mezic, I., Meinhart, C., and Petzold, L., 2003, Numerical
simulation of  and electroosmotic micromixer, ASME Paper IMECE2003-55017.
71. Zhang, Y., Follman, D., Chen, H., Mezic, I., Meinhart, C., Petzold, L., and
McDonald, N. C., 2003, Design and fabrication of a ring electrokinetic chaotic
micromixer (RECM) with integrated electrodes, ASME Paper IMECE2003-
44005.
72. Shin, S.M., Kang, I.S., and Cho, Y.-K., 2005, Mixing enhancement by using
electrokinetic instability under time-periodic electric ﬁeld, Journal of Microme-
chanical Microengineering, 15, 455–462.
73. Solomon, T.H., Tomas S., and Warner, J.L., 1996, Role of lobes in chaotic mixing
of miscible and immiscible impurities, Physical Review Letters, 77(13), 2862–2865.
74. Suzuki, H. and Ho, C.M., 2002, A magnetic force driven chaotic micro-mixer,
IEEE MEMS 2002, 40–43.
75. Suzuki, H., Kasagi, N., and Ho, C.M., 2003, Chaotic mixing of magnetic beads
in micro cell separator, Proceedings of 3rd International Symposium of Turbulence
and Shear Flow Phenomena, 817–822.
76. Rida, A., Lehnert, T., and Gijs, M.A.M., 2003, Microﬂuidic mixer using magnetic
beads, 7th International Conference on Miniaturized Chemical and Biochemical Anal-
ysis Systems, Squaw Valley, California.
77. Lu, L.H., Ryu K.S., and Liu, C., 2002, A magnetic microstirrer and array for
microﬂuidic mixing, Journal of Micro-Electromechanical Systems, 11(5), 462–469.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Micromixers
211
78. Ryu, K.S., Shaikh, K., Goluch, E., Fan, Z., and Liu, C., 2004, Micro magnetic
stir-bar mixer integrated with parylene microﬂuidic channels, Lab on a Chip, 4,
608–613.
79. Hosokawa, K., Fujii, T., and Endo, I., 1999a, Droplet-based nano/picoliter mixer
using hydrophobic microcapillary vent, IEEE Paper 0-7863-5194-0.
80. Hosokawa, K., Fujii, T., and Endo, I., 1999b, Handling of picoliter liquid sam-
ples in a poly(dimethylsiloxane)-based microﬂuidic device, Analytical Chemis-
try, 71(20), 4781–4785.
81. Song, H., Bringer, M.R., Tice, J.D., Gerdts, C.J., and Ismagilov, R.F., 2003, Ex-
perimental test of scaling of mixing by chaotic advection in droplets moving
through microﬂuidic channels, Applied Physics Letters, 83 (22), 4664–4666.
82. Bringer, M.R., Gerdts, C.J., Song, H., Tice, J.D., and Ismagilov, R.F., 2004, Mi-
croﬂuidic systems for chemical kinectics that rely on chaotic mixing in droplets,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A, 362, 1087–1104.
83. Fowler, J., Moon, H., and Kim, C.-J., 2002, Enhancement of mixing by droplet-
based microﬂuidics, IEEE Paper 0-7803-7185, 97–100.
84. Paik, P., Pamula, V.K., Pollack, M.G., and Fair, R.B., 2003, Electrowetting-based
droplet mixers for microﬂuidic systems, Lab on a Chip, 3, 28–33.
85. Darhuber, A.A., Chen, J.Z., Davis, J.M., and Troian, S.M., 2004, A study of
mixing in thermocapillary ﬂows on micropatterned surfaces, Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London A, 362, 1037–1058.
86. Mitchell, M., Liu, X.W., Bejat, Y., Ford, M.S., Nikitopoulos, D.E., Soper, S.A.,
and Murphy, M.C., Modeling and validation of a molded polycarbonate con-
tinuous ﬂow polymerase chain reaction device, in MicroFluidics, Bio-MEMS,
and Medical Microsystems, Becker, H. and Wolas, P., Eds., Society of Photo-optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), 4982, 2002, 83–98.
87. White, F.M., Fluid Mechanics, 1986, McGraw-Hill, New York.
88. McAuley, S.A., Ashraf, H., Atabo, L., Chambers, A., Hall, S., Hopkins, J., and
Nicholls, G., 2001, Silicon micromachining using a high density plasma source,
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 34, 2769–2774.
89. White, F.M., 1974, Viscous Fluid Flow, McGraw-Hill, New York.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

213
8
Microfabricated Devices for Sample 
Extraction, Concentrations, and Related 
Sample Processing Technologies
Gang Chen and Yuehe Lin
CONTENTS
8.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 214
8.2
Sample Extraction and Concentrations.................................................. 214
8.2.1
Solid-Phase Extraction Techniques on Microchips.................. 215
8.2.2
Field Ampliﬁcation Stacking Techniques on Microchips....... 218
8.2.3
Field-Ampliﬁed Injection on Microchips .................................. 218
8.2.4
Stacking of Neutral Analytes ...................................................... 219
8.2.5
Isotachophoresis for Sample Preconcentration ........................ 219
8.3
Derivatization of Samples........................................................................ 220
8.3.1
Labeling and Complexation on Microchips ............................. 220
8.3.2
Postcolumn Reactors for Derivatization ................................... 221
8.3.3
Precolumn Reactor Derivatization ............................................. 222
8.3.4
Postcolumn Reactors for Chemiluminescence
on Microchips ................................................................................ 223
8.3.5
Miniaturized Flow Injection Analysis (µFIA)........................... 224
8.4
Microfabricated Dialysis Devices............................................................ 224
8.4.1
Microfabricated Single-Stage Microdialysis Device
for Fast Desalting of Biological Samples................................... 224
8.4.2
Microfabrcated Dual-Stage Microdialysis Device
for Rapid Fractionation and Cleanup of Complex
Biological Samples ........................................................................ 227
8.4.3
Application to Complex Cellular Samples ............................... 230
8.5
Conclusions................................................................................................. 232
Acknowledgments.............................................................................................. 232
References ............................................................................................. 233
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

214
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
8.1
Introduction
During the past decade, microﬂuidic analytical systems fabricated on silica,
glass, and polymer microchips have undergone explosive growth. Much
attention has been paid to capillary electrophoresis (CE) microchips owing to
their high degree of integration, portability, minimal solvent and reagent
consumption, high performance, and speed [1–3]. These microchip analysis
systems hold considerable promise for applications such as environmental
monitoring, biomedical and pharmaceutical analysis, clinical diagnostics, and
forensic investigations. Many microﬂuidic systems were produced on glass
substrates using standard photolithographic techniques [3–5], whereas some
polymer chips were fabricated based on techniques such as in situ polymer-
ization [6], laser ablation [7], imprinting [8], and injection molding [9].
As with other analytical techniques, sample introduction and sample pre-
treatments are extremely important. The analytical procedures based on
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices and systems starts with a
sampling step. The sample usually undergoes some kind of sample prepa-
ration or pretreatment step before being submitted to the actual analysis.
This step may involve extracting the sample from its matrix, removing large
matrix components from the sample, masking or removing interference spe-
cies, derivatizing the sample to make it detectable, or performing a sample
preconcentration step. Once the sample has been prepared, it is subjected to
analysis, at which time the presence of the analyte of interest is ascertained
and its concentration often quantiﬁed. This chemical information is then
converted to an electronic signal during the data-acquisition step.
The aim of lab-on-a-chip devices is to integrate the components for sample
pretreatment (including sample extraction, sample concentration, and sam-
ple derivertization), sample introduction, separation, and detection on a
microfabricated chip made of glass, silica, and polymers. The integration of
sample pretreatment into microﬂuidic devices is still a challenging task when
attempting to achieve true miniaturized total analysis systems (µ-TAS). The
challenge is made more complex by the enormous variation in samples to
be analyzed. Moreover, the pretreatment technique must be compatible with
the coupled microdevice in terms of time, reagent, and power consumption,
as well as sample volume. This chapter provides a thorough overview of the
developments in this ﬁeld to date.
8.2
Sample Extraction and Concentrations
In most cases, real samples are not suitable for direct analysis for a number
of reasons. For example, samples contain large organic or inorganic particles
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
215
that must be removed from the sample matrix to prevent disruption of ﬂuid
handling by fouling or blockage of the analytical system. The biological
sample is often contained within a cell and must be removed by means of a
cell membrane rupture technique. Usually the analytes in biological and
environmental samples are only available in trace amounts, and detection
of a signal over the background noise becomes difﬁcult although highly
sensitive detection techniques have been employed. The sample needs to be
separated from a complex background matrix in an initial puriﬁcation step.
Extracting and preconcentrating a sample before analysis can alleviate the
sensitivity demands placed on the detector by concentrating available ana-
lyte molecules into a smaller volume for enhanced detection. Many applica-
tions therefore require some form of sample preconcentration before analysis
to ensure that trace amounts of analytes can be reproducibly quantiﬁed.
Physiological samples present a particular challenge because analytes are
often present at submicromolar levels. To counteract lower detection sensi-
tivity, a number of solution-based, online preconcentration techniques have
been developed for electrokinetic separation.
8.2.1
Solid-Phase Extraction Techniques on Microchips
In general, solid-phase extraction (SPE) refers to processes where the analyte
is retained by an appropriate solid stationary phase and subsequently eluted
in a more concentrated form. It includes the isolation of analytes from an
interfering sample matrix and sample preconcentration. A perhaps somewhat
arbitrary division of SPE methods into two categories, termed nonselective
and selective, has been made. This reﬂects the degree of selectivity of the
surface layers used for sample extraction. In the ﬁrst case, surfaces adsorbing
a wide range of compounds were used, whereas in the latter, selectivity was
imparted to the surface by immobilizing very bioactive species.
Nakagawa et al. [10] fabricated a simple microchip device for DNA extrac-
tion based on electrostatic interactions between surface amine groups and
DNA. The microchannel was fabricated on a silicon wafer by photolithog-
raphy and modiﬁed with amine groups on the surface. The amount of DNA
captured in the microchip increased, depending on surface amine density.
Furthermore, DNA extraction from whole blood, using an amine-coated
microchip, was examined. The quantiﬁcation of DNA and proteins in a
washing or eluting fraction indicates that proteins were removed at washing
steps, and only DNA was effectively eluted by changing the alkalinity of the
buffer. The performance of a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the eluted
fraction indicates that DNA extracted from whole blood was well puriﬁed
using an amine-coated microchip.
A high-efﬁciency DNA extraction microchip was designed by Chung et
al. [11] to extract DNA from lysed cells using immobilized beads and the
solution ﬂowing back and forth. This chip was able to increase the extraction
efﬁciency two-fold when there was no serum. When serum existed in the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

216
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
solution, the extraction efﬁciency of immobilized beads was 88-fold higher
than that of free beads. The extraction efﬁciency of the microchip was tested
under different conditions and numbers of E. coli cells. This study indicated
that DNA could be efﬁciently extracted, even when the number of bacterial
cells was smaller. This microﬂuidic extraction chip could ﬁnd potential appli-
cations in genomic studies where the samples are limited.
Wolfe et al. [12] developed a silica-based, solid-phase extraction system
suitable for incorporation into a microchip platform (µ-TAS) that would ﬁnd
utility in a variety of genetic analysis protocols, including DNA sequencing.
The extraction procedure used is based on adsorption of the DNA onto bare
silica. The procedure involves three steps: (1) DNA adsorption in the pres-
ence of a chaotropic salt, (2) removal of contaminants with an alcohol and
water solution, and (3) elution of the adsorbed DNA in a small volume of
buffer suitable for PCR ampliﬁcation. Multiple approaches for incorporating
this protocol into a microchip were examined with regard to extraction
efﬁciency, reproducibility, stability, and the potential to provide PCR-ampli-
ﬁable DNA. This method allowed nanogram quantities of DNA to be
extracted and eluted in less than 25 min, with the DNA obtained in the
elution buffer fraction. Evaluation of the eluted DNA indicated that it was
of suitable quality to be subsequently ampliﬁed by PCR.
For DNA puriﬁcation to be functionally integrated into the microchip for
high-throughput DNA analysis, Tian et al. [13] developed a miniaturized
puriﬁcation process that could be easily adapted to the microchip format. In
this study, they evaluated the effectiveness of a variety of silica resins for
miniaturized DNA puriﬁcation and gauged the potential usefulness for on-
chip solid-phase extraction. A micro-solid-phase extraction device containing
only nanograms of silica resin is shown to be effective for adsorbing and
desorbing DNA in the program-nanogram mass range. Fluorescence spec-
troscopy, as well as capillary electrophoresis with laser-induced ﬂuorescence
detection, were employed to analyze DNA recovered from solid-phase res-
ins, whereas the PCR was used to evaluate the ampliﬁable nature of the
eluted DNA. They demonstrated that DNA can be directly recovered from
white blood cells with an efﬁciency of roughly 70%, whereas greater than
80% of the protein was removed with a 500 nl bed volume µ-SPE process,
which took less than 10 min. With a capacity in the range of 10 to 30 ng/mg
of silica resin, it was shown that the DNA extracted from white blood cells,
cultured cancer cells, and even whole blood on the low microliter scale is
suitable for direct PCR ampliﬁcation. The miniaturized format as well as the
rapid time frame for DNA extraction is compatible with fast electrophoresis
on microfabricated chips. Lander’s group also demonstrated a microchip
solid-phase extraction method for purifying DNA from biological samples,
such as blood [14]. Silica beads were packed into glass microchips, and the
beads were immobilized with sol-gel to provide a stable and reproducible
solid phase onto which DNA could be adsorbed. Optimization of the DNA
loading conditions established a higher DNA recovery at pH 6.1 than at 7.6.
This lower pH also allowed for the ﬂow rate to be increased, resulting in a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
217
decrease in extraction time from 25 min to less than 15 min. Using this
procedure, template genomic DNA from human whole blood was puriﬁed
on the microchip platform with the only sample preparation being mixing of
the blood with a load buffer before loading on the microchip device. Com-
parison between the microchip SPE procedure and a commercial microcen-
trifuge method showed that comparable amounts of PCR-ampliﬁable DNA
could be isolated from cultures of Salmonella typhimurium. The greatest
potential of the microchip SPE device was illustrated by purifying DNA from
spores from the vaccine strain of Bacillus anthracis where eventual integration
of SPE and PCR and separation on a single microdevice could potentially
enable complete detection of the infectious agent in less than 30 min.
Maruyama et al. [15] fabricated a three-phase ﬂow, water/n-heptane/
water microchannel on a glass microchip that was used as a liquid membrane
to separate metal ions. Surface modiﬁcation of the microchannel by octade-
cylsilane groups induced spontaneous phase separation of the three-phase
ﬂow in the microﬂuidic device, which allows control of interfacial contact
time and off-chip analysis using a conventional analytical apparatus. Before
selectively transporting a metal ion through the liquid membrane in the
microchannel, the forward and backward extraction of yttrium and zinc ions
was investigated in a two-phase ﬂow on a microﬂuidic device using 2-
ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (commercial name, PC-
88A) as an extractant. The extraction conditions (contact time of the two
phases, pH, extractant concentration) in the microﬂuidic device were exam-
ined. These investigations demonstrated that the conventional methodology
for solvent extraction of metal ions is applicable to solvent extraction in a
microchannel. Finally, the three-phase ﬂow was employed in the microchan-
nel as a liquid membrane, and the selective transport of Y ions through the
liquid membrane was observed. This was the ﬁrst time that a targeted metal
ion was selectively separated from an aqueous feed solution into a receiving
phase within a few seconds by employing a liquid membrane formed in a
microﬂuidic device.
Tokeshi et al. [16] reported a newly designed microchannel for solvent
extraction fabricated in a quartz glass chip and applied to solvent extraction
of a Co-2-nitroso-5-dimethylaminophenol complex. The aqueous solution of
the Co complex and toluene were introduced into the microchannel, and the
Co complex extracted in toluene was detected by thermal lens microscopy
(TLM). The Co complex was quickly extracted into toluene when the ﬂow
was stopped. The observed extraction time, about 50 s, was almost equivalent
to the value calculated using the diffusion distance and diffusion coefﬁcient.
The dependence of the TLM signal on the concentration of the Co complex
showed good linearity in the range of 1.107 to 1.106 M. Kutter et al. [17]
created a microfabricated device with C18-coated channels used to demon-
strate on-chip solid-phase extraction. Sample solutions containing a neutral
dye were enriched and eluted in less than 4 min. Distinct elution peaks with
good signal-to-noise ratios were obtained even for highly diluted samples.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

218
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
The gain in concentration estimated from the enrichment and elution vol-
umes was 80-fold.
8.2.2
Field Ampliﬁcation Stacking Techniques on Microchips
Field ampliﬁcation stacking (FAS) in conventional capillary systems was ﬁrst
mentioned by Mikkers et al. [18] and was intensively studied [19–22]. It has
been used on microchips for stacking analytes [23] and for stacking a full
column’s worth of sample [24, 25]. Sample preconcentration is achieved by
generating a high electrical ﬁeld within an injected sample plug that rapidly
drives and stacks sample ions at the ends of that plug. This ﬁeld ampliﬁcation
is created when the sample is dissolved in a buffer that has a much lower
conductivity than the running buffer used for electrophoresis separation.
Higher preconcentration efﬁciencies require a larger amount of sample to be
introduced into the microsystem. Full-column stacking techniques using
polarity reversal offer this possibility at the price of increased analysis time
(1 to 2 min, typically). Li et al. [24] used such a device to preconcentrate trace-
level protein digests as preparation for quadrupole time-of-ﬂight mass spec-
trometry. When the entire channel between the sample reservoir and the on-
chip nanoelectrospray emitter was ﬁlled with sample solution, the polarity
was reversed to remove the sample matrix whereas the analyte stacked at the
boundary of the running buffer. The progress of matrix removal could be
followed by current monitoring until only a small amount of buffer was left
in the channel. Finally, the preconcentrated sample zone was pumped by the
electroosmotic ﬂow (EOF) into the electrospray emitter for mass spectrometry
(MS) analysis. The concentration detection limit could be enhanced from 3-
to 50-fold for different peptides. A different conﬁguration was used by Lich-
tenberg et al. [23] for full-column stacking of ﬂuorescently labeled amino acids
combined with on-chip CE for separation. The design consists of a 55 to 170
mm–long, folded stacking channel connected to a 40 mm–long separation
channel. In this way, high-efﬁciency stacking of a large sample volume could
be combined with rapid separation in a short CE column. The stacking chan-
nel and the stacking itself were ﬁlled in 90 s, whereas the separation took
only 35 s. The signal gain was found to be nearly linear with stacking channel
lengths from 55 to 170 mm, yielding 60- to 95-fold increases.
8.2.3
Field-Ampliﬁed Injection on Microchips
Jacobson and Ramsey [26] and Kutter et al. [27] have investigated ﬁeld-
ampliﬁed injection (FAI) techniques on microchips extensively. Although
FAS works for both negatively and positively charged ions, FAI has an
electrophoretic bias depending on the direction of EOF. In this case, positive
ions are stacked at the sample–buffer interface during the injection process.
FAI can be easily implemented using the time-based, gated injection methods
proposed by Jacobson et al. [28]. FAI yielded a concentration enhancement
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
219
for dansylated amino acids of up to 13.8-fold. Separations using stacked
injection had efﬁciencies of 22,000 to 29,000 theoretical plates, which made
them only 60 to 70% as efﬁcient as CE on the same devices. In combination
with postcolumn complexation for detection, FAI was also used to precon-
centrate inorganic cations before microchip CE [27], employing the same
procedure as described above. The stacked injection mode improved the
signal by a factor of 16, which corresponded to extrapolated detection limits
of 18 ppb for calcium and 0.5 ppb for magnesium.
8.2.4
Stacking of Neutral Analytes
At philosophical pH ranges, some analytes, such as glucose, are neutral. Meth-
ods like FAS or FAI mentioned above are applicable to positively or negatively
charged analytes only. Methods for stacking neutral analytes for separation
by micellar electrokinetic chromatography in fused silica capillaries have also
been investigated. One approach, termed sweeping, involves the injection of
an analyte zone into a column of separation buffer containing a pseudosta-
tionary phase (micelles). Upon application of the electric ﬁeld, the micelles are
swept through the analyte zone, collecting analyte and resulting in a unique
focusing effect. More importantly, charged species could also be preconcen-
trated in this way. In a recent report, sensitivity increases approaching
1,000,000-fold have been achieved [29]. Though not yet applied to microchips,
it is clear that the use of this technique could be enormously advantageous
for the less sensitive detection methods integrated into microﬂuidic devices.
8.2.5
Isotachophoresis for Sample Preconcentration
Isotachophoresis (ITP) extends the stacking concept of FAS to ternary buffer
systems and can be used for both sample preconcentration and as an analytical
technique. In the case of ITP, the sample is injected between a leading and
a terminating buffer electrolyte, LE and TE, respectively. Upon application
of the separation voltage, the sample constituents are separated over a given
time into distinct zones located between LE and TE in order of descending
mobilities in the separation channels. Once this steady state is reached, the
boundaries between sample zones are very sharp because of a self-focusing
mechanism. The concentration in the sample zones is equal to the concen-
tration of the leading buffer. Therefore, a preconcentration or dilution can
be tailored by adapting the LE composition. Kaniansky et al. [30] realized
various ITP conﬁgurations on a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) chip
with two coupled separation columns and on-chip conductivity detectors.
One application involving a combination of sample pretreatment by ITP and
separation by CE involved the analysis of low concentration constituents (10
µM each of nitrite, phosphate, and ﬂuoride) in a model mixture containing
high background concentrations of ions such as chloride (600 µM) and sulfate
(800 µM). A sample fraction containing the microconstituents could be
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

220
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
extracted from the steady-state ITP zone system and electrophoretically
transferred into the second column for CE separation. Another polymer
microﬂuidic device for the ITP separation of metal cations, fabricated with
silicone rubber by casting, has recently been reported [31]. Similarly, detec-
tion was performed using an integrated single-electrode conductivity detec-
tor, indicating the utility of this less sensitive detection technique when used
together with a preconcentration method like ITP. The separation of a sample
containing a mixture of the four metal ions, lithium, lanthanum, dysprosium,
and ytterbium, was reproducibly achieved using these devices. The minia-
turized separations were achieved in less than 600 s, which is less than half
the time taken for conventional capillary-electrophoresis separations.
8.3
Derivatization of Samples
Usually an ultraviolet detector, laser-induced laser detector, or electrochem-
ical detector is coupled with the microﬂuidic system for high sensitivity
detection. Unfortunately, none of these methods is universal, that is to say,
not all analytes can be detected by a single detection technique because some
analytes are not active for a chosen detection method. Sometimes sample
derivatization is necessary before detection. This involves the chemical trans-
formation of the analyte to render it detectable by the detection system
employed. In biochemical assays on microchips, speciﬁc or nonspeciﬁc label-
ing of biomolecules with ﬂuorescent labels is a common technique. A signif-
icant number of examples of sample derivatization exist in chip-based
analysis to facilitate small-volume detection, particularly by ﬂuorescence.
Based on the fact that some analytes cannot be detected by the detector
employed, they have to be derivatized before detection. Off-chip, precolumn,
or postcolumn derivatization are commonly used. In addition, the sample
preparation and preconcentration are important when analyzing environmen-
tal samples (concentrations in trace amounts) with microchip CE, which is
generally known not to be as sensitive as classical chromatographic methods.
8.3.1
Labeling and Complexation on Microchips
Nowadays, ﬂuorescence detection continues to be the method employed for
chip-based analysis, as it has superior sensitivity and is ideally suited to the
ultrasmall volume (pl) analysis and the detection of single molecules. Unfor-
tunately, most species are not intrinsically ﬂuorescent and so must be
covalently labeled with a ﬂuorescent tag. Generally these tagging reactions
are carried out manually before the separation is done, which leads to addi-
tional preparative tasks and the requirement for comparatively large sample
volumes. In addition, total analysis times are drastically increased consider-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
221
ing the labeling times. For instance, the labeling reaction beforehand took
several hours, whereas the ﬁrst reported separations of ﬂuorescein isothio-
cyanate (FITC)-labeled amino acids took only a few seconds [32]. Fluorescent
labeling reactions that are kinetically very fast for aminated species do exist,
opening up the possibility of online tagging directly before or after analysis
by separation. This type of application is ideal for a chip-based approach
because low dead-volume connections between microchannels minimize
band broadening due to mixing with the reagent. Besides, covalent ﬂuores-
cent labeling, noncovalent ﬂuorescent labeling, complexation, and chemilu-
minescence are available for postcolumn (postseparation) tagging of species.
Flow-injection analysis–type methods have been integrated into microﬂuidic
devices to convert inorganic, ionic species to colored molecules detectable
by absorbance, ﬂuorescence, or other optical detection methods. In this case,
no electrophoresis separations are carried out.
8.3.2
Postcolumn Reactors for Derivatization
The ﬁrst successful example of on-chip labeling reactions was a postcolumn
ﬂuorescent tagging of amino acids using o-phthaldialdehyde (OPA) [33].
This particular label was chosen because of its rapid reaction kinetics. The
planar glass device consisted of a typical microchip CE structure with an
additional side channel intersecting with the separation channel 6 mm after
the injection cross (the chip consisted of an injection channel and a separation
channel that crossed each other) via this side channel; the labeling reagent
was pumped into contact with the separated analyte zones. The reaction
took place downstream, followed by ﬂuorescence detection at 351.1 nm using
an argon-ion laser. Band broadening due to adding reagent at the entrance
of the reaction column was studied by injecting rhodamine B plugs into the
system and comparing peak shapes before and after the mixing point. This
additional band broadening was attributed to the different migration speeds
at which already labeled and unlabeled analytes migrated in the channel.
Although the kinetics of the labeling reaction were relatively fast (the reaction
half-time is 4 s), analyte bands spread in the reaction column. Harrison et
al. [34] worked on postcolumn reactors using the same sample and label
combination as Jacobson et al. Initially they encountered comparably low
separation efﬁciencies using a design with the separation and reaction chan-
nels laid out in a straight line. However, a closer analysis of the band-
broadening source led to an improved design and operation conditions,
which allowed separations having theoretical plate numbers, N, of over
83,000 [35]. The authors proposed two reasons for band broadening: (1) the
analyte band spread because of different mobilities of labeled and unlabeled
species during the reaction, as in Jacobson et al. [33]; (2) differences in
electroosmotic velocity caused by mismatched pH or ionic strength in run-
ning the CE buffer and labeling streams caused Poiseuille ﬂow proﬁles and
distorted the bands further [36]. In an early conﬁguration similar to that in
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

222
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Fluri et al. [35], the labeling reagent stream was directly introduced into the
reaction channel in a perpendicular, head-on manner. This conﬁned the label
to a narrow zone at one side of the channel and increased the time necessary
for diffusive mixing [38]. In a later design, the label and separation channels
intersected in a Y conﬁguration, ensuring fast diffusive mixing of sample
and reagent ﬂows. The second important issue, namely the mismatch in
electroosmotic mobilities of the different liquids, could be veriﬁed by chang-
ing the pH of the labeling reagent. In addition, glass microchips, integrating
chemical derivatization reactions, electrophoretic separations, and ampero-
metric detection, have been developed by Wang et al. [37]. The performance
of the new integrated microfabricated devices is demonstrated for rapid on-
chip measurements of amino acids utilizing precolumn reactions of amino
acids to generate electroactive derivatives that are separated electrophoreti-
cally and detected at the end-column electrochemical detector. The inﬂuence
of the sample-to-reagent mixing ratio, reagent concentrations, driving volt-
age, detection potential, and other variables is explored. The integrated
microsystem offers a rapid (6 min) simultaneous measurement of eight
amino acids, down to the 2.5 MM (5 fmol) level, with linearity up to the 0.2
mM level examined, and good reproducibility (RSD ) 2.2 to 2.7%). The
integrated microfabricated device expands the scope of on-chip electrochem-
ical detection to electroactive analytes and holds promise of being a powerful
analytical tool.
8.3.3
Precolumn Reactor Derivatization
OPA has also been used as the labeling reagent for precolumn labeling of
amino acids on a microchip [38]. The amino acid sample was mixed with
the labeling reagent including OPA in a 1 nl reaction chamber before it was
injected into the 15.4 mm separation column by time-based, gated injection
with 1.8% relative standard deviation (RSD) in the peak area. The series
combination of reaction chamber and separation channel created a direct
dependence of the reaction time for each particular analyte based on its
electrophoretic mobility. Fluorescent labeling of amino acids before off-chip
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation has been pro-
posed using 4-ﬂuoro-7-nitrobenzofurazan (NBD-F) as the ﬂuorophore [39].
The labeling reaction requires the sample-NBD-F mixture to be heated to
60°C for 2 min, which is achieved in a 100 mm–long, 50 µl–volume reaction
channel in a silicon–glass sandwich structure. Integrated Cr–Pt resistors
heated the chip at a rate of 2°C s1 up to 90°C, consuming 2 W. The temperature
could also be monitored by integrated resistive sensors. Postcolumn reactors
for complexation ﬂuorescent tagging are not the only technique for making
ions of interest visible for optical detection methods. Using the same chip
structure as in those used by Jacobson et al. [33], calcium and magnesium
were labeled after separation using 8-hydroxyquinoline-5-sulfonic acid (HQS)
to form a ﬂuorescent complex [40]. Fluorescence is maximal at an excitation
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
223
around 390 nm and pH 8, conditions that could be met by using an argon-
ion laser and a borate buffer system. A fourfold decrease in signal intensity
between ofﬂine and online complexation could be observed, which was easily
compensated for by ﬁeld-ampliﬁed stacking and injection. Liu et al. [41]
combined on-chip CE with postcolumn complexation using a ﬂuorogenic dye,
NanoOrange, to detect proteins by laser-induced ﬂuorescence. An advantage
of NanoOrange is the short reaction half-life of only 110 ms for noncovalent
binding to the hydrophobic regions of proteins (compared with 12 s for OPA).
The labeling rate is therefore within the range for a diffusion-limited reaction,
leading to plate heights of 10 to 20 µm. Wang et. al. [42] have developed a
novel lab-on-a-chip protocol generating two electrophoretic peaks for a single
analyte, based on the coupling of two different precolumn enzymatic reac-
tions of the same substrate followed by electrophoretic separation of the
reaction products. Such operation is illustrated for the measurement of glu-
cose in connection with the corresponding glucose oxidase (GOx) and glucose
dehydrogenase (GDH) reactions. The precolumn enzymatic reactions gener-
ate hydrogen peroxide and NADH species, which are separated (based on
their different charges) and detected at the end-column amperometric detec-
tor. The peak-to-current ratio can be used for conﬁrming the peak identity,
estimating the peak purity, addressing comigrating interferences, and devia-
tions from linearity. A driving voltage of 2000 V results in peroxide and
NADH migration times of 93 and 260 s, respectively. Factors inﬂuencing the
unique dual glucose response are examined and optimized. The concept can
be extended to different target analytes based on the coupling of two precol-
umn reactions with electrophoretic separation of the reaction products.
8.3.4
Postcolumn Reactors for Chemiluminescence on Microchips
A different derivatization technique for biomolecules integrated on-chip is
chemiluminescence detection, based on the horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)–catalyzed reaction of luminol with peroxide in a postcolumn scheme
[43]. The device used for this experiment is the same as described in Fluri
et al. [35], with the added feature of a sputter-deposited aluminum mirror
on the backside of the detection zone of some devices for increased concen-
tration sensitivity. Luminol (5 mM) was added to the separation buffer itself,
whereas 1.5% peroxide was mixed with the analyte bands after separation
at the Y-shaped intersection before detection. The initial optimization of the
detector setup showed a 1.6-fold improvement in detection limits for ﬂuo-
rescein-labeled HRP from 171 nM down to 105 nM when using the mirror.
Depending on the injection technique used, the separation efﬁciency was
determined to be 1000 to 5800 theoretical plates, a value in general sufﬁcient
for the immunoassay application of the device. A direct immunoassay of
mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG) using a fragment of the HRP-conjugate of
goat antimouse IgG was demonstrated for a concentration range from 0 to
60µg mL1, by injecting the sample after off-chip immunological reaction.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

224
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
8.3.5
Miniaturized Flow Injection Analysis (µµµµFIA)
Wet chemical methods have been integrated into micromachined ﬂuidic sys-
tems. One pioneer example focused on the analysis of phosphate using the
molybdenum blue method to form a blue-colored phosphate complex allow-
ing easy detection by absorbance [44, 45]. The microﬂuidic system was three-
dimensional in nature, consisting of a number of silicon chips (23 × 23 mm)
stacked on top of one another. The regular arrangement of through-holes
around the chip perimeter ensured the passage of liquid between layers. This
example was interesting in that it was the ﬁrst to use silicon-based micro-
pumps for controlling liquid ﬂuid within a valveless system. A more recent
example of µFIA is based on three-layer, glass-silicon-glass devices, contain-
ing an integrated optical cuvette etched through the silicon chip [46]. The
device was developed to analyze ammonia in waste and drinking waters,
using the Berthelot reaction to convert ammonia through reaction with phenol
to a blue indophenol dye. In this case, syringe pumps were used to control
the ﬂows in the chip. An all-glass version of the three-layer chips for this
application has also been reported [47]. EOF-driven µFIA systems based on
glass have also been used for phosphate analysis by the molybdenum blue
method [48], as well as analysis of other inorganic analytes [49].
8.4
Microfabricated Dialysis Devices
8.4.1
Microfabricated Single-Stage Microdialysis Device
for Fast Desalting of Biological Samples
Electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS is amenable to analysis of nearly the entire
range of biomolecules, and the use of mild ionization conditions allows
noncovalent associations to be directly detected. However, sample matrix
interference (generally due to low molecular weight salts) presents a major
limitation to the use of ESI-MS for analyzing large biopolymers. Biological
samples extracted under physiological conditions typically contain signiﬁ-
cant concentrations of nonvolatile solvents and salts (e.g., sodium chloride),
and other reagents are often added to stabilize samples or to maintain their
enzymatic activity. The presence of small to moderate amounts of salts will
not only affect electrospray stability, but may also signiﬁcantly reduce the
detected ion signals because of both the suppression of ionization and the
formation of multiple sodium adduct species. Low signal-to-noise ratios in
the mass spectra and poor reproducibility due to excessive adduction can
result in inaccurate mass assignments, and in severe cases, even preclude
spectrum interpretation. Although online liquid chromatography (LC)/MS
can tolerate small to moderate amounts of salt, and desalting columns are
commercially available, they are not suitable for many ESI-MS experiments
where samples may precipitate on the column or interact with the solvent,
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
225
or when very high salt concentrations are present. Direct ESI-MS of biological
samples often relies upon centrifugation or ofﬂine microdialysis for desalt-
ing. Such a batch cleanup process can be time-consuming (taking several
hours) and may suffer from adverse effects, such as sample losses during
each step due to protein aggregation or precipitation on the ﬁltering media.
When only a small amount of sample is available, these effects can become
even more pronounced. If noncovalent associations are of interest, slow
desalting steps are more likely to result in denaturation or complex dissoci-
ation in solution.
A microdialysis approach has been used to address complex biological
samples [50–52]. This approach employs a small microdialysis tube through
which the sample ﬂows in conjunction with a countercurrent ﬂow of a
suitable buffer. The dialyzed samples can be directly interfaced with the ESI
source at a ﬂow rate of approximately 2 to 5 µL/min. Although the microdi-
alysis approach has demonstrated great promise for efﬁcient sample cleanup
capability, dialysis ﬁbers less than the 200 µm diameter size used in our
earlier work are not yet available, and this factor contributed to the minimum
useful ﬂow rates and sample processing times achieved previously. It is clear
that miniaturizing the approach will not only further increase its speed,
ﬂexibility, and robustness, but also allow the use of lower rates and result
in enhanced sensitivity. Recently we reported on a microfabricated microdi-
alysis device constructed for this purpose and demonstrated its desalting
efﬁciency for protein samples [53].
sample and buffer channels were machined directly into the polycarbonate
chip (30 × 30 × 6 mm) using a laser micromachining system. The sample chan-
nel was 160 µm wide, 60 µm deep, and 11 cm long. The buffer channel was
500 µm wide, 250 µm deep, and 12 cm long. A Spectra/Por Biotech 1.1 dialysis
membrane with a molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) of 8000 was sandwiched
between the chips. Figure 8.1b shows a photograph of the overlapping sample
and buffer channels after aligning the microchannel dialysis chips. 
The microfabricated dialysis device can be used in the online mode for
direct ESI-MS analysis and has been evaluated for this purpose using the
syringe needle used for buffer delivery and provided electrical contact
through the buffer and sample solution. In this arrangement, the ESI emitter
was a short piece of silica capillary (4 to 6 cm, 200 µm o.d. × 100 µm i.d.)
ﬁxed to the chip through a standard ﬁtting. A 5 µM horse heart myoglobin
solution in a complex matrix consisting of 500 mM of NaCl, 100 mM of Tris,
and 10 mM of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was studied as an
direct infusion with the microspray ESI source. No protein charge state
envelope was evident, and the spectrum was complicated by undesired
peaks due to Tris and EDTA (commonly used in protein sample prepara-
tion). Online microdialysis was carried out using a dialysis buffer solution
containing 10 mM of NH4OAc and 1% (v/v) acetic acid at a ﬂow rate of
Figure 8.1 shows the structure of the single-stage microdialysis device. The
arrangement shown in Figure 8.2. High voltage was applied to the metal
example. Figure 8.3a shows a mass spectrum obtained for this solution by
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

226
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
100 µl/min, while the sample was introduced at a ﬂow rate of 0.5 µl/min.
states from 19+ to 10+ of denatured myoglobin were clearly resolved, and
the interference peaks from the Tris and EDTA were greatly diminished.
The S/N was increased by a factor of more than 40 compared to that
obtained without desalting.
With the current design, the total volume of the sample serpentine channel
is only 1 µl, and the actual dialysis time for the sample, that is, the time the
sample spent inside the microdialysis channels, was approximately 2 min at
a sample ﬂow rate of 0.5 µL/min. The effectiveness of the cleanup can be
ascribed to the size difference between the sample channel and the buffer
channel, and the fact that the cleanest sample solution is effectively exposed
to the cleanest dialysis buffer because of its countercurrent ﬂow. For effective
FIGURE 8.1
Schematic diagram of microfabricated single-stage microdialysis device (a) and photo of over-
lapping sample and buffer channels after alignment of the microchannel device (b). (Reprinted
with permission from Xu, N. et al., Anal. Chem., 70, 3553, 1998. Copyright 1998 American
Chemical Society.)
Sample channel: 60 µm
deep, 150 µm wide
Buﬀer channel: 250 µm
deep, 500 µm wide
(a)
(b)
As shown in Figure 8.3b, effective desalting was achieved. Multiple charge
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
227
desalting, it has been found that air bubbles trapped inside the sample
channels need to be forced out before the dialysis occurs. The sample loss
during the dialysis is minimal because of the short residence time in the
microdialysis channel and the fact that the analytes are above the MWCO
of the chosen membrane. The Spectra/Por Biotech 1.1 membrane used for
this work has a high tolerance to acidic solvents, such as 90% acetic acid and
organic solvents (e.g., 90% methanol), thus providing versatility in applying
the microfabricated dialysis device.
8.4.2
Microfabrcated Dual-Stage Microdialysis Device for Rapid 
Fractionation and Cleanup of Complex Biological Samples
As discussed previously, a single-stage microdialysis device can be used for
rapid and efﬁcient desalting of biological samples. More recently, we developed
a microfabricated dual-stage microdialysis device for fast and efﬁcient fraction-
ation and cleanup of complex biological samples (i.e., cellular extracts) [54].
alysis device. The sample channel (60 µm deep, 150 µm wide) was machined
directly into the polymer chip (30 × 30 × 6 mm) by using multiple parallel
laser passes. A 500 µm–wide buffer channel was machined from 225 µm–thick
polyimide with a silicone adhesive on one side. The adhesive was used to
attach the buffer channel to a ﬂat polymer chip. Two microdialysis membranes
are sandwiched between three polymer chips with microfabricated serpentine
channels. This novel design makes the dual-stage microdialysis device highly
compact and rugged, eliminating the need for tubing to connect the two
FIGURE 8.2
Schematic representation of the setup of the microfabricated device for online ESI-MS analysis.
The top panel shows a photograph of the sample channel chip. (Reprinted with permission
from Xu, N. et al., Anal. Chem., 70, 3553, 1998. Copyright 1998 American Chemical Society.)
Sample
Buﬀer
+2.2 kV
MS
entrance
Figure 8.4 shows the structure and ﬂow diagram of the dual-stage microdi-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

228
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
stages of the microdialysis units. The ﬂuid channels were designed to make
the raw sample ﬂow in a microchannel along one side of the ﬁrst stage
membrane so that a portion of sample ﬂows through the membrane and
enters the second stage. This partial ﬂow in the ﬁrst stage provides a mech-
anism for sweeping out cellular residues in the sample channel and results
in a reduced possibility of membrane clotting. Alternatively, the sample
channel outlet (b) can be completely sealed if the lifetime of the membrane
is not of concern. The sample ﬂow rate entering the second stage of the
device can be adjusted by controlling the ﬂow rate at the outlet (b) by
throttling the sample ﬂow through fused silica tubing of various lengths and
inner diameters. The sample entering the second stage of the device is
stripped of the small molecules and salts by a dialysis buffer ﬂowing in a
microchannel on the opposite side of the second-stage membrane.
A protein mixture consisting of 30 µM of bovine serum albumin (BSA),
8 µM of cytochrome c, and 2.4 µM of ubiquitin in 10 mM phosphate buffer
FIGURE 8.3
(a) ESI-mass spectrum of 5 µM horse heart myoglobin in 500 mM of NaCl, 100 mM of Tris, and
10 mM of EDTA by direct infusion; (b) ESI mass spectrum of previous myoglobin sample after
online microdialysis using 10 mM of NH4OAc and 1% acetic acid as a dialysis buffer. (Reprinted
with permission from Xu, N. et al., Anal. Chem., 70, 3553, 1998. Copyright 1998 American
Chemical Society.)
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
m/z
(b)
(a)
1400
1600
1800
2000
Relative intensity
Relative intensity
18+
17+
16+15+
14+
13+
12+
11+
10+
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
229
saline PBS was used to evaluate the performance of the dual-stage microdi-
alysis device. A 50 kDa MWCO membrane and an 8 kDa MWCO membrane
were used in the ﬁrst- and second-stage microdialysis, respectively. The
sample was injected at 0.5 µL/min, and the cleanup buffer at 10 µL/min. As
useful ESI-MS spectrum. ESI-MS performance is well known to be poor for
such solutions, presumably due to the excess BSA and NaCl. After the online
dual dialysis in the microfabricated device, the spectrum in Figure 8.5b
clearly showed peaks from cytochrome c, ubiquitin, and removal of the
unresolved envelope of peaks at higher m/z. The improvement in spectral
quality using the dual-stage microdialysis device enabled us to effectively
assign peaks and accurately determine molecular weights.
For analyzing complex biological samples, initial sample fractionation and
cleanup can simplify analytical procedures. Online dual dialysis using the
microfabricated device is a fast and efﬁcient means of achieving this. The
molecular weight range selected for analysis by dual microdialysis can be
controlled by selecting appropriate MWCO membranes at both stages.
FIGURE 8.4
(a) Exploded view showing construction of the microfabricated dual-stage microdialysis device.
(b) Flow diagram of the device showing sample inlet, buffer inlet, and microelectrospray tip.
(Reprinted with permission from Xiang, F. et al., Anal. Chem., 71, 1485, 1999. Copyright 1999
American Chemical Society.)
Channel 1
Channel 3
Bottom view
Outlet (b)
Sample inlet (a)
Channel 2
Channel 4
MWCO, 8 k
MWCO, 50 k
Top view
(a)
(b)
µ-ESI Tip
ESI Tip
Dialysis buﬀer
Dialysis membrane 2
(MWCO, 2000)
Dialysis membrane 1
(MWCO, 50 k)
shown in Figure 8.5a, direct infusion of the protein mixture produced no
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

230
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
8.4.3
Application to Complex Cellular Samples
The analysis of cellular extracts and other complex biological samples is of
great interest for many purposes, including biotechnology, pathogen detec-
tion, medical research, bioremediation, and clinical applications. However,
such analysis will require that complex samples be readily separated, frac-
tionated, or cleaned up to the point where useful mass spectra can be
obtained. Interferences from both high-molecular-weight and low-molecu-
lar-weight components constitute limitations for the direct use of ESI-MS to
analyze target biomolecules in such complex systems.
The use of the microfabricated dual-stage microdialysis device for sample
processing is attractive because of its ruggedness, its potential for extension
to multichannel devices, and its feasibility in greatly increasing the speed
and care of automation. To evaluate the processing efﬁciency of the micro-
fabricated dialysis device, an E. coli lysate with a total protein concentration
FIGURE 8.5
ESI-MS spectra of a protein mixture consisting of 30 µM of bovine serum albumin, 8 µM of
cytochrome c, and 2.4 µM of ubiquitin in 0.01 M of PBS. (a) Sample directly infused without
passing through the dual-microdialysis device; (b) sample passed by the dual microdialysis
device. Identities of the peaks: u, ubiquitin; c, cytochrome c. (Reprinted with permission from
Xiang, F. et al., Anal. Chem., 71, 1485, 1999. Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society.)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Relative abundance
2000
700
800
900
1000 1100 1200 1300
m/z
(a)
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Relative abundance
2000
700
800
900
1000 1100 1200 1300
m/z
(b)
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
c
c
c
c
c
u
u
c
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
231
of approximately 1 mg/mL was analyzed by ESI-MS before and after the
dual dialysis. Direct infusion of the crude cell lysate produced the spectrum
shown in Figure 8.6a. The spectrum is largely uninterpretable because of
the complex components, the high concentration of NaCl, and the conse-
quently low signal-to-noise ratio. After passing the sample through the dual-
stage microdialysis device with a 50 kDa (MWCO) membrane in the ﬁrst
stage and a 8-kDa (MWCO) membrane in the second stage, a large improve-
ment in spectral quality was observed (Figure 8.6b). An approximately 20-
fold increase of signal-to-noise ratio was obtained. The characteristic peaks
FIGURE 8.6
ESI-MS spectra for an E. coli cell lysate. (a) Spectrum obtained from the sample directly infused
without passing through the dual microdialysis device; (b) spectrum obtained using online
dual microdialysis sample processing; two expanded views show detail of peaks at m/z 969
and 1124; (c) CID spectrum of m/z 969 at a relative collision energy of 35%; (d) CID spectrum
of m/z 1124 at a relative collision energy of 35%. (Reprinted with permission from Xiang, F. et
al., Anal. Chem., 71, 1485, 1999. Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society).
100
0
20
40
60
80
Relative abundance
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
m/z
(a)
800
600
400
200
100
0
20
40
60
80
Relative abundance
2000
1900
1800
1700
1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
1000
1100
m/z
(b)
700
900
800
600
500
100
0
20
40
60
80
Relative abundance
1100
1050
900
850
800
750
700
717
9383
650
m/z
(c)
600
100
0
20
40
60
80
Relative abundance
1100
1150
1200
1050
1000
1000
950
950
900
850
800
750
m/z
928
10355
1079
1105
1122
(d)
700
985
1168
1322
1523
1804
663
774
1218
1322
1458
1523
1824
560
565
570
575
580
1118 1120 1122 1124 1126 1128 1130 1132
951
969
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

232
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
from major cellular components are readily discernible in the spectrum and
provide the basis for further MS/MS experiments [55]. Lower ﬂow rates
with ESI-MS provide greater sensitivity. With the current device, online ESI-
MS can be conducted at a few hundred nL/min, more than an order of
magnitude reduction compared to the previous dual-stage dialysis system
[56]. Another feature of the current device is the reduced dead volume
achieved by eliminating connection tubing between the two stages. These
features should allow faster analysis of smaller samples. MS/MS of distinc-
tive ions provides a potential basis for identiﬁcation (i.e., serving as biom-
in Figures 8.6c and d show an average of 38 scans and present an excellent
signal-to-noise ratio. Using a ﬂow rate of 200 nL/min, only 16 µL of the
sample was consumed for MS/MS data acquisition of 40 cellular compo-
nents. The distinctive MS/MS spectral patterns can be used to identify mass
spectrometric–detected species useful as biomarkers, which then provide a
basis for conﬁdent identiﬁcation of microorganisms. The results presented
also demonstrate the application of this for detecting bacteriophage MS2 in
the presence of a large excess of E. coli.
8.5
Conclusions
It is clear that the integration of the components for the sample pretreatment
on microﬂuidic devices represents one of the remaining bottlenecks in
achieving true µ-TAS. The challenge is made more complex by the enormous
variation in samples to be analyzed. More importantly, the pretreatment
technique employed has to be compatible with the analysis device to which
it is coupled in terms of time, reagent, and power and sample consumption.
As this review shows, however, signiﬁcant progress has been made, espe-
cially in recent years, driven largely by developments in the life sciences. An
exponential increase in papers dealing with this subject is to be expected in
the next couple of years.
Acknowledgments 
The work performed at Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) was
supported by a Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program,
Strategic Environmental Research and Development Program (Project # CU
1297), U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)-Environmental Management Science
Program, and National Institutes of Health (NIH)/1R01 ES010976-01A2.
arkers) of microorganisms. Figures 8.6c and d show two MS/MS spectra of
m/z 969 and 1124 ions in the expanded views of Figure 8.6b. The spectra
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
233
PNNL is operated by Battelle for DOE under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830.
The work performed at Fudan University was supported by the High-Tech
Research and Development (863) Program of China (Grant No. 2004AA639740),
the National Nature Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 20405002), and
the Nature Science Foundation of Shanghai (Grant No. 2004ZR14015). 
References
[1] Verpoorte, E., Microﬂuidic chips for clinical and forensic analysis, Electrophore-
sis, 23, 677, 2002.
[2] Reyes, D.R. et al., Micro total analysis systems. 1. Introduction, theory, and
technology. , Anal. Chem., 74, 2623, 2002.
[3] Wang, J., Chen, G., and Chatrathi, M.P., Microchip capillary electrophoresis
coupled with a boron-doped diamond electrode-based electrochemical detec-
tor, Anal. Chem., 75, 935, 2003.
[4] Harrison, J.D. et al., Capillary electrophoresis and sample injection systems
integrated on a planar glass chip, Anal. Chem., 64, 1926, 1992.
[5] Jacobson, S.C. et al., High-speed separations on a microchip, Anal. Chem., 66,
1114, 1994.
[6] Chen, Z.F. et al., Fabrication and characterization of poly(methyl methacrylate)
microchannel by in-situ polymerization method with novel metal template,
Electrophoresis, 24, 3246, 2003.
[7] Roberts, M.A. et al., UV laser machined polymer substrates for the develop-
ment of microdiagnostic systems, Anal. Chem., 69, 2035, 1997.
[8] Martynova, L. et al., Fabrication of plastic microﬂuid channels by imprinting
methods, Anal. Chem., 69, 4783, 1997.
[9] McCormick, R.M. et al., Microchannel electrophoretic separations of DNA in
injection-molded plastic substrates, Anal. Chem., 69, 2626, 1997.
[10] Nakagawa, T., Fabrication of amino silane-coated microchip for DNA extrac-
tion from whole blood., J Biotechnol.116(2), 105, 2005.
[11] Chung, Y.C. et al., Microﬂuidic chip for high efﬁciency DNA extraction, Lab on
a Chip, 4(2), 141, 2004.
[12] Wolfe, K.A. et al., Toward a microchip-based solid-phase extraction method for
isolation of nucleic acids, Electrophoresis, 23(5), 727, 2002.
[13] Tian, H.J., Huhmer, A.F.R., and Landers, J.P., Evaluation of silica resins for the
direct and efﬁcient extraction of DNA from complex biological matrices in a
miniaturized format, Anal. Biochem., 283(2), 175, 2000.
[14] Breadmore, M.C. et al., Microchip-based puriﬁcation of DNA from biological
samples, Anal. Chem., 75(8), 1880, 2003.
[15] Maruyama, T. et al., Liquid membrane operations in a microﬂuidic device for
selective separation of metal ions, Anal. Chem., 76(15), 4495, 2004.
[16] Tokeshi, M., Minagawa, T., and Kitamori, T., Acceleration of an enzymatic
reaction in a microchip, J. Chromatogr. A., 894(1–2), 19, 2000.
[17] Kutter, J.P., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Integration of a microextraction
system: solvent extraction of Co-2-Nitroso-5-dimethylaminophenol complex
on a microchip, J. Microcol. Sep. 12(2), 93, 2000.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

234
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[18] Mikkers, F.E.P., Everearts, F.M., and Verheggen, T.P.E.M., High-performance
zone. Electrophoresis, J. Chromatogr., 169, 11, 1979.
 [19] Burgi, D.S. and Chien, R.L., Application and limits of sample stacking in cap-
illary electrophoresis, Meth. Mol. Biol., 52, 211, 1996.
[20] Chien, R.L. and Burgi, D.S., Sensitivity enhancement for capillary electrophore-
sis, Anal. Chem., 64, 489A, 1992.
[21] Burgi, D.S. and Chien, R.-L., Field ampliﬁed sample stacking: optimization in
sample stacking for high-performance capillary electrophoresis, Anal. Chem.,
63, 2042, 1991.
[22] Chien, R.-L. and Helmer, J.C., Anal. Chem., 63, 1354, 1991.
[23] Lichtenberg, J. Verpoorte, E., and de Rooij, N.F., Sample preconcentration by
ﬁeld ampliﬁcation stacking for microchip-based capillary electrophoresis, Elec-
trophoresis, 22, 258, 2001.
[24] Li, J. et al., Rapid and sensitive separation of trace level protein digests using
microfabricated devices coupled to a quadrupole—time-of-ﬂight mass spec-
trometer, Electrophoresis, 21, 198, 2000.
[25] Herr, A.E. et al., Electroosmotic capillary ﬂow with nonuniform zeta potential,
Anal. Chem., 72, 1053, 2000.
[26] Jacobson, S.C. and Ramsey, J.M., Microchip electrophoresis with sample stack-
ing, Electrophoresis, 16, 481, 1995.
[27] Kutter, J.P. et al., Determination of metal cations in microchip electrophoresis
using on-chip complexation and sample stacking, J. Microcolumn. Sep., 10, 313,
1998.
[28] Jacobson, S.C. et al., Effects of column geometry on the performance of micro-
chip electrophoresis devices, Anal. Chem., 66, 1107, 1994.
[29] Quirino, J.P. and Terabe, S., Approaching a million fold sensitivity increase in
capillary electrophoresis with direct ultraviolet detection: cation selective ex-
haustive injection and sweeping, Anal. Chem., 72, 1023, 2000.
[30] Kaniansky, D. et al., Capillary electrophoresis separations on a planar chip with
the column-coupling conﬁguration of the separation channels, Anal. Chem., 72,
3596, 2000.
[31] Prest, J.E. et al., Determination of metal cations on miniaturised planar poly-
meric separation devices using isotachophoresis with integrated conductivity
detection, Analyst, 126, 433, 2001.
[32] Effenhauser, C.S., Manz, A., and Widmer, H.M., Glass chips for high-speed
capillary electrophoresis separations with submicrometer plate heights, Anal.
Chem., 65, 2637, 1993.
[33] Jacobson, S.C. et al., Microchip capillary electrophoresis with an integrated
postcolumn reactor, Anal. Chem., 66, 3472, 1994.
[34] Harrison, D.J. et al., Integrated electrophoresis systems for biochemical analy-
ses, in Proceedings of the IEEE Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton
Head Island, SC, IEEE Electron Devices Society, 1994, 21.
[35] Fluri, K. et al., Integrated capillary electrophoresis devices with an efﬁcient
postcolumn reactor in planar quartz and glass chips, Anal. Chem., 68, 4285, 1996.
[36] Seiler, K. et al., Electroosmotic pumping and valveless control of ﬂuid ﬂow,
Anal. Chem., 66, 3485, 1994.
[37] Wang, J. et al., Micromachined separation chips with a precolumn reactor and
end-column electrochemical detector, Anal. Chem. 2000, 72, 5774–5778.
[38] Jacobson, S.C. et al., Precolumn reactions with electrophoretic analysis inte-
grated on a microchip, Anal. Chem., 66, 4127, 1994.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microfabricated Devices
235
[39] Eijkel, J.C.T. et al., Micromachined heated chemical reactor for pre-column
derivatization, J. Chromatogr., 815, 265, 1998.
[40] Swaile, D.F. and Sepaniak, M.J., Determination of metal ions by capillary zone
electrophoresis using on-column chelation, Anal. Chem., 63, 179, 1991.
[42] Liu, Y.J. et al., Electrophoretic separation of proteins on a microchip with
noncovalent, postcolumn labeling, Anal. Chem., 72, 4608, 2000.
[42] Wang, J. et al., Glucose biochip: dual analyte response in connection to two
pre-column enzymatic reactions, Analyst, 2001, 126, 1203–1206
[43] Mangru, S.D. and Harrison, D.J., Microchip-based capillary electrophoresis and
afﬁnity electrophoresis, Electrophoresis, 19, 2301, 1998.
[44] Verpoorte, E.M.J. et al., Silicon-based chemical microsensors and microsystems,
Interfacial Des. Chem. Sensing, 561, 244, 1994.
[45] Verpoorte, E.M.J. et al., 3-dimensional micro-ﬂow manifolds for miniaturized
chemical-analysis systems, J. Micromech. Microeng,. 4, 246, 1994.
[46] Daridon, A. et al., Chemical sensing using an integrated microﬂuidic system
based on colorimetrics: a comparative kinetic study of the Bertholet reaction
for ammonia determination in microﬂuidic systems, Sens. Actuators B, 76, 235,
2001.
[47] Daridon, A. et al., Multi-layer microﬂuidic glass chips for microanalytical ap-
plications, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem., 371, 261, 2001.
[48] Doku, G.N. and Haswell, S.J., Further studies into the development of micro
FIA (m FIA) system based on electroosomotic ﬂow for the determination of
phosphate as orthophosphate, Anal. Chim. Acta, 382, 1, 1999.
[49] Haswell, S.J., Development and operating characteristics of micro ﬂow injection
analysis systems based on electroosmotic ﬂow, Analyst, 122, R1, 1997.
[50] Wu, Q., Liu, C.L., and Smith, R.D., On-line microdialysis desalting for electro-
spray ionization mass spectrometry of proteins and peptides, Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom. 10, 835, 1996.
[51] Liu, C. et al., On-line microdialysis sample cleanup for electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry of nucleic acid samples, Anal. Chem. 68, 3295, 1996.
[52] Muddiman, D.C. et al., Characterization of PCR products from bacilli using
electrospray ionization FTICR mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 68, 3705, 1996.
[53] Xu, N. et al., A microfabricated dialysis device for sample cleanup in electro-
spray ionization mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 70, 3553, 1998.
[54] Xiang, F. et al., An integrated microfabricated device for dual-microdialysis
and on-line ESI ion trap mass spectrometry for analysis of complex biological
samples, Anal. Chem., 71, 1485, 1999.
[55] Xiang, F. et al., Characterization of microorganisms and biomarker development
from Global ESI-MS/MS analyses of cell lysates, Anal. Chem., 72, 2475, 2000.
[56] Liu, C. et al., On line dual microdialysis with ESI-MS for direct analysis of
complex biological samples and microorganism lysates, Anal. Chem., 70, 1797,
1998.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

237
9 
Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation: 
Microﬂow Cytometry and Applications
Choongho Yu and Li Shi
CONTENTS
9.1
Conventional Cytometers......................................................................... 237
9.2
Microﬂow Cytometers .............................................................................. 240
9.2.1
Particle Focusing Systems............................................................ 241
9.2.1.1
Hydrodynamic Focusing............................................... 241
9.2.1.2
Small Constriction .......................................................... 245
9.2.1.3
Dielectrophoretic Focusing............................................ 246
9.2.2
Detection Systems ......................................................................... 255
9.2.2.1
Optical Detection ............................................................ 255
9.2.2.2
Impedance Detection...................................................... 256
9.2.3
Sorting and Counting................................................................... 258
9.3
Summary..................................................................................................... 259
References ............................................................................................. 259
9.1
Conventional Cytometers
Flow cytometers are widely used for rapidly analyzing large populations of
cells and other particulate or molecular analytes that have been captured on
the surface of carrier particles. The analysis speed is in the range of 105 to
106 particles per minute. In addition, particles can be sorted based on their
distinct dielectric or ﬂuorescence properties. These capabilities have made
ﬂow cytometers indispensable in bioindustrial research and clinical diagnos-
tic applications for the last 40 years [1–4]. 
Two of the key components of a typical cytometer are the hydrodynamic
focusing system and the optical detection system. The hydrodynamic focus-
ing system uses a high-speed sheath ﬂuid medium to focus particles in a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

238
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
ﬂuid suspension within the focal point of the optical detection system. In
practice, the sheath ﬂuid is injected into a ﬂow chamber at a high speed and
particles are focused into a tight stream of 10 to 25 µm in diameter established
within a 50 to 300 µm–diameter ﬂow channel. In addition, the sheath ﬂuid
medium prevents impurities or agglomerated clusters from clogging the
channel. The hydrodynamic focusing system consists of a tapered ﬂow cham-
ber with a smaller diameter ﬂow channel or an oriﬁce at the end, as sche-
matically shown in Figure 9.1. In detail, the sample and sheath ﬂuids are
simultaneously supplied through two concentric ﬂuidic channels by using
a mechanical pump. The pressurized sheath ﬂuid pushes the particle sus-
pended in the sample ﬂuid to the center of the chamber and the oriﬁce. By
the time the particle reaches the optical detection region, the particle stream
is tightly focused within the focal point of the excitation source. The particle
trajectory in this so-called hydrodynamic focusing channel is represented by
the white dotted line in Figure 9.1. 
In order to conﬁne the particle stream within the focal point of the excitation
optics during the entire measurement, the ﬂuid ﬂow should be in the laminar
FIGURE 9.1
Schematic of a conventional ﬂow cytometer (not to scale).
Dichroic
mirror
Photo-
detector
Biological
particle
Oriﬁce
Sample ﬂow channel
Laser or light source
Hydrodynamic
focusing
Sheath
ﬂow
channel
Deﬂection plate for
sorting particles
Flow
chamber
Sheath
ﬂuid
direction
Filter
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
239
ﬂow regime, where the sample and sheath ﬂuids rarely mix together. In this
ﬂow regime, once the stream is stabilized, the particle tends to stay on the same
path in the ﬂuidic channel. The ﬂow in the channel is laminar when the Reynolds
number (Re) is less than approximately 2300. The Reynolds number is deﬁned
as Re ≡ ρuD/µ, where ρ, u, µ, and D are the density, velocity, dynamic viscosity
of ﬂuid, and the diameter of the channel, respectively. For example, the density
and the dynamic viscosity of water-based solutions are on the order of 103 kg/
m3 and 103 N⋅s/m2, respectively. The diameter of the channel is often less than
500 µm in conventional cytometers. Therefore, the ﬂow in a cytometer is usually
in the laminar regime unless the ﬂuid velocity is faster than a few meters per
second. Figure 9.2 shows a ﬂow of ink focused by sheath ﬂuid in the laminar
regime. It can be seen that the core and sheath ﬂuids are clearly separated.
In general, ﬂows in microﬂuidic devices are usually laminar ﬂows, in
which mixing is limited by the slow nature of molecular diffusion. While
there have been signiﬁcant efforts to enhance mixing in microﬂuidic chan-
nels, the slow mixing process in microchannels is a very attractive feature
for cytometry applications. Moreover, this feature allows one to integrate a
sorting mechanism with a focusing channel because it is relatively easy to
switch the ﬂow direction without disturbing the particle streams, as will be
discussed in a subsequent section.
Another key component of a ﬂow cytometer is the optical system that excites
ﬂuorescently labeled particles and detects photons of selected wavelengths.
The particle trajectory is coincident with the focus of one or more illumination
sources and detectors that are used to determine the light scattering and
ﬂuorescence properties of individual particles. Because the ﬂuorescence or
scattering signal is much weaker than the excitation, it is important to align
various optical components including dichroic mirrors, ﬁlters, and photode-
tectors in order to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio. The excitation light can
consist of one or more wavelengths depending on the type or number of light
sources. Xenon and mercury lamps generate polychromatic incoherent lights
that require complicated optics for ﬁltering and focusing. They are inherently
FIGURE 9.2
Photographs of a stream of hydrodynamically focused ink along the center of the tube in the
laminar ﬂow regime. The ink ﬂows from the left to the right. (From Melamed, M. R., Lindmo,
T., and Mendelsohn, M. L., Flow Cytometry and Sorting, Copyright © Wiley, New York, 1991.
Reprinted with permission of Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

240
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
inferior to monochromatic and coherent laser lights, which are often used for
conventional cytometry applications. However, lasers often consume a lot of
power and are much larger than microﬂudic devices. It is also difﬁcult to
fabricate solid-state lasers and microﬂuidic channels on the same chip. Hence,
it has been challenging to integrate lasers with microﬂuidic devices, and this
integration has been a topic of active research.
For optical detection, biological particles are stained by ﬂuorochromes.
Different particles can be selectively stained with different types of ﬂuoro-
chromes with different excitation and emission spectra, enabling one to
distinguish different cells or determine particle properties. Additionally, the
light scattering pattern of a particle depends on the particle shape. Forward-
angle light scattering (FALS) detection at an angle of about 0.5 to 5° can be
used for measuring the cell size, and side-angle light scattering (SALS) detec-
tion at an angle of about 15 to 150° can be used for measuring internal
granularity and surface roughness. The combination of FALS and SALS can
be used to discriminate dead and viable cells [1,3]. Dichroic mirrors installed
at a 45° angle to the path of an incident beam can be used to separate the
excitation and ﬂuorescence spectra into two different optical paths, one
transmitted light can be further ﬁltered by using a band-pass ﬁlter prior to
detection by a sensitive photodetector. The low intensity of the ﬂuorescence
signal requires the use of photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) with a high gain and
excellent signal-to-noise ratio. Because PMTs are bulky, it is rather difﬁcult
to integrate them with a microﬂuidic device. As a comparison, photodiodes
such as p-i-n (PIN) or avalanche photodiodes (APDs) can be made more
compact than PMTs. 
Conventional cytometers are equipped with a particle sorter at the end
of the oriﬁce as shown in Figure 9.1. Small droplets of the particle suspension
are formed by the application of controlled vibration at the end of the oriﬁce.
Under the inﬂuence of an electric or magnetic ﬁeld originating from the
deﬂection plates, the particles with different dielectric or magnetic proper-
ties are deﬂected toward different paths and subsequently collected by
different containers. It is rather difﬁcult to miniaturize this sorting mecha-
nism due to the difﬁculty in breaking the suspension into droplets in a
microﬂuidic device.
9.2
Microﬂow Cytometers
Hydrodynamic focusing and optical detection systems make conventional
cytometers complex, large, and expensive. First, the hydrodynamic particle
focusing mechanism requires a complicated system for controlling the proper
ﬂow rates of the sheath and sample ﬂows. In addition, a reservoir is required
for the sheath ﬂow medium, which also has to be supplied and kept free of
deﬂected and one transmitted, as shown in Figure 9.1. The deﬂected or
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
241
dust and bacteria. The optical system, moreover, is large, expensive, and
prone to misalignment from electrical drift, thermal expansion, and vibra-
tion. As a result, the system requires constant alignment and preventive
maintenance by skilled personnel. This prevents the wide use of cytometers
outside core facilities or laboratories for detecting pathogens, human disease,
hazardous species, and many other biological particles.
The recent development of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) tech-
nologies has provided a possible solution to the aforementioned problems
of conventional cytometers. Because of their small size, MEMS devices can
effectively handle micron-size biological cells and can be fabricated in large
volumes at low costs. In addition, they offer other potential beneﬁts such as
portability, low power consumption, disposability, ease of operation, sim-
plicity, small sample and sheath ﬂuid volumes, and on-chip integration of
electronic circuitry. If all optical components including light sources, detec-
tors, lenses, and ﬁlters can be integrated with a microﬂuidic device on the
same chip, the device would not require frequent alignment and maintenance
and would be much more robust and easier to operate than conventional
cytometers. Furthermore, a microﬂow cytometer can be used as a module
or a component of other medical diagnosis devices or micro total analysis
systems. Because of these potential beneﬁts of miniaturized cytometers, there
have been many attempts to fabricate microﬂow cytometers using MEMS
fabrication techniques.
Efforts to miniaturize a ﬂow cytometer can be categorized into three dif-
ferent groups: (1) the development of a microﬂuidic system for particle
focusing, (2) the integration of a detection system, and (3) the development
of a micro cell sorter and counter, as discussed in the following.
9.2.1
Particle Focusing Systems
One of the essential functions of the cytometer is to focus the particles within
the focal point of a detection system. Various approaches to the miniaturiza-
tion of the focusing mechanism have been investigated. These approaches
are based on pressurized sheath liquid or air ﬂows, electrokinetic ﬂows, small
constriction, or dielectrophoresis. Some of them require a sheath ﬂuid as in
a conventional cytometer, while the sheath ﬂuid is eliminated in some other
approaches. 
9.2.1.1
Hydrodynamic Focusing
The conventional hydrodynamic focusing mechanism is miniaturized in sev-
eral microcytometer designs. One of the very ﬁrst versions of a small-scale
sheath and sample ﬂow chamber was reported by Miyake et al. [5]. In this
work, small ﬂuidic channels were carved on three thin metal sheets. Glass
pieces were bonded with the metal pieces to form the ﬂow channel that
allowed optical access to the particles inside the channel. Sobek et al. [6]
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

242
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
fabricated a hexagonal ﬂuidic channel using multiple etching and bonding
procedures. A hypodermic needle was used for injecting the sample ﬂuid, and
optical waveguides were fabricated for detecting the ﬂuorescence signal. A
simpler microﬂow chamber based on a silicon micromachining process was
reported by Hodder et al. [7]. In their design, one sample and two sheath ﬂow
channels were created with the use of anisotropic etching of a silicon wafer.
A similar conﬁguration of the three separated ﬂuidic channels is shown in the
upper portion of Figure 9.3. When the three ﬂuidic channels were merged into
one, hydrodynamic focusing in the lateral direction occurred. The channel
height was 50 µm and the width of the channel ranged from 150 to 580 µm.
For optical measurements, a glass cover was bonded with the etched silicon
wafer by anodic bonding to complete a trapezoid-shaped channel. A similar
focusing system made of a glass wafer was reported by Lee et al. [8].
Recently, other new MEMS materials, such as plastics or polymers instead
of commonly used silicon and glass wafers, have been employed to fabricate
microﬂow cytometers. Plastic and polymer materials have become a popular
choice in bio-MEMS applications because the fabrication process is simple
and the materials are transparent, biocompatible, low in cost, and disposable.
However, some properties of polymers and plastics are inferior to those of
glass and silicon. For example, they often emit ﬂuorescence at a wavelength
close to the signal from particular analytes. Thus, one needs to be careful in
selecting a ﬂuorochrome for use in a polymeric ﬂuidic channel. In addition,
they are less resistive to heat and chemicals than glass or silicon. In some
applications, the polymer surface needs to be treated in order to prevent
unwanted surface reactions with molecules in the ﬂow. Additionally, their
electrical breakdown voltage is often not high enough to allow for electro-
kinetically driven ﬂows.
FIGURE 9.3
SEM of an etched Si mold for soft lithograpahy patterning of a PDMS hydrodynamic focusing
microchannel. The channel is 7.6 µm deep and 25 µm wide. (From Dittrich P. S. and Schwille,
P., Anal. Chem., 75, 5767, 2003. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
243
Conventional silicon micromachining procedures are used for the fabrication
of the molds for soft lithography patterning of polymer-based microcytome-
an upstanding channel patterned on a silicon wafer [9]. One of the upper three
branches is for the sample ﬂow. while the other two are for the sheath ﬂow.
The middle and lower branches are for particle sorting. The microﬂuidic chan-
nel was made of an intaglio on a solidiﬁed poly dimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
layer, which was formed from liquid phase PDMS poured on the mold. Lee
et al. [10] used quartz to fabricate the template for imprinting patterns on a
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) layer. Figure 9.4 shows a two-dimensional
(2D) hydrodynamic focusing channel using this so-called hot embossing
method. The sample and sheath ﬂows can be injected into the three separate
channels shown on the left of the image. The middle channel was for the
sample ﬂow, and the upper and lower channels were for the sheath ﬂow.
Similar 2D liquid sheath ﬂuid systems for hydrodynamic focusing were devel-
oped by Tung et al. [11] and Kruger et al. [12]. 
Yang et al. [13] used a thick SU-8 negative photoresist to create a three-
dimensional (3D) hydrodynamic focusing channel. They tilted the direction
of exposure for cross-linking the resist so as to form the slanted focusing
sample and sheath ﬂuid were formed in subsequent exposures, as shown in
Figures 9.5 b and c. Note that the exposed portions of a negative photoresist
were cross-linked and became hardened. 
The aforementioned designs require a large amount of liquid sheath ﬂuid,
which is difﬁcult to accommodate in a microcytometer. Huh et al. [14]
replaced the liquid sheath medium with air to eliminate the large sheath
liquid reservoirs, that is, 250 to 1000 mL for 1 mL biological samples. They
FIGURE 9.4
Photograph of a microﬂuidic focusing chamber fabricated by using the hot embossing method.
The depth of the channel is around 40 µm. (From Lee, G.-B., Hung, C.-I., Ke, B.-J., Huang, G.-
R., Hwei, B.-H., and Lai, H.-F., ASME J. of Fluids Engineering, 123, 672, 2001. Reprinted with
permission from ASME.)
1.2 mm
0.3 mm
0.6 mm
ters. Figure 9.3 shows a scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the mold of
chamber shown in Figure 9.5a. A suspended hole and sidewalls for injecting
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

244
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
FIGURE 9.5
Fabrication process of a 3D hydrodynamic focusing channel made of SU-8 negative photoresist.
(a) A slanted ﬂow chamber was formed with the use of a 30° tilted exposure from the substrate.
(b) A suspended injector nozzle at the center of the sample ﬂuid channel was formed after
subsequent exposure at a 45° tilted angle. (c) The sidewalls of the focusing chamber were
ﬁnalized after a vertical exposure. (From Yang, R., Feeback, D. L., and Wang, W., Sensors
Actuators A, 118, 259, 2005. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.)
Titled expose light
Cross section view
Side view
Cross section view
Side view
Cross section view
Top view
Top view
(a)
30°
(b)
Top view
(c)
Titled
expose
light
Expose
light
Expose light
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
245
demonstrated that stable focusing could be achieved with the use of com-
pressed air as a sheath ﬂuid in a microﬂuidic channel. 
A mechanical pump is often required in a hydrodynamic focusing system
to deliver the high-speed sheath ﬂuid. However, the miniaturization of the
ﬂuid pump has remained a challenging task. Alternative approaches to the
pressure-driven sheath ﬂow have been investigated. In one approach, electric
manipulation of biological particles was employed by Schrum et al. [15]. In
their work, electrokinetically driven sheath ﬂuid was used to focus the sample
ﬂow, and the mechanical pump was replaced with a high voltage power
supply. As shown in the photo images of Figure 9.6 (obtained using a time-
integrated charge coupled device [CCD] camera), the sample ﬂuid was focused
laterally. The two sheath ﬂow channels were perpendicular to the sample and
waste ﬂow channel in order to maximize the focusing capability near the
junction. High voltages in the range of 102 to 103 V were used to drive the
sheath ﬂuid. The application of this approach is limited by the susceptibility
of biological cells to the high electric ﬁeld. Fu et al. [16] and Jacobson et al.
[17] also reported the use of electrokinetic ﬂows with similar designs.
9.2.1.2
Small Constriction
Except for Huh et al.’s work with an air sheath ﬂow, the aforementioned
microcytometer based on the hydrodynamic focusing approach required a
FIGURE 9.6
An electrokinetic focusing microﬂuidic channel. The sample ﬂuid was focused by introducing
the sheath ﬂuids in a direction perpendicular to the sample ﬂow. (From Schrum, D. P., Culbert-
son, C. T., Jacobson, S. C., and Ramsey, J. M., Anal. Chem., 71, 4173, 1999. Reprinted with
permission of the American Chemical Society.)
Sample
100 V/cm
Focus 2
Focus 1
300 V/cm
Probe
region
Waste
300 V/cm
700 V/cm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

246
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
large sheath ﬂuid reservoir, which needs to be kept free of dust and bacteria
in addition to a complicated ﬂuidic control system for ensuring proper rates
of the ﬂuid medium. To address these problems, microcytometers without
the need of a sheath ﬂow have been developed. One of the approaches was
to use a small constriction to focus the sample ﬂow. For example, Altendorf
et al. [18] used a small V-groove constriction as the focusing channel without
using a sheath ﬂow. The V-groove channel was 15 µm deep and 20 to 25 µm
wide, and was made by anisotropic etching of a silicon wafer. Gawad et al.
[19] fabricated 40 µm–wide and 20 µm–deep rectangular-shaped channel that
was used for impedance detection of the particles with high signal-to-noise
ratio. The small channel sizes in these designs require careful sample prep-
aration in order to prevent channel clogging. 
9.2.1.3
Dielectrophoretic Focusing
Recently, dielectrophoresis focusing has been investigated to replace the
hydrodynamic focusing mechanism or a small constriction design in order
to eliminate the sheath ﬂow and prevent channel clogging. In dielectrophore-
sis, a nonuniform AC electric ﬁeld induces a dipole moment in a charge-
neutral particle, causing the particle to move toward a region of maximum
or minimum electric ﬁeld strength [20]. A dielectrophoretic force 
, acting
on a spherical particle of radius r, subjected to an AC electric ﬁeld 
 of
angular frequency ω, can be calculated as [21]
(9.1)
The subscripts m, p, and rms stand for medium, particle, and root-mean-
square value, respectively. The term 
 is the complex permittivity of the
indexed material, which is deﬁned as
(9.2)
where ε and σ are the permittivity and electrical conductivity, and j = 
.
For a spherical homogeneous particle with ohmic loss, the expression
, referred as the Clausius–Mossotti factor, is deﬁned as 
(9.3)
At frequencies well above and below 
, the real
component of the Clausius–Mossotti factor becomes independent of the
frequency of the electric ﬁeld [22], that is,
I
F
I
E
I
I
F
r
f
E
m
p
m
rms
=
∇
2
3
2
πε
ε
ε
Re[ (
,
)]
*
*
εi
*
ε
ε
σ
ω
i
i
i
j
*
/
=
−
−1
f
p
m
(
,
)
*
*
ε
ε
f
j
p
m
p
m
p
m
p
m
p
m
(
,
)
(
)/
*
*
*
*
*
*
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
σ
σ
ω
=
−
+
=
−
−
−
2
ε
ε
σ
σ
ω
p
m
p
m
j
+
−
+
2
2
(
)/
τ
σ
σ
ε
ε
MW
p
m
p
m
−
=
+
+
1
2
(
)/(
)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
247
(9.4)
On the other hand, the Clausius–Mossotti factor for a heterogeneous par-
ticle, such as a biological cell, deviates from Equation 9.3 due to the different
polarizability of the particle. For instance, eukaryotic cells, which contain a
nucleus and other organelles suspended in a semiﬂuid medium called the
cytosol, are enclosed by outer membranes. Those layered spherical particles
can be modeled using an effective complex permittivity. For the particle that
has a single outer shell of thickness d, the complex permittivity of the particle
in Equation 9.3 can be substituted by the effective complex permittivity
described as [22]
(9.5)
where 
 and 
 are the complex permittivity of the shell and that of the
cell interior, respectively. In the case of d << r, which holds for most of the
cells without a cell wall, such as mammalian cells, 
 in Equation 9.5 can be
calculated as
(9.6)
where Cs
*, Cs, and Gs are the complex speciﬁc capacitance, speciﬁc capaci-
tance, and speciﬁc conductance of the shell, respectively.
As shown in Equation 9.1, the dielectrophoretic force depends on the prop-
erties of the particle and the medium as well as the amplitude of the applied
electric ﬁeld. The force is attractive or repulsive depending on the sign of the
real component of the Clausius–Mossotti factor, which is a function of the
frequency of the electric ﬁeld as well as the dielectric properties of the particle
acting on particles in a nonuniform electric ﬁeld in a 2D space. When particles
are attracted to or repelled from regions of high electric ﬁeld strength, the
phenomenon is respectively called positive or negative dielectrophoresis.
Re[ (
,
)]
,
*
*
f
p
m
p
m
p
m
MW
p
m
ε
ε
σ
σ
σ
σ
ωτ
ε
ε
ε
→
−
+
<<
−
2
1
for
p
m
MW
+
>>







2
1
ε
ωτ
,
for
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
p eff
s
s
s
r
r
d
,
*
*
int
*
*
int
*
*
=
−



+
−
+
3
2
2




−



−
−
+




r
r
d
s
s
3
2
ε
ε
ε
ε
int
*
*
int
*
* 














εs
*
εint
*
εs
*
ε
ω
s
s
s
s
C d
C
jG
d
*
*
(
)
=
=
−
and the suspending medium. Figure 9.7 shows the dielectrophoretic force
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

248
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
At the so-called crossover frequency, 
 is 0, thereby the dielec-
trophoretic force acting on the particle is zero. At frequencies above the
crossover frequency, 
 is often positive for mammalian cells with
a maximum value of 1, whereas at frequencies below the crossover frequency,
 has a minimum value of 0.5. The dielectric properties of the
particle are affected by several factors including the particle type, membrane
structure, internal organization, and in the case of cells, viability. 
To estimate the frequency range for negative and positive dielectrophoresis,
one can calculate the Clausius–Mossotti factors as a function of the frequency
of the applied voltage. For example, the factor for a homogeneous particle like
latex beads can be calculated by using Equation 9.3. The permittivities of the
bead and the medium used in the calculation were 2.5ε0 and 80ε0, where ε0 is
the permittivity of free space. The conductivity of the latex beads can be
calculated as 
, where 
 and Ks are the bulk conductiv-
ity and surface conductance of the latex bead. The bulk conductivity is approx-
imately zero and the typical value of the Ks is on the order of 1 nS [23,24]. The
Clausius–Mossotti factor is negative regardless of the frequency, as shown in
typical value used for a ﬂow cytometer, as shown in case c in Figure 9.8. 
For heterogeneous particles such as biological cells, the single-shell model
with effective permittivity, that is, Equations 9.5 and 9.6, is often used.
Although some of the cells have multiple shells and complex organelles, the
single-shell model is frequently used with averaged dielectric properties of
the shell and the cell interior due to difﬁculties in ﬁnding the property of each
function of the frequency of the applied voltage for different dielectric prop-
erties of a biological cell. The dielectric properties of the membrane of  HL-60
leukemia cells [25] and the typical dielectric properties of the interior of a blood
cell [26] were used for the calculation of case a in Figure 9.9. Within the typical
FIGURE 9.7
A schematic diagram showing the positive and negative dielectrophoretic forces exerted on
particles in a nonuniform electric ﬁeld. (From Yu, C., Vykoukal, J., Vykoukal, D., Schwartz, J.,
Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14, 480, 2005. Reprinted with permission
from IEEE.)
Electrode
FPos
FNeg
Particle
Positive
dielectrophoresis
Negative
dielectrophoresis
Electric
ﬁeld lines
Re[ (
,
)]
*
*
f
p
m
ε
ε
Re[ (
,
)]
*
*
f
p
m
ε
ε
Re[ (
,
)]
*
*
f
p
m
ε
ε
σ
σ
p
p bulk
s
K
r
=
+
,
/
2
σp bulk
,
case a in Figure 9.8, unless the medium conductivity is much lower than the
element in a single cell. Figure 9.9 shows the Clausius–Mossotti factor as a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
249
range of the dielectric properties of biological cells [27], negative dielectro-
phoresis is expected at frequencies below about 100 kHz. At high frequencies
above 100 kHz, the dielectrophoretic force is determined by the frequency-
FIGURE 9.8
The Clausius–Mossotti factor for a 10 µm–diameter latex bead as a function of the frequency of
the applied voltage for the different dielectric properties of the medium and the bead. The
permittivity and conductivity of the bead are 2.5ε0 and 8 × 104 S/m, ε0 is the permittivity of free
space. The unit of σm is S/m. (From Yu, C., Vykoukal, J., Vykoukal, D., Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and
Gascoyne, P.R.C., J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14, 480, 2005. Reprinted with permission from IEEE.)
FIGURE 9.9
The Clausius–Mossotti factor as a function of the frequency of the applied voltage for different
dielectric properties of a 10 µm–diameter biological cell. εint and σint are the permittivity and the
electrical conductivity of the cell interior. The units of Cs, Gs, and σint are mF/m2, kS/m2, and
S/m, respectively. The thickness of the membrane is 5 nm. The permittivity and conductivity
of the medium are 80ε0 and 0.056 S/m, respectively. (From Yu, C., Vykoukal, J., Vykoukal, D.,
Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14, 480, 2005. Reprinted
with permission from IEEE.)
Frequency (Hz)
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Clausius–Mossotti factor
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
c. σm = 2 × 10–5
b. σm = 8 × 10–4
a. σm = 0.038
Frequency (Hz)
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Clausius–Mossotti factor
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
a. Cs = 17.5, Gs = 2.5, εint = 120ε0, σint = 0.5
b. Cs = 17.5, Gs = 25, εint = 120ε0, σint = 0.5
c. Cs = 5, Gs = 0.02, εint = 50ε0, σint = 0.1
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

250
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
dependent complex permittivities, and thus strongly depends on the fre-
quency. At low frequencies, on the other hand, the conductivities dominate
the Clausius–Mossotti factor. In a living cell, the conductivity of the plasma
membrane is several orders of magnitude smaller than that of the cell interior
[28]. Depending on the conductivity of the medium and that of the cell interior,
either positive or negative dielectrophoresis is achieved. For instance, when
the medium conductivity is on the same order of or one order of magnitude
smaller than that of the cell interior, the large difference between the conduc-
tivity of the membrane and that of the suspending medium can result in the
maximum negative value of the Clausius–Mossotti factor. In other words, a
large negative force weakly depending on the frequency can be expected at
frequencies below 100 kHz, unless the membrane conductance is assumed to
be much higher than the range of 20 to 2000 S/m2 of a typical biological cell
needs to be avoided in order to prevent hydrolysis of the medium.
As discussed later in this chapter, negative dielectrophoresis has been
employed in microﬂow cytometers. In order to optimize dielectrophoretic
focusing regardless of the particle type and structure, one needs to operate
the microcytometer in a regime where the repulsive dielectrophoretic force
is maximized. This can be achieved by using a frequency well below the
crossover value and a voltage below the threshold for which cell damaging
by the electric ﬁeld occurs.
Cui et al. [29] developed a cytometer based on traveling wave dielectro-
phoresis (twDEP) that moves particles to the optical detection region by
applying an AC electric ﬁeld generated from an array of electrodes. A small
channel size is needed in this design because of the lack of a focusing
mechanism. Additionally, the traveling speed of particles, approximately 13
µm/s, is lower than the speed of up to a few m/s in a conventional cytometer.
Fiedler et al. [30] and Morgan et al. [31] used a pair of funnel-shaped micro-
bottom of a ﬂuidic channel for focusing micron- and nanometer-size particles
via negative dielectrophoresis. Cheung et al. [32] reported a similar design to
focus particles for impedance spectroscopy. In these designs, an AC electric
ﬁeld was applied between the two identical funnel-shaped electrodes, one
patterned on the top and the other on the bottom of the channel. The particles
were repelled by the electric ﬁeld away from the electrodes and focused grad-
ually toward the center of the channel. The focusing was achieved using
negative DEP force without the need of a sheath ﬂuid or a narrow channel
width. Nevertheless, the channel heights of these designs need to be as small
as 30 µm to obtain a large electric ﬁeld gradient, and thus a sufﬁciently large
focusing force at an applied voltage below the threshold for cell damage.
Similar small channel heights have also been used in 2D hydrodynamic
formed by fusion bonding of two etched glass wafers [33]. Note that the
channel height was only a few times larger than the typical size of a cell
in order to ensure vertical focusing. However, channel clogging can be
[27], as in case b of Figure 9.9. Note that a very low frequency close to DC
electrodes, which are marked as E in Figure 9.10, patterned on the top and
focusing channels. Figure 9.11 shows a cross-sectional area of such a channel
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
251
problematic for the small channel height in either the hydrodynamic focus-
ing or DEP focusing channels.
There have been a few attempts to develop 3D focusing channels employ-
ing dielectrophoresis. Lin et al. [34] combined hydrodynamic focusing and
dielectrophoretic focusing to focus particles in both the lateral and vertical
directions. They fabricated electrodes on the top and bottom walls at the
downstream part of the hydrodynamic focusing channel. The particles were
focused in the lateral direction using the hydrodynamic focusing mechanism
and in the vertical direction using negative dielectrophoresis. 
Yu et al. [35] explored the use of dielectrophoresis to obtain 3D focusing
without the use of hydrodynamic focusing. They designed a ring-shaped
microelectrode array to focus biological particles using negative dielectro-
the microchannel from all directions by negative dielectrophoretic force gen-
erated by the fringing ﬁeld from the ring-shaped microelectrodes patterned
FIGURE 9.10
Photograph of a pair of funnel-shaped electrodes patterned on the bottom of a microchannel.
The dark areas marked as E are electrodes and the ﬂow direction is indicated by the arrow.
The width of the exit gap of the particles is 35 µm and the channel height is 30 µm. (From
Fiedler, S., Shirley, S. G., Schnelle, T., and Fuhr, G., Anal. Chem., 70, 1909, 1998. Reprinted with
permission of the American Chemical Society.)
FIGURE 9.11
Cross-section view of a typical micromachined ﬂow cytometer. (From Lin, C.-H., and Lee,
G.-B., J. Micromech. Microeng. 13, 447, 2003. Reprinted with permission from IOP Pupl.)
Sheath ﬂow
chamber #1
093108  25 KV
X77.0
.39 mm
Cell ﬂow
chamber
Sheath ﬂow
chamber #2
phoresis, as shown in Figure 9.12. Particles are directed toward the center of
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

252
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
on the circumference of an elliptic-like channel. In this conﬁguration, the
electric ﬁeld strength gradually changes in the radial direction of the channel
with the region of the minimum ﬁeld gradient located at the center of the
channel. Figure 9.13a shows the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld (E) in a cross-
section along the longitudinal direction of the 100 µm–diameter channel when
FIGURE 9.12
A schematic diagram of a microﬂuidic channel with an array of interdigitated ring-shaped
microelectrodes patterned on the circumference of the channel for dielectrophoretic particle
focusing. (From Yu, C., Vykoukal, J., Vykoukal, D., Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C.,
J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14, 480, 2005. Reprinted with permission from IEEE.)
FIGURE 9.13
(a) Calculation results of the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld (E) in a cross-section of the 100
µm–diameter channel when a DC voltage of 7.5 V is applied to the black electrodes and the
white electrodes are grounded. The permittivity and conductivity of the ﬂuid in the channel
are 80 ε0 and 0.056 S/m. The ﬁeld strength is represented by the gray-scale bar. (b) The
calculation results of the 
 vector ﬁeld. The vector points toward the center of the channel.
The magnitude of 
 is represented by the gray-scale bar. (From Yu, C., Vykoukal, J.,
Vykoukal, D., Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14, 480, 2005.
Reprinted with permission from IEEE.)
Elliptic-like channel
Elliptic-like electrode
Bottom wafer
Top wafer
(a) E(V/m)
(b) –  E2(V2/m3)
1.50 × 105
1.32 × 105
1.15 × 105
9.75 × 104
8.00 × 104
6.25 × 104
4.50 × 104
1.00 × 1015
5.62 × 1014
3.16 × 1014
1.78 × 1014
1.00 × 1014
2.75 × 104
1.00 × 104
Electrode
7.5V  0V
∆
−∇E2
−∇E2
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
253
a DC voltage of 7.5 V is applied to one of the two sets of the interdigitated
the –∇E2 vector ﬁeld. Because the dielectrophoretic force is proportional to
the product of the Clausius–Mossotti factor and ∇E2 as described in Equation
9.1, the force is parallel to the direction of the –∇E2 vector ﬁeld when the
real part of the Clausius–Mossotti factor is negative. The minima of the
magnitude of the electric ﬁeld were found to be at the center of the channel,
where particles were focused by negative dielectrophoresis. Figure 9.14
shows a photograph of the bottom half of the dielectrophoretic focusing
channel etched into a glass wafer. Two of these etched glass wafers were
to prevent clogging.
The width of the focusing stream was measured when the amplitude of
the applied voltage was varied from 0 to 20 V at three different frequencies,
10, 30, and 100 kHz. The results were shown for polystyrene beads and
streams at the three different frequencies varies in the low voltage range, it
steadily decreases with the applied voltages at any speciﬁc frequency. At
15 Vp-p, the cells were focused within 10 to 15 µm, sufﬁciently small for
cytometry applications. On the other hand, at voltages below 5 V, the dielec-
trophoretic force was too weak to hold the particles at the center of the
channel because the dielectrophoretic force falls exponentially with the dis-
tance from the edges of the electrodes [36].
FIGURE 9.14
A photograph of the elliptic-like channel with the Au/Cr electrode array. (From Yu, C., Vyk-
oukal, J., Vykoukal, D., Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14,
480, 2005. Reprinted with permission from IEEE.)
Electrode
100 µm
Channel
width
Separation between
two electrodes
Electrode
Elliptic-like
channel
ring-shaped electrodes and the adjacent set is grounded. Figure 9.13b shows
thermally bonded together to create the elliptic-like channel shown in Figure
channel wall. This design allows a large channel diameter of about 100 µm
9.12. An AC voltage is applied between adjacent electrode rings on the
human leukemia cells in Figure 9.15. Although the width of the particle
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

254
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
To verify that the particle was indeed focused by a negative dielectrophoretic
force, they varied the frequency of the applied AC voltage and observed that
the latex beads could not be focused when the frequency was 200 Hz at a
medium conductivity of 2 × 10–5 S/m. This observation agrees with their
is positive at this frequency and cannot be used to focus the latex beads.
Additionally, they found that the leukemia cells cannot be focused at a
frequency much higher than 100 kHz, indicating that the Clausius–Mossotti
factor becomes positive or close to zero at high frequencies, in agreement
focusing observed for the beads and cells at the frequency window of 10 to
100 kHz was not due to other effects such as Joule heating of the medium.
In addition, the temperature rise due to Joule heating could be estimated as
 [37], where σ  and k are the electrical conductivity and the
thermal conductivity of the medium, respectively. For σ = 0.038 S/m, Vrms =
5.3 V, k = 0.6 
, the temperature rise is on the order of 2°C. This
small temperature rise was not sufﬁcient to focus particles via thermally
induced ﬂuid ﬂow. 
At a voltage of 15 Vp-p, they did not observe signatures indicating cell
damage. According to the investigation by Forster et al. [38] and Muller et
al. [39] on the effect of an electric ﬁeld on cell viability, yeast cells were not
damaged by exposure in an electric ﬁeld of up to approximately 7 × 105 V/
m. At an applied voltage of 15 Vpp, the maximum voltage difference between
the two adjacent electrodes in the focusing channel is 7.5 V. As shown in
5
channel when a voltage of 7.5 V is applied. Thus, the ﬁeld strength is expected
to be below the threshold for damaging the cell. Additionally, Wang et al.
[40] found that an accumulation of electrochemically generated peroxide in
the suspending medium by an electric ﬁeld could account for cell damage,
FIGURE 9.15
The width of a ﬂow stream of microbeads (left) and human leukemia cells (right) as a function
of the applied voltage at different frequencies. (From Yu, C., Vykoukal, J., Vykoukal, D.,
Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., J. Microelectromech. Syst. 14, 480, 2005. Reprinted
with permission from IEEE.)
Applied voltage (Vp-p)
0
5
10
15
20
Applied voltage (Vp-p)
0
5
10
15
20
Width of the particle stream (µm) 
0
50
100
150
200
250
  10 kHz
  30 kHz
100 kHz
Width of the particle stream (µm)
0
50
100
150
200
250
10 kHz
30 kHz
100 kHz
∆T
V
k
rms
≈σ
2 /
J m s K
1
1
1
−
−
−
calculation results shown in case c of Figure 9.8 that the dielectrophoretic force
with case a of Figure 9.9. The frequency dependence would suggest that the
Figure 9.13a, the ﬁeld strength is below 7 × 10  V/m at most part of the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
255
but can be eliminated by the addition of catalase to the suspending medium.
In the ﬂuidic device of Yu et al. [35], the medium is continually refreshed
and thereby the peroxide accumulation would be negligible. In the focusing
channel, furthermore, the cells were moved away from the high ﬁeld region
very quickly into the center with the minimum ﬁeld strength. Hence, cells
can be focused at a voltage of about 15 Vp-p without being damaged.
9.2.2
Detection Systems
Microorganisms can be detected with the use of a variety of methods includ-
ing optical, electrochemical, impedance, piezoelectric, and acoustic methods
[41]. Schwarz et al. [42] have reviewed spectroscopic and electrochemical
detection methods in microsystems, including ﬂuorescence, absorbance,
chemiluminescence, amperometry, and conductometry. Depending on the
application, different methods have their own advantages.
9.2.2.1
Optical Detection
The common detection method for ﬂow cytometry is optical detection of
light scattering and ﬂuorescence. In the ﬂuorescence detection approach,
different cells are selectively stained with different ﬂuorescent dyes. The
excitation must be narrowly focused on the particle stream in order to
increase the signal-to-noise ratio. Because the ﬂuorescence intensity is often
several orders of magnitude smaller than the excitation intensity, one or more
dichroic and band-pass ﬁlters are used to reduce the scattered and excitation
lights that reach the detector. To increase the signal-to-noise ratio further, the
ﬂuorescent light needs to be focused into the detection zone of a photode-
tector, which needs to be highly sensitive. A PMT is often used as the detector
due to its high sensitivity. Ideally, all optical components, including light
sources, ﬁlters, lenses, and photodetectors, should be self-aligned and inte-
grated on-chip with the microﬂow focusing channel.
These stringent requirements make it difﬁcult to miniaturize the optical
detection system and integrate it with microﬂow focusing channel. To date,
the miniaturization and integration of the complex optical systems is one of
the key challenges for developing microﬂow cytometers, as well as other
lab-on-a-chip devices or micro total analysis systems.
Despite these challenges, an optical detection scheme has been used in
several microcytometer designs because the optical properties of biological
particles are well established for cytometry applications. Ideally, with the
optical components integrated directly with the microﬂow focusing channel,
the optical component does not need frequent alignment and maintenance.
In several efforts toward achieving this goal, off-the-shelf optical components
were assembled with microﬂuidic focusing channels [15,18,29,43]. On the
other hand, there have also been intense efforts toward the miniaturization
and on-chip integration of these components. For example, small laser diodes
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

256
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
or light emitting diodes (LEDs) were mounted or fabricated on the microf-
luidic channel to serve as the excitation source in the experiments by Tung
et al. [11], Kruger et al. [12], Cui et al. [29], and Chabinyc et al. [44]. For
transmitting the excitation or ﬂuorescence signals, optical ﬁbers were embed-
ded near the microﬂuidic channel. Alternatively, optical wave guides incor-
porated with optical ﬁbers were also used to achieve this goal.
[8,16,33,34,44–46]. For optical waveguides, spin-on-glass (SOG)/SU-8 photo-
resist [8] or silicon nitride/silicon oxide [6,47] can be used. Additionally,
Grosse et al. [48] fabricated optical leaky wave guides on a glass wafer, and
Camou et al. [49] fabricated PDMS 2D optical lenses near microﬂuidic chan-
nels in order to improve the the signal-to-noise ratio of ﬂuorescence spec-
troscopy. Figure 9.16 shows an integrated optical detection system developed
by Tung et al. [11] In this system, optical ﬁbers were inserted into prefabri-
cated grooves close to the optical detection region. They demonstrated the
feasibility of two-color excitation and detection in a single interrogation zone. 
In addition to the miniaturization of the light source, the PMT that was
often used in a large-scale cytometer was replaced with a miniaturized and
inexpensive PIN photodiode or APD in a few microcytometer developments.
Tung et al. [11] used a lock-in detection method to improve the signal-to-
noise ratio of the PIN detector. To achieve high sensitivity, Kruger et al. [12]
and Chabinyc et al. [44] integrated APD with microﬂuidic devices with
optical ﬁlter coatings or a colored polycarbonate ﬁlter.  
9.2.2.2
Impedance Detection
Cell properties can also be analyzed with the use of an impedance detection
system integrated with a microﬂow cytometer. The impedance detection
scheme is based on the Coulter counter principle [50]. In this approach, the
impedance of a medium is monitored when a particle stream ﬂows through
the detection zone. The recorded impedance signal is used for cell counting
FIGURE 9.16
A microﬂuidic channel with multiple embedded optical ﬁbers for two-color excitation and
detection. (From Tung, Y.-C., Zhang, M., Lin, C.-T., Kurabayashi, K., and Skerlos, S. J., Sensors
Actuators B, 98, 356, 2004. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier.)
Sample
Red
detection
Red
excitation
Blue
excitation
Interrogation
zone
100 µm
Green
detection
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
257
and size measurements. This technique is much less complicated than the
optical detection method because it does not require cell modiﬁcation, such
as tagging ﬂuorescence markers or antibodies. It is also much easier to
miniaturize the impedance detection mechanism than the optical detection
method. However, impedance detection is generally slow and the density of
cells needs to be low.
Ayliffe et al. [51] were able to distinguish different cell types using an
electric impedance measurement technique in a microﬂuidic device. In their
experiment, cells were ﬂowed through a 10 µm–wide and 4 µm–high chan-
nel with protruding electrodes on the two sidewalls of the channel ﬁlled
with electrically conducting liquid. In this electrode conﬁguration, a change
of the electrical resistance in the liquid-ﬁlled capillary can be detected as a
particle passes through the channel. Gawad et al. [19] used an array of
electrodes patterned on the bottom of the channel to perform impedance
spectroscopy. They demonstrated that their microcytometer could be used
to distinguish erythrocytes from ghost cells. Cheung et al. [32] patterned
electrodes on the top and bottom of the channel for sizing the biological
particles with the use of impedance spectroscopy as shown in Figure 9.17.
In these two latter designs, the impedance values measured by two sets of
electrodes were compared. When one cell is between one pair of electrodes
with no intervening cell between the other pair of electrodes, the difference
in the impedance of the suspending ﬂuid can be detected. In order to ensure
only one cell passing through the detection region at a time, the density of
the cell needs to be low.
FIGURE 9.17
Top (a) and side (b) views of the measurement channel of the microfabricated impedance
spectroscopy. The impedance of two pairs of electrodes are compared when a particle passes
through one of the interrogation regions as shown in (b). (From Cheung, K., Gawad, S., and
Renaud, P., in Proc. IEEE Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS), 2004, 343. Reprinted with
permission from IEEE.)
Particle
Electrodes detect the
passage of a particle
Electrodes measure
the reference medium
(a)
(b)
Fluid
ﬂow
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

258
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
9.2.3
Sorting and Counting
A particle sorter or counter can be added to the focusing and detection
channel of the microﬂow cytometer. Fiedler et al. [30] used dielectrophoresis
to sort biological particles, while Fu et al. [52,53] fabricated ﬂuorescence-
activated cell sorter. Alternatively, a similar concept of the conventional cell
additional ﬂuidic channels can be fabricated at the downstream of the particle
focusing channel to replace the deﬂection plates of a conventional large-
scale cytometer. As demonstrated by Dittrich et al. [9] in Figure 9.18, the
horizontal ﬂuidic channels were used to deﬂect the particle stream. The end
of the main ﬂow channel can be separated into two or more paths for
collecting different types of particles. The ﬂow was driven by using a
mechanical pump [12] or by using an electrokinetic ﬂow [9,16]. The switch-
ing speed of an electrokinetic ﬂow is usually faster than that of a pressure-
driven ﬂow, although a high voltage is required for the operation. Some
other sorters can potentially be integrated with a microﬂow cytometer.
Carlson et al. [54] have reported a different blood cell sorter made of a lattice
of channels. Cells can also be sorted and trapped within a cage created by
negative dielectrophoresis from an electric ﬁeld generated by electroplated
metal posts [55].
On the other hand, particles can also be counted with the use of an optical
or impedance detection method. For example, Altendorf et al. [18] used an
external optical system to count different blood cells by measuring the inten-
sity of small- and large-angle scattering. In a different work, two parallel
optical ﬁbers for excitation and detection were embedded close to the ﬂuidic
channel. The scattered light was monitored as the particles ﬂowed across the
optical path [16].
Cell counting has been realized with the use of a Coulter counter by
recording the peaks in the recorded impedance signal. In a Coulter counter,
FIGURE 9.18
Photograph of an electrokinetic sorting device showing particle streams before the switching
ﬂuid was injected (the left panel), after the switching ﬂuid was injected from the left (the middle
panel), and from the right (the right panel) to the main stream. (From Dittrich P. S. and Schwille,
P., Anal. Chem., 75, 5767, 2003. Reprinted with permission of the American Chemical Society.)
25 µm
sorter shown in Figure 9.1 can be exploited in microcytometers. For example,
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
259
the signal depends on the particle size and dielectric properties, and the
signal-to-noise ratio increases as the channel size decreases. In order to
maximize the impedance signal, Koch et al. [56] reduced the size of the
detection channel and used a particle ﬁlter in front of the channel in order
to avoid sample clogging. A detailed description of the resistive-pulse sens-
ing method can be found in Bayley et al. [57].
9.3
Summary
This chapter discusses the miniaturization of ﬂow cytometers for analyzing
biological particles. Many attempts have been made to miniaturize the con-
ventional hydrodynamic focusing method and also to utilize dielectro-
phoretic focusing for use in a microﬂow cytometer. Three-dimensional
focusing has been achieved by using a 3D design of a hydrodynamic focusing
microchannel fabricated using a soft photolithography–based process, by
combining hydrodynamic focusing with dielectrophoresis focusing, and by
using a dielectrophoretic focusing channel with an array of ring-shaped
electrodes patterned on the elliptic channel wall. 
One of the major challenges to the fabrication of a microcytometer is the
miniaturization and on-chip integration of the optical detection system. There
have been attempts to replace bulky and complex light sources and optical
components with miniaturized LEDs, integrated waveguides and optical
ﬁbers, and compact PINs or APDs. The success of this approach critically
depends on the future advancement of optical MEMS research. Meanwhile,
micro cell sorters and counters based on the Coulter counter principle have
been demonstrated and used successfully in microﬂow cytometers.
Although many of the microcytometer designs bear similarity to conven-
tional large-scale systems, new approaches such as dielectrophoresis have
received increasing attention. The further development in the research
described in this chapter can potentially lead to highly effective, portable,
and low-cost microcytometers, which can be used as a stand-alone device
as well as a module in a micro total analysis system. 
References
[1] Shapiro, H.M., Practical Flow Cytometry, Wiley, New York, 1995.
[2] Melamed, M.R., Lindmo, T., and Mendelsohn, M.L., Flow Cytometry and Sorting,
Wiley, New York, 1991.
[3] Watson, J.V., Introduction to Flow Cytometry, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, U.K., 1991.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

260
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[4] Ormerod, M.G., Flow Cytometry, Oxford University Press, New York, 2000.
[5] Miyake, R., Ohki, H., Yamazaki, I., and Yabe, R., A development of micro sheath
ﬂow chamber, in Proc. IEEE Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS), 1991, 265.
[6] Sobek, D., Young, A.M., Gray, M.L., and Senturia, S.D., A microfabricated ﬂow
chamber for optical measurements in ﬂuids, in Proc. IEEE, 2, 1993, 219.
[7] Hodder, P.S., Blankenstein, G., and Ruzicka, J., Microfabricated ﬂow chamber
for ﬂuorescence-based chemistries and stopped-ﬂow injection cytometry, An-
alyst, 122, 883, 1997.
[8] Lee, G.-B., Lin, C.-H., and Chang, G.-L., Micro ﬂow cytometers with buried
SU-8/SOG optical waveguides, Sensors Actuators A, 104, 165, 2003.
[9] Dittrich P.S. and Schwille, P., An integrated microﬂuidic system for reaction,
high-sensitivity detection, and sorting of ﬂuorescent cells and particles, Anal.
Chem., 75, 5767, 2003.
[10] Lee, G.-B., Hung, C.-I., Ke, B.-J., Huang, G.-R., Hwei, B.-H., and Lai, H.-F.,
Hydrodynamic focusing for a micromachined ﬂow cytometer, ASME J. of Fluids
Engineering, 123, 672, 2001. 
[11] Tung, Y.-C., Zhang, M., Lin, C.-T., Kurabayashi, K., and Skerlos, S.J., PDMS-
based opto-ﬂuidic micro ﬂow cytometer with two-color, multi-angle ﬂuores-
cence detection capability using PIN photodiodes, Sensors Actuators B, 98, 356,
2004.
[12] Kruger, J., Singh, K., O’Neill, A., Jackson, C., Morrison, A., and O’Brien, P.,
Development of a microﬂuidic device for ﬂuorescence activated cell sorting, J.
of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 12, 486, 2002.
[13] Yang, R., Feeback, D.L., and Wang, W., Microfabrication and test of a three-
dimensional polymer hydro-focusing unit for ﬂow cytometry applications,
Sensors Actuators A, 118, 259, 2005.
[14] Huh, D., Tung, Y.-C., Wei, H.-H., Growtherg, J.B., Skerlos, S.J., Kurabayashi, K.,
and Takayama, S., Use of air-liquid two-phase ﬂow in hydrophobic microﬂuidic
channels for disposable ﬂow cytometers, Biomedical Microdevices, 4, 141, 2002.
[15] Schrum, D.P., Culbertson, C.T., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Microchip
ﬂow cytometry using electrokinetic focusing, Anal. Chem., 71, 4173, 1999.
[16] Fu, L.-M., Yang, R.-J., Lin, C.-H., Pan, Y.-J., and Lee, G.-B., Electrokinetically
driven micro ﬂow cytometers with integrated ﬁber optics for on-line cell/
particle detection, Analytica Chimica Acta, 507, 163, 2004.
[17] Jacobson S.C. and Ramsey J.M., Electrokinetic focusing in microfabricated
channel structures, Anal. Chem., 69, 3212, 1997.
[18] Altendorf, E., Zebert, D., Holl, M., and Yager, P., Differential blood cell counts
obtained using a microchannel based ﬂow cytometer, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, IL, 1997, 531.
[19] Gawad, S., Schildb, L., and Renauda, Ph., Micromachined impedance spectros-
copy ﬂow cytometer for cell analysis and particle sizing, Lab on a Chip, 1, 76, 2001.
[20] Pohl, H.A., Dielectrophoresis, Cambridge University Press, London, U.K., 1978,
chap. 1.
[21] Wang, X.-B., Huang, Y., Becker, F.F., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., A uniﬁed theory of
dielectrophoresis and traveling wave dielectrophoresis, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.,
27, 1571, 1994.
[22] Jones, T.B., Electromechanics of Particles, Cambridge University Press, New York,
1995, chaps. 2 and 3.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices in Cell Manipulation
261
[23] Arnold, W.M., Schwan, H.P., and Zimmermann, U., Surface conductance and
other properties of latex particles measured by electrorotation, J. Phys. Chem.,
91, 5093, 1987.
[24] Morgan, H., Hughes, M.P., and Green, N.G., Separation of submicron biopar-
ticles by dielectrophoresis, Biophys. J., 77, 516, 1999.
[25] Wang, X., Becker, F.F., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., Membrane dielectric changes
indicate induced apoptosis in HL-60 cells more sensitively than surface phos-
phatidylserine expression or DNA fragmentation, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1564,
412, 2002.
[26] Yang, J., Huang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, X.-B., Becker, F.F., and Gascoyne, P.R.C.,
Dielectric properties of human Leukocyte subpopulations determined by elec-
trorotation as a cell separation criterion, Biophys. J., 76, 3307, 1999.
[27] Gascoyne, P.R.C., Becker, F.F., and Wang, X.-B., Numerical analysis of the in-
ﬂuence of experimental conditions on the accuracy of dielectric parameters
derived from electrorotation measurements, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 36, 115,
1995. 
[28] Gascoyne, P.R.C., Wang, X.-B., Huang, Y., and Becker, F.F., Dielectrophoretic
separation of cancer cells from blood, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 33, 670, 1997.
[29] Cui, L., Zhang, T., and Morgan, H., Optical particle detection integrated in a
dielectrophoretic lab-on-a-chip, J. Micromech. Microeng., 12 ,7, 2002.
[30] Fiedler, S., Shirley, S.G., Schnelle, T., and Fuhr, G., Dielectrophoretic sorting of
particles and cells in a microsystem, Anal. Chem., 70, 1909, 1998.
[31] Morgan, H., Holmes D., and Green, N.G., 3D focusing of nanoparticles in
microﬂuidic channels, in Proc. IEE Nanobiotechnol., 150, 76, 2003.
[32] Cheung, K., Gawad, S., and Renaud, P., Microﬂuidic impedance spectroscopy
ﬂow cytometer: particle size calibration, in Proc. IEEE Microelectromech. Sys.
(MEMS), 2004, 343.
[33] Lin, C.-H. and Lee, G.-B., Micromachined ﬂow cytometers with embedded
etched optic ﬁbers for optical detection, J. Micromech. Microeng. 13, 447, 2003.
[34] Lin, C.-H., Lee, G.-B., Fu, L.-M., and Hwey, B.-H., Vertical focusing device
utilizing dielectrophoretic force and its application on microﬂow cytometer, J.
Microelectromech. Sys., 13, 923, 2004.
[35] Yu, C., Vykoukal, J., Vykoukal, D., Schwartz, J., Shi, L., and Gascoyne, P.R.C.,
A three-dimensional dielectrophoretic particle focusing channel for micro-cy-
tometry applications, J. Microelectromech. Sys., 14, 480, 2005.
[36] Wang, X.-B., Vykoukal, J., Becker, F.F., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., Separation of
polystyrene microbeads using dielectrophoretic/gravitational ﬁeld-ﬂow-frac-
tionation, Biophys. J., 74, 2689, 1998.
[37] Ramos, A., Morgan, H., Green, N.G., and Castellanos, A., AC electrokinetics: a
review of forces in microelectrode structures, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 31, 2338, 1998.
[38] Forster, E., and Emeis, C.C., Quantitative studies on the viability of yeast
protoplasts following dielectrophoresis, FEMS Microbiology Letters, 26, 65, 1985.
[39] Muller, T., Pfennig, A., Klein, P., Gradl, G., Jager, M., and Schnelle, T., The
potential of dielectrophoresis for single-cell experiments, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Mag., November/December 2003, 51.
[40] Wang, X., Yang, J., and Gascoyne, P.R.C., Role of peroxide in AC electrical ﬁeld
exposure effects on Friend murine erythroleukemia cells during dielectro-
phoretic manipulations, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1426, 53, 1999.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

262
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[41] Gruden, C., Skerlos, S., and Adriaens, P., Flow cytometry for microbial sensing
in environmental sustainability applications: current status and future pros-
pects, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 49, 37, 2004.
[42] Schwarz, M.A. and Hauser, P.C., Recent developments in detection methods
for microfabricated analytical devices, Lab on a Chip, 1, 1, 2001.
[43] Byun, I., Kim, W., and Park, S., A micro ﬂow cell cytometry based on MEMS
technologies using silicon and optical ﬁbers, J. Mater. Sci., 38, 4603, 2003.
[44] Chabinyc, M.L., Chiu, D.T., McDonald, J.C., Stroock, A.D., Christian, J.F., Karger,
A.M., and Whitesides, G.M., An integrated ﬂuorescence detection system in
poly(dimethylsiloxane) for microﬂuidic applications, Anal. Chem., 73, 4491, 2001.
[45] Kanda, M., Nakata, M., Osoegawa, M., Niwa, S., Yamashita, T., Suzuki, S., and
Murayama, K., Flow cytometer using a ﬁber optic detection system, in Proc.
SPIE, 4260, 2001, 155.
[46] Qi, S., Liu, X., Ford, S., Barrows, J., Thomas, G., Kelly, K., McCandless, A., Lian,
K., Goettert, J., and Soper, S.A., Microﬂuidic devices fabricated in poly (methyl
methacrylate) using hot-embossing with integrated sampling capillary and
ﬁber optics ﬂuorescence detection, Lab on a Chip, 2, 88, 2002. 
[47] Kutter, J., P., Mogensen, K.B., Friis, P., Jorgensen, A.M., Petersen, J.N., Telleman,
P., and Hubner, J., Integration of waveguides for optical detection in microfab-
ricated analytical devices, in Proc. SPIE, 4177, 2000, 98.
[48] Grosse, A., Grewe, M., and Fouckhardt, H., Deep wet etching of fused silica
glass for hollow capillary optical leaky waveguides in microﬂuidic devices, J.
Micromech. Microeng., 11, 257, 2001.
[49] Camou, S., Fujita, H., and Fujii, T., PDMS 2D optical lens integrated with
microﬂuidic channels: principle and characterization, Lab on a Chip, 3, 40, 2003.
[50] Coulter W.H., High speed automatic blood cell counter and cell size analyzer,
in Proc. Natl. Electronics Conf., 12, 1956, 1034.
[51] Ayliffe, E., H., Frazier, A.B., and Rabbitt, R.D., Electric impedance spectroscopy
using microchannels with integrated metal electrodes, J. Microelectromech. Sys.,
8, 1, 1999.
[52] Fu, A.Y., Chou, H.P., Spence, C., Arnold, F.H., and Quake, S.R., An integrated
microfabricated cell sorter, Anal. Chem., 74, 2451, 2002.
[53] Fu, A.Y., Spence, C., Scherer, A., Arnold, F.H., and Quake, S.R., A microfabri-
cated ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorter, Nature Biotechnol., 17, 1109, 1999.
[54] Carlson, R.H., Gabel, C.V., Chan, S.S., Austin, R.H., Brody, J.P., and Winkelman,
J.W., Self-sorting of white blood cells in a lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 11, 1997.
[55] Voldman, J., Martha L., Gray, M.T., and Martin A.S., A Microfabrication-Based
Dynamic Array Cytometer, Anal. Chem., 74, 3984, 2002. 
[56] Koch, M., Evans, A.G.R., and Brunnschweiler, A., Design and fabrication of a
micromachined coulter counter, J. Micromech. Microeng. 9, 159, 1999.
[57] Bayley, H. and Martin, C.R., Resistive-pulse sensings from microbes to mole-
cules, Chem. Rev., 100, 2575, 2000.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Part III
Sensing Technologies
for Bio-MEMS Applications
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

265
10
Coupling Electrochemical Detection
with Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis
Carlos D. García and Charles S. Henry
CONTENTS
10.1
Introduction.............................................................................................. 266
10.2
Motivations for Electrochemical Detection......................................... 267
10.3
Historical Development ......................................................................... 267
10.4
Instrumental Development.................................................................... 268
10.5
Electrode Conﬁgurations ....................................................................... 270
10.5.1
Off-Chip Detection ................................................................... 270
10.5.2
Microfabricated Electrodes...................................................... 272
10.5.3
Other Electrode Conﬁgurations ............................................. 273
10.6
Detection Modes...................................................................................... 275
10.6.1
Amperometry ............................................................................ 275
10.6.2
Pulsed Electrochemical Detection.......................................... 277
10.6.3
Conductivity .............................................................................. 278
10.6.4
Other Electrochemical Detection Modes............................... 281
10.7
Dual Electrochemical Detection and ECD Coupled
to Other Detection Modes ..................................................................... 281
10.8
Decouplers................................................................................................ 282
10.9
Electrode Materials and Designs.......................................................... 283
10.9.1
Thin-Film Metallic Electrodes................................................. 284
10.9.2
Carbon Electrodes..................................................................... 285
10.10 Conclusions and Future Directions...................................................... 288
Acknowledgments.............................................................................................. 288
References ............................................................................................. 288
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

266
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
10.1
Introduction
Laboratory-on-a-chip (LOC) or µ-total analysis systems (µTAS) are some of
the names given to a novel class of analytical tools that emphasize minia-
turization and integration of function to enhance device performance.1
Because these devices can contain a wide range of different sample pretreat-
ment and analysis methods on a single monolithic structure, the ﬁnal goal
of most µTAS devices is to integrate an entire laboratory onto a single micro-
chip. Since the initial report describing a gas chromatography column fab-
ricated on a silicon wafer,2 an enormous number of papers have been
published showing the capabilities of microdevices. Some of the advantages
of µTAS over conventional bench-top systems include custom design,
reduced consumption of reagents and sample, lower waste generation, and
increased analysis speed and portability.
Much of the initial research in µTAS devices has focused on the use of
capillary electrophoresis (CE). CE is very attractive for miniaturized devices
because it offers high separation efﬁciency, low cost, fast analysis, and min-
imal waste generation. An additional advantage of CE is the simplicity of
the required instrumentation. In CE, the separation takes place inside a
capillary (ID < 100µm) ﬁlled with an electrolyte solution. When a potential
is applied at the extremes of the capillary, ions migrate based on their elec-
trophoretic mobility. The electrophoretic mobility of an ion depends on its
charge-to-mass ratio, the magnitude of the applied potential and the elec-
trolytic solution conditions (viscosity, pH, and ionic strength). Bulk ﬂow is
also generated inside the capillaries by a process referred as electroosmotic
ﬂow (EOF). EOF occurs as a result of the formation of a charged ionic double
layer at the capillary–buffer interface when a potential is applied to the
extremes of the capillary. As a result of the applied potential, the double
layer moves and carries the bulk solution through the capillary.3 This ﬂow
mechanism requires no moving parts and therefore can be easily miniatur-
ized. Microchip CE combines most of the advantages of CE with sample
handling capabilities, custom design, portability, low power requirements,
and (sometimes) similar analytical performance. Microchip CE also allows
high separation speed, minimum sample consumption, low analysis cost,
and automation.
Many modes of detection have been employed to monitor separations on
microchip CE devices but for many reasons, the most commonly used detec-
tion method is laser-induced ﬂuorescence (LIF).4 However, the cost of optical
instrumentation, the frequent need for analyte derivatization, and the limited
portability of LIF have led to a signiﬁcant interest in electrochemical detec-
tion (ECD) as an attractive alternative for detection for microchip CE. 
In this chapter, an introduction to microchip CE with electrochemical detec-
tion (CE-ECD) is provided. First, motivations for coupling microchip CE-
ECD and early developments in the ﬁeld are presented. This is followed by
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
267
two sections on instrument development and electrode conﬁgurations. The
remaining portion of the chapter focuses on detection waveforms and appli-
cations of microchip CE-ECD. It is worth mentioning that additional material
containing valuable information about different aspects of microchip CE,5
microchip CE-ECD,6–17 detection for microﬂuidic systems,18,19 and micro-
fabrication20,21 can also be found in previously presented material.
10.2
Motivations for Electrochemical Detection
Electrochemical detection (ECD) offers great promise for µTAS. ECD can be
used with many different assay types, ranging from CE to DNA and protein
arrays. Furthermore, ECD features include remarkable mass sensitivity
(approaching that of ﬂuorescence), inherent miniaturization of both the detec-
tor and control instrumentation, independence from sample turbidity, optical
path length, or substrate clarity, low cost, minimal power demands, and high
compatibility with advanced micromachining and microfabrication technol-
ogies.15 In addition, ECD does not scale linearly with decreasing electrode
size, a limitation in most optical methods. Therefore, it is easier to miniaturize
the detection elements and still maintain a signiﬁcant signal level. Further-
more, with the use of microfabrication, it is possible to integrate multiple
electrodes into a single microchip, thus improving the ability to perform more
selective and more sensitive detection modes. Finally, electrodes for detection
can be fabricated at the same time as electrodes for driving the electrophoresis,
making the overall microfabrication process very efﬁcient.
10.3
Historical Development
Capillary electrophoresis (CE) was developed as a powerful tool for the
separation of biomolecules and credit is normally given to Jorgenson and
Lukacs for the initial report of the modern version of this technique.22 CE
has evolved from these humble beginnings showing separation of proteins
in an open tube to include a vast array of different analytes and methodol-
ogies. For an extensive introduction to CE, it is recommended that readers
consult the excellent review presented by Righetti.23
Initial CE research used optical detection methods such as UV absorbance
during the ﬁrst years of development. It was not long, however, before other
methods of detection began to appear. Ewing is generally credited with the
ﬁrst report of electrochemical detection coupled with conventional CE.24
While not the main focus of the current manuscript, it is worth considering
this initial development because many of the same problems faced in the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

268
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
development of conventional CE-ECD are also faced in the development of
microchip CE-ECD. In the initial work of Wallingford and Ewing, a 75 µm
fused silica capillary was used, and a carbon ﬁber working electrode was
aligned at the exit of the capillary. The major obstacle faced in this work was
trying to measure a nA signal in the presence of the large background current
(µA) generated by the separation potential. To overcome this problem, the
authors used a current decoupler. Decouplers provide a ground for the
separation current prior to the working electrode, but do not signiﬁcantly
impede ﬂow. In this ﬁrst example of CE-ECD, a small section of the fused
silica was etched with HF, leaving a porous conductive joint. It was soon
recognized by Ewing and others that a simple approach to decoupling the
separation and detection currents was to use capillaries with smaller inner
diameters (approximately 25 µm) and place the electrode just outside the
capillary exit. Ewing was also able to couple ECD with micellar electrokinetic
chromatography (MEKC) to separate neutral compounds.25 
The development of microchip CE-ECD, like the development of conven-
tional CE-ECD did not take place until several years after the ﬁrst report of
microchip CE by Manz et. al.26 Again, it was Ewing’s group that reported
the ﬁrst microfabricated device for CE-ECD.27 In this device, an electrode
array was fabricated at the end of a wide, shallow, continuous electrophoretic
separation channel. Shortly after the publication of this work, Mathies’s
group published the ﬁrst example of microchip CE-ECD in what is now
considered the conventional format with a cross-shaped microchannel pat-
tern.28
electrodes were fabricated on a glass microchip after etching channels. Upon
sealing of a top piece of glass to complete the channel, the ﬁrst microchip
CE-ECD system with integrated electrodes was realized. Using this system,
they were able to separate dopamine, epinephrine, and catechol as well as
DNA fragments from two different bacterial systems. For DNA, the authors
adopted an indirect detection mode using Fe-(phen)3
2+ in the background
buffer. Upon intercalation to DNA, the Fe-(phen)3
2+ could no longer be
detected giving a negative signal. These original papers on microchip CE-
ECD set the stage for what has now become a growing and active ﬁeld of
research and development in µTAS.
10.4
Instrumental Development
One advantage of using electrochemical detection with microchip CE is the
ability to miniaturize the associated instrumentation for both the electrophore-
sis and detection. Furthermore, because all of the components are electronic,
it should be possible to construct a small rugged system for point-of-measure-
ment applications. Several research groups have demonstrated the ability to
generate small portable analyzers and high-voltage power supplies.
 Their basic chip design is shown in Figure 10.1. In their design, Pt
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
269
The ﬁrst example of a miniaturized and integrated microchip CE-ECD
system was published by Martin and coworkers.29 In their system, the detec-
tion electrodes were placed directly in the channel, and the working electrode
was controlled with an electrically isolated potentiostat. The use of an in-
channel electrode signiﬁcantly reduced the peak skew and thus the ability
to resolve more peaks. Furthermore, the electrically isolated potentiostat
prevented the electrophoresis voltage from interfering with the potentiostat.
A second example of miniaturizing instrumentation was published by Bald-
win’s group.30 In their work, the authors integrated both the potentiostat for
FIGURE 10.1
Capillary electrophoresis chip with integrated electrochemical detection ﬁrst produced by
Mathies’s group. (a) Overall chip layout. (b) Schematic drawing of the alignment of the reference
electrode relative to the access hole and working electrodes. (c) Scanning electron microscope
image showing the working electrode alignment in a ﬁnal device. (Reprinted from Woolley,
A.T., Lao, K., Glazer, A.N., and Mathies, R.A., Anal. Chem. 1998, 70(4), 684–688. With permission.)
Counter
electrode
(a)
(b)
(c)
Working
electrode
Injection
channel
Injection waste
reservoir
Detection
reservoir
5 mm
Reference electrode
Counter
electrode
Separation
channel
Working
electrode
UCB
20 kV
100 µm
x250
37 mm
Exit
channel
Sample
reservoir
High-voltage
reservoir
Separation
channel
Access
hole
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

270
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
electrochemical detection and the high-voltage power supply for controlling
electrophoresis. A battery-powered potentiostat was used to isolate the inter-
fering separation current, allowing the ECD of cotechol and dopomine. The
combined system was an amazing 4 in. × 6 in. × 1 in. and weighed only 350
g. A third example of miniaturizing the instrumentation for microchip CE-
ECD was published by Garcia and coworkers.31 In this work, a simple 3-
channel power supply with integrated analog controls was constructed. The
power supply could be operated in any of the three standard injection modes:
gated, pinched, or hydrodynamic. The system could operate from either
battery or AC power sources and had a battery lifetime of two hours for
continuous operation. The ﬁnal example of a miniaturized integrated micro-
chip CE-ECD system was published by Jiang and coworkers.32 In their exam-
ple, a miniaturized potentiostat was produced that ﬁt in a card that was
3.6 × 5.0 cm. A high-voltage power supply was also generated that could
produce up to 4000 V and perform either gated or pinched injection.
10.5
Electrode Conﬁgurations
The second key element in developing an effective electrochemical detector
is the interface between the microchip and the electrode. To date, there have
been two popular methods for coupling, which we will refer to here as off-
chip detection and microfabricated electrodes. In the off-chip electrode con-
ﬁguration, the electrodes are separate from, but aligned to, the microchip.
With microfabricated electrodes, the electrodes are produced using micro-
machining techniques and are contained on the same microchip as the elec-
trophoresis system. Finally, there has been recent interest in the development
of other electrode conﬁgurations, that integrate electrodes as part of the
microchip but do not use micromachining methods for construction. This
section will present the major types of electrode conﬁgurations and their
advantages and disadvantages.
10.5.1
Off-Chip Detection
The ﬁrst two electrode conﬁgurations reported for microchip CE-ECD used
microfabricated electrodes, however off-chip electrodes quickly became the
most popular approach because they could be made with existing electrodes
and required signiﬁcantly less microfabrication time and expertise. Much of
the earlier work in this ﬁeld was pioneered by Wang’s group.33,34 Wang’s group
the end of a glass microchip that had been cut to expose the separation channel.
A simple Teﬂon spacer provided constant spacing between the working elec-
trode and the outlet of the channel. Using this conﬁguration, Wang’s group
used a simple X-positioner as shown in Figure 10.2a to align an electrode with
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
271
was able to demonstrate several important separations and modes of detection
including amperometry and voltammetry. An example of one of these sepa-
rations is shown in Figure 10.2b from a report detailing the comparison of
glass and poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) microchips for CE-ECD.35 The
major advantages of off-chip electrodes include excellent electrode stability
and a wide range of electrode materials, including chemically modiﬁed elec-
trodes. The major disadvantages of off-chip electrodes include tedious or man-
ual electrode alignment and limits to the number of working electrodes that
can be used simultaneously. The remainder of this section provides examples
of different types of off-chip detection conﬁgurations.
In addition to the work of Wang’s group, several other examples of micro-
chip CE-ECD using off-chip electrode conﬁgurations have been published.
One example of this was a simple design for electrode alignment published
by Zeng and coworkers.36 In their system, a traditional microelectrode was
used for detection and aligned using a simple X-positioner. The positioner
was integrated as part of the microchip holder to simplify device alignment
and use. With this system and a carbon-ﬁber electrode, they were able to
achieve a detection limit of 240 nM for dopamine, and showed nice sepa-
rations of several catecholamine neurotransmitters. A second interesting
example of using off-chip electrodes for detection was published by Coltro
and coworkers.37 In their example, microchips were made by printing the
pattern on transparencies followed by thermal sealing of two layers of the
polyester material. The toner used in the printing process served as the
spacer to form the channel. Electrodes for these devices were made by
patterning the metal layer present on a compact disk, making the overall
system very inexpensive and easy to assemble in laboratories without
microfabrication equipment. A ﬁnal interesting example of off-chip elec-
trode alignment systems was published by Bao and coworkers.38 In their
FIGURE 10.2
(a) Schematic drawing of the alignment system initially developed by Wang’s group for micro-
chip CE-ECD. (Reprinted from Wang, J., Tian, B., and Sahlin, E., Anal. Chem. 1999, 71(23), 5436–
5440. With permission.) (b) Electropherograms showing the comparison of glass and PMMA
microchips used for the separation of different compounds. (Reprinted from Wang, J., Pumera,
M., Chatrathi, M.P., Escarpa, A., Konrad, R., Griebel, A., Dorner, W., and Lowe, H., Electrophoresis
2002, 23(4), 596–601. With permission.) 
F
G T
T
T
T
R
S
U
G
Current
P
K
H
D E
C
A
Q
L
L
N
O
M
A
b
a
Time
a
b
B
20 nA
30 s
20 nA
30 s
B
J
(a)
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

272
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
report, a simple X-Y-Z positioner was used to hold the electrode in close
proximity to the outlet of the microchip. Using this system, it was feasible
to switch between electrodes of different materials. Several other interesting
examples of off-chip electrode conﬁgurations have been published, which
readers are encouraged to investigate as well.39,40
10.5.2
Microfabricated Electrodes
Microfabrication provides the ability to generate large numbers of well-
deﬁned electrodes on planar surfaces. It was for this reason that both Ewing’s
and Mathies’s groups took this approach when they developed the ﬁrst
microchip CE-ECD systems. Microfabricated electrodes also have the advan-
tage of being produced using many of the same methods that are used for
fabrication of the channels for electrophoresis. The major advantages of
microfabricated electrodes include ease of fabrication using existing micro-
fabrication methods, production of electrode arrays for multielectrode detec-
tion, and integration of electrodes as part of the microchip. The major
disadvantages of microfabricated electrodes include the cost of fabrication
relative to off-chip electrodes, a limited number of electrode materials that
can be used, and longevity of the electrodes under electrophoresis conditions.
Furthermore, it is difﬁcult to fabricate multiple electrodes from different
materials in a single microchip without signiﬁcantly increasing the fabrica-
tion time and complexity. The remaining portion of this section details exam-
ples of microfabricated electrodes coupled with microchip CE.
Numerous examples of microchip CE-ECD systems using integrated elec-
trodes have been published in recent years. The following highlights some
examples of this approach but is by no means exhaustive. Instead, we hope
to highlight several good examples of how this approach can be used to
perform microchip CE-ECD. One example of integrated electrodes was pub-
lished by Baldwin’s group.41,42 In their approach, electrodes for both detection
and electrophoresis were integrated on one substrate, along with the micro-
approach was the use of recessed channels to contain the electrodes. Elec-
trodes were fabricated in channels that were recessed in the glass prior to
sealing the microchip, facilitating the ability to form very good seals around
the electrodes. A second interesting example of microchip CE-ECD that used
traditional micromachining methods was reported by S. Lunte’s group.43 In
this effort, dual Au electrodes were fabricated on a glass substrate and then
a poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) substrate containing the channels was
sealed on top of the electrodes. The use of dual electrodes provides an addi-
tional degree of selectivity based on relative oxidation and reduction poten-
tials. For example, in the separation of a mixture of tyrosine, 5-hydroxyindole-
3-acetic acid, and catechol, only catechol is reversibly oxidized and gives a
peak at the second electrode. Lunte’s group also extended this work to inte-
grate electrodes directly in the channel, as discussed above in Section 10.4.29 
channels. As can be observed in Figure 10.3, one unique aspect of their
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
273
In addition to traditional microfabrication methods, several groups have
demonstrated hybrid methods for microchip CE-ECD. Osborne and C. Lunte
were among the ﬁrst to report the use of a decoupler to improve detection
limits with microchip CE-ECD.44 More discussion of decouplers will be pro-
vided later in this chapter. Using this conﬁguration, the authors achieved
detection limits as low as 25 nM. A second example of using hybrid micro-
fabrication techniques to produce CE-ECD microchips was reported by Man-
ica and Ewing.45 In their approach, a Au-coated glass plate was patterned
by inking the metal with a permanent marker followed by etching of the
exposed Au and Cr. Finally, the ink was removed with a simple acetone
rinse. The electrophoresis channel was made from PDMS and sealed directly
over the electrode pattern. Using this approach, the authors were able to
achieve detection limits of 648 nM for dopamine.
10.5.3
Other Electrode Conﬁgurations
In addition to the two main categories of electrodes used with microchip
CE-ECD, several groups have demonstrated alternative electrode conﬁgura-
tions that are interesting with respect to the current discussion. In these cases,
FIGURE 10.3
Photographs of (a) entire CE/ED microchip and (b) magniﬁed (30×) top view of the ED cell and
electrodes. (Reprinted from Keynton, R.S., Roussel, T.J., Crain, M.M., Jackson, D.J., Franco, D.B.,
Naber, J.F., Walsh, K.M., and Baldwin, R.P., Anal. Chim. Acta 2004, 507(1), 95–105. With permission.)
100 um
(a)
(b)
Exit of
separation
channel
Working
electrode
Reference
electrode
Edge of drilled
reservoir hole
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

274
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
the authors have sought to maintain the portability of microchip CE-ECD
by integrating the electrodes as part of the microchip without using micro-
fabrication techniques for their creation. This approach has several advan-
tages. First, a wider variety of electrode materials and chemically modiﬁed
electrodes can be coupled to microchip CE. Second, multielectrode detection
systems can be made without the use of extensive cleanroom systems. 
The ﬁrst example of this approach was presented by the Lunte group when
they demonstrated the alignment of a Pt wire at the exit of a capillary channel
made from a low-temperature, co-ﬁred ceramic microchip.46 While this work
demonstrated the principle, several later reports showing the integration of
carbon-ﬁber and carbon-paste electrodes provided better performance. Car-
bon is an attractive electrode material for detection of biological molecules
because it resists electrode fouling. Carbon electrodes cannot be produced
using traditional microfabrication methods, leaving an important gap in
electrode materials. In the work of Lunte, an additional channel was fabri-
cated in one piece of the material, and an electrode was aligned prior to ﬁnal
assembly of the system.47,48 Hauser’s group published a similar report64 using
metallic wires at roughly the same time as the work of Lunte’s group. In
their design, the end of the separation capillary was etched to a conical shape
and a traditional microelectrode aligned in the opening. They were able to
demonstrate the use of several different electrode materials, including cop-
per, and the electrodes were integrated as part of the microchip and dem-
onstrated the ability to detect a wide range of analytes, including
catecholamines, phenolic compounds, carbohydrates, and amino acids.
Another approach to fabrication of carbon electrodes was recently dem-
onstrated by Martin’s group. In their approach, a PDMS channel of the
electrode pattern was produced and reversibly sealed to a glass substrate.
Carbon ink diluted with solvent to reduce the viscosity, was pushed through
the channel and then the solvent driven off in a heating step. The PDMS was
removed leaving behind a trace of the carbon. The resulting microelectrodes
were 6 µm high on average and possessed very good electrochemical behav-
ior. The author was able to demonstrate the use of the electrodes in both a
ﬂow injection mode as well as with electrophoresis using an integrated thin-
ﬁlm Pd decoupler to provide a sensitive, stable electrode system. The authors
also showed the ability to increase selectivity of the electrodes using a
Naﬁon® coating on the electrodes.
A ﬁnal approach to the fabrication of electrode systems using integrated
microwires was recently reported by Garcia et al. and Liu et al.49,50 Building
on the previous work of Hauser and Lunte, this system integrated solid metal
wires into the microchip. Unlike the work of Lunte, however, the electrodes
were placed directly in the ﬂowing stream by incorporating the electrode
alignment channel in the same PDMS layer as the separation channels.49 The
system has proven to be easy to fabricate, generates very low detection limits,
and can be adapted to many different electrode conﬁgurations. In many
ways, the design provides the advantages of both off-chip and microfabri-
cated electrodes without many of the disadvantages inherent in both of these
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
275
conﬁgurations. For example, the electrode alignment results in the generation
of a high collection efﬁciency (up to 90% depending on electrode size) that
provides detection limits as low as 100 nM in a nondecoupled detection
scenario. A second advantage of the system is the use of solid metal elec-
trodes. The electrodes provided enough chemical stability to be used for
pulsed amperometric detection (PAD) thus opening the door to detecting
alcohols, carbohydrates, amines, and thiols.3,31,49,51–56 Finally, the design per-
mitted the inclusion of multiple electrodes made from different materials.50
Figure 10.4 shows a picture of a microchip containing a single Pd electrode
and two Au electrodes as well as an electropherogram obtained for dopam-
ine, catechol, and ascorbic acid operating in dual electrode detection mode.57
Dopamine and catechol have reversible electrochemistry and therefore give
a reduction peak at the second electrode. Ascorbic acid does not have revers-
ible electrochemistry and therefore only gives a peak at the oxidizing elec-
trode. In this case, the Pd electrode serves as a decoupler and allows detection
limits to be reduced to 5 nM for dopamine.57
10.6
Detection Modes
10.6.1
Amperometry
Many modes of electrochemical detection have been used with microchips.
Among others, the most common is DC amperometry or simply amperom-
etry. In amperometry, a constant potential is applied to the detection electrode
FIGURE 10.4
Picture of a microchip containing a single Pd electrode and two Au electrodes as well as an
electropherogram obtained for dopamine, catechol, and ascorbic acid operating in dual elec-
trode detection mode. (Courtesy of Vickers, J.A. and Henry, C.S., Unpublished data.) 
30
20
10
–10
Current (nA)
–20
–30
40
60
Time (s)
80
100
120
20
140
0
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

276
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
and the current is followed as a function of time. This is the simplest elec-
trochemical technique that can be applied for detection of readily electroac-
tive compounds, and the required instrumentation is rather simple,
inexpensive, and can be integrated with the power supply used for the
separation (see Section 10.4). A ﬁnal advantage of amperometric detection
is the ability to reach extremely low detection limits. The use of a constant
potential reduces the background current caused by double-layer charging,
and thus detection limits in the low nM range can be achieved. Amperometry
also has several disadvantages. The two most signiﬁcant disadvantages are
(1) the low number of naturally electrochemically active compounds, and
(2) electrode fouling resulting in loss of signal. 
Because of the instrumental simplicity of amperometric detection, it has
been widely applied in bioanalysis.37,41,58–62 One of the most common appli-
cations has been analysis of catecholamines. Catecholamines are a major class
of neurotransmitters that are also readily electrochemically active. Neu-
rotransmitters also serve as model compounds for comparing new microchip
CE-ECD designs with existing systems. For example, a microdisk electrode
operating in amperometric mode was used to evaluate a microchip that
utilized hydrodynamic injection instead of one of the electrically controlled
injection techniques.39 Using this system, the authors were able to show low
relative standard deviations (5%) and detection limits in the low µM range.
Ascorbic acid, noradrenaline, and L-dopa were used as the model analytes
in this study, again because these compounds are all easily detected using
amperometry.
In addition to the use of amperometry for characterization of new micro-
chips, it has also been applied to a variety of real-world applications. Hauser
and Schwarz used a microchip CE-ECD system with amperometric detection
for the chiral separation and detection of the enantiomers of adrenaline,
noradrenaline, ephedrine, and pseudoephedrine.63 Detection was carried out
with a new two-electrode amperometric detector, eliminating the need for
individual counter and reference electrodes. A similar concept, using the
amperometric working and electrophoretic ground electrodes only was also
presented. The latter serves as a counter and pseudoreference as well, and
was applied to the determination of neurotransmitters, ascorbic acid, phe-
nols, carbohydrates, and amino acids on gold, platinum, or copper working
electrodes.64 Chiral separations are particularly important in the character-
ization of pharmaceuticals. Amperometric detection has also been used for
the detection of DNA.65 In this example, DNA fragments were detected using
both an electroactive intercalating dye (iron phenanthroline) and ferrocene-
labeled primers.
One other interesting example of the use of amperometric detection was
recently reported by Nyholm’s group.58 A potentiostatless detection scheme
was presented based on the use of a microband array of two gold electrodes
positioned in the proximity of the capillary outlet. The induced potential
difference between the two electrodes was recorded as a function of the
applied separation high voltage and the dependence of the electrochemically
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
277
generated current on the high-voltage ﬁeld, and the concentration of
Fe(CN)6
4/Fe(CN)6
3 was investigated. The results showed that plots of the
generated current versus the CE separation voltage have the same shape as
cyclic voltammograms obtained with the same electrodes in a traditional
potentiostatic setup and that the current is proportional to the concentration
of the redox couple. As a decoupling device is not needed, the described
potentiostatless approach signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the instrumental setup for
amperometric detection.66 Other contributions from the same group were
also published.17,67,68
10.6.2
Pulsed Electrochemical Detection
As stated before, one problem with amperometry is electrode fouling. Elec-
trodes are fouled by the accumulation of adsorbed cabonaceus material,
causing a signiﬁcant decrease in signal as well as transient instability in the
signal. Several strategies have been suggested to overcome problems asso-
ciated with electrode fouling. Among other approaches,69–71 a potential
waveform referred to as pulsed electrochemical detection (PED) can be applied.
PED uses a potential pulse applied to a noble metal (Au or Pt) electrode to
remove adsorbed materials. Two main forms of PED exist: pulsed ampero-
metric detection (PAD) and integrated pulsed amperometric detection
(iPAD). In PAD, a high positive potential is applied in order to clean the
electrode surface, followed by a negative potential step to reactivate the
electrode surface. A third potential is then applied for detection of the target
analytes at a clean electrode surface. In iPAD, a triangular waveform is
applied to the electrode and the current is integrated over this waveform,
followed by the application of a high positive potential and a negative
regenerating potential. PAD is particularly useful when the analyte lacks a
strongly absorbing chromophore, when the analyte is not electrochemically
active under other techniques, or when rapid electrode fouling occurs. iPAD
is better for analytes that adsorb to the surface during the detection step
including amines and thiols.
The ﬁrst report of PAD on an electrophoretic microchip was presented by
Fanguy and Henry in 2002.72 Under optimized detection conditions, glucose,
maltose, and xylose were detected. Later, the separation and detection of
underivatized carbohydrates, amino acids, and sulfur-containing antibiotics
was described by Garcia and Henry.49 In that report, the separation and
injection potentials, buffer pH and composition, injection time, and PAD
parameters were studied. Later, a solution with higher pH (compared to the
running buffer) was used at the waste reservoir in order to improve the
detection performance while maintaining good separation by using a lower
electrolyte pH.53 As a proof of this concept, the separation of glucosamine
and glucose was performed at pH 7.1, while the detection was performed
at pH 11.0, mimicking the use of postcolumn pH modiﬁcation used in HPLC-
ECD (high performance liquid chromatography, electrochemical detection).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

278
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
It was also observed that when sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added,
not only a stabilization of the EOF but also an improvement in the electro-
chemical signal of about 30%, was achieved. The compatibility of higher
concentrations of SDS (up to 40 mM) with PAD was also demonstrated. The
separation and detection of catechins (natural antioxidants) were performed
in less than 2 minutes and successfully compared with HPLC-UV.55 
iPAD has also been used with microchip CE-ECD. iPAD achieves a much
lower baseline stabilization time in comparison to PAD. Carbohydrates such
as glucose, mannose, sucrose, maltose, glucosamine, lactose, maltotriose, and
galactose were analyzed by PAD and iPAD. The electrochemical response
and migration times were studied as functions of buffer concentration, pH,
and the concentration of SDS.54 Results showed that both iPAD and PAD are
affected in a similar manner by changes in solution conditions. For both
detection methods, the highest electrochemical responses were obtained
using lower electrolyte concentrations (4 mM), higher pH values (12.2), and
a moderate level of SDS (0.8 mM). Other microelectrode applications of
pulsed electrochemical detection were recently reviewed by LaCourse.73
10.6.3
Conductivity
CE offers several advantages with respect to ion chromatography in the
analysis of ions. Costs of column hardware and required eluent chemicals
are lower, separation times can be incredibly short (less than 1 min), and the
sample injection volume (which is required for a quantitative analysis in CE)
can be as low as 10 fL. Additionally, conductivity detection is intrinsically
simpler than optical methods in terms of hardware, as UV lamps, monochro-
mators, focusing optics, and photodetectors are not required. Conductivity
detection can be considered a universal detection method with the possibility
of direct as well as indirect measurement of the analyte's response signal.74
It is also worth noting two articles by Kuban and Hauser regarding the
fundamental aspects of contactless conductivity detection for CE.75,76
There are two general modes of conductivity detection that have been
adapted to microchip CE—contact and contactless. Contact conductivity
detection utilizes electrodes that are in direct contact with the background
electrolyte. Contactless detection isolates the detection electrodes from the
solution through an insulator. Contact conductivity has the advantage of
lower detection limits, but contactless detection has the advantage of being
able to place the electrodes anywhere along the separation channel. For more
information on the fundamentals behind both detection modes, the readers
are directed to an excellent review published by Guijt and coworkers.14
Contact conductivity detection has been reported by several groups. Liu
and coworkers demonstrated the use of contact conductivity detection to
monitor mixing of solutions in a microﬂuidic device.77 The conductivity
detector in this case showed the ability to follow the concentration of two
buffers that were mixing in a separation channel and has the potential to
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
279
help control reactions in bio-MEMS and µTAS devices. Several other exam-
ples of contact conductivity detection have been published. Organic mole-
cules (amino acids, peptides, proteins, oligonucleotides) were separated and
detected with an on-column contact conductivity detector fabricated in
PMMA.78 The detector consisted of a pair of Pt wires (127 µm diameter) with
an end-to-end spacing of approximately 20 µm and situated within the ﬂuidic
channel. Reverse-phase ion pair microcapillary electrochromatography cou-
pled with a similar detector was also used to separate and detect double-
stranded DNA fragments.79 A group of 22 organic and inorganic acids
expected in wines was also separated and detected on a PMMA chip with
integrated conductivity detection.80
Despite the sensitivity advantages of contact conductivity detection, it is
contactless detection that has begun to dominate the ﬁeld of microchip CE
with conductivity detection.60,81–89 One interesting approach for contactless
conductivity detection for microchip-CE was presented by Verpoorte et al.90
The detector integrates easily with well-known microfabrication techniques
for glass-based microﬂuidic devices. Platinum electrodes are structured in
recesses in-plane with the microchannel network after glass etching, which
allows precise positioning and batch fabrication of the electrodes. A thin
glass wall of 10 to 15 µm separates the electrodes and the buffer electrolyte
in the separation channel to achieve the electrical insulation necessary for
contactless operation. Another contactless conductivity microchip detector
is based on placing two planar sensing aluminum ﬁlm electrodes, and was
presented by Wang et al.91 In that report, the separation of 7 inorganic
explosive residues (cations and anions) was achieved using the same micro-
channel and run buffer. The addition of 18-crown-6 ether was used to
improve the separation of potassium and ammonium ions. The possibility
of using a high-voltage contactless conductivity detection for lab-on-a-chip
devices was demonstrated by P. Hauser’s lab.92 The same group studied the
effects of the cell geometry and operating parameters on the performance of
an external contactless conductivity detector93 and used microchip-CE and
conductivity detection to analyze inorganic and organic ions;94 amino acids;95
mixtures of underivatized sulfonates, carboxylates, amino acids, sugars,
sweeteners, and catecholamines;96 and other biochemically relevant species
such as immunoglobulin G, down to 0.4 nM.97
A passive electrochemical detection principle that can be applied to cap-
illary electrophoresis was also presented.98 The separation electrical ﬁeld is
used to generate a potential difference between two electrodes located along
the channel. For constant-current electrophoresis, the generated signal is
proportional to the resistance of the solution passing between the two elec-
trodes. Contrary to conductivity detectors that are AC driven and need to
be decoupled from the separation ﬁeld, the passive detection directly takes
advantage of the separation ﬁeld. The signal is simply measured by a high-
impedance voltmeter. The detection concept has been validated by numerical
simulations showing how the magnitude of the signal is related to the ratio
between the electrode distance and the length of the sample plug. As a proof
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

280
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
of the principle, this detection concept has been demonstrated by the elec-
trophoretic separation of three alkali ions on a polymer microchip. Based on
preliminary results, a detection limit of 20 µM and a dynamic range of up
to 3 orders of magnitude have been achieved.
A microscale continuous ion exchanger based on two liquid streams ﬂow-
ing in parallel was presented by Kuban, Dasgupta, and Morris.99 The ion
exchange reaction occurs through diffusional transfer of molecules between
the ion exchanger phase and the eluent phase and is applied for conductivity
suppression. Using either a liquid or a solid ion exchanger, the detection of
various inorganic cations including heavy metals is possible. A similar sys-
tem using vertically stratiﬁed ﬂows in microchannels was also presented
describing computational simulations and applications to solvent extraction
and ion exchange.100
Isotachophoresis (ITP) is a well-known electrophoretic separation tech-
nique for qualitative and quantitative analysis of ionic compounds based on
differences in the effective electrophoretic mobilities of the ions. ITP can be
used as a separation technique itself, but can also be considered as an ideal
preconcentration technique when it is coupled with CZE (capillary zone
electrophoresis) or HPLC. In this regard, Grab et al. described the design,
fabrication and use of new microanalytical devices based on PMMA.101 The
devices are fabricated by hot embossing and are sealed with a thin plexiglas
cover plate which contains platinum electrodes for contact conductivity
detection and power supply. Two different chip designs were introduced to
demonstrate the advantages of the manufacturing procedure and the use of
PMMA as a substrate material. The channel system on the chips is equipped
with two sample loops with different volumes to take advantage of the high
sample loadability and the enrichment qualities of ITP. Later, the perfor-
mance of different electrode geometries (thin-ﬁlm platinum) was studied
considering the inﬂuence of the width of the electrodes and their positioning
relative to the separation channel.102 The same year, Bodor et. al. reported
the use of CZE coupled online with ITP sample pretreatment (ITP-CZE) on
a PMMA chip and on-column conductivity detection.103 The sensor was used
to detect bromate in drinking water up to a 20 nM (2.5 ppb) limit of detection.
Prest et. al. applied ITP to the analysis of inorganic arsenic species using
both miniaturized planar polymer separation devices and capillary-scale
devices. Limits of detection of 2 and 5 mg/L for arsenic (V) and arsenic (III),
respectively, have been achieved with the miniaturized device. A similar
device was also applied for the analysis of amino acids using glycolate as
the leading ion. Addition of magnesium to the leading electrolyte as a counter
species was found to improve the separations.104 ITP was also combined with
CZE and applied for the detection of nitrite, phosphate, and ﬂuoride (each
at 10 µM) accompanied by matrix constituents (sulfate and chloride) at
considerably higher concentrations.105 This concept (called column switch-
ing) was then applied in a feasibility study to perform sample cleanup and
separate malate, malonate, tartrate, and citrate.106
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
281
10.6.4
Other Electrochemical Detection Modes
Microﬂuidic chip devices are shown to be attractive platforms for performing
microscale voltammetric analysis and for integrating voltammetric proce-
dures with on-chip chemical reactions and ﬂuid manipulations. Wang and
coworkers recorded linear-sweep, square-wave, and adsorptive-stripping
voltammograms while electrokinetically driving the sample through the
microchannels.107 According to the authors, the adaptation of voltammetric
techniques to microﬂuidic chip operation required an assessment of the effect
of relevant experimental variables, particularly the high voltage used for
driving the electroosmotic ﬂow, upon the background current, potential
window, and size or potential of the voltammetric signal. Rapid square-wave
voltammetry and ﬂow injection operation allowed a detection limit of 2 pmol
of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene.
The detection of native carbohydrates at planar copper electrodes was
reported using a PDMS microchip and sinusoidal voltammetry. This tech-
nique utilizes information in the frequency domain to achieve sensitive
detection through either of two approaches—maximization of signal or min-
imization of noise—and detection limits of less than 200 amol were reported
for glucose and sucrose.108 The performance of this technique was also com-
pared to constant potential amperometry. Sinusoidal voltammetry was found
to be roughly an order of magnitude more sensitive than amperometry, with
calculated mass detection limits of 12 and 15 amol for dopamine and iso-
proterenol, respectively.109
Potentiometric detection is based on electrode-bearing membranes, which
are semipermeable to certain ions only, leading to a charge separation and
thus the buildup of a measurable potential, which follows the Nernst equa-
tion. Potentiometry is rarely used in separation methods but is promising
for certain classes of analytes that can only, with difﬁculty, be quantiﬁed by
more standard methods 7,110
10.7
Dual Electrochemical Detection and ECD Coupled
to Other Detection Modes
As CE has been reduced to the microchip scale, separation times have been
signiﬁcantly reduced meaning peak overlap can become a real problem.
One way to overcome the reduced resolution is to use detectors that are
more selective.111 In ECD, one way selectivity can be achieved is through
the use of dual electrode detectors. Dual electrode detectors can apply two
different potentials (typically one oxidizing and one reducing) to detect
compounds that comigrate out of the column. In the case presented by Lai
et al.,111 the ﬁrst electrode typically oxidizes compounds coming out of the
channel. The second electrode then reduces any compounds that have a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

282
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
reversible electrochemical mechanism. An example of dual electrode detec-
ﬁrst carbon-based, dual-electrode detector for microchip CE was reported in
2001. A PDMS layer containing separation and injection channels was sealed
to another PDMS layer containing carbon-ﬁber working electrodes. End-
channel amperometric detection was employed and the performance of the
chip was evaluated using catechol. The response was found to be linear
between 1 and 600 µM with an experimentally determined limit of detection
(LOD) of 500 nM.48 A prototype that includes all necessary electrodes on-
chip and utilizes miniaturized CE- and ED-supporting electronics was
reported by Balwin’s group.41 State-of-the-art design and modeling tools and
novel microfabrication procedures were used to create recessed platinum
electrodes with complex geometries and the CE/ED device from two pat-
terned ultra-ﬂat glass substrates. 
Wang also presented a microchip with dual conductivity and amperomet-
ric detection.112 The combination of a contactless conductivity detector with
an end-column thick-ﬁlm amperometric detector greatly enhances the sam-
ple characterization to offer simultaneous measurements of both ionic and
electroactive species, improved reproducibility, and conﬁrmation of peak
identity. The combination of amperometric and ﬂuorescence detection was
reported by Lapos, Manica, and Ewing.113 The combination allows the anal-
ysis of a wider spectrum of compounds per separation, leading to higher
throughput and enabling resolution of two neutral analytes, NBD-arginine
and catechol. In addition, insight into the detection and separation mecha-
nisms is realized. Differences in migration time and peak widths between
the two detectors are compared, providing a better understanding of detector
alignment. By the use of an internal standard (active in only one of the
detection modes) reproducibility has been improved. This dual detection
method was applied to normalize unknown peak mobilities in a cerebral
spinal ﬂuid sample.
10.8
Decouplers
One of the problems associated with microchip CE-ECD is the noise intro-
duced by the separation current in the detection circuit. In order to solve
this problem using conventional CE, a crack created right before the detection
point was performed. The purpose was to allow the majority of the separa-
tion current to ﬂow though the crack and minimize its effect on the detection
current. Due to the possibility of customizing the design at the microchip
scale, a wide variety of designs have been proposed for microchip CE-ECD.
All decouplers have in common the ability to provide an electrical ground
point in the channel prior to the detection electrode without stopping elec-
troosmotic ﬂow.
tion is shown in Figure 10.4 and was also discussed in Section 10.5.3. The
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
283
The ﬁrst decoupler was published by Hubert Girault’s group and consisted
of a series of small laser-etched holes in a polymer microchip.111,114–116 More
recently, the use of Pd electrodes for decoupling has been reported.117 The
decoupling electrode as well as the working electrodes, were thermally evap-
orated onto a plastic chip and oriented vertically across the separation chan-
nel. After the sample zones ﬂow over the Pd decoupler, their electrochemical
response is measured at downstream electrodes. Because the electrodes are
on the separation channel, the electrode channel alignment is no longer a
problem. In addition, a platinized pseudoreference electrode has been used
as a decoupler to offer a stable potential in electrochemical detection gener-
ating a limit of detection for dopamine of 0.125 µM.118 The development of
a cellulose acetate decoupler for on-column electrochemical detection in
microchip capillary electrophoresis was presented by Osbourn and Lunte.44
The capillary-based, laser-etched decoupler was translated to the planar
format to isolate the detector circuit from the separation circuit. The decou-
pler was constructed by aligning a series of holes (30 µm) through the cover
plate of the microchip with the separation channel, and casting a thin ﬁlm
of cellulose acetate within the holes. The decoupler shows excellent isolation
of the detection circuit for separation currents up to 60 µA, with noise levels
at or below 1 pA at a carbon-ﬁber electrode. Detection limits of 25 nM were
achieved for dopamine. According to the authors, this decoupler combines
excellent mechanical stability, effective shunting of high separation currents,
and ease of manufacture.44 A method of integrating a carbon microelectrode
with a microfabricated palladium decoupler for use in microchip CE was
detailed by Kovarik et. al.119 The manner in which the working electrode is
made did not add additional etching or lithographic steps to the fabrication
of the glass electrode plate. The hybrid poly(dimethylsiloxane) and glass
device was characterized with ﬂuorescence microscopy and by monitoring
a CE-based separation of dopamine. Hydrodynamic voltammograms exhib-
ited diffusion-limited currents occurring at potentials above +1.0 V. It was
also shown that the half-wave potential did not shift as the separation poten-
tial is changed, as is the case in nondecoupled systems. 
10.9
Electrode Materials and Designs
The proper selection of the electrode material is one of the many ways of
optimizing selectivity, stability, and sensitivity in microchip CE-ECD. The
electrode material will also deﬁne the potential window to be used for
detection. Working electrodes for microchips have been fabricated using a
wide variety of materials. The choice of material is, however, largely deter-
mined by the type of electrode being used. In the following section, we
classify electrodes according to metallic electrodes and carbon electrodes
(carbon, carbon paste, carbon nanotubes, and diamond electrodes).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

284
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
10.9.1
Thin-Film Metallic Electrodes
Many applications have been published using metallic thin-ﬁlm electrodes.
The main advantage for their application in microchip CE-ECD is the rela-
tively simple procedure required to fabricate the ﬁlms (chemical vapor dep-
osition or photolithography),70,109,111,120,121 relatively good stability (when
amperometry is used), ease of alignment with respect to the separation
channel, variety of metals available, the ability to integrate electrode arrays,
and a very well-controlled surface area. On the other side, delamination
(when the electrode is exposed to redox cycles) and the possibility of induc-
ing a potential difference (within the detection electrode) as a consequence
of the applied separation potential are the main drawbacks of these elec-
trodes. In general, three materials have been used for thin ﬁlm electrodes:
Au, Pt, and Cu. Pd has also been used, but has found much more of an
application as a decoupler (see Section 10.8).
Numerous examples of thin-ﬁlm electrodes have been published for a vari-
ety of important bioanalytical applications. A CE chip-based detection system
with a downstream gold-coated carbon electrode, presented by Wang and
coworkers, was used for the simultaneous measurements of glucose, ascorbic
acid, acetaminophen, and uric acid,122 glucose and ethanol,123 and later for
the determination of creatine, creatinine, p-aminohippuric acid, and uric
acid.124 The design was based on the use of a screen-printed carbon electrode125
with a silver contact printed also on a ceramic substrate. The active working
electrode area (0.30 mm × 2.50 mm) was deﬁned by a layer of insulator. The
carbon working electrode area was then coated with a gold ﬁlm, prepared
by applying a pulse waveform (square-wave pulse potential between 0.2 and
+0.75V, vs. Ag/AgCl), with a pulse width of 0.6 s for 20 min in a solution
containing 300 ppm of Au(III), 0.1M NaCl, and 1.5% (w/v) HCl. The detector
was also applied to develop an electrochemical immunoassay protocol, based
on the use of a ferrocene redox label.126 The use of a redox tracer offers the
advantages of simpliﬁed protocol, wider linear range, higher stability, and
higher separation efﬁciency compared to an analogous use of enzyme tags.
The direct mouse-immunoglobulin G (IgG) assay and the competitive 3,3',5-
triiodo-L-thyronine (T3) version were accomplished within less than 150 s,
and offer minimum detectable concentrations of 2.5 × 1012 and 1 × 106 g/mL,
respectively. Other examples of applications of thick-ﬁlm amperometric detec-
tors to microchip CE were recently presented.127
The second common metallic type of electrodes can generally be referred
to as solid electrodes. Solid electrodes are comprised of a pure material and
are typically adapted from a traditional electrochemical measure-
ment.38,108,116,128–130 One of the main advantages of solid electrodes is that the
surface can be regenerated by polishing (mechanical or chemical) without
affecting the electrode performance. A PDMS and glass microchip with an
off-chip platinum working electrode was presented by Fanguy and Henry131
reporting a limit of detection for dopamine and uric acid of 1 µM. Once
characterized, the system was used to measure the concentration of uric acid
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
285
in a dilute urine sample in less than 30 s. A three-dimensional positioner
was used to align the electrode and the channel outlet. Both total homocys-
teine (tHcy) and protein-bound homocysteine (pbHcy) in plasma were
detected by end-column and off-column amperometric detection using a
Au/Hg wire microelectrode. The detection limit for homocysteine was 500
nM and the response was linear between 1 and 100 µM.129 A number of other
papers reported the use of solid metallic electrodes (gold or platinum) for
coupling EC with microchip CE.63,64,132–134 It is worth noting the novelty of
the design presented by Garcia and Henry (described in Section 10.5.3) for
the integration of gold wires with PDMS chips.3,31,49,52–55 Examples of these
results are included in Figure 10.5.
10.9.2
Carbon Electrodes
Carbon has been well established for many years as an electrode material. It
is mechanically and thermally stable, impermeable to gases, and ﬂuids, and
chemically resistant to a broad range of solvents. In addition, the low cost,
great applicability, and low background currents over a wide potential range
have driven years of research, particularly in electroanalysis.69 The primary
advantage of carbon electrodes, however, lies in their resistance to fouling by
organic redox couples.48 Carbon electrodes can be used for many runs without
fouling, while metal electrodes require periodic electrochemical cleaning.
The advantages of carbon electrodes were combined with a microﬂuidic
device for conducting enzyme immunoassays. The lab-on-a-chip protocol
FIGURE 10.5
(Left) Effect of the surfactant concentration on the separation of catechin (C), epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG), epicatecatechin (EC) and epicatechin gallate (ECG). (a) No SDS added to the
BGE, (b) 10 mM SDS, (c) 20 mM SDS and (d) 30 mM SDS. (Reprinted from Hompesch, R.W.,
Garcia, C.D., Weiss, D.J., Vivanco, J.M., and Henry, C.S., Analyst 2005, 130(5), 694–700. With
permission.) (Right) Separation and PAD of phenols using the PDMS microchip. (a) 22.5 µM
phenol, 13.1 µM pentachlorophenol, and 8.3 µM 4,6- dinitro-o-cresol. (b) 67.7 µM phenol,
39.4 µM pentachlorophenol, and 25.0 µM 4,6-dinitro-o-cresol. Reprinted from Ding, Y. and
Garcia, C.D., Analyst 2006, 131(2), 208–214. With permission.)
20 nA
MeOH
EGCG
ECG
(D)
20 nA
PCP
DNOC Phenol
B
A
(C)
(B)
(A)
300
0
50
100
Time (sec)
150
250
200
150
Time (s)
100
50
0
EC
C
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

286
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
integrates precolumn reactions of alkaline phosphatase–labeled antibody (anti-
mouse IgG) with the antigen (mouse IgG), followed by electrophoretic sepa-
ration of the free antibody and antibody-antigen complex. The separation is
followed by a postcolumn reaction of the enzyme tracer with the 4-aminophe-
nyl phosphate substrate and subsequent amperometric detection of the liber-
ated 4-aminophenol product. A remarkably low detection limit of 2.5 × 1016 g/
mL (2aM) was obtained for the mouse IgG model analyte.135 Aromatic amino
acids (tyrosine, 5-hydroxytryptophan, tryptophan, p-aminobenzoic acid, and
m-aminobenzoic acid) were also separated and detected using carbon sur-
faces.136 In this case, the working electrode was a thick-ﬁlm carbon-strip elec-
trode positioned opposite the outlet of the separation channel.
Multistrand carbon-ﬁber microdisk electrodes were constructed with 6 µm
O. carbon ﬁbers. A bundle (about 30 to 40 ﬁbers) of 30 mm–long carbon
ﬁbers were carefully inserted into a 20 mm length × 250 µm ID and 375 µm
OD fused-silica capillary, from one terminal (connection terminal) of the
capillary until the ﬁbers protruded from the other end of the capillary. Epoxy,
copper wire, and mercury were used to allow electrical contact. After curing,
the capillary was cut to a disk, polished with abrasive paper, and cleaned
ultrasonically. The microdisk electrode was inserted into the orientating bore
on the chip, moving toward the separation channel along the groove under
the bottom of the detection cell until a desired distance (20 to 50 µm) between
the disk surface of the electrode and the channel exit.137 Carbon ﬁbers,138 a
sol-gel-derived carbon composite,139 carbon ink,140 and pyrolyzed photoresist
carbon ﬁlms141 are additional examples of the analytical performance of
carbon electrodes.
The ﬁrst reported use of a carbon-paste electrochemical detector for micro-
chip capillary electrophoresis (CE) was described by Martin et al. A PDMS
microchip CE device was constructed by reversibly sealing a PDMS layer
containing separation and injection channels to a separate PDMS layer that
contained carbon-paste working electrodes. End-channel amperometric
detection with a single electrode was used to detect amino acids derivatized
with naphthalene dicarboxaldehyde. Two electrodes were placed in series
for dual electrode detection. This approach was also demonstrated for the
detection of copper(II) peptide complexes. A major advantage of carbon
paste is that catalysts can be easily incorporated into the electrode. Carbon
paste that was chemically modiﬁed with cobalt phthalocyanine was used for
the detection of thiols following a CE separation. These devices illustrate the
potential for an easily constructed microchip CE system with a carbon-based
detector that exhibits adjustable selectivity.142
Carbon nanotubes have begun to attract enormous interest in electrochem-
istry because of their small size and good electrochemical properties. The
vast majority of studies thus far have used ensembles of carbon nanotubes
and nanostructure macroscopic electrodes either with randomly dispersed
nanotubes or with aligned carbon nanotubes.143–146 The resultant nanotube-
modiﬁed electrodes have most frequently been used for electroanalytical
purposes such as the development of biosensors. The carbon nanotube
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
287
(CNT)-modiﬁed electrode also allows CE amperometric detection at signif-
icantly lower operating potentials and yields substantially enhanced signal-
to-noise characteristics. Such advantages were illustrated in connection with
several classes of hydrazine, phenol, purine, and amino acids and
tyrosine.147 Although some advantages of the use of CNT are clear, the
reported detection limits for catechol and dopamine were still 7 and 8 µM,
respectively. Carbon nanotube electrodes have also been demonstrated to
be highly useful as detectors in ﬂow injection analysis and standard capil-
lary electrophoresis.148,149
Thin ﬁlms of highly boron-doped diamond (BDD) have also recently
received increasing attention as new electrode materials for electrochemical
applications. Such material exhibits attractive electrochemical properties,
including low and stable background currents, a wide potential window in
aqueous media, high resistance to deactivation via analyte fouling, and long-
term stability. Based on these unique features, several groups have reported
on the favorable analytical performance of diamond electrodes in various
electroanalytical measurements of biologically and environmentally impor-
tant compounds.120,121,150 A chemically vapor-deposited boron-doped dia-
mond (BDD) ﬁlm band electrode was used for end-column amperometric
detection (Figure 10.6). The favorable performance of the diamond electrode
microchip detector was indicated from comparison to a commonly used thick-
ﬁlm carbon detector. The diamond electrode offered enhanced sensitivity,
lower noise levels, and sharper peaks for several groups of important analytes
(nitroaromatic explosives, organophosphate nerve agents, phenols).120,121,150
FIGURE 10.6
(Left) SEM image of a BDD microﬁber electrode on a tungsten wire. (Right) Electropherograms
of ﬁve aromatic amines, detected with boron-doped diamond (a), screen-printed carbon (b), and
glassy carbon (c) electrodes. Sample mixture: 50 µM 4-aminophenol (1), 50 µM 1,2-phenylene-
diamine (2), 50 µM 2-aminonaphthalene (3), 100 µM 2-chloroaniline (4), and 100 µM o-aminoben-
zoic acid (5). Operation conditions: separation buffer solution, 30 mM acetate buffer (pH 4.5);
separation voltage, +1500 V; injection voltage, +2000 V for 1 s; working potential, +1.1 V (a),
+0.9 V (b), +0.9 V (c) (with respect to Ag/AgCl wire). (Reprinted from Einaga, Y., Sato, R., Olivia,
H., Shin, D., Ivandini, T.A., and Fujishima, A., Electrochim. Acta 2004, 49(22–23), 3989. With
permission.)
1 2
3 4
5
c
b
a
0
15 kV X1, 500
10 µm 062824
60
120
Time/s
Current
180
5 nA
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

288
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
10.10 Conclusions and Future Directions
A large number of publications have been presented in recent years focus-
ing on microchip CE-ECD. More and more groups are recognizing the great
potential of electroanalytical techniques, particularly coupled to microchip
CE. Among others, conductivity and amperometry are the most reported
techniques due to their universality and simplicity. Other detection tech-
niques, such as pulsed amperometric detection or dual detection schemes
require more complex instrumentation and characterization, but also show
signiﬁcant potential for future applications. Conventional electrode materials
such as gold or platinum are still used by most research groups but the
introduction of carbon electrodes in the paste, diamond, and nanotube forms
is very promising in terms of future analytical applications. The detection
limit is still a problem to be solved in microchip CE-EC. Although great
progress has been shown, typical detection limits are in the low µM to high
nM range. To increase either the collection efﬁciency or the capacity of
handling larger samples in order to work with real samples below the nM
range is one of the future challenges in the area. Certainly, the future direction
and limits of this technology are unpredictable, however it is a great pleasure
to see that novel ideas are being published every day in the literature. 
Acknowledgments
Carlos Garcia thanks The University of Texas at San Antonio and the San
Antonio Area Foundation for ﬁnancial support. In addition, the authors
would like to thank Scott Martin and Jonathon Vickers for input on this
chapter. Financial support for a portion of the work shown here was pro-
vided by the Department of Energy.
References
1. Manz, A., Graber, N., and Widmer, H.M., Miniaturized total chemical analysis
systems: a novel concept for chemical sensing. Sens. Actuators, B 1990, B1,
244–248.
2. Terry, S.C., Jerman, J.H., and Angell, J.B., A gas chromatograph air analyzer
fabricated on a silicon wafer. IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices 1979, ED-26, 1880.
3. Garcia, C.D., Engling, G., Herckes, P., Collett, J.L., Jr., and Henry, C.S., Deter-
mination of levoglucosan from smoke samples using microchip capillary elec-
trophoresis with pulsed amperometric detection. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2005,
39(2), 618–623.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
289
4. Johnson, M.E. and Landers, J.P., Fundamentals and practice for ultrasensitive
laser-induced ﬂuorescence detection in microanalytical systems. Electrophoresis
2004, 25(21–22), 3513–3527.
5. Bruin, G.J., Recent developments in electrokinetically driven analysis on mi-
crofabricated devices. Electrophoresis 2000, 21(18), 3931–3951.
6. Lacher, N.A., Garrison, K.E., Martin, R.S., and Lunte, S.M., Microchip capillary
electrophoresis/electrochemistry. Electrophoresis 2001, 22(12), 2526–2536.
7. Tanyanyiwa, J., Leuthardt, S., and Hauser, P.C., Conductimetric and potentio-
metric detection in conventional and microchip capillary electrophoresis. Elec-
trophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3659–3666.
8. Wang, J., Portable electrochemical systems. TrAC. Anal. Chem. 2002, 21(4),
226–232.
9. Vandaveer, W.R.I.V., Pasas, S.A., Martin, R.S., and Lunte, S.M., Recent devel-
opments in amperometric detection for microchip capillary electrophoresis.
Electrophoresis 2002, 23 (21), 3667–3677.
10. Rossier, J., Reymond, F., and Michel, P.E., Polymer microﬂuidic chips for elec-
trochemical and biochemical analyses. Electrophoresis 2002, 23 (6), 858–867.
11. Holland, L.A. and Leigh, A.M., Amperometric and voltammetric detection for
capillary electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3649–3658.
12. Ehrfeld, W., Electrochemistry and microsystems. Electrochim. Acta 2003, 48
(20–22), 2857.
13. Liu, Y., Garcia, C.D., and Henry, C.S., Recent progress in the development of
micro-TAS for clinical analysis. Analyst 2003, 128(8), 1002–1008.
14. Guijt, R.M., Evenhuis, C.J., Macka, M., and Haddad, P.R., Conductivity detec-
tion for conventional and miniaturised capillary electrophoresis systems. Elec-
trophoresis 2004, 25(23–24), 4032–4057.
15. Wang, J., Electrochemical detection for capillary electrophoresis microchips: a
review. Electroanalysis 2005, 17(13), 1133–1140.
16. Garcia, C.D. and Henry, C.S., Coupling capillary electrophoresis with pulsed
amperometric detection. Electroanalysis 2005, 17(13), 1125–1131.
17. Nyholm, L., Electrochemical techniques for lab-on-a-chip applications. Analyst
2005, 130(5), 599–605.
18. Mogensen, K.B., Klank, H., and Kutter, J.P., Recent developments in detection
for microﬂuidic systems. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(21–22), 3498–3512.
19. Vilkner, T., Jansek, D., and Manz, A., Micro total analysis systems: recent
developments. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76(12), 3373–3386.
20. Becker, H. and Locascio, L., Polymer microﬂuidic devices. Talanta 2002, 56(2),
267–287.
21. Henry, C.S., Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis: Methods and Protocols. Humana
Press, Totowa, NJ, 2005.
22. Jorgenson, J.W. and Lukacs, K.D., Zone electrophoresis in open-tubular glass-
capillaries. Anal. Chem. 1981, 53(8), 1298–1302.
23. Righetti, P.G., Electrophoresis: the march of pennies, the march of dimes. J.
Chromatogr. A 2005, 1079(1–2), 24.
24. Wallingford, R.A. and Ewing, A.G., Capillary zone electrophoresis with elec-
trochemical detection. Anal. Chem. 1987, 59(14), 1762–1766.
25. Wallingford, R.A. and Ewing, A.G., Amperometric detection of catechols in
capillary zone electrophoresis with normal and micellar solutions. Anal. Chem.
1988, 60(3), 258–263.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

290
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
26. Manz, A., Harrison, D.J., Verpoorte, E.M.J., Fettinger, J.C., Paulus, A., Luedi,
H., and Widmer, H.M., Planar chips technology for miniaturization and inte-
gration of separation techniques into monitoring systems. Capillary electro-
phoresis on a chip. J. Chromatogr. 1992, 593(1–2), 253–258.
27. Gavin, P.F. and Ewing, A.G., Continuous separations with microfabricated
electrophoresis-electrochemical array detection. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1996, 118(37),
8932–8936.
28. Woolley, A.T., Lao, K., Glazer, A.N., and Mathies, R.A., Capillary electrophore-
sis chips with integrated electrochemical detection. Anal. Chem. 1998, 70(4),
684–688.
29. Martin, R.S., Ratzlaff, K.L., Huynh, B.H., and Lunte, S.M., In-channel electro-
chemical detection for microchip capillary electrophoresis using an electrically
isolated potentiostat. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(5), 1136–1143.
30. Jackson, D.J., Naber, J.F., Roussel, T.J., Jr., Crain, M.M., Walsh, K.M., Keynton,
R.S., and Baldwin, R.P., Portable high-voltage power supply and electrochem-
ical detection circuits for microchip capillary electrophoresis. Anal.Chem.2003,
75(14), 3643–3649.
31. Garcia, C.D., Liu, Y., Anderson, P., and Henry, C.S., Versatile 3-channel high-
voltage power supply for microchip capillary electrophoresis. Lab Chip 2003,
3(4), 331–335.
32. Jiang, L., Lu, Y., Dai, Z., Xie, M., and Lin, B., Mini-electrochemical detector for
microchip electrophoresis. Lab on a Chip 2005, 5(9), 930–934.
33. Wang, J., Tian, B., and Sahlin, E., Micromachined electrophoresis chips with
thick-ﬁlm electrochemical detectors. Anal. Chem. 1999, 71(23), 5436 –5440.
34. Wang, J., Chatrathi, M.P., and Tian, B., Micromachined separation chips with
a precolumn reactor and end-column electrochemical detector. Anal. Chem.
2000, 72(23), 5774–5778.
35. Wang, J., Pumera, M., Chatrathi, M.P., Escarpa, A., Konrad, R., Griebel, A.,
Dorner, W., and Lowe, H., Towards disposable lab-on-a-chip: poly(methyl-
methacrylate) microchip electrophoresis device with electrochemical detection.
Electrophoresis 2002, 23(4), 596–601.
36. Zeng, Y., Chen, H., Pang, D.W., Wang, Z.L., and Cheng, J.K., Microchip capillary
electrophoresis with electrochemical detection. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(10), 2441–2445.
37. Coltro, W.K., da Silva, J.A., da Silva, H.D., Richter, E.M., Furlan, R., Angnes,
L., do Lago, C.L., Mazo, L.H., and Carrilho, E., Electrophoresis microchip
fabricated by a direct-printing process with end-channel amperometric detec-
tion. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(21–22), 3832–3839.
38. Bao, N., Xu, J.-J., Dou, Y.-H., Cai, Y., Chen, H.-Y., and Xia, X.-H., Electrochemical
detector for microchip electrophoresis of poly(dimethylsiloxane) with a three-
dimensional adjustor. J. Chromatogr. A 2004, 1041(1–2), 245.
39. Backofen, U., Matysik, F.M., and Lunte, C.E., A chip-based electrophoresis
system with electrochemical detection and hydrodynamic injection. Anal. Chem.
2002, 74(16), 4054–4059.
40. Vandaveer, W.R.I.V., Pasas-Farmer, S.A., Fischer, D.J., Frankenfeld, C.N., and
Lunte, S.M., Recent developments in electrochemical detection for microchip
capillary electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(21–22), 3528–3549.
41. Keynton, R.S., Roussel, T.J., Crain, M.M., Jackson, D.J., Franco, D.B., Naber, J.F.,
Walsh, K.M., and Baldwin, R.P., Design and development of microfabricated
capillary electrophoresis devices with electrochemical detection. Anal. Chim.
Acta 2004, 507(1), 95–105.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
291
42. Baldwin, R.P., Roussel, T.J., Jr., Crain, M.M., Bathlagunda, V., Jackson, D.J.,
Gullapalli, J., Conklin, J.A., Pai, R., Naber, J.F., Walsh, K.M., and Keynton, R.S.,
Fully integrated on-chip electrochemical detection for capillary electrophoresis
in a microfabricated device. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(15), 3690–3697.
43. Martin, R.S., Gawron, A.J., and Lunte, S.M., Dual-electrode electrochemical
detection for poly(dimethylsiloxane)-fabricated capillary electrophoresis mi-
crochips. Anal. Chem. 2000, 72(14), 3196–3202.
44. Osbourn, D.M. and Lunte, C.E., On-Column Electrochemical Detection for
Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(11), 2510–2514.
45. Manica, D.P. and Ewing, A.G., Prototyping disposable electrophoresis micro-
chips with electrochemical detection using rapid marker masking and laminar
ﬂow etching. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3735–3743.
46. Henry, C.S., Zhong, M., Lunte, S.M., Kim, M., Bau, H., and Santiago, J.J.,
Ceramic microchips for capillary electrophoresis-electrochemistry. Anal. Comm.
1999, 36(8), 305–307.
47. Gawron, A.J., Martin, R.S., and Lunte, S.M., Microchip electrophoretic separa-
tion systems for biomedical and pharmaceutical analysis. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci.
2001, 14(1), 1–12.
48. Gawron, A.J., Martin, R.S., and Lunte, S.M., Fabrication and evaluation of a
carbon-based dual-electrode detector for poly(dimethylsiloxane) electrophore-
sis chips. Electrophoresis 2001, 22(2), 242–248.
49. Garcia, C.D. and Henry, C.S., Direct determination of carbohydrates, amino
acids and antibiotics by microchip electrophoresis with pulsed amperometric
detection. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(18), 4778–4783.
50. Liu, Y., Vickers, J.A., and Henry, C.S., Simple and sensitive electrode design for
microchip electrophoresis/electrochemistry. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76(5), 1513–1517.
51. Garcia, C.D., Dressen, B.M., Henderson, A., and Henry, C.S., Comparison of
surfactants for dynamic surface modiﬁcation of poly(dimethylsiloxane) micro-
chips. Electrophoresis 2005, 26, 703–709.
52. Garcia, C.D. and Henry, C.S., Direct detection of renal function markers using
microchip CE with pulsed electrochemical detection. Analyst 2004, 129(7),
579–584.
53. Garcia, C.D. and Henry, C.S., Enhanced determination of glucose by microchip
electrophoresis with pulsed amperometric detection. Anal. Chim. Acta 2004,
508(1), 1–9.
54. Garcia, C.D. and Henry, C.S., Comparison of pulsed electrochemical detection
modes coupled with microchip capillary electrophoresis. Electroanalysis 2005,
17(3), 223–229.
55. Hompesch, R.W., Garcia, C.D., Weiss, D.J., Vivanco, J.M., and Henry, C.S.,
Analysis of natural ﬂavonoids by microchip-micellar electrokinetic chromatog-
raphy with pulsed amperometric detection. Analyst 2005, 130(5), 694–700.
56. Ding, Y. and Garcia, C.D., Pulsed amperometric detection with poly(dimeth-
ylsiloxane)–fabricated capillary electrophoresis microchips for the determina-
tion of EPA priority pollutants. Analyst 2006, 131(3), 208–214.
57. Vickers, J.A. and Henry, C.S., Unpublished data.
58. Klett, O., Nischang, I., and Nyholm, L., Deviceless decoupled electrochemical
detection of catecholamines in capillary electrophoresis using gold microband
array electrodes. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3678–3682.
59. Schwarz, M.A., Enzyme-catalyzed amperometric oxidation of neurotransmit-
ters in chip-capillary electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(12), 1916–1922.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

292
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
60. Muck, A., Jr., Wang, J., Jacobs, M., Chen, G., Chatrathi, M.P., Jurka, V., Vyborny,
Z., Spillman, S.D., Sridharan, G., and Schoning, M.J., Fabrication of poly(methyl
methacrylate) microﬂuidic chips by atmospheric molding. Anal. Chem. 2004,
76(8), 2290–2297.
61. He, F.Y., Liu, A.L., Yuan, J.H., Coltro, W.K., Carrilho, E., and Xia, X.H., Electro-
kinetic control of ﬂuid in plastiﬁed laser-printed poly(ethylene terephthalate)-
toner microchips. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2005, 382(1), 192–197.
62. Schoning, M.J., Jacobs, M., Muck, A., Knobbe, D.T., Wang, J., Chatrathi, M., and
Spillmann, S., Amperometric PDMS/glass capillary electrophoresis-based bio-
sensor microchip for catechol and dopamine detection. Sens. Actuators, B 2005,
108(1–2), 688.
63. Schwarz, M.A. and Hauser, P.C., Rapid chiral on-chip separation with simpli-
ﬁed amperometric detection. J. Chromatogr. A 2001, 928(2), 225–232.
64. Schwarz, M.A., Galliker, B., Fluri, K., Kappes, T., and Hauser, P.C., A two-
electrode conﬁguration for simpliﬁed amperometric detection in a microfabri-
cated electrophoretic separation device. Analyst 2001, 126(2), 147–151.
65. Ertl, P., Emrich, C.A., Singhal, P., and Mathies, R.A., Capillary electrophoresis
chips with a sheath-ﬂow supported electrochemical detection system. Anal.
Chem. 2004, 76(13), 3749–3755.
66. Klett, O. and Nyholm, L., Separation high voltage ﬁeld driven on-chip amper-
ometric detection in capillary electrophoresis. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(6), 1245–1250.
67. Bjorefors, F., Strandman, C., and Nyholm, L., Electrochemical detection based
on redox cycling using interdigitated microarray electrodes at mL/min ﬂow
rates. Electroanalysis 2000, 12(4), 255–261.
68. Klett, O., Bjorefors, F., and Nyholm, L., Elimination of high-voltage ﬁeld effects
in end column electrochemical detection in capillary electrophoresis by use of
on-chip microband electrodes. Anal. Chem. 2001, 73(8), 1909–1915.
69. Garcia, C.D., De Pauli, C.P., and Ortiz, P.I., Electrochemical characterization of
glassy carbon electrodes modiﬁed by resol mixtures. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2001,
510(1–2), 115–119.
70. Manica, D.P., Mitsumori, Y., and Ewing, A.G., Characterization of electrode
fouling and surface regeneration for a platinum electrode on an electrophoresis
microchip. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(17), 4572–4577.
71. Johnson, D.C. and LaCourse, W.R., Pulsed electrochemical detection at Nobel
metal electrodes in LC. Electroanalysis 1992, 4, 367–380.
72. Fanguy, J.C. and Henry, C.S., Pulsed amperometric detection of carbohydrates
on an electrophoretic microchip. Analyst 2002, 127(8), 1021–1023.
73. LaCourse, W.R. and Modi, S.J., Microelectrode applications of pulsed electro-
chemical detection. Electroanalysis 2005, 17(13), 1141–1152.
74. Zemann, A.J., Conductivity detection in capillary electrophoresis. TrAC. Anal.
Chem. 2001, 20(6–7), 346.
75. Kuban, P. and Hauser, P.C., Fundamental aspects of contactless conductivity
detection for capillary electrophoresis. Part I: Frequency behavior and cell
geometry. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(20), 3387–3397.
76. Kuban, P. and Hauser, P.C., Fundamental aspects of contactless conductivity
detection for capillary electrophoresis. Part II: Signal-to-noise ratio and stray
capacitance. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(20), 3398–3405.
77. Liu, Y., Wipf, D.O., and Henry, C.S., Conductivity detection for monitoring
mixing reactions in microﬂuidic devices. Analyst 2001, 126(8), 1248–1251.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
293
78. Galloway, M., Stryjewski, W., Henry, A., Ford, S.M., Llopis, S., McCarley, R.L.,
and Soper, S.A., Contact conductivity detection in poly(methyl methacylate)-
based microﬂuidic devices for analysis of mono- and polyanionic molecules.
Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(10), 2407–2415.
79. Galloway, M. and Soper, S.A., Contact conductivity detection of polymerase
chain reaction products analyzed by reverse-phase ion pair microcapillary
electrochromatography. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3760–3768.
80. Masar, M., Poliakova, K., Dankova, M., Kaniansky, D., and Stanislawski, B.,
Determination of organic acids in wine by zone electrophoresis on a chip with
conductivity detection. J. Sep. Sci. 2005, 28(9–10), 905–914.
81. Guijt, R.M., Baltussen, E., van der Steen, G., Schasfoort, R.B., Schlautmann, S.,
Billiet, H.A., Frank, J., van Dedem, G.W., and van den Berg, A., New approaches
for fabrication of microﬂuidic capillary electrophoresis devices with on-chip
conductivity detection. Electrophoresis 2001, 22(2), 235–241.
82. Guijt, R.M., Baltussen, E., van der Steen, G., Frank, H., Billiet, H., Schalkham-
mer, T., Laugere, F., Vellekoop, M., Berthold, A., Sarro, L., and van Dedem,
G.W., Capillary electrophoresis with on-chip four-electrode capacitively cou-
pled conductivity detection for application in bioanalysis. Electrophoresis 2001,
22(12), 2537–2541.
83. Laugere, F., Lubking, G.W., Berthold, A., Bastemeijer, J., and Vellekoop, M.J.,
Downscaling aspects of a conductivity detector for application in on-chip cap-
illary electrophoresis. Sens. Actuators, A 2001, 92(1–3), 109.
84. Laugere, F., Lubking, G.W., Bastemeijer, J., and Vellekoop, M.J., Design of an
electronic interface for capacitively coupled four-electrode conductivity detec-
tion in capillary electrophoresis microchip. Sens. Actuators, B 2002, 83(1–3), 104.
85. Wang, J., Pumera, M., Collins, G.E., and Mulchandani, A., Measurements of
chemical warfare agent degradation products using an electrophoresis micro-
chip with contactless conductivity detector. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(23), 6121–6125.
86. Pumera, M., Wang, J., Opekar, F., Jelinek, I., Feldman, J., Lowe, H., and Hardt,
S., Contactless conductivity detector for microchip capillary electrophoresis.
Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(9), 1968–1971.
87. Wang, J. and Pumera, M., Nonaqueous electrophoresis microchip separations:
conductivity detection in UV-absorbing solvents. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(2),
341–345.
88. Laugere, F., Guijt, R.M., Bastemeijer, J., van der Steen, G., Berthold, A., Baltus-
sen, E., Sarro, P., van Dedem, G.W., Vellekoop, M., and Bosschet, A., On-chip
contactless four-electrode conductivity detection for capillary electrophoresis
devices. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(2), 306–312.
89. Vogt, O., Pﬁster, M., Marggraf, U., Neyer, A., Hergenroder, R., and Jacob, P., A
new two-chip concept for continuous measurements on PMMA-microchips.
Lab Chip 2005, 5(2), 205–211.
90. Lichtenberg, J., De Rooij, N.F., and Verpoorte, E., A microchip electrophoresis
system with integrated in-plane electrodes for contactless conductivity detec-
tion. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3769–3780.
91. Wang, J., Pumera, M., Collins, G., Opekar, F., and Jelinek, I., A chip-based
capillary electrophoresis-contactless conductivity microsystem for fast mea-
surements of low-explosive ionic components. Analyst 2002, 127(6), 719–723.
92. Tanyanyiwa, J. and Hauser, P.C., High-voltage capacitively coupled contactless
conductivity detection for microchip capillary electrophoresis. Anal. Chem.
2002, 74(24), 6378–6382.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

294
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
93. Kuban, P. and Hauser, P.C., Effects of the cell geometry and operating param-
eters on the performance of an external contactless conductivity detector for
microchip electrophoresis. Lab Chip 2005, 5(4), 407–415.
94. Kuban, P. and Hauser, P.C., Application of an external contactless conductivity
detector for the analysis of beverages by microchip capillary electrophoresis.
Electrophoresis 2005, 26(16), 3169–3178.
95. Tanyanyiwa, J., Abad-Villar, E.M., Fernández-Abedul, M.T., Costa-García, A.,
Hoffmann, W., Guber, A.E., Herrmann, D., Gerlach, A., Gottschlich, N., and
Hauser, P.C., High-voltage contactless conductivity-detection for lab-on-chip
devices using external electrodes on the holder. Analyst 2003, 128(8), 1019–1022.
96. Tanyanyiwa, J., Abad-Villar, E.M., and Hauser, P.C., Contactless conductivity
detection of selected organic ions in on-chip electrophoresis. Electrophoresis
2004, 25(6), 903–908.
97. Abad-Villar, E.M., Kuban, P., and Hauser, P.C., Determination of biochemical
species on electrophoresis chips with an external contactless conductivity de-
tector. Electrophoresis 2005, 26(19), 3609–3614.
98. Bai, X., Wu, Z., Josserand, J., Jensen, H., Schafer, H., and Girault, H.H., Passive
conductivity detection for capillary electrophoresis. Anal Chem 2004, 76(11),
3126–3131.
99. Kuban, P., Dasgupta, P.K., and Morris, K.A., Microscale continuous ion ex-
changer. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(21), 5667–5675.
100. Kuban, P., Berg, J., and Dasgupta, P.K., Vertically stratiﬁed ﬂows in microchan-
nels. Computational simulations and applications to solvent extraction and ion
exchange. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(14), 3549–3556.
101. Grab, B., Neyer, A., Johnck, M., Siepe, D., Eisenbeib, F., Weber, G., and Her-
genroder, R., A new PMMA-microchip device for isotachophoresis with inte-
grated conductivity detector. Sens. Actuators, B 2001, 72(3), 249.
102. Grab, B., Siepe, D., Neyer, A., and Hergenroder, R., Comparison of different
conductivity detector geometries on an isotachophoresis PMMA-microchip.
Fresenius J. Anal. Chem. 2001, 371(2), 228–233.
103. Bodor, R., Kaniansky, D., Masar, M., Silleova, K., and Stanislawski, B., Deter-
mination of bromate in drinking water by zone electrophoresis-isotachophore-
sis on a column-coupling chip with conductivity detection. Electrophoresis 2002,
23(20), 3630–3637.
104. Prest, J.E., Baldock, S.J., Fielden, P.R., Goddard, N.J., and Treves Brown, B.J.,
Analysis of amino acids by miniaturised isotachophoresis. J. Chromatogr. A
2004, 1051(1–2), 221.
105. Kaniansky, D., Masar, M., Bielcikova, J., Ivanyi, F., Eisenbeiss, F., Stanislawski,
B., Grass, B., Neyer, A., and Johnck, M., Capillary electrophoresis separations
on a planar chip with the column-coupling conﬁguration of the separation
channels. Anal. Chem. 2000, 72(15), 3596–3604.
106. Kaniansky, D., Masar, M., Dankova, M., Bodor, R., Rakocyova, R., Pilna, M.,
Johnck, M., Stanislawski, B., and Kajan, S., Column switching in zone electro-
phoresis on a chip. J. Chromatogr. A 2004, 1051(1–2), 33.
107. Wang, J., Polsky, R., Tian, B., and Chatrathi, M.P., Voltammetry on microﬂuidic
chip platforms. Anal. Chem. 2000, 72(21), 5285–5289.
108. Hebert, N.E., Kuhr, W.G., and Brazill, S.A., Microchip capillary electrophoresis
coupled to sinusoidal voltammetry for the detection of native carbohydrates.
Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3750–3759.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
295
109. Hebert, N.E., Kuhr, W.G., and Brazill, S.A., A microchip electrophoresis device
with integrated electrochemical detection: a direct comparison of constant po-
tential amperometry and sinusoidal voltammetry. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(14),
3301–3307.
110. Yu, R.-Q., Zhang, Z.-R., and Shen, G.-L., Potentiometric sensors: aspects of the
recent development. Sens. Actuators B 2000, 65(1–3), 150.
111. Lai, C.-C.J., Chen, C.-h., and Ko, F.-H., In-channel dual-electrode amperometric
detection in electrophoretic chips with a palladium ﬁlm decoupler. J. Chro-
matogr. A 2004, 1023(1), 143.
112. Wang, J. and Pumera, M., Dual conductivity/amperometric detection system
for microchip capillary electrophoresis. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(23), 5919–5923.
113. Lapos, J.A., Manica, D.P., and Ewing, A.G., Dual ﬂuorescence and electrochem-
ical detection on an electrophoresis microchip. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74(14),
3348–3353.
114. Rossier, J.S., Ferrigno, R., and Girault, H.H., Electrophoresis with electrochem-
ical detection in a polymer microdevice. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2000, 492(1), 15–22.
115. Lacher, N.A., Lunte, S.M., and Martin, R.S., Development of a microfabricated
palladium decoupler/electrochemical detector for microchip capillary electro-
phoresis using a hybrid glass/poly(dimethylsiloxane) device. Anal. Chem. 2004,
76(9), 2482–2491.
116. Du, Y., Yan, J., Zhou, W., Yang, X., and Wang, E., Direct electrochemical detec-
tion of glucose in human plasma on capillary electrophoresis microchips. Elec-
trophoresis 2004, 25(21–22), 3853–3859.
117. Chen, D., Hsu, F.L., Zhan, D.Z., and Chen, C., Palladium ﬁlm decoupler for
amperometric detection in electrophoresis chips. Anal. Chem. 2001, 73(4), 758–762.
118. Wu, C.C., Wu, R.G., Huang, J.G., Lin, Y.C., and Hsien-Chang, C., Three-elec-
trode electrochemical detector and platinum ﬁlm decoupler integrated with a
capillary electrophoresis microchip for amperometric detection. Anal. Chem.
2003, 75(4), 947–952.
119. Kovarik, M.L., Li, M.W., and Martin, R.S., Integration of a carbon microelec-
trode with a microfabricated palladium decoupler for use in microchip capil-
lary electrophoresis/electrochemistry. Electrophoresis 2005, 26(1), 202–210.
120. Shin, D., Tryk, D.A., Fujishima, A., Jr., A.M., Chen, G., and Wang, J., Microchip
capillary electrophoresis with a boron-doped diamond electrochemical detector
for analysis of aromatic amines. Electrophoresis 2004, 25(17), 3017–3023.
121. Einaga, Y., Sato, R., Olivia, H., Shin, D., Ivandini, T.A., and Fujishima, A.,
Modiﬁed diamond electrodes for electrolysis and electroanalysis applications.
Electrochim. Acta 2004, 49(22–23), 3989.
122. Wang, J., Chatrathi, M.P., Tian, B., and Polsky, R., Microfabricated electrophore-
sis chips for simultaneous bioassays of glucose, uric acid, ascorbic acid, and
acetaminophen. Anal. Chem. 2000, 72(11), 2514–2518.
123. Wang, J., Chatrathi, M.P., and Tian, B., Microseparation chips for performing
multienzymatic dehydrogenase/oxidase assays: simultaneous electrochemical
measurement of ethanol and glucose. Anal. Chem. 2001, 73(6), 1296–1300.
124. Wang, J. and Chatrathi, M.P., Microfabricated electrophoresis chip for bioassay
of renal markers. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(3), 525–529.
125. Wang, J., Tian, B., and Sahlin, E., Integrated electrophoresis chips/amperomet-
ric detection with sputtered gold working electrodes. Anal. Chem. 1999, 71,
3901–3904.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

296
BioMEMS: Technologies and Applications
126. Wang, J., Ibanez, A., and Chatrathi, M.P., Microchip-based amperometric im-
munoassays using redox tracers. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(21), 3744–3749.
127. Pumera, M., Wang, J., Lowe, H., and Hardt, S., Poly(methylmethacrylate) mi-
crochip electrophoresis device with thick-ﬁlm amperometric detector: towards
fully disposable lab-on-a-chip. J. Assoc. Lab. Auto. 2002, 7(2), 73.
128. Lee, H.-L. and Chen, S.-C., Microchip capillary electrophoresis with ampero-
metric detection for several carbohydrates. Talanta 2004, 64(1), 210.
129. Pasas, S.A., Lacher, N.A., Davies, M.I., and Lunte, S.M., Detection of homocys-
teine by conventional and microchip capillary electrophoresis/electrochemis-
try. Electrophoresis 2002, 23(5), 759–766.
130. Wang, J., Ibanez, A., and Chatrathi, M.P., On-chip integration of enzyme and
immunoassays: simultaneous measurements of insulin and glucose. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2003, 125(28), 8444–8445.
131. Fanguy, J.C. and Henry, C.S., The analysis of uric acid in urine using microchip
capillary electrophoresis with electrochemical detection. Electrophoresis 2002,
23(5), 767–773.
132. He, F.Y., Liu, A.L., and Xia, X.H., Poly(dimethylsiloxane) microchip capillary
electrophoresis with electrochemical detection for rapid measurement of ace-
taminophen and its hydrolysate. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2004, 379(7–8), 1062–1067.
133. Yin, X.-B., Kang, J., Fang, L., Yang, X., and Wang, E., Short-capillary electro-
phoresis with electrochemiluminescence detection using porous etched joint
for fast analysis of lidocaine and oﬂoxacin. J. Chromatogr. A 2004, 1055(1–2), 223.
134. Castano-Alvarez, M. and Fernandez-Abedul, M.T., Costa-Garcia, A., Poly(me-
thylmethacrylate) and Topas capillary electrophoresis microchip performance
with electrochemical detection. Electrophoresis 2005, 26(16), 3160–3168.
135. Wang, J., Ibanez, A., Chatrathi, M.P., and Escarpa, A., Electrochemical enzyme
immunoassays on microchip platforms. Anal. Chem. 2001, 73(21), 5323–5327.
136. Wang, J. and Chen, G., Microchip capillary electrophoresis with electrochemical
detector for fast measurements of aromatic amino acids. Talanta 2003, 60(6),
1239–1244.
137. Wang, Y. and Chen, H., Integrated capillary electrophoresis amperometric de-
tection microchip with replaceable microdisk working electrode: II. Inﬂuence
of channel cross-sectional area on the separation and detection of dopamine
and catechol. J. Chromatogr. A 2005, 1080(2), 192.
138. Woods, L.A. and Ewing, A.G., Etched electrochemical detection for electro-
phoresis in nanometer inner diameter capillaries. ChemPhysChem 2003, 4(2),
207–211.
139. Sun, X., Yan, J., Yang, X., and Wang, E., Electrochemical detector based on sol-
gel-derived carbon composite material for capillary electrophoresis microchips.
Electrophoresis 2004, 25(20), 3455–3460.
140. Wang, J., Chatrathi, M.P., and Tian, B., Capillary electrophoresis microchips
with thick-ﬁlm amperometric detectors: separation and detection of phenolic
compounds. Anal. Chim. Acta 2000, 416(1), 9.
141. Hebert, N.E., Snyder, B., McCreery, R.L., Kuhr, W.G., and Brazill, S.A., Perfor-
mance of pyrolyzed photoresist carbon ﬁlms in a microchip capillary electro-
phoresis device with sinusoidal voltammetric detection. Anal. Chem. 2003,
75(16), 4265–4271.
142. Martin, R.S., Gawron, A.J., Fogarty, B.A., Regan, F.B., Dempsey, E., and Lunte,
S.M., Carbon paste-based electrochemical detectors for microchip capillary
electrophoresis/electrochemistry. Analyst 2001, 126(3), 277–280.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Coupling Electrochemical Detection
297
143. Lin, Y., Taylor, S., Li, H., Fernando, K.A.S., Qu, L., Wang, W., Gu, L., Zhou, B.,
and Sun, Y.-P., Advances toward bioapplications of carbon nanotubes. J. Mater.
Chem. 2004, 14(4), 527–541.
144. Karajanagi, S.S., Vertegel, A.A., Kane, R.S., and Dordick, J.S., Structure and
function of enzymes adsorbed onto single-walled carbon nanotubes. Langmuir
2004, 20(26), 11594–11599.
145. Cai, C. and Chen, J., Direct electron transfer of glucose oxidase promoted by
carbon nanotubes. Anal. Biochem. 2004, 332(1), 75–83.
146. Gooding, J.J., Nanostructuring electrodes with carbon nanotubes: a review on
electrochemistry and applications for sensing. Electrochim. Acta 2005, 50(15),
3049.
147. Wang, J., Chen, G., Chatrathi, M.P., and Musameh, M., Capillary electrophoresis
microchip with a carbon nanotube-modiﬁed electrochemical detector. Anal.
Chem. 2004, 76(2), 298–302.
148. Chicharro, M., Sanchez, A., Zapardiel, A., Rubianes, M.D., and Rivas, G., Cap-
illary electrophoresis of neurotransmitters with amperometric detection at mel-
anin-type polymer-modiﬁed carbon electrodes. Anal. Chem. Acta 2004, 523,
185–191.
149. Deo, R.P. and Wang, J., Electrochemical detection of carbohydrates at carbon-
nanotube modiﬁed glassy-carbon electrodes. Electrochem. Commun. 2004, 6(3),
284–287.
150. Wang, J., Chen, G., Chatrathi, M.P., Fujishima, A., Tryk, D.A., and Shin, D.,
Microchip capillary electrophoresis coupled with a boron-doped diamond elec-
trode-based electrochemical detector. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75(4), 935–939.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

299
11
Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection
of Environmental Mycobacteria
Ian Papautsky and Daniel Oerther
CONTENTS
11.1
Introduction.............................................................................................. 299
11.2
Culture-Based Approach........................................................................ 301
11.3
Parafﬁn Deposition and Patterning ..................................................... 303
11.3.1
Parafﬁns...................................................................................... 303
11.3.2
Parafﬁn Deposition................................................................... 305
11.3.3
Parafﬁn Patterning.................................................................... 306
11.4
Testing of Parafﬁn Surfaces with Microorganisms............................ 311
11.5
Microﬂuidic Culture-Based Biochip..................................................... 315
11.5.1
Microchannel Fabrication........................................................ 315
11.5.2
Adhesive Bonding .................................................................... 317
11.5.3
Challenging Biochip with Mycobacteria............................... 318
11.6
Conclusions .............................................................................................. 320
Acknowledgments.............................................................................................. 320
References ............................................................................................. 320
11.1
Introduction
To environmental engineers, microorganisms are important for a number of
reasons. First and foremost, pathogenic microorganisms represent a threat
to public health and must be eliminated from potable water. Some biocata-
lytic microorganisms are used in bioprocesses to remove toxic pollutants
(i.e., bioremediation) and thus should be encouraged to thrive. Yet others
are nuisance microorganisms that upset the steady-state performance of
bioprocesses. For environmental engineers, mycobacteria represent all three
types. For instance, Gordonia (formerly Nocardia) amarae have been shown to
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

300
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
be a causative agent for the formation of ﬁlamentous nuisance biological
foam (e.g., nocardiafoam) on the surfaces of aeration basins, secondary clar-
iﬁers, and anaerobic digesters in municipal sewage treatment around the
world [1–3]. The problem of nocardiafoam has been studied for more than
thirty years, and the estimated total accumulative cost of incidences of nocar-
diafoam disrupting the acceptable performance of sewage treatment plants
is on the order of $1 billion.
Perhaps most notable of all mycobacteria are the pathogens Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (i.e., the etiological agent of the disease tuberculosis  [TB]) and
Mycobacterium leprae (i.e., the etiological agent of the disease leprosy).
Although TB was nearly eradicated during the 20th century, occurrence of
the illness is rising, with more than two million annual deaths attributed to
TB, especially in less developed countries—the largest number of deaths
attributed to a single organism. This resurgence of TB is signiﬁcantly more
dangerous because the widespread use of antibiotics over the past ﬁfty years
has lead to the emergence of Mycobacterium demonstrating multiple-antibi-
otic resistance [4]. Furthermore, with the outbreak of human immuno virus
(HIV)–induced acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) in the indus-
trialized world beginning in the 1980s, the infection of immunocompromised
individuals with opportunistic pathogens belonging to the Mycobacterium
avium complex (MAC) has risen dramatically [5,6]. Although a historically
well-known opportunistic pathogen, MACs generally do not infect individ-
uals with healthy immune systems. Instead, individuals suffering from HIV
infection, patients on a regimen of immunosuppressant medication, as well
as children and the elderly are the most commonly infected individuals.
Because MAC infection primarily occurs due to oral ingestion, with inhala-
tion as a secondary route, and because MACs are ubiquitous in nature, the
United States Environmental Protect Agency (EPA) listed MACs as one of
ten microbiological agents of interest on the Drinking Water Contaminant
Candidate List (CCL) released in 1998 [7,8]. 
Mycobacteria are slim, rod-shaped microorganisms approximately 1–10 µm
in size [9] with a high guanine plus cytosine content of DNA (high G+C
Gram positive bacteria). These microorganisms are characterized by the pres-
ence of unique lipids called mycolic acids on the cell surface. Mycolic acid,
found only in mycobacteria, is a group of complex branched-chain hydroxyl
lipids that is covalently bound to the peptidoglycan of the mycobacterial
wall. Mycolic acids make the mycobacterial cell surface hydrophobic and
limit the maximum growth rate of the microorganisms. The mycobacteria
include six distinct genera: Corynebacterium, Gordonia, Mycobacterium, Nocar-
dia, Rhodococcus, and Tsukamurella. A recent review is available online [10]. 
The traditional methods of identifying and monitoring mycobacteria in
environmental samples include direct observation using microscopy, often
coupled with staining procedures or cultivation on semiselective media
[11–13]. Although these traditional methods have been used successfully to
track mycobacteria in a variety of environmental samples, they suffer a
number of limitations. For example, direct observation using microscopy
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
301
requires signiﬁcant training to recognize staining properties and the mor-
phology of individual populations of microorganisms. Furthermore, it is
accepted that the staining properties and morphology of microbial popula-
tions can change dramatically depending upon the environmental conditions
experienced by the microorganisms. Thus, the robust nature of direct obser-
vation using microscopy can be questioned. Traditional cultivation of myco-
bacteria can require 3 to 5 weeks for the growth of colonies on agar surfaces.
Obviously, such a turnaround time for an assay is extensive and cannot be
classiﬁed as rapid by practical standards.
Recently, signiﬁcant efforts have been invested in the development of
molecular biology–based assays to identify and enumerate mycobacteria in
environmental samples. Antibody stains [14–16], ﬂuorescence in situ hybrid-
ization (FISH) targeting 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (16S rRNA)
[14,17–20], and fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis [21] have been dem-
onstrated successfully, as well as commercial kits such as AccuProbe from
Gen-Probe [22] and the COBAS AMPLICOR system from Roche [23]. An
important strength of these methods is the ability to identify bacteria without
cultivation. However, molecular biology–based techniques often lack the
ability to distinguish between living and dead organisms, do not generate
cultures that may be assayed subsequently for additional phenotypic traits,
and are yet to be integrated into a user-friendly format. These drawbacks
have caused cultivation to remain the primary means of screening for myco-
bacteria in clinical and environmental samples. 
To improve culture-based techniques for monitoring speciﬁc microbial
populations in environmental samples, we have developed a novel approach
using microfabrication to create devices to rapidly screen for mycobacteria.
Rather than using molecular biology–based assays to identify mycobacteria,
we have miniaturized the culture-based assay to rapidly identify individual
microbial populations adhered to a semiselective surface material inside a
microﬂuidic biochip. Here we describe the development of this culture-based
biochip and the application of this approach to rapid detection of mycobac-
teria in samples removed from a municipal activated sludge sewage treat-
ment system.
11.2
Culture-Based Approach
Microorganisms in the environment are often present in multispecies popu-
lations arranged in ﬂocs or bioﬁlms. A sample collected from the environ-
ment (e.g., an activated sludge sewage treatment system) is ﬁrst processed
using chemical or physical procedures to disaggregate the microorganisms
to release single, planktonic cells. The cell suspension is then incubated with
The culture-based biochip function is schematically illustrated in Figure 11.1.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

302
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
a culture-based biochip using available selective culturing conditions to iso-
late speciﬁc microbial populations from a mixture of microorganisms. 
The biochip detects mycobacteria using selective culturing conditions based
on the hydrophobic properties and the parafﬁnophilic nature of mycobacteria
[11]. As mentioned earlier, one deﬁning characteristic of mycobacteria is the
presence of mycolic acid in cell walls. This unique hydrophobic cell envelope
permits mycobacteria to preferentially adhere to hydrophobic surfaces such as
long-chain saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons (e.g., parafﬁn) [24]. Another deﬁn-
ing characteristic of mycobacteria is the presence of a parafﬁnase enzyme that
allows mycobacteria to utilize parafﬁn as a carbon source. Thus, mycobacteria
can be selectively isolated on parafﬁn surfaces, which serve as a baiting layer,
providing both a hydrophobic surface and a carbon source. The use of this
specialized metabolic trait to selectively isolate mycobacteria from environmen-
tal samples was ﬁrst described by Sohngen in 1913 [25] for the selective isolation
of Mycobacterium spp. and Nocarida spp. from soil using parafﬁn-coated rods.
During the past ﬁfteen years, Ollar and coworkers [11] expanded upon these
initial studies by developing a parafﬁn bating technique for selective isolation
of mycobacteria from clinical samples. On the biochip surface, target microor-
ganisms become embedded and grow, while nontarget microorganisms are
removed by washing. Following this semiselective culturing, target microor-
ganisms are visualized using microscopy coupled with staining.
The primary advantages of the culture-based biochip are speed and spec-
iﬁcity. Because microscopy is used to visualize microbial populations, the
technique can be performed rapidly without the need for extensive growth
of colonies of bacteria. Furthermore, by using an appropriate selective cul-
turing condition, the speciﬁcity of the technique can be decided a priori. As
described above and discussed extensively in the literature [11], parafﬁn is
a suitable selective culturing surface for environmental mycobacteria. Ulti-
mately, a microﬂuidic device containing an array of different culture media
regions to simultaneously track multiple microbial populations in an envi-
ronmental sample can be envisioned.
wafer containing a trench fabricated with hot embossing. Fabrication of the
biochip is conceptually simple and is similar to the fabrication of conven-
tional plastic biochips (see [29] for review). However, there are three main
FIGURE 11.1
Culture-based biochip approach to detection of mycobacteria.
Biomass
Disaggregate
Incubate
Detect
A microﬂuidic biochip for detection of mycobacteria is illustrated in Figure
and culturing bacteria. The chip is formed by two plastic wafers, with one
11.2. It consists of a microchannel containing parafﬁn islands used for bating
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
303
challenges to miniaturizing this technology: (1) parafﬁn must be depositing
in uniform ﬁlms of controlled thickness and patterned into detection
islands, (2) microorganisms must adhere to and proliferate on the parafﬁn
surfaces, and (3) microﬂuidic biochip channels containing parafﬁn patterns
must be sealed at low temperature to ensure that parafﬁn patterns remain
unchanged. Each of these challenges is discussed in detail below.
11.3
Parafﬁn Deposition and Patterning
11.3.1
Parafﬁns
Parafﬁn is a common name for a group of saturated hydrocarbons, typically
consisting of a mixture of alkanes of different chain lengths. The general
FIGURE 11.2
Schematic diagram of the culture-based microﬂuidic biochip for detection of mycobacteria. One
substrate contains a microﬂuidic channel (a), while another substrate contains parafﬁn patterns
(b). Two substrates are bonded together to complete the device (c). Arrows indicate the direction
of sample ﬂow into and out of the chip.
Embossed
microchannel
Patterned
paraﬃn islands
(a)
(b)
(c)
Input &
output
ports
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

304
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
chemical formula for parafﬁn is CnH2n+2, where n is greater than about 10.
There are two hydrogen atoms bonded to each carbon atom of the chain plus
an additional hydrogen atom bonded to each end of the chain. These satu-
rated hydrocarbons contain only single bonds and can be arranged in simple
straight chains (normal parafﬁns) or branched chains (isoparafﬁns). Most of
the natural parafﬁns are normal parafﬁns, while isoparafﬁns are frequently
produced in reﬁnery processes. Longer-chain parafﬁns are major constituents
of waxes. In most cases, the term parafﬁn refers speciﬁcally to normal alkanes. 
Normal parafﬁns are named according to the number of carbon atoms in
the chain. Table 11.1 summarizes the names and chemical formulas for several
parafﬁns. The increased length of the carbon chains increases the molar
weight, resulting in higher melting temperatures. The large selection of par-
afﬁns with different chain lengths means a wide range of melting tempera-
tures. Figure 11.3 illustrates this range for parafﬁns with 15 to 70 carbon atoms.
Parafﬁns are characterized by very low chemical reactivity with nearly all
materials. The term parafﬁn means chemically inactive, derived from Latin para
afﬁnis meaning “lacking afﬁnity” or “lacking reactivity.” Like most polymeric
TABLE 11.1
Summary of Normal Parafﬁns
n
Name
Formula
10
n-Decane
CH3(CH2)8CH3
15
n-Pentadecane
CH3(CH2)13CH3
20
n-Eicosane
CH3(CH2)18CH3
30
n-Triacontane
CH3(CH2)28CH3
40
n-Tetracontane
CH3(CH2)38CH3
50
n-Pentacontane
CH3(CH2)48CH3
FIGURE 11.3
Variation of parafﬁn melting temperature based on carbon chain length.
140
120
100
80
60
40
Melting temperature (°C)
20
0
10
20
30
40
Number of carbon atoms
50
60
70
80
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
305
materials, parafﬁns exhibit low thermal and electrical conductivities, which
accounts for their excellent insulating properties. Unlike many other polymeric
materials, parafﬁns are stable throughout phase change cycles because no
chemical reactions occur during the thermal energy storage process.
On the macroscale, parafﬁns are used for a number of applications. Beyond
the common use in candle making, parafﬁns are used in candies or to coat fruits
in order to make them look shiny. Although these food-grade parafﬁns are
edible, they are nondigestible and pass right through the body without being
broken down. Another common use of parafﬁns is in preparing specimens
for histology in medical and biological applications. In the automotive indus-
try, parafﬁns have been used as thermostats, and more recently parafﬁn
actuators have been used in positioning systems [30,31] and endoscopic
surgical instruments [32].
There has been little reported on using parafﬁns in microfabrication. One
example is the recent work by Mastrangelo and coworkers [33–35], who used
parafﬁn as a working substance in thermally activated microactuators and
microﬂuidic valves. These solid-liquid phase-change devices were fabricated
by encapsulating a thin layer of parafﬁn with paralene. Two parafﬁns were
used in that work: bonding wax from Logitech (bulk melting temperature
Tm = 72°C) and n-hexatriacontane (C36, Tm = 75°C). These parafﬁns were
thermally evaporated into 9 µm–thick layers and patterned with 20:80 sccm
CF4:O2 plasma (100 nm/min at 200 W [34]).
Another recent example of parafﬁn application in microfabrication is the
demonstration of thermally activated microactuators and valves by Klintberg
and coworkers [36,37]. These devices were fabricated by encapsulating par-
afﬁn wax from Sigma-Aldrich (bulk melting temperature Tm = 44 to 46°C)
using conventional silicon bulk micromachining [36] or hot embossing of
polycarbonate [37]. However, unlike the work by Mastrangelo et al., parafﬁn
was deposited into the prefabricated components, which was accomplished
by pumping molten parafﬁn with a syringelike piston. In order to keep
parafﬁn liquid during ﬁlling, the entire system was kept inside a 68°C oven.
For applications in bacteria culturing, microorganisms are sensitive to the
complexity of parafﬁn chains. Mycobacteria exhibit good growth on parafﬁns
with 12 to 23 carbon atoms, with some microorganisms using parafﬁns up
to C40 [24]. On the other hand, poor growth occurs on parafﬁns with chains
of less than 12 carbon atoms or more than 40. Thus, for parafﬁn baking, pure,
relatively short-chain, low-melting temperature parafﬁns are needed. Con-
sequently, despite the recent examples of parafﬁn deposition on the micro-
scale discussed above, new approaches to parafﬁn deposition and patterning
are needed.
11.3.2
Parafﬁn Deposition
In this work, TissuePrep Embedding Media parafﬁn (T565-2, Fisher Scien-
tiﬁc), which exhibits a melting temperature of 55 to 57°C and thus contains
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

306
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
chains about 23 to 25 carbon atoms long, was liqueﬁed and deposited onto
clean 18 mm–diameter glass wafers (12-546, Fisher Scientiﬁc) using spin
coating. Analogous to the traditional photolithographic photoresist poly-
mers, a solvent was used to liquefy parafﬁn. A number of solvents can be
used to dissolve parafﬁn, including xylene, carbon tetrachloride, acetone,
hexane, and butanol [38]. For this application, the choice of solvent must
include an appreciation for the impacts of the residual solvent upon the
microorganisms. Thus, it is important that any residual solvent remaining
in the ﬁlm does not adversely affect bacterial colonization and proliferation
on the microfabricated parafﬁn surfaces. Xylene and carbon tetrachloride
chemically interact with parafﬁn chains on contact and are toxic to bacteria.
Acetone, hexane, and butanol do not interact with parafﬁn chains and are
soluble in parafﬁn to various degrees [38]. 
Parafﬁn and butanol were mixed in deﬁned ratios using a water bath at
70°C. After spin coating, the molten parafﬁn solidiﬁed as it cooled, and the
butanol was evaporated by placing the wafers onto a leveled hotplate at
40°C for 2 hours. Using this process, uniform parafﬁn ﬁlms of different
thickness were successfully deposited and patterned on the surface of 18
afﬁn was to deposit a uniform ﬁlm on a glass wafer before the molten
parafﬁn solidiﬁed during spin coating. Although parafﬁn can also be liq-
ueﬁed using a head gun or a high-intensity halogen lamp placed immedi-
ately over the glass wafer, it solidiﬁes rapidly and produces inconsistent,
chunky layers. 
Using parafﬁn–butanol solutions of different concentrations (0 to 80%
butanol by volume) and different spin-coating parameters (1000 to 9000
rpm), parafﬁn ﬁlms of any desired thickness from 10 µm to 70 µm can be
on deposition rpm and solvent concentration. The data were collected by
patterning trenches in parafﬁn ﬁlm and scanning with a surface proﬁlometer.
The data clearly show that increasing the concentration of butanol yields
thinner ﬁlms. This result is consistent with our expectations because increas-
ing butanol content produces ﬁlms of lower viscosity.
11.3.3
Parafﬁn Patterning
Parafﬁn layers were patterned using dry etching. A 20 µm–thick layer of
AZ4620 photoresist (Clariant Corp.) was used as a masking layer. Due to the
low melting point of parafﬁn, the photoresist soft bake time was modiﬁed
to 2 hours on a 40°C hotplate. The resist was exposed and developed in
AZ400K developer (Clariant Corp) diluted with water at the ratio of 1:3.5 as
normal. The parafﬁn layer was etched with a mixture of O2 and CF4 plasma
at 50 W and 20 sccm total ﬂow. The remaining masking AZ4620 photoresist
mm–diameter glass wafers (Figure 11.4a). The challenge to depositing par-
deposited. Figure 11.5 illustrates the dependence of parafﬁn ﬁlm thickness
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
307
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 11.4
(a) Photograph of a 18 mm–diameter glass wafer with a 30 µm–thick layer of parafﬁn. Light-
ﬁeld (b) and dark-ﬁeld (c) 30 µm–thick parafﬁn patterns are 750 µm square at 1.5 mm spacing.
(d) Y-shaped 30 µm–thick parafﬁn patterns have characteristic dimensions of 250 µm (smaller
patterns) and 1000 µm (larger patterns).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

308
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
was stripped using a ﬂood UV exposure followed by a treatment in undiluted
AZ400K developer. The patterns used in this work included 4 × 4 arrays of
750 µm squares at 1.5 mm spacing, and arrays of Y-shaped patterns with
characteristic dimensions of 250 µm (smaller patterns) and 1000 µm (larger
ﬁeld in a 30 µm–thick parafﬁn ﬁlm. 
One of the key challenges to parafﬁn patterning was to ﬁnd an appropriate
photoresist. Due to the hydrophobic nature of parafﬁn, conventional photo-
resists exhibited poor adhesion (e.g., Shipley 1818 or Clariant AZ1500). Par-
afﬁn has a low surface tension, with a contact angle measured to be
approximately 109° ± 1°. Adhesion promoters, such as hexamethyldisilazane
(HMDS), showed only marginal improvement in adhesion. Thick photoresist
AZ4620 from Clariant Corp., on the other hand, adhered to parafﬁn. We
believe that this is due to the combination of a higher viscosity of this thick
photoresist as compared with the conventional photoresists and the n-butyl
acetate solvent, which has a lower surface energy and thus a higher contact
angle. The contact angle of AZ4620 photoresist was measured to be approx-
imately 89° ± 2°. Through experimentation, we found that the deposition
speed used for the thick photoresist needed to be at least 4000 rpm in order
to produce a deposit with minimal edge bead. While the edge bead is easily
removed with acetone in conventional microfabrication processing, acetone
cannot be used in our process as it attacks parafﬁn.
In dry etching, the addition of CF4 was necessary because parafﬁn was found
to exhibit a very low etch rate in pure oxygen plasma. Thus, 3 to 40% CF4 was
added to O2. Affects of the CF4-to-O2 ratio and other ﬂuorine containing gases,
FIGURE 11.5
Dependence of parafﬁn ﬁlm thickness on deposition rate and solvent concentration.
70
60
50
40
Film thickness (µm)
30
20
10
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Deposition rate (rpm)
7000
8000
9000
10000
11000
60% Butanol
20% Butanol
0% Butanol
patterns). Figure 11.4 illustrates these patterns in both light-ﬁeld and dark-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
309
such as CHF3 and SF6, were investigated by dry etching arrays of squares in
parafﬁn ﬁlm and scanning with a surface proﬁlometer to determine the etch
rate. From Figure 11.6, it is clear that the etch rate reaches a maximum of
approximately 0.6 µm/min when the CF4 percentage is approximately 10%.
We suggest that this is due to the fact that supplementing pure O2 plasma
with ﬂuorine-containing gases, such as CF4, increases the oxygen atom con-
centration, which increases the etch rate of polymers, as recently reported
[39]. If the ratio of O2 to CF4 is increased further and additional ﬂuorine
atoms react with parafﬁn, the rate of a competing reaction that generates
nonvolatile products is expected to increase. We believe that this increase in
nonvolatile products will prevent the reaction between O2 and parafﬁn and
thereby reduce the etch rate. The etch rate of parafﬁn ﬁlms containing butanol
was found to be higher than that of pure parafﬁn (Figure 11.6), peaking at
approximately 0.65 µm/min at 10% CF4. While the reason for this increased
rate is not clear, one possible explanation is that the ﬁlm containing butanol
is less dense than the pure parafﬁn ﬁlm due to butanol evaporation after
soft baking. With respect to other ﬂuorine-containing gases, CF4 proved to
The contact angle of parafﬁn ﬁlms before and after patterning were mea-
sured to check surface properties. These measurements were important for
two reasons. First, O2 plasma is commonly used to modify surface properties
of polymers resulting in signiﬁcantly lower contact angles [40–42]. Second,
our detection approach relies on the hydrophobicity of the parafﬁn layer to
selectively adsorb hydrophobic microorganisms from samples. Thus,
changes to phobicity of the parafﬁn layer will have a direct effect on the
FIGURE 11.6
Dependence of pure parafﬁn and parafﬁn with butanol etch rates on the ratio of O2 and CF4.
Error bars show one standard deviation.
be the most effective additive (Figure 11.7).
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Etch rate (µm/min)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
3
6
CF4 concentration (%)
10
20
30
Pure paraﬃn
Paraﬃn & butanol
40
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

310
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
performance of our device. As mentioned earlier, the pure parafﬁn contact
angle was measured to be approximately 109° ± 1°. Contact angle measure-
ments were performed using a contact angle analyzer (FTA 125, First Ten
Angstroms, Inc.). Parafﬁn ﬁlms containing butanol exhibited slightly higher
contact angles, measured to be approximately 114° ± 5°, due to butanol
having a lower surface tension. Following photoresist processing and dry
etching, the contact angle of parafﬁn ﬁlms reduced to 101° ± 2° for pure
parafﬁn and to 107° ± 5° for parafﬁn-butanol mixtures. Tracking the contact
angle over a period of three days after patterning showed virtually no
change, 98° ± 5° for pure parafﬁn and 110° ± 5° for parafﬁn-butanol mixtures.
These ﬁndings are consistent with the observations of others that the O2
plasma surface modiﬁcation effect is only temporary and lasts anywhere
from several minutes to several hours, depending on the processing param-
eters [41,42]. In our case, contact angle data indicate that the hydrophobicity
of the parafﬁn surface is not affected by the plasma and photoresist process-
ing. Further, it may be possible to store patterned parafﬁn surfaces for at
least several days, and possibly weeks or even longer without adverse effects
on the surface hydrophobicity.
The results presented in this chapter demonstrate that parafﬁn can be
successfully patterned using a variety of methods. In future research, the
patterns of the parafﬁn surface will be further modiﬁed to include additional
materials to either discourage the growth of speciﬁc populations of mycobac-
teria (i.e., through the incorporation of antibiotics) or to encourage the growth
of speciﬁc populations of mycobacteria (i.e., through the incorporation of
additional growth substrates such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons).
FIGURE 11.7
Etch rate comparison between 10% CHF3, 10% SF6, and 10% CF4 for pure parafﬁn and parafﬁn
with butanol. Error bars show one standard deviation.
0.8
0.7
0.6
Pure paraﬃn
Paraﬃn & butanol
0.5
0.4
Etch rate (µm/min)
0.3
0.2
0.1
CHF3
SF6
Gases
CF4
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
311
Thus, the successful patterning of the parafﬁn surface is an important result
suggesting that future research is needed to create an array of different types
of modiﬁed patterned parafﬁn surfaces in a single device to simultaneously
screen for a wide variety of speciﬁc populations of mycobacteria.
11.4
Testing of Parafﬁn Surfaces with Microorganisms
Concurrent with the development of a patterned parafﬁn surface, testing
with microorganisms was performed to verify that the ability of the parafﬁn
to selectively isolate mycobacteria was maintained [28]. Thus, we challenged
the parafﬁn surfaces using pure cultures of target and nontarget microor-
ganisms. Pure cultures of target microorganisms included four representative
mycobacteria, namely, Mycobacterium fortuitum, Tsukamurella pauromycobacte-
rium, Rhodococcus equi, and Gordonia amarae. Pure cultures of Escherichia coli
(gamma-subclass proteobacteria), Bacillus subtilis (Gram positive), and Paeni-
bacillus polymyxa (Gram positive) were tested as negative controls. The cul-
tures were grown in commercially available Middelbrook medium for
mycobacteria (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI) or Luria Bertani medium for
all other microorganisms (10 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract, and 10 g NaCl per
liter H2O, at a pH of 7) from stock cultures maintained at 4°C on 1.5% agar
plates prepared with Middelbrook (for mycobacteria) or Luria Bertani media.
Batch cultures of microorganisms were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min,
and resuspended in Czapek broth (3 g NaNO3, 1 g K2HPO4, 0.5 g MgSO4-
H2O, 0.5 g KCl, and 0.01 g FeSO4 per liter H2O) in 50 mL conical tubes. The
concentration of biomass for each test was determined according to the
procedure for volatile suspended solids (VSS) as reported in Standard Meth-
ods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater [43]. Parafﬁn-coated
wafers were placed inside 50 mL conical tubes, and the cultures were incu-
bated aerobically at 20°C for two hours. The parafﬁn-coated wafers were
removed from the 50 mL conical tubes, rinsed twice in distilled, deionized
water, and then each parafﬁn-coated wafer was stained with fresh 4’,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI) staining solution (100
mM Tris HCl [pH 7.2], 0.9 M NaCl, and 25 mg DAPI l-1 H2O) for 2 min,
rinsed with distilled, deionized water, and rapidly air dried. Fluorescent
DAPI staining of microorganisms on the parafﬁn surfaces was visualized
using an upright epiﬂuorescence microscope (Nikon model E-600, Melville,
NY) equipped with a digital CCD camera (Spot Advanced RT Monochrome,
Diagnostic Instruments, Sterling Heights, MI). Digital images were captured
and exported for analysis with MetaMorph Imaging software (version 4.6r1,
Universal Imaging Corp., Downingtown PA). All parafﬁn surfaces were
examined at 40× magniﬁcation and an average of ten random microscope
ﬁelds (images) were collected from each chip to ensure a total count of at
least 250 objects from each parafﬁn surface. Semiautomated image analysis
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

312
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
included manual thresholding with and without the use of the unsharp mask
for enhanced edge detection of objects, followed by integrated morphometry
analysis of a suite of parameters.
Figure 11.8 shows the results of a 2-hour incubation of a parafﬁn-coated
substrate with a pure culture of G. amarae at high and low surface coverage
or a pure culture of E. coli. Cells of the target microorganism can be seen on
the parafﬁn surface, whereas only minimal cellular debris is visualized on the
substrate incubated with the nontarget microorganism. Figure 11.8d illustrates
the results of a 2-hour incubation of the patterned parafﬁn surface with a
pure culture of G. amarae. The microorganisms are clearly conﬁned to the
patterned parafﬁn area (a corner of the 750 µm square pattern is shown).
This qualitative screening approach was used repeatedly with target
(M. fortuitum, T. pauromycobacteriuim, R. equi, and G. amarae) and nontarget
(E. coli, B. subtilis, and P. polymyxa) microorganisms throughout the develop-
ment of the prototype biochip.
four target and three nontarget microorganisms. As expected, no signiﬁcant
FIGURE 11.8
Pure cultures of a target microorganism G. amarae at low (a), and high (b) surface coverage,
and (c) nontarget bacteria E. coli after 2 hrs of incubation. (d) Pure cultures of a target micro-
organism G. amarae after 2 hrs of incubation on a 750 µm square parafﬁn pattern. Organisms
are DAPI stained (40× magniﬁcation, the size of the bar is 10 mm).
Figure 11.9 provides summary data for the calibration experiment with
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
313
binding to the surface of the device was observed as the concentration of
nontarget microorganisms was increased. For target microorganisms, the
relationship between the percentage surface coverage and the concentration
of biomass in the sample appeared to follow a rectangular hyperbola that is
characteristic of surface sorption phenomena (i.e., as the concentration of
biomass in the sample was increased, the percentage surface coverage
increased to a maximum.) This result suggests that multiple target microor-
ganisms appear to behave in a similar manner with an increase in the per-
centage of parafﬁn surface coverage, concurrent with an increase in the
biomass in the sample. The maximum percentage surface coverage appears
to depend upon the identity of the target microorganism. Further, the sensi-
tivity of the parafﬁn surface to detect changes in the concentration of biomass
in a sample is greatest for the lowest concentrations of biomass. In practical
terms, this means that the biochip would be expected to perform best for the
quantiﬁcation of biomass in an environmental sample when the concentration
of target microorganisms is less than approximately 100 mg VSS/liter.
Although the concentrations of mycobacteria tested in these experiments are
relevant for certain environmental samples, namely samples collected from
wastewater treatment plants or to monitor bioremediation of soils, the con-
centrations we examined in this work were signiﬁcantly higher than typically
encountered in drinking water. Therefore, future research is needed to eval-
uate if our biochip approach can be used to monitor for mycobacteria in
samples of drinking water in addition to samples of wastewater.
Finally, the speciﬁcity of the parafﬁn surfaces was tested by combining an
excess of biomass from nontarget microorganisms with biomass from target
microorganisms and incubating the mixture with prototype biochips. As
FIGURE 11.9
Relationship between the concentration of target microorganisms in solution and the percentage
surface coverage of replicated biochips.
1 
0.75 
0.5 
0.25 
Fractional chip coverage 
0 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
M. fortuitum
T. pauromycobacterium
R. equi
G. amarae
E. coli
B. subtilis
P. polymyxa
VSS (mg/liter) 
4000 
5000 
6000 
shown in Figure 11.10a, we were successful in detecting T. pauromycobacterium
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

314
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
from a mixture containing approximately 1000 mg VSS/liter of E. coli (non-
target), approximately 1000 mg VSS/liter of B. subtilis (nontarget), and
approximately 50 mg VSS/liter of T. pauromycobacterium after 2 hours of
incubation. Alternative mixtures of target and nontarget microorganisms
showed similar results (data not shown). These results strongly point to the
high speciﬁcity of the parafﬁn surfaces to selectively identify target micro-
organisms in the presence of an abundance of nontarget microorganisms.
To challenge the parafﬁn surfaces with a real environmental sample, grab
samples of mixed liquor were collected from the aeration basins of the Mill Creek
Wastewater Treatment plant operated by the Greater Cincinnati Metropolitan
Sewer District, transported on ice to laboratories at the University of Cincinnati,
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11.10
(a) Detection of T. pauromycobacterium from a mixture containing E. coli, B. subtilis, and T.
pauromycobacterium after 2 hrs of incubation. (b) Mycobacteria detected following 2 hrs of
incubation in samples of sewage sludge from the Mill Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant in
Cincinnati, Ohio. Organisms are DAPI stained (100× magniﬁcation, the size of the bar is 4 µm).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
315
and analyzed within one hour of collection. Parafﬁn-coated substrates were
incubated with the activated sludge sample, and cells were found to adhere to
ing characteristics of the adhered microorganisms according to standard proce-
dures [11,12] indicated that the microorganisms were members of the gram
positive mycobacteria. This result demonstrates that the culture-based biochip
environmental samples collected from a municipal sewage treatment plant.
11.5
Microﬂuidic Culture-Based Biochip
To integrate the culture-based detection of mycobacteria with a microﬂuidic
platform, parafﬁn islands were formed inside a cyclic oleﬁn copolymer
(COC) microchannel for bating and culturing bacteria. COC is a relatively
new thermoplastic polymer that has been gaining popularity due to its
excellent physical and chemical properties [44–46]. COC is more chemically
inert than most thermoplastics, exhibits very low (less than 0.01%) water
absorption, and has excellent optical properties making it ideally suited for
ﬂuorescence-based analyses [46,47].
The general concept of the microﬂuidic biochip was schematically illus-
containing a trench formed with hot embossing, the other containing parafﬁn
First, parafﬁn was deposited and patterned on a COC substrate. As discussed
previously, Tissue Prep parafﬁn can be successfully deposited and patterned
on glass substrates by spin coating and dry etching. The same approach can
be used to deposit parafﬁn on COC substrates. Next, a microchannel was
formed in a second COC substrate using hot embossing. The hot embossing
the biochip was completed by adhesively bonding the two COC substrates.
11.5.1
Microchannel Fabrication
Microchannels in COC wafers were formed by hot embossing using soft PDMS
embossing tools. Details of PDMS tool fabrication and performance are given
elsewhere [51]. The process is brieﬂy described as follows. Initially, a 3 in. silicon
wafer was RCA cleaned and kept in an oven at 120°C for 30 min to remove
moisture. A 110 µm–thick SU-8 (2075, MicroChem Corp.) mold was formed
using standard methods. Many investigators [52–56] have optimized SU-8 pro-
cessing for different applications involving various aspect ratios and feature
sizes. Quick oxygen plasma was used to clean up surfaces from any remaining
SU-8 residue. Prior to casting PDMS, the SU-8 surface was treated with CHF3
plasma to enhance separation of the PDMS ﬁlm from the SU-8 mold.
the surface (Figure 11.10b). A careful examination of the morphology and stain-
technology outlined in Figure 11.1 is suitable to screen for mycobacteria in
trated in Figure 11.2. The chip is formed by two plastic wafers: one wafer
islands. The fabrication sequence has three key three steps (Figure 11.11).
is rather straightforward and was discussed in detail in Chapter 5. Finally,
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

316
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
PDMS elastomer precursor and the curing agent (Sylgard 184, Dow Corn-
ing) were well mixed at the ratio of 10:1 and poured onto the silicon surface
with the SU-8 mold. The mixture was degassed inside a vacuum chamber
for about 30 min and cured on a leveled, ﬂat hot plate at 60°C for 3 hours.
The ﬂatness and proper leveling of the hot plate are critical to ensure that
the PDMS ﬁlm thickness is uniform. The cured PDMS was then peeled off
with care from the SU-8 mold. 
The embossing machine used in this work had a movable top hot plate and
a stationary bottom hot plate on which the PDMS mold and blank COC wafer
were placed. A vacuum pump was connected to the machine to provide a high
vacuum during the entire embossing cycle. The PDMS mold and COC wafer
were heated together to a temperature of 165°C, which is about 40°C above the
glass transition temperature of COC. The vacuum was used to prevent formation
of air bubbles during the embossing process. After the mold-polymer sandwich
reached the temperature, the system was allowed to rest at that temperature for
5 min to make sure that all the materials inside the chamber reached the desired
FIGURE 11.11
Schematic diagram of the microﬂuidic biochip fabrication.
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
PDMS
COC
COC
COC
PDMS
(1) Spin coating SU-8
(2) Lithography
(3) PDMS casting
(4) Hot embossing
(5) Adhesive bonding
SU-8
SU-8
UV adhesive
Paraﬃn
Outlet
Inlet
SU-8
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
317
temperature. Then a uniform, controlled force of 4.45 kN with a ramping speed
of 1 kN/min was applied by lowering the bottom plate and holding it against
the bottom stationary hot plate for 10 min. The system was cooled down to room
temperature, at which point the force was released. The mold-polymer sandwich
was then de-embossed manually by peeling the PDMS tool off the COC wafer.
Inlet and outlet ports were drilled in the COC wafer with the microﬂuidic
channel and the device was completed using adhesive bonding.
11.5.2
Adhesive Bonding
Due to presence of parafﬁn patterns on one of the COC wafers, conventional
adhesive bonding by spin coating could not be used. Further, polymer fusion
bonding could not be used because of the low melting temperature of par-
afﬁn (55 to 57 °C). Thus, a new stamping approach was developed to adhe-
sively bond the COC wafers. Overall, the process resembles micro contact
printing (µCP), and is illustrated in Figure 11.12. In this approach, a blank
FIGURE 11.12
Schematic diagram of adhesive bonding approach using stamping.
COC
(1) Surface treatment
COC
COC
COC
COC
COC
Inlet
Outlet
(2) Spin coating UV adhesive
(3) Stamping
(4) Bonding
UV adhesive
UV adhesive
UV adhesive
Paraﬃn
UV adhesive
Oxygen plasma
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

318
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
COC wafer was ﬁrst treated with quick oxygen plasma (50 W, 30 sec, 25
sccm) to make the surface hydrophilic in order to enhance spreading of the
adhesive. The COC substrate with microﬂuidic channel was also treated with
oxygen plasma to enhance the adhesive transfer. Loctite 3001 UV-cured
adhesive was spin coated on a wafer at 2000 rpm for 20 sec. Low-viscosity
UC-cured adhesive (100 cp) was used in this work because high-viscosity
adhesives (e.g., Loctite 3301, 5000 cp) introduced air bubbles during process-
ing and required degassing. A COC wafer containing embossed microchan-
nels was brieﬂy contacted on the surface of this wafer such that UV adhesive
was transferred. An aligner was used to align and bond the embossed COC
wafer, now containing UV-cured adhesive on its surface, with the parafﬁn-
patterned wafer.
11.5.3
Challenging Biochip with Mycobacteria
The microﬂuidic culture-based biochips fabricated in this work are shown
in Figure 11.13. The device was formed from 1 mm–thick, approximately 2
cm × 3 cm COC substrates. The microchannels are 1 mm in width, 15 mm
in length, and 110 µm in height, while input and output ports are 600 µm in
diameter. The three parafﬁn islands inside the microchannel are spaced at 2
mm, each being 800 µm wide, 1.5 mm long, and 5 µm thick, spaced at 2 mm.
FIGURE 11.13
Photographs of the completed culture-based biochips for environmental monitoring.
COC
substrates
Paraﬃn islands
2 cm
3 cm
Input/output
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
319
The device was packaged with commercial HPLC connectors (e.g., Upchurch
Scientiﬁc, Inc.) using 5000 cP UV-cured adhesive. A syringe pump (KDS 101,
KD Scientiﬁc Inc.) was used to operate the biochip.
To demonstrate detection of mycobacteria in environmental samples in
a robust, rapid, and easy-to-use fashion, biochips were incubated with a
variety of biological samples. The culturing and detection procedures dis-
cussed earlier were used. The results showed target microorganisms bind-
ing to parafﬁn in the device in a predictable manner, with nontarget
microorganisms not exhibiting signiﬁcant adhesion. Representative results
are shown in Figure 11.14. For example, panels b and c show the results
of challenging the biochip with a mixture of a pure culture of G. amarae
and nontarget E. coli following a 30-min incubation. Cells of the target
organism can be clearly observed on the surface, while only cell debris is
present on surfaces incubated with the nontarget microorganism. Figure
11.14, panels d and e, show results of a 2-hour incubation of a biochip with
a pure culture of G. amarae. Once again, cells of the target microorganism
can be clearly seen on the parafﬁn surface, whereas only minimal cellular
debris is visualized off the parafﬁn surface. Because the parafﬁn islands
and microﬂuidic channels were both fabricated using a transparency mask
(printed using an inkjet printer at 1200 dpi), the edges of parafﬁn islands
are not very smooth and appear wavy.
FIGURE 11.14
Representative results of challenging culture-based biochip with a pure culture of G. amarae.
(a) Bright ﬁeld image at 10× magniﬁcation illustrating a parafﬁn island inside a microﬂuidic
channel prior to biochip operation. (b–c) Epiﬂuorescence images at 10× of the parafﬁn island
illustrating detection of target microorganism G. amarae and lack of interference from non-
target microorganism E. coli following 30 min of incubation. Bright ﬁeld (d) and epiﬂuores-
cence (e) images at 40× of the parafﬁn surface illustrating the detection of individual cells of
G. amarae. All microorganisms were stained with DAPI.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Paraﬃn
G. amarae
E. coli
Paraﬃn
100 mg/liter
Paraﬃn
100 mg/liter
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

320
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
11.6
Conclusions
Micromachining technologies have been used to fabricate parafﬁn substrates
for culture-based detection of mycobacteria in environmental samples. A
new method of depositing parafﬁn was demonstrated, permitting us to
successfully deposit uniform parafﬁn ﬁlms ranging from 10 to 70 µm in
thickness. Dry etching techniques were demonstrated to be effective in pat-
terning parafﬁn ﬁlms. The developed culture-based biochip is capable of
detecting pure cultures of target microorganisms in as little as 2 hours as
compared to 3 weeks for a conventional assay in the presence of a 100-fold
excess of nontarget microorganisms. Such a biochip to selectively culture
mycolic acid containing actinomycetes from environmental samples will
improve screening for mycobacteria to protect public health as well as screen-
ing for nocardiafoams to reduce the costs associated with treating nocar-
diafoam at sewage treatment plants. In the long term, we expect to develop
an array-based technology for rapidly and speciﬁcally identifying, enumer-
ating, and characterizing mycobacteria to protect drinking water, to monitor
the success of petroleum bioremediation, and to identify the cause of ﬁla-
mentous foaming on the surfaces of sewage treatment plants.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science
Foundation (BES0116912 and BES0428600) and Emerging Concepts, Inc. The
authors are also grateful to the Greater Cincinnati Metropolitan Sewer Dis-
trict for access to the Mill Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant.
References
[1] Pitt, P. and Jenkins, D. Res., Causes and control of nocardia in activated sludge,
J. Water Pollution Control Federation 62, 143, 1990.
[2] Seviour, E., Williams, C., Seviour, R., Soddell, J., and Lindrea, K., Survey of
ﬁlamentous bacterial populations from foaming activated sludge plants in
eastern states of Australia, Water Research, 24, 493–498, 1990.
[3] Soddell, J. and Seviour, R., Microbiology of foaming in activated sludge
plants—a review, J. Appl. Bacteriol., 69, 145, 1990.
[4] McCormick, J.B., Epidemiology of emerging/re-emerging antimicrobial-resis-
tant bacterial pathogens, Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 1, 125–129, 1998.
[5] Horsburgh, C.R., In vitro and in vivo antimycobacterial activities of a new
quinolone, New Engl. J. Med., 324, 1332–1338, 1991.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
321
[6] Nightingale, S.D. et al., Incidence of mycobacterium avium-intracellular com-
plex bacteremia in human immunodeﬁciency virus-positive patients, J. Infect.
Dis., 165, 1082–1085, 1992.
[7] Safe Drinking Water Act: Contaminant Candidate List, U.S. Environmental Protec-
[8] Federal Register notice about the Contaminant Candidate List, U.S. Environ-
[9] K. J. Ryan, Sherris Medical Microbiology, 3rd Ed. Norwalk, CT: Appleton &
Lange, 1994.
[10] M. Dworkin, M., Ed., The Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic Resource for the
[11] Ollar, R. and Connell, N. Molecular Mycobacteriology, New York, Marcel Dek-
ker, 1999.
[12] Jenkins, D., Richards, M., and Daigger, G., Manual on the Causes and Control of
Filamentous Bulking and Foaming, 2nd Ed., Boca Raton, FL, Lewis Publisher, 1993.
[13] Eikelboom, D., Process Control of Activated Sludge Plants by Microscopic Investi-
gation, London, U.K., International Water Association, 2000.
[14] Oerther, D., de los Reyes III, F., Hernandez, M., and Raskin, L., Simultaneous
application of oligonucleotide probes and an antibody stain for in situ detection
of gordona spp, FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 29, 129–136, 1999.
[15] Iwahori, K., Miyata, N., Morisada, S., and Suzuki, N., Rapid detection of No-
cardia amarae in the activated sludge process using enzyme-linked immun-
osorbent assay (ELISA), J. Biosci. Bioeng., 89, 469–473, 2000.
[16] Iwahori, K. et al., Production of anti-Gordonia amarae mycolic acid polyclonal
antibody for detection of mycolic acid-containing bacteria in activated sludge
foam, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 92, 417, 2001.
[17] de los Reyes, F., Ritter, W., and Raskin, L., Group-speciﬁc small-subunit rRNA
hybridization probes to characterize ﬁlamentous foaming in activated sludge
systems, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 63, 1107–1117, 1997.
[18] Schuppler, M., Wagner, M., Schon, G., and Gobel, U., Microbiology, 144, 249, 1998.
[19] de los Reyes III, F. et al., Characterization of ﬁlamentous foaming in activated
sludge systems using oligonucleotide hybridization probes and antibody
probes, Water Sci. Tech., 37, 485–493, 1998.
[20] de los Reyes, M. et al., Identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of Gordona amarae
strains in activated sludge systems using comparative rRNA sequence analysis
and phylogenetic hybridization probes, Water Sci. Tech., 37, 521–525, 1998.
[21] Cha, D., Fuhrmann, J., Kim, D., and Golt., C. Water Res., 33, 1964, 1999.
[22]
®
[23]
[24] Soddell, J. and Seviour, R., Water Sci. Tech., 34, 113–118, 1996.
[25] Sohngen, N., Benzen, petroleum, parafﬁnol, und parafﬁn als kohlenstoff und
engiequelle fur mikroben, Zbl. Bakt. Hyg. Abt. II, 37, 595–609, 1913.
[26] Jing, G., Eluru, H., Polaczyk, A., Kinkle, B., Oerther, D., and Papautsky, I.,
Culture-based detection of mycobacteria in environmental samples, J. Micro-
mech. Microeng., 15, 270–276, 2005.
[27] Jing, G., Hollis, G., Eluru, H., Polaczyk, A., Kinkle, B., Oerther, D., and Pa-
pautsky, I., Developing rapid detection of mycobacteria using microwaves,
Analyst, 129, 963–969, 2004.
tion Agency, http://www.epa.gov/OGWDW/ccl/cclfs.html
mental Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/safewater/ccl/ccl_fr.html
Microbiology Community, http://141.150.157.117:8080/prokPUB/index.htm
AccuProbe  Culture Identiﬁcation Tests, Gen-Proge, Inc., http://www.gen-probe
.com/prod_serv/mycobac_accuprobe.asp
Roche Molecular Diagnostics, http://www.roche-diagnostics.com/ba_rmd/
rmd_products_mycobateria.html
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

322
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[28] Polaczyk, A., Kinkle, B., Papautsky, I., and Oerther, D., Culture-based MEMS
device to track Gordonia in activated sludge, Environ. Sci. Technol., 40, 2269–2274,
2006.
[29] Becker, H. and Locascio, L.E., Polymer microﬂuidic devices, Talanta, 56, 267,
2002.
[30] Dowen, D.E., Design and implementation of parafﬁn based micro-positioning
actuator, Proc. SPIE, 3132, 127–134, 1997.
[31] Tibbitts, S.F., High-output parafﬁn linear motors: utilization in adaptive sys-
tems, Proc. SPIE, 1543, 388–426, 1991.
[32] Kabei, N. et al., Thermal-expansion type microactuator using parafﬁn as ex-
pansive material, Trans. JSME, Part C., 62, 4624–4629, 1997.
[33] Carlen, E.T. and Mastrangelo, C.H., Electrothermally activated parafﬁn micro-
actuators, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 11, 167–174, 2002.
[34] Selvaganapathy, P., Carlen, E.T., and Mastrangelo, C.H., Electrothermally ac-
tuated inline microﬂuidic valve, Sensors and Actuators A, 104, 275–282, 2003.
[35] Carlen, E.T. and Mastrangelo, C.H., Surface micromachined thermally actuated
microvalve, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 11, 408–420, 2002.
[36] Klintberg, L., Karlsson, M., Stenmark, L., and Thornell, G., A thermally acti-
vated parafﬁn-based actuator for gas-ﬂow control in a satellite electrical pro-
pulsion system, Sensors and Actuators A, 105, 237–246, 2003.
[37] Klintberg, L., Svedberg, M., Nikolajeff, F., and Thornell, G., Fabrication of a
parafﬁn actuator using hot embossing of polycarbonate, Sensors and Actuators
A, 103, 307–316, 2003.
[38] Plomp, M., van Hoof, P.J.C.M., and van Enckevort, W.J.P., AFM-induced melt
growth on n-parafﬁn crystals, Surface Science, 448, 231–249, 2000.
[39] D’Agostino, R., Plasma Deposition, Treatment, and Etching of Polymers, Boston,
MA, Academic Press, 1990.
[40] Jo, B., Van Lerberghe, L., Motsegood, K., and Beebe, D., J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 9, 76, 2000.
[41] Morra, M., Occhiello, E., Marola, R., Garbassi, F., Humphrey, P., and Johnson,
D., On the aging of oxygen plasma-treated polydimethylsiloxane surfaces,
Colloid Interface Sci., 137, 11–24, 1990.
[42] Lee, J., Park, C., and Whitesides, G., Solvent compatibility of poly(dimethylsi-
loxane)-based microﬂuidic devices, Anal. Chem., 75, 6544–6554, 2003.
[43] Clesceri, L., Asn, A., and Eaton, A., Standard Methods for Examination of Water
& Wastewater, 20th ed, Washington, DC, APHA/AWWA/WEF, 1999.
[44] Becker, H. and Gartner, C., Polymer microfabrication methods for microﬂuidic
analytical applications, Electrophoresis, 21, 12, 2000.
[45] Rotting, O. et al., Polymer microfabrication technologies, Microsyst. Technol., 8,
32, 2002.
[46] Ahn, C.H. et al., Disposable smart lab on a chip for point of care clinical
diagnostics, Proc. IEEE, 92, 154, 2004.
[47] Piruska, A. et al., The autoﬂuorescence of plastic materials and chips under
laser irradiation, Lab Chip, submitted, 2005.
[48] Puntambekar, A., Choi, J.-W., Ahn, C. H., Kim, S., and Makhijani, V., Fixed-
volume metering microdispenser module, Lab Chip, 2, 213–218, 2002.
[49] Divakar, R., Butler, D., and Papautsky, I., Room temperature low-cost UV-cured
adhesive bonding for microﬂuidic biochips, in Proc. Micro-Total Analysis Systems
(µTAS 2001), Monterey, CA, 21–25, October, 2001.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Culture-Based Biochip for Rapid Detection of Environmental Mycobacteria
323
[50] Huang, Z., Sanders, J.C., Dunsmor, C., Ahmadzadeh, H., and Landers, J.P., A
method for UV-bonding in the fabrication of a glass electrophoretic microchips,
Electrophoresis, 22, 3924–3929, 2001.
[51] Narasimhan, J. and Papautsky, I., Polymer embossing tools for rapid prototyp-
ing of plastic microﬂuidic devices, J. Micromech. Microeng., 14, 96, 2004.
[52] Loechel, B., Thick-layer resists for surface micromachining, J. Micromech. Mi-
croeng., 10, 108–111, 2000.
[53] Brien, J. et al., Advanced photoresist technologies for microsystems, J. Micro-
mech. Microeng., 11, 353–358, 2001.
[54] Juncker, D. et al., Soft and rigid two-level microﬂuidic networks for patterning
surfaces, J. Micromech. Microeng., 11, 532–541, 2001.
[55] Zhang, J., Tan, K., and Gong, H.,Characterization of the polymerization of SU-
8 photoresist and its applications in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS),
Polymer Testing, 20, 693–701, 2001.
[56] Lorenz, H. et al., SU-8: A low-cost negative resist for MEMS, J. Micromech.
Microeng., 7, 121–124, 1997.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

325
12 
MEMS for Drug Delivery
Kabseog Kim and Jeong-Bong Lee
CONTENTS
12.1
Introduction.............................................................................................. 325
12.2
Human Skin and Microneedles ............................................................ 326
12.3
In-Plane Silicon Microneedles............................................................... 328
12.4
In-Plane Metallic Microneedles............................................................. 331
12.5
Out-of-Plane Silicon Microneedles....................................................... 333
12.6
Out-of-Plane Metallic and Polymeric Microneedles ......................... 338
12.7
Mechanical Robustness of the Microneedles...................................... 340
12.8
Microreservoir Devices for Drug Delivery ......................................... 344
12.9
Biocompatibility and Biofouling of MEMS Drug
Delivery Devices...................................................................................... 346
References ............................................................................................................ 346
12.1
Introduction
There are many routes by which drugs can be delivered into the body. These
routes include oral (drugs taken by mouth), injections, nasal (sprayed into
nose), inhalation (breathed into the lungs), rectal (injection into the rectum),
cutaneous (applied on the skin), and transdermal (delivery through the skin).
Injections can be further divided into intravenous (injection into a vein),
intramuscular (injection into a muscle), intrathecal (injection into the space
around the spinal cord), and subcutaneous (injection beneath the skin). Each
drug delivery route has speciﬁc advantages and disadvantages, and the route
greatly impacts the therapeutic efﬁcacy of the delivered drug inside the body.
The oral route is the most common way to deliver drugs into the body.
However, it should be noted that the popularity of oral drug administration
is not because it is effective, but because it is convenient. Compared to the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

326
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
majority of the other methods, oral drug administration is the simplest and
the least expensive method. In addition, it is also often the safest method for
most drugs. However, conventional oral drug delivery is not an ideal route
for the delivery of many drugs, especially newly available protein- or peptide-
based drugs developed through biotechnology. The orally administered drug
is partially absorbed in the mouth and stomach, although most of the drug
is absorbed from the small intestine. The drug passes through the liver before
it is transported via the bloodstream to its target site. Most drugs are degraded
in the gastrointestinal tract by digestive enzymes or eliminated by the liver.
The most common alternative route to oral drug delivery is injection.
Although injection would be an effective way to deliver large-molecule drugs
into the body in large quantities, it has inherent problems, such as invasiveness
(needles cause pain and tissue damage) and it is difﬁcult to achieve a sustained,
controlled release of the drug. In addition, this method is relatively expensive
because medical professionals need to administer drugs in most cases.
Recently, there have been many studies on new drug delivery methods
using emerging micro- and nanotechnologies with goals of overcoming these
limitations. This chapter presents a survey of these newly proposed drug
delivery methods using MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) tech-
niques. The vast majority of the MEMS for drug delivery work are dedicated
to the development of microneedles for minimally invasive transdermal drug
delivery. Various materials and microfabrication processes used for the real-
ization of various kinds of microneedles are surveyed, and methods for
modeling mechanical robustness of microneedles are described. The devel-
opment of microreservoir devices (using MEMS techniques) that contain
drugs and deliver them via the oral route or via an intravenous injection is
also discussed. The last section is devoted to a discussion of biocompatibility
and biofouling issues in MEMS devices for drug delivery applications.
12.2
Human Skin and Microneedles
Hypodermic syringes with a hollow pointed needle have been one of the
most commonly used body ﬂuid extraction, vaccination, and medication
devices since their invention by C. Pravaz and A. Wood in the 1850s [1].
While there have been many variations in materials and methods of provid-
ing safety, the hypodermic syringe design has changed very little since its
ﬁrst use. Conventional hypodermic needles create fear of injection-related
pain among patients, and there has been increasing concern regarding the
transmission of bloodborne pathogens such as HIV (human immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus) and hepatitis to healthcare workers by accidental needle stick
injuries [2].
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
327
Figure 12.1 shows a schematic diagram of a cross-section of human skin.
Human skin is composed of three layers: epidermis, dermis, and subcuta-
neous tissue. The outermost layer of the epidermis is stratum corneum (10
to approximately 15 µm thick), a layer of dead cells, which is a protective
diffusion barrier layer preventing the loss of body ﬂuids and blocking the
entry of external materials into the body. Sensory ﬁbers in the cutaneous
nerves detect external stimuli such as temperature, pressure, and those
causing pain, and generate signals that are relayed through a nerve pathway
to the brain. Sensory ﬁbers and blood vessels reach to the dermis layer in
the skin. The pain associated with an injection using a hypodermic syringe
is due to the fact that the needle is large and penetrates deep into the skin
with excessive contact with these sensory ﬁbers. The smallest needle typi-
cally used for insulin injection for diabetes is a 31-gauge needle which is
254 µm in outer diameter.
With the advances in MEMS technology, it is possible to make micronee-
dles that are long enough to penetrate the epidermis, but short enough not
to penetrate deep into the dermis layer and farther down in the subcutaneous
tissue for minimally invasive transdermal drug delivery and body ﬂuid
sampling. Moreover, microneedles and microneedle arrays can be used as
stand-alone devices as well as a part of more sophisticated smart biological
detection and delivery systems in which microneedles are integrated with
microﬂuidics and biosensors or microelectronics.
FIGURE 12.1
A schematic diagram of a cross-section of human skin with a microneedle array and a conventional
needle. (From Australian College of Dermatologists. With permission.)
Microneedles 
Dermal papillae 
Cold receptor 
Heat receptor 
Blood vessels 
Nerve 
Fat globules
Connective 
tissue 
Conventional  
needle 
Pore 
Hair 
Epidermis 
Dermis 
Sweat gland 
Subcutaneous 
layer 
Errector pili
muscle 
Sebaceous
gland
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

328
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
There have been many investigations on a variety of microneedles that
allow precise control of the delivery depth and rate of the sophisticated gene
and drugs. Both in-plane and out-of-plane microneedles made of various
materials, including single crystal silicon, polysilicon, metals, and polymers,
have been investigated. Various fabrication techniques, from a simple single-
step process to a complex sequence of multiple fabrication steps and various
shapes of microneedles in both solid and hollow forms have been studied.
12.3
In-Plane Silicon Microneedles
Although it was not intended for drug delivery, development of in-plane
microneedles can be traced back to the work of Dr. Wise on neural probes
at the University of Michigan in the 1980s [4]. An implantable ten-channel
microelectrode recording array with an on-chip signal-processing smart
biopotentials and as a basis for closed-loop neural prostheses. The probe is
4.7 mm long, 15 µm thick, and has a shank that tapers from 160 µm near the
base to less than 15 µm near the tip. A one-dimensional array of microneural
probes [5], and much more sophisticated microassembled, two-dimensional
array [6] have been developed since that time.
In-plane microneedles have been under development since the early 1990s
beginning at the University of California at Berkeley with Dr. Pisano’s group.
A combination of surface- and bulk-micromachining techniques was used to
fabricate hollow, in-plane microneedles in 1 to 6 mm lengths with fully
are 9 µm in height and have one of two widths, 30 or 50 µm. Access to the
channels is provided at their shank and distal ends through 40 µm square
apertures in the overlying silicon nitride layer. Polysilicon microheaters were
integrated to generate bubbles, which can be used as a micropump. Because
it is complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) compatible, it has
great possibilities for integration with electronics to realize smart microneedles.
Polysilicon microneedles have also been made with a two-wafer polysilicon
micromolding process, referred to as polymolding, which has the potential to
needles by Dr. Fujita’s group at the University of Tokyo. Chun et al. have
used the deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) technique to deﬁne an array of
deep holes in silicon and oxidize it to form hollow silicon dioxide microcap-
illaries [11]. Oka et al. have also fabricated SiO2 hollow microneedles, which
mimic a jagged mosquito’s needle [12].
probe was fabricated (Figure 12.2) for the long-term recording of neural
enclosed channels formed of silicon nitride (Figure 12.3) [7,8]. The channels
Silicon dioxide has also been investigated as a viable material for micro-
be much more cost-effective because the silicon micromolds are reusable (Fig-
ure 12.4) [9,10]. 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
329
FIGURE 12.2
(a) Schematic diagram and (b) SEM images of an in-plane micro neural probe. (From K. Najaﬁ
and K. Wise, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 21, 1035–1044, 1986. With permission.)
Output leads
Signal processing
circuit
Interconnecting
lead
Supporting
substrate
(a)
Exposed
recording sites
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

330
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
FIGURE 12.3
(a) Schematic diagrams and (b) SEM images of silicon processed in-plane microneedles (From
L. Lin and A. Pisano, J. Microelectromechanical Systems, 8, 78–84, 1999. With permission).
Single-crystal
silicon
(50 µm thick)
Polysilicon 
resistor 
Contact pad 
Cross section B-B 
Cross section A-A 
(a) 
Flow channel 
Silicon nitride 
Silicon dioxide 
Boron doped Si 
Single-crystal Si 
IC–Interface 
region 
Micro heaters 
Fluid port 
Micro channel 
A 
A 
B 
B 
Etch holes 
Fluid port 
Distal end 
13 µm Thick
boron doped Si
Shank end 
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
331
12.4
In-Plane Metallic Microneedles
Electroplated metals were also investigated as materials for microneedles by
Dr. B. Frazier’s group at Georgia Tech. Chandrasekaran et al. demonstrated
surface micromachined, in-plane, hollow metallic hypodermic microneedles
and microneedle arrays using electroplated palladium, palladium alloys, and
geometries, microbarbs, mechanical penetration stops, and multiple ﬂuid
output ports. The ﬂuid-coupled microneedles were packaged in a standard
luer-lock ﬁtting using UV-curable epoxy.
FIGURE 12.4
(a) SEM of a microneedle mold. (b) SEM of a polysilicon hypodermic microneedle fabricated
by polymolding technique. (From J. Zahn, N. Talbot, D. Liepmann, and A. Pisano, Biomedical
Microdevices, 2, 295–303, 2000. With permission.)
(a)
(b)
nickel (Figure 12.5) [13–15]. These metallic microneedles feature complex tip
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

332
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 12.5
SEM photomicrographs of surface micromachined microneedles: (a) a metallic microneedle
with multiple output ports, (b) cross-section of the microneedle showing its microchannel, (c)
a sophisticatedly designed single microneedle with a shaft length of 500 µm. 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
333
12.5
Out-of-Plane Silicon Microneedles
One of the major issues with respect to in-plane microneedles is their limited
density. This is due to the fact that only a one-dimensional array of micro-
needles can be microfabricated in a wafer. In order to achieve two-dimensional
arrays of microneedles, a complex microassembly process similar to one dem-
onstrated by Bai et al. [6] would be needed. With the typical microneedle inner
diameters of 10 to 100 µm, the limited density of the microneedles may become
an issue when delivering a large amount of a drug or in blood analysis appli-
cations, which typically require a fair amount of blood. In addition, shear stress
created by the tissue during insertion may cause mechanical fracture for the
single microneedle or one-dimensional array of long microneedles. The out-
of-plane microneedle array appears to be a viable option for addressing the
aforementioned issues because many microneedles can be microfabricated in
a wafer and the two-dimensional arrays are less prone to fracturing when
exposed to shear forces during penetration. 
The ﬁrst demonstrated out-of-plane microdevices for drug and gene deliv-
ery are sharp solid silicon structures [16,17]. Dizon et al. realized an array
of sharp solid silicon structures using a conventional anisotropic silicon wet
etching technique [16]. The timed wet etching using a square mask and fast-
etching (411) planes was used to realize approximately 80 µm high and very
sharp (with a tip radius of curvature less than 0.1 µm) solid silicon structures
has been coated with speciﬁc genes, which have been successfully transferred
(d)
FIGURE 12.5 (continued)
SEM photomicrographs of surface micromachined microneedles: (d) an array of the micro-
needles with a center-to-center distance of 2 mm. (From S. Chandrasekaran, J. Brazzle and
B. Frazier, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 289–295, 2003, and S. Chandrasekaran and B.
Frazier, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 281–288, 2003. With permission.)
(Figure 12.6a). An array of such sharp solid silicon micropiercing structures
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

334
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
into plant and animal cells. The anisotropic silicon dry etching technique
using SF6 and O2 plasma has also been used to realize an array of sharp solid
silicon microstructures with a height of 150 µm (Figure 12.6b) [17]. The ratio
between SF6 and O2 can be used to control the tapered angle of the etched
silicon microstructure. Henry et al. [17] used such a solid microneedle array
to pierce human skin and demonstrate the increased permeability of human
skin by up to four orders of magnitude in vitro.
In order to realize three-dimensional out-of-plane hollow silicon microneedles,
multiple lithography steps and a combination of wet and dry etching and dep-
osition techniques have been used. Stoeber and Liepmann have fabricated arrays
of out-of-plane, sharp, and hollow single-crystal silicon microneedles with a
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 12.6
SEM images of (a) a wet etched sharp solid silicon microstructure. (From R. Dizon, H. Han, A.
Russell, and M. Reed, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2, 151–159, 1993, with permission). (b) An array
of dry etched sharp solid silicon microneedles. (From S. Henry, D. McAllister, M. Allen, and
M. Prausnitz, J. Pharm. Sci., 87, 922–925, 1998, with permission).
combination of isotropic and anisotropic etching techniques (Figure 12.7) [18].
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
335
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 12.7
(a) Fabrication sequence, (b) SEM image of an array of pointed hollow silicon microneedles
with a height of 200 µm and a channel diameter of 40 µm, and (c) a conceptual schematic
diagram of a disposable MEMS syringe. (From B. Stoeber and D. Liepmann, Design, fabrication
and testing of a MEMS syringe, in Solid-State Sensors, Actuator and Microsystems Workshop, Hilton
Head Island, South Carolina, June 2–6, 2002. With permission.)
δ
Masks
Isotropic
etching
DRIE
(deep reactive
ion etching)
Flexible container
Drug
Needles
Skin
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

336
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
An array of needle channels through the substrate were deﬁned using the
DRIE process, which was followed by an isotropic etching process with a
small offset of the center lines resulting in a microneedle with a sharp tip on
the circumference of its shaft. They further demonstrated a disposable
syringe that has a hollow microneedle array with a ﬂexible polydimethyl
siloxane (PDMS) container for drug storage.
Griss and Stemme demonstrated an array of hollow, out-of-plane silicon
microneedles with openings in the shaft of the microneedles using three steps
of dry etching (Figure 12.8) [19]. This particular microneedle was developed with
FIGURE 12.8
(Top) Three-step fabrication sequence, (Bottom) SEM image of side-opened, out-of-plane hollow
silicon microneedles. (From P. Griss and G. Stemme, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12,
296–301, 2003. With permission.)
Isotropic
DRIE
Anisotropic
DRIE
Isotropic
plasma
etch
(a)
(b)
(c)
Si
Si
Si
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
337
a goal of achieving low ﬂow resistance, high structural strength, a large area
of drug exposure to the tissue, and a low risk of clogging. The size and position
of the side ﬂow channel openings were deﬁned by RIE process parameters.
Gardeniers et al. demonstrated an array of hollow sharp silicon micro-
needles using a sequence of DRIE, anisotropic wet etching, and conformal
thin ﬁlm deposition steps (Figure 12.9) [20]. The thick black line in the Figure
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 12.9
(a) Microneedle fabrication sequence; (b) SEM images of 350 µm–high triangular silicon mi-
croneedles. (From H. Gardeniers, R. Luttge, E. Berenschot, M. de Boer, S. Yeshurun, M. Hefetz,
R. Oever, and A. Berg, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 855–862, 2003. With permission.)
a
b
1
2
c
d
3
4
5
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

338
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
12.9a represents a silicon nitride coating, which is used as a protection layer
during KOH etching.
Mukerjee et al. produced different needle shapes by changing the relative
position of the central bore hole to the shaft of the microneedles by a com-
bination of DRIE, diamond blade circular sawing, and isotropic etching [21].
12.6
Out-of-Plane Metallic and Polymeric Microneedles
Along with out-of-plane silicon microneedles, there have been several inves-
tigations with respect to development of out-of-plane metallic microneedles
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 12.9 (continued)
(c,d) SEM images of 350 µm–high triangular silicon microneedles. (From H. Gardeniers, R.
Luttge, E. Berenschot, M. de Boer, S. Yeshurun, M. Hefetz, R. Oever, and A. Berg, J. of Micro-
electromechanical Systems, 12, 855–862, 2003. With permission.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
339
using electroplated metals. McAllister et al. demonstrated three-dimensional
tapered-shaft and straight-shaft hollow metallic microneedles as shown in
Figure 12.10 [22]. The straight-shaft microneedles were fabricated by electro-
plating through cylindrically deﬁned SU-8 holes. For the tapered needles, a
relatively complex combination of the SU-8 mold and the anisotropically
etched sharp solid Si mold insert [17] and electroplating technique were used.
The SU-8 was later etched from the top surface to form the tip opening by
O2/CHF3 plasma and the SU-8 mold was fully etched away to release the
metallic microneedles. Similar tapered metallic microneedles were demon-
strated by Davis et al. using excimer and infrared laser micromachining [23].
In this approach, both the metal and polymer molds were drilled to form
tapered conical holes by controlling the energy distribution of the laser beam,
then conformal electroplating was carried out on these drilled molds to
fabricate the metallic microneedles.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 12.10
SEM photomicrographs of metallic microneedle arrays: (a) NiFe microtubes 200 µm in height
and 80 and 40 µm in outer and inner diameter, respectively; (b) 150 µm–tall, hollow NiFe
microneedles using an SU-8 mold of a silicon mold insert. (From D. McAllister, F. Cros, S. Davis,
L. Matta, M. Prausnitz, M. Allen, Dig. Transducers’99, Int. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators,
1098–1101, 1999. With permission.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

340
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Recently, Kim et al. demonstrated a tapered hollow metallic microneedle
array using a relatively simple backside exposure of the SU-8 process [24].
An SU-8 mesa was formed on a glass substrate and another SU-8 layer,
which was spun on top of the SU-8 mesa, was exposed through the backside
tures with angles between 3.1 and approximately 5° on top of the SU-8 mesa
was formed. Conformal electrodeposition of metal was carried out, followed
by mechanical polishing using a planarized polymeric layer. All organic
layers were then removed to create a metallic hollow microneedle array
with a ﬂuidic reservoir on the back side. Both 200 µm– and 400 µm–tall, 10
by 10 arrays of metallic microneedles with inner diameters of the tip
between 33.6 and approximately 101 µm, and wall thicknesses of 10 to
approximately 20 µm were fabricated (Figure 12.11b). A polymeric microf-
luidic interconnector assembly was designed to have one male interconnec-
tor that directly ﬁts into the ﬂuidic reservoir (3 × 3 mm) of the microneedle
array at one end, and another male interconnector that provides external
ﬂuidic interconnection to tubing (1/16 in. inner diameter) at the other end.
Liquid transfer testing was carried out (Figure 12.11c) and the measured
ﬂow rate was approximately 72.5 nl/s-kPa.
As one of useful and cheap materials in MEMS applications, polymers
have also been utilized to fabricate three-dimensional microneedle arrays.
Moon and Lee demonstrated polymeric, hollow, out-of-plane microneedle
arrays using a modiﬁed LIGA process [25]. The fabrication process consists
of a vertical deep x-ray exposure and a successive inclined deep x-ray
triangular column array with a needle conduit through a deep x-ray mask.
The triangular column array is shaped into the microneedle array by the
second inclined x-ray exposure without additional mask alignment. Chang-
ing the inclined angle and the gap between the mask and PMMA (poly-
methyl-methacrylate) substrate, different types of microneedle arrays are
fabricated. Although the microneedle is made of PMMA, a polymer, the
three-dimensional tip is sharp, and mechanically robust enough to pierce
the skin without fracturing.
12.7
Mechanical Robustness of the Microneedles
Microneedles made of brittle materials such as silicon have a high risk of
catastrophic microneedle fracture during insertion. As an approach to solv-
ing this problem, Stupar and Pisano proposed parylene laminated silicon
needles, parylene needles, and parylene needles with silicon tips [26]. It was
found that fabricated parylene-coated silicon microneedles were strong
enough to withstand signiﬁcant bending moments.
of the glass substrate (Figure 12.11a). An array of SU-8 tapered pillar struc-
exposure, as shown in Figure 12.12. The ﬁrst vertical exposure makes a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
341
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 12.11
(a) Backside exposure of SU-8 through glass substrate and conformal electroplating process for
simple tapered three-dimensional metallic microneedle array fabrication, (b) SEM photomicro-
graph of a 400 µm–tall tapered hollow metallic microneedle array in comparison with a con-
ventional stainless steel needle. (From Kabseog Kim, D. Park, H. Lu, K-H. Kim, J.B. Lee, J.
Micromechanics and Microengineering, 14, 597–603, 2004. With permission.). (c) An optical photo-
micrograph of successful liquid transfer through the microneedle array.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

342
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
(c)
FIGURE 12.12
(a) and (b) Fabrication sequence of a PMMA microneedle array using the dual deep x-ray
exposure process, (c) SEM of an array of sharp and long shank out-of-plane PMMA micro-
needles. (From S. Moon and S. Lee, J. Micromechanics and Microengineering, 15, 903–911, 2005.
With permission.)
Deep X-ray
Au absorber
(a)
(b)
Unexposed
column array
PMMA
Deep X-ray
PMMA microneedle array
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
343
In order to predict the force of fracture of hollow microneedles, Kim et al.
developed analytic solutions of the critical buckling of arbitrarily angled,
truncated, hollow, cone-shaped columns (Figure 12.13) [24]. The critical buck-
ling load (Pcr) for a ﬁxed-free truncated cone column is given by:
,
(12.1)
where d0 and di are outer and inner diameters of the cone column, α is the
taper angle, and L is the length of the microneedle. It was found that a single
400 µm–tall hollow cylindrical microneedle made of electroplated nickel with
a wall thickness of 20 µm, a tapered angle of 3.08°, and a tip inner diameter
of 33.6 µm has a critical buckling force of 1.8 N. This analytic solution can
be used to create square or rectangular cross-sectioned column structures
with proper modiﬁcations.
Recently, Davis et al. carried out comprehensive experimental and theo-
retical studies on the insertion and fracture forces of the microneedles [27].
It was found that insertion forces vary linearly with the interfacial area of
the needle tip. Measured insertion forces were low (0.1–3 N) enough so that
FIGURE 12.13
A schematic diagram of the hollow truncated cone column.
d0
L
α
Z
d1
P
E
L
d
d
d
cr
o
i
o
=
−
(
)+
+




−
80
5
16
5
5
4
2
4
4
4
2
4
3
π
π
π
π
d
L
d
d
L
i
o
i
3
2
4
2
2
2
2
15
5
2
(
)
+
+




−
(
)
tan
tan
α
π
π
α
+ −
+
+




−
(
)







120
30
5
2
2
4
3
3
π
π
α
d
d L
o
i
tan















© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

344
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
the microneedle can be inserted into the skin by hand. A thin-shelled ana-
lytical model was used in this study to predict the fracture force. As expected,
the fracture force was found to increase with increasing wall thickness, wall
angle, and needle tip radius.
12.8
Microreservoir Devices for Drug Delivery
Although the majority of the MEMS work on drug delivery is on the devel-
opment of microneedles, there has been another interesting approach for
drug delivery using MEMS technology. The device is called a microreservoir
and as the name suggests, it has a reservoir that contains a single dose of a
drug, and the reservoir is covered by a lid. Depending on the size, the device
can be surgically implanted, orally ingested, or injected into the body, and
the lid of the reservoir is broken in a controlled manner to release the desired
dosage of drug.
The ﬁrst such device was reported by Santini et al. [28]. An array of microres-
ervoirs was deﬁned by crystallographic anisotropic bulk micromachining of
silicon, and each microreservoir had a volume that could be ﬁlled with approx-
imately 25 nl of drug (Figure 12.14). The microreservoirs were sealed with a very
thin (0.3 µm–thick) gold membrane anode. When an appropriate electric poten-
tial is applied between the gold membrane anode and the cathode in the pres-
ence of chloride ion, the gold membrane is dissolved by its reaction with the
chloride ion by forming soluble gold–chloride complexes. Because the device is
scalable, large and small reservoirs with single or multiple drugs can be stored.
FIGURE 12.14
Silicon bulk micromachined microreservoir device for drug delivery. (From R. Shawgo, A.
Grayson, Y. Li, and M. Cima, Current Opinion in Solid State and Material Science, 6, 329–334, 2002.
With permission.)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
345
A good introductory article on the microreservoir drug delivery device
was published in an IEEE Spectrum [30]. When packaged with a power source
and control electronics, the device is the size of a pacemaker. The device can
be surgically implanted in the body and used for long-term controlled drug
release. Speciﬁc reservoirs can be manually opened on demand by an exter-
nal signal. It is also possible to make the microreservoir device ingestible;
each membrane has a different thickness to be dissolved sequentially so that
the drug can be released in a certain period of time. 
A completely plastic microreservoir drug delivery system that does not
require an electrical power source was reported by Su and Lin [31]. The
device as shown in Figure 12.15 has an osmotic actuator on a substrate, which
is bonded with a patterned PDMS to form a reservoir, a microﬂuidic channel,
and a delivery port. Because this device uses water ﬂow induced by osmosis
as actuation mechanism [32], it does not require electrical power source.
FIGURE 12.15
A water-powered drug delivery system. (From Y. Su and L. Lin, J. Microelectromechanical Systems,
13, 75–82, 2004. With permission.)
Drug reservoir
Drug ﬂow
PDMS
microﬂuidic
components
Osmotic
microactuator
Water ﬂow
Membrane
expansion
Osmotic
driving agent
Semipermeable
membrane
Structural
layer
Delivery
channel 
Delivery port
Impermeable
membrane
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

346
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Since the drug delivery rate and drug storage reservoir volume are control-
lable, this device can be used both for quick drug release as well as long-
term drug release.
12.9
Biocompatibility and Biofouling of MEMS Drug 
Delivery Devices 
Biocompatibility of materials used in devices for in vivo applications is of
paramount importance. Voskerician et al. carried out a comprehensive study
on the biocompatibility and biofouling of common materials used for MEMS
drug delivery devices including gold, silicon nitride, silicon dioxide, silicon,
and SU-8 photoresist [33]. The material under test was placed into a stainless
steel cage and the cage was implanted subcutaneously. The cage was peri-
odically checked, the exudates in the cage were sampled, and leukocyte
concentration was measured to determine the biocompatibility of the
implanted material. It was determined that the responses of all of these
materials, and that of the empty cage, were not much different, which let
us draw the conclusion that all of the tested materials are biocompatible.
In addition, in vivo biofouling, which is measured as an undesirable
accumulation of microorganisms on the implanted artiﬁcial surfaces, was
also studied by scanning electron micrography. It was determined that
gold, silicon nitride, silicon dioxide, and even SU-8 generate very low
accumulations of microorganisms. In fact, gold is biocompatible, less prone
to biofouling, and known for its corrosion resistance in many solutions
over the entire pH range, making it an ideal coating material for in vivo
MEMS devices.
However, silicon showed a much higher density of adherent cells in the
biofouling test. This result shows that drug delivery MEMS devices made
of silicon must be coated with biofouling-proof materials, such as silicon
dioxide or silicon nitride, to be used in in vivo applications.
References
[1] R. McGrew and M. McGrew, Encyclopedia of Medical History, McGraw Hill, New
York, 1985.
[2] J. Jagger, E. Hunt, J. Brand-Elnaggar, and R. Person, Rates of needle-stick injury
caused by various devices in a university hospital, New England J. of Medicine,
319, 284–288, 1988.
[3]
[4] K. Najaﬁ and K. Wise, An implantable multielectrode array with on-chip signal
processing, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 21, 1035–1044, 1986.
Australian College of Dermatologists, http://www.dermcoll.asn.au.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS for Drug Delivery
347
[5] J. Chen, K. Wise, J. Hetke, and S. Bledsoe, A multichannel neural probe for
selective chemical delivery at the cellular level, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 44,
760–769, 1997.
[6] Q. Bai, K. Wise, and D. Anderson, A high-yield microassembly structure for
three dimensional microelectrode arrays, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 47, 281–289,
2000.
[7] L. Lin, A. Pisano, and R. Muller, Silicon processed microneedles, in Dig. Trans-
ducers’93, Int. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, 237–240, 1993.
[8] L. Lin and A. Pisano, Silicon processed microneedles, J. Microelectromechanical
Systems, 8, 78–84, 1999.
[9] N. Talbot and A. Pisano, Polymolding: two wafer polysilicon micromolding of
closed ﬂow passage for microneedles and microﬂuidic devices, Solid State Sen-
sor and Actuator Workshop Hilton Head, 265–268, 1998.
[10] J. Zahn, N. Talbot, D. Liepmann, and A. Pisano, Microfabricated polysilicon
microneedles for minimally invasive biomedical devices, Biomedical Microde-
vices, 2, 295–303, 2000.
[11] K. Chun, G. Hashiguchi, H. Toshioyoshi, B. Piouﬂe, J. Ishikawa, Y. Murakami,
E. Tamiya, Y. Kikuchi, and H. Fujita, DNA injection into cell conglomerates by
micromachined hollow microcapillary arrays, in Dig. Transducers’99, Int. Conf.
Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, 41–47, 1999.
[12] K. Oka, S. Aoyagi, Y. Arai, Y. Isono, G. Hashiguchi, and H. Fujita, Fabrication
of a microneedle for a trace blood test, Sensors and Actuators A, 97–98, 478–485,
2002.
[13] J. Brazzle, I. Papautsky, and B. Frazier, Hollow metallic micromachined needle
arrays, J. Micro Biomed. Devices, 2, 197–205, 2000.
[14] S. Chandrasekaran, J. Brazzle and B. Frazier, Surface micromachined metallic
microneedles, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 289–295, 2003.
[15] S. Chandrasekaran and B. Frazier, Characterization of surface micromachined
metallic microneedles, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 281–288, 2003.
[16] R. Dizon, H. Han, A. Russell, and M. Reed, An ion milling pattern transfer
technique for fabrication of three-dimensional micromechanical structures, J.
Microelectromech. Syst., 2, 151–159, 1993.
[17] S. Henry, D. McAllister, M. Allen, and M. Prausnitz, Microfabricated micron-
eedles: a novel approach to transdermal drug delivery, J. Pharm. Sci., 87,
922–925, 1998.
[18] B. Stoeber and D. Liepmann, Design, fabrication and testing of a MEMS syringe,
in Solid-State Sensors, Actuator and Microsystems Workshop, Hilton Head Island,
South Carolina, June 2–6, 2002.
[19] P. Griss and G. Stemme, Side-opened out-of-plane microneedles for microﬂu-
idic transdermal liquid transfer, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 296–301,
2003.
[20] H. Gardeniers, R. Luttge, E. Berenschot, M. de Boer, S. Yeshurun, M. Hefetz,
R. Oever, and A. Berg, Silicon micromachined hollow microneedles for trans-
dermal liquid transport, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12, 855–862, 2003.
[21] E. Mukerjee, S. Collins, R. Isseroff, and R. Smith, Microneedle array for trans-
dermal biological ﬂuid extraction and in situ analysis, Sensors and Actuators, A,
114, 267–275, 2004.
[22] D. McAllister, F. Cros, S. Davis, L. Matta, M. Prausnitz, M. Allen, Three-dimen-
sional hollow microneedle and microtube arrays, in Dig. Transducers’99, Int.
Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, 1098–1101, 1999.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

348
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[23] S. Davis, M. Prausnitz, and M. Allen, Fabrication and characterization of laser
micromachined hollow microneedles, in Dig. Transducers’03, Int. Conf. Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators, 1435–1438, 2003.
[24] K. Kim, D. Park, H. Lu, K-H. Kim, JB Lee, A tapered hollow metallic micron-
eedle array using backside exposure of SU-8, J. Micromechanics and Microengi-
neering, 14, 597–603, 2004.
[25] S. Moon and S. Lee, A novel fabrication method of a microneedle array using
inclined deep x-ray exposure, J. Micromechanics and Microengineering, 15,
903–911, 2005.
[26] P. Stupar and A. Pisano, Silicon, parylene and silicon/parylene microneedles
for strength and toughness, in Dig. Transducers’01, Int. Conf. Solid-State Sensors
and Actuators, 1386, 2001.
[27] S. Davis, B. Landis, Z. Adams, M. Allen, and M. Prausnitz, Insertion of micron-
eedles into skin: measurement and prediction of insertion force and needle
fracture force, J. Biomechanics, 37, 1155–1163, 2004.
[28] J. Santini, M. Cima, and R. Langer, A controlled-release microchip, Nature, 397,
335–338, 1999.
[29] R. Shawgo, A. Grayson, Y. Li, and M. Cima, Bio-MEMS for drug delivery,
Current Opinion in Solid State and Material Science, 6, 329–334, 2002.
[30] C. Webb, Chip shots, IEEE Spectrum, 41, 48–53, 2004.
[31] Y. Su and L. Lin, A water-powered micro drug delivery system, J. Microelectro-
mechanical Systems, 13, 75–82, 2004.
[32] Y. Su, L. Lin, and A. Pisano, A water-powered osmotic microactuator, J. Micro-
electromechanical Systems, 11, 736–742, 2002.
[33] G. Voskerician, M. Shive, R. Shawgo, H. von Recum, J. Anderson, M. Cima,
and R. Langer, Biocompatibility and biofouling of MEMS drug delivery devic-
es, Biomaterials, 24, 1959–1967, 2003.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

349
13
Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems 
for DNA Analysis
Ryan T. Kelly and Adam T. Woolley
CONTENTS
13.1
Introduction.............................................................................................. 349
13.2
Optimization of DNA Sequencing Separations ................................. 350
13.3
Parallel DNA Separations in Microchips ............................................ 353
13.4
Integrated Microchips for DNA Analysis ........................................... 356
13.5
Phase-Changing Sacriﬁcial Layers for Polymer
Microchip Fabrication............................................................................. 357
13.6
Conclusions .............................................................................................. 359
Acknowledgment................................................................................................ 360
References ............................................................................................. 360
13.1
Introduction
Nucleic acids are the storage medium for inherited information in living
organisms. Thus, scientists have considerable interest in developing
enhanced tools for the determination of nucleic acids, and the past twenty
years have seen a tremendous expansion in DNA analysis capabilities. Size
sorting of DNA, a critical aspect of both genotyping and sequencing, has
been transformed from an onerous, slow, and labor-intensive operation
involving slab gel electrophoresis to a rapid, automated, and ultra-high-
throughput process. The initial miniaturization of electrophoresis into a cap-
illary format enabled higher electric ﬁelds to be applied in DNA separations,
providing much faster analyses.1–3 The subsequent development of capillary
array electrophoresis (CAE) systems with parallel bundles of lanes4–6 pro-
vided a substantial boost in DNA sample analysis capacity. These advances
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

350
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
were among the ﬁrst clear manifestations of the beneﬁts of miniaturization
and parallel separation in DNA analysis. 
While CAE was being developed, researchers were also evaluating next-
generation techniques to enhance DNA analysis even more. Indeed, in 1992,
the same year that CAE systems for DNA separation were reported, a new
technology involving planar capillary electrophoresis (CE) microdevices was
described in the literature.7 CE microchips were quickly recognized as having
potential for both miniaturizing chemical separations and integrating various
sample handling steps in analyses. The processes involved in the fabrication
of planar CE microdevices, such as photolithographic patterning, etching of
substrates, growth of thin ﬁlms, metal deposition, and so on, were in large
part developed for integrated circuit manufacturing. These techniques have
now been modiﬁed to meet the needs of scientists interested in miniaturizing
cedures involved in glass CE microchip fabrication. Importantly, the layout
for a micromachined device can be created using computer-aided design
software, so rather than having to couple various chambers and capillaries
together manually to perform a multistep analysis, different analytical pro-
cedures can be integrated on a single, monolithic platform through the clever
design of photomasks for batch microfabrication. The advantages of minia-
turization looked especially appealing to researchers trying to improve DNA
analysis, so CE microchips were soon enlisted for this task.
In this chapter we document how DNA separations in CE microdevices
have improved during the past decade. We also discuss how analysis
throughput has been enhanced signiﬁcantly by using CAE microchips. We
then detail progress in the integration of DNA sample preparation with CE
separation. Finally, we describe a new phase-changing sacriﬁcial layer micro-
fabrication methodology that holds great promise for making low-cost poly-
meric microdevices for DNA analysis.
13.2
Optimization of DNA Sequencing Separations
In 1994 Effenhauser et al. separated ﬂuorescently labeled oligonucleotides
in 45 s,8 and Woolley and Mathies analyzed PCR products and restriction
digests in approximately 100 s,9 utilizing CE microchips fabricated using
procedures similar to those in Figure 13.1. In the following year, four-color
DNA sequencing with a read length of approximately 150 bases (97% accu-
racy) in less than 10 min was demonstrated in a microfabricated CE device.10
Since these initial publications, signiﬁcant DNA sequencing improvements
have been made in single-lane micromachined systems.11–15 As discussed
below, important parameters, including the sieving matrix, device tempera-
ture, electric ﬁeld, and channel length, have been optimized.
chemical analysis systems. Figure 13.1 depicts schematically the general pro-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems for DNA Analysis
351
Because DNA molecules have essentially the same electrophoretic mobility
in free solution regardless of fragment length, size-based separation is
achieved best in cross-linked gels or entangled polymer solutions. Entangled
linear polymers provide convenient sieving matrixes because they can be
pumped into capillaries or channels and replaced with fresh solution as
needed.16 Linear polyacrylamide (LPA) has been widely used for DNA
sequencing in both capillaries17 and microdevices, and extensive research
effort has led to improved microchip DNA separations with LPA. A system-
atic study was performed to develop a quantitative model of DNA separation
in LPA, resulting in nearly a threefold increase in sequencing read length11
compared to earlier microchip results.10 Another group used an optimized
polymerization protocol17 to produce approximately 1 MDa average molec-
ular weight LPA, which provided four-color sequencing to 500 bases in 20 min
FIGURE 13.1
Schematic overview of typical methods for glass CE microchip fabrication. (a) A thin layer
of amorphous silicon (black) is deposited on a clean glass wafer (light gray, side view). (b)
Photoresist (dark gray) is spin coated on top of the amorphous silicon. (c) UV radiation on
regions of the surface that are not protected by a mask enables the patterned photoresist to
be solubilized in a developer solution. (d) Amorphous silicon, which is uncovered by the
removal of photoresist, is etched away in a CF4 plasma. (e) The underlying glass in the pattern
of the exposure mask is etched isotropically in HF. (f) Photoresist and amorphous silicon are
removed from the etched wafer, which is then bonded in a furnace to another piece of glass.
(g) Electron micrograph of channels patterned and etched as described above. Scale bar is
50 µm. (Reprinted with permission from Simpson, P.C., Woolley, A.T., and Mathies, R.A., J.
Biomed. Microdevices, 1, 7, 1998. Copyright 1998, Springer Science and Business Media.) (h)
Top-view photograph of a 96-channel glass microdevice. (Image courtesy of Prof. Richard A.
Mathies.)
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
(e)
(f)
(h)
(g)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

352
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
with 99.4% accuracy in a microchip.15 Salas-Solano et al. used a mixture of
both high and low molecular weight LPA to improve microchip sequencing.12
Similar read lengths were obtained using either 4% 10 MDa LPA or a blend
of 3% 10 MDa LPA and 1% 50 kDa LPA, but the run time was reduced
signiﬁcantly with the mixed sieving matrix: four-color sequencing to 580
bases with 98.5% accuracy was achieved in 18 min.12
A polyacrylamide nanogel medium with similar rheological properties to
LPA was developed to improve separation performance.14 The matrix was
made by copolymerizing acrylamide with a small amount (approximately
10–4 mol %) of N,N-methylene bisacrylamide (Bis) cross-linker, such that Bis
moieties were present in approximately 75% of the polymer chains, provid-
ing intra- and intermolecular covalent linkages. The Bis concentration was
sufﬁciently low to prevent the polymerization of a rigid, cross-linked hydro-
gel; instead, subcolloidal structures with an average radius of approximately
230 nm were formed. A comparison of performance between nanogel and
LPA matrixes using CE showed that average sequencing read lengths were
approximately 20% greater with the nanogel matrix, yielding 680 bases with
98.5% accuracy. The nanogel medium was also evaluated in 96-lane CAE
microdevices, and average sequence read lengths for the same separation
time increased by approximately 4% compared with LPA; importantly, load-
ing of the nanogel matrix into microchannels was much easier than LPA.
Other efforts to create sieving matrixes that are optimized for microchip
DNA separations have focused on reducing the solution viscosity because
the pressure (greater than 300 psi13) required for ﬁlling microchannels with
LPA can cause thermally bonded glass microdevices to delaminate.16 One
promising approach is to use polymer solutions whose viscosities change
abruptly at a certain temperature, allowing easy pumping into channels in
the low viscosity state, after which the temperature can be adjusted to create
a solution with appropriate sieving properties for DNA separation. A copol-
ymer of N,N-diethylacrylamide and N,N-dimethylacrylamide was used as
such a thermoresponsive sieving medium for DNA sequencing.18 The low-
viscosity solution was loaded into the separation column above 75°C, such
that the polymer chains were insoluble and aggregated to form dispersed,
colloidal droplets. For CE, the solution was cooled to 44°C, causing the
polymer to redissolve and form an entangled matrix. DNA sequence infor-
mation to approximately 460 bases was obtained with 97% accuracy in a CE
system. An alternative viscosity-switching matrix with a N-methoxyethyl-
acrylamide/N-ethoxyethylacrylamide copolymer has been reported, in
which the transition from low to high viscosity occurs when the temperature
is raised,19 allowing facile solution pumping into a capillary at room tem-
perature. At 44°C (above the viscosity transition temperature), CE sequenc-
ing to approximately 600 bases with 98.5% accuracy was obtained. Even
though these viscosity-switching matrixes have only been evaluated in con-
ventional CE, their rheological properties are especially attractive for micro-
chip DNA separations.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems for DNA Analysis
353
In addition to the composition of the sieving matrix, DNA separation
conditions are crucial. For instance, column temperature affects both sepa-
ration quality and speed; if the temperature is raised to between 35 and 50°C,
the run time decreases and the read length increases because compression
regions are largely eliminated.12,15,17 Heating beyond this optimal tempera-
ture range further reduces the run time, but the resolution becomes worse,
due to a combination of increased analyte diffusion15 and less favorable DNA
interactions with the sieving matrix.12 Microchannel length and depth also
inﬂuence separation performance. Longer channels increase read lengths but
require greater run times; for example, Koutny et al. sequenced over 800
bases in a 40 cm–long microchannel, but the separation time was 80 min.13
With sufﬁciently narrow microchannels (less than 150 µm), Joule heating has
little effect on resolution unless electric ﬁelds greater than 200 V/cm are
applied.12 Thus, 50 µm–deep channels provided similar resolution to shal-
lower lanes, but the greater optical path length in the deeper microchannels
improved detection sensitivity.15
13.3
Parallel DNA Separations in Microchips
Microchip systems provide a clear beneﬁt relative to conventional CE in
terms of analysis speed;20 however, single-lane microdevices do not offer an
appreciable gain in sample throughput in comparison with either slab gel
electrophoresis or CAE instrumentation. To maximize the impact of micro-
machined analysis systems on DNA separations, it was essential for sample
throughput to be increased over that of single-lane devices. Indeed, one of
the ﬁrst papers on microchip CE of DNA recognized this need: each microde-
vice had ﬁfteen lanes, although separations in individual microcapillaries
were performed serially rather than in parallel.9
The ﬁrst demonstration of microchip CAE of DNA was reported in 1997;21
glass microchips with twelve independent lanes were constructed, and detec-
tion was carried out by repeated linear scanning of the bundled channels using
a confocal laser-induced ﬂuorescence system. Twelve DNA restriction digest
samples were analyzed in less than 160 s in these devices, and excellent lane-
to-lane separation reproducibility was evidenced by the less than 1.5% relative
standard deviation for band migration times. Practical application of 12-lane
CAE microdevices was shown in rapid typing experiments on the HFE gene.
These CAE microchips provided an order-of-magnitude increase in throughput
over single-lane devices, but still lagged behind the sample-handling capabil-
ities of slab gel and conventional CAE systems. Another fourfold increase in
sample capacity was gained by carrying out four serial injections in twelve
lanes in a CAE microdevice with a modiﬁed design;22 however, the analysis
throughput rate remained about the same as in the earlier CAE chip setup.21
Subsequently, a 48-lane CAE microplate was developed; this system enabled
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

354
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
HFE typing of 96 samples in about 8 min,23 a severalfold improvement in
throughput over previous studies. However, increasing the number of separa-
tion lanes beyond approximately 50 would have been difﬁcult in this format,
as the parallel bundle of capillaries in the detection region was already
approaching a 1 cm width, such that adding channels would have led to less
than ideal sampling in the linearly rastered scanning confocal detection system.
To overcome these limitations, a rotary scanning confocal detection setup
was constructed,24 and radial CAE microplates were designed as outlined in
Figure 13.2.25 These microchips had sample loading regions around the
FIGURE 13.2
Microdevice layout for 96-channel CAE sequencing. (a) Top view. (b) Vertical cutaway of a CAE
microdevice. Concentric plastic rings create separate “moats” used to provide electrical contact
to the drilled cathode and waste ports. (c) Expanded view of the injector region. (d) Expanded
view of the channel turn geometry used to reduce dispersion. (Reprinted with permission from
Paegel, B.M. et al., High throughput DNA sequencing with a microfabricated 96-lane capillary
array electrophoresis bioprocessor, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 574, 2002. Copyright 2002,
National Academy of Sciences.)
Moat rings
Sample
(mm)
0
5
10
Cathode
Waste
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems for DNA Analysis
355
perimeter, and the separation capillaries converged at the center of a device
to enable the rotary detection system to probe each lane readily. Sequencing
separations on M13mp18 samples were carried out in 96-lane microplates,
with a mean read length of 430 bases per channel at 99% accuracy, corre-
sponding to a throughput of 1.7 kilobases per minute.25 This sequencing rate
was ﬁvefold higher than in the best commercial instrumentation and repre-
sented a 100-fold increase over the ﬁrst microchip sequencing paper.10 Radial
CAE microdevices for sizing 384 DNA specimens were also developed in a
layout similar to the 96-sample microplates.26 These microsystems were fab-
ricated on 20 cm–diameter glass disks and had 8 cm–long, gel-ﬁlled channels.
HFE genotyping was performed simultaneously on 384 samples, and the
separation time was approximately 325 s, corresponding to a throughput of
more than one sample per second. This format provided faster separation
times and fourfold more lanes than the best commercial instruments, yield-
ing a 20-fold improvement in throughput.
As a summary of the enhanced throughput enabled by micromachining,
Figure 13.3 illustrates how sample processing rates have increased over the
past decade for DNA sizing and sequencing by microchip CE. Two key
advances led to improved DNA sequencing throughput: ﬁrst, read lengths
increased fourfold between 1995 and 1999 with better sieving matrix formu-
lations and optimized separation conditions (discussed in Section 13.2); sec-
ond, multichannel sequencing microchips raised sample throughput from
one lane in 1995,10 to 16 lanes in 2000,27 and 96 lanes in 2002.25 Is it possible
to increase DNA throughput in CE microdevices even more? Several factors
inﬂuence how many samples can be analyzed in CE microchips. These lim-
itations include the microdevice surface area occupied by sample input sys-
tems, the length of separation channels, and the parallel bundling of lanes
for detection. For instance, in 20 cm–diameter, 384-lane microplates, approx-
imately 15% of the surface area was occupied by the sample injectors alone.26
Thus, increasing well beyond several hundred capillaries would require
either larger-diameter substrates or microfabrication advances that reduce
sample injector dimensions. Moreover, the packing of lanes in the central
FIGURE 13.3
Throughput improvement over time for DNA analysis in micromachined systems. Circles refer
to DNA sizing (left axis) and are from References 9, 21, 23, 24, and 26. Diamonds correspond
to four-color sequencing (right axis) and are from References 10, 15, 25, 27, and 52.
100
10000
1000
100
10
Bases/minute
1
10
Samples/minute
1
0.1
1992
1994
1996
1998
Year
2000
2002
2004
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

356
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
detection region is a key factor as the number of separation channels
increases. For a 200-µm lane pitch typical of CAE microchips,23 384 channels
would reach their closest packing approximately 1.2 cm from the center of
a device, which is about half of the maximum radius of current rotary
scanners.26 Because the closest packing radius is directly proportional to both
the number of capillaries and the pitch between them, the interlane spacing
must be decreased, or larger-radius confocal scanning systems must be
developed to increase sample capacity in CAE microplates.
13.4
Integrated Microchips for DNA Analysis
Section 13.3 describes how micromachined systems can provide high
throughput in DNA separations. Another area where microchips have great
potential to streamline DNA analysis is in the integration of multiple steps
on a single miniaturized platform. For example, thermal cycling is an impor-
tant sample processing step in DNA ampliﬁcation by PCR, and considerable
progress has been demonstrated in the integration of PCR with microchip
DNA separation. The ease of micromachining submicroliter-volume contain-
ers and the efﬁcient heat transfer in such small vessels are important beneﬁts
of downsizing PCR.
Microchips that integrate PCR with CE have been demonstrated in two
different formats. Whole-device cycling is one approach, where an entire
microsystem having a reaction chamber connected to CE channels is heated
and cooled in a conventional thermal cycler, and then the microchip is
transferred manually to a separate platform for electrophoretic analysis.28
The more widely applied PCR-CE format involves thermal cycling of only
the reaction chamber (and not the integrated separation microﬂuidics). This
approach was ﬁrst demonstrated using a micromachined silicon PCR cham-
ber attached to a glass CE microchip.29 A viscous sieving matrix in the
separation channel prevented the PCR mixture from entering the analysis
microﬂuidics during ampliﬁcation; after PCR, the sample was injected into
the CE system by a potential applied between the reaction chamber and a
waste reservoir. Monolithically integrated PCR-CE systems with localized
reaction vessel heating have made important improvements over this initial
work. In one study, the PCR chamber was heated with focused infrared
radiation, providing approximately 12 s cycle times and completing DNA
ampliﬁcation in approximately 4 min.30 This device format provided approx-
imately 10 min ampliﬁcation of a β-globin target, which was analyzed sub-
sequently by microchip CE in the integrated device.31 Mathies’s group
developed integrated PCR-CE microdevices with 200 nL reaction chambers.32
Micropatterned heaters and temperature sensors, as well as valves to control
ﬂuid within a microchip, provided exceptional control over processing, such
that PCR ampliﬁcation from a single DNA template with on-chip CE analysis
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems for DNA Analysis
357
was feasible.33 Continuous-ﬂow thermal cycling, which involves transferring
the sample between regions of different temperatures in a microﬂuidic array,
is a PCR ampliﬁcation approach that is well suited for the microchip format.34
Recent ﬂow PCR microdevice experiments have demonstrated convective35
and electrokinetic36 sample movement between temperature zones; future
efforts should lead to integration of ﬂow PCR with microchip CE.
Miniaturization and integration of sample handling operations such as
DNA extraction and puriﬁcation are also advantageous, and important
progress has been seen in this area. A microchip with silica beads embedded
in a sol-gel in a microchannel was developed and shown to be effective in
solid-phase extraction of DNA from whole blood in preparation for PCR
ampliﬁcation.37 Oligonucleotide-modiﬁed hydrogels having a sequence com-
plementary to a target analyte38 have been devised for sample cleanup after
DNA sequencing reactions.39 Prior to microchip CE analysis the raw Sanger
extension product sample is passed through the hydrogel, and the target
DNA fragments are captured selectively while the high-salt buffer, dNTPs
and template, which can interfere with separation, are not retained. The
puriﬁed target DNA is then eluted with an electric ﬁeld, heat, or a different
buffer to allow facile on-chip CE.
Recent work from Mathies’s group40 has demonstrated that sophisticated
DNA analyses for the detection of whole bacterial cells can be integrated in
a portable, high-performance microchip setup. Indeed, detection limits of
approximately 3 E. coli cells were obtained, a speciﬁc E. coli strain was
recognized in the presence of a 10,000-fold higher background of another
strain, and methicillin resistance of S. aureus was probed in these portable
microanalysis systems. Importantly, the miniaturized and integrated format
provided rapid (less than 30 min) analysis times for these PCR-CE determi-
nations; such results showcase the power of microchip devices. 
13.5
Phase-Changing Sacriﬁcial Layers for Polymer
Microchip Fabrication
Challenges associated with micromachining and thermally bonding glass
microﬂuidic devices have led researchers to pursue alternative materials,
such as polymers, which offer greater fabrication ease and ﬂexibility. Indeed,
polymeric substrates have been effective in carrying out electrophoretic
DNA analyses.41–44 However, DNA sequencing separations in plastic
microchips45,46 have not yet achieved the performance of those in glass
microdevices. For low-cost polymer microchips to be legitimate alternatives
to glass microsystems for DNA sequencing, two performance-limiting fac-
tors must be addressed. First, the maximum internal pressure (approxi-
mately 200 psi) that can be applied without delaminating thermally bonded
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) microchips47 is much lower than can
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

358
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
be sustained in glass (approximately 2,000 psi),48 making it difﬁcult to ﬁll
thermally bonded polymer devices with viscous sieving solutions typically
used for DNA sequencing. Second, covalent surface passivation procedures
are straightforward for glass microdevices, but less well established in poly-
mers. Therefore, polymer microchips with a stronger bond between sub-
strates and appropriately modiﬁed surfaces should perform as well as glass,
while offering greater fabrication ease and lower costs.
We have addressed the delamination issue by developing a phase-chang-
ing sacriﬁcial layer (PCSL) approach for solvent bonding polymer substrates
that can withstand much higher internal pressures than thermally sealed
systems.47
poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS, gray, Figure 13.4a) over a patterned PMMA
substrate (white), with access holes in the PDMS aligned with the PMMA
channel ends. The assembly is heated to 70°C, and a liquid PCSL (parafﬁn
wax, white with gray horizontal lines, Figure 13.4b) is loaded into the
microchannels. When the device is cooled to room temperature, the PCSL
solidiﬁes (gray with white horizontal lines, Figure 13.4c) and prevents bond-
ing solvent (black) or softened PMMA from ﬁlling the channels during the
process of afﬁxing a polymer cover plate to the patterned substrate (Figure
13.4d). Once a seal has formed between the PMMA pieces, the microchip
is heated to 70°C to melt the PCSL, which is removed easily (Figure 13.4e)
by ﬁrst applying vacuum at the reservoirs and then ﬂushing cyclohexane
through the channels. The improved robustness of PCSL-fabricated, solvent-
bonded PMMA microdevices has allowed hundreds of CE separations at
electric ﬁelds as high as 1.5 kV/cm to be performed in a single microchip
without any degradation of performance.47 Moreover, internal pressures
greater than 2,200 psi have been applied without delaminating the PMMA
substrates,47 indicating excellent compatibility with conditions for introduc-
ing viscous sieving media for DNA sequencing.
In addition, PCSLs can facilitate the interfacing of hydrogel membranes with
microﬂuidic networks in polymers.49 This capability should be valuable for
DNA sample enrichment prior to CE, which has been shown in glass microde-
vices having a porous sodium silicate thin ﬁlm,50,51 although the microchip
fabrication was somewhat cumbersome. In contrast, polymerization of an ion-
permeable membrane in situ using a PCSL is straightforward; a patterned
microchannel is ﬁlled with PCSL (Figure 13.4a and b) as described above, and
a second substrate having an opening to serve as a membrane reservoir is
brought into contact with the microchannel-containing piece (Figure 13.4f).
The PCSL prevents the prepolymer solution (dark gray, Figure 13.4g) in the
well from ﬁlling the channel, and after polymerization a rigid, semipermeable
hydrogel (gray with white cross-hatching, Figure 13.4h) is formed. Finally, the
PCSL is melted and removed (Figure 13.4i) as described previously, providing
a microﬂuidic array interfaced with an ionically conductive hydrogel.
 The solvent bonding fabrication procedure is shown in Figure
13.4a–e. First, temporarily enclosed microchannels are formed by sealing
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems for DNA Analysis
359
Although the initial application of PCSLs in coupling membranes with micro-
ﬂuidics involved protein focusing in an electric ﬁeld gradient,49 the same
technology should also enable on-column DNA preconcentration for CE. Thus,
the newly developed PCSL fabrication approach offers great promise in cre-
ating low-cost yet powerful microﬂuidic systems for DNA analysis.
13.6
Conclusions
Microfabrication technologies have led to the formation of sophisticated
microﬂuidic instrumentation, which has advanced DNA analysis. The devel-
opment of better sieving matrices and separation conditions has facilitated
DNA characterization in both capillary and micromachined systems. In addi-
tion, the construction of increasingly parallel microdevice architectures that
can handle hundreds of samples simultaneously has raised DNA separation
throughput signiﬁcantly. Moreover, micromachined systems provide a facile
platform for the coupling of multiple sample manipulation steps on a single
substrate, and this integration has led to versatile and powerful DNA anal-
ysis devices for pathogen detection, single-template PCR ampliﬁcation, and
more. Finally, phase-changing sacriﬁcial layer microchip fabrication should
facilitate the development of low-cost, high-performance polymer microde-
vices for DNA characterization. This continued progress in microﬂuidic sys-
tems will further increase DNA separation performance, throughput, and
versatility, while driving analysis costs lower.
FIGURE 13.4
Phase-changing sacriﬁcial layers for solvent bonding (left) and interfacing polymerized hydro-
gels with microchannels (right). Additional description is in the text.
(a)
(i)
(h)
(g)
(f)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Solvent
bonding
In situ membrane
incorporation
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

360
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the National
Institutes of Health (1 R01 GM064547-01A1).
References
1. Kasper, T.J. et al., Separation and detection of DNA by capillary electrophoresis,
J. Chromatogr., 458, 303, 1988.
2. Cohen, A.S. et al., Rapid separation of DNA restriction fragments using capil-
lary electrophoresis, J. Chromatogr., 458, 323, 1988.
3. Drossman, H. et al., High-speed separations of DNA sequencing reactions by
capillary electrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 62, 900, 1990.
4. Huang, X.C., Quesada, M.A., and Mathies, R.A., DNA sequencing using cap-
illary array electrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 64, 2149, 1992.
5. Huang, X.C., Quesada, M.A., and Mathies, R.A., Capillary array electrophoresis
using laser-excited confocal ﬂuorescence detection, Anal. Chem., 64, 967, 1992.
6. Mathies, R.A. and Huang, X.C., Capillary array electrophoresis: An approach
to high-speed, high-throughput DNA sequencing, Nature, 359, 167, 1992.
7. Manz, A. et al., Planar chips technology for miniaturization and integration of
separation techniques into monitoring systems: Capillary electrophoresis on a
chip, J. Chromatogr., 593, 253, 1992.
8. Effenhauser, C.S. et al., High-speed separation of antisense oligonucleotides on
a micromachined capillary electrophoresis device, Anal. Chem., 66, 2949, 1994.
9. Woolley, A.T. and Mathies, R.A., Ultra-high-speed DNA fragment separations
using microfabricated capillary array electrophoresis chips, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA, 91, 11348, 1994.
10. Woolley, A.T. and Mathies, R.A., Ultra-high-speed DNA sequencing using cap-
illary electrophoresis chips, Anal. Chem., 67, 3676, 1995.
11. Schmalzing, D. et al., DNA sequencing on microfabricated electrophoretic de-
vices, Anal. Chem., 70, 2303, 1998.
12. Salas-Solano, O. et al., Optimization of high-performance DNA sequencing on
short microfabricated electrophoretic devices, Anal. Chem., 72, 3129, 2000.
13. Koutny, L. et al., Eight hundred-base sequencing in a microfabricated electro-
phoretic device, Anal. Chem., 2000, 3388, 2000.
14. Doherty, E.A.S. et al., Sparsely cross-linked "nanogel" matrixes as ﬂuid, me-
chanically stabilized polymer networks for high-throughput microchannel
DNA sequencing, Anal. Chem., 76, 5249, 2004.
15. Liu, S. et al., Optimization of high-speed DNA sequencing on microfabricated
capillary electrophoresis channels, Anal. Chem., 71, 566, 1999.
16. Albarghouthi, M.N. and Barron, A.E., Polymeric matrices for DNA sequencing
by capillary electrophoresis, Electrophoresis, 21, 4096, 2000.
17. Carrilho, E. et al., Rapid DNA sequencing of more than 1000 bases per run by
capillary electrophoresis using replaceable linear polyacrylamide solutions,
Anal. Chem., 68, 3305, 1996.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Microchip Capillary Electrophoresis Systems for DNA Analysis
361
18. Buchholz, B.A. et al., Microchannel DNA sequencing matrices with a thermally
controlled "viscosity switch," Anal. Chem., 73, 157, 2001.
19. Kan, C.-W., Doherty, E.A.S., and Barron, A.E., A novel thermogelling matrix
for microchannel DNA sequencing based on poly-N-alkoxyacrylamide copol-
ymers, Electrophoresis, 24, 4161, 2003.
20. Jacobson, S.C. et al., Microchip structures for submillisecond electrophoresis,
Anal. Chem., 70, 3476, 1998.
21. Woolley, A.T., Sensabaugh, G.F., and Mathies, R.A., High-speed DNA genotyp-
ing using microfabricated capillary array electrophoresis chips, Anal. Chem.,
69, 2181, 1997.
22. Simpson, P.C., Woolley, A.T., and Mathies, R.A., Microfabrication technology
for the production of capillary array electrophoresis chips, J. Biomed. Microde-
vices, 1, 7, 1998.
23. Simpson, P.C. et al., High throughput genetic analysis using microfabricated
96-sample capillary array electrophoresis microplates, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 95, 2256, 1998.
24. Shi, Y. et al., Radial capillary array electrophoresis microplate and scanner for
high-performance nucleic acid analysis, Anal. Chem., 71, 5354, 1999.
25. Paegel, B.M. et al., High throughput DNA sequencing with a microfabricated
96-lane capillary array electrophoresis bioprocessor, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
99, 574, 2002.
26. Emrich, C.A. et al., Microfabricated 384-lane capillary array electrophoresis bio-
analyzer for ultrahigh-throughput genetic analysis, Anal. Chem., 74, 5076, 2002.
27. Liu, S. et al., Automated parallel DNA sequencing on multiple channel micro-
chips, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 5369, 2000.
28. Waters, L.C. et al., Multiple sample PCR ampliﬁcation and electrophoretic
analysis on a microchip, Anal. Chem., 70, 5172, 1998.
29. Woolley, A.T. et al., Functional integration of PCR ampliﬁcation and capillary
electrophoresis in a microfabricated DNA analysis device, Anal. Chem., 68,
4081, 1996.
30. Giordano, B.C. et al., Polymerase chain reaction in polymeric microchips: DNA
ampliﬁcation in less than 240 seconds, Anal. Biochem., 291, 124, 2001.
31. Ferrance, J.P. et al., Developments toward a complete micro-total analysis
system for Duchenne muscular dystrophy diagnosis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 500,
223, 2003.
32. Lagally, E.T., Emrich, C.A., and Mathies, R.A., Fully integrated PCR-capillary
electrophoresis microsystem for DNA analysis, Lab Chip, 1, 102, 2001.
33. Lagally, E.T., Medintz, I., and Mathies, R.A., Single-molecule DNA ampliﬁca-
tion and analysis in an integrated microﬂuidic device, Anal. Chem., 73, 565, 2001.
34. Kopp, M.U., de Mello, A.J., and Manz, A., Chemical ampliﬁcation: Continuous-
ﬂow PCR on a chip, Science, 280, 1046, 1998.
35. Krishnan, N. et al., Reactions and ﬂuidics in miniaturized natural convection
systems, Anal. Chem., 76, 6254, 2004.
36. Chen, J.F. et al., Electrokinetically synchronized polymerase chain reaction
microchip fabricated in polycarbonate, Anal. Chem., 77, 658, 2005.
37. Breadmore, M.C. et al., Microchip-based puriﬁcation of DNA from biological
samples, Anal. Chem., 75, 1880, 2003.
38. Olsen, K.G., Ross, D.J., and Tarlov, M.J., Immobilization of DNA hydrogel plugs
in microﬂuidic channels, Anal. Chem., 74, 1436, 2002.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

362
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
39. Paegel, B.M., Yeung, S.H.I., and Mathies, R.A., Microchip bioprocessor for
integrated nanovolume sample puriﬁcation and DNA sequencing, Anal. Chem.,
74, 5092, 2002.
40. Lagally, E.T. et al., Integrated portable genetic analysis microsystem for patho-
gen/infectious disease detection, Anal. Chem., 76, 3162, 2004.
41. Xu, F., Jabasini, M., and Baba, Y., DNA separation by microchip electrophoresis
using low-viscosity hydroxypropylcellulose-50 solutions enhanced by polyhy-
droxy compounds, Electrophoresis, 23, 3608, 2002.
42. Wainright, A. et al., Preconcentration and separation of double-stranded DNA
fragments by electrophoresis in plastic microﬂuidic devices, Electrophoresis, 24,
3784, 2003.
43. Llopis, S.D., Stryjewski, W., and Soper, S.A., Near-infrared time-resolved ﬂuo-
rescence lifetime determinations in poly(methylmethacrylate) microchip elec-
trophoresis devices, Electrophoresis, 25, 3810, 2004.
44. Buch, J.S. et al., DNA mutation detection in a polymer microﬂuidic network
using temperature gradient gel electrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 76, 874, 2004.
45. Shi, Y. and Anderson, R.C., High-resolution single-stranded DNA analysis on
4.5 cm plastic electrophoretic microchannels, Electrophoresis, 24, 3371, 2003.
46. Zhu, L., Stryjewski, W.J., and Soper, S.A., Multiplexed ﬂuorescence detection
in microfabricated devices with both time-resolved and spectral-discrimination
capabilities using near-infrared ﬂuorescence, Anal. Biochem., 330, 206, 2004.
47. Kelly, R.T., Pan, T., and Woolley, A.T., Phase-changing sacriﬁcial materials for
solvent bonding of high-performance polymeric capillary electrophoresis mi-
crochips, Anal. Chem., 77, 3536, 2005.
48. Scherer, J.R. et al., High-pressure gel loader for capillary array electrophoresis
microchannel plates, BioTechniques, 31, 1150, 2001.
49. Kelly, R.T. and Woolley, A.T., Electric ﬁeld gradient focusing, J. Sep. Sci., 28,
1985, 2005.
50. Khandurina, J. et al., Microfabricated porous membrane structure for sample
concentration and electrophoretic analysis, Anal. Chem., 71, 1815, 1999.
51. Khandurina, J. et al., Integrated system for rapid PCR-based DNA analysis in
microﬂuidic devices, Anal. Chem., 72, 2995, 2000.
52. Schmalzing, D. et al., Toward real-world sequencing by microdevice electro-
phoresis, Genome Res., 9, 853, 1999.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

363
14
Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
Justin S. Mecomber, Wendy D. Dominick, Lianji Jin,
and Patrick A. Limbach
CONTENTS
14.1
Introduction.............................................................................................. 363
14.2
Microarrays and Immunoassays........................................................... 365
14.2.1
Peptide and Protein Microarrays ........................................... 365
14.2.2
Immunoassays........................................................................... 366
14.3
Bottom-Up Proteomics ........................................................................... 370
14.3.1
Overview of Proteomics Methodologies............................... 370
14.3.2
Bio-MEMS in Bottom-Up Proteomics.................................... 371
14.3.2.1
One-Dimensional Analyte Separations................. 371
14.3.2.2
Two-Dimensional Analyte Separations................. 372
14.3.2.3
Modiﬁcations to Fluidic Networks........................ 373
14.3.2.4
Sample Puriﬁcation and Preconcentration........... 376
14.3.2.5
Bio-MEMS-Compatible Enzyme Reactors............ 379
14.4
Integrated Bio-MEMS Approaches in Proteomics............................. 380
14.4.1
Integrated High-Throughput Devices
Using MALDI-MS..................................................................... 381
14.4.2
Integrated High-Throughput Devices Using ESI-MS......... 382
14.5
Summary................................................................................................... 383
References ............................................................................................. 384
14.1
Introduction
The ﬁeld of proteomics has emerged to directly characterize proteins at a
global level. With the advances arising in genomics, the identiﬁed functional
genes can provide a blueprint for the possible gene products that are the
focal point of proteomics. A genome is a static entity whereas a proteome is
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

364
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
dynamic and must be studied individually. Proteomes vary due to splicing
of mRNA during transcription and due to posttranslational modiﬁcation.
Moment-by-moment snapshots of a proteome can reﬂect the up- and down-
regulation of proteins, their modiﬁcation status, and their interacting part-
ners at a given cell state. Proteomics covers a broad range of subjects aimed
at understanding complex cellular functions in a systematic manner. It is
generally categorized in three areas: (1) large-scale protein identiﬁcations
including isoforms and posttranslational modiﬁcations; (2) quantitative pro-
teomics or global analysis of protein expression; and (3) the characterization
of protein–protein interactions.
The identiﬁcation of all of the proteins present in a cell provides the basis
for understanding cell regulation and function. A single gene can produce
multiple gene products as a result of alternative splicing, generating a protein
having many isoforms, each of which must be characterized. Posttransla-
tional modiﬁcations (PTMs) are covalent modiﬁcations of protein amino acid
residues. PTMs such as phosphorylation and glycosylation can be involved
in important cell processes, such as the regulation of enzyme activity, cell
signaling, and modulation of molecular interactions.
In addition to identiﬁcation of proteins present in a proteome, it is often
useful to generate quantitative information related to these proteins, most
commonly concerning changes in protein abundance. In these experiments,
one measures the relative abundance of proteins present in two systems (e.g.,
cells or biological ﬂuids) to evaluate perturbation-induced protein expres-
sion. A technically more challenging measurement is the determination of
absolute protein amounts within a given proteome.
The third area of proteomics involves characterizing protein–protein inter-
actions. The success in obtaining genomic information has increased interest
in studying the encoded protein networks that govern cellular function.
Elucidating protein–protein interactions on a proteome-wide scale often
requires combining the techniques associated with protein identiﬁcation and
those required for protein quantitation with additional biochemical tech-
niques that probe protein–protein interactions.
An emerging paradigm in proteomics is the combination of traditional
methodology with novel advancements in miniaturization. To rapidly diag-
nose unhealthy (i.e., diseased) and normal individuals, methods for the early
detection and diagnosis of the disease state are most beneﬁcial. With respect
to proteomics, a signiﬁcant constraint is that the proteins of interest in bio-
logical samples, such as tissue biopsies or bioﬂuids, are typically very low
in abundance. The analytical benchmarks for detecting low abundance pro-
teins in biological samples are helping drive developments in bio-MEMS. To
carry out the necessary chemical and biochemical reactions in miniaturized
systems requires the fabrication of pumps, valves, storage containers, inter-
connects, and detection strategies [1]. These components typically have
dimensions on the order of a few micrometers to several millimeters in length
or width, and are between 100 nm and 100 µm in depth and height. Numer-
ous fabrication techniques for creating these microstructures for proteomic
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
365
purposes have been developed [2–8]. This chapter will discuss advances in
biological microelectromechanical systems (bio-MEMS), such as assay
development, improved separation performance, and enhanced detection
strategies, which should eventually contribute to our understanding of the
proteome.
14.2
Microarrays and Immunoassays
14.2.1
Peptide and Protein Microarrays
As DNA and oligonucleotide microarrays have greatly accelerated research
at the DNA and RNA levels, similar applications are being envisioned at the
protein level [9]. MEMS technology offers a host of methods that are being
applied to materials processing and production of fast, reliable, and econom-
ically feasible array-based devices. Just as in gene-based arrays, processes
such as photolighography [10], a development common to the silicon com-
puter industry, can be employed to fabricate the highest possible density of
biologically activated regions [11]. Ink-jet printing [12,13], soft lithography
[14,15], and scanning probe–based lithography [16] are also promising tech-
nologies compatible with bio-MEMS systems. While protein modiﬁcations
and three-dimensional (3D) structure present obstacles in peptide and pro-
tein microarray development, numerous companies, such as ProtoPharm
(San Diego, CA), BioSite (San Diego, CA), Zyomyx (Hayward, CA), and
Hypromatrix and Diversys (Cambridge, U.K.) are developing approaches to
solve these issues.
Hunt and coworkers employed a versatile, highly speciﬁc, and biologically
friendly technique known as nanoimprint lithography (NIL) for the gener-
terning of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and rhodamine-labeled streptavidin
was completed in both line and dot formats. These proteins feature densities
that are more than an order of magnitude greater than those currently avail-
able and have the potential for patterning down to 10 nm. 
Alternative approaches typically involve creating bio-MEMS devices
allowing for parallel peptide synthesis, on-chip, using conventional peptide
chemistry to create a miniaturized, spatially addressable peptide microchip
[18]. In-solution removal of acid-labile protecting groups, monomer building
blocks, photogenerated reagents, and digital photolithography have been
used in combination to create a bio-MEMS platform for epitope-binding
assays. Proof of principle was demonstrated through the rapid screening for
sequences speciﬁc to the human p53 antibody. This platform demonstrates
the potential of bio-MEMS-based peptide microchips for additional pro-
teomic applications, and is advantageous as it only requires a conventional
synthesizer and computer-controllable optical module.
ation of ultrahigh-resolution protein patterns (Figure 14.1) [17]. Protein pat-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

366
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Han and coworkers have developed the ProteoChip for high-throughput
derivatives with a bifunctional coupling property, allow for efﬁcient immo-
bilization of capture proteins on solid matrixes. The ProteoChip provided
beneﬁts in high-density array spots, biomarker assays, and identifying pro-
tein–protein interactions. A spot density of 4900 cm2 was achieved along with
a detection sensitivity of 1 fg mL1. The ProteoChip was also used to selectively
screen potential drug targets for various integrin-associated diseases such as
blood clotting, tumor-induced angiogenesis, and rheumatoid arthritis.
14.2.2 Immunoassays
Immunoassays for identifying proteins exemplify one of the most fundamen-
tal devices in environmental analysis, biochemical studies, and clinical diag-
nostics due to its selectivity and quantitative capabilities. The beneﬁts of the
integration of bio-MEMS and immunoassays are reduced cost and consump-
tion, increased speed of analysis, and the ability for portable automation in
a single device. Immunoassays can take on various formats in microanalytical
systems, with the most common built upon homogenous, heterogeneous, and
diffusion immunoassays or immunosorbent assays [4,5,20–27]. For example,
Wang and coworkers have developed biochips for simultaneous detection of
major renal markers [28] and dual-bioassay single-channel microchips with
the integration of immunochemical and enzymatic assays [29].
FIGURE 14.1
Epi-ﬂuorescence image of rhodamine-labeled steptavidin bound to sharp uniform microscale
dots (a) and lines (b) of biotinylated BSA protein on oxidized Si substrates. Fluorescent intensity
signal in the passivated regions is at or below the noise level of the imaging system, indicating
the ﬂuorophore concentration in these areas is less than 0.1% of that observed in the patterned
regions. (c) Rhodamine-labeled streptavidin bound to patterns of immobilized biotinylated BSA
on cover glass.
a
b 
c 
analysis of proteins (Figure 14.2) [19]. Protein linkers, which are calixacrown
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
367
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has long been a valu-
able technique used in the life sciences. Integration of ELISA with MEMS-
based devices is advantageous because microchannels provide a vast reduc-
tion in volume compared to microtiter plates. This means that reaction
volumes can be controlled, shorter incubation times are necessary, and the
high surface area-to-volume ratio leads to improvements in dynamic range
and sensitivity. Kitamori and coworkers recently presented an idea for
microsystem integration that includes afﬁnity capture of a target molecule,
separation, and thermal lens detection [30]. In this system, known as
microELISA, streptavidin peroxidase was used as a labeling material and
thermal lens detection was employed for evaluation of the enzyme reaction
FIGURE 14.2
(a) Microarray images spotted with a Proteogen CM 1000 microarrayer. (Left panel) Spotting
test for ProteoChip base plate prepared with an ArrayIt SMP3 (100 mm). The array spot density
is 4900 ea/cm2. (Right panel) Spotting tests for ProteoChip base plate prepared with an ArrayIt
SMP10 (335 mm). The array spot density is approximately 460 ea/cm2 in this test. The proteins
used for the spotting tests are protein A-Alexa546 (yellow). CRP mAb-Cy5 (green) and mouse
IgG-Cy3 (red). (b) Rainbow color displays spotted using two different pin sizes, 300 mm (left
panel) and 100 mm (right panel), for immobilization of a capture mAB (CEA) in varied con-
centrations from 1 fg/mL to 100 mg/mL on ProteoChip. The microarrayer and ﬂuorescence
scanner used for this experiment were the Proteogen CM 1000 and GSI scanner, respectively.
(c) Dose-response curves for immobilized capture mAb represented by ﬂuorescence intensity
as a function of mAB concentration. The numerical values of ﬂuorescence intensity were
calculated using software from the GSI scanner. The immobilized capture mAb was detectable
at a concentration of 1 fg/mL and appeared saturated at a mAb concentration of 100 mg/mL.
(a)
(CEA mAb)
(b)
(c)
100 µg/mL
7
6
0.5 s
0.2 s
5
4
3
Fluorescence intensity x 10000
2
1
0
CEA mAb (ng/mL)
10–6 10–510–410–3
103 104 105 106
0.01 0.1 1
10 100
1 cm
100 ng/mL
100 pg/mL
100 fg/mL
10 fg/mL
1 fg/mL
PBS buﬀer
10 pg/mL
1 pg/mL
10 ng/mL
1 ng/mL
10 µg/mL
1 µg/mL
1 cm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

368
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
product (Figure 14.3). Polystyrene beads, precoated with recombinant
human interferon-γ, were loaded and held at the dam region in the glass
microchip. Next, streptavidin peroxidase was loaded, followed by N-ethyl-
N-(2-hydroxy-3-sulfopropyl)-3-methylaniline, and sodium salt, with the
reaction being detected downstream by a thermal lens microscope. The
advantage was a signiﬁcant reduction in assay time, data error, and the
laborious nature of conducting surface measurements.
While glass has been the primary material of choice in bio-MEMS devices,
thermoplastics have been implemented due to their ease of fabrication, high
aspect ratios, and low cost. Kim and coworkers have developed a polymer-
based microﬂuidic device for immunosensing biochips in handheld diagnos-
functionalization of ferritin and biotin to the sensing monolayer, and their
FIGURE 14.3
ELISA microchip, (a) photography of chip, (b) micrograph of dam area with polystyrene beads
(45 mm in diameter), (c) operation procedure, and (d) cross-section of the fabricated microchip
with microbeads.
Drain
(a)
(c)
Antigen–antibody reaction
Enzyme reaction
Reagents
Drain
Detection
Substrates
(b)
(d)
Detection with
a thermal lens
microscope
Polystyrene beads
Pump
700 µm
90 µm
Beads
Dam
10 mm
70 mm
30 mm
tic systems (Figure 14.4) [31]. The device was used in the investigation of the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
369
biospeciﬁc interactions with the antiferritin, antiserum, and streptavidin
samples. Results show that ﬂuid ﬂow can be passively controlled through
surface modiﬁcations and geometrical changes of the capillary. With the
integration of electrochemical detection, cyclic voltammograms are gener-
ated to provide data showing that the device can be employed as a portable
diagnostic system.
FIGURE 14.4
Photographs of the fabricated polymer microﬂuidic device. (a) PDMS top substrate. (b) PMMA
bottom substrate, and (c) the packaged device. Denotations: 1, sample inlet port; 2, diffusion
barrier; 3, reaction chamber; 4, ﬂow-delay neck; 5, detection chamber; 6, buffer solution inlet
port; 7, waste reservoir; 8, air vent; 9, electronic pad; and 10, gold electrode.
Sample inlet port
Diﬀusion barrier
Reaction chamber
1
8
1
2
3
4
5
9
10
6
7
2
3
Detection chamber
5
Buﬀer solution inlet port
6
Waste reservoir
7
Air vent
8
Electronic pad
9
Gold electrode
10
Flow-delay neck
4
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

370
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
14.3
Bottom-Up Proteomics
14.3.1
Overview of Proteomics Methodologies
Current proteomics approaches are generally placed in two categories: bot-
tom-up and top-down. In the bottom-up approach, peptides generated from
the proteolytic digestion of puriﬁed protein(s) are analyzed by mass spec-
trometric approaches. In the top-down approach, intact proteins are initially
characterized by mass spectrometric approaches. This approach is based
upon the accurate molecular mass determination of the intact protein fol-
lowed by gas-phase fragmentation. This approach is most commonly imple-
mented using specialized instrumentation, and will not be discussed further
in this chapter. Both approaches, independently or collaboratively, are imple-
mented in current proteomic studies.
Peptide mass ﬁngerprinting (PMF) or peptide mass mapping (PMM), pio-
neered by Henzel and colleagues for the rapid identiﬁcation of proteins
separated by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)
[32], is the process of identifying an unknown protein by mass determination
of its peptide fragments generated by speciﬁc enzymatic or chemical cleav-
age. In PMF, the peptides resulting from cleavage of the unknown protein
are identiﬁed by matching the mass of the peptide to peptide masses in a
database. The analytical methodology most often used for PMF is protein
separation by two-dimensional (2D) PAGE followed by in-gel proteolytic
digestion, peptide extraction, and detection using matrix-assisted laser des-
orption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS). 
An alternative, and often more effective approach, is to sequence peptides
by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrom-
etry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) to generate sequence tags (i.e., partial sequence
information), which can be searched against the database to identify the
protein of interest. The protocol begins with the enzymatic digestion of the
protein as before. The resulting peptides are applied to a reversed phase
high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) column (typically
C18 columns are used). Peptides are retained on the RP column and con-
taminating salts and buffer components are washed away. The peptides
are then eluted from the RP column into the mass spectrometer using an
acetonitrile gradient. As peptides are eluted from the RP column into the
ionization source of the mass spectrometer, the instrument acquires tandem
(MS/MS) mass spectra of the eluting peptides. The acquired MS/MS spec-
tra of peptides are correlated with predicted amino acid sequences in
translated genomic databases and the resulting list of peptide sequences
are used to identify the protein. Alternatively, sequence tags can be gener-
ated by use of MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry, wherein particular
peptides generated in the standard PMF experiment are selected for gas-
phase fragmentation instrumentally.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
371
As an alternative to 2D gel electrophoresis separation of proteins, protein
mixtures (e.g., complexes or whole-cell lysates) can be enzymatically
digested and analyzed by 2D chromatography coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry [33]. This method is particularly useful for identifying proteins,
such as hydrophobic membrane proteins or proteins with extreme pI values,
which are not normally well represented on a 2D polyacrylamide gel. Iden-
tiﬁcation is done by the sequence tag technique with signiﬁcant bioinformat-
ics support.
14.3.2
Bio-MEMS in Bottom-Up Proteomics
One of the bottlenecks in conventional proteomics is the time required to
run standard 2D-PAGE prior to analysis of proteolytic digests by mass spec-
trometry. These heterogeneous assays can be time consuming and involve
often troublesome and costly handling equipment along with bulky instru-
mentation. These problems also add to the difﬁculty in making assessments
in point-of-care applications. The 2D-PAGE-MS approach also remains deﬁ-
cient in protein coverage because proteins have acute isoelectric points or
molecular masses. The advantages bio-MEMS has to offer will seek to alle-
viate these shortcomings by integrating analytical systems, which will reduce
cost (minimal sample and waste), enhance reaction efﬁciency, and reduce
assay time.
Because there is no protein equivalent to the polymerase chain reaction,
protein analyses are often sample limited. Bio-MEMS devices allow for the
handling of small sample volumes (nanoliter and picoliter) while maintain-
ing sensitivity without any loss of analyte in the sample processing steps
prior to detection [27,34,35]. These dimensions also increase the surface area-
to-volume ratios. In this dimensional region, the analysis time is now on the
order of 
, (D = diffusion coefﬁcient), which results in faster reaction
kinetics. Reaction vessel size is also reduced up to an order of magnitude
compared to typical vessels (e.g., microvials). MEMS devices are amenable
to automation, which can further reduce analysis time and expense.
14.3.2.1
One-Dimensional Analyte Separations
Fluid manipulation remains one of the primary challenges in bio-MEMS
systems for proteomics. Depending on the dimensions of the channel net-
works, a number of different ﬂow rates, from microliters to nanoliters per
minute, are required. The mechanism employed to drive ﬂuids can include
thermal capillary pumping, gas pressure, and electrokinetic techniques (i.e.,
electroosmotic ﬂow (EOF) or electrophoresis) among others [36,37]. While
Gyros and Tecan have developed novel microﬂuidic separation systems
using centrifugal forces [38], the two most common approaches are pressure-
driven and electrokinetic separations [25,39–48]. Pressure-driven ﬂow gen-
erates a laminar proﬁle and is often implemented with the miniaturization
Dt
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

372
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
of HPLC on microchips. Pressure-driven ﬂow exhibits a nonuniform para-
bolic velocity proﬁle, which while beneﬁcial when diffusion is necessary [49],
can reduce the separation performance as measured by resolution and the-
oretical plates. Electokinetic techniques are a more popular avenue for sep-
arating molecules in microﬂuidic devices. Electrokinetic techniques in bio-
MEMS devices arise from principles found in conventional capillary electro-
phoresis (CE). Electrophoresis generates a ﬂat ﬂow proﬁle and allows for
easier integration in multiplexed systems [50]. Electroomosis in combination
with electrophoresis allows for samples that are negative, neutral, and pos-
itive to separate based on their charge-to-size ratios. 
Shintani and coworkers developed a miniaturized multichannel HPLC for
high-throughput analysis of protein tryptic digests [51]. This device incor-
porates a quartz microchip with polydimethlysiloxane (PDMS) connections
between valves. Protein tryptic digests of β-casein are separated and detected
by implementation of a single, high-pressure gradient pump, the chip-based
module, a monolithic silica capillary column array, and a multichannel UV
unit. This HPLC chip device allows for multiple samples to be analyzed for
increased biological throughput.
Guo and coworkers fabricated an integrated microﬂudic device employing
micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography (MEKC) for the analysis of
amino acids [52]. The system geometry consisted of a serpentine channel,
reaction chamber, and mixer, with an embedded light-emitting diode (LED)
in an optical ﬁber to collect and transfer the ﬂuorescence signal to a photo-
multiplier tube. Detection limits for the amino acids investigated were as
low as 0.5 mM. The device shows promise with proteomic applications
through the integration of sample loading, labeling, separation, and detec-
tion of various amino acids on a single device. 
14.3.2.2
Two-Dimensional Analyte Separations
One-dimensional separations are typically limited to the separation of four or
less protein digests and have peak capacities in the hundreds [53]. By contrast,
multidimensional separations allow for an eightfold or greater increase in peak
capacity, which is becoming necessary for proteomics. While 2D-HPLC has
been the chosen technique for multiprotein digests, 2D microchip capillary
electrophoresis (MCE) offers advantages such as ease of integration and fab-
rication, portability, and increased speed of analysis. Multidimensional meth-
ods such as micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography microchip
capillary electrophoresis (MEKC-MCE) and high-performance liquid chroma-
tography microchip capillary electrophoresis (HPLC-MCE) offer the more
advanced approach of tackling high-throughput proteomics [5,45,54]. 
Ramsey and coworkers fabricated an MEKC-MCE microﬂuidic device with
relatively long channels in the ﬁrst dimension (19.6 cm) and shorter channels
lengths in the second dimension, care had to be taken with tuning the device
(applied electric ﬁeld strength in both dimensions). To increase peak capacity
in the second dimension (1.3 cm) (Figure 14.5a) [55]. With such short channel
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
373
while analyzing a BSA tryptic digest, a novel approach was taken in tapering
the serpentine channel (Figure 14.5b) to avoid the “race track” effect. By
improving the sampling rate, (each MEKC peak was sampled 6 times), a
peak capacity of 4200 (110 in the ﬁrst dimension and 38 in the second
dimension) and an analysis time of 15 min were obtained.
Since the ﬁrst experimental investigation and performance evaluation of
HPLC on a microchip [56], a number of advances have been made using
MEMS technology to improve upon design. Yang and coworkers developed
a comprehensive 2D separation device employing HPLC-MCE [57]. Fluores-
cein isothiocyanate-labeled tryptic digests of BSA were separated every 20
seconds and detected using LIF. Kirby and coworkers developed an HPLC-
MCE device for the rapid separation of proteins and peptides [58]. In this
system, a silica microdevice containing an injector valve and monolithic C18
tion allowed for 220 to 800 pL to be linearly metered. Similar to the study
mentioned previously, an LED was used in conjunction with laser-induced
ﬂuorescence detection. Rapid separations were achieved as well as excellent
separation performance. Operating at ﬂow rates of 30 ± 10 nL min–1, column
efﬁciencies of 25,000 plates m–1 were obtained (Figure 14.6b). 
14.3.2.3
Modiﬁcations to Fluidic Networks
Chemical and biochemical modiﬁcations to the channel surfaces of bio-
MEMS devices for proteomic research are essential for integrating sample
cleaning, puriﬁcation, preconcentration, protein enzymatic digestion, and
FIGURE 14.5
(a) Image of a microchip with a serpentine channel for two-dimensional separations. (b) Instru-
mental setup of the coupled system. The dimensions are indicated on the ﬁgure and are taken
from the top of the channel. The channel was ﬁlled with black ink for contrast.
25 µm
580 µm
480 µm
630 µm
75 µm
225 µm
(a)
(b)
SW1
SW2
W
D
CE
MEKC
V2
B2
V1
B1
S
media was fabricated (Figure 14.6a). The integration of pressure-driven injec-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

374
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
solid phase extraction onto the bio-MEMS device. Channel surface modiﬁ-
cations can be classiﬁed into two categories: dynamic coatings and covalent
modiﬁcations. Dynamic coatings involve adding small molecules or a poly-
meric material, which is adsorbed physically to the channel wall [59]. Cova-
lent modiﬁcations involve chemically or photochemically derivatizing the
wall with an added material. Initially, dynamic coatings were used due to
their simplicity; however, covalent modiﬁcations are becoming more popular
as technical difﬁculties associated with their use are being resolved [60].
While the electroosmotic mobility is affected by factors such as buffer
concentration, ionic strength, viscosity, and applied ﬁeld strength, one of the
most important parameters is the net charge on the surface of the channel
FIGURE 14.6
(a) Four-port valve allowing rapid sample changes. Sample is changed by ﬂushing at low
pressure when the sample waste port is open. Sample is injected by closing sample waste port
and pressurizing the sample line. (b) Repeated 6400 pL, 750-ms injections of a protein mixture.
Isocratic separation was performed using 24% CAN + 0.16% HFBA in 5 mM phosphate buffer
(pH 2.0) at 300 psi. Peak identities and retention factors: a, free dye; b, insulin (3.2); c, anti-
biotin (6.0); d, α-lactalbumin (9.1).
Buﬀer
input port
Sample
input port
Sample
waste
port
Fluoropolymer
element
(a)
300
(b)
a
b
c
d
250
200
150
Fluorescence (a.u.)
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
400
500
Separation
column
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
375
walls. It is essential that the EOF remain stable during an experiment. A
drawback of dynamic coatings is their limited lifetime; after sufﬁcient usage,
these coatings can be depleted from the channel surface. Additionally, when
proteins adhere to the channel walls, they can lead to ﬂuctuations or a
reduction in the inherent EOF of the separated device [61].
Wu and coworkers have developed a multilayer adsorbed coating on PDMS
microﬂuidic chips for biopolymer separation (Figure 14.7) [62]. Poly(vinyl
FIGURE 14.7
(a) Electroosmotic mobility in microchannel of original PDMS, O2 plasma–treated PDMS, one-,
two-, and three-layer PVA(88)-coated PDMS pretreated with O2 plasma, three-layer PVA(100)-
coated PDMS pretreated with O2 plasma. Current monitoring conditions: 12 mM low concen-
tration; 30 mM high-concentration sodium phosphate buffer, pH 9; electric ﬁeld strength, 400
V/cm; running time was limited within 200 s. (b) Fluorescently labeled basic proteins running
in (a) original, (b) O2 plasma–treated, (c) O2 plasma–treated and three-layer PVA(100)-coated,
and (d) O2 plasma treated and three-layer PVA(88)-coated PDMS microﬂuidic chip. Separation
conditions: 30 mM phosphate sodium buffer, pH 3.0; 2 cm separation distance. Sample: 50 µg/
mL, 1, lysozyme; 2, ribonuclease B.
0.0
31
30
29
28
27
26
Fluorescence (mV)
25
24
23
22
21
20
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
25
30
35
40
d
c
b
a
1
2
(a)
(b)
PVA (100, 3)
PVA (88, 3)
PVA (88, 2)
PVA (88, 1)
Original
O2 plasma
treated only
0.5
1.0
1.5
µ? (10–4cm2V1S–1)
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

376
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
alcohol) was adsorbed on an oxygen plasma–treated surface of PDMS thereby
converting the original hydrophobic surface into a hydrophilic surface. This
treatment effectively suppressed the EOF when using solutions in the pH
range of 3 to 11. The coating also provided a resistance to protein adsorption
and led to exceptional separations of proteins. More than 1 × 106 plates m–1
and baseline resolution were obtained during the separation of ﬂuorescently
labeled proteins such as lysozyme and ribonuclease B.
Silica surfaces have also been modiﬁed to yield improved surface charac-
teristics. Zhang and coworkers modiﬁed silicon and gold-patterned silicon
for improved biocompatibility and could selectively resist or enhance the
adsorption of proteins [63]. In this study, silicon and gold-patterned silicon
were modiﬁed with methoxy-polyethylene glycol (M-PEG silane) via a self-
assembly technique. The dense, stable, self-assembled monolayer provided
resistance to ﬂuorescently labeled proteins (ﬁbrinogen and IgG) in the exam-
ple of bare silicon treated with PEG. A noticeable difference was found in
the adsorption of ﬂuorescently labeled proteins.
Baba and coworkers also applied this PEG coating technology to a
poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) chip for protein separations [64]. The
adsorption of SDS-protein complexes were reduced, and the technique
allowed for the separation of proteins ranging from 21.5 to 116.0 kDa. These
separations were completed within 8 seconds in a 3 mm separation channel.
This research group has also used a dynamic dodecyl sulfate coating for
high-speed separations of proteins and peptides [65]. In this study the
researchers used, to their advantage, the adsorption of SDS onto the hydro-
phobic channel PMMA surfaces for the separation of proteins and peptides
up to 116.0 kDa. This adsorption essentially created a dynamic coating result-
14.3.2.4
Sample Puriﬁcation and Preconcentration
The separation of peptides and proteins from undesirable salts, biological
matrix, solvent exchange, and from one another is critical in bio-MEMS
devices used for proteome research. One form of sample cleaning, known
as solid-phase extraction, has been employed to retain analytes in a station-
ary phase, while undesired compounds are washed out. For example, a C18
solid phase has been attached to channel surfaces for solid-phase extraction.
However, merely coating channel surfaces with hydrophobic media limits
the surface area available for sample puriﬁcation. The surface area of these
types of derivatizations is on the order of 230 to 781 mm1 [66]. Implementa-
tion of monoliths solves this surface area deﬁciency by increasing the surface
area-to-volume ratio to 104 mm–1 or greater [67,68].
Rolando and coworkers have recently investigated novel monolithic
devices for proteomics applications [69]. Lauryl methyacrylate, ethylene
dimethacrylate, cyclohexanol, and ethylene glycol were used to create a C12
ing in a cathodic EOF (Figure 14.8).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
377
monolithic electrochromatography stationary phase. The monolithic columns
were able to separate peptide fragments of a cytochrome C (Cyt-C) digest
from as little as 80 fmol of sample at efﬁciencies up to 145 × 103 plates m–1.
Lee and coworkers presented an approach for microafﬁnity puriﬁcation of
proteins based on photolytic elution. In this device, bead-based (CutiCore®)
afﬁnity chromatography integrated into a glass-silicon microchip was used
to purify speciﬁc target proteins. Using ligand-coupled beads in combination
with elution using ultraviolet irradiation, the target protein was captured
with a high speciﬁcity, puriﬁed, and eluted effectively. 
A number of methods in MEMS devices, such as isotachophoresis [70] and
isoelectric focusing [71,72] have been shown to further enhance sensitivity by
preconcentration and separation of the sample. Han and coworkers developed
a simple protein preconcentration device based on electrokinetic trapping by
a nanoﬂuidic ﬁlter [73]. A 40 nm nanochannel is used as a ﬁltering membrane
to generate an ion-depletion region for electrokinetic trapping. The efﬁciency
of the device is controlled by an increase in electrokinetic ﬂow by accumulation
of charges on one side of the nanochannel. The resulting nonlinear electroo-
motic ﬂow and geometrical design yields a 100-fold increase in protein con-
centration in approximately 60 min of preconcentration. This device, acting as
an ampliﬁer for signal intensity, is ideally suited for proteomic studies. 
FIGURE 14.8
Schematic image of electrophoretic migration of SDS-protein complexes in a plastic microchip
channel. (a) Uncoated microchip. (b) Dynamic SDS-coated chip.
SDS-protein complexes
SDS layer
Cathode
Cathode
Polyacrylamide
PMMA channel wall
A
B
Anode
Anode
EOF
Sample ﬂow direction
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

378
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Garrell and coworkers developed a microﬂuidic device based on the tech-
nique of digital microﬂuidics in which a dried droplet containing peptides
or proteins and impurities is moved by an electrowetting-on-dielectric
(EWOD) technique (Figure 14.9) [74,75]. This method allows for the reduction
of salt adducts, which increase the signal-to-noise ratio in MALDI-MS. By
reducing the amount of contaminated peptides, this method also shows
enrichment as the signal-to-noise ratio increases with the number of drops
FIGURE 14.9
(a) Schematic of EWOD-driven sample puriﬁcation and micrographs of dried spots. Insets: The
rinsed sample (left) appears to be primarily composed of DHB crystals, while the nonrinsed
sample (right) is dominated by urea. (b) MALDI-MS spectra comparing the spectral signal-to-
noise ratios from spots of 0.33 µM angiotensin II + 100 mM urea. Spots were prepared by
moving and drying one, two, or three droplets (0.17, 0.33, and 0.66 pmol of total peptide,
respectively) at the same place on the EWOD device. n = 3 for each condition.
Sample
Impurity
Matrix
Rinse
Move droplet of water to dried spot
Remove water + impurity
Move and dry droplet containing matrix
Move and dry droplet containing matrix
(b)
(a)
600
500
400
S/N
300
200
100
0
One
Two
Three
Number of droplets deposited
Rinsed
Not rinsed
No Rinse
8 M Urea + 1 µm
angiotensin II, rinsed
8 M Urea + 1 µm
angiotensin II, not
rinsed
Move and dry droplet
containing sample and impurity
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
379
deposited. Consequently, peptide mass ﬁngerprint searches showed an
increase in efﬁciency by employing this technique.
14.3.2.5
Bio-MEMS-Compatible Enzyme Reactors
Typical proteomics involves some sort of enzymatic digestion of a particular
protein or set of proteins. Typical in-solution enzymatic digestion of proteins
has a number of weaknesses. The digestion time is lengthy (on average 12
hours), and to decrease this time, either the amount of protein or protease
has to be increased. However, increasing the amount of protease can lead
to autolysis of the protease and additional protein may be unavailable.
Traditional enzymatic digestion involves extensive manual sample han-
dling. Immobilization of enzymes has been introduced to decrease these
drawbacks. Immobilization of enzymes reduces digestion times, autolysis
of enzymes and the diffusional limitations of in-solution digestions [76,77].
Immobilization has been shown to increase the stability of an enzyme [78].
Bio-MEMS devices offer a way to decrease the amount of protein and the
time needed for digestion by integrating high surface-to-volume ratios of
enzyme into microchannels [79]. The integration and immobilization of
enzymes into a microﬂuidic device can be carried out by a number of
different approaches, such as hydrogel and membrane-based immobiliza-
tion [80–82] and attachment to porous microstructures [35,83,84] including
monolithic media [85,86].
Zimmerman and coworkers have fabricated a bio-MEMS enzyme-based
electrochemical sensor for glucose monitoring (Figure 14.10) [87]. An in-
device immobilization method using a photosensitive poly(vinyl alcohol)-
styrylpyridinium (PVA-SbQ) cross-linker is used for entrapment of enzymes.
As the enzyme is entrapped, it is not chemically modiﬁed, and the result is
a preservation of the enzyme’s native properties. Enzyme kinetic measure-
ments revealed Michaelis constants of 3.0 mM for an enzyme concentration
FIGURE 14.10
Schematic diagram of an integrated enzyme-based ﬂow-through glucose sensor. The enzymes
are immobilized in side pockets and around silicon posts inside the ﬂow channel. Hydrogen
peroxide is transported in the ﬂow direction to the working electrode.
Silicon
Immobilized GOD
glucose + O2 → H2O2
Immobilized GOD
Flow channel
Flow direction
Silicon post
Pyrex
Ag/AgCl reference electrode
Pt counter electrode
Pt working electrode
H2O2 → O2 + 2H+ + 2e–
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

380
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
of 22.8 µg mL–1. The sensor also demonstrated stable operation for 24 h with
a linear range of 0 to 160 mg dL–1. 
Viovy and coworkers fabricated a microﬂudic device that employed self-
assembled magnetic beads for on-chip digestion [88]. Trypsin was grafted
on magnetic latex nanoparticles by functionalizing the beads to contain a
carboxylate group. The beads were loaded into a device that had magnets
integrated on either side of the channel, which generated the immobilizing
magnetic ﬁeld. Human growth hormone and other proteins were then
injected into the chip containing the plug of trypsin-immobilized beads. The
efﬁciency of the on-chip microreactor was found to be comparable to the in-
solution-based digest, although at a cost of longer digestion time. The
researchers noted that the device is reusable and could be applied to other
types of microﬂuidic chromatography.
Kong and coworkers developed a microﬂuidic device for on-chip digestion
through enzyme patterning on PMMA [89]. In this device, a graft copolymer
(butyl methacrylate/methylacryloxy)propyltrimethoxysilicane) was used to
place a silane functionality (sol-gel) on the polymer wall surface. This
allowed a patterned hydrophilic surface to be obtained with enzyme func-
tionality intact. The efﬁciency of the device was then compared to in-solu-
tion-based proteomic methods. The digestion time for Cyt-C and BSA was
reduced to less than 5 s for the enzyme reactor, compared to 6 h for solution-
based digestions. The efﬁciency was comparable in both methods, while
sequence coverage was slightly less for the microreactor digest of Cyt-C (68
vs 90%). Similarly, Wu and coworkers developed a microﬂuidic-based enzy-
matic reactor using sol-gel-derived PDMS substrates [90]. Because PDMS
was used, plasma oxidation of the surface was necessary to form silanol
groups, which allowed for a tether between the sol-gels (titania and alumina).
The sol-gels contained encapsulated trypsin and scanning electron micro-
scope images were taken to show the morphology differences before and
after enzyme immobilization. At a ﬂow rate of 7.0 µL min–1, the time required
for digestion (2 s) was signiﬁcantly reduced compared to in-solution digest
and other on-chip digestion procedures. For both sol-gels investigated, the
efﬁciency was actually better than in-solution digests. Sequence coverage,
peptides matched, and protein scores were all higher in these microreactors.
Consequently, with such rapid digestion times and compatible mass spec-
trometry ﬂow rates, the integrated microﬂuidic device could be advanta-
geous in future proteomic studies.
14.4
Integrated Bio-MEMS Approaches in Proteomics
Mass spectrometry is an indispensable technique in proteomics due to its
sensitivity, separation capability, and resolving power of complex protein
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
381
mixtures. Some of the fundamental sample preparation steps that were listed
in the preceding sections will only beneﬁt by the integration of MS techniques
with bio-MEMS devices. Bio-MEMS task-handling abilities are not only ben-
eﬁcial to MS but the analytical characteristics of MS mesh well with bio-
MEMS devices. Those analytical characteristics include the duty cycles of
today’s MS instrumentation and the high-throughput volumes of bio-MEMS,
the ﬂow rate necessary for ion formations (ESI/LC-MS) and the ﬂow rate
typically found in microﬂuidic channels, and ﬁnally the complex assay devel-
opment in bio-MEMS and the performance capabilities of the mass spec-
trometer. Throughout the past 5 years, there has been an abundant amount
of novel research in the application of MEMS devices for proteome research
using MS [34,91–97].
14.4.1
Integrated High-Throughput Devices Using MALDI-MS
The analytical properties of MALDI-MS, namely, its automated and high-
throughput capabilities, make it amenable for integration with bio-MEMS
devices. One of the ﬁrst reports of this union came from Reinhoudt and
coworkers [98]. They imbedded a microﬂuidic system capable of a com-
plete biochemical reaction with on-line MALDI-MS. The system took
advantage of atmospheric pressure (just prior to loading the device into
the mass spectrometer) and the vacuum of the instrument to generate the
driving force for ﬂuid ﬂow once inside the mass spectrometer. While
peptide digestion was done ofﬂine, employing the device allowed for
minimal sample handling, sample loss, and method development time.
Adequate detection of a peptide mixture was noted and the device was
also used to detect other analytes such as polymers (PMMA and polysty-
rene) and oligonucleotides. 
Bergman and coworkers have also demonstrated the beneﬁts arising from
the integration of microchip devices with MALDI-MS by integrating the
sample preparation steps inside a microﬂuidic compact disk for high-
loaded onto the disk, which contains a 10 nL reversed-phase chromatogra-
phy column. Next, using the Gyrolab workstation, the disk is spun at a
speciﬁc rate to allow for centrifugal movement of the mixture. This allows
for removal of salts, concentration of analytes, and subsequent elution with
the matrix all in one step. Once crystallization has taken place, the entire
disk is inserted into the mass spectrometer for analysis. With the implemen-
tation of robotics, this device allows for the analysis of up to 96 samples with
50 amol detection limits to be obtained. They have also integrated a 16 nL
immobilized metal afﬁnity column (IMAC) onto the microﬂuidic compact
disk [100]. This sensitive and selective technique, in combination with the
MS-compact disk technology, allowed for high-throughput peptide mass
ﬁngerprinting and detection of phosphorylated peptides.
throughput protein identiﬁcation (Figure 14.11) [99]. Peptide digests are
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

382
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
14.4.2
Integrated High-Throughput Devices Using ESI-MS
The ﬂow rates typically used in LC-MS instrumentation are of the same mag-
nitude as those found in bio-MEMS devices. Karger and coworkers were one
of the ﬁrst to take advantage of this relationship to develop a high-throughput
microfabricated glass chip for automated sampling from a microwell plate
[101]. Building on that approach, Henion and coworkers developed an auto-
mated chip-based nanoelectrospray system for the analysis of 2D gel samples
[102]. This chip serves as both an autosampler and a nano-ESI source. Instead
of using one device to sample a microwell plate, the device consisted of a
10 × 10 array of nozzles that allows for the elimination of analyte carryover
Pointing out future commercial possibilities, Yin and coworkers from Agi-
lent recently integrated nano-LC onto a commercial microﬂuidic chip for
peptide analysis [103]. A packed bed allows for sample enrichment and sep-
aration. Reverse-phase gradient separations of tryptic protein digests in the
subfemtomole range were obtained. Using an enrichment column, a separa-
tion column, a nanoelectrospray tip, and a novel valving scheme, this system
demonstrates the utility of integrated bio-MEMS devices in proteomics. The
goal of elucidating multiple structural components of complex protein mix-
tures was recently demonstrated using this chip-MS technology [104].
FIGURE 14.11
Microﬂuidic structure for on-CD processing of samples of up to 1 µL (96 structures per CD).
An individual microstructure element is shown separately for the three consecutive steps of
sample application (a), washing and elution (b), and co-crystallization with MALDI matrix (c).
The dilute and salt-containing crude sample is applied at (a) onto a the 10 nL reversed-phase
column. The washing and elution/matrix solutions are applied via a common distribution
channel at (b), with the liquid volume deﬁned to 200 nL after activation of an overﬂow channel
(not shown). Co-crystallization of the concentrated and desalted sample with MALDI matrix
is taking place at (c) in a 200 × 400 µm target where the crystalline deposit is accessible to the
laser beam of the MALDI instrument as shown by photography of the crystals in the desorption
area at the outlet. (d) Gryolab MALDI SP1 CD.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(Figure 14.12). This system also allows for high sample throughput.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
383
14.5
Summary
Analytical methods in bio-MEMS have made great strides in the ﬁeld of
proteomics. These techniques are beginning to be used in combination to
create systems that are truly totally integrated. The future of bio-MEMS in
proteomics holds great promise. While many fabrication and protein-han-
dling techniques have been investigated, and novel advancements will only
continue as new doors are opened. While bio-MEMS is about integration
and miniaturization, mass spectrometers recently proved amenable for
FIGURE 14.12
(a) Sequential photographs of the ESI chip showing the array of microfabricated nanoelectro-
spray nozzles with successive enlargements of an individual nozzle. The ﬁnal scanning electron
micrograph (SEM) shows a single nanoelectrospray emitter with dimensions of 10 µm ID and
20 µm OD. (b) Schematic representation for a cross-section of a portion of an ESI chip. A
disposable pipette tip, containing sample, presses and seals against the inlet side of the chip
with the nanoelectrospray plume spraying toward the mass spectrometer ion oriﬁce entrance.
Nanoelectrospray is initiated by applying a head pressure and voltage to the sample in the
pipette tip.
ESI Chip
(a)
(b)
Disposable
pipette tip
Sample
Nozzle
Nanoelectrospray
plume
MS oriﬁce
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

384
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
miniaturization [105], and will become useful if portable systems are to
evolve. The goal in future proteomics applications is to make a migration
from laboratory settings into point-of-care applications and recent literature
only supports this movement [106].
References
[1] Jakeway, S.C., de Mello, A.J., and Russell, E.L., Miniaturized total analysis
systems for biological analysis. Fresenius J. Anal. Chem. 2000, 366, 525–539.
[2] Madou, M., Fundamentals of Microfabrication.  CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL (1997).
[3] Gad-el-Hak, M. The MEMS Handbook. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL (2002). 
[4] Figeys, D. and Pinto, D., Proteomics on a chip: Promising developments. Elec-
trophoresis 2001, 22, 208–216.
[5] Lion, N., Rohner, T.C., Dayon, L., Arnaud, I.L., Damoc, E., Youhnovski, N., Wu,
Z., Roussel, C., Josserand, J., Jensen, H., Rossier, J.S., Przybylski, M., and Gi-
rault, H.H., Microﬂuidic systems in proteomics. Electrophoresis 2003, 24,
3533–3562.
[6] Ziaie, B., Baldi, A., Gu, Y., and Siegel, R.A., Hard and soft micromachining for
Bio-MEMS: Review of techniques and examples of applications in microﬂuidics
and drug delivery. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2004, 56, 145–172.
[7] Becker, H. and Gartner, C., Microreplication technologies for polymer-based
µTAS applications, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oosterbroek, R.E. and Van Den Berg, A.,
Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  21–36 (2003).
[8] Gardeniers, J.G.E., Oosterbroek, R.E., and van den Berg, A., Silicon and glass
micromachining for µ-TAS, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oosterbroek, R.E. and Van Den
Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 37–64 (2003).
[9] Wilson, D.S. and Nock, S., Recent developments in protein microarray tech-
nology. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2003, 42, 494–500.
[10] Schwartz, A., Rossier, J.S., Roulet, N., Mermod, M.A., Roberts, H.H., and Gi-
rault, H.H., Micropatterning of biomolecules on polymer substrates. Langmuir
1998, 14, 5526–5531.
[11] Anderson, R.C., McGall, G., and Lipshutz, R.J., Polymucleotite arrays for ge-
netic sequence analysis, in Microsystem Technology in Chemistry and Life Sciences,
Manz, A. and Becker, H., Eds. Springer-Verlag, Germany,  117–129 (1999).
[12] Cooley, P., Wallace, D., and Antohe, B., Applications of ink-jet printing tech-
nology to Bio-MEMS and microﬂuidic systems. JALA 2002, 7, 33–39.
[13] Pawlack, M., Schick, E., Bopp, M.A., Schneider, M.J., Oroszlan, P., and Ehrat,
M., Zeptosens' protein microarrays: A novel high performance microarray
platform for low abundance protein analysis. Proteomics 2002, 2, 383–393.
[14] Zhao, X.M., Xia, Y.N., and Whitesides, G.M., Soft lithographic methods for
nano-fabrication. J. Mat Chem. 1997, 7, 1069–1074.
[15] Bernard, A., Delamarche, E., Schmid, H., Michel, B., Bosshard, H.R., and Bie-
buyck, H., Printing patterns of proteins. Langmuir 1998, 14, 2225–2229.
[16] Wadu-Mesthrige, K., Xu, S., Amro, N.A., and Liu, G., Fabrication and imaging
of nanometer-sized protein patterns. Langmuir 1999, 15, 8580–8583.
[17] Hoff, J.D., Cheng, L., Meyhofer, E., Guo, L.J., and Hunt, A.J., Nanoscale protein
patterning by imprint lithography. Nano Letters 2004, 4, 853–857.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
385
[18] Pellois, J.P., Zhao, X., Srivannavit, O., Zhou, T., Gulari, E., and Gao, X., Indi-
vidually addressable parallel peptide sythesis on microchips. Nature Biotech-
nology 2002, 20, 922–926.
[19] Lee, Y., Lee, E.K., Cho, Y.W., Matsui, T., Kang, I., Kim, T., and Han, M.H.,
ProteoChip: A highly sensitive protein microarray prepared by a novel method
of protein immobilization for application of protein-protein interaction studies.
Proteomics 2003, 3, 2289–2304.
[20] Cheng, S.B., Skinner, C.D., Taylor, J., Attiya, S., Lee, W.E., Picelli, G., and
Harrison, D.J., Development of a multichannel microﬂuidic analysis system
employing afﬁnity capillary electrophoresis for immunoassay. Analytical Chem-
istry 2001, 73, 1472–1479.
[21] Lee, S.J. and Lee, S.Y., Micro total analysis system (µ-TAS) in biotechnology.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2004, 64, 289–299.
[22] Khandurina, J. and Guttman, A., Bioanalysis in microﬂuidic devices. Journal of
Chromatography A 2002, 943, 159–183.
[23] Sato, K., Hibara, A., Tokeshi, M., Hisamoto, H., and Kitamori, T., Microchip-
based chemical and biochemical analysis systems. Advanced Drug Delivery Re-
views 2003, 55, 379–391.
[24] Vandaveer, W.R., Pasas-Farmer, S.A., Fishcer, D.J., Frankenfeld, C.N., and
Lunte, S.M., Recent developments in electrochemical detection for microchip
capillary electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2004, 25, 3528–3549.
[25] Weigl, B.H., Bardell, R.L., and Cabrera, C.R., Lab-on-a-chip for drug develop-
ment. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2003, 55, 349–377.
[26] Rossier, J.S., Reymond, F., and Michel, P.E., Polymer microﬂuidic chips for
electrochemical and biochemical analyses. Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 858–867.
[27] Sanders, G.H. and Manz, A., Chip-based microsystems for genomic and pro-
teomic analysis. Trends in Analytical Chemistry 2000, 19, 364–378.
[28] Wang, J. and Chatrathi, M.P., Microfabricated electrophoresis chip for bioassay
of renal markers. Analytical Chemistry 2003, 75, 525–529.
[29] Wang, J., Ibanez, A., and Chatrathi, M.P., On-chip integration of enzyme and
immunoassays: Simultaneous measurements of insulin and glucose. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 8444–8445.
[30] Sato, K., Yamanaka, M., Hagino, T., Tokeshi, M., Kimura, H., and Kitamori, T.,
Microchip-based enzyme-linked immonosorbent assay (microELISA) system
with thermal lens detection. Lab Chip 2004, 4, 570–575.
[31] Ko, J.S., Yoon, H.C., Yang, H., Pyo, H., Chung, K.H., Kim, S.J., and Kim, Y.T.,
A polymer-based microﬂuidic device for immonosensing biochips. Lab Chip
2003, 3, 106–113.
[32] Henzel, W.J., Billeci, T.M., Stults, J.T., Wong, S.C., Grimley, C., and Watanabe,
C., Identifying proteins from two-dimensional gels by molecular mass search-
ing of peptide fragments in protein sequence databases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 1993, 90, 5011–5015.
[33] Link, A.J., Eng, J., Schieltz, D.M., Carmack, E., Mize, G.J., Morris, D.R., Garvik,
B.M., and Yates, J.R.I., Direct analysis of protein complexes using mass spec-
trometry. Nature Biotech. 1999, 17, 676–682.
[34] Marko-Varga, G., Nilsson, J., and Laurell, T., Micro- and nanotechnology for
proteomics, in Proteome Analysis Interpreting the Genome, Speicher, D.W., Ed.,
Elsevier, Amsterdam,  327–365 (2004).
[35] Laurell, T. and Marko-Varga, G., Miniaturization is mandatory unravelling the
human proteome. Proteomics 2002, 2, 345–351.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

386
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[36] Shoji, S., Fluids for sensor systems, in Microsystem Technology in Chemistry and
Life Sciences, Manz, A. and Becker, H., Eds., Springer, Berlin,  163–188 (1999).
[37] Guzman, N.A., New directions for concentration sensitivity enhancement in
CE and microchip technology. LC-GC Europe 2001, 6, 1–9.
[38] Felton, M.J., CD simplicity. Analytical Chemistry 2003, 75, 302A–306A.
[39] Crabtree, H.J., Cheong, E.C., Tilroe, D.A., and Backhouse, C.J., Microchip in-
jection and separation anomalies due to pressure effects. Analytical Chemistry
2001, 73, 4079–4086.
[40] de Mello, A.J. and Beard, N., Lab Chip 2003, 3, 11N–19N.
[41] Dolnik, V., Liu, S., and Jovanovich, S., Capillary electrophoresis on microchip.
Electrophoresis 2000, 21, 41–54.
[42] Kutter, J., Current developments in electrophoretic and chromatographic sep-
aration methods on microfabricated devices. Trends in Analytical Chemistry 2000,
19, 352–363.
[43] Bruin, G.J.M., Recent developments in electrokinetically driven analysis on
microfabricated devices. Electrophoresis 2000, 21, 3931–3951.
[44] Effenhauser, C.S., Integrated chip-based microcolumn separation systems, in
Microsystem Technology in Chemistry and Life Sciences, Springer, Berlin,  51–82
(1999).
[45] Chang, H.T., Huang, Y.F., Chiou, S.H., Chiu, T.C., and Hsieh, M.M., Advanced
capillary and microchip electrophoretic techniques for proteomics. Current Pro-
teomics 2004, 1, 325–347.
[46] Binyamin, G., Boone, T.D., Lackritz, H.S., Ricco, A.J., Sassi, A.P., and Williams,
S.J., Plastic microﬂuidic devices: Electrokinetic manipulations, life science ap-
plications, and production technologies, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oosterbroek, R.E. and
Van Den Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  83–112 (2003).
[47] Khandurina, J. and Guttman, A., Microscale separation and analysis. Current
Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7, 595–602.
[48] Auroux, P.A., Iossiﬁdis, D., Reyes, D.R., and Manz, A., Micro total analysis
systems. 2. Analytica standard operations and applications. Analytical Chemistry
2002, 74, 2637–2652.
[49] Yager, P., Transverse diffusion in microﬂuidic systems, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oost-
erbroek, R. E. and Van Den Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  115–150 (2003).
[50] Bousse, L., Cohen, C., Nikiforov, T., Chow, A., Kopf-Sill, A.R., Dubrow, R., and
Parce, J.W., Electrokinetically controlled microﬂuidic analysis systems. Annu.
Rev. Biophys. Biomolec. Struct. 2000, 29, 155–181.
[51] Shintani, Y., Hirako, K., Motokawa, M., Iwano, T., Zhou, X., Takano, Y., Furuno,
M., Minakuchi, H., and Ueda, M., Development of miniaturized multi-channel
high performance liquid chromatography for high-throughput analysis. Journal
of Chromatography A 2005, 1073, 17–23.
[52] Guo, Y., Uchiyama, K., Nakagama, T., Shimosaka, T., and Hobo, T., An inte-
grated microﬂuidic device in polyester for electrophoretic analysis of amino
acids. Electrophoresis 2005, 1843–1848.
[53] Culbertson, C.T., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Microchip devices for high-
efﬁciency separations. Analytical Chemistry 2000, 72, 5814–5819.
[54] Molina, M. and Silva, M., Micellar electrokinetic chromatography: Current
developments and future. Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 3907–3921.
[55] Ramsey, J.D., Jacobson, S.C., Culbertson, C.T., and Ramsey, J.M., High-efﬁcien-
cy, two-dimensional separations of protein digests on microﬂuidic devices.
Analytical Chemistry 2003, 75, 3758–3764.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
387
[56] Ocvirk, G., Verpoorte, E., Manz, A., Grasserbauer, M., and Widmer, H.M., High
performance liquid chromatography partially integrated onto a silicon chip.
Anal. Methods Instrum. 1995, 2, 74–82.
[57] Yang, X., Zhang, X., Li, A., Zhu, S., and Huang, Y., Comprehensive two-dimen-
sional separations based on capillary high-performance liquid chromatography
and microchip electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2003, 24, 1451–1457.
[58] Reichmuth, D.S., Shepodd, T.J., and Kirby, B.J., Microchip HPLC of peptides
and proteins. Analytical Chemistry 2005, 77, 2997–3000.
[59] Righetti, P.G., Gelﬁ, C., Verzola, B., and Castelletti, L., The state of the art of
dynamic coatings. Electrophoresis 2001, 22, 603–611.
[60] Locascio, L.E., Henry, A.C., Johnson, T.J., and Ross, D., Surface chemistry in
polymer microﬂuidic systems, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oosterbroek, R.E. and Van Den
Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  65–82 (2003).
[61] Vreeland, W.N. and Barron, A.E., Functional materials for microscale genomic
and proteomic analyses. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2002, 13, 87–94.
[62] Wu, D., Luo, Y., Zhou, X., Dai, Z., and Lin, B., Multilayer poly(vinyl alcohol)-
adsorbed coating on poly(dimethylsiloxane) microﬂuidic chips for biopolymer
separation. Electrophoresis 2005, 26, 211–218.
[63] Lan, S., Veiseh, M., and Zhang, M., Surface modiﬁcation of silicon and gold-
patterned silicon surfaces for improved biocompatibility and cell patterning
selectivity. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2005, 20, 1697–1708.
[64] Nagata, H., Tabuchi, M., Hirano, K., and Baba, Y., High-speed separation of
proteins by microchip electrophoresis using a polyethylene glycol-coated plas-
tic chip with a sodium dodecyl sulfate-linear polyacrylamide solution. Electro-
phoresis 2005, 26, 2687–2691.
[65] Nagata, H., Tabuchi, M., Hirano, K., and Baba, Y., Microchip electrophoresis
protein separation using electroomotic ﬂow induces by dynamic sodium sul-
fate-coating of uncoated plastic chips. Electrophoresis 2005, 26, 2247–2253.
[66] Kutter, J., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Solid phase extraction on micro-
ﬂuidic devices. Journal of Microcolumn Separations 2000, 12, 93–97.
[67] van der Wijngaart, W., Anderson, H., and Stemme, G., Handling of beads in
microﬂuidic devices for biotech applications, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oosterbroek,
R.E. and Van Den Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  187–204 (2003).
[68] Pumera, M., Microchip-based electrochromatography: Designs and applica-
tions. Talanta 2005, 66, 1048–1062.
[69] Le Gac, S., Carlier, J., Camart, J.C., Cren-Olive, C., and Rolando, C., Monoliths
for microﬂuidic devices in proteomics. Journal of Chromatography B 2004, 808,
3–14.
[70] Huang, H., Xu, F., Dai, Z., and Lin, B., On-line isotachophoretic preconcentra-
tion and gel electrophoresis separation of sodium dodecyl sulfate-proteins on
a microchip. Electrophoresis 2005, 26, 2254–2260.
[71] Li, Y., DeVoe, D.L., and Lee, C.S., Dynamic analyte introduction and focusing
in plastic microﬂuidic devices for proteomic analysis. Electrophoresis 2003, 24,
193–199.
[72] Cui, H., Horiuchi, K., Dutta, P., and Ivory, C.F., Isoelectric focusing in a
poly(dimethylsiloxane) microﬂuidic chip. Analytical Chemistry 2005, 77,
1303–1309.
[73] Wang, Y.C., Stevens, A.L., and Han, J., Million-fold preconcentration of proteins
and peptides by nanoﬂuidic ﬁlter. Analytical Chemistry 2005, 77, 4293–4299.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

388
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[74] Wheeler, A.R., Moon, H., Bird, C.A., Ogorzalek Loo, R.R., Kim, C.J., Loo, J.A.,
and Garrell, R.L., Digital microﬂuidics with in-line sample puriﬁcation for
proteomics analyses with MALDI-MS. Analytical Chemistry 2005, 77, 534–540.
[75] Wheeler, A.R., Moon, H., Kim, C.J., Loo, J.A., and Garrell, R.L., Electrowetting-
based microﬂuidics for analysis of peptides and proteins by matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry 2004, 76,
4833–4838.
[76] Peterson, D.S., Rohr, R., Svec, F., and Frechet, J.M., Enzymatic microreaction
on-a-chip: protein mapping using trypsin immobilized on porous polymer
monoliths molded in channels of microﬂuidic devices, Analytical Chemistry
2002, 74, 4081.
[77] Slysz, G.W. and Schriemer, D.C., On-column digestion of proteins in aqueous-
organic solvents. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2003, 17, 1044.
[78] Arica, M.Y., Senel, S., Alaeddinoglu, N.G., Patir, S., and Denizli, A., Invertase
immobilized on spacer-arm attached poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate) mem-
brane: Preparation and properties. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2000, 75, 1685.
[79] Kerenkova, J. and Foret, F., Immobilized microﬂuidic enzymatic reactors. Elec-
trophoresis 2004, 25, 3550–3563.
[80] Gao, J., Xu, J.L., Locascio, L.E., and Lee, C.S., Integrated microﬂuidic system
enabling protein digestion, peptide separation, and protein identiﬁcation. An-
alytical Chemistry 2001, 73, 2648–2655.
[81] Rubina, A.Y., Dementieva, E.I., Stomakhin, A.A., Darii, E.L., Pan'kov, S.V., Bar-
sky, V.E., Ivanov, S.M., Konovalova, E.V., and Mirzabekov, A.D., Hydrogel-
based protein microchips: Manufacturing, properties, and applications. Bio-
Techniques 2003, 34, 1008–1022.
[82] Sakai-Kato, K., Kato, M., and Toyo'oka, T., Creation of an on-chip enzyme
reactor by encapsulating trypsin in sol-gel on a plastic microchip. Analytical
Chemistry 2003, 75, 388–393.
[83] Ekstrom, S., Onnerfjord, P., Nilsson, J., Bengtsson, M., Laurell, T., and Marko-
Varga, G., Integrated microanalytical technology enabling rapid and automated
protein identiﬁcation. Analytical Chemistry 2000, 72, 286–293.
[84] Laurell, T., Marko-Varga, G., Ekstrom, S., Bengtsson, M., and Nilsson, J., Mi-
croﬂuidic components for protein characterization. Reviews in Molecular Bio-
technology 2001, 82, 161–175.
[85] Wang, C., Oleschuk, R., Ouchen, F., Li, J., Thibault, P., and Harrison, D.J.,
Integration of immobilized trypsin bead beds for protein digestion within a
microﬂuidic chip incorporating capillary electrophoresis separations and an
electrospray mass spectrometry interface. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2000,
14, 1377–1383.
[86] Jin, L.J., Ferrance, J., Sanders, J.C., and Landers, J.P., A microchip-based proteolyt-
ic digestion system driven by electroosmotic pumping. Lab Chip 2003, 3, 11–18.
[87] Zimmermann, S., Fienbork, D., Flounders, A.W., and Liepmann, D., In-device
enzyme immobilization: Wafer-level fabrication of an integrated glucose sensor.
Sensors and Actuators B 2004, 99, 163–173.
[88] Slovakova, M., Minc, N., Bilkova, Z., Smadja, C., Faigle, W., Futterer, C., Tav-
erna, M., and Viovy, J.L., Use of self assembled magnetic beads for on-chip
protein digestion. Lab Chip 2005, 5, 935–942.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Bio-MEMS Devices for Proteomics
389
[89] Qu, H., Wang, H., Huang, Y., Zhong, W., Lu, H., Kong, J., Yang, P., and Liu, B.,
Stable microstructured network for protein patterning on a plastic microﬂuidic
channel: Strategy and characterization of on-chip enzyme microreactors. Ana-
lytical Chemistry 2004, 76, 6426–6433.
[90] Wu, H., Tian, Y., Liu, B., Lu, H., Wang, X., Zhai, J., Jin, H., Yang, P., Xu, Y., and
Wang, H., Titania and alumina sol-gel-derived microﬂuidics enzymatic-reac-
tors for peptide mapping: Design, characterization, and performance. Journal
of Proteome Research 2004, 3, 1201–1209.
[91] Harrison, D.J., Oleschuk, R.D., and Thibault, P., Microﬂuidic systems for anal-
ysis of the proteome with mass spectrometry, in Lab-on-a-Chip, Oosterbroek,
R.E. and Van Den Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  249–270 (2003).
[92] Laurell, T., Marko-Varga, G., and Nilsson, J., Interfacing µTAS to matrix assisted
laser desorption time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometryóMALDI-TOF-MS, inLab-on-
a-Chip, Oosterbroek, R.E. and Van Den Berg, A., Eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam,
271–284 (2003). 
[93] Limbach, P.A. and Meng, Z., Integrating micromachined devices with modern
mass spectrometry. Analyst 2002, 127, 693–700.
[94] Nice, E. and Catimel, B., Afﬁnity-based biosensors, microarrays and proteom-
ics, in Proteome Analysis Interpreting the Genome, Speicher, D.W., Ed., Elsevier,
Amsterdam,  243–285 (2004).
[95] Zhang, S. and Van Pelt, C.K., Chip-based nanoelectrospray mass spectrometry
for protein characterization. Expert Rev. Proteomics 2004, 1, 449–468.
[96] de Mello, A.J., Chip-MS: Coupling the large with the small. Lab Chip 2001, 1,
7N–12N.
[97] Oleschuk, R.D. and Harrison, D.J., Analytical microdevices for mass spectrom-
etry. Trends in Analytical Chemistry 2000, 19, 379–388.
[98] Brivio, M., Fokkens, R.H., Verboom, W., and Reinhoudt, D.N., Integrated mi-
croﬂuidic system enabling (bio)chemical reaction with on-line MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry 2002, 74, 3972–3976.
[99] Gustafsson, M., Hirschberg, D., Palmberg, C., Jornvall, H., and Bergman, T.,
Integrated sample preparation and MALDI mass spectrometry on a microﬂu-
idic compact disk. Analytical Chemistry 2004, 76, 345–350.
[100] Hirschberg, D., Jagerbrink, T., Samskog, J., Gustafsson, M., Stahlberg, M., Alve-
lius, G., Husman, B., Carlquist, M., Jornvall, H., and Bergman, T., Detection of
phosphorylated peptides in proteomic analyses using microﬂuidic compact
disk technology. Analytical Chemistry 2004, 76, 5864–5871.
[101] Zhang, B., Foret, F., and Karger, B.L., High-throughput microfabricated CE/
ESI-MS: Automated Sampling from a MicroWell Plate. Analytical Chemistry
2001, 2675–2681.
[102] Zhang, S., Van Pelt, C.K., and Henion, J.D., Automated chip-based nanoelec-
trospray-mass spectrometry for rapid identiﬁcation of proteins separated by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2003, 24, 3620–3632.
[103] Yin, H., Killeen, K., Brennen, R., Sobek, D., Werlich, M., and van de Goor, T., Mi-
croﬂuidic chip for peptide analysis with an integrated HPLC column, sample en-
richment column, and nanoelectrospray tip. Analytical Chemistry 2005, 77, 527–533.
[104] Fortier, M.H., Bonneil, E., Goodley, P., and Thibault, P., Integrated microﬂuidic
device for mass spectrometry-based proteomics and its application to biomar-
ker discovery programs. Analytical Chemistry 2005, 77, 1631–1640.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

390
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
[105] English, R.D. and Cotter, R.J., A miniaturized matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization time of ﬂight mass spectrometer with mass-correlated acceleration
focusing. Journal of Mass Spectrometry 2003, 38, 296–304.
[106] Inganas, M., Derand, H., Eckersten, A., Honerud, A.K., Jensen, G., Thorsen, G.,
Soderman, T., and Anderson, P., Integrated microﬂuidic compact disc device
with potential use in both centralized and point-of-care laboratory settings.
Clinical Chemistry 2005, 51, 1985–1987.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

391
15
Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses 
Using Microﬂuidic Devices
Malgorzata A. Witek, Mateusz L. Hupert, and Steven A. Soper
CONTENTS
15.1
Introduction.............................................................................................. 391
15.1.1
What Is a Cell? .......................................................................... 391
15.1.2
The Molecular Makeup of Cells............................................. 394
15.1.3
Single-Molecule Analysis ........................................................ 395
15.1.4
Why Analyze Single Cells or Single Molecules?................. 397
15.2
Single-Cell Analysis Using Microﬂuidic Devices .............................. 398
15.2.1
Cell Sorting and Capture......................................................... 399
15.2.2
Cell Lysis .................................................................................... 402
15.2.3
Cellular Physiology and Signaling ........................................ 405
15.2.4
Molecular Analysis of Cells .................................................... 412
15.2.5
Organelle Manipulation in Microﬂuidics ............................. 419
15.3
Single-Molecule Detection in Microﬂuidic Devices .......................... 422
15.3.1
DNA Fragment Sizing.............................................................. 423
15.3.2
Sequencing of Single DNA Molecules .................................. 427
15.3.3
Other SMD Bioassays On-Chip.............................................. 428
15.3.4
Submicrometer-Sized Fluidic Channels................................ 430
15.3.5
Selection of the Right Substrate Material for SMD............. 433
15.4
Concluding Remarks .............................................................................. 435
References ............................................................................................. 435
15.1
Introduction
15.1.1
What Is a Cell?
The cell is the fundamental structural and functional unit of all living organ-
isms, with organisms consisting of a single cell such as bacteria, or many
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

392
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
cells such as humans, which possess nearly 1014 cells. Cells typically function
as independently operating machines providing a large heterogeneity in cell
characteristics, even for a group of cells that are localized to a speciﬁc organ
or tissue within a multicellular organism. However, cells do share several
common capabilities such as:
•
Reproduction by cell division.
•
Metabolism, including taking in raw materials, building cell compo-
nents, converting energy and molecules, and releasing by-products.
The functioning of a cell depends upon its ability to extract and use
chemical energy stored in organic molecules. This energy is derived
from metabolic pathways.
•
Synthesis of proteins, the functional workhorses of cells, such as
enzymes. A typical mammalian cell contains up to 10,000 different
proteins.
•
Response to external and internal stimuli, such as changes in tem-
perature, pH, or nutrient levels.
One way to classify cells is whether they live alone or in groups. Organisms
vary from single cells (called single-celled or unicellular organisms), which
function and survive more or less independently, through colonial forms with
cells living together, to multicellular forms in which cells are specialized. There
are 220 types of cells and tissues that make up the multicellular human body.
Cells can also be classiﬁed into two categories based on their internal structure.
•
Prokaryotic cells are structurally simple. They are found only in sin-
gle-celled and colonial organisms. In the three-domain system of
scientiﬁc classiﬁcation, prokaryotic cells are placed in the domains
Archaea and Eubacteria.
•
Eukaryotic cells have organelles with their own membranes. Single-
celled eukaryotic organisms such as amoebae and some fungi are
very diverse, but many colonial and multicellular forms such as
plants, animals, and brown algae also exist.
Cells are comprised of components called organelles, which perform cer-
tain functions in this operating machine. The organizational structure and
the important organelles comprising a typical eukaryotic animal cell are
which serves to separate and protect the cell from its surrounding environ-
ment and is composed primarily of a double layer of lipids and proteins.
Embedded within this membrane are a variety of other molecules that act
as channels and pumps, moving different molecules into and out of the cell. 
There is an additional membrane contained within most cells called the
nuclear membrane, which forms the cell nucleus and contains the genetic mate-
rial of the cell. Two different kinds of genetic material exist: deoxyribonucleic
shown in Figure 15.1. A eukaryotic cell is surrounded by a plasma membrane,
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
393
acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Most organisms use DNA for their
long-term information storage, while the RNA is used for information trans-
port (e.g., mRNA). Transcription is the process by which genomic DNA is
used to build mRNA molecules to carry instructional information to the
ribosomes for protein production. A human cell has genetic material in the
nucleus (the nuclear genome) and the mitochondria (the mitochondrial
genome). The nuclear genome is divided into 46 linear DNA molecules called
chromosomes. The mitochondrial genome consists of circular DNA mole-
cules that are separate from the nuclear DNA.
The ribosome is a large complex composed of many molecules, including
RNAs and proteins, and is responsible for processing the genetic instructions
carried by an mRNA. The process of converting an mRNA’s genetic code
into the exact sequence of amino acids that make up a protein is called
translation. Protein synthesis is extremely important to all cells, and therefore
a large number of ribosomes—sometimes hundreds or even thousands—can
be found throughout a cell.
Mitochondria are self-replicating organelles that occur in various numbers,
shapes, and sizes in the cytoplasm of all eukaryotic cells. As mentioned
earlier, mitochondria contain their own genome, which is separate and dis-
tinct from the nuclear genome of a cell. Mitochondria play a critical role in
generating energy in the eukaryotic cell, and this process involves a number
of complex metabolic pathways.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the transport network for molecules
targeted for certain modiﬁcations and speciﬁc destinations as compared to
molecules that roam freely within the cytoplasm. The ER has two forms: the
FIGURE 15.1
Schematic of a typical animal cell showing subcellular components. Organelles: (1) nucleolus,
(2) nucleus, (3) ribosome, (4) vesicle, (5) rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER), (6) Golgi apparatus,
(7) cytoskeleton, (8) smooth ER, (9) mitochondria, (10) vacuole, (11) cytoplasm, (12) lysosome,
(13) centrioles.
9
8
10
13
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

394
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
rough ER, which has ribosomes on its surface, and the smooth ER, which
lacks them. Translation of the mRNA for those proteins that will either stay
in the ER or be exported from the cell occurs at the ribosomes attached to the
rough ER. The smooth ER is important in lipid synthesis, detoxiﬁcation, and
as a calcium reservoir. The Golgi apparatus, sometimes called a Golgi body
or Golgi complex, is the central delivery system for the cell and is a site for
protein processing, packaging, and transport. Both organelles consist largely
of heavily folded membranes.
Lysosomes and peroxisomes are often referred to as the garbage disposal
system of a cell. Both organelles are somewhat spherical, bound by a single
membrane, and rich in digestive enzymes—naturally occurring proteins that
speed up biochemical processes. For example, lysosomes can contain more
than three dozen enzymes for degrading proteins, nucleic acids, and certain
sugars called polysaccharides.
15.1.2
The Molecular Makeup of Cells
Cells are comprised of a variety of different types of molecules, such as
proteins, peptides, amino acids, DNAs, RNAs, lipids, carbohydrates, and so
on. These molecules perform diverse functions within the cell machinery
and the presence, absence, structural modiﬁcation, amount, or location of
certain molecules within the cell provides the unique signature or identity
of that cell. An example of how a unique cell signature can have signiﬁcant
consequences on the functional state of an organism is evident in cancer.
Cancer develops due to a variety of different mutagenic changes that occur
in a cell’s genome, providing unregulated cell growth in many cases (neo-
plasm). However, a solid tumor contains a highly heterogeneous collection
of neoplastic cells that can originate from a single cancer cell. The heteroge-
neity within the tumor results from the stochastic cascading mutational
events that occur within each cell of the solid mass during tumorigenesis. 
The amount (i.e., copy number) of cellular molecules varies considerably
and depends on the type of molecule and the size of the cell. For example,
most eukaryotic cells contain only two copies of genomic DNA within their
nucleus, while the copy number of mRNAs can vary from several to tens of
thousands with the exact number dependent on the activity of the gene for
which it codes. In addition, there is usually one unique mRNA molecule for
each gene that is transcribed, and thus a single cell may contain more than
5000 different mRNA molecules. The number of different proteins found
within a single cell varies considerably as well, with a common estimate
being somewhere in the neighborhood of 10,000. In addition, the copy num-
ber of each protein found within the cell can vary tremendously.
There are a variety of different types of cells, all containing unique struc-
tural and morphological features. Several different types of cells and their
sizes are listed in Table 15.1.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
395
Cells can be considered ultrasmall-volume containers that possess mole-
cules with a diverse range of concentrations as noted above. For example,
genomic DNA is found in eukaryotic cells at 2 molecules per cell, and for a
human lymphocyte, this represents a concentration of 19.3 pM (pM = 10–12
M). However, for a protein that is modestly expressed (approximately
250,000 copies per cell), the concentration of that protein within the same
cell would be 2.14 µM (µM = 10–6 M).
The conclusion that can be drawn from these simple calculations is that
the concentration of most molecules found within a single cell is relatively
high and easily analyzed by most readout modalities, such as laser-induced
ﬂuorescence or amperometric detection. However, because many readout or
detection strategies are concentration sensitive, dilution of the intracellular
contents following cell lysis must be minimized to aid in detection. The use
of microsystems for single-cell analysis is particularly attractive because the
reaction and processing chambers in these systems are on the same volume
scale as that of a single cell. In addition, the closed architecture of most
microﬂuidic systems, and the fact that several processing steps can be inte-
grated into a single system, minimizes sample loss and contamination.
15.1.3
Single-Molecule Analysis
As noted previously, the content of a single cell can vary tremendously, from
two copies of a molecule (genomic DNA) to tens of thousands of molecules
(mRNA or proteins). Therefore, in many cases when embarking upon the
mission of analyzing single cells, it may be necessary to design the system
with the capability to detect single molecules as well. In the case of genomic
DNA, there are strategies that can be used to amplify the target material (i.e.,
DNA) using such techniques as the polymerase chain reaction, rolling circle
ampliﬁcation, or strand displacement ampliﬁcation. While these ampliﬁca-
tion strategies are attractive for building the copy number of DNA that can
be read from the assay, they do have some limitations in terms of their
implementation. For example, providing quantitative information is some-
what tenuous when using thermal ampliﬁcation techniques due to the lim-
ited dynamic range associated with these techniques. In addition, there are
TABLE 15.1
The Physical Dimensions and Volumes of Different Types of Cells
Long Dimensions (µµµµm)
Volume (fL)
Mammalian neuron
4–150
—
Lymphocyte
13–16
172–204
Erythrocyte
8–14
53–87
E. coli
0.7–1.5
0.5–1.5
Cancer cell
20–30
4,200–14,100
Source: Hogan, B.L. and Yeung, E.S. (1993). TrAC, Trends in Analytical Chemistry 12(1):
4–9.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

396
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
parts of the genome that are difﬁcult to amplify, such as highly repetitive
regions or regions rich in guanines and cytosine residues. The ampliﬁcation
step would require an additional functional component to be integrated into
the system, complicating packaging and assembly of the system. And ﬁnally,
some molecules that are to be analyzed from a single cell do not lend them-
selves to ampliﬁcation, such as proteins, peptides, or amino acids. 
Therefore, it is necessary to consider the possibility of reading out the
results of a single-cell assay using single-molecule detection. Single-molecule
detection is affected by interrogating the signature of a single molecule when
it is resident within the sampling volume. To delineate some of the under-
lying principles associated with single-molecule detection, we will use laser-
induced ﬂuorescence readout as an example. During the single molecule’s
residence within the sampling volume, which in this case is deﬁned by the
confocal volume produced by a focused Gaussian laser beam, the molecule
is continuously cycled between the ground electronic state and an upper
electronic state with relaxation producing a ﬂuorescent photon. This cycling
process generates a burst of photons (Mathies et al. 1990), with the number
of photons per molecule (nf) approximately equal to;
(15.1)
where Qf is the ﬂuorescence quantum yield, Qd is the photodestruction quan-
tum yield, τ and k are dimensionless parameters equal to τt/τd (τt = molecular
residence time in excitation volume; τd = photobleaching lifetime of the
molecule), and ka/kf (ka = absorption rate of the single molecule; kf = ﬂuores-
cence emission rate of molecule), respectively. As can be seen from Equation
15.1, molecules with high ﬂuorescence quantum yields that are photochem-
ically stable produce large numbers of ﬂuorescent photons. In addition, nf
can be increased by increasing the residence time of the molecule within the
sampling volume to a point in time where photobleaching occurs, at which
time photon emission ceases.
In any analytical measurement, one is interested in the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), which provides a criterion by which the analytical signal of interest
is statistically greater than the noise in the measurement. For single-molecule
detection, the noise is typically comprised of scattering (Raman, Rayleigh,
specular), autoﬂuorescence from the sample matrix and shot noise from the
detection and processing electronics. In most cases, single-molecule measure-
ments are performed with threshold levels used to provide an acceptable
level of conﬁdence that the event scored arises from a single molecule and
not from the background (false positive). However, lowering the level of
false positives typically provides higher levels of false negatives. To assess
the validity of the data and to assure that the scored events are those arising
from single molecules and not multiple molecules resident within the sam-
pling volume, one can use the following equations (Soper et al. 1993):
n
Q
Q
e
f
f
k
k
f
= 



−


−
+
1
1
τ(
)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
397
(15.2)
(15.3)
Equation 15.2 represents the probability (Po) of a single molecule occupying
the probe volume, and is typically adjusted to less than 0.1 to minimize the
probability of double occupancy (C = molecular concentration, molar; Dv is
the size of the probe volume in liters; NA is Avogadro’s number). Nev is the
number of events expected during a typical experimental run and can be
used as a diagnostic to assess the degree of false negatives incurred in an
experimental run (v is the linear sample velocity, cm/s; T is the duration of
the experiment, s; and ωo is the laser beam waist, cm).
15.1.4
Why Analyze Single Cells or Single Molecules?
Most biological samples represent a high degree of heterogeneity and as
such, making a bulk measurement over many targets, whether they are cells
or molecules, will yield an ensemble average of the entire sampling domain.
Therefore, ﬁne structure in the heterogeneous sample is lost due to this
ensemble averaging phenomenon. Single-cell or single-molecule measure-
ments eliminate such artifacts, and thus can provide ﬁne detail from mixed
population samples. Additionally, single-entity measurements produce the
ability to study rare events. For example, micrometastasis is typically asso-
ciated with breast cancer, in which tumor cells are released into circulating
blood prior to full-stage metastasis. It is not uncommon to ﬁnd 1 to 10 cells
per milliliter of whole blood with the red blood cell count exceeding 107. The
detection of these rare cells can be used as an effective early diagnostic for
breast cancer (Baker Megan et al. 2003; Husebekk et al. 1988; Kahn Harriette
et al. 2004). Another diagnostic example is detecting genetic disorders in
embryos at the 6- to 10-cell embryonic developmental stage, in which only
1 to 2 cells can be biopsied for DNA analysis without permanently damaging
the embryo.
In the case of single-molecule detection, practical examples of where this
can be of importance is in developing biological assays that seek to minimize
the number of processing steps required to elicit a response, which can
provide near real-time readout and simplify assay processing. DNA frag-
ment sizing following restriction enzyme digestion can be used to score
potential mutation sites at speciﬁc locations (restriction fragment length
polymorphism [RFLP]). This assay typically requires a gel electrophoresis
step to sort (by size) the restriction fragments that are generated. Using
single-molecule detection, the electrophoresis step can be completely elim-
inated (Ambrose et al. 1993; Foquet et al. 2002; Habbersett et al. 2004).
Another example is the detection of mutations in certain gene fragments
P
CD N
o
v
A
=
N
P vT
ev
o
o
= 2
πω
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

398
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
following PCR ampliﬁcation of the prerequisite gene fragments. The use of
single-molecule detection can completely eliminate the need for PCR, reduc-
ing assay cost and development time (Wabuyele et al. 2003). From a micro-
systems point of view, single-molecule detection capabilities eliminate the
need for fabricating devices that carry out these ampliﬁcation processes,
simplifying the operation of the system and improving manufacturing suc-
cess rates.
In this chapter, we will provide some practical examples of using micro-
systems for analyzing both single cells and single molecules. Special empha-
sis will be placed on the fabrication of devices and systems capable of
detecting single molecules and analyzing single cells as well as substrate
material considerations of the microsystem and its effects on single-molecule
and single-cell analyses.
15.2
Single-Cell Analysis Using Microﬂuidic Devices
Each biological cell is self-contained and self-maintaining: it takes in nutri-
ents, converts them into energy, carries out specialized functions, reproduces,
and dies. Each cell stores its own set of information for performing each of
these activities. The study of cells, what is in them, on them, around them,
how they eat, sleep, grow, die, complete tasks, and work by stimulating,
inﬂuencing, inhibiting and destroying each other is called cellomics. Under-
standing the molecular biology of cells is an active area of research that is
fundamental to all of the basic sciences, agriculture, biotechnology, and
medicine. Detailed knowledge of the cell biology, cell metabolic processes
and pathways, and genetic and proteomic makeup can contribute to the
development of new methodologies and drug therapies for prevention or
treatment of many disorders and diseases. The stakes involved in single-cell
analysis are of great signiﬁcance, and not surprisingly, the development of
single-cell analysis tools has become the focus of signiﬁcant efforts in the
bio-MEMS arena. Well-founded techniques, such as capillary electrophoresis
and ﬂow cytometry, have both demonstrated valuable and effective abilities
to manipulate large numbers of cells (with few exceptions where single-cell
handling was demonstrated) and have rather limited capability to manipu-
late and analyze single biological cells. A disadvantage of currently available
cell screening techniques is their low throughput capabilities, making it
difﬁcult to obtain data for large cell populations.
New methodologies and rapid developments in micro- and nanofabrica-
tion technologies are creating new opportunities for single-cell analysis.
There are a number of reasons microﬂuidic devices and systems are partic-
ularly attractive for performing cellomics (Andersson et al. 2003, 2004): (1)
micromechanical devices are capable of manipulating single objects with
cellular dimensions, (2) the size of cells ﬁts very well with that of commonly
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
399
used ﬂuidic devices (10 to 100 µm), (3) the ability to integrate standard
operations into the microﬂuidic system, (4) heat and mass transfer charac-
teristics that are very fast in microﬂuidic systems. The unique ability of
microﬂuidic devices to integrate sample manipulation and processing oper-
ations with separations and analyte detection allows for the efﬁcient auto-
mation and high-throughput capabilities of chemical analyses. Microdevices
possess several advantages over conventional chemical and biochemical
analysis instrumentation, including (1) the ability to perform fast separations
with no losses in separation efﬁciency, (2) lower reagent and sample con-
sumption, and (3) the ability to fabricate many parallel systems on the same
device making it a convenient platform for single-cell assays with high-
throughput capabilities.
Cell studies utilizing microﬂuidic systems have focused thus far on cytom-
etry (Andersson et al. 2003; Andersson et al. 2004; Beebe 2000; Chan et al.
2003; Chin Vicki et al. 2004; Erickson and Li 2004; Eyal and Quake 2002;
Palkova et al. 2004; Sohn et al. 2000; Wu et al. 2004), sorting (Andersson et
al. 2003; Emmelkamp et al. 2004; Fu et al. 2002; Fu et al. 1999; Kruger et al.
2002; Lu et al. 2004a; Rao et al. 2004; Sia et al. 2003), cell lysis (Chaiyasut et
al. 2002; Dhawan et al. 2002; Gao et al. 2004; Hellmich et al. 2005; Heo et al.
2003; Huang et al. 2003; Lee and Tai 1999; McClain et al. 2003; Waters et al.
1998; Wheeler et al. 2003), followed by extraction (Hong et al. 2004), and
separation and analysis of intracellular components (Ocvirk et al. 2004).
Microfabrication technology has also enabled the engineering of cell culture
environments. Recent microﬂuidic work has demonstrated successful cultur-
ing of biological cells on chips (Balagadde et al. 2005; Chung et al. 2005; Futai
et al. 2006; Gu et al. 2004; Hung et al. 2004; Rhee et al. 2005; Shackman et al.
2005; Tourovskaia et al. 2005). These studies addressed certain aspects of cell
culture control, including nutrient mass transport and modulation of culture
conditions. The ultimate goal, however, is single-cell analyses that can be
helpful where culturing processes are difﬁcult (i.e., unculturable microbes,
viruses), or when one deals with developing organisms or primary cells.
15.2.1
Cell Sorting and Capture
Cell separation and recognition techniques are fundamental in cell biology.
The ability to effectively isolate and recognize single cells from a heteroge-
neous population is a limiting factor in many sorting technologies. Sohn et
al. (2000) developed a capacitance cytometry technique that allows recogni-
tion of single cells based on their internal properties. This technique allows
probing the polarization response of different biological materials present in
a cell. DNA, for example, is a highly charged molecule and when placed in
an applied low-frequency AC electric ﬁeld has a substantial polarization
response. Unlike a Coulter counter, which measures the displaced volume,
capacitance cytometry measures the response of the polarization of a cell as
it passes through an electric ﬁeld. Sohn et al. observed a linear relationship
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

400
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
between the DNA content of eukaryotic cells and the change in capacitance
value that was evoked by the passage of individual cells across a 1 kHz 250
mV rms electric ﬁeld (Figure 15.2c). The developed microﬂuidic cytometer
was used to quantify the DNA content of eukaryotic cells and to analyze the
cell-cycle kinetics of populations of cells. A comparison with standard ﬂow
cytometry demonstrated high sensitivity of the method, which was achieved
by the use of shallow poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) channels (30 µm depth
and 30 µm width), grounding and shielding the device, and precisely con-
trolling the temperature. Gold electrodes were fabricated photolithographi-
cally onto the glass and were 50 µm wide. The interelectrode spacing was
30 µm and the noise magnitude observed was 0.1 to 2 fF. A schematic of the
device is presented in Figures 15.2a and b. In contrast to a standard laser
ﬂow cytometer, this method required no special sample preparation, such
as cell staining.
FIGURE 15.2
Schematic illustration of the integrated microﬂuidic device. (a) Top view shows the entire
device, including electrode conﬁguration, inlet and outlet holes for ﬂuid, and the PDMS
microﬂuidic channel. The electrodes are made of gold and are 50 µm wide. The distance, d,
separating the electrodes is 30 µm. The width of the PDMS microﬂuidic channel is also d, the
length, L, is 5 mm, and the height, h, is either 30 µm or 40 µm. (b) Side view along the vertical
axis of the device shows a detailed view of ﬂuid delivery. Fluid delivery is accomplished with
a syringe pump at rates ranging from 1 to 300 µl/hr. (c) Change in capacitance CT vs. DNA
content of mouse SP2/0, yeast, avian, and mammalian red blood cells. As shown, there is a
linear relationship between CT and DNA content at 1 kHz frequency. ○–Data taken with a
device whose channel height was 30 µm; –data taken with a device whose channel height
was 40 µm. The 40 µm data were scaled by the ratio of the CT values obtained for mouse SP2/
0 cells measured with 30 µm– and 40 µm–high channel devices. All data were obtained at
T = 10°C and in PBS solution. (Reprinted with permission from Sohn, L.L., Saleh, O.A., Facer,
G.R., Beavis, A.J., Allan, R.S., and Notterman, D.A. (2000). Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 97(20): 10687–10690. © 2000, The National Academy
of Science of the USA.)
L
d
PDMS
microﬂuidic
channel
Substrate
Inlet
Outlet
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
∆CT (fF)
Mouse SP2/0 G2
Mouse SP2/0 G1
Rat-1 Fibroblast G2
Rat-1 Fibroblast G1
Human Leukocyte
Avian RBC
Yeast G2
Yeast G1
Mammalian RBC
DNA Content (pg)
h
Fluid in
Electrode
Fluid out
PDMS Channel
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
401
Microﬂuidic devices are being designed in ways that allow the investiga-
tion of single-cell phenomena rather than batch culture. Numerous methods
are being or have been already developed for the immobilization of partic-
ular types of cells in microﬂuidics (Braschler et al. 2005; Toriello et al. 2005).
Among the various immobilization or cell capture methods, several include:
(1) chemical surface modiﬁcations with microcontact printing, (2) laser trap-
ping, and (3) dielectrophoretic or electromagnetic trapping.
A PDMS and glass microchip that performed direct capture and chemical
activation of surface-modiﬁed single cells has been presented by Toriello et
al. (2005). The cell capture system was comprised of gold electrodes micro-
fabricated on a glass substrate (Figure 15.3a). The cell capturing mechanism
involved a labeling of the cell surface with thiol functional groups (using
RGD endogenous receptors) and the utilization of spontaneous adsorption
of thiol-containing species onto gold surfaces. The off-chip incubation in
RGD peptide resulted in approximately 5 × 106 thiol groups per cell. The
labeled cells were electrophoretically transported to electrodes and captured
on gold surfaces. Once captured, the single cells were activated with an
agonist to a membrane-bound receptor, and the response was monitored
optically with a ﬂuorescent probe. Multiple cell types were sequentially and
FIGURE 15.3
(a) Schematic of the glass-PDMS microdevice for single cell capture. A cell suspension enters
the 200 µm–wide PDMS channel through the 0.5 mm–diameter ﬂuidic port. Cells ﬂow over the
PDMA derivitized glass surface in the 32 µm–deep channel and are captured on the 16 µm2
exposed gold pads centered on the 40 µm–wide gold electrodes. Cells are directed to the desired
electrode by applying a 50 V/cm electric ﬁeld between the interdigitated electrodes (200 µm
spacing). Inset: electron micrograph of an electrode showing the three exposed gold pads on
the oxide-coated electrode. Bar, 30 µm. (b) Sequential directed capture of two populations of
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. The ﬁrst population of thiolated K1 cells, labeled with
CellTracker Blue, is captured by applying a 50 V/cm potential to the even-numbered electrodes
for 10 min. (c) A second population of thiolated K1 cells, labeled with Cell Tracker Green, is
introduced into the channel through the opposite ﬂuidic port and ﬁeld-mediated binding occurs
selectively at the odd-numbered electrodes. Bar 40 µm. (Reprinted with permission from Tori-
ello, N.M., Douglas, E.S., and Mathies, R.A. (2005). Analytical Chemistry 77(21): 6935–6941.
© 2005, American Chemical Society.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fluidic port
Electrode
contact pad
Glass
SiO2
Exposed gold
Initial capture
A
After E reversal
B
1 +
1 −
2 −
2 +
3 +
3 −
4 −
4 +
−
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

402
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
selectively captured on neighboring electrodes by changing the ﬁeld direc-
pad rows having a single cell captured) was optimized by variations in the
duration of the applied ﬁeld, which was 63 ± 9% (n = 30) for 10 min and
was 90 ± 5% for a 60 min incubation. The use of cell surface thiolation
presents several advantages; (1) it relies on the robust and strong gold–thiol
bond; (2) it leaves the gold electrodes in their native state, which is useful
for sensor applications, and (3) the cell modiﬁcation approach provides
superior adhesion with electrical measurement ﬂexibility. 
15.2.2
Cell Lysis
Typical laboratory protocols for cell lysis include the use of enzymes
(lysozyme), chemical agents such as detergents (Chaiyasut et al. 2002; Dorre
et al. 1997), mechanical forces such as sonication and bead milling (Belgrader
et al. 1999; Belgrader et al. 2000; Taylor et al. 2001), and thermal and laser
methods (Dhawan et al. 2002; He et al. 2001; Ivanov 1999; Sims et al. 1998).
Some of these methods have been successfully implemented into microﬂu-
idic formats. For example, an integrated monolithic microchip was fabricated
using electrokinetic ﬂuid actuation and thermal cycling to accomplish lysis
of Escherichia coli and the subsequent ampliﬁcation of the released DNA
(Waters et al. 1998).
In a similar electrokinetic device, the controlled manipulation of red blood
cells (RBCs) throughout a channel network and chemical lysis of the cells
was demonstrated (Dorre et al. 1997). A continuous ﬂow device for rapid
RBC lysis and leukocytes isolation from whole blood was also developed by
Toner et al. (2005). RBCs lysis was performed on a PDMS chip using a NH4Cl-
based lysing buffer (Toner and Irimia 2005). The advantage of chemical lysis
on chip is reduced diffusion time, which allows for fairly short lysing times
of 30 s, as opposed to 10 to 20 min for benchtop formats. 
 The use of microﬂuidic glass chips for continuous single-cell lysis and
detection of β-Galactosidase (β-Gal) content was described by Ocvirk et al.
(2004). Cells were transported toward a Y-shaped mixing junction, at which
imately 100 and 40 mm/s were used under protein denaturing (35 mM
sodium dodecylsulfate [SDS]), and nondenaturing (0.1% Triton X-100) con-
ditions. Complete and reproducible lysis of individual cells on-chip occurred
within 30 s using Triton X-100 and 2 s when using SDS. Fluorescence peaks,
due to the enzymatic product of the reaction of β–Gal with ﬂuorescein mono-
β-D-galactopyranoside (FMG), were detected downstream of the mixing.
Unincubated cells were mixed on-chip with both FDG and Triton X-100 with
each individual cell generating ﬂuorescence downstream of the mixing point,
which was detected within 2 min of mixing. In contrast, viable cells incubated
with FDG required 1 h or more in order to generate signiﬁcant signals.
tion (Figures 15.3b and c). The capture efﬁciency (deﬁned as the electrode
point lytic agents were introduced (Figure 15.4). Flow velocities of approx-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
403
Another way to disassemble the cell membrane to provide access to the
cell's interior is through the use of an electric ﬁeld. Lysis of cells in an electric
ﬁeld is due to the dielectric breakdown of the membrane as the transmem-
brane voltage reaches a certain magnitude. In mammalian cells, membrane
breakdown leading to pore formation usually begins at a transmembrane
voltage of 0.2 to 1.5 V, depending on the buffer concentration and the cell
type and size (Tsong 1991). As the transmembrane voltage increases, pores
and irreversible holes in the membrane are formed, which cause cell rupture.
In designing microﬂuidic devices for cell lysis, the electrode geometry is very
important. The degree of electroporation/lysis of a cell depends on the
interelectrode distance when the absolute voltage and pulse duration are
constant. The greater the inter-electrode distance, the slower the process of
cell lysis. The goal is to utilize an electrode geometry that leads to the fastest
formation of irreversible pores at the lowest interelectrode voltage. 
Ramsey’s group (McClain et al. 2003) implemented electrical lysis into a
microﬂuidic device for the high-throughput chemical analysis of Jurkat cells.
Cells loaded with dyes were hydrodynamically transported from the cell-
containing reservoir to a region on the microﬂuidic device where they were
focused and rapidly lysed using an electric ﬁeld. The hydrolyzed, ﬂuorescent
dyes in the cell were injected into a separation channel on the device and
The total separation time was 2.2 s with absolute migration time repro-
ducibilities of less than 1% and efﬁciencies ranging from 2300 to 4000 theo-
retical plates. Cell analysis rates of 7 to 12 cells/min were demonstrated,
which were signiﬁcantly faster than those reported for standard bench-scale
capillary electrophoresis.
FIGURE 15.4
Scheme of on-chip lysing and on-chip incubation of HL-60 cell with substrate. Substrate and
lysing agents were in ports A–C. Cells were placed in port D and suction applied at port E,
causing mixing of cells and lytic solution containing enzyme substrate at the intersection. A
ﬂuorescence detector was located downstream of the mixing point, and an observation micro-
scope sat over the intersection. (Reprinted with permission from Ocvirk, G., Salimi-Moosavi,
H., Szarka, R.J., Arriaga, E.A., Andersson, P.E., Smith, R., Dovichi, N.J. and Harrison, D.J. (2004).
Proceedings of the IEEE 92(1): 115–125. © 2004, IEEE.)
CELLS
Substrate +
lysing agent
Cells
Pump
A
D
C
D
E
Fluorescence detection
Cell lysing
Lysing agent
Substrate
Unincubated
viable cells
On-chip
cell lysate
∆tincubate
∆tlysing
detected 3 mm downstream of the injection point (Figure 15.5). 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

404
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
 Complete electrical lysis was demonstrated in less than 33 ms using an
AC electric ﬁeld with a DC offset to lower the joule heating and provide
sufﬁcient ﬁeld strength for lysis. Fields of 0.45 kV/cm peak-to-peak square
waves (75 Hz) were used with a 0.68 kV/cm DC offset and a 50% duty cycle.
an individual Jurkat cell loaded with Calcein AM. In Figure 15.6a, the Jurkat
cell appeared close to one side of the main channel due to the ﬂow from the
focusing and emulsiﬁcation channel. In Figure 15.6b, the cell entered the
lysis intersection, encountered the electric ﬁeld, and was lysed. The ﬂuores-
cent dyes in the cytosol moved electrophoretically down the channel toward
the anode. Spatially separated bands from two dyes could be seen in the
third image (Figure 15.6c). Figure 15.6d shows the separation of Oregon
green and carboxyﬂuorescein compounds from eight interrogated cells.
These devices should make it feasible to analyze large cell populations.
Another example of a device for single-cell interrogation was introduced
by Khine et al. (2005). A PDMS device was designed ﬁrst to selectively immo-
bilize, and second to locally electroporate cells. The cell suspension was
introduced into the device with a syringe and controlled manually to allow
cell trapping by applying negative pressure on the trapping channel. When
trapped, a cell was pulled laterally into a smaller channel, which acted as a
high-resistance component in the ﬂuidic circuit. The localized electroporation
occurring across the membrane of the cell inside the channel, which is
inversely proportional to its surface area, hence the localized electroporation
FIGURE 15.5
(a) Image of microchip used for cell analysis experiments. (b) Schematic of the emulsiﬁcation
and lysis intersections for the microchip design shown in (a). The solid arrows show the
direction of bulk ﬂuid ﬂow and the dashed arrow shows the electrophoretic migration direction
of the labeled components in the cell lysate. (Reprinted with permission from McClain, M.A.,
Culbertson, C.T., Jacobson, S.C., Allbritton, N.L., Sims, C.E., and Ramsey, J.M. (2003). Analytical
Chemistry 75(21): 5646–5655. © 2003, American Chemical Society.)
Emulsiﬁer 
Emulsiﬁcation 
/focusing 
Waste 
(syringe 
pump) 
Emulsiﬁcation 
intersection 
Cells 
µrp
130 µm
+
Buﬀer 
Waste 
Separation
channel
V 
V 
t 
Lysis 
intersection 
Buﬀer 
Cell 
Separation
channel
−
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.6 shows a time series of CCD images demonstrating the lysis of
was achieved when cells were sequestered in the PDMS channels (Figures
15.7a and b). The electric ﬁeld was focused with the greatest potential drop
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
405
was achieved at relatively low voltages (approximately 0.75 V/cm). The
effectiveness of the device was demonstrated by electroporating HeLa cells.
Additionally, the average transmembrane poration potential of these cells
has been determined to be 0.51 ± 0.13 V. The required ﬁeld was maintained
by measuring characteristic increases in the current that corresponded to a
drop in the cell resistance and microscopically by recording either the escape
of cytoplasmic dye Calcein AM or the entrance of Trypan blue stain. Time-
Trypan blue moving into the cell. The data also provided evidence of the
occurrence of cell resealing after the ﬁrst sequence of the applied ﬁeld.
15.2.3
Cellular Physiology and Signaling
Studies of cellular physiology require maintaining cells in a life-supporting
environment while measurements are made on them. Such studies are typ-
ically performed on a laboratory bench, with cells suspended in a physio-
logical medium while immobilized in a macroscale perfusion system.
Microfabricated ﬂuidic systems offer the potential to develop experimental
stations that incorporate multiparameter measurements on cells that are
viable (Shackman et al. 2005). Shackman et al. reported on a microﬂuidic
device that perfused cells and monitored the insulin secretion from single
FIGURE 15.6
CCD images of cell lysis. (a) The Jurkat cell loaded with Calcein AM (within white oval) is
being hydrodynamically transported to the lysis intersection. The cell image is distorted because
the integration (exposure) time of the CCD camera was long compared to the cell velocity. The
arrows depict the direction of ﬂuid ﬂow in the channels. The faint line and spots above the cell
are the result of pixel blooming during readout in the frame-transfer mode of the camera. (b)
The cell has encountered the electric ﬁeld and been lysed. The ﬂuorescently labeled contents
are injected into the separation channel and migrate toward the anode. The arrow depicts the
direction of lysate migration in the channel. (c) The separation of two of the ﬂuorescently labeled
components (marked by asterisks) in the separation channel is seen. (d) Electrophoretic sepa-
ration of cytosolic dyes released from individual cells. This is a 40s segment of a 2 min run.
The peak envelopes from eight cells are shown and are demarcated by the thick black horizontal
lines and labeled 1 through 8. (Reprinted with permission from McClain, M.A., Culbertson,
C.T., Jacobson, S.C., Allbritton, N.L., Sims, C.E., and Ramsey, J.M. (2003). Analytical Chemistry
75(21): 5646–5655. © 2003, American Chemical Society.)
−
−
+
+
#
−
+
∗
∗
130 µm
80
90
100
110
120
Relative migration times (s)
1   2
3
6
4   5
7    8
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
lapsed images of electroporation are shown in Figure 15.7d and consist of
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

406
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
islets of Langerhans. Islets are 75 to 200 mm–diameter spheroid microorgans
located in the pancreas, which contain endocrine cells. Most islet cells secrete
insulin as part of the glucose homeostasis mechanism. Upon exposure to
glucose, an initial burst of insulin is released followed by a lower rate oscilla-
tory release. This process is of interest because weakened secretion is associated
with type II diabetes and drugs that treat diabetes target this process (Shack-
man et al. 2005). The assay on a chip allowed the quantitative monitoring of
insulin secretion in a highly automated fashion. The results were comparable
to those of the ofﬂine method utilizing ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay). The micromethod also allowed longer cell survival and rapid change
of solutions contacting the cells as compared to the macroscale version. The
FIGURE 15.7
The layout of the chip and cell. (a) The two wide inlet channels on the left and right are used
for cell input and output. An electrode is connected to one of these main channels. The other
electrode is connected to the small channel where the cell is trapped. (b) A schematic of the
cross-section of the chip. When trapped, a cell is pulled laterally into the small trapping channel
by applying a negative pressure. The trapped cell acts as a high resistance component in the
circuit. (c) An image showing the cell trapped in the channel. The cell extends into the channel
leaving a tail-like structure in the channel. Because of its viscoelastic nature, the cell retains its
shape after the negative pressure is removed. (d) Time-lapsed video of Trypan blue entering
the cell. The cell is trapped in a channel when the pulse sequence is applied. After the pulse
sequence application, the cell turns distinctly blue as the dye diffuses through the electropores
and concentrates inside the cell. It can be observed that the blue dye ﬁrst appears in the cell at
the region within the channel, and gradually migrates throughout the cell. (Reprinted with
permission from Khine, M., Lau, A., Ionescu-Zanetti, C., Seo, J., and Lee, L.P. (2005). Lab on a
Chip 5(1): 38–43. © 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)
200 µm
PDMS 
PDMS 
Trapping Channel 
Cell 
Conductive 
Media 
Ag/AgCl electrode 
a
d
b
c
V 
4 µm
First pulse sequence applied 
Time between frames = 5s 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
407
technique could be amenable to studies involving other tissues or cells that
release chemicals. The detection method (i.e., optical, electrochemical) could
be customized for the particular analyte of interest.
Another cellular metabolite, lactate, was assayed in a microﬂuidic format.
Lactate is the ﬁnal product of glycolysis and is one of the most important
cellular metabolites. It is produced in small concentrations during aerobic
respiration and in larger concentrations during cell death. Measurements of
its concentration provide information on the complex timeline of metabolic
changes. Cai et al. (2002) presented ultra-low-volume, real-time measurements
of lactate from single heart cells utilizing amperometric detection. The rod-
shaped myocyte cell membrane integrity was compromised by permeabiliza-
tion with saponin, which caused immediate cell contracture (Figure 15.8). 
Lactate was released from the cell immediately after the addition of saponin.
Dynamic electrochemical measurements of lactate during cell permeabilization
FIGURE 15.8
Healthy “dormant” rod-shaped myocyte being permeabilized with saponin. Upon addition of
the saponin (at 8 s to 80 g/mL), the myocyte shortened and rounded up. Images from 50 s
onward are shown (those from 0 to 50 s are identical). Observation of the cell within the chamber
showed that lactate was released immediately when saponin was added to the cell. (Reprinted
with permission from Shackman, J.G., Dahlgren, G.M., Peters, J.L., and Kennedy, R.T. (2005).
Lab on a Chip 5(1): 56–63. © 2005 The Royal Society of Chemistry.)
50 s
60 s
65 s
70 s
80 s
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

408
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
found that the lactate content after metabolic inhibition was three times that
in the healthy cell. The method provided a generic assay to make single-cell
sensing in picoliter volumes.
The detection of lactate was optimized using an enzyme-linked assay with
lactate oxidase involving amperometric detection of H2O2 at +0.64 V versus
a Ag/AgCl reference electrode, according to Equations 15.4 and 15.5.
L-lactate + O2 → pyruvate + H2O2
(15.4)
H2O2 → O2 + 2H+ + 2e-
(15.5)
A two-electrode microamperometric system was developed based on a
platinized working microelectrode and an integrated Ag/AgCl electrode
serving as a counter and reference electrode. The platinized microelectrode
possessed a very large surface area, which increased the signal-to-back-
ground ratio and improved the detection limits. Also, this working electrode
is highly catalytic with a reduced overpotential for the oxidation of hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2). The entire device consisted of an electrochemical sensor
and a dispensation technology capable of delivering small volumes (6.5 pL),
and single cells into a microelectrochemical cell.
There is tremendous interest in understanding not only how cells react to
environmental stimuli, but also how they receive and process signals. Cel-
lular signal transduction has been found to be important in multiple phys-
iological functions, including their role in the immune system, neural activity,
and proper organ development. Molecular-level communication between
adjacent cells is essential for proper functioning of living tissue. It has been
noted for years that membrane contact with neighboring cells can cause
changes in morphology, gene expression, and growth. Impaired cell–cell
communication has been implicated in numerous diseases, and is correlated
with most forms of cancer (Lee et al. 2005). Lee et al. (2005) fabricated a
device to study cell–cell communication between neighboring cells. The
developed microﬂuidic device consisted of a module that selectively trapped
cell pairs followed by optical characterization. Microﬂuidic devices were
intended to trap individual cells within one cell diameter of an adjacent cell
by 20 µm on opposite sides of a microﬂuidic channel. The cell line used
averaged 12 µm in diameter, and hence the channel was wide enough to
allow cells to ﬂow through unhindered and yet narrow enough to allow
membrane contact when the cell pairs were trapped across from each other.
The cell-trapping design consisted of two different heights of channels
molded in PDMS. The cell trapping array had four ﬂuidic ports connected
to control valves. The west and east ports were used for the ﬂow of cells into
the device and the north and south ports controlled the corresponding row
of cell-trapping sites. Independent control of the two trapping ports (north
and south) allowed trapping of one cell.
(Figure 15.9). A single pair of trapping sites was designed to be separated
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
409
Device operation was veriﬁed by observation of dye transfer between
mouse ﬁbroblasts placed in membrane contact. The intracellular ﬂuorescent
dye was permeable through cell–cell junctions and was used to study dye
transfer. After ﬂuorescent and nonﬂuorescent cell pairs were selectively
trapped, the device was placed in a standard cell culture incubator to pro-
mote dye diffusion. Dye transfer was observed for incubation times between
were not in contact.
The objective of much research is to measure and understand cellular
signaling in order to explain the complex relationships between intracellular
pathways leading to, for example, cell death. Apoptotic cell death dynamics
of HL60 cells studied using a microﬂuidic cell trap device were presented
by Valero et al. (2005). The term apoptosis deﬁnes a genetically encoded cell
death program, which is morphologically, biochemically, and molecularly
distinct from necrosis. Apoptosis is a kinetic event and the entire duration
of it, from onset to total disintegration of the cell, is relatively short. The
various inducers of apoptosis start the process by activation of intracellular
cysteine-aspartic acid proteases (i.e., caspases). These enzymes participate in
a series of reactions that are triggered in response to pro-apoptotic signals
and result in the cleavage of protein substrates, causing the disassembly of
FIGURE 15.9
A layout of microﬂuidic cell-trapping device. (a) Microscope image of the arrayed device. The
four inlets are referred to as north, south, west, and east according to the depicted layout for
clarity. Cells are ﬂowed through the main channel from west to east. Trapping is controlled by
altering ﬂuid ﬂow using valves connected to the four outlets. (b) The trapping design allows
two independently controlled sets of channels for localizing different cell populations either to
the north or south trapping sites. (c) Three-dimensional schematic view depicting channel
geometry, trapped cells, and cell ﬂow. (Reprinted with permission from Lee, P.J., Hung, P.J.,
Shaw, R., Jan, L., and Lee, L.P. (2005). Applied Physics Letters 86(22): 223902/223901–223902/
223903. © 2005, American Institute of Physics.)
“North” trapping port
“South” trapping port
Cells Out
“east”
Cells In
“west”
300 µm
50 µm
2 µm
20 µm
(a)
(c)
(b)
3 and 16 h for cells in membrane contact (Figure 15.10), but not for cells that
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

410
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
the cell. The process of their activation is considered to be the key event of
apoptosis and is studied as a target for drug discovery. Suppression or
enhancement of apoptosis is known to cause or contribute to many diseases,
such as cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and AIDS (Valero et al. 2005).
Valero et al. 2005 fabricated a microﬂuidic cell trap device for analysis of
apoptosis. The microﬂuidic silicon-glass chip enabled the immobilization of
cells and real-time monitoring of the apoptotic process. The device consisted
trapping microstructures were located in the vicinity of this crossway acting
as a ﬁlter; buffer ﬂew through the trap while the cells were captured. The
cell-trapping structures varied in terms of shape, size, and the number of
trapping sites. Figures 15.11b and c show photographs of two different trap-
ping layouts. The layout shown in Figure 15.11b contains traps that differ in
size. The diameters of the capturing sites varied between 8 µm and 12 µm
and openings between traps were of 3 µm. The second layout in Figure 15.11c
shows a mechanical trap with identical trap diameters (10 µm) and no exit
channels between them. Figure 15.11d shows a SEM of the trapping sites
designed in the ﬁrst layout.
Cells were interrogated with different apoptosis-inducing factors, either
electric or chemical, followed by the exposure of treated cells to the appro-
priate ﬂuorescent dyes, FLICA™ and propidium iodide (PI). This allowed
discrimination between viable, apoptotic, and necrotic cells. For example,
FLICA is a reagent that measures apoptosis via detection of caspase activity.
It is a cell-permeable, noncytotoxic peptide reagent, called ﬂourochrome
inhibitor of caspase, that binds active caspases within cells. When added to
a population of cells, the probe enters the cell and covalently binds to a
reactive cysteine residue on the subunit of the target active caspase, thereby
inhibiting further enzymatic activity. Unbound reagent diffuses out of the
cell. The remaining ﬂuorescent signal is a direct measure of the number of
active caspase enzymes present in the cell at the time the reagent is added.
FIGURE 15.10
Diffusion of intracellular dye between ﬁbroblasts in membrane contact. The north cell in both
cell pairs was initially labeled with calcein AM, while the south cell was not. When the two
trapped cells were not in membrane contact (left), no dye transfer occurred. When membrane
contact was present (right), ﬂuorescent dye was able to transfer to the adjacent cell within 16
h. Phase contrast and ﬂuorescence images are depicted for the same ﬁeld of view. Reprinted
with permission from Lee, P.J., Hung, P.J., Shaw, R., Jan, L., and Lee, L.P. (2005). Applied Physics
Letters 86(22): 223902/223901–223902/223903. © 2005, American Institute of Physics.)
20 µm
3 hours
16 hours
3 hours
16 hours
No membrane contact
Membrane contact
of two channels joined together in a crossway (Figure 15.11a). The cell-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
411
Propidium iodide (PI) binds to DNA by intercalating between the bases with
little or no sequence preference and with a stoichiometry of one dye per 4.5
base pairs of DNA. PI is a membrane-impermeable dye and generally is
excluded from viable cells. PI is commonly used for identifying dead cells
with open membranes. HL60 cells incubated with different factors transi-
tioned from viable to early apoptotic and eventually to late apoptotic during
FIGURE 15.11
(a) Drawing of the microﬂuidic chip with dimensions in mm. Photographs of the trapping sites,
(b) layout 1 and (c) layout 2, in the microﬂuidic chip design. (d) SEM picture of the trapping
sites (close-up) for layout 1. (Reprinted with permission from Valero, A., Merino, F., Wolbers,
F., Luttge, R., Vermes, I., Andersson, H., and van den Berg, A. (2005). Lab on a Chip 5(1): 49–55.
© 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)
20
12
10
5
0.2
0.8
R1
R2
R3
R4
(a)
8 µm
3 µm
12 µm
200 µm
Central
Channel
(b)
(c)
3 µm
10 µm
200 µm
2.5 kV
×600
20 µm
19 19 SE I
Cell trap sites 
(d)
the course of the cell death cascade (Figure 15.12).
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

412
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
15.2.4
Molecular Analysis of Cells
Conventional benchtop approaches for the molecular analysis of cells typi-
cally starts with thousands to millions of cells from which sufﬁcient molec-
ular material is harvested (i.e., DNA, proteins) to enable a successful analysis.
However, individual cells isolated from a speciﬁc location and contained
within a large population pool may possess unique genomes due to their
response to external stimuli resulting in unique expression proﬁles produced
by the individual cell imposing upon it a distinct phenotype. Thus, the
isolation of genetic material from single cells is of great interest. The ability
to analyze cells (mutational content, identiﬁcation, etc.) via signature
sequences elucidated from their genomic DNA (gDNA) or mRNA requires
the ability to effectively recover or purify the DNA and RNA from the whole
cell lysate. Following cell lysis, it is often necessary to remove cellular debris,
proteins and other intracellular components that may potentially interfere
with subsequent bioenzymatic reactions. Hong et al. (2004) recently
described a pneumatic microsystem for DNA and RNA isolation from a
single mammalian cell. All processes (i.e., cell isolation, cell lysis, DNA or
mRNA puriﬁcation, and recovery) were performed on a single microﬂuidic
chip in nanoliter volumes.
 The process for mRNA puriﬁcation consisted of stacking an afﬁnity col-
umn with oligo-dT polymer magnetic beads, isolating the cells of interest,
measuring and mixing reagents, lysing cells, ﬂushing lysate over the afﬁnity
cessing took place in a linear fashion; valves and cross-junctions were used
to load different segments of a channel with reagents. Opening the valve
between the lysis buffer and the cell chamber allowed diffusive mixing and
FIGURE 15.12
PI uptake in HL60 cells sitting at the trap due to the high electric ﬁeld line density. (a) Fluo-
rescence image at the time the HL60 cells arrive at the trap. (b) Light microscopy image of the
cells 10 s after EOF control was stopped. (c) Fluorescence image from image (b). Reprinted with
permission from Valero, A., Merino, F., Wolbers, F., Luttge, R., Vermes, I., Andersson, H., and
van den Berg, A. (2005). Lab on a Chip 5(1): 49–55. © 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
column, and recovering mRNA from the column (Figure 15.13). Batch pro-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
413
cell lysis. Reverse transcription and ampliﬁcation (RT-PCR) were carried out
directly on the beads. Gel electrophoresis of the RT-PCR products revealed
that for high abundant actin mRNA, detection was down to the single-cell
level, while for the moderately abundant type of mRNA (only zinc ﬁnger
[OZF]) detection was at the level of 2 to 10 cells.
One of the strong attributes of microﬂuidic devices is the ability to integrate
standard operations onto a single device. An example of such integration
can be found in work by Wu et al. (2004). A microﬂuidic chip for analyzing
the chemical contents of a single cell was designed to accomplish four dif-
ferent functions: (i) cell handling, (ii) metering and delivering of chemical
reagents, (iii) cell lysis with derivatization, and (iv) separation of labeled
compounds and detection by laser-induced ﬂuorescence (LIF). All of these
functions were accomplished using a device equipped with two three-state
valves and a picopipette. The valves prevented diffusion or pumping of
reagents from the chamber, which allowed sufﬁcient time for the derivati-
zation reaction to reach completion. 
Three-way valves were constructed by multilayer soft lithography. Their per-
formance depended upon the elastomeric property of poly(dimethylsiloxane)
FIGURE 15.13
mRNA puriﬁcation chip. (a) Layout of the microﬂuidic chip. The blue lines represent the 100
µm–wide ﬂuidic channels, the red lines are the 100 µm–wide valve actuation channels. The
ﬂuidic ports are named; the actuation ports are numbered 1 to 11. The lysing buffer chamber
is composed of the channel space delineated by valves 1, 2, 3 and 4. The cell chamber is composed
of the channel space delineated by valves 4, 5, 6 and 7 (see also b and c). The bead chamber is
composed of the channel space delineated by valves 7, 8, 9 and 10 (see also b). (b) Photograph
of the in situ afﬁnity column construction. A column of 2.8 µm–diameter paramagnetic beads
covered with oligo dT is being built against a partially closed microﬂuidic valve (valve 8). Scale
bar, 200 µm. (c) One cell is loaded in the cell chamber before the lysis step. (The channels are
100 µm wide). Scale bar, 100 µm. (Reprinted with permission from Hong, J.W., Studer, V., Hang,
G., Anderson, W.F., and Quake, S.R. (2004). Nature Biotechnology 22(4): 435–439. © 2004, Nature
Publishing Group.)
3
2
4
5
6
1
7
8
9
10
11
Output
Lysing
buﬀer
out
Lysing
buﬀer in
Buﬀer
trapping
???
??
Buﬀer
 in
Cells
 in
Cell
 out
Air
 in
+
+
+
+
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

414
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
(PDMS). The upper layer contained a closed chamber that was connected to
an external pressure controller; the lower layer contained the microﬂuidic
network. Between the layers was a thin elastomeric membrane that deformed
under pressure to close the ﬂuidic channel. The three stages of valve oper-
ation were: (1) when no pressure is applied, the PDMS membrane does not
deform and the ﬂuidic channel is open; (2) when slight pressure is applied,
FIGURE 15.14
Three-state valve and picopipette. (a) Schematic illustration of three-state valve (top view and
cross-section). Channels on the upper layer (light shade) are ﬁlled with water and connected to
an external pressure controller; channels of the lower layer (dark shade) are the microﬂuidic
channels with smoothly curved surfaces. The pressure from the upper channel deforms the
membrane between the layers and controls the opening and closing of the lower channel. (b) A
simpliﬁed diagram of a three-state valve. (c) Schematic of the three states of this valve. (d) Scheme
of the function of a picopipette. (Reprinted with permission from Wu, H., Wheeler, A., and Zare
Richard, N. (2004). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
101(35): 12809–12813. © 2004, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA.)
Top view
Cross-section
along dashed
line
To external
pressure controler
PDMS
(a)
d
(b)
×
×
×
Valve fully open
Valve half open
Valve fully closed
(c)
Liquid in
Air in
(d)
L
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
415
the membrane starts to deform and the left horizontal channel is blocked, but
the side channel remains open to the right horizontal channel; and (3) when
more pressure is applied, the side channel is also blocked and no ﬂow takes
achieved by injection of the liquid from an inlet channel by pressure, with the
three-state valve closed (Figure 15.14d). Because PDMS is permeable to air,
liquid is pushed toward the closed valve; as air is displaced through the PDMS,
the chamber between the inlet and the valve is ﬁlled with ﬂuid. Injecting air
from the inlet forces most of the liquid from the channel and traps a small
volume of liquid that can be loaded through the three-state valve into a reaction
chamber. The volume of the remaining liquid is accurately deﬁned by the
channel dimensions and the distance from the inlet to the valve. This method
can accurately deliver picoliter amounts of liquid. Although fast evaporation
of water makes it difﬁcult to meter lower volumes accurately with an air–water
interface, it might be possible to meter aqueous solutions with subpicoliter
volume by using oil as the second ﬂuid to prevent evaporation.
A reaction volume of approximately 70 pL was used for the lysis and
derivatization of the contents of a single Jurkat cell, which limited the dilu-
tion of the contents of the single cell. The total analysis time of one cell (cell
injection, ﬂuorescence derivatization, and separation) was 1 h. An electro-
pherogram of amino acids from single cells was recorded and compared
with those collected from a multiple-cell homogenate. Differences in the
separation traces between the single-cell and multicell samples were
assumed to be from insoluble single-cell debris, as this sample was not
ﬁltered, whereas it was ﬁltered in the case of the large cell population. 
(Wheeler et al. 2003) developed a microﬂuidic device constructed from
PDMS for the analysis of single cells designed for two functions: (1) rapid
isolation of an individual cell from a mixture of cells in bulk solution, and
(2) precise delivery of minute volumes of reagents to the selected cell.
FIGURE 15.14 (continued)
Three-state valve and picopipette. (e) Pictures of a three-state valve that is connected to a
picopipette. (Reprinted with permission from Wu, H., Wheeler, A., and Zare Richard, N. (2004).
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101(35): 12809–12813.
© 2004, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA.)
Valve fully open
Valve half open
Valve fully closed
(e)
place through the valve (Figure 15.14a). The operation of the picopipette is
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

416
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Isolating individual cells from bulk solution was achieved by utilizing ﬂuid
dynamics in microﬂuidics. The behavior of ﬂuids at the microscale differs
from the macroscale. In microﬂuidics, the surface tension, energy dissipation,
and ﬂuidic resistance start to dominate and the ﬂuid ﬂow thus exhibits a
number of characteristic features, the most important of which is laminar
ﬂow. Fluids ﬂowing in channels with dimensions on the order of micrometers
and at ﬂow speeds of 1 mm/s are characterized by low Reynolds numbers
(Re). The Re is usually much less than 100, and oftentimes less than 1.0 in
microscale channels. In this Reynolds number regime, ﬂow is completely
laminar and no turbulence occurs.
To increase the efﬁciency of capture in ﬂows that are dominated by laminar
ﬂow, cells were hydrodynamically focused between two buffer streams.
Additional side inlet channels delivered reagents directly to a docked cell
for cell viability assays and measurements of calcium ﬂuxes at the level of
single cells. The reagent delivery system utilized PDMS pumps and valves
that were actuated with a manifold of three-way pneumatic switch valves.
The manifold was controlled by compressed nitrogen or helium applied to
the device (approximately 20 psi). Two channels were positioned to the left
shield buffer; the channel farther from the dock delivered reagents. By actu-
ating pumps and valves such that the contents of both channels were ﬂowing
by the dock, reagents were loaded within a few micrometers from the cell
(Figure 15.15c, main). If the shield buffer valve was closed, the reagent could
perfuse over the cell (Figure 15.15c, inset). The microﬂuidic network enabled
the passive separation of a single cell from a bulk cell suspension, and
integrated valves and pumps allowed the delivery of nL (10–9 L) volumes of
reagents to the cell. Various applications of this system were demonstrated,
including cell viability assays and measurements of intracellular Ca+2 ﬂux. 
Microﬂuidic devices play a key role in handling small quantities of mate-
rial, delivering those materials to different locations within the device, and
controlling the movement of cells within the channels. Microﬂuidic devices
have found numerous applications in biology, biochemistry, and medicine
because of their ability to efﬁciently control and replicate microenviron-
ments. They also offer practical beneﬁts, such as limiting human exposure
to large amounts of hazardous samples (Shelby et al. 2003). The ability to
fabricate micrometer-sized features in glass, silicon, and polymers makes
these materials attractive options for making capillary-sized structures.
Many of these devices are integrated into far-reaching formats with the
ability to control physical parameters such as ﬂow rate, temperature, and
pressure. Microsystems can closely mimic in vivo environments, and can be
helpful in characterizing biological cell surface area, volume, deformability,
and so forth.
For instance, Shelby et al. (2003) developed a microﬂuidic for observations
and characterization of Plasmodium falciparum–infected erythrocytes (i.e., red
blood cells [RBCs]). Normal erythrocytes are highly deformable cells, and
they owe their high degree of ﬂexibility to low internal viscosity, high sur-
of the cell dock (Figure 15.15c). The channel close to the dock delivered a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
417
face-area-to-volume ratio, and the highly elastic nature of the membrane and
cytoskeleton (Shelby et al. 2003). When invaded by Plasmodium falciparum,
RBCs become rigid, which causes occlusions of capillaries and symptoms of
malaria. Plasmodium falciparum, a parasitic protozoan, has been implicated
in causing the most lethal form of human malaria. After the parasites enter
the body by a mosquito bite, they disappear from circulating blood within
an hour and gather in the liver. After several days, infected RBCs emerge
from the liver and infect other RBCs. Severe malaria is potentially fatal, and
FIGURE 15.15
Single-cell analysis device. (a) Schematic of device: ﬂuidic channels are dark; control channels
are light. R1 through R5 are reactant inlets, SB and FB are shield and focusing buffer inlets,
respectively. Valves are actuated by applying pressure to control inlets V1 through V8. Pumps
are activated by actuating P1 through P3 or P4 through P6 in series. The serpentine regions of
reagent and shield buffer channels diminish ﬂow pulsing resulting from pump activation. Inset:
close-up of cell trapping region. Cells are pushed by hydrostatic pressure from cell inlet to
waste; they are focused to the center of the stream by the focusing buffer. Note the point of
stagnation formed at *. (b) CCD image of an individual Jurkat T-cell trapped in cell dock. Note
the drain channels (arrows) on the dock. (c) Images of “load” (main) and “perfuse” (inset)
states. In the load state, reagents (R) and shield buffer (SB) are both pumped over the dock. In
the perfuse state, the shield buffer valve is closed, and the reagents ﬂow onto the dock. (d)
Oscilloscope screen capture of dye-marked solution change during a switch from load to
perfuse. A complete solution change is achieved in approximately 100 ms. (Reprinted with
permission from Wheeler, A.R., Throndset, W.R., Whelan, R.J., Leach, A.M., Zare, R.N., Liao,
Y.H., Farrell, K., Manger, I.D., and Daridon, A. (2003). Analytical Chemistry 75(14): 3581–3586.
© 2003, American Chemical Society.)
P1 P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
V1
V2
V3 V4 V5
V6 V7 V8
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
SB
Cells
FB
Waste
−
−
−
−
(a)
50 µm
(b)
R
SB
(c)
Fluorescence intensity
(arb. units)
Time (ms)
130 ms
(d)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

418
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
frequently unresponsive to even the most aggressive treatments. There are
two distinct stages of P. falciparum erythrocytic stage asexual develop-
ment—trophozoite and schizont.
Shelby et al. (2003) developed a microﬂuidic device for observation and
in vitro modeling of cell deformability. The authors demonstrated the unique
abilities of elastomeric PDMS microchannels to characterize complex behav-
iors of the cells of interest (Figure 15.16). Microchannels were fabricated to
mimic capillaries between 2 and 8 µm in diameter. The average ﬂow velocity
in the channel constriction modeled the ﬂow rates in capillaries (100 to 500
µm/s). Channels ranging in width between 2 and 8 µm were readily tra-
versed by the 8 µm–wide, highly elastic, uninfected RBCs, as well as by
infected cells. Trophozoite stages failed to freely traverse 2 to 4 µm channels.
However, some emerged with morphological deformations. Heavily infected
RBCs failed to traverse 6 µm channels and rapidly formed a capillary block-
age. Uninfected RBCs, though, readily squeezed through the blockages of a
6 µm capillary. The individual erythrocytes in the trophozoite stage of infec-
tion (Figure 15.16b) and in the late schizont stages of infection after being
hydrodynamically forced through a 4 µm channel are shown in Figure 15.16c.
It was observed that the trophozoites recovered their spherical appearance
within approximately 30 s, however, the schizonts did not fully recover their
FIGURE 15.16
(a) Schematic illustrating the geometry of the microchannel. The constricted segment of the
channel (width denoted by w) was sized at 8, 6, 4, and 2 µm. The white arrow represents the
direction of ﬂuid ﬂow. (Upper inset) A differential interference contrast image of normal
(smooth) and infected RBCs. (Lower left inset) A normal RBC passing through a 2 µm constric-
tion. (Lower right inset) Infected RBCs blocking a 6 µm constriction. (b–c) Differences in
recovery of compressed infected cells; (b) Early trophozoite stages of infected RBCs were
partially distorted after passage through a 4 µm constriction and remained compressed for 30
sec after emerging from the channels. (c) Schizont forms of RBC infections were more severely
deformed and did not relax back to their original shape after passage through a 4 µm constriction
even 1 to 2 min after compression. (Reprinted with permission from Shelby, J.P., White, J.,
Ganesan, K., Rathod, P.K., and Chiu, D.T. (2003). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 100(25): 14618–14622. © 2003, The National Academy of Sciences
of the USA.)
w
5 µm
5 µm
(b)
10 µm
(c)
(a)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
419
spherical shape even after 1 to 2 min. It was concluded that both the RBC’s
membrane rigidity and internal viscosity increase as the parasite matures;
therefore, erythrocytes in the later stages of infection have longer recovery
times than cells in the early stages of infection. Such devices can thus be
used to screen antimalarial drugs or agents that can reverse the biomechan-
ical effects of malaria parasites on RBCs.
15.2.5
Organelle Manipulation in Microﬂuidics
A typical single organelle may range in size from tens of nanometers to a
couple of micrometers with a corresponding volume of approximately 6 × 10–20
L for a 50 nm synaptic vesicle to approximately 8 × 10–15 L for a 2 µm mito-
chondrion (Chiu 2003). Within a volume of 6 × 10–20 L, even at a relatively high
concentration of 100 mM, the number of molecules present is only approxi-
mately 3600. At this small scale, most proteins would be present as a single
copy or only as a few copies. Therefore, the analysis of subcellular compart-
ments necessitates an approach that is both highly sensitive and capable of
isolating each organelle and then analyzing the various components of the
organelle for characterization and quantitation (Lu et al. 2004a). 
Lu et al. (2004a) reported a microfabricated ﬁeld ﬂow fractionation device
for continuous separation of subcellular organelles by isoelectric focusing.
The microdevice provided fast separation while avoiding large voltages and
heating effects. The authors presented the separation of mitochondria from
whole cells and nuclei (Figure 15.17) as well as the separation of two mito-
chondrial subpopulations. When automated and operated in parallel, these
microdevices could facilitate high-throughput analysis in studies requiring
separation of speciﬁc organelles. 
FIGURE 15.17
IEF of mitochondria from lysate of NR6WT cells stained with MitoTracker Green and propidium
iodide. The mitochondria focus into a distinct narrow band while the nuclei migrate to a broad
band. A pH 3 to 6 buffer was used; the mitochondria focused at pI between 4 and 5. (Reprinted
with permission from Lu et al. (2004a). © 2004, American Chemical Society.)
Flow direction
Cathode
Anode
Mitochondrial
fraction
Nuclei
}
100 µm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

420
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Strömberg et al. (2001) described an electrofusion-based technique for
combinatorial synthesis of individual liposomes. A device with containers
for liposome fusion was constructed. Optical trapping (Chiu et al. 1996) was
used to transport individual liposomes and cells through the microchannels
into the fusion container, where pairs of liposomes were fused together.
Optical trapping is a technique that utilizes laser light to trap and manipulate
small (nm scale) spherical objects using the radiation pressure produced from
a focused laser beam. 
Sequential fusion of liposomes with different dyes incorporated into their
membranes is shown in Figures 15.18a through h. The ﬁrst fusion (Figures
15.18a through d) involves a liposome with no membrane dye incorporated
and a green ﬂuorescent liposome in the membrane. The product liposome,
shown in Figure 15.18d, was then fused with a red ﬂuorescent liposome
FIGURE 15.18
Sequential pairwise fusion of three different liposomes. The ﬁrst fusion involves a plain liposome
(no membrane dye in the membrane) and a liposome with the membrane ﬂuorescent dye DiO
(a–c). The membrane dye distributes evenly over the entire membrane surface in the product
liposome (d). In the next fusion the created hybrid liposome with DiO was fused with a liposome
with the membrane ﬂuorescent dye DiI (e–g). DiI was distributed over the entire membrane
surface of the product hybrid liposome (h). Black-and-white ﬂuorescence images were pseudo-
color-coded and enhanced digitally. The scale bar is 10 µm. (Reprinted with permission from
Stromberg, A., Karlsson, A., Ryttsen, F., Davidson, M., Chiu, D.T., and Orwar, O. (2001). Ana-
lytical Chemistry 73(1): 126–130. © 2001, American Chemical Society.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
421
dyes were evenly distributed after each fusion. This procedure allowed for
a large number of synthesized liposomes with complex components and
reaction systems to be obtained from small sets of precursor liposomes. The
use of optical trapping for the handling of cells required that trapping leave
the cells undamaged, which could be achieved using near-IR lasers. They
demonstrate excellent spatial resolution (10 nm to 100 µm) and confer a large
degree of dexterity and accuracy in the manipulation of micron-scale objects.
For biological applications, the fact that the lasers are noninvasive, sterile,
and operate in the near-IR (λ = 700 to 1064 nm) means that there are little
to no biological effects on cells. In the future the cell selection and fusion
concept should be advantageously used for the production of hybridomas,
cloning, and cell–liposome fusions.
Sinclair et al. (2002) presented a cell-based bar code reader for screening
of ion channel–ligand interactions. The microﬂuidic platform performed a
high-throughput screening and characterization of weak-afﬁnity ion chan-
nel–ligand interactions. The device integrated a microﬂuidic chip with mul-
tiple channels entering an open volume with standard patch clamp
equipment (Figure 15.19). The microﬂuidic chip was placed on a motorized
scanning stage (ms scan rate capabilities). A patch-clamped cell was rapidly
scanned across zones of different solutions. This method had the capacity to
obtain kinetically resolved patch clamp measurements and dose-response
curves of up to 1000 ligands in a single day.
FIGURE 15.19
Schematic showing the design of a microﬂuidic device for generating chemical bar codes in
open volumes. The microﬂuidic chip is mounted on a programmable scanning stage (not
shown) that can move the channel outlets relative to a patch-clamped cell. The patch clamp
electrode is positioned using micromanipulators. B represents buffer reservoirs and channels,
and L1-3 represents the different ligand reservoirs and channels. F1 is the drag force acting on
the cell due to scanning, and F2 is the force created by ﬂuid ﬂow from the microchannel outlets.
The inset shows a cross-section of the device with the channel structure in Si bonded to glass
and PDMS. PDMS was used to increase the height of the reservoirs and sensor chamber. Each
channel is 50 µm wide and 100 µm high, and the ﬂow rate was 3 mm/s. The stream remains
collimated in the open volume. B and L depict channels ﬁlled with buffer solution and dye,
respectively. (Reprinted with permission from Sinclair, J., Pihl, J., Olofsson, J., Karlsson, M.,
Jardemark, K., Chiu, D.T., and Orwar, O. (2002). Analytical Chemistry 74(24): 6133–6138. © 2002,
American Chemical Society.)
+P
PDMS 
Si
Glass
To ampliﬁer
Translation of
microscope stage
F2 
F1 
L3 
L2 
L1 
B 
B 
B 
B 
z 
x 
y 
x 
z 
within the membrane (Figures 15.18e through h). The ﬂuorescent membrane
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

422
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
A method, which combined the optical trapping and microﬂuidic-based
droplet generation, was developed by He et al. (2005). This work described
a method for selective and controlled encapsulation of a single cell or sub-
cellular structure into a picoliter or femtoliter volume of an aqueous droplet
surrounded by an immiscible phase. Once the selected moiety was encased
within the droplet, rapid laser photolysis within the droplet was demon-
strated (Figure 15.20). The process conﬁned the cell lysate within the pL
volume of the droplet. With further development, the droplet manipulations
could be combined with droplet fusion for initiating chemical reactions, such
as derivatization reactions. The biggest advantage of such an approach is
that the cell lysate and cell biocomponents are conﬁned within a small
volume, minimizing the dilution and diffusion of the analytes of interest.
15.3
Single-Molecule Detection in Microﬂuidic Devices
Initial studies on SMD (single-molecule detection) in microﬂuidic devices
have indicated how powerful this marriage can become (Dorre et al. 1997;
FIGURE 15.20
Single-cell enzymatic assay within an aqueous droplet in soybean oil. (a) A mast cell was
encapsulated in an aqueous droplet that contained the ﬂuorogenic substrate FDG. (b) Prior to
photolysis of the cell, there was little ﬂuorescent product within the droplet because the intrac-
ellular enzyme β-galactosidase was physically separated from FDG by the cell membrane. (c, d)
After laser induced cell lysis (c), β-galactosidase catalyzed the formation of the product ﬂuores-
cein, which caused the droplet to become highly ﬂuorescent (d). (Reprinted with permission
from He, M., Edgar, J.S., Jeffries, G.D.M., Lorenz, R.M., Shelby, J.P., and Chiu, D.T. (2005). Selective
encapsulation of single cells and subcellular organelles into picoliter- and femtoliter-volume
droplets. Analytical Chemistry 77(6): 1539–1544. © 2005, American Chemical Society.)
0 s
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
10 µm
0 s
370 s
372 s
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
423
Effenhauser et al. 1997; Fister et al. 1998; Mathis et al. 1997). Higher sensi-
tivities, minimized sample consumption, increased throughput and speed,
and full automation of the assays were pointed out as the most appealing
beneﬁts. To this point, genomic-based studies are probably the area that has
gained the most from the powerful combination of SMD and microﬂuidics.
Many new tools for DNA sequencing, mapping and sizing have been devel-
oped over the last 10 years with some already commercialized or being
introduced to the market as we speak. SMD and microﬂuidics have also
proven invaluable in studies of protein folding kinetics (Lipman et al. 2003)
and mechanistic studies of DNA–enzyme interactions (Lee et al. 2006; van
Oijen et al. 2003). Furthermore, advancements in microfabrication technolo-
gies allow the fabrication of submicrometer-sized or even nanometer-sized
channels as well as new, on-chip optical detection schemes (e.g., zero-mode
waveguides or near ﬁeld scanner) (Levene et al. 2003; Tegenfeldt et al. 2001),
which signiﬁcantly extend the range of capabilities of this powerful tech-
nique. In the following sections, a description and discussion of some of the
applications of SMD in microﬂuidics will be presented. Anyone interested
in this topic should also consult the following reviews: de Mello (2003),
Dittrich and Manz (2005), and Tegenfeldt et al. (2004).
15.3.1
DNA Fragment Sizing
Separation of DNA molecules distinguished by their size (in base pairs [bp])
is a fundamental requirement in most molecular biology assays. For example,
the isolation of certain fractions of DNA samples based on size may be
required for further experiments, such as the preparation of bacterial artiﬁcial
chromosome (BAC) or plant artiﬁcial chromosome (PAC) libraries. DNA siz-
ing is also an important tool in a wide range of diagnostic applications, such
as restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). Conventional DNA
sizing techniques typically rely on gel electrophoretic sorting, which are time-
consuming processes, require the use of relatively large amounts of sample,
and have limited sensitivity and resolution. To alleviate some of these limi-
tations, various microﬂuidic approaches with SMD have been proposed. Two
general approaches can be distinguished. The ﬁrst one, practical for sizing
shorter DNA fragments, uses on-chip microcapillary gel electrophoresis with
highly sensitive single-molecule ﬂuorescence burst counting for detection. In
the second approach, the electrophoretic step is completely eliminated from
the assay as single DNA molecules are directly detected and sized using
specially designed microﬂuidic or nanoﬂuidic chips. This second approach
is especially useful for sizing very long (e.g., genome-sized) DNA fragments.
The size of the DNA is transduced by quantitatively measuring the ﬂuores-
cence signal generated from a single DNA molecule traveling through a
focused laser beam. The DNA is made ﬂuorescent by adding to it an inter-
calating dye, which acts like a molecular light switch, in which the ﬂuores-
cence is “turned on” when the dye is incorporated into the double-stranded
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

424
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
DNA molecule and is “turned off” when the dye is in the surrounding ﬂuid.
Because the loading of these dyes to double-stranded DNA is quantitative,
the intensity of the ﬂuorescence signal is proportional to the size of the DNA
molecule. On-chip capillary gel electrophoresis combined with a single-mol-
ecule ﬂuorescence burst counting for the separation and detection of ﬂuo-
rescently labeled DNA fragments was introduced by Haab and Mathies
(1999). On-chip microcapillary gel electrophoresis for DNA separations offers
several advantages over conventional gel and capillary gel electrophoreses.
These include shorter separation times, improved control of the sample
injection plug, reduction in sample and buffer consumption, and increased
throughput via high-density parallelism (e.g., 384 analyses running at the
same time) (Aborn et al. 2005; Tian et al. 2005). On the other hand, using
SMD signiﬁcantly improves the sensitivity of the assay. For example, 100 to
1000 bp DNA sizing ladder can be separated in approximately 300 s with a
mass detection limit of approximately 1000 molecules using a microchip with
an effective separation length of 4 cm (Haab et al. 1999). The unique feature
FIGURE 15.21
Scanning electron micrographs of the straight (a) and pinched (b) detectors. Fluorescence images
of continuously injected ﬂuorescein electrophoresing through the straight (c) and pinched (d)
detectors. The electrophoresis medium was 3% LPA and 1× TAE. The separation channel current
was 3.2 µA, and each cross-channel carried a focusing current of 1.6 µA (current ratio 0.5).
(Reprinted with permission from Haab, B.B. and Mathies, R.A. (1999). Analytical Chemistry
71(22): 5137–5145. © 1999, American Chemical Society.)
100 µm
100 µm
Detection
Detection
44 µm
44 µm
62 µm
62 µm
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
425
of Haab’s design was the capability of focusing the DNA sample through a
confocal detection volume in order to increase the percentage of DNA mol-
ecules that could be detected without increasing the background. Focusing
of the sample was achieved by physical narrowing (or tapering) of the
channel dimensions and electrodynamic focusing (a sheath ﬂow delivered
shown to be 3 times higher than that of normal chip-based separations.
A second SMD approach toward DNA sizing is based on direct measure-
ment of ﬂuorescent signals of DNA molecules labeled with intercalating dyes.
Because the amount of the intercalating dye bound to the DNA molecule is
proportional to the size of the molecule, the length of the DNA molecule can
be found simply by quantifying the total ﬂuorescent signal detected from the
molecule. The ﬁrst application of this concept in a microﬂuidic format was
demonstrated by Quake and coworkers (Chou et al. 1999). The authors suc-
cessfully used confocal detection of DNA ﬂowing through a simple T-channel
fabricated in PDMS. Sizing of DNA molecules ranging in size from 2 to 200
kbp was achieved in less than 10 min using only 28 femtograms (approxi-
mately 3000 molecules) of DNA (Figure 15.22). There are two important
features of this approach that clearly differentiate it from gel electrophoresis
methods. First, the sizing time is independent of the length of the DNA
molecules, whereas in gel electrophoresis it increases proportionally with the
fragment length and can take days to size genomic DNA. Second, the reso-
lution of the assay increases with increasing DNA length, as more ﬂuorescent
signal is generated by longer molecules. In the case of electrophoresis, longer
DNAs typically result in reduced sizing resolution.
FIGURE 15.22
(a) Optical micrograph of T-channel device. The large channels have lateral dimensions of 100
µm, which narrow down to 5 µm at the T-junction. The depth of the channels is 3 µm. (b)
Analysis of ladder. To test the upper length limit of the device, a ladder was analyzed. Peaks
corresponding to 50, 100, 150, and 200 kbp can clearly be resolved. (Inset) The peak height
measurement is linear even out to 200 kbp. (Reprinted with permission from Chou, H.-P.,
Spence, C., Scherer, A., and Quake, S. (1999). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 96(1): 11–13. © 1999, The National Academy of Sciences of the USA.)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pulse height (V)
1.5
2.0
2.5
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Pulse height (V)
0
50 100
DNA size (kbp)
150 200
Number
(a)
(b)
from cross channels) (Figure 15.21). The detection efﬁciency of this assay was
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

426
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Further improvements to direct single-molecule sizing of DNA samples was
provided by the use of submicrometer-sized ﬂuidic channels (Foquet et al.
2002) (Figure 15.23). By using ultrasmall channels, high signal-to-noise ratios
(SNR) were achieved even for very fast ﬂow speeds, up to 5 mm/s, thereby
shortening the analysis time per molecule to less than a few milliseconds.
FIGURE 15.23
(a) SEM showing the cross-section of channel (10 µm width, 270 nm height). The width appears
smaller in this image because the channel is viewed from a side angle. (b) Photon burst
histogram obtained for a mixture of several DNA fragments. The red curves correspond to the
ﬁtting of a set of six Gaussian peaks by a least-squares method. The positions of the peaks
depend on the size of DNA fragments; the peak area is proportional to the relative concentration
of each fragment. (c) Plot of the burst size as a function of the (known) fragment size. Error
bars correspond to the standard deviation of the peak sizes. The dashed line is a linear least-
squares ﬁt. The intercept was 256 photons, and the slope was 2.498 photons/bp. The correlation
coefﬁcient is 0.9998. (Reprinted with permission from Foquet, M., Korlach, J., Zipfel, W., Webb,
W.W., and Craighead, H.G. (2002). Analytical Chemistry 74(6): 1415–1422. © 2002, American
Chemical Society.)
Frequency
Burst size (photons)
2 µm 
300
275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
0
2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
2.0
2.3
4.4 6.6 9.4
23.1 27.5
Burst size (photons)
DNA fragment size (bp)
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
0
5000
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
(a)
(b)
(c)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
427
15.3.2
Sequencing of Single DNA Molecules
The Sanger reaction combined with electrophoretic separations has become
a workhorse for most DNA sequencing projects. However, this technology
has inherent limitations, especially in terms of cost, read length, and sensi-
tivity. For example, it took over 9 months at a total cost of over $3 billion to
make conventional Sanger sequencing rather impractical for massive com-
parative genomic studies. Deciphering the genomes of thousands of people
will make it easier to track down genetic risk factors for many genetic
disorders (e.g., diabetes or heart diseases) and eventually lead to a discovery
of new medical treatments. Inexpensive DNA sequencing technologies could
be used to monitor the environment for speciﬁc microorganisms, including
biowarfare agents. Applications of single-molecule detection to DNA
sequencing has monumental potential to alleviate the cost and speed issues
associated with classical Sanger sequencing. Two examples of SMD in micro-
ﬂuidic formats for DNA sequencing are brieﬂy described below.
Sequencing by controlled enzymatic digestion performed in microﬂuidic
channels was proposed by Dorre and colleagues (1997). In this assay, DNA
is ﬁrst synthesized with each nucleotide labeled with a ﬂuorescent dye. The
DNA is ﬁxed within a ﬂow stream and an exonuclease enzyme is used to
sequentially cleave the terminal nucleotide, which is then released into the
ﬂow and detected (Figure 15.24). As long as the nucleotides can be detected
in the order that they were released, the sequence of the DNA of interest can
FIGURE 15.24
The principle of single-molecule sequencing. (1) A bead loaded with a labeled DNA molecule
is held by a trap laser (D 1064 nm) inside a transparent microstructure. (2) The DNA is degraded
sequentially by an exonuclease. The liberated monomers are transported to the detection focus
via electroosmotic ﬂow (EOF). (3) Passing the focus, the labeled monomers are excited by a
laser and emit photon bursts that are recorded with respect to their ﬂuorescence characteristics
(wavelength, lifetime). (Reprinted with permission from Dorre, K., Brakmann, S., Brinkmeier,
M., Han, K.-T., Riebeseel, K., Schwille, P., Stephan, J., Wetzel, T., Lapczyna, M., Stuke, M., Bader,
R., Hinz, M., Seliger, H., Holm, J., Eigen, M., and Rigler, R. (1997). Bioimaging 5(3): 139–152. ©
1997, John Wiley and Sons.)
Trap
laser
Exonuclease
Excitation
laser
1
2
3
Labeled DNA,
immobilized on a
carrier particle
EOF
sequence genomes from only ﬁve persons (http://www.ornl.gov/sci/
techresources/Human_Genome/project/whydoe.shtml). These limitations
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

428
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
be established. The speed of this assay is, in principle, limited only by the
rate of an enzymatic digestion (100 to 1000 bases/min). The complete detec-
tion of all dye-labeled monomers, which are cleaved off of the isolated DNA
template during the sequencing reaction, is an essential requirement. This
can be addressed by use of a microﬂuidic system with a confocal multiele-
ment setup (Dorre et al. 1997; Dorre et al. 2001). A linear array of adjacent
multimode optical ﬁbers, each connected to its own avalanche photodiode
detector, is set at each microﬂuidic channel. The entire cross-section of the
microchannel is illuminated at the detection area. This arrangement gener-
ates a number of overlapping femtoliter detection volumes across the chan-
nel and ensures high detection efﬁciency.
On-chip DNA sequencing can be also performed using sequencing-by-
synthesis approaches (Braslavsky et al. 2003; Kartalov and Quake 2004). A
primed DNA template is anchored within a microﬂuidic reactor and its
position is recorded using high-sensitivity digital cameras connected to a
microscope. The DNA template is then exposed to a mixture of a known
type of standard nucleotide, its ﬂuorescently tagged analog, and DNA
polymerase. If the tagged nucleotide is complementary to the template base
next to the primer’s end, the polymerase extends the primer with it and a
ﬂuorescence signal is detected after a washing step. Iteration with each type
of nucleotide reveals the DNA sequence. By imaging many reactors, the
sequence of multiple DNA molecules can be obtained in parallel. The proof
of principle of sequencing-by-synthesis with an average read length of 3
bp has been demonstrated in a fully integrated PDMS microﬂuidic system
omy of material and integration under the lab-on-a-chip paradigm, and has
the ability to obtain sequence information from millions of independent
molecules in parallel.
15.3.3
Other SMD Bioassays On-Chip
Many types of genomic studies, such as comparative studies of differences
among species or among individuals within a given species, do not require
single-base resolution provided by DNA sequencing. DNA mapping, which
provides low resolution information about DNA sequence, is especially use-
ful in such cases as it is much faster and less expensive for long, genome-
sized DNA. An interesting approach to DNA mapping using SMD in micro-
fabricated devices is called direct linear analysis (DLA) (Chan et al. 2004)
with intercalating dyes and with sequence-speciﬁc ﬂuorescent tags (e.g.,
ﬂuorescent peptide nucleic acids [PNAs]), which target 7 to 8 bp of DNA.
In the next step, the sample is introduced into a microﬂuidic chip containing
micropost arrays and tapered channels. By interaction with microposts, DNA
molecules uncoil and ﬁnally stretch into a linear form in the tapered region
of the channel. Individual DNA molecules are then interrogated with laser
(Figure 15.25). This approach to DNA sequencing has advantages in econ-
(Figure 15.26). In the ﬁrst step, double-stranded DNA molecules are labeled
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
429
radiation to reveal the length of the molecule as well as the number and
location of site-speciﬁc tags.
Detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) has high analytical
value for early detection of such diseases as cystic ﬁbrosis, Alzheimer’s, sickle
cell anemia, and certain cancers. The most difﬁcult problem of detecting SNPs
in real samples is that the mutant DNA is present in a much lower concen-
tration than normal DNA. Thus, SNP detection assays have to be capable of
distinguishing between both forms of DNA with high sensitivity. New assays
for the detection of SNPs by combination of ligase detection reaction (LDR)
and single-pair ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer (spFRET) with molec-
ular beacons have been proposed by Soper and colleagues (Wabuyele et al.
FIGURE 15.25
Chip architecture. The microchannels are ﬁlled with food dyes to accentuate features. The
derivatization tree supplies reagents to form surface chemistry in all ﬁve sequencing chambers
at once. Lane controls direct ﬂow of sequencing reagents from the sequencing tree into any
chamber of choice. Valves are formed only where wide control segments cross over ﬂow
segments. Arrows indicate the ﬂow direction during operation–derivatization and sequencing.
(Reprinted with permission from Kartalov, E.P. and Quake, S.R. (2004). Nucleic Acids Research
32(9): 2873–2879. © 2004, Oxford University Press.)
Sequencing
reagents
Derivatization
reagents
Sequencing
chamber
To exhaust
To exhaust
1B
30 µm
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

430
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
2003). By using single-molecule approaches, the authors were able to detect
low abundant point mutations in K-ras oncogenes without the initial PCR
ampliﬁcation required by other assays. This assay could be performed in
less than 5 min at a frequency of 1 mutant DNA per 10 normals using PMMA
microﬂuidic chips and sheath ﬂows for sample stream focusing.
15.3.4
Submicrometer-Sized Fluidic Channels
Typical microﬂuidic channels have cross-sections that are still much larger
than the cross-sections associated with most confocal detection volumes.
Relatively large channel dimensions impose some restrictions with respect
to the optimal resolution that can be obtained. For example, large channel
dimensions require relatively large observation windows for uniform illu-
mination of the entire channel width. Therefore, only slow ﬂow speeds or
low sample concentrations can be employed to avoid multiple molecular
occupancies. Also, noise contributions from buffer solutions increase with
increasing channel size. In addition, hydrodynamic and electric-current
focusing techniques require additional ﬂuidic control systems that may lead
to off-center focusing. In order to alleviate these problems, ﬂuidic channels
with sizes smaller than the confocal detection volume may be used.
FIGURE 15.26
(a) Schematics of the direct linear analysis (DLA) technology. (b) Typical raw data traces from
data channels 1 through 3 for a single tagged DNA molecule. The traces arise from ﬂuorescence
of the intercalating dye when the DNA backbone travels through the excitation spots ExII and
ExIII (ex = 633 nm), respectively. The spikes are detected when the DNA-bound PNA tags pass
through the excitation spot ExI (ex = 532 nm) and emit bursts of photons. (Reprinted with
permission from Chan, E.Y., Goncalves, N.M., Haeusler, R.A., Hatch, A.J., Larson, J.W., Maletta,
A.M., Yantz, G.R., Carstea, E.D., Fuchs, M., Wong, G.G., Gullans, S.R., and Gilmanshin, R. (2004).
Genome Research 14(6): 1137–1146. © 2004, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.)
Flow
50 µm
5 µm
20 µm
Ex: I, II
Ex: III
Z
Photon counts
T = 1.18 ms
τ = 0.9 ms
150
100
50
0
0
1
2
Time (ms)
(a)
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
431
In order to match a typical confocal detection volume of less than 1 fL,
channels with dimensions of less than 1 µm × 1 µm have to be fabricated. Some
of the techniques that have been successfully used for fabrication of submi-
crometer-sized and nanometer-sized channels for SMD are listed in Table 15.2.
With submicrometer or nanometer channel dimensions, the detection vol-
umes on the order of tens of attoliters can be generated, which are roughly
100 times smaller than the effective observation volume of typical confocal
setups. Thus, nearly all of the individual molecules can be detected rapidly
with high signal-to-noise ratios. This is extremely important for the SMD-
based assays, which depend on 100% sampling efﬁciencies, such as the DNA
sequencing-by-digestion assays described in the previous section. Higher
counting efﬁciencies also improve the statistical accuracy of any single-mol-
ecule characterization because all molecules are counted and contribute to
the analysis. Another advantage of extremely small detection volumes is that
higher sample concentrations can be used without a risk of detection errors
resulting from multiple occupancy of the detection volume. This is especially
useful for studying biochemical processes, which occur efﬁciently only at
much higher than the pico- or nanomolar concentration regime. Thus, nano-
fabricated devices offer the potential to study these processes at physiolog-
ically more appropriate concentrations. Finally, extremely higher linear
velocities can be used with submicron channel shortening analysis time per
molecule, signiﬁcantly reducing analysis time (Foquet et al. 2004).
TABLE 15.2
Techniques Used for Fabrication of Submicrometer-Sized and Nanometer-Sized 
Channels
Fabrication 
technique
Channel 
characteristics
Example 
application
Reference
Sacriﬁcial layer
350 nm wide × 250 nm 
tall channels in fused 
silica
DNA fragment 
sizing
(Foquet et al. 2002; 
Foquet et al. 2004)
Focused ion beam 
(FIB)
individual 150–900 nm 
trapezoidal trenches 
in silicon
Electrophoretic 
behavior of single, 
ﬂuorescently 
labeled DNA 
molecules 
(Campbell et al. 
2004)
Reactive ion etch
(RIE)
500 nm square cross-
section channels in 
fused silica
Detection of 
individual 
quantum dots 
conjugated with 
organic 
ﬂuorophores
(Stavis et al. 2005)
Nanoimprint 
lithography (NIL)
Array of 10 nm–200 nm 
trenches
Sizing of genome-
length  (>1 million 
bp) DNA
(Cao et al. 2002a,b; 
Tegenfeldt et al. 
2004a,b)
Polymer ﬁbers as 
sacriﬁcial layer
Suspended glass 
nanotubes, 100–500 
nm diameter
Detection of single 
ﬂuorescently 
labeled proteins
(Verbridge et al. 
2005)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

432
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
One has to remember, however, that when using submicrometer- and
nanometer-sized channels, new issues can arise. These include channel clog-
ging, increased molecule-to-surface interactions, high levels of background
caused by increased refraction from channel surfaces, interfacing nanometer-
sized channels to macroscale instrumentation, and extremely high back pres-
sures induced by nanometer-sized channels when hydrodynamic pumping
is used. Some of these issues can be addressed by proper design of the
nanoﬂuidic devices. For example, nanochannels can be accessed by microf-
luidic channel networks, which are easier to interface to macroscale instru-
mentation (Cao et al. 2002a, b; Foquet et al. 2004). Dense arrays of parallel
nanochannels can be used to reduce clogging issues as well (Cao et al. 2002a;
Tegenfeldt et al. 2004b) (Figure 15.27), whereas suspended glass nanotubes
with extremely thin walls reduce the problem of substrate-related back-
problems associated with molecule adhesion to the channel walls and elec-
trokinetic forces can be used to drive the ﬂuids eliminating the problems of
high back pressures.
FIGURE 15.27
(a) SEM image shows the “roof” and proﬁle of the nanochannels fabricated with NIL and sealed
by the SiO2 sputtering process. (b) Buried nanochannels under the sealing roof were shown to
be perfectly intact after sealing. (c) CCD image of λ-phage DNA concatemers stretched in
nanoﬂuidic channels. (Reprinted with permission from Cao et al. 2002b, © 2002, American
Institute of Physics.
30 µm
(c)
500 nm
500 nm
(a)
(b)
ground (Verbridge et al. 2005) (Figure 15.28). Surface coatings can reduce the
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
433
15.3.5
Selection of the Right Substrate Material for SMD
The material for microﬂuidic chip fabrication has to fulﬁll several require-
ments in order to be successfully used for SMD with optical methods. These
include optical clarity, low-level background ﬂuorescence, compatibility
with a wide range of potential chemistries, and biocompatibility. Glass is
an ideal material for such applications as it fulﬁlls most of these require-
ments. Despite the appealing and promising developments of microﬂuidic
devices fabricated in glass, it is considered relatively expensive for appli-
cations where disposability of the device is often required. Polymers are
viewed as promising alternative substrates for such applications as they are
FIGURE 15.28
Scanning electron micrograph of (a, b) 400 nm outer diameter, 100 nm inner diameter sputtered
glass channel suspended over a 5 µm–wide, 25 µm–deep trench etched in silicon. (c) Schematic
for the optical apparatus used for ﬂuorescent measurement and (d) a 0.5 s portion of a photon
burst scan for 2 nM Rhodamine Red-X cellulase enzyme. At a 2 nM sample, the average volume
per molecule was a factor of 100 greater than the focal volume of approximately 10 × 10–18 L
for a 100-nm inner diameter channel. (Adapted with permission from Verbridge, S.S., Edel, J.B.,
Stavis, S.M., Moran-Mirabal, J.M., Allen, S.D., Coates, G., and Craighead, H.G. (2005). Journal
of Applied Physics 97(12): 124317/124311–124317/124314. © 2005, American Institute of Physics.)
8.5
8.6
8.7
8.8
8.9
9.0
Time (s)
Photon counts
40
30
20
10
0
50
Detector
Emission ﬁlter
Dichroic mirror
Objective
Suspended
nanochannel
568 nm
(b)
(c)
2 µm
200 nm
(b)
(a)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

434
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
less expensive and offer greater ﬂexibility in fabrication strategies for mass
producing microstructures.
Many polymeric materials possess good light transmission properties for
use in optical detection (see Figure 15.29a). Unfortunately, most polymers
also show high ﬂuorescent backgrounds in the visible range of the electro-
magnetic spectrum as compared to glass (see Figure 15.29b). This high auto-
ﬂuorescence can be attributed to either the polymer itself or to different
additives, such as plasticizers, commonly used in commercial-grade poly-
mers (compare autoﬂuorescence values for different types of PMMA in Fig-
ure 15.29b). The autoﬂuorescence of polymeric material is strongly
dependent on excitation wavelength with higher autoﬂuorescence values
observed for shorter wavelengths (Piruska et al. 2005; Wabuyele et al. 2001).
PDMS and PMMA (especially high purity grade) are the only polymeric
materials used for microﬂuidic chip applications that come close to glass in
terms of its low autoﬂuorescence properties using a relatively wide range of
excitation wavelengths (λexc > 480 nm). These properties of both PDMS and
PMMA have already been widely used in SMD (Braslavsky et al. 2003; Chou
et al. 1999; Effenhauser et al. 1997; Wabuyele et al. 2003; Wabuyele et al.
FIGURE 15.29
(a) The transmission spectra of the plastic materials taken at normal incidence. (Reprinted with
permission from Piruska, A., Nikcevic, I., Lee, S.H., Ahn, C., Heineman, W.R., Limbach, P.A., and
Seliskar, C.J. (2005). Lab on a Chip 5(12): 1348–1354. © 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b)
LIF background levels of different polymers measured at three different excitation wavelengths,
488 nm, 632.8 nm, or 780 nm. The average ﬂuorescence intensity (cps) of the polymers was
normalized with respect to the value obtained for glass at the same excitation wavelength. COC:
cyclic oleﬁn copolymer; PDMS: poly(dimethylsiloxane); PMMA: poly(methylmethacrylate); MG-
PMMA: medical-grade PMMA; G-PMMA: grey acrylic; C-PMMA: clear acrylic; ABS: poly(acry-
lonitirle-butadiene-styrene); PETG: polyethylene terephtalate glycolate; PS: polystyrene; PC: poly-
carbonate; LX-PC: Lexan-grade PC; PET: polyethylene terephtalate; PU: polyurethane; PP:
polypropylene; NY: nylon; PSU: polysulfone; HDPE: high-density polyethylene; LDPE: low-
density polyethylene. (Reprinted with permission from Shadpour et al. 2005 , © 2005, Elsevier B.V.) 
PMMA (0.25 mm)
PMMA (3.0 mm)
PMMA (5.0 mm)
Boro ﬂoat glass (1 mm)
COC (1 mm)
PC (0.25 mm)
PC (2.0 mm)
PDMS
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
400
600
800
1000
200
400
600
800
1000
Transmission (%)
Transmission (%)
Wavelength/nm
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Relative ﬂuorescence intensity
G-PMMA
ABS
PETG
PS
PC
PET
LX-PC
PU
PP
NY
PSU
PMMA
HDPE
LDPE
MG-PMMA
C-PMMA
488.0 nm
632.8 nm
780.0 nm
(a)
(b)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
435
2001). Other polymers, such as PC, may be used as long as near-IR chro-
mophores are utilized (Wabuyele et al. 2001).
15.4
Concluding Remarks
The development of microﬂuidic chip systems provides an attractive platform
for the study of single cells, and the very low number of molecules comprising
those cells, due to the fact that the volume scale of microﬂuidics is on the same
scale as a whole cell, which minimizes dilution of the molecular intracellular
contents of those cells. When the size scale of ﬂuidic networks is reduced below
1 µm, then new opportunities exist for sampling single molecules using bio-
logically and chemically relevant concentrations, for such applications as
bioenzymatic reactions and chemical derivatization reactions. Due to the
extensive level of integration of processing steps into a single device, sample
loss due to sample transfer is eliminated as well as contamination effects. For
further information on this topical area, a number of different books and
valuable journal review articles on the general use of microﬂuidic devices are
available: Erickson and Lu (2004), Huang et al. (2002), Jakeway et al. (2000),
Lagally and Mathies (2004), and Lu et al. (2004a, b). For further information
on single-cell manipulation and analysis using microﬂuidic devices, see
References
Aborn, J.H., El-Difrawy, S.A., Novotny, M., Gismondi, E.A., Lam, R., Matsudaira, P.,
McKenna, B.K., O'Neil, T., Streechon, P., and Ehrlich, D.J. (2005). A 768-lane
microfabricated system for high-throughput DNA sequencing. Lab on a Chip
5(6): 669–674.
Ambrose, W.P., Goodwin, P.M., Jett, J.H., Johnson, M.E., Martin, J.C., Marrone, B.L.,
Schecker, J.A., Wilkerson, C.W., Keller, R.A., Haces, A., Shih, P.J., and Harding,
J.D. (1993). Application of single-molecule detection to DNA-sequencing and
sizing. Berichte Der Bunsen-Gesellschaft-Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
97(12): 1535–1542.
Andersson, H. and van den Berg, A. (2003). Microﬂuidic devices for cellomics: A
review. Sensors and Actuators, B: Chemical B92(3): 315–325.
Andersson, H. and van den Berg, A. (2004). Microtechnologies and nanotechnologies
for single-cell analysis. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 15(1): 44–49.
Baker Megan, K., Mikhitarian, K., Osta, W., Callahan, K., Hoda, R., Brescia, F., Kneu-
per-Hall, R., Mitas, M., Cole David, J., and Gillanders William, E. (2003). Mo-
lecular detection of breast cancer cells in the peripheral blood of advanced-stage
Andersson and van den Berg (2003), Andersson et al., Beebe (2000), Beebe et
al. (2002), Brehm-Stecher and Johnson (2004), Chovan and Guttman (2002),
Olson et al. (2005), and Toner and Irimia (2005). 
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

436
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
breast cancer patients using multimarker real-time reverse transcription-poly-
merase chain reaction and a novel porous barrier density gradient centrifuga-
tion technology. Clinical Cancer Research 9(13): 4865–4871.
Balagadde, F.K., You, L., Hansen, C.L., Arnold, F.H., and Quake, S.R. (2005). Long-
term monitoring of bacteria undergoing programmed population control in a
microchemostat. Science (Washington, DC, United States) 309(5731): 137–140.
Beebe, D.J. (2000). Microfabricated ﬂuidic devices for single-cell handling and anal-
ysis. Emerging Tools for Single-Cell Analysis, 95–113.
Beebe, D.J., Mensing, G.A., and Walker, G.M. (2002). Physics and applications of
microﬂuidics in biology. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering 4, 261–286.
Belgrader, P., Hansford, D., Kovacs, G.T.A., Venkateswaran, K., Mariella, R., Jr., Mi-
lanovich, F., Nasarabadi, S., Okuzumi, M., Pourahmadi, F., and Northrup, M.A.
(1999). A minisonicator to rapidly disrupt bacterial spores for DNA analysis.
Analytical Chemistry 71(19): 4232–4236.
Belgrader, P., Okuzumi, M., Pourahmadi, F., Borkholder, D.A., and Northrup, M.A.
(2000). A microﬂuidic cartridge to prepare spores for PCR analysis. Biosensors
& Bioelectronics 14(10–11): 849–852.
Braschler, T., Johann, R., Heule, M., Metref, L., and Renaud, P. (2005). Gentle cell
trapping and release on a microﬂuidic chip by in situ alginate hydrogel for-
mation. Lab on a Chip 5(5): 553–559.
Braslavsky, I., Hebert, B., Kartalov, E., and Quake, S.R. (2003). Sequence information
can be obtained from single DNA molecules. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 100(7): 3960–3964.
Brehm-Stecher, B.F. and Johnson, E.A. (2004). Single-cell microbiology: Tools, tech-
nologies, and applications. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 68(3):
538–559.
Campbell, L.C., Wilkinson, M.J., Manz, A., Camilleri, P., and Humphreys, C.J. (2004).
Electrophoretic manipulation of single DNA molecules in nanofabricated cap-
illaries. Lab on a Chip 4(3): 225–229.
Cao, H., Tegenfeldt, J.O., Austin, R.H., and Chou, S.Y. (2002a). Gradient nanostruc-
tures for interfacing microﬂuidics and nanoﬂuidics. Applied Physics Letters
81(16): 3058–3060.
Cao, H., Yu, Z., Wang, J., Tegenfeldt, J.O., Austin, R.H., Chen, E., Wu, W., and Chou,
S.Y. (2002b). Fabrication of 10 nm enclosed nanoﬂuidic channels. Applied Physics
Letters 81(1): 174–176.
Chaiyasut, C., Tsuda, T., Khansuwan, U., and Ong-Chai, S. (2002). Red blood cell
lysis at the single cell level by using a mini electrophoresis apparatus. Chroma-
tography 23(1): 33–38.
Chan, E.Y., Goncalves, N.M., Haeusler, R.A., Hatch, A.J., Larson, J.W., Maletta, A.M.,
Yantz, G.R., Carstea, E.D., Fuchs, M., Wong, G.G., Gullans, S.R., and Gilman-
shin, R. (2004). DNA mapping using microﬂuidic stretching and single-mole-
cule detection of ﬂuorescent site-speciﬁc tags. Genome Research 14(6): 1137–1146.
Chan, S.D.H., Luedke, G., Valer, M., Buhlmann, C., and Preckel, T. (2003). Cytometric
analysis of protein expression and apoptosis in human primary cells with a
novel microﬂuidic chip-based system. Cytometry, Part A 55A(2): 119–125.
Chin Vicki, I., Taupin, P., Sanga, S., Scheel, J., Gage Fred, H., and Bhatia Sangeeta, N.
(2004). Microfabricated platform for studying stem cell fates. Biotechnology and
Bioengineering 88(3): 399–415.
Chiu, D.T. (2003). Micro- and nano-scale chemical analysis of individual sub-cellular
compartments. TrAC, Trends in Analytical Chemistry 22(8): 528–536.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
437
Chiu, D.T. and Zare, R.N. (1996). Biased diffusion, optical trapping, and manipulation
of single molecules in solution. Journal of the American Chemical Society 118(27):
6512–6513.
Chou, H.-P., Spence, C., Scherer, A., and Quake, S. (1999). A microfabricated device
for sizing and sorting DNA molecules. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 96(1): 11–13.
Chovan, T. and Guttman, A. (2002). Microfabricated devices in biotechnology and
biochemical processing. Trends in Biotechnology 20(3): 116–122.
Chung, B.G., Flanagan, L.A., Rhee, S.W., Schwartz, P.H., Lee, A.P., Monuki, E.S., and
Jeon, N.L. (2005). Human neural stem cell growth and differentiation in a
gradient-generating microﬂuidic device. Lab on a Chip 5(4): 401–406.
de Mello, A.J. (2003). Focus: Seeing single molecules. Lab on a Chip 3(2): 29N–34N.
Dhawan, M.D., Wise, F., and Baeumner, A.J. (2002). Development of a laser-induced
cell lysis system. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 374(3): 421–426.
Dittrich, P.S. and Manz, A. (2005). Single-molecule ﬂuorescence detection in microf-
luidic channels-the Holy Grail in µTAS? Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry
382(8): 1771–1782.
Dorre, K., Brakmann, S., Brinkmeier, M., Han, K.-T., Riebeseel, K., Schwille, P.,
Stephan, J., Wetzel, T., Lapczyna, M., Stuke, M., Bader, R., Hinz, M., Seliger,
H., Holm, J., Eigen, M., and Rigler, R. (1997). Techniques for single molecule
sequencing. Bioimaging 5(3): 139–152.
Dorre, K., Stephan, J., Lapczyna, M., Stuke, M., Dunkel, H., and Eigen, M. (2001).
Highly efﬁcient single molecule detection in microstructures. Journal of Biotech-
nology 86(3): 225–236.
Effenhauser, C.S., Bruin, G.J.M., Paulus, A., and Ehrat, M. (1997). Integrated capillary
electrophoresis on ﬂexible silicone microdevices: Analysis of DNA restriction
fragments and detection of single DNA molecules on microchips. Analytical
Chemistry 69(17): 3451–3457.
Emmelkamp, J., Wolbers, F., Andersson, H., DaCosta, R.S., Wilson, B.C., Vermes, I.,
and van den Berg, A. (2004). The potential of autoﬂuorescence for the detection
of single living cells for label-free cell sorting in microﬂuidic systems. Electro-
phoresis 25(21–22): 3740–3745.
Erickson, D. and Li, D. (2004). Integrated microﬂuidic devices. Analytica Chimica Acta
507(1): 11–26.
Eyal, S. and Quake, S.R. (2002). Velocity-independent microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometry.
Electrophoresis 23(16): 2653–2657.
Fister, J.C., III, Jacobson, S.C., Davis, L.M., and Ramsey, J.M. (1998). Counting single
chromophore molecules for ultrasensitive analysis and separations on micro-
chip devices. Analytical Chemistry 70(3): 431–437.
Foquet, M., Korlach, J., Zipfel, W., Webb, W.W., and Craighead, H.G. (2002). DNA
fragment sizing by single molecule detection in submicrometer-sized closed
ﬂuidic channels. Analytical Chemistry 74(6): 1415–1422.
Foquet, M., Korlach, J., Zipfel, W.R., Webb, W.W., and Craighead, H.G. (2004). Focal
volume conﬁnement by submicrometer-sized ﬂuidic channels. Analytical Chem-
istry 76(6): 1618–1626.
Fu, A.Y., Chou, H.-P., Spence, C., Arnold, F.H., and Quake, S.R. (2002). An integrated
microfabricated cell sorter. Analytical Chemistry 74(11): 2451–2457.
Fu, A.Y., Spence, C., Scherer, A., Arnold, F.H., and Quake, S.R. (1999). A microfabri-
cated ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorter. Nature Biotechnology 17(11): 1109–1111.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

438
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Futai, N., Gu, W., Song, J.W., and Takayama, S. (2006). Handheld recirculation system
and customized media for microﬂuidic cell culture. Lab on a Chip 6(1): 149–154.
Gao, J., Yin, X.-F., and Fang, Z.-L. (2004). Integration of single cell injection, cell lysis,
separation and detection of intracellular constituents on a microﬂuidic chip.
Lab on a Chip 4(1): 47–52.
Gu, W., Zhu, X., Futai, N., Cho Brenda, S., and Takayama, S. (2004). Computerized
microﬂuidic cell culture using elastomeric channels and Braille displays. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101(45):
15861–15866.
Haab, B.B. and Mathies, R.A. (1999). Single-molecule detection of DNA separations
in microfabricated capillary electrophoresis chips employing focused molecu-
lar streams. Analytical Chemistry 71(22): 5137–5145.
Habbersett, R.C. and Jett, J.H. (2004). An analytical system based on a compact ﬂow
cytometer for DNA fragment sizing and single-molecule detection. Cytometry
Part A 60A(2): 125–134.
He, M., Edgar, J.S., Jeffries, G.D.M., Lorenz, R.M., Shelby, J.P., and Chiu, D.T. (2005).
Selective encapsulation of single cells and subcellular organelles into picoliter-
and femtoliter-volume droplets. Analytical Chemistry 77(6): 1539–1544.
He, Y., Zhang, Y.H., and Yeung, E.S. (2001). Capillary-based fully integrated and
automated system for nanoliter polymerase chain reaction analysis directly
from cheek cells. Journal of Chromatography. 924(1–2): 271–284.
Hellmich, W., Pelargus, C., Leffhalm, K., Ros, A., and Anselmetti, D. (2005). Single
cell manipulation, analytics, and label-free protein detection in microﬂuidic
devices for systems nanobiology. Electrophoresis 26(19): 3689–3696.
Heo, J., Thomas, K.J., Seong, G.H., and Crooks, R.M. (2003). A microﬂuidic bioreactor
based on hydrogel-entrapped E. coli: Cell viability, lysis, and intracellular en-
zyme reactions. Analytical Chemistry 75(1): 22–26.
Hogan, B.L. and Yeung, E.S. (1993). Single-cell analysis at the level of a single human
erythrocyte. TrAC, Trends in Analytical Chemistry 12(1): 4–9.
Hong, J.W., Studer, V., Hang, G., Anderson, W.F., and Quake, S.R. (2004). A nanoliter-
scale nucleic acid processor with parallel architecture. Nature Biotechnology
22(4): 435–439.
Huang, Y., Chen, N., Borninski, J., and Rubinsky, B. (2003). A novel microﬂuidic cell-
chip for single cell analysis and manipulation. Proceedings—IEEE Annual
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 16th, Kyoto,
Japan, January 19–23, 403–406.
Huang, Y., Mather Elizabeth, L., Bell Janice, L., and Madou, M. (2002). MEMS-based
sample preparation for molecular diagnostics. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chem-
istry 372(1): 49–65.
Hung, P.J., Lee, P.J., Sabounchi, P., Lin, R., and Lee, L.P. (2004). Continuous perfusion
microﬂuidic cell culture array for high-throughput cell-based assays. Biotech-
nology and Bioengineering 89(1): 1–8.
Husebekk, A., Skogen, B., and Husby, G. (1988). High-density lipoprotein has differ-
ent binding capacity for different apoproteins. The amyloidogenic apoproteins
are easier to displace from high-density lipoprotein. Scandinavian Journal of
Immunology 28(6): 653–658.
Ivanov, I.T. (1999). Investigation of surface and shape changes accompanying the
membrane alteration responsible for the heat-induced lysis of human erythro-
cytes. Colloids and Surfaces, B: Biointerfaces 13(6): 311–323.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
439
Jakeway, S.C., de Mello, A.J., and Russell, E.L. (2000). Miniaturized total analysis
systems for biological analysis. Fresenius' Journal of Analytical Chemistry
366(6–7): 525–539.
Kahn Harriette, J., Presta, A., Yang, L.-Y., Blondal, J., Trudeau, M., Lickley, L., Hollo-
way, C., McCready David, R., Maclean, D., and Marks, A. (2004). Enumeration
of circulating tumor cells in the blood of breast cancer patients after ﬁltration
enrichment: Correlation with disease stage. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment
86(3): 237–247.
Kartalov, E.P. and Quake, S.R. (2004). Microﬂuidic device reads up to four consecutive
base pairs in DNA sequencing-by-synthesis. Nucleic Acids Research 32(9):
2873–2879.
Khine, M., Lau, A., Ionescu-Zanetti, C., Seo, J., and Lee, L.P. (2005). A single cell
electroporation chip. Lab on a Chip 5(1): 38–43.
Kruger, J., Porta, P., Morrison, A., Singh, K., O'Neill, A., and O'Brien, P. (2002). Micro-
optical laser induced ﬂuorescence detection on a miniaturized ﬂow cytometry
device. Micro Total Analysis Systems 2002, Proceedings of the mTAS 2002 Sym-
posium, 6th, Nara, Japan, November 3–7, 290–292.
Lagally, E.T. and Mathies, R.A. (2004). Integrated genetic analysis microsystems.
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 37(23): R245–R261.
Lee, J.-B., Hite, R.K., Hamdan, S.M., Sunney Xie, X., Richardson, C.C., and van Oijen,
A.M. (2006). DNA primase acts as a molecular brake in DNA replication. Nature
(London, United Kingdom) 439(7076): 621–624.
Lee, P.J., Hung, P.J., Shaw, R., Jan, L., and Lee, L.P. (2005). Microﬂuidic application-
speciﬁc integrated device for monitoring direct cell-cell communication via gap
junctions between individual cell pairs. Applied Physics Letters 86(22): 223902/
223901–223902/223903.
Lee, S.-W. and Tai, Y.-C. (1999). A micro cell lysis device. Sensors and Actuators, A:
Physical A73(1–2): 74–79.
Levene, M.J., Korlach, J., Turner, S.W., Foquet, M., Craighead, H.G., and Webb, W.W.
(2003). Zero-mode waveguides for single-molecule analysis at high concentra-
tions. Science (Washington, DC, United States) 299(5607): 682–686.
Lipman, E.A., Schuler, B., Bakajin, O., and Eaton, W.A. (2003). Single-molecule mea-
surement of protein folding kinetics. Science (Washington, DC, United States)
301(5637): 1233–1235.
Lu, H., Gaudet, S., Schmidt Martin, A., and Jensen Klavs, F. (2004a). A microfabricated
device for subcellular organelle sorting. Analytical Chemistry 76(19): 5705–5712.
Lu, X., Huang, W.-H., Wang, Z.-L., and Cheng, J.-K. (2004b). Recent developments
in single-cell analysis. Analytica Chimica Acta 510(2): 127–138.
Mathies, R.A., Peck, K., and Stryer, L. (1990). Optimization of high-sensitivity ﬂuo-
rescence detection. Analytical Chemistry 62(17): 1786–1791.
Mathis, H.P., Kalusche, G., Wagner, B., and McCaskill, J.S. (1997). Steps towards
spatially resolved single molecule detection in solution. Bioimaging 5(3):
116–128.
McClain, M.A., Culbertson, C.T., Jacobson, S.C., Allbritton, N.L., Sims, C.E., and
Ramsey, J.M. (2003). Microﬂuidic devices for the high-throughput chemical
analysis of cells. Analytical Chemistry 75(21): 5646–5655.
Ocvirk, G., Salimi-Moosavi, H., Szarka, R.J., Arriaga, E.A., Andersson, P.E., Smith,
R., Dovichi, N.J. and Harrison, D.J. (2004). b-Galactosidase assays of single-cell
lysates on a microchip: A complementary method for enzymatic analysis of
single cells. Proceedings of the IEEE 92(1): 115–125.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

440
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Olson, K.J., Ahmadzadeh, H., and Arriaga, E.A. (2005). Within the cell: Analytical
techniques for subcellular analysis. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 382(4):
906–917.
Palkova, Z., Vachova, L., Valer, M., and Preckel, T. (2004). Single-cell analysis of yeast,
mammalian cells, and fungal spores with a microﬂuidic pressure-driven chip-
based system. Cytometry A 59(2): 246–253.
Piruska, A., Nikcevic, I., Lee, S.H., Ahn, C., Heineman, W.R., Limbach, P.A., and
Seliskar, C.J. (2005). The autoﬂuorescence of plastic materials and chips mea-
sured under laser irradiation. Lab on a Chip 5(12): 1348–1354.
Rao, S.R., Yamamura, S., Takamura, Y., and Tamiya, E. (2004). Multiplexed microﬂu-
idic devices for single-cell manipulation and analysis. Special Publica-
tion—Royal Society of Chemistry 296 (Micro Total Analysis Systems 2004, Volume
1): 61–63.
Rhee, S.W., Taylor, A.M., Tu, C.H., Cribbs, D.H., Cotman, C.W., and Jeon, N.L. (2005).
Patterned cell culture inside microﬂuidic devices. Lab on a Chip 5(1): 102–107.
Shackman, J.G., Dahlgren, G.M., Peters, J.L., and Kennedy, R.T. (2005). Perfusion and
chemical monitoring of living cells on a microﬂuidic chip. Lab on a Chip 5(1):
56–63.
Shelby, J.P., White, J., Ganesan, K., Rathod, P.K., and Chiu, D.T. (2003). A microﬂuidic
model for single-cell capillary obstruction by plasmodium falciparum-infected
erythrocytes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 100(25): 14618–14622.
Sia, S.K. and Whitesides, G.M. (2003). Microﬂuidic devices fabricated in poly(dime-
thylsiloxane) for biological studies. Electrophoresis 24(21): 3563–3576.
Sims, C.E., Meredith, G.D., Krasieva, T.B., Berns, M.W., Tromberg, B.J., and Allbritton,
N.L. (1998). Laser-micropipet combination for single-cell analysis. Analytical
Chemistry 70(21): 4570–4577.
Sinclair, J., Pihl, J., Olofsson, J., Karlsson, M., Jardemark, K., Chiu, D.T., and Orwar,
O. (2002). A cell-based bar code reader for high-throughput screening of ion
channel–ligand interactions. Analytical Chemistry 74(24): 6133–6138.
Sohn, L.L., Saleh, O.A., Facer, G.R., Beavis, A.J., Allan, R.S., and Notterman, D.A.
(2000). Capacitance cytometry: Measuring biological cells one by one. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97(20):
10687–10690.
Soper, S.A., Mattingly, Q.L., and Vegunta, P. (1993). Photon burst detection of single
near-infrared ﬂuorescent molecules. Analytical Chemistry 65(6): 740–747.
Stavis, S.M., Edel, J.B., Samiee, K.T., and Craighead, H.G. (2005). Single molecule
studies of quantum dot conjugates in a submicrometer ﬂuidic channel. Lab on
a Chip 5(3): 337–343.
Stromberg, A., Karlsson, A., Ryttsen, F., Davidson, M., Chiu, D.T., and Orwar, O.
(2001). Microﬂuidic device for combinatorial fusion of liposomes and cells.
Analytical Chemistry 73(1): 126–130.
Taylor, M.T., Belgrader, P., Furman, B.J., Pourahmadi, F., Kovacs, G.T.A., and
Northrup, M.A. (2001). Lysing bacterial spores by sonication through a ﬂexible
interface in a microﬂuidic system. Analytical Chemistry 73(3): 492–496.
Tegenfeldt, J.O., Bakajin, O., Chou, C.-F., Chan, S.S., Austin, R., Fann, W., Liou, L.,
Chan, E., Duke, T. and Cox, E.C. (2001). Near-ﬁeld scanner for moving mole-
cules. Physical Review Letters 86(7): 1378–1381.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Single-Cell and Single-Molecule Analyses Using Microﬂuidic Devices
441
Tegenfeldt, J.O., Prinz, C., Cao, H., Chou, S., Reisner, W.W., Riehn, R., Wang, Y.M.,
Cox, E.C., Sturm, J.C., Silberzan, P., and Austin, R.H. (2004a). The dynamics of
genomic-length DNA molecules in 100-nm channels. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101(30): 10979–10983.
Tegenfeldt, J.O., Prinz, C., Cao, H., Huang, R.L., Austin, R.H., Chou, S.Y., Cox, E.C.,
and Sturm, J.C. (2004b). Micro- and nanoﬂuidics for DNA analysis. Analytical
and Bioanalytical Chemistry 378(7): 1678–1692.
Tian, H., Emrich, C.A., Scherer, J.R., Mathies, R.A., Andersen, P.S., Larsen, L.A., and
Christiansen, M. (2005). High-throughput single-strand conformation poly-
morphism analysis on a microfabricated capillary array electrophoresis device.
Electrophoresis 26(9): 1834–1842.
Toner, M. and Irimia, D. (2005). Blood-on-a-chip. Annual Review of Biomedical Engi-
neering 7: 77–103. 
Toriello, N.M., Douglas, E.S., and Mathies, R.A. (2005). Microﬂuidic device for electric
ﬁeld-driven single-cell capture and activation. Analytical Chemistry 77(21):
6935–6941.
Tourovskaia, A., Figueroa-Masot, X., and Folch, A. (2005). Differentiation-on-a-chip:
A microﬂuidic platform for long-term cell culture studies. Lab on a Chip 5(1):
14–19.
Tsong, T.Y. (1991). Electroporation of cell membranes. Biophysical Journal 60(2): 297–306.
Valero, A., Merino, F., Wolbers, F., Luttge, R., Vermes, I., Andersson, H., and van den
Berg, A. (2005). Apoptotic cell death dynamics of HL60 cells studied using a
microﬂuidic cell trap device. Lab on a Chip 5(1): 49–55.
van Oijen, A.M., Blainey, P.C., Crampton, D.J., Richardson, C.C., Ellenberger, T., and
Xie, X.S. (2003). Single-molecule kinetics of l exonuclease reveal base depen-
dence and dynamic disorder. Science (Washington, DC, United States)
301(5637): 1235–1239.
Verbridge, S.S., Edel, J.B., Stavis, S.M., Moran-Mirabal, J.M., Allen, S.D., Coates, G.,
and Craighead, H.G. (2005). Suspended glass nanochannels coupled with mi-
crostructures for single molecule detection. Journal of Applied Physics 97(12):
124317/124311–124317/124314.
Wabuyele, M.B., Farquar, H., Stryjewski, W., Hammer, R.P., Soper, S.A., Cheng, Y.-
W., and Barany, F. (2003). Approaching real-time molecular diagnostics: Single-
pair ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer (spFRET) detection for the analysis
of low abundant point mutations in K-ras oncogenes. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 125(23): 6937–6945.
Wabuyele, M.B., Ford, S.M., Stryjewski, W., Barrow, J., and Soper, S.A. (2001). Single
molecule detection of double-stranded DNA in poly(methylmethacrylate) and
polycarbonate microﬂuidic devices. Electrophoresis 22(18): 3939–3948.
Waters, L.C., Jacobson, S.C., Kroutchinina, N., Khandurina, J., Foote, R.S., and Ram-
sey, J.M. (1998). Microchip device for cell lysis, multiplex PCR ampliﬁcation,
and electrophoretic sizing. Analytical Chemistry 70(1): 158–162.
Wheeler, A.R., Throndset, W.R., Whelan, R.J., Leach, A.M., Zare, R.N., Liao, Y.H.,
Farrell, K., Manger, I.D., and Daridon, A. (2003). Microﬂuidic device for single-
cell analysis. Analytical Chemistry 75(14): 3581–3586.
Wu, H., Wheeler, A., and Zare Richard, N. (2004). Chemical cytometry on a picoliter-
scale integrated microﬂuidic chip. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 101(35): 12809–12813.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

443
16
Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
Celeste Frankenfeld and Susan Lunte
CONTENTS
16.1
Advantages of the Microworld for Pharmaceutical
and Biomedical Analysis........................................................................ 443
16.2
Basic Components of Bio-MEMS and Lab-on-a-Chip Devices
for Pharmaceutical Analysis.................................................................. 444
16.3
Challenges of Pharmaceutical Bio-MEMS........................................... 448
16.4
Applications: Clinical Chemistry and Bioanalysis ............................ 449
16.4.1
Clinical Chemistry.................................................................... 449
16.4.2
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring ................................................ 455
16.4.3
High-Throughput Screening................................................... 457
16.5
Conclusion................................................................................................ 459
References ............................................................................................. 460
16.1
Advantages of the Microworld for Pharmaceutical
and Biomedical Analysis
Pharmaceutical analysis deals with the detection of any drug compound or
biological molecule that elicits a pharmacological response. Fast, efﬁcient,
and selective analytical methods are important for drug research and devel-
opment as well as the clinical diagnosis of disease. The emergence of bio-
logical microelectromechanical systems (bio-MEMS) provides a new
opportunity for the creation of high-throughput and portable analysis sys-
tems that can be used for a variety of pharmaceutical applications. These
include in vivo sensing, point-of-care diagnostics, and high-throughput
screening of drug candidates.
Bio-MEMS and lab-on-a-chip devices offer several advantages over con-
ventional analytical methods for pharmaceutical analysis. First, the small
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

444
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
sample requirements of these devices (mid-to-low picoliter range) mean
that only a few microliters of blood or micrograms of protein are necessary
for clinical or biological assays. The small footprint of the device also makes
it possible to perform multiple assays on a single chip.1–3 The integration of
several procedures including sample preparation, separation, and detection,
all in one device also means that sample loss and handling errors are
minimized.
Three additional advantages afforded by microchips are due to their small
size. First, the overall shorter channel dimensions make it possible to per-
form separations within seconds as opposed to the minutes required when
using conventional analytical systems. Secondly, the smaller dimensions of
the individual components make them portable. This offers the potential
for point-of-care analysis in the ﬁeld, at home, or in a physician’s ofﬁce.
Lastly, plastics and other inexpensive substrate materials can be used to
generate the microchips, making the production of disposable devices fea-
sible. Disposable devices are particularly attractive for the analysis of blood
and other biological ﬂuids that may contain biohazardous substances (such
as HIV or hepatitis B virus). It also eliminates many of the problems with
cross-contamination that can occur when a single chip is employed for
several analyses.
Perhaps the greatest advantage that microchip devices offer to the phar-
maceutical industry is the capability of high-throughput analysis. Multiple
channels and detectors may be fabricated onto a single chip, allowing any-
where between two and several hundred online analyses to occur simulta-
neously. This saves time and allows pharmaceutical companies to screen
molecular libraries that contain hundreds of thousands of potential drugs.
16.2
Basic Components of Bio-MEMS and Lab-on-a-Chip 
Devices for Pharmaceutical Analysis 
Most bio-MEMS and lab-on-a-chip devices used for pharmaceutical or bio-
medical analysis have several common components that are employed for
schematic outlining the different functions of the components that are com-
monly employed for pharmaceutical and clinical applications.
Sample introduction into an analytical microchip is most often accom-
plished by manually pipetting the sample into a low-volume reservoir that
is built into the chip. Alternatively, a syringe pump may be connected to
chip ﬁttings to reproducibly introduce the sample via a pressure-driven ﬂow.
A portion of the sample is then injected from the reservoir into the analytical
system using either pressure-driven ﬂow or electrokinetic gating. If pressure-
driven ﬂow is employed, the sample is forced from the sample well into the
processing channel hydrodynamically.4,5 In electrokinetic gating, the sample
sample introduction, sample processing, and detection. Figure 16.1 shows a
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
445
is injected into the processing channel by application of voltages that gen-
erate electroosmotic ﬂow (EOF).6,7 The magnitude of the EOF is dependent
on pH, ionic strength, and the type of substrate employed for the device as
well as the ﬁeld strength. In general, EOF forces the bulk ﬂuid toward
cathodic buffer reservoirs; in the process it carries the analyte along with
other sample components into the sample processing region of the chip. 
A recent trend in sample injection into microchips is the introduction of
discrete samples from a ﬂowing stream.8 In 2001, Harrison’s group ﬁrst pub-
lished a paper entitled, “Allowing microﬂuidic chips to drink from the ﬁre
hose of the external environment.”9 In this application, discrete injections were
made from a solution ﬂowing at one mL/min and then analyzed by electro-
phoresis. Later, Chen et al. described an interface that could be employed at
lower ﬂow rates (1 µl/min) and was employed for a ﬂow injection-based
immunoassay.10 More recently, our group has further modiﬁed this approach
to incorporate microdialysis as an online sample preparation method.11
data obtained for the near real-time monitoring of an enzymatic reaction.
Once a sample has been introduced into the chip, additional processing
steps such as sample preparation, mixing, reactions, and separation are
usually necessary prior to analyte detection. Some commonly employed
sample preparation strategies include ﬁltration, solid-phase extraction, and
derivatization. Filtration can be accomplished using pillars fabricated
directly into the device, beads packed into a channel, or microdialysis mem-
branes sandwiched within the chip.12–14 For solid-phase extraction, particles
FIGURE 16.1
Components of bio-MEMS chips for pharmaceutical and biomedical analysis.
Sample Introduction 
Sample Processing 
Filtration 
Extraction 
Derivatization 
Mixing 
On-chip reaction 
Separation 
Immunoassay 
... and Injection 
Pipette 
Electrokinetic 
Pressure-driven 
ﬂow 
Syringe 
Electrochemical
Fluorescence
Mass spectrometry
Detection 
 Figure
16.2 shows a schematic of the online microdialysis-microchip CE system and
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

446
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
and monolithic chromatographic materials have been used to isolate the
compound(s) of interest from the other components of the sample.15,16 Several
types of supports have been investigated for this purpose, including reversed
phase17 and immunoafﬁnity chromatography.18
In some cases, derivatization is necessary to make the analyte of interest
detectable. Derivatization can be accomplished precolumn, postcolumn, or
on-column. James Landers has employed on-chip derivatization for the
detection of proteins following sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).19 Ramsey’s group has used postcolumn deriva-
tization for the detection of peptides following electrophoretic separation.20,21 
Control of ﬂuid ﬂow is essential to carry out the diverse functions required
of analytical bio-MEMS, including derivatization, mixing,22 and other on-
chip chemical reactions.23  Valves may be incorporated into the chip to direct
ﬂuid ﬂow and promote mixing of two ﬂuid streams. These valves can be
pressure driven24 or electrokinetic.25  Valves produced by soft lithography
can also be used as pneumatic pumps within the chip or simply act as
isolation points where ﬂuid ﬂows may be separated from one another.24 
Electrophoresis is commonly employed for the separation of analytes on
microchip devices.26 Several forms of electrophoresis have been accomplished
FIGURE 16.2
Online microdialysis microchip electrophoresis continuous monitoring of hydrolysis of ﬂuo-
rescein mono--D-galactopyranoside by galactosidase. (From Huynh, B. et al., Anal. Chem. 76,
6440-6447, 2004. With permission.)
Perfusate syringe
Microdialysis probe
Guide cannula
Sample vial
Microchip device
Fluorescein
FMG
300
200
100
400
0
600
800
1000
400
1200
Time (sec)
Fluorescence intensity (mV)
0
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
1200
1250
100
200
300
400
Lag time~5.5 min
∗
1.0
Time (sec)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
447
on-chip, including zone electrophoresis,27 polyacrylamide gel electrophore-
sis (PAGE), SDS-PAGE,28 and micellar electrokinetic chromatography
(MEKC) separations.29 In zone electrophoresis, the analytes are separated
based on their charge-to-mass ratio. This approach is most commonly
employed for the separation of amino acids and peptides. SDS-PAGE and
PAGE are size-based separations and are used for separations of proteins
and DNA, respectively. MEKC separates compounds based on their hydro-
phobicity and is most commonly employed for the separation of nonionic
pharmaceuticals. 
Chromatographic supports have also been incorporated into microchips
to effect a separation. This can be accomplished through the incorporation
of porous hydrophobic beads, commonly utilized in conventional HPLC,
into micron-sized channels.17 Alternatively, in situ production of monoliths
has been accomplished by several groups. The separation can be accom-
plished by the application of pressure-driven ﬂow or an electric ﬁeld (elec-
trochromatography).
Antibodies have been used for both sample processing and detection. If
the antibodies are immobilized on a chromatographic support, they can be
used for sample preparation and concentration. Alternatively, antibodies can
be employed for sample detection by immunoassay. Both of these methods
take advantage of the high selectivity of binding of an antigen to an anti-
body.30–32 In the case of immunoafﬁnity, the antibodies are used to trap the
antigen of interest and isolate it from potential interferences. This approach
was discussed above under the sample preparation methods.
Separation-based immunoassays have also been performed on-chip.33 In
the competitive immunoassay format, labeled antigens compete with endog-
enous antigens for antibody binding sites. Then electrophoresis or chroma-
tography is used to separate the bound from the free fraction of labeled
antigen. An alternative approach is to immobilize a speciﬁc known quantity
of antibodies on beads or the channel walls in the chip. A sample containing
both endogenous antigen and labeled antigen is introduced into the channel.
Both compete for the binding sites. When the labeled antigens are measured
(via ﬂuorescence or an enzyme reaction), the concentration of target analyte
may be determined.
There are many forms of detection that may be incorporated into a bio-
MEMS device. An entire chapter of this book is devoted to one of those
methods, electrochemical detection (EC).34–37 Another common form of inte-
grated detection is laser-induced ﬂuorescence (LIF).38 Other optical forms of
detection, less commonly included on microchips, are thermal lens spectros-
copy,39 deep UV spectroscopy,40 and ﬁber-optic methods of capturing emis-
sion intensity.41 Mass spectrometry (MS) is an important detection method
that is highly desirable to the pharmaceutical industry. Although MS has not
been incorporated on-chip, several chips have been developed with micro-
fabricated interfaces that allow analyte to be injected from the microdevice
onto the mass spectrometer.42–45
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

448
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
16.3
Challenges of Pharmaceutical Bio-MEMS
The greatest challenge to face pharmaceutical bio-MEMS is that of com-
patibility with biological ﬂuids, tissues, and cells. Devices used for moni-
toring the release of substances from cells or tissue culture or those that
are implanted into a tissue must be constructed of biocompatible materials
that will resist biofouling. A review by Grayson et al.46 addresses many of
these issues.
The analysis of complex biological ﬂuids, including blood, saliva, or urine,
also presents a challenge. In this case, cells, proteins, large molecules, and
other components that may interfere with analysis must be separated or
removed completely. Otherwise, they may adhere to channel walls, foul
detector electrodes (diminishing electrode response), physically clog the
channel, or co-elute or co-migrate with analytes of interest, hindering detec-
tion. Samples are usually ﬁltered either pre-, or on-chip, and channel walls
can be coated to resist adherents.
For cells or tissue studies on-chip, it is important to provide an environ-
ment in which cells can grow and tissue will remain viable. Also, in neural
networks, the brain cells must remain in contact with the electrodes that are
stimulating or recording their activity without fouling them. Commonly
employed materials and substrates in microfabrication of bio-MEMS include
silicon, silicon nitride, silicon dioxide, gold, SU-8, higher noble metals (plat-
inum, titanium), and activated carbon electrodes have all been found to be
biocompatible in the short term, although different forms (porous as opposed
to smooth silicon) elicited different degrees of biocompatibility.46
Another potential problem for lab-on-a-chip devices can be the high salt
concentrations characteristic of physiological samples. This can be a partic-
ular problem for electrophoretic-based analyses. The mismatch between the
ionic strengths of the samples and the run buffer can lead to peak dispersion
and loss of efﬁciency. It is possible to increase the ionic strength of the run
buffer, however this can lead to joule heating. In most cases, physiological
samples are simply diluted to overcome the high salt concentrations, but this
also dilutes the sample. Therefore, the detector must have limits of detection
that are low enough to allow sample dilution.
Blood can be a particularly difﬁcult sample for microchip-based assays.
Over 46% of the components of blood are solids, including red blood cells,
white blood cells, and platelets. In standard clinical assays involving blood,
these solid components are removed through centrifugation. However, this
approach is not easily transferred to the microchip format. Recently, a variety
of ﬁlters and techniques that take advantage of the slower ﬂow of the larger
particles have been incorporated into chips to isolate small molecules from
the larger components.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
449
16.4
Applications: Clinical Chemistry and Bioanalysis
16.4.1
Clinical Chemistry
Lab-on-a-chip devices have been developed for a number of clinical analyses,
including those to detect exposure to biological warfare agents. Recently,
Moorthy et al.47 described a microassay for botulinum neurotoxin in whole
blood. This toxin is one of the most deadly substances known, and can be
lethal at concentrations as low as 1 ng/kg. Because the only known antidote
for this toxin is an antitoxin that binds the toxin before it can bind to nerves,
fast analysis is critical. 
 In the microchip-based assay, whole blood is ﬁrst mixed with a hypotonic
solution that causes the red blood cells to swell. The swollen cells are retained
behind a porous polymer ﬁlter, allowing the serum to pass into the process-
ing part of the chip where a bead-based sandwich enzyme-linked immun-
osorbent assay (ELISA) is performed. Valves are used to control the ﬂow and
addition of reagents in the immunoassay. For this assay, quantitation was
not necessary, as just an indication of the presence of the toxin was needed
to conﬁrm contamination. Hence, a simple colorimetric response generated
by the enzyme label in the immunoassay was used as an indicator for the
existence of the toxin. 
A more common clinical application of microchip-based assays is the
extensive list of clinical assays reported in the literature. One example of
such an assay is the detection of homocysteine in blood. Homocysteine has
been identiﬁed as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
Therefore, a point-of-care device for analysis of homocysteine levels would
be a useful tool for cardiologists to monitor their patients’ heart health. In
this microchip-based assay, a cobalt (II) phthalocyanine (coPC)-modiﬁed
carbon paste electrode was used to detect the three major thiols in blood
(glutathione, homocysteine, and cysteine). The modiﬁed electrode showed
high selectivity for thiols compared to other easily oxidized compounds
found in blood.48
Another microchip electrophoresis device currently under investigation in
our laboratory has clinical possibilities for the detection of nitrate and nitrite.
Nitric oxide is an important signaling molecule that plays a role in neural
signal mediation, inﬂammation, and vasodilation. Nitric oxide degrades
quickly into nitrate (NO3
–) and nitrite (NO2
–) under physiological conditions.
The presence of nitrite in urine frequently indicates a bacterial infection. 
Kikura-Hanajiri et al. developed a microchip-based analytical method for
the detection of nitrate and nitrite as an indirect measurement of NO pro-
duction. Two separate measurements were used to determine the total con-
centration of NO because only nitrite could be analyzed directly using
detection of endogenous compounds or biomarkers. Table 16.1 provides an
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

450
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
TABLE 16.1
Clinical and Bioanalytical Applications
Analyte
 Signiﬁcance
Device/Technique
Notes
Carnitine/acetylcarnitine standards, 
also imipramine and desipramine in 
fortiﬁed human plasma
Amino acid derivative 
important in fatty acid 
oxidation; deﬁciency leads 
to cardiac, CNS, and 
skeletal problems
Microchip electrophoresis to separate 
analytes, coupled with mass 
spectrometry for detection57
Linear calibration curve obtained, 
demonstrating ability for robust, 
reproducible quantitation
 Sequential injection analysis with 
amperometric biosensor detection58
Carnitine, acylcarnitine, 
butylcarnitine 
Microchip electrophoresis coupled to 
mass spec59
Separated small, polar molecules w/o 
channel treatment on-chip, ion-sprayed 
into MS
Microchip electrophoresis with 
online electrospray to MS42
Carnitine and three acylcarnitines in urine 
separated in 48 s
Potassium in blood
Electrolyte involved in 
signaling
Microarray sensor in a potassium-
selective electrode60
Potassium, sodium, lithium
Electrolytes
Microchip electrophoresis with 
contactless conductivity detection61
Blood gases and electrolytes (CO2, O2, 
Ca2+, Na+, K+)
6-channel ﬂuorescence sensor array62
 Superblue LED acted as light sources
Creatine, creatinine, p-aminohippuric 
acid, uric acid
Renal markers used to 
assess health of renal 
system
Microchip electrophoresis coupled 
with enzymatic reaction using 
amperometric detection56
Glucose, uric acid, ascorbic acid, 
acetaminophen
Enzyme reaction on-chip, separation 
by electrophoresis, and 
electrochemical detection63
Enzyme mixed with glucose on-chip, 
reaction products separated from ascorbic 
acid and internal standard, uric acid
Glucose and lactate
Blood sugar monitored in 
diabetes and related 
metabolic disorders and 
ubiquitous by-product of 
cellular metabolism
Microdialysis interface, microﬂow 
manifold, and biosensor array for 
detection64
In vivo microdialysis of core blood of dogs 
Microdialysis probe coupled to ﬂow 
cell/ enzyme biosensor array65
(continued)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
451
TABLE 16.1 (continued)
Clinical and Bioanalytical Applications
Analyte
 Signiﬁcance
Device/Technique
Notes
Lactate in serum
On-chip enzyme reaction, mixing, 
ﬂow injection analysis, and 
chemiluminescence detection66
Lactate, glucose, glutamate
Enzymatic microsensor for FIA67
Dialysis tube traps enzyme—substrates 
(lactate, etc.) ﬂow past and react, releasing 
hydrogen peroxide, which is then detected 
electrochemically
Glucose
Microchip electrophoresis with 
electrochemical detection68
Amperometric detection of glucose in 
diluted human plasma
Amino acids in urine
Building blocks of proteins, 
serve various functions in 
the body
Microchip electrophoresis with 
indirect ﬂuorescence detection69
Micellar electrokinetic capillary 
chromatography on-chip with LIF 
detection of amino acids in urine 
and serum70
Cyclic channel design allows column 
switching and variable separation channel 
lengths
Hydrolysis of ﬂuorescein mono-D-
galactopyranoside
Microdialysis coupled to microchip 
electrophoresis with laser-induced 
ﬂuorescence detection11
Microdialysis may be used to monitor 
biological compounds in vivo as well as a 
sample cleanup technique
Neuropeptides
Bioactive compounds in the 
brain that act as 
neurotransmitters and 
signal regulators
Microdialysis coupled to MS for in 
vivo monitoring of 
neurochemicals71, 72
Microdialysis sampling of brain peptides of 
live rats
Homocysteine
High blood level a risk 
factor for heart disease
Microchip electrophoresis with 
electrochemical detection73
Homocysteine and glutathione standards 
separated on-chip
Lipoproteins (LDL and HDL)
Concentrations correlated 
to heart disease 
Microchip electrophoresis with LIF 
detection74
 Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) added to 
sample to increase peak efﬁciency
Hepatitis C virus
A cause of liver disease
Post-PCR microchip electrophoresis 
with LIF detection75
(continued)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

452
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
TABLE 16.1 (continued)
Clinical and Bioanalytical Applications
Analyte
 Signiﬁcance
Device/Technique
Notes
ATP
Energy molecule in cellular 
metabolism
Microchip ﬂow-through channels 
with chemiluminescence detection76
Channels mimic blood vessels, ATP 
released from erythrocytes that are 
physically deformed in those channels
Catecholamines (epinephrine, 
norepinephrine, dopamine, L-dopa)
Neurotransmitters
Mixing and reacting on-chip with 
thermal lens microscopy detection77
Sodium metaperiodate oxidized analytes to 
aminochromes (detectable via TLS) in only 
15 s on-chip
Ascorbic acid
Vitamin C
Flow injection analysis with thermal 
lens microscopy detection78
Mixing, reactions, extraction, and detection 
all occurred on-chip; AA and 
dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA) 
determined in urine samples
Amino sugars (glucosamine, 
galactosamine, and reduced forms)
Microchip electrophoresis with LIF 
detection79
Uric acid
Measured in urine to 
monitor diverse 
conditions such as kidney 
stones, lead poisoning, 
gout, alcoholism
Microchip electrophoresis with 
amperometric electrochemical 
detection of urine samples80
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)/
glutathione (GSH)
Cellular oxidants / 
endogenous antioxidant
Microchip electrophoresis with LIF 
detection of apoptic leukemia cell 
extracts81
DHR-123 converted to ﬂuorescent
Rh-123 by ROS; GSH reacts with NDA
to form ﬂuorescent adduct so each is 
visible via LIF
Insulin secretion
Mixing, reaction, electrophoretic 
separation with LIF detection30,82
Single islet of Langerhans placed into 
reservoir and surrounding ﬂuid 
continually sampled for secretion of 
insulin
(continued)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
453
TABLE 16.1 (continued)
Clinical and Bioanalytical Applications
Analyte
 Signiﬁcance
Device/Technique
Notes
NO
Dilates blood vessels; 
modulates synaptic signal 
transmission
Cells grown in channels of 
microﬂuidic chip with 
amperometric detection83
Bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells 
stimulated to release NO, detected with C 
ink electrode coated with naﬁon to block 
interfering species.
Cell culture, enzyme reactions, and 
detection by a colorimetric reaction 
and laser-induced thermal lens 
microscopy50
Indirect detection via Griess reagent of NO 
released from mouse macrophages
Cytokine
Cellular proteins that 
regulate immune response
Immunoafﬁnity capture, dye-
labeling, electrophoresis, and LIF 
detection31
Immobilized antibodies in injection 
port–captured cytokines in serum and CSF 
of head-trauma patients
Botulinum toxin
Bacterial toxin used in 
biological warfare 
ELISA, including sample prep of 
blood, on-chip47
Filtration, mixing, incubation coupled to 
microﬂuidic channels, valves, ﬁlters, and 
enzymatic reaction for colorimetric 
detection
Cortisol
 Stress hormone
Competitive immunoassay, 
electrophoretic separation of bound 
and free labeled antigen, and LIF 
detection on-chip84
Determination of cortisol in blood serum in 
clinical range without extraction or other 
sample prep (separation in less than 30 s)
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

454
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
electrochemical detection. First, the total amount of NO2 was determined by
zone electrophoresis with amperometric detection at a carbon electrode.
Second, NO3 was reduced to NO2
– on-chip with copper-coated cadmium
granules, separated, and detected. The total concentration of NO3
– was cal-
culated by subtracting the ﬁrst run (NO2
–) from the second (NO2
– + NO2
–
from reduction of NO3
–).49
A different microchip-based bioassay was developed for the detection of
nitric oxide release from macrophage cells stimulated by lipopolysaccharide
(LPS).50 A diagram of the microchip is shown in Figure 16.3. Cells were
cultured on-chip in a microchamber and incubated at 37°C by a Peltier
element-based temperature control device. In order to stimulate NO produc-
tion, LPS in medium was introduced through a reservoir upstream from the
cells. The NO quickly degraded to generate NO2
– and NO3
–. Nitrate reductase
was introduced through another reservoir to reduce the nitrate to nitrite. The
resulting nitrite (from both NO2
– and NO3
–) was then reacted with sulfanil-
amide and N-1-naphthylethylendiamine to form a colored product that was
detected using a thermal lens microscope.
Another application of microchips to clinical analysis is immunoassays.
These are frequently used to detect the presence of certain proteins or anti-
bodies in blood or other tissues. Examples of microchip assays of this type
include those for simple protein analytes such as bovine serum albumin
(BSA)51,52 or IgG.51,53,54 Other on-chip assays are more complex. One example
is a chip that is designed to aid in the diagnosis of Duchene muscular
dystrophy.55 In this assay, genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood
and ampliﬁed using an on-chip IR-mediated polymerase chain reaction
FIGURE 16.3
Microsyringe pumps, microchip, and temperature control device for bioassay of NO release
from macrophages. (From Goto, M. et al., Anal. Chem., 77, 2125, 2005. With permission.)
Switching valve
Cells
Medium
LPS in medium
Nitrate reductase
Sulranilamide
N-1-Naphtylethylendiamine
TLM detection
Waste
Temperature
control device
37°C
50°C
20°C
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
455
(PCR). The resulting DNA related to the disease was detected following
electrophoretic separation.
Wang et al. have coupled an enzymatic bioassay with an electrophoretic
separation on-chip for the measurement of the renal markers creatine, cre-
atinine, p-aminohippuric acid, and uric acid.56 These markers are routinely
monitored to assess kidney function. Sample and a mixture of creatinase,
creatininase, and sarcosine oxidase were combined and allowed to react.
The enzyme reactions produced hydrogen peroxide, which is neutral and
can be electrophoretically separated from other anionic analytes of interest,
urate, and p-aminohippuric acid. Amperometric detection was used for
quantitation.
In large clinical labs, most assays take place at a location that is far from
the patient. In these cases, the analysis can take a great deal of time and the
sample may be mishandled, mislabeled, or lost. Microﬂuidic devices offer
the opportunity for point-of-care analysis, giving both the patient and the
doctor instant feedback. These small, fast, and disposable devices offer the
potential for quick, less error-prone analyses—at the doctors’ ofﬁce or at
of microchip-based clinical assays.
16.4.2
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Microchip-based assays have also been developed for therapeutic drug mon-
theophylline was developed by Chiem and Harrison.51,85 Theophylline is an
antiasthmatic drug. Physicians can adjust the dosage for maximum efﬁcacy
if serum theophylline levels are followed. In this study, the antibody, labeled
theophylline, and sample serum were mixed on-chip by electroosmotic
pumping. The antibodies were allowed to react with the antigen and then
the bound versus free fractions were separated by electrophoresis and
detected by ﬂuorescence. Limits of detection for theophylline of 26 mg/L in
serum were achieved.
Vrouwe et al.86 created a microchip analysis system for measurement of
Li+ in whole blood. Li+ is normally not present in the body; however, it is
used in the treatment of manic-depressive illnesses. The upper therapeutic
level of this drug is dangerously close to toxic concentrations; therefore,
careful monitoring of blood concentration is important. Vrouwe exploited
the fact that in an electric ﬁeld, Li+ ions move more quickly than the much
larger blood cells. The sample was injected electrokinetically, and Li+ was
loaded into the separation channel before the blood cells had a chance to
enter the injection T. Glucose was also added to the run buffer to match the
osmotic strength of the run buffer to that of blood so that the cells did not
lyse and release contents that could interfere with Li+ detection. Because
sodium concentrations are high and fairly constant in blood, sodium was
used as an internal standard. The Li+ peak areas were normalized to Na+
home. Table 16.1 lists a majority of the current research toward development
itoring as Table 16.2 shows. An on-chip competitive immunoassay for serum
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

456
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
and quantitated after calibration. Channels were coated with polyacrylamide
so that the chip might be reused (protein adhesion to channel walls would
otherwise not allow more than one run). Conductivity detection was
employed in this study.
A mixture of serotonin, propranolol, 3-phenoxy-1,2-propandiol, and tryp-
tophan, as well as a distinct mixture of unlabeled lysozyme, trypsinogen,
and chymotrypsinogen were analyzed by microchip electrophoresis with
deep UV LIF detection.40 The signiﬁcance of this particular study is the
sensitivity with which the low molecular weight biomolecules could be
detected and the simplicity of the chip design. The use of deep UV ﬂuores-
cence detection also meant that proteins could be detected by native ﬂuo-
shows a comparison of the sensitivity obtained using deep UV ﬂuorescence
detection versus other detection systems.
TABLE 16.2
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Analyte
Signiﬁcance
Device/Technique
Notes
Propanolol, 
serotonin, 
tryptophan, and 
a diol (also, 
unlabeled basic 
proteins, and egg 
white protein)
Microchip 
electrophoresis to 
separate analytes, 
deep UV 
ﬂuorescence for 
detection40
Deep UV ﬂuorescence 
detection enabled post-
separation detection at 
low micromolar 
concentrations w/o ﬁrst 
labeling analytes
β-blockers 
(oxprenolol, 
atenolol, timolol, 
propanolol, 
metoprolol, 
acebutolol)
Drug for regulation 
of cardiovascular 
system
Mixtures of β-
blockers in urine 
SPE treated, then 
separated and 
detected with CD 
and LIF87
Coupled channel on-chip 
allowed preconcentra-
tion in one channel, and 
separation in another
Octopamine, 
doxylamine, 
ephedrine, 
noradrenaline, 
isoproterenol, 
adrenaline
Microchip 
electrophoresis 
with contactless 
conductivity 
detection88
Amphetamines
Drugs of abuse that 
affect the CNS, also 
over-the-counter 
decongestants
FITC-derived 
amphetamines 
from spiked urine 
separated in 
microchip and 
detected with LIF89
Chiral separations 
using cyclodextrins 
and microchip 
electrophoresis 
with LIF detection90
Direct separation of 
chiral molecules 
through addition of 
chiral selector to the run 
buffer
(continued)
rescence, obviating any deriviatization steps normally required. Figure 16.4
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
457
16.4.3
High-Throughput Screening
As mentioned previously, microchips and bio-MEMS are of great value to
the pharmaceutical industry for the purpose of high-throughput screening.
TABLE 16.2 (continued)
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Analyte
Signiﬁcance
Device/Technique
Notes
Lithium
Used as treatment in 
manic-depressive 
illness, therapeutic 
range dangerously 
close to toxic level 
Microchip 
electrophoresis 
separation of Li+, 
K+, and Na+ with 
AC conductivity 
detection86
Whole blood mixed with 
anticoagulant, loaded 
on-chip, channels 
coated to resist 
contamination by 
proteins, voltage 
controlled so that 
sample entered 
separation channel, yet 
RBC did not
Phenytoin 
Anticonvulsant
Competitive 
immunoassay of 
whole blood with 
ﬂuorescence 
detection91
T-sensor allows diffusion 
of side-by-side streams 
of antigen and antibody; 
binding of antigen 
(small and thus fast) to 
antibody (larger thus 
slower) slows their 
diffusion; diffusion 
proﬁle changes 
compared to proﬁle of 
freely diffusing antigen. 
Albumin bound to 
iophenoxate to decrease 
binding assay 
interference.
General 
immunoassay 
microfabrication 
technique
Patterning
protein antigens 
on-chip with 
surface plasmon 
resonance, then 
probed antigens 
with complement-
ary antibodies to 
visualize 
patterning92
Fabrication of chip 
microarray for 
immunoassay
Theophylline
Drug for respiratory 
diseases
On-chip 
competitive 
immunoassay, 
detection down to 
1.25 ng/mL, linear 
in therapeutic 
range51,85,93
Reagent and serum 
samples mixed, reacted, 
separated, and analyzed 
all on one chip
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

458
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
Multiple channels and detectors on one chip greatly increase the number of
analyses that can be run. To that end, several research groups have developed
microchips to investigate high volumes of samples. This enables drug screen-
ing of molecular libraries to identify successful drug candidates.94
Currently, many high-throughput screenings involve microarrays. Numer-
ous physiological processes involve protein–carbohydrate interactions, and
the ideal microanalysis tool to study these interactions in the high-through-
put format is the carbohydrate microarray.95,96 These chips consist of carbo-
hydrates immobilized on glass slides. Detection is external, frequently
ﬂuorescence detection. A high-throughput carbohydrate array microchip
was developed and used to determine the binding afﬁnities between lectins
and carbohydrates.97 A different carbohydrate microarray was used to screen
85 compounds to ﬁnd inhibitors of fucosyltransferases.98 
Another form of high-throughput screening, multiplexed enzyme assay,
was developed to screen enzymatic activity of MAP, IR, and PKA kinases.51,99
These assays were especially valuable because they were multiplexed; three
FIGURE 16.4
Electropherograms of separations of a mixture of (1) serotonin, (2) propranolol, (3) 3-phenoxy-
1,2-propandiol, and (4) tryptophan using different detection systems. (a) Conventional capillary
electrophoresis with UV absorbance detection. (b) Microchip electrophoresis with deep UV
ﬂuorescence detection. (c) Commercial microchip electrophoresis system with UV absorbance
detection. (From Schulze, P. et al., Anal. Chem., 77, 1325, 2005. With permission.)
2
50
75
1
2
3
4
Absorbance
(a)
1
2
3
4
Fluorescence
(b)
t (S)
t (S)
6
18
30
(c)
1
2
3
4
5
10
15
20
x (mm)
Absorbance
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
459
enzymes, each from a different kinase family, were assayed simultaneously
within each channel. Although sample preparation was conducted off-chip,
enzymes and product were separated in a double-T microchip design. Using
this device, drugs were screened for activity, cross-reactivity, speciﬁcity, and
potential side effects. In a separate high-throughput application, a 6-channel
microﬂuidic immunoreactor/immunoassay was developed for the simulta-
neous assay of ovalbumin and antiestradiol within 30 to 60 s.51,100 Another
high-throughput immunoassay was used to screen afﬁnity complexes of
phenobarbitol antibody and nine barbiturates, including phenobarbitol.
Sample loading, washing, and dissociation steps were performed on-chip,
and the device was then coupled to ESI-MS for detection.101
Tabuchi et al. developed an integrated cell-culture chip that incorporated
protein separation and detection along with cell culture. Washing, stimula-
tion, and lysis could be accomplished on-chip and were coupled to a com-
mercial Agilent microelectrophoresis chip.102 The culture chip contained 48
to 96 wells 5 to 6.5 mm in diameter, with a second layer that contained
molded cups that ﬁt into the wells of the ﬁrst chip. Jurkat cells were cultured
in the ﬁrst row of wells in the strip of cups that ﬁt into those wells. For a
medium change, the cups in which the cells were cultured were removed
and placed into the next row of wells, which were ﬁlled with fresh medium.
This process was repeated for each new step, that is, stimulation, lysis, and
protein extraction, until ﬁnally the cups were placed in wells ﬁtted with the
wires for the electrophoretic separation chip. This Agilent chip has 12 chan-
nels; in this application, 11 samples from the cells and a protein ladder sample
were run and detected by LIF. The cell density remained constant in contrast
to conventional cell culture and CE analysis, where cells are consistently lost
to dilution, washing, medium change, and pipetting. Ultimately, this device
enabled analysis of extracted proteins without sample loss at a rate of 12
samples per minute.
DNA sequencing is the most popular application of microchips in the high-
cussion of this topic will be left to that chapter. 
16.5
Conclusion
Although many examples of useful clinical and bioanalytical pharmaceutical
applications have been presented in this chapter, most of the bio-MEMS used
in these are prototypes. There is still much work to be done to improve the
limits of detection, reproducibility, and ruggedness of these devices. In addi-
tion, the integration and fabrication of several components onto a single chip
has been accomplished by only a few groups thus far. However, the potential
utility of these microchip devices for high-throughput and point-of-care
analyses makes this research well worth the effort. 
throughput world; however, Chapter 13 addresses DNA directly, and dis-
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

460
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
References
1. Gawron, A.J., Martin, R.S., and Lunte, S.M., Microchip electrophoretic separa-
tion systems for biomedical and pharmaceutical analysis, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci.,
14, 1, 2001.
2. Kricka, L.J. and Wilding, P., Micromachining: a new direction for clinical ana-
lyzers, Pure Appl. Chem., 68, 1831, 1996.
3. Verpoorte, E., Microﬂuidic chips for clinical and forensic analysis, Electrophore-
sis, 23, 677, 2002.
4. Wang, J. et al., Single-channel microchip for fast screening and detailed iden-
tiﬁcation of nitroaromatic explosives or organophosphate nerve agents, Anal.
Chem., 74, 1187, 2002.
5. Fang, Q., Xu, G.M., and Fang, Z.L., A high-throughput continuous sample
introduction interface for microﬂuidic chip-based capillary electrophoresis sys-
tems, Anal. Chem., 74, 1223, 2002.
6. Alarie, J.P., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Electrophoretic injection bias in
a microchip valving scheme, Electrophoresis, 22, 312, 2001.
7. Jacobson, S.C., Ermakov, S.V., and Ramsey, J.M., Minimizing the number of
voltage sources and ﬂuid reservoirs for electrokinetic valving in microﬂuidic
devices, Anal. Chem., 71, 3273, 1999.
8. Roddy, E.S., Xu, H., and Ewing, A.G., Sample introduction techniques for
microfabricated separation devices, Electrophoresis, 25, 229, 2004.
9. Attiya, S. et al., Design of an interface to allow microﬂuidic electrophoresis
chips to drink from the ﬁre hose of the external environment, Electrophoresis,
22, 318, 2001.
10. Chen, S.H. et al., Flow-through sampling for electrophoresis-based microchips
and their applications for protein analysis, Anal. Chem., 74, 5146, 2002.
11. Huynh, B.H. et al., On-line coupling of microdialysis sampling with microchip-
based capillary electrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 76, 6440, 2004.
12. Wilding, P. et al., Integrated cell isolation and polymerase chain reaction anal-
ysis using silicon microﬁlter chambers, Anal. Biochem., 257, 95, 1998.
13. Foote, R.S. et al., Preconcentration of proteins on microﬂuidic devices using
porous silica membranes, Anal. Chem., 77, 57, 2005.
14. Xu, N. et al., A microfabricated dialysis device for sample cleanup in electro-
spray ionization mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 70, 3553, 1998.
15. Yu, C. et al., Preparation of monolithic polymers with controlled porous prop-
erties for microﬂuidic chip applications using photoinitiated free-radical poly-
merization, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 40, 755, 2002.
16. Kutter, J.P., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Solid phase extraction on microf-
luidic devices, J. Microcolumn Sep., 12, 93, 2000.
17. Oleschuk, R.D. et al., Trapping of bead-based reagents within microﬂuidic
systems: on-chip solid-phase extraction and electrochromatography, Anal.
Chem., 72, 585, 2000.
18. Delaunay-Bertonicini, N. and Hennion, M.C., Immunoafﬁnity solid-phase ex-
traction for pharmaceutical and biomedical trace-analysis-coupling with HPLC
and CE-perspectives, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 34, 717, 2004.
19. Giordano, B. et al., Microchip laser-induced ﬂuorescence detection of proteins
at submicrogram per milliliter levels mediated by dynamic labeling under
pseudonative conditions, Anal. Chem., 76, 4705, 2004.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
461
20. Gottschlich, N. et al., Integrated microchip-device for the digestion, separation
and postcolumn labeling of proteins and peptides, J. Chromatog. B, 745, 243,
2000.
21. Jacobson, S.C. et al., Microchip structures for submillisecond electrophoresis,
Anal. Chem., 70, 3476, 1998.
22. Veenstra, T.T. et al., Characterization method for a new diffusion mixer applicable
in micro ﬂow injection analysis systems, J. Micromech. Microeng., 9, 199, 1999.
23. Eijkel, J.C.T. et al., Micromachined heated chemical reactor for pre-column
derivatisation, J. Chromatog. A, 815, 265, 1998.
24. Unger, M.A. et al., Monolithic microfabricated valves and pumps by multilayer
soft lithography, Science, 288, 113, 2000.
25. Jacobson, S.C., McKnight, T.E., and Ramsey, J.M., Microﬂuidic devices for elec-
trokinetically driven parallel and serial mixing, Anal. Chem., 71, 4455, 1999.
26. Weinberger, R., Practical Capillary Electrophoresis. 2nd ed., San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic Press, 2000.
27. Culbertson, C.T., Jacobson, S.C., and Ramsey, J.M., Microchip devices for high-
efﬁciency separations, Anal. Chem., 72, 5814, 2000.
28. Han, J. and Singh, A.K., Rapid protein separations in ultra-short microchannels:
microchip sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and iso-
electric focusing, J. Chromatog. A, 1049, 205, 2004.
29. Rodriguez, I., Lee, H.K., and Li, S.F., Microchannel electrophoretic separation
of biogenic amines by micellar electrokinetic chromatography, Electrophoresis,
20, 118, 1999.
30. Shackman, J.G. et al., Perfusion and chemical monitoring of living cells on a
microﬂuidic chip, Lab Chip, 5, 56, 2005.
31. Phillips, T.M., Rapid analysis of inﬂammatory cytokines in cerebrospinal ﬂuid
using chip-based immunoafﬁnity electrophoresis, Electrophoresis, 25, 1652, 2004.
32. Wang, J., Ibanez, A., and Chatrathi, M.P., On-chip integration of enzyme and
immunoassays: simultaneous measurements of insulin and glucose, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 125, 8444, 2003.
33. Wang, J., Ibanez, A., and Chatrathi, M.P., Microchip-based amperometric im-
munoassay using redox tracers, Electrophoresis, 23, 3744, 2002.
34. Wooley, A.T. et al., Capillary electrophoresis chips with integrated electrochem-
ical detection, Anal. Chem., 70, 684, 1998.
35. Wang, J., Tian, B.M., and Sahlin, E., Micromachined electrophoresis chips with
thick-ﬁlm electrochemical detectors, Anal. Chem., 71, 5436, 1999.
36. Tantra, R. and Manz, A., Integrated potentiometric detector for use in chip-
based ﬂow cells, Anal. Chem., 72, 2875, 2000.
37. Martin, R.S. et al., In-channel electrochemical detection for microchip capil-
lary electrophoresis using an electrically isolated potentiostat, Anal. Chem.,
74, 1136, 2002.
38. Lui, Y. et al., Electrophoretic separation of proteins on a microchip with non-
covalent, postcolumn labeling, Anal. Chem., 72, 4608, 2000.
39. Tamaki, E. et al., Single cell analysis by a scanning thermal lens microscope
with a microchip: direct monitoring of cytochrome-c distribution during apo-
ptosis process, Anal. Chem., 74, 1560, 2002.
40. Schulze, P. et al., Deep UV laser-induced ﬂuorescence detection of unlabeled
drugs and proteins in microchip electrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 77, 1325, 2005.
41. Chau, L.K. et al., Microfabricated silicon ﬂow-cell for optical monitoring of
biological ﬂuids, Anal. Sci., 15, 721, 1999.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

462
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
42. Deng, Y. et al., Chip-based capillary electrophoresis/mass spectrometry deter-
mination of carnitines in human urine, Anal. Chem., 73, 639, 2001.
43. Deng, Y., Zhang, H., and Henion, J., Chip-based quantitative capillary electro-
phoresis/mass spectrometry of drugs in human plasma, Anal. Chem., 73, 1432,
2001.
44. Li, J. et al., Integration of microfabricated devices to capillary electrophoresis-
electrospray mass spectrometry using a low dead volume connection: applica-
tion to rapid analyses of proteolytic digests, Anal. Chem., 71, 3036, 1999.
45. Zhang, B. et al., Microfabricated devices for capillary electrophoresis-electro-
spray mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 71, 3258, 1999.
46. Grayson, A.C.R. et al., A bioMEMS review: MEMS technology for physiologi-
cally integrated devices, IEEE, 2, 6, 2004.
47. Moorthy, J. et al., Microﬂuidic tectonics platform: a colorimetric, disposable
botulinum toxin enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay system, Electrophoresis,
25, 1705, 2004.
48. Pasas-Farmer, S.A., New analytical methods for the determination of homocys-
teine in human plasma, Ph.D. thesis, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of
Kansas, Lawrence, 2004.
49. Kikura-Hanajiri, R., Martin, R.S., and Lunte, S.M., Indirect measurement of
nitric oxide production by monitoring nitrate and nitrite using microchip elec-
trophoresis with electrochemical detection, Anal. Chem., 74, 6370, 2002.
50. Goto, M. et al., Development of a microchip-based bioassay system using
cultured cells, Anal. Chem., 77, 2125, 2005.
51. Guijt, R.M., Baltussen, E., and Van Dedem, G.W.K., Use of bioafﬁnity interac-
tions in electrokinetically controlled assays on microfabricated devices, Electro-
phoresis, 23, 823, 2002.
52. Qui, C.X. and Harrison, D.J., Integrated self-calibration via electrokinetic solvent
proportioning for microﬂuidic immunoassays, Electrophoresis, 22, 3949, 2001.
53. Martynova, L. et al., Fabrication of plastic microﬂuid channels by imprinting
methods, Anal. Chem., 69, 4783, 1997.
54. Dodge, A. et al., Electrokinetically driven microﬂuidic chips with surface-mod-
iﬁed chambers for heterogeneous immunoassays, Anal. Chem., 73, 3400, 2001.
55. Ferrance, J.P. et al., Developments toward a complete micro-total analysis system
for Duchene muscular dystrophy diagnosis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 500, 223, 2003.
56. Wang, J. and Chatrathi, M.P., Microfabricated electrophoresis chip for bioassay
of renal markers, Anal. Chem., 75, 525, 2003.
57. Deng, Y., Zhang, H., and Henion, J., Chip-based quantitative capillary electro-
phoresis/mass spectrometry determination of drugs in human plasma, Anal.
Chem., 73, 1432, 2001.
58. Stefan, R. et al., Simultaneous determination of L- and D-carnitine using a
sequential injection analysis/amperometric biosensors system, J. Pharm.
Biomed. Anal., 33, 323, 2003.
59. Kameoka, J. et al., A polymeric microﬂuidic chip for CE/MS determination of
small molecules, Anal. Chem., 73, 1935, 2001.
60. Uhlig, A. et al., Miniaturised ion-selective sensor chip for potassium measure-
ment in a biomedical application, Sens. Actuators B, 34, 252, 1996.
61. Lichtenberg, J., De Rooij, N.F., and Verpoorte, E., A microchip electrophoresis
system with integrated in-plane electrodes for contactless conductivity detec-
tion, Electrophoresis, 23, 3769, 2002.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
463
62. Bruno, A.E. et al., All-solid-state miniaturized ﬂuorescence sensor array for the
determination of critical gases and electrolytes in blood, Anal. Chem., 69, 507, 1997.
63. Wang, J. et al., Microfabricated electrophoresis chips for simultaneous bioas-
says of glucose, uric acid, ascorbic acid, and acetaminophen, Anal. Chem., 72,
2514, 2000.
64. Freaney, R. et al., Novel instrumentation for real-time monitoring using miniatur-
ized ﬂow systems with integrated biosensors., Ann. Clin. Biochem., 34, 291, 1997.
65. Dempsey, E. et al., Design and development of a miniaturised total chemical
analysis system for on-line lactate and glucose monitoring in biological sam-
ples, Anal. Chim. Acta, 346, 341, 1997.
66. Nakamura, H. et al., A compactly integrated ﬂow cell with a chemiluminescent
FIA system for determining lactate concentration in serum, Anal. Chem., 73,
373, 2001.
67. Bohm, S. et al., A ﬂow-through amperometric sensor based on dialysis tubing
and free enzyme reactors, Biosens. Bioelectron., 16, 391, 2001.
68. Du, Y. et al., Direct electrochemical detection of glucose in human plasma on
capillary electrophoresis microchips, Electrophoresis, 25, 3853, 2004.
69. Munro, N.J. et al., Indirect ﬂuorescence detection of amino acids on electro-
phoretic microchips, Anal. Chem., 72, 2765, 2000.
70. Von Heeren, F. et al., Micellar electrokinetic chromatography separations and
analyses of biological samples on a cyclic planar microstructure, Anal. Chem.,
68, 2044, 1996.
71. Kennedy, R.T. et al., In vivo neurochemical monitoring by microdialysis and
capillary separations, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 6, 659, 2002.
72. Haskins, W.E. et al., Discovery and neurochemical screening of peptides in
brain extracellular ﬂuid by chemical analysis of in vivo microdialysis samples,
Anal. Chem., 76, 5523, 2004.
73. Pasas, S.A. et al., Detection of homocysteine by conventional and microchip
capillary electrophoresis/electrochemistry, Electrophoresis, 23, 759, 2002.
74. Ceriotti, L. et al., Low-density lipoprotein analysis in microchip capillary elec-
trophoresis systems, Electrophoresis, 23, 3615, 2002.
75. Chen, Y. et al., Plastic microchip electrophoresis for analysis of PCR products
of hepatitis C virus, Clin. Chem., 45, 1938, 1999.
76. Price, A.K. et al., Deformation-induced release of ATP from erythrocytes in a
poly(dimethylsiloxane)-based microchip with channels that mimic resistance
vessels, Anal. Chem., 76, 4849, 2004.
77. Sorouraddin, H.M., Hibara, A., and Kitamori, T., Use of a thermal lens micro-
scope in integrated catecholamine determination on a microchip, Fresenius J.
Anal. Chem., 371, 91, 2001.
78. Sorouraddin, H.M. et al., Integrated FIA for the determination of ascorbic acid
and dehydroascorbic acid in a microfabricated glass-channel by thermal-lens
microscopy, Anal. Sci., 16, 1033, 2000.
79. Suzuki, S. et al., Rapid analysis of amino sugars by microchip electrophoresis
with laser-induced ﬂuorescence detection, Electrophoresis, 22, 4023, 2001.
80. Fanguy, J.C. and Henry, C.S., The analysis of uric acid in urine using microchip
capillary electrophoresis with electrochemical detection, Electrophoresis, 23,
767, 2002.
81. Qin, J. et al., Simultaneous and ultrarapid determination of reactive oxygen
species and reduced glutathione in apoptotic leukemia cells by microchip elec-
trophoresis, Electrophoresis, 26, 1155, 2005.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

464
Bio-MEMS: Technologies and Applications
82. Roper, M.G. et al., Microﬂuidic chip for continuous monitoring of hormone
secretion from live cells using an electrophoresis-based immunoassay, Anal.
Chem., 75, 4711, 2003.
83. Spence, M.D. et al., Amperometric determination of nitric oxide derived from
pulmonary artery endothelial cells immobilized in a microchip channel, Ana-
lyst, 129, 995, 2004.
84. Koutny, L.B. et al., Microchip electrophoretic immunoassay for serum cortisol,
Anal. Chem., 68, 18, 1996.
85. Chiem, N.H. and Harrison, D.J., Microchip systems for immunoassay: an in-
tegrated immunoreactor with electrophoretic separation for serum theophyl-
line determination, Clin. Chem., 44, 591, 1998.
86. Vrouwe, E.X., Luttge, R., and Van Den Berg, A., Direct measurement of lithium
in whole blood using microchip capillary electrophoresis with integrated con-
ductivity detection, Electrophoresis, 25, 1660, 2004.
87. Kriikku, P. et al., Isotachophoresis of β-blockers in a capillary and on a poly(me-
thyl methacrylate) chip, Electrophoresis, 25, 1687, 2004.
88. Tanyanyiwa, J. and Hauser, P.C., Capillary and microchip electrophoresis of
basic drugs with contactless conductivity detection, Electrophoresis, 25, 3010,
2004.
89. Ramseier, A., Von Heeren, F., and Thormann, W., Analysis of ﬂuorescein isothio-
cyanate derivatized amphetamine and analogs in human urine by capillary
electrophoresis in chip-based and fused-silica capillary instrumentation, Elec-
trophoresis, 19, 2967, 1998.
90. Wallenborg, S.R. et al., On-chip chiral and achiral separation of amphetamine
and related compounds labeled with 4-ﬂuoro-7-nitrobenzofurazane, Electro-
phoresis, 21, 3257, 2000.
91. Hatch, A. et al., A rapid diffusion immunoassay in a T-sensor, Nature Biotech.,
19, 461, 2001.
92. Kanda, V. et al., Label-free reading of microarray-based immunoassays with
surface plasmon resonance imaging, Anal. Chem., 76, 7257, 2004.
93. Chiem, N. and Harrison, D.J., Microchip-based capillary electrophoresis for
immunoassays: analysis of monoclonal antibodies and theophylline, Anal.
Chem., 69, 373, 1997.
94. Sundberg, S.A. et al., Microchip-based systems for target validation and HTS,
Drug Discov. Today, 5, 92, 2000.
95. Khan, I., Desai, D.V., and Kumar, A., Carbochips: a new energy for old bio-
builders, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 98, 331, 2004.
96. Wang, D., Carbohydrate microarrays, Proteomics, 3, 2167, 2003.
97. Park, S. et al., Carbohydrate chips for studying high-throughput carbohydrate-
protein interactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 4812, 2004.
98. Bryan, M.C., Lee, L.V., and Wong, C.H., High-throughput identiﬁcation of
fucosyltransferase inhibitors using carbohydrate microarrays, Bioorg. Med.
Chem. Lett., 14, 3185, 2004.
99. Xue, Q. et al., Multiplexed enzyme assays in capillary electrophoresis single-
use microﬂuidic devices, Electrophoresis, 22, 4000, 2001.
100. Cheng, S.B. et al., Development of a multichannel microﬂuidic analysis system
employing afﬁnity capillary electrophoresis for immunoassay, Anal. Chem., 73,
1472, 2001.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pharmaceutical Analysis Using Bio-MEMS
465
101. Jiang, Y. et al., Integrated plastic microﬂuidic devices with ESI-MS for drug
screening and residue analysis, Anal. Chem., 73, 2048, 2001.
102. Tabuchi, M. and Baba, Y., Self-contained on-chip cell culture and pretreatment
system, J. Proteom. Res., 3, 871, 2004.
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

