
Blackboard Essentials  
for Teachers
Build and deliver great courses using this  
popular Learning Management System
William Rice
   BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

[ FM-2 ]
Blackboard Essentials for Teachers
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: July 2012
Production Reference: 1190712
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-292-2
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Asher Wishkerman (a.wishkerman@mpic.de)

[ FM-3 ]
Credits
Author
William Rice
Reviewers
Robin Hoffman
David Hopkins
Berkley Kilgore
Dr. Malcolm Murray
Matthew Weathers
Acquisition Editor
Sarah Cullington
Lead Technical Editor
Pramila Balan
Technical Editors
Ameya Sawant
Devdutt Kulkarni
Copy Editor
Insiya Morbiwala
Project Coordinator
Sai Gamare
Proofreader
Aaron Nash
Indexer
Tejal R. Soni
Graphics
Manu Joseph
Production Coordinator
Prachali Bhiwandkar
Cover Work
Prachali Bhiwandkar

[ FM-4 ]
About the Author
William Rice is an e-learning professional who lives, works, and plays in New York 
city. He has authored books on Moodle, Blackboard, Magento, and classroom training.
He especially enjoys building e-learning solutions for small- and mid-sized businesses. 
His greatest professional satisfaction is when one of his courses enables students to do 
something that makes their work easier and more productive.
His indoor hobbies include writing books and spending way too much time reading 
http://slashdot.org/. His outdoor hobbies include orienteering and practicing 
archery within sight of JFK Airport.
William is fascinated by the relationship between technology and society—how we 
create our tools and how our tools in turn shape us. He is married to an incredible 
woman who encourages his writing pursuits and has two amazing sons.
You can reach William through his website at http://williamrice.com.
Many of the course materials used in this book's demonstration 
course are supplied by Open High School of Utah, an innovative and 
fully online public charter high school that produces quality courses 
and releases them to the public. Specific thanks goes to the Earth 
Systems creator and teacher, Jessica Mordecai and to Curriculum 
Director, Sarah Weston. Learn more at www.openhighschool.org.

[ FM-5 ]
About the Reviewers
David Hopkins is a regular blogger on aspects of learning technology, Blackboard, 
CMS/VLEs, social networks, and other aspects of the utilization of technology in a 
pedagogic environment. He started blogging about his experiences and activities in 
2008, but has been an advocate of blogging and online 'communities' since 1999. His 
first role was as a web designer.
Using advances in social media and social networks, David has made the most of what 
is available and has grown an international reputation for his blogging and conference 
activity. You can follow David on his e-learning blog (www.dontwasteyourtime.
co.uk) and on Twitter (@hopkinsdavid), where he writes on the aspects of e-learning, 
m-learning, pedagogy, learning technology, social media, and social networks.
Berkley Kilgore has been trained by Blackboard to do independent course 
design. She is a freelance designer who can develop courses in a number of 
subjects. She received her Bachelor's degree in Ancient History and Sociology,  
and has worked at American Heritage as the Museum Services Manager. She 
currently does consulting with them, and is receiving her MBA from the  
University of Maryland University College. 
I would like to thank Elizabeth Kilgore for helping me receive my 
certification in Blackboard, and keeping my spirits high.

[ FM-6 ]
Dr. Malcolm Murray, who was originally a biogeographer based at The 
University of Edinburgh, Scotland, joined the learning technologies team at  
Durham University in 2002. He holds a PhD in Geography and a postgraduate 
certificate in learning, teaching, and research in higher education. He has been  
a daily user of Blackboard—since Version 5—as a System Administrator, a  
Building Block Developer, and also at the chalkface to support his teaching.
Malcolm currently leads the learning technologies team at Durham and is an 
Honorary Fellow of the School of Education. He is a member of the UK Heads  
of eLearning Forum and Blackboard Idea Exchange. He is also a certified member  
of the Association for Learning Technology and a Director of Open Source 
Community for Educational Learning Objects and Tools (OSCELOT). Being 
a regular presenter at the Blackboard conferences in Europe and North America,  
he is a past winner of the Blackboard Greenhouse Award (2005), Blackboard 
Innovators Award (2008), and Blackboard Catalyst Award (2010).
Matthew Weathers is the Applied Instructional Technology Administrator in 
the Distance Learning Department of Biola University in La Mirada, California.  
He is also an Adjunct Instructor who has been teaching mathematics and computer 
science for the past decade or so. His background in the computer industry and his 
experience in teaching help him train other faculty in the use of Blackboard and other 
technology on a university campus.

[ FM-7 ]
www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online 
digital book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire 
library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.


[ FM-9 ]
For Lisa, my loving wife and partner in everything good that I create. And for Liam 
and Gavin, whose love of learning just for the joy of it inspires me to keep learning.
-William Rice


Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: The Blackboard Experience	
5
Home page	
6
Announcements	
7
Discussion Board	
8
Gradebook	
10
Content Page	
12
Learning Module	
14
Blog	
16
Forum	
17
Uploaded files	
18
Video	
19
Wiki	
21
Assignment	
22
Test	
23
Groups	
24
Summary	
25
Chapter 2: Organizing a Course with Pages  
and Learning Modules	
27
Adding Content Areas to hold and organize course content	
27
What is Content Area?	
28
How to add a Content Area	
28
What's next?	
30
Adding a Blank Page tool, which can hold any content  
or links that you want	
30
What is a Blank Page?	
30

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
How to add a Blank Page	
31
Adding a Blank Page to your course	
31
Adding a Blank Page to the Content Area	
33
What's next?	
34
Composing a page with the HTML editor	
34
What's next?	
36
Creating a sequential path for the student to work through,  
using a Learning Module	
37
When to use a learning path	
37
How to add a learning path	
37
Adding a Learning Module to a Content Area	
37
What's next?	
42
About the Availability and View settings	
43
Keeping students informed with Course Tools	
44
What are Course Tools?	
44
How to add Course Tools	
47
Adding a Course Tool to the Course Menu	
47
Adding a Course Tool to the home page	
48
Summary	
48
Chapter 3: Adding Static Material to a Course	
49
Adding a file for students to download	
50
File versus item	
50
Content Collections	
51
How to add a file	
52
Adding an item	
54
What's next?	
56
Adding a video to your course	
56
Uploading a video in your course	
58
Linking to a video that is on another site	
59
Embedding a video on a Blank Page	
61
Embedding a video that is hosted on another site	
63
What's next?	
66
Adding a web link to your course	
66
Adding a link to an external website	
66
Adding a link to a Course Asset	
68
Adding an image to your course	
69
Adding an image to a Content Area	
70
Summary	
71
Chapter 4: Discussion Boards	
73
About Discussion Boards	
73
Creating forums with Discussion Board	
74

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Making Discussion Board available to students	
80
Adding a link to Discussion Board on the Course Menu	
81
Creating a link to a forum	
82
Managing a forum	
86
Collecting posts in a forum	
86
Grading posts in a forum	
90
Summary	
91
Chapter 5: Blogs and Wikis	
93
About blogs	
93
Individual versus class blogs	
94
Blogs Course Tool link	
94
Creating a blog	
95
Making blogs available to students	
96
Adding a link to the Blogs page	
96
Creating a link to a blog	
98
Managing a blog	
100
Grading blogs	
100
Deleting and editing entries and comments	
104
About wikis	
106
Creating a wiki	
106
Adding a link to the Wikis page	
107
Summary	
108
Chapter 6: Assignments	
109
About assignments	
109
Adding an assignment	
110
Responding to an assignment	
113
Summary	
119
Chapter 7: Testing Students	
121
Creating a test	
121
Creating a blank test	
122
Determining the behavior of questions by using Question Settings	
122
Adding and creating questions on Test Canvas	
123
Adding the test to a page in your course	
123
Setting the Test Options page	
124
Creating questions	
125
Navigating to the Test Canvas page	
125
Enter the type, title, and question text	
126
Adding answers and answer feedback	
127
Adding categories, keywords, and notes	
129

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Other types of questions	
130
Calculated formula questions	
131
Calculated numeric	
135
Either/Or—True/False, Yes/No, Right/Wrong, Correct/Incorrect	
136
Essay	
136
File Response	
136
Filling in the Blank and Multiple Blanks	
136
Hot Spot	
137
Jumbled Sentence	
138
Matching	
139
Multiple Answer and Multiple Choice	
139
Opinion Scale/Likert	
139
Ordering	
140
Quiz Bowl	
140
Short Answer	
140
Random blocks versus question sets	
140
Question pools, the source for random blocks	
141
Question sets: fewer limits, greater choices	
142
Which should I use: Random Block or Question Set?	
143
Creating a question pool	
144
Creating a random block	
148
Creating Question Set	
150
Summary	
152
Chapter 8: Working with Groups	
153
Creating groups	
154
Creating a single group with manual enrollment	
154
Creating a group with self enrollment	
156
From the student's point of view—self-enrollment into a group	
159
Creating multiple groups at once	
160
How group settings affect activities	
164
Sending e-mails to members of a group	
169
Summary	
170
Chapter 9: Communicating with Students  
Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements	
171
The difference between e-mails, messages,  
announcements, and alerts	
171
Sending an e-mail to your students	
172
Sending messages	
174
Posting announcements	
176
Summary	
179

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Chapter 10: Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live	
181
Making your first online meeting a test session	
182
Making Collaborate available to you and your students	
184
Launching the Collaborate tool	
184
Configuring audio and video	
186
Showing a PowerPoint slideshow	
187
Using basic whiteboard tools	
190
Using the chat	
193
Using emoticons during a Collaborate session	
195
Talking in Collaborate	
196
Taking your students on a web tour	
198
Dropping your students on a web page with Web Push	
199
Sharing an application on your computer	
200
Giving a student the ability to share an application	
203
Whiteboarding over a shared application	
204
Summary	
206
Before the session	
206
During the session	
207
After the session	
207
Chapter 11: Grading Students	
209
Viewing Grade Center	
211
Finding things that need to be graded	
212
Smart Views	
214
Creating Grading Periods	
215
Creating categories	
218
Showing, hiding, and moving rows	
219
Some examples of filtering and finding	
219
Assigning and entering grades	
221
Screen Reader Mode	
221
Manually overriding an automated grade	
223
Entering all of the students' grades for an activity	
226
Preparing a report for grades	
228
Adding a calculated column	
228
Reporting versus downloading grades	
228
Summary	
229
Index	
231


Preface
Blackboard Essentials for Teachers gives you all the information you need to  
build and deliver great courses. The book shows teachers how to construct and 
deliver a professional quality course using Blackboard's most essential features.  
The book begins with a tour of a completed Blackboard course. Then you will  
see, step by step, how to build the example course using Blackboard's free site  
for teachers—coursesites.com.
As you work through the book, you will see exactly how the demonstration course 
is built. You will see how to add and use interactive activities, media, and other 
resources. You will also learn how to assess and communicate with students and 
manage them in groups. You will see how to add static material for the students to 
view, such as pages, links, and media. Then you will learn how to add interaction  
to your courses with discussion boards, blogs, and wikis. The book demonstrates 
how to assess your students with assignments and tests. You will also see how to 
manage students in groups, and how to communicate with them using messages  
and announcements. Finally, you will learn the basics of the Blackboard grade book.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, The Blackboard Experience, allows you to tour our demonstration Blackboard 
course. At each stop on our tour, we will view it from a student's and teacher's role. 
This will help you learn two things. First, what a teacher can do with Blackboard and 
second, how decisions made by the course creator affect the student's experience.
Chapter 2, Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules, shows you how to 
add, remove, and rearrange pages. You will see how to organize course material  
into learning modules.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 3, Adding Static Material to a Course, shows you how to add links, web pages, 
and files to a course. You will learn how to upload your own files, and to use files 
that other people in your organization have uploaded into the content collection.
Chapter 4, Discussion Boards, shows you how to add and use discussion boards in 
your course. We'll also look at the capabilities and limitations of discussion boards.
Chapter 5, Blogs and Wikis, shows you how to add and use blogs and wikis in your 
course. We'll look at the capabilities and limitations of each tool, to help you decide 
when to use each one.
Chapter 6, Assignments, focuses on creating assignments where the student must 
submit or upload a file. You will learn how to review and respond to the files that 
students submit.
Chapter 7, Testing Students, shows you how to add several kinds of questions to your 
quizzes using Blackboard. You can also add media and descriptive pages. You can 
control the page breaks in a quiz and create several kinds of feedback. All of these 
features are covered in this chapter.
Chapter 8, Working with Groups, helps you learn about groups, which enable students 
to work together. You can create tools and resources, which only the members of a 
group can access, such as a group Assignment or a group Wiki.
Chapter 9, Communicating with Students Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements, 
helps you learn how to send messages to our students, and how to post course 
announcements.
Chapter 10, Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live, helps you learn about Collaborate, 
which is Blackboard's application for holding live, web-based sessions with 
your students. It shows you how to configure audio and video settings, share a 
PowerPoint slideshow, use the chat feature, share an application, and so on.
Chapter 11, Grading Students, shows you how to use the most often-used features of 
the gradebook. You will learn how to review the students' grades for your course, 
including filtering and organizing the display of grades. You will also learn how 
to associate graded items with a grading period. You will see how to find items 
that need to be graded, and some options for entering grades. There is a lot to the 
gradebook, and this chapter gives you a solid start in making the best use of it.
What you need for this book
To use this book, you need only basic computer skills, and a desire to build and deliver 
the best online courses you can. You don't need any background in online teaching 
or building web pages. If you are an experienced teacher, you will be able to translate 
many of the teaching techniques that you use in the classroom, to Blackboard.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Who this book is for
If you are a teacher or a course builder, you need only basic computer skills to get the 
most from this book. You don't need any background in online teaching or building 
web pages.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "Blackboard will plug in values for a and b. 
It will then calculate c²."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "In this 
example, Homepage includes modules such as My Announcements, My Calendar, 
What's New, and To Do".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title through the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem 
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

The Blackboard Experience
In this chapter, we will tour our demonstration Blackboard course. At each stop 
on our tour, we will view it from a student role. While looking at the course from 
a student's point of view, we'll discuss the settings and features that the instructor 
used, to create what we see. This will help you to learn what you can do with 
Blackboard. It will also show you how decisions made by the course creator affect 
the student's experience.
During our tour, we will see many of the features covered in this book, including  
the following:
• 
Home page
• 
Announcements
• 
Discussion Board
• 
Gradebook
• 
Content Page
• 
Learning Module
• 
Blog
• 
Forum
• 
Uploaded files
• 
Video
• 
Wiki
• 
Assignment
• 
Test
• 
Groups

The Blackboard Experience
[ 6 ]
Home page
Our first stop after logging in the course home page:
In this example, Homepage includes modules such as My Announcements, My 
Calendar, What's New, and To Do. We will take a closer look at some of these 
modules later. For now, you should know that when an instructor views this page, 
(s)he will see two buttons at the top of the page, which a student doesn't see—Add 
Course Module and Customize Page:

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
These buttons enable the instructor to add and rearrange the modules on the page. 
(Your Blackboard system might not allow instructors to use these buttons. If you 
don't have these buttons, ask your system administrator if you have been given the 
ability to arrange and add modules.)
Also notice the Edit Notification Settings button under What's New and To Do, and 
the editing icons in the upper-right corner of each module. These are seen only by 
the instructor. These extra buttons and icons are a good example of how Blackboard 
changes the display for students and instructors.
Announcements
Let's take a brief look at Announcements:
Note that clicking on the arrow icon 
 next to Announcements displays a pop-up 
menu. When you want to open or affect an item, Blackboard often places the menu 
items for doing this, in a pop-up menu next to the item. When you want to manipulate 
an item, look for the pop-up menu (the arrow icon) next to that item, and if you can't 
find the pop-up menu, then look in the menu bar at the top of the page.
In this example, clicking on Open brought us to the Announcements page. 
This shows all the announcements that the student has received for this course:

The Blackboard Experience
[ 8 ]
Note that when a student accesses Announcements from the front page of a course, 
the student is viewing the announcements for that course only, and not for any other 
courses. In addition, Announcements are displayed and hidden according to the 
dates set by the instructor.
You will learn how to use the Announcements tool in Chapter 9, Communicating with 
Students Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements.
Discussion Board
Also within the What's New area, we find Blogs, Discussion Board, and Gradebook:
A course can have a blog for all of the students in a course. It can also have a blog 
for each group of students within the course. And, each student can have his/her 
individual blog. You will learn more about blogs in Chapter 5, Blogs and Wikis, and 
about working with groups in Chapter 8, Working with Groups.
By default, there is a discussion board for a course. Under this board, there are 
forums. Forums are composed of threads, which are composed of posts written 
by the course participants. In some Learning Management Systems, there can be 
multiple forums spread throughout the course. In Blackboard, the Discussion Board 
page puts all of the coursewide forums in one place, as shown in the following 
screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
The instructor can add links to the individual forums throughout the course. As a 
result, the student has two ways to get to the forum that (s)he is looking for. The 
student can go to the Discussion Board page and click on Forum, or the student 
can use a direct link to the forum, which was created by the instructor.
Blackboard offers similar functionalities for blogs and wikis. It collects them all on 
a Blogs or Wikis page, and also enables the instructor to add a link to an individual 
blog or wiki throughout the course.

The Blackboard Experience
[ 10 ]
Gradebook
The My Grades tool enables students to see their own, personal Gradebook. In this 
course, in the What's New block, you can see that the instructor has recently graded 
two of the students' activities:
The instructor can also add a link from the student's Gradebook page to the course's 
main menu:

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
When the student views his or her Gradebook menu, the student sees all activities 
that the instructor has designated as "graded":
Notice the first graded item, Where did you waste water today?. This item is a thread 
in the forum called Your Water Inventory. Blackboard enables you to grade forum 
postings, blog entries, and wikis. You can use these social tools in your course, and 
make them part of the grade. When the instructor graded this item, the instructor left 
a comment, which you can see in the right column of the preceding screenshot.

The Blackboard Experience
[ 12 ]
Note the Due Date column for the assignment, Take an Inventory of Your Water 
Usage. This Due Date appears on the course's home page, as shown previously in 
the screenshot of the course home page. The exclamation point in the green box, on 
this item's line, indicates that the student has finished the assignment and it is ready 
to be graded. In Chapter 11, Grading Students, you will see how to locate only those 
items that are ready to be graded.
Content Page
Let's move away from the course's home page. The next page we will look at is a 
Content Page. In Blackboard, a Content Page can hold course content such as PDF 
files, links to web pages, links to other course pages, and multimedia. It can hold 
assessments, such as tests and assignments. It can also hold links to activities such  
as blogs, wikis, and forums.
Our example Content Page, Introduction to the Oceans, would be the equivalent 
of a chapter in a course:

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
Each of the items on this Content Page demonstrate one of Blackboard's abilities. 
Let's look at them, one at a time.
Our first item on the page is the Learning Module. It's like another Content Page. 
You can use Learning Modules to organize your course into units:
You will learn more about Learning Modules in Chapter 2, Organizing a Course with 
Pages and Learning Modules. Next, we see a link to one of the blogs in the course 
followed by a link to one of the discussion forums:
You will learn more about blogs in Chapter 5, Blogs and Wikis, and about forums in 
Chapter 4, Discussion Boards. Next, we see two links to files that were uploaded into 
the course. One is an RTF file, and the other is a video. Note that both of these are 
files that are now stored inside the Blackboard system, not links to files that are 
elsewhere on the web:

The Blackboard Experience
[ 14 ]
You will learn about adding files to a course in Chapter 3, Adding Static Material to a 
Course. The next item on this Content Page is a link to a wiki in the course:
We cover wikis in Chapter 5, Blogs and Wikis. Next is a link to an assignment. Note 
that this assignment includes a file. Students download the file, modify it, and then 
upload it into the assignment for grading:
We cover assignments in Chapter 6, Assignments. Next, we see a link to a video:
This video is hosted on another site. We have embedded the video on a page in our 
Blackboard course. This is one of the techniques covered in Chapter 3, Adding Static 
Material to a Course. Lastly, we see two tests:
You will learn how to create tests in Chapter 7, Testing Students. The first test is a 
practice test. It won't count toward the students' final grade. You will learn how to 
include and exclude items from a calculated grade in Chapter 11, Grading Students.
As stated before, the first item on this Content Page is the Learning Module. Let's 
look at the Physical Properties of Water learning module in more detail.
Learning Module
In the following screenshot, the student has clicked into the Learning Module. 
(S)he is viewing a web page that was created and displayed entirely in Blackboard:

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Notice Table of Contents for the Learning Module, on the left-hand side of the 
previous screenshot. This gives the module a level of organization that was missing 
from our content page.
Also, notice the student viewing the first item in this learning module. The link for 
the second item has become available. The links for three items and beyond are 
greyed out, because they are unavailable. In the Learning Module, you can also force 
the student to view the material in order. This gives the Learning Module a structure 
that is missing from a simple Content Page.
In general, if you can add it to a Content Page, you can add it to a Learning Module. 
The Learning Module gives you another level of organization, a table of contents, and 
the ability to enforce a viewing order for the material. This makes it a good choice for 
the course material that must be highly structured and learned in a specific sequence.

The Blackboard Experience
[ 16 ]
Blog
In the following screenshot, a student is viewing another student's blog:
Notice how Blackboard displays links to other students' blogs. Each student has been 
given a Water Walks blog. The students could also have other blogs in this course, 
but we are not seeing the links to those blogs here. This is because we are "inside" 
the Water Walks blog. If we wanted to see all of the blogs available to us, we would 
select the Blogs page from the course's main menu. The Blogs page lists all of the 
blogs available in this course:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Forum
On the first Content Page of the course, we have a link called Discuss Your 
Water Inventory:
This link takes the student directly to a forum:

The Blackboard Experience
[ 18 ]
The student could also have arrived at this forum by selecting Course Discussions 
from the course's main menu. This would display a page listing all of the forums in 
the course, including the one in the following screenshot:
There are several times when Blackboard gives us several options to navigate 
to an activity. The instructor can create links to specific Forums, Blogs, Wikis, 
Assignments, and other activities. The instructor can also create pages where  
all of the occurrences of a type of activity are displayed in one place.
Uploaded files
Further down the page, we see a link to a file that was uploaded into the course. 
This file is called Ocean Salinity.rtf:

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Blackboard is in the process of storing this file. However, Blackboard doesn't have 
an editor or special player for RTF files, that is, it doesn't know what to do with 
an RTF file. So when the student clicks on this file, Blackboard will not attempt 
to open it. Instead, the student's browser will "decide" what to do with the file. 
Depending upon the settings in the student's browser, the file might open in the 
student's browser, or the browser will ask the student whether to open or save the 
file, or the file might open in the student's word processor. When you serve a file 
to the student, you don't have complete control over how that student's computer 
will handle the file.
Video
Below the link to the RTF file is a link to a video file, Drifters of the Deep. This is 
a web page created in Blackboard, with the video embedded on the page; that is, 
the page is on Blackboard, but the video is on a different hosting service, such as 
YouTube or Vimeo:

The Blackboard Experience
[ 20 ]
Compare how the embedded video is displayed above, to the one in the 
following screenshot:
In this example, we uploaded the video file into Blackboard. The file is no longer 
being stored and played on an external site. Blackboard is using its built-in media 
player to display and play the file. In Chapter 3, Adding Static Course Material, you will 
see how to add a video by embedding it on a page and uploading it into your course.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Wiki
In the following screenshot, the student is viewing a wiki:
Just like a course can have several blogs and forums, a course can have several wikis. 
And just like the forums are collected on the Discussion Board page, the wikis are 
collected on the Wiki page.
The buttons that are displayed on this Wiki page indicate that the student can edit 
the content and leave comments. You can control whether the students can edit and 
comment on a wiki. You'll learn more about them in Chapter 5, Blogs and Wikis.

The Blackboard Experience
[ 22 ]
Assignment
In the following screenshot, the student is viewing an assignment:
Notice that the student has already uploaded her answers to this assignment. 
You can see that under Review Submission History. However, the Start New 
Submission button enables her to submit another version of her work. You can 
control whether students get multiple attempts at an assignment. The number  
of attempts allowed is one of the features we'll cover in Chapter 6, Assignments.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Test
In the following screenshot, the student is viewing a test:
Notice the notes at the top of the page, for Multiple Attempts and Force Completion. 
These are settings that the instructor can control. In this example, the test counts 
towards the student's grade, so the instructor allows only one attempt. If this were a 
practice test, the instructor could allow unlimited attempts and exclude the test from 
the gradebook. You will learn more about this in Chapter 7, Tests.

The Blackboard Experience
[ 24 ]
Groups
In the following screenshot, the student is viewing the Groups page. Note that 
there are two groups displayed—Field Trip to Aquarium and Sandwalkers.
The instructor made a student a member of Sandwalkers. This student has the 
option to enroll herself in the Field Trip group as well.
Every group automatically gets its own course tools; for example, the Sandwalkers 
group has its own blog:

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
In some cases, group activities are visible to everyone in the course. In other cases, 
group activities are visible only to members of the specified group. You will learn 
about these settings in Chapter 8, Working with Groups.
A group activity, like the blog shown previously, can be graded. When you give  
a grade for a group activity, everyone in the specified group gets the same grade.
Summary
In this chapter, we toured the demonstration course that we will create in this  
book. The course uses Blackboard's core features. There are many other features  
and settings available to you. The ones discussed in this chapter will enable you  
to create an effective, engaging course.
Now, let's get started with building our course.


Organizing a Course with 
Pages and Learning Modules
Blackboard enables you to add different types of pages to a course. Each type of page 
adds different kinds of functionality to your course. This chapter shows you how to 
add, remove, and rearrange pages. You will see how to organize course material into 
Learning Modules. In the next chapter, you will populate the Pages and Learning 
Modules with static course material.
In this chapter, you will be learning how to do the following:
• 
Adding Content Areas to hold and organize course content
• 
Adding a Blank Page tool, which can hold any content, or links that you want
• 
Understanding the difference between a Blank Page and a Content Page, and 
when to use each
• 
Creating a sequential path for the student to work through, using  
a Learning Module
• 
Adding links to useful tools, such as the course glossary, calendar,  
or messages
Adding Content Areas to hold and 
organize course content
In Blackboard, Content Area is intended to be used like a topic or chapter. Of course, 
you can have as many or as few Content Areas as you want in a course. You can 
even build a course without using the Content Area tool. In our demonstration,  
we will use the Content Area tool in the most common way, that is, to organize  
our course into topics, with one topic per Content Area.

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 28 ]
What is Content Area?
In Blackboard, Content Area is a special kind of course page. Adding Content Area 
adds a link to the Course Menu. In a Content Area, you can add many kinds of 
course material, activities, and tools.
Usually, we add a Content Area for each topic or chapter in a course. Use a Content 
Area when you want to add different kinds of resources and activities to a topic, 
such as links, graphics, videos, tests, assignments, surveys, and more.
How to add a Content Area
In this chapter, we will cover how to add a Content Area. In other chapters, we will 
cover how to add items to a Content Area.
To add a Content Area, perform the following steps:
1.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is: is set to ON:
2.	 From Course Menu, select Create Content Area:

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
3.	 Blackboard will prompt you to name the Content Area. The Name: field that 
you enter here will be displayed as a link in the Course Menu, and in a tab 
across the top of the course window:
4.	 If you select Available to Users, students in this course will be able to see 
the Content Area. If you do not make it available, it will be hidden from  
the students, and the link and tab for this Content Area will not appear.
Hide Content Areas to keep them in reserve, just in case
You can create Content Areas and keep them hidden in your 
course until you need them. Extra-credit activities, assignments 
that you might not have time for, and additional explanations 
that you might need are all things that you can keep in reserve.
5.	 Click on the Submit button. The Content Area will be added to your course. 
A link to the Content Area will also be added to the Course Menu:

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 30 ]
What's next?
You can add many types of content to a Content Area. In later chapters, we will 
cover adding images, audio, video, files for download, discussion boards, wikis, 
blogs, assignments, and tests. These items will be added using the tabbed menus  
at the top of the Content Area:
"Adding material" is covered in Chapters 3 through 6 
of this book.
Adding a Blank Page tool, which can 
hold any content or links that you want
The Blank Page tool enables you to create a Blank Page. You can add a Blank Page 
to your course, or to the Content Area. When you add a Blank Page to your course, 
a link to the page is added to the Course Menu. When you add a Blank Page to the 
Content Area, a link to the page is added to the Content Area.
What is a Blank Page?
In Blackboard, a Blank Page is a simple web page. You can add text, graphics, and 
HTML code to the page. You can also attach an item to the page.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
When you want to add a page of information, and you want that information  
to stand by itself, a Blank Page is a good solution. Let's look at  some situations 
where you might consider using a Blank Page.
For one of the topics, your class is taking a field trip. Under that topic's Content  
Area, you might add a Blank Page. On this Blank Page, you can add information 
about the trip, and embed a Google map.
The class has a strict code of conduct and standards, for completing work and 
turning it in on time. Under the main Course Menu, you might create a Blank Page  
of course policies. This page will always be available from the main Course Menu.
You want to create a transition from one topic to the next. Each topic is a Content Area 
in your course. In between the Content Areas, you can insert a Blank Page. On this 
page, you can put information that will help the student transition between topics.
When you create a Blank Page, consider where it will best fit into your course. If the 
page is as important as a topic or chapter, then add it to the Course Menu. If it's part 
of a topic or chapter, then add it to the Content Area for that topic.
How to add a Blank Page
Let's look at adding a Blank Page to the Course Menu, and to Content Area.
Adding a Blank Page to your course
1.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is set to ON.
2.	 From the Course Menu, select Create Blank Page:

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 32 ]
3.	 Blackboard will prompt you to name the Blank Page. The Name: field that 
you enter here will be displayed as a link in the Course Menu, and in a tab  
at the top of the course window:
4.	 If you select Available to Users, students in this course will be able to see 
the Blank Page tool. If you do not make it available, it will be hidden from 
the students, and the link and tab for this page will not appear.
5.	 Click on the Submit button. The Blank Page tool will be added to your course:

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
But the page is blank! Now what?
As you can see from the preceding screenshot, this really is a 
Blank Page. At some point, you will want to add material to 
the page. Keep reading for instructions.
Adding a Blank Page to the Content Area
1.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is set to ON.
2.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you want to 
add the Blank Page:
3.	 At the top of the Content Area, select the Build Content tab:
4.	 Under the New Page menu, select Create Blank Page.
5.	 Blackboard will prompt you to name the Blank Page. The name that you 
enter here will be displayed as a link in the Content Area.

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 34 ]
6.	 If you select Available to Users, students on this course will be able to see 
the Blank Page. If you do not make it available, it will be hidden from the 
students, and the link for this Blank Page will not appear.
7.	 Click on the Submit button. The Blank Page will be added to your 
Content Area.
But the page is blank! Now what?
As you can see from the preceding screenshot, this really is a 
Blank Page. At some point, you will want to add material to 
the page. Keep reading for instructions.
What's next?
After adding a Blank Page, you can add text, graphics, and media to that page,  
just like you can to any other web page. Blackboard gives you a user-friendly  
editor that you can use to compose the page. It is the subject of the next section.
Composing a page with the HTML editor
After you have added a Blank Page, you can use Blackboard's HTML editor to 
compose that page. We won't cover every function of the editor. Instead, we  
will cover just those functions that might not be obvious, or those that are  
especially useful.
Blackboard's web page editor looks and behaves like most web-based editors that 
you might have used:
1.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is set to ON.
2.	 Select the Blank Page, either from the Course Menu or the Content Area  
that holds the page.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
3.	 In the Content section, use the editor to write your text, as you would with 
any basic word processor:
4.	 To insert multimedia into the page, use the Insert icons. Move the mouse 
pointer over each icon to see what kind of multimedia it applies to:

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 36 ]
5.	 To insert HTML code into the page, such as the code that you would  
copy from YouTube, click on the HTML button:
When you finish adding the HTML code, you can click on the HTML  
button again to return to the normal editing mode.
6.	 In the Attachments section, you can attach a file to this page. Note that 
you are attaching, not embedding the file.
7.	 In the Options section, you can make this page available or unavailable. 
You can also set the time for this page to display.
8.	 Clicking on the Submit button saves the page.
What's next?
Your Blank Page is no longer blank. It is now a page full of content in your course. 
But remember, in online learning, you can almost always change the content when 
you need it. It's your page. Update it as you wish.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Creating a sequential path for the student 
to work through, using a Learning 
Module
A Learning Module must be added to a Content Area. Similar to a Content Area, it 
can hold many kinds of content—static material such as web pages, links, and media; 
active material such as tests; and social material such as wikis and forums.
You can think of a Learning Module as a Content Area inside a Content Area.
A Learning Module can require the student to complete its material in a sequential 
order. This is one of the features that we will see in this section.
When to use a learning path
If you have a Content Area that has a lot of material, you can use Learning Modules 
to organize the Content Area into smaller sections. For example, in our course about 
the world's oceans, we could have a Content Area for The Five Oceans. Then, within 
that Content Area, we could create a Learning Module for each of the five oceans.
If your course is very long, consider using Learning Modules to organize the course. 
Also, use a Learning Module when you need to enforce a sequence in the course.
How to add a learning path
We will demonstrate how to add a Learning Module to the Content Area called 
Introduction to the Oceans.
Adding a Learning Module to a Content Area
1.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is set to ON.
2.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you want to add 
the Blank Page.
3.	 At the top of the Content Area, select the Build Content tab.

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 38 ]
4.	 Under the Create menu, select Learning Module:
5.	 The Create Learning Module page is displayed. This page has five sections:
°°
Learning Module Information
°°
Availability
°°
View
°°
Table of Contents
°°
Submit
Let's look at each of these sections.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
6.	 In the Learning Module Information section, enter the Name field for 
the module, and also a description. In the Availability section, you can 
determine if the user can see the module yet. You can hide it, show it, or  
set a date for it to be visible:

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 40 ]
7.	 In the View section, you can force the student to view the items in the 
module in order. This setting does not force the user to view the items for 
a specific amount of time. So, the student could view a large document or 
video for only one second, and then immediately move on to the next item. 
You require students to view the items in order, but you cannot force them  
to read or pay attention to the items.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
8.	 Also in the View section, you can make the module open in a new window, 
and track the number of times the module was opened. Note that these 
settings affect the module, not the items in the module. So when a student 
clicks on the name of the module, the module launches in a new window.  
But the items in that module do not open new windows unless you indicate 
that for each item.
9.	 The Table of Contents section enables you to automatically create a table 
of contents for the items in the module. In the following screenshot, notice 
the table of contents on the left-hand side. Also, notice that each item in the 
module is numbered:

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 42 ]
What you see in the preceding screenshot, is the result of the settings shown 
in the following screenshot:
10.	 Finally, the Submit button saves your work and adds the Learning Module 
to the Content Area.
What's next?
You can add many types of content to a Learning Module. In later chapters, we  
will cover adding images, audio, video, files for download, discussion boards,  
wikis, blogs, assignments, and tests. These items will be added using the tabbed 
menus at the top of the screen, in the Learning Area:

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Adding material is covered in Chapters 3 through 6, 
of this book.
About the Availability and View settings
Throughout this chapter, when adding items to a course, you have seen settings  
for Availability and View:
For almost all items that you add to a course, you will see these settings.

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 44 ]
Permit Users to View this Content determines if students can see the item. Teachers 
can always see the item.
Select Date and Time Restrictions makes the item visible to the students only 
during the time that you enter. If you are going to reuse this course, you will need  
to edit this time period every time you run the course again. Consider creating a 
Blank Page, with its Availability set to No. Only teachers will be able to see that 
Blank Page. Then, add reminders to the page about things the teacher must do  
when copying and reusing the course.
Keeping students informed with Course 
Tools
Blackboard has many tools that you can add to your course. On most Blackboard 
systems, when you create a course, it's home page will have several tools 
automatically added to it. Which tools are added, depends upon the version of 
Blackboard you are using and your system's default settings.
What are Course Tools?
Course Tools are not learning or teaching materials. They are gadgets and functions 
that enable you to keep your students informed, and help you and the students to 
manage the course:

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
Notice in the preceding screenshot, that our demonstration course's Homepage 
has the tools My Announcements, My Calendar, What's New, To Do, Alerts, and 
Needs Attention. There are other tools that can be added to the course. Also, notice 
that the user has selected Create Tool Link from the Course Menu. This is how we 
add new tools to a course.

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 46 ]
Using Create Tool Link, you can add a tool to the Course Menu. In the following 
screenshot, we are adding the link:
The result is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
This is the same course calendar that is on the course's home page. Why would we 
give it a link in the Course Menu instead of just putting it on the home page? There 
are two reasons: first, if the tool is especially important, you might want to have it at 
both the home page and the Course Menu; second, if the tool requires a full screen to 
see all the information, you might want to give the tool its own link so that it opens 
in its own page. In the screenshot of the home page a few pages earlier, look at how 
much room My Calendar has, against the amount of room it has in the immediate 
preceding screenshot.
How to add Course Tools
Let's look at how to add Course Tools to both the Course Menu and the home page.
Adding a Course Tool to the Course Menu
1.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is set to ON.
2.	 From the Add Menu Item list, select Create Tool Link.
3.	 Select the tool that you want to add:

Organizing a Course with Pages and Learning Modules
[ 48 ]
4.	 Enter Name: for the tool.
5.	 Set the tool's Availability by clicking on the checkbox next to Available 
to Users.
6.	 Click on the Submit button. A link for the tool is added to the Course Menu.
Adding a Course Tool to the home page
1.	 Select the course's home page.
2.	 In the upper-right corner of the page, ensure that Edit Mode is set to ON. 
3.	 Click on the Add Course Module button. The system will display a list of 
modules and tools that you can add.
4.	 Next to the tool that you want to add, click on the Add button. The tool will 
be added to the home page.
5.	 To move the tools around the home page, click on the reposition button in 
the upper-right corner:
Summary
In this chapter, we took the first steps to building a course in Blackboard. By adding 
Content Areas, Blank Pages, and Learning Modules, we created a structure for our 
course. Now, we can begin adding many kinds of content to the course. That will  
be the subject of the next few chapters.

Adding Static Material  
to a Course
In the previous chapter, you learned how to add Content Areas and Learning 
Modules. These were blank areas, ready to be filled with course content. In this 
chapter, you will learn how to add static course material. Static course material is 
course content that the student reads, views, or listens to, but does not interact with.
In addition to learning how to upload your own files, you will also learn how to use 
files in Content Collection, which other people in your organization have uploaded.
In this chapter, you will be learning how to do the following:
• 
Adding a file for students to download
• 
Adding a video to your course
• 
Accessing files in Content Collection, which other users in your system  
have uploaded
• 
Uploading files in Content Collection so that other users in your system  
can access the files
• 
Adding a web link to your course
• 
Adding an image to your course

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 50 ]
Adding a file for students to download
There are two ways to add a file for students to download. You can add the file as 
a file, or add it as an item. We'll look at both options.
File versus item
In the following screenshot, we have added two documents to the course. They are 
the first and second things on the page, Water Inventory Homework.rtf and Ocean 
Salinity. They are both .rtf or word-processing documents. The first one was 
added as a file, and the second as an item:
Notice that Water Inventory Homework.rtf, the one added as a file, consists of 
only a title. This title is the link to the file. When clicked, the link will download  
or open the file. Notice that Ocean Salinity, the one added as an item, consists of 
a title, a description, and a link to the file. In both cases, you are supplying a file  
to your students.
If the file requires explanation, consider adding it as an item. If the title will give 
your students enough information about the file, consider adding it as a file.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
Content Collections
When a file is added to a course, that file will also be added to the Course 
Content area:
Notice that in the preceding screenshot, the Course Content area for Intro_to_
Oceans_Demo_ImportedContent_20111023061707 is part of the user's Content 
Collection. The Content Collection is available to the teacher and the creator of 
the course. Teachers can create links to the content in the collection. So you can  
add a file once, and link to it many times. By default, the Content Collection is  
not available to students. Teachers make a specific piece of content available to  
the students by linking to that piece of content from the course.
Not all Blackboard installations have access to the Content Collection system.  
If your school does not subscribe to this piece of the Blackboard system, you will 
see "Files" instead of "Content Collection", and see the Content Collection for just 
one course at a time.

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 52 ]
In the preceding screenshot, notice that there are three Content Collection areas.  
The first one is a list of files added to the course. The second is a list of files added  
to all of the courses that this teacher can access. The third Content Collection area, 
All Organizations Content, links to content that is provided by organizations. 
This is shown only if your installation has the Community system.
Your System Administrator will set up the Content Collections for you. Your content 
collections might differ from what you see here. However, they will work in the 
same way—as a repository for sharing and reusing files among courses.
How to add a file
This procedure will make the file available to the students in your course as follows:
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add 
the file, for example, Introduction to the Oceans (Demo for Blackboard 
Essential Book), as shown in the screenshot that follows.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | File:

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
3.	 The Create File page is displayed:
4.	 Under the Find File section, you can use the Browse My Computer button 
to select a file that is on your computer, or on a drive connected to your 
computer. You can also use the Browse Content Collection button to select 
a file that is in one of your Content Collection areas.
5.	 The Name field that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you 
are adding this file.

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 54 ]
6.	 Under the Open in New Window section, if you select Yes, the file will 
open in a new browser window when the student selects it. If the browser 
can display the file, the file will be displayed in a new browser window.  
If the browser cannot display the file, it will be downloaded to the  
student's computer.
7.	 Under the Standard Options section, set the availability and tracking 
options for this file.
8.	 Click on the Submit button to save it. You should see the file added to 
the Content Area.
Adding an item
In this section, we'll show you how to add an item, so that the student can see 
not only the title, but also a description for what you have added:
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add  
the item.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | Item:

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
3.	 The Edit Item page is displayed:
4.	 The Name that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you are 
adding this file.
5.	 The description that you enter into the text editor will also be displayed on 
the page. Notice that this is a full-featured text editor. You can add anything 
to the description that you put on a web page.
When entering the description for the item, remember that there 
might be other things in the same Content Area. If you add a long 
description, the page for the Content Area can get very long.

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 56 ]
6.	 Under the Attachments section, you can use the Browse My Computer 
button to select a file that is on your computer, or on a drive connected to 
your computer. You can also use the Browse Content Collection button 
to select a file in one of your Content Collection areas.
Notice that it's called Attachments. Unlike adding a 
file, when you add an item, you can include multiple 
files. Also, attachments appear under the filename and 
description, displayed on a separate line.
7.	 Under the Open New Window section, if you select Yes, the file will open 
in a new browser window when the student selects it. When the student's 
browser opens the file, the settings for that browser and computer determine 
how the student's computer handles the file. The file might be displayed in a 
new browser window, downloaded to the student's computer, or opened by 
an application on the student's computer.
Setting a file to open in a new window can avoid many 
browser issues. Use this setting unless you have a good 
reason to open the file in the student's browser in the 
current window.
8.	 Under the Standard Options section, set the availability and tracking 
options for this item.
9.	 Click on the Submit button to save. You should see the item added to 
the Content Area.
What's next?
Now that the file is added to your course, it also appears in the Content Area. You 
can add multiple links to the file. If your System Administrator has allowed sharing 
between courses, other teachers can add the file to their course.
Adding a video to your course
There are several ways to add multimedia to your course. You can upload the file 
directly to Blackboard, just like you did with a file in the previous section, or you can 
link to the media on another site, such as YouTube or Vimeo. Finally, you can embed 
the video on a page in your course. The following table compares the methods 
available to you:

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
Uploading a file
Linking to a video-sharing 
site
Embedding a video on 
a Blank Page in your 
course
For example, uploading 
.mpg, .wav, .wmv, .mov, 
and so on directly onto 
Blackboard.
For example, linking to 
media on www.youtube.
com or www.vimeo.com.
For example, embedding 
a YouTube video in a 
web page.
Blackboard embeds the 
video in the Content Area, 
and displays it on the page 
with the rest of the content.
Blackboard shows the link 
to the video site.
Blackboard shows the 
link to the page.
The student's browser plays 
the video.
When students click on the 
link, they are taken to the 
video site. The video site 
takes care of playing the 
video.
When students click on 
the link, they are taken 
to the page in the course. 
The video site's player is 
embedded on the page, 
so the video site takes 
care of playing the video.
Keeps all the content on one 
page. However, the Content 
Area page can get long.
Puts a link on your Content 
Area page, so it doesn't 
take much room. However, 
the student is taken to a 
different site for the video 
and you might not have 
control over that site.
Puts a link on your 
Content Area page, so it 
does not take much room 
and you can add text to 
the page where the video 
is embedded, to explain 
the video. However, the 
video is still being hosted 
on someone else's site, 
where you don't have full 
control over it.
The first method in the preceding table, uploading a video to your course, has some 
disadvantages. Blackboard is not a streaming video server. If your video is large in 
file size, or many students try to access it at once, your Blackboard server can slow 
down (or even fail) under the load. However, uploading the video to your own 
Blackboard installation ensures that you have control over it. You might even be 
forbidden from putting the video on a sharing site, because of confidentiality issues.
When you put the video on an external site such as YouTube or Vimeo, unless you 
register for a premium account on either site, your video will be available to the 
public. This might be unacceptable to your institution. However, these sites are 
optimized for delivering videos. You won't need to worry about performance  
issues if several students try to play the video at the same time.
Let's look at each method.

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 58 ]
Uploading a video in your course
When you have the video on your computer, instead of on another website, you can 
upload the video in Blackboard and serve it directly to your students:
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add  
the file.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | Video.
3.	 The Create Video page is displayed.
4.	 Under the Find File section, you can use the Browse My Computer button 
to select a file that is on your computer, or on a drive connected to your 
computer. You can also use the Browse Content Collection button to select 
a file that is in one of your Content Collection areas.
When searching for videos and other material to add 
to your course, consider starting your search at  
www.creativecommons.org.
5.	 The Name field that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you are 
adding this video.
6.	 Under the Dimensions section if you resize the video, it will be displayed at 
the new size. You might distort the video if you choose different proportions.
7.	 Under Standard Options, set the availability and tracking options for 
this video.
8.	 Click on the Submit button to save it. You should see the video added to the 
Content Area:

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Linking to a video that is on another site
Instead of embedding the video on a page in your course, you might want to send 
the student out to the video-hosting site. And, it is certainly faster to just create a link 
than it is to create a page:
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add  
the file.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | URL.
3.	 The Create URL page is displayed.
4.	 The Name that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you are 
adding this link.
5.	 The URL is the link itself. The URL will not be displayed.
6.	 The description that you enter in the text editor will also be displayed  
on the page. Notice that this is a full-featured text editor. You can add 
anything to the description that you can put on a web page.
When entering the description for the item, remember that there 
might be other things in the same Content Area. If you add a long 
description, the page for the Content Area can get very long.
7.	 You can add an Attachment field; it will get its own link, next to the one for 
the website that you entered in the URL field.
8.	 If you select Open in New Window, the link will open in a new browser 
window or tab. This new window will show only the video site. If you do  
not select this option, the page that is being linked to it will appear in the 
same window. However, the Course Menu field and other items in the 
sidebars will not be displayed while the page is being viewed. There will  
be a Blackboard navigation menu across the top of the page. The rest of  
the page will belong to the video-sharing site. 

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 60 ]
The following screenshot shows the result when you select Open in 
New Window:
9.	 It looks similar to the following screenshot, when you do not select Open in 
New Window:

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
10.	 Click on the Submit button to save it. You should see the link, its description, 
and any attachments, added to the Content Area.
Embedding a video on a Blank Page
This will keep your students on your course site, even though the video itself is hosted 
on the external site. Embedding the video on a page enables you to add your own 
explanatory text around the video. This makes the video a seamless part of the page:
1.	 From the Course Menu field, select the Content Area to which you want to 
add the Blank Page.

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 62 ]
2.	 At the top of the Content Area section, select the Build Content tab:
3.	 Under the New Page menu, select Blank Page.
4.	 Blackboard will prompt you to name the Blank Page. The Name field 
that you enter here will be displayed as a link in the Content Area.
5.	 If you select Available to Users, students in this course will be able to 
see the Blank Page. If you do not make it available, it will be hidden  
from students, and the link for this Blank Page will not appear.
6.	 Click on the Submit button. The Blank Page will be added to your 
Content Area.
7.	 In the Content section, use the editor to write your text as you would 
with any basic word processor:

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Embedding a video that is hosted on another 
site
To embed a video that is hosted on another site, such as www.youtube.com or 
www.vimeo.com, you will need to use an HTML code as follows:
1.	 In your browser, launch another window. Keep the page in Blackboard  
open in the background.
2.	 Go to the site that is hosting the video. In this example, we are using  
player.vimeo.com/video/466491:

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 64 ]
3.	 On the video's page, you should see some HTML code that you can copy. For 
example, on Vimeo, there will be a button labeled EMBED that you can click, 
to reveal the HTML code:
On YouTube, there will be a button labeled SHARE, which opens a new 
panel. Then you will click on the EMBED link, which reveals the HTML code.
4.	 Copy the HTML code:

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
5.	 Switch back to your course in Blackboard.
6.	 In the page editor, click on the HTML button:
7.	 Paste the code that you copied from the video site:

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 66 ]
8.	 Click on the HTML button again to switch back to normal view. You should 
see the video embedded on the page:
9.	 In the Options section, you can make this page available or unavailable. 
You can also set the time for this page to display.
10.	 Clicking on the Submit button saves the page.
What's next?
If you uploaded the video in your course, it is now part of the Content Collection. 
You and other teachers with access to the Content Collection can reuse the video.
Adding a web link to your course
You can add two types of links to a course. As with other Learning Management 
Systems, you can add links to websites. Blackboard also offers a fast and easy way  
to add links to other material in your course. This makes it easy to reuse content 
from your course.
Adding a link to an external website
Use the following procedure to link to a website or resource outside of your 
Blackboard course:
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add the file.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | URL.

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
3.	 The Create URL page is displayed.
4.	 The Name: field that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you 
are adding this link.
5.	 The URL is the link itself. It will not be displayed.
6.	 The Description field that you enter in text editor will also be displayed on 
the page. Notice that this is a full-featured text editor. You can add anything 
to the description that you put on a web page.
7.	 You can add an Attachment field; it will get its own link next to the one for 
the website that you entered in the URL field.
8.	 If you select Open in New Window, the link will open in a new browser 
window or tab. This new window will show only the external site. If you do 
not select this option, the page that is being linked to will appear in the same 
window. However, the Course Menu and other items in the sidebars will 
not be displayed while the page is being viewed. There will be a Blackboard 
navigation menu across the top of the page. The rest of the page will belong 
to the external site, as shown in the following screenshot:

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 68 ]
9.	 Click on the Submit button to save it. You should see the link, its  
description, and any attachments, added to the Content Area.
Adding a link to a Course Asset
Before you begin this procedure, you must have some content in your course to 
link to, for example, a file, Content Area page, link, or activity. You can't link to 
something in a blank course, because there's nothing to link to:
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add  
the file.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | Course Link.
3.	 The Course Link Information page is displayed.
4.	 Click on the Browse… button. A pop-up window is displayed, listing 
all of the assets in the course:
5.	 Click on the item to select it.
6.	 The Name field that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you 
are adding this link.

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
7.	 The Location field is filled in for you. You can edit this field, but it will break 
the link. Therefore, do not edit the location!
8.	 The description that you enter in the text editor will also be displayed on  
the page.
9.	 Unlike when you link to an external website, there is no option to attach a  
file or to open the link in a new window.
10.	 Select Standard Options for this link.
11.	 Click on the Submit button to save it. You should see the link and its 
description, added to the Content Area.
The links for external websites and internal course links have slightly 
different icons:
Blackboard supports several sets of icons. The ones used by your installation 
might be different than the ones shown here.
Adding an image to your course
There are several ways to add an image to your course. You can create a new Blank 
Page and add the image to that. Essentially, you are giving the image its own page. 
If you do this, a link to the page will appear in the Content Area to which you added 
the page. You can keep the name of the link and its description short. This enables 
you to add an image to a Content Area without taking up much room on the Content 
Area page.
Also, you can add an image directly to a Content Area. If you do this, the image will 
appear on the Content Area. It will take up more room than a link to another page, 
but your students won't need to click on a link to see the image.
We have already covered how to add a Blank Page, earlier in this chapter. In the 
following procedure, we will cover how to add an image directly to a Content Area.

Adding Static Material to a Course
[ 70 ]
Adding an image to a Content Area
1.	 From the Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add 
the image.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Create | Image.
3.	 The Create Image page is displayed:
4.	 Under the Find File section, you can use the Browse My Computer button 
to select an image that is on your computer, or on a drive connected to your 
computer. You can also use the Browse Content Collection button to select 
an image that is present in one of your Content Collection areas.
5.	 The Name field that you enter will be displayed on the page to which you are 
adding this image.
6.	 The Alt Text field is displayed when the user points to the image, and is also 
used to help visually-impaired users to navigate the page.
7.	 The Long Description field is displayed on the page along with the image.

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
8.	 Under Dimensions, if you resize the image it will be displayed at the new 
size. You might distort the image if you choose different proportions.
9.	 If the image is too big to display on the same page as the rest of the items  
in the Content Area, consider setting Open Target in New Window to Yes.
10.	 Under Standard Options, set the availability and tracking options for 
this image.
11.	 Click on the Submit button to save it. You should see the image added to 
the Content Area.
Summary
In this chapter, we saw how to add several kinds of static content to a course. We 
used links and embedding to include the content in our course. Blackboard also  
has special functions for adding other kinds of static content, such as photos from 
www.flickr.com, textbooks from McGraw-Hill, videos and other assets from NBC, 
and so on. Using the methods learnt in this chapter, you'll be able to add these 
other content types.


Discussion Boards
In the previous chapter, you learned how to add static material to a course. In this 
chapter, we will discuss how to add interaction to a course using Discussion Board. 
The activities that we will cover enable students to collaborate with each other and 
with the instructor. These activities require feedback and guidance from the instructor 
to make them work. In this chapter, we will cover the following:
• 
Creating forums with Discussion Board
• 
Creating links to specific forums
• 
Collecting posts in a forum
• 
Grading posts in a forum
About Discussion Boards
Your course's Discussion Board enables students to interact with each other, and  
also with the instructor. Discussions can be as follows:
• 
Moderated or unmoderated
• 
Graded or ungraded
• 
Attributed or anonymous
Depending upon your installation, there could be a default Discussion Board for 
each course. The Discussion Board consists of one or more forums. Each forum 
contains threads. So the hierarchy is as follows:
• 
Discussion Board (there is one default created for your course)
• 
Forum (there can be many)
• 
Thread (there can be many)

Discussion Boards
[ 74 ]
The following screenshot shows our course's Discussion Board with two forums:
Let's begin by learning to use the course's default Discussion Board.
Creating forums with Discussion Board
By itself, the default Discussion Board is of no use. To give students a place to hold 
discussions, you must create at least one forum.
To create a forum, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Course Tools | Discussion Board.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
2.	 The page displays all of the Discussion Boards in the course. In our example 
course, there is only one board so far, that is, the default board for the course 
named Intro to the Oceans (Demo for Blackboard Essentials Book):
3.	 Select the default Discussion Board. In this example, we click on Intro to 
Oceans Demo. The Discussion Board is displayed. Remember that you are 
looking at this from the instructor's point of view. Students cannot create a 
new forum.
4.	 Click on the Create Forum button. The Create Forum page is displayed.

Discussion Boards
[ 76 ]
5.	 In the forum-information area, enter Name and Description for the forum. 
Students will see these when the forum is listed on the Discussion Board:
6.	 In the forum-availability area, set the availability of the forum. Even if you 
make this forum available to students, if you don't create a link to the forum, 
the students will never see it. For now, make the forum available, and we 
will create a link to it later.
7.	 Most of the options under the Forum Settings area are self-explanatory. For 
example, you can make the forum posts graded. However, here are some 
options that we will explain:
°°
When a user subscribes to the forum, the user will receive an e-mail 
notifying him or her of new posts to the forum. The instructor can 
determine how the e-mail is generated. You can either send a link to 
the Discussion Board or send full text of the posting within the e-mail.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
°°
If you select Allow Members to Rate Posts, then each student will be 
able to rate posts made by other students. They won't be able to rate 
posts made by the instructor. The standard scale for rating posts is 
one to five stars. In the following screenshot, a student named Suzy  
is rating a post made by another student named Sammy:
Allowing students to rate each other's posts enables you to see the amount  
of consensus that the class has about a post:
°°
If you select Force Moderation of Posts, then each time a student 
posts, the moderator must review the post. The moderator can 
publish or deny the post. By default, the instructor is the moderator. 
However, using the forums' Manage option, you can make any 
student a moderator.

Discussion Boards
[ 78 ]
8.	 From the students' view, the following screenshot shows what it looks like 
when the student is waiting for his or her post to be moderated:
From the instructor's view, the following screenshot shows what it looks like 
to moderate a student's post:

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
°°
Under Forum Settings, in the Grade section, you can choose to give the 
student a grade for the entire forum, or for each thread in the forum.
9.	 To save your work and create the forum, click on the Submit button.
In a later section, you will see how to create a link to this forum.

Discussion Boards
[ 80 ]
Making Discussion Board available  
to students
When you create a course, sometimes it automatically has a Discussion Board created 
for it. It depends upon your installation's course template. However, the board might 
not appear on the student's Course Menu. In that case, you must add a link to the 
board, or else the student will never see the board.
The following screenshot shows the instructor's view of the default Discussion Board. 
The instructor got to this page by clicking on Course Tools | Discussion Board:

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
In this example, the student doesn't have a Discussion Board link. You must create a 
link to the board, or link to the individual forums on the board.
Adding a link to Discussion Board on the 
Course Menu
If you give students a link to Discussion Board, they will see a list of all of the forums 
in the course. You can also give them links to one forum at a time.
To create a link to Discussion Board on Course Menu, perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Add Menu Item menu, select Create Tool Link:
2.	 The Create Tool Link dialog box is displayed. In the Name field, enter 
the name for the link. Students will see this in the Course Menu.
3.	 From the Type drop-down list, select Discussion Board.
4.	 Mark it as Available to Users.
5.	 To save the link, click on the Submit button.

Discussion Boards
[ 82 ]
Remember that while the link you create will display whatever name you enter,  
the Discussion Board page will always have the title Discussion Board displayed 
at the top:
Creating a link to a forum
You can link directly to a forum. When the student clicks on the link, he or she is 
taken to the forum. Note that the thread crumbs at the top of the page show the 
Discussion Board is one level up from the forum:

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
To add a link to a forum on Content Area, perform the following steps:
1.	 From Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add 
the link.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Add Interactive Tool | 
Discussion Board.
3.	 The Create Link to Discussion Board page is displayed. On this page, 
you will select the forum to link to.
4.	 Select the radio button for Select a Discussion Board Forum.
5.	 Select a forum to link to.

Discussion Boards
[ 84 ]
6.	 Click on the Next button.
7.	 Another page is displayed; on this page, you will enter the text and settings 
for the link.
8.	 In the Link Name field, enter the name for the link. This will be displayed to 
the user.
9.	 In the Text field, enter a description for the link. You might consider copying 
the description from the forum and pasting it here.
10.	 Set Availability of the link.
11.	 Click on the Submit button. The link is added to the page.
You can also create a link to a forum in Course Menu. If you place the link in Course 
Menu, then the forum should be one that is relevant to all parts of the course. For 
example, you would probably not place a link to a forum that discusses just one unit in 
the course. But you might place a link to the course-wide, question-and-answer forum.
To add a link to a forum in Course Menu, perform the following steps:
1.	 From Add Menu Item, select Create Course Link:
2.	 The Add Course Link dialog box is displayed. In the Name field, enter the 
name for the link. Students will see this in Course Menu.
3.	 Click on the Browse button. Another pop-up window is displayed, which 
shows all the assets in the course that you can link to:

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
4.	 Select the forum to which you will link. In our example, we will select 
Open Q&A.
5.	 Mark it as Available to Users.
6.	 To save the link, click on the Submit button.
Course links are not just for forums.
You can use this technique to link to any asset in your course. Look 
at the screenshot in step 3 of the preceding procedure, and you'll see 
that all of the Course Assets show up on the list of possible links.

Discussion Boards
[ 86 ]
Managing a forum
Now that you have created a forum and your students are posting in it, you can start 
managing the forum. Blackboard offers several features for this.
Collecting posts in a forum
Blackboard enables you to select individual posts in a forum, and then display just 
the selected posts on a single page. Let's look at a simple example.
In this forum, the instructor started a thread with a post called Where did you waste 
water today? Then, two students responded as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
Suppose that we want to see the students' posts collected on one page. First, 
we select these posts by clicking on the checkbox next to them:

Discussion Boards
[ 88 ]
Then, we click on the Collect button. The result is a page containing only the selected 
posts; this page shows not only the subject, but also the content of the posts:
In the upper-right corner of the page, is the Filter button. When you click on the 
Filter button, you can search for posts by several criteria:
Once you have collected and filtered the posts, you can print them.
Saving posts as HTML or text
Blackboard does not enable you to export posts as HTML or text. 
However, there is a workaround. Read further to know more.

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
When you are viewing Forum Collection, click on the Print Preview button; 
Blackboard will open two new windows. First, it will open a window showing just 
the Collection. In the following screenshot, this is the window on the right-hand side 
of the screen. Then, it will open a window with a Print dialog box. In the following 
screenshot, this is the window on the left-hand side of the screen.
To save the posts as HTML, ignore the Print dialog box. Instead, select the window 
containing just the collected posts, and save it as a web page.
In most browsers, you will right-click on that window and select Save as… or Save 
page as…. Once you have saved the collected posts as HTML, you can use any HTML 
editor (or even most word processors , such as Word and OpenOffice) to edit the text.
This procedure might differ slightly in different browsers, but 
viewing the Collection and saving it as a web page is common 
to them all. The exact clicks for saving as a web page might be 
slightly different.

Discussion Boards
[ 90 ]
Grading posts in a forum
When you created the forum, you determined whether:
• 
The forum would be ungraded
• 
The student would receive one grade for all his/her participation in the forum
• 
Each thread would be graded
To grade a forum, navigate to the front page of that forum. If Grade Forum is 
activated, you will see a Grade Forum button. If Grade Threads is activated, 
you will see a Grade Thread button next to each thread. Click on the button to 
begin the grading process:

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
This brings you to a page that lists the individual postings in this thread. From 
this page, click on the Grade button for each posting, and then assign it a grade:
Summary
An online course can often leave students feeling isolated from their classmates, 
and from the instructor. Forums can help to overcome this. They provide a way to 
encourage discussion among the students, and can give insight into the students' 
attitudes and feelings about the course.
You can encourage your students to use the forums by:
• 
Providing convenient links to the forums
• 
Presenting students with thought-provoking and funny questions  
for discussion
• 
Grading students' posts
In the next chapter, we will cover blogs and wikis. We will learn about the mechanics 
of adding them to a course, using, and managing them. We will also discuss when 
they are appropriate and how to include them in the flow of a course.


Blogs and Wikis
In this chapter, we will cover adding blogs and wikis to a course. These activities 
enable students to collaborate with each other, and with the teacher. These activities 
usually require feedback and guidance from the teacher to make them work well.
In this chapter, you will learn how to do the following:
• 
Adding a blog to your course
• 
Adding a wiki to your course
• 
Understanding when to use blogs and wikis
• 
Monitoring and managing blogs and wikis
We'll look at the capabilities and limitations of each tool, to help you decide when  
to use each one. We will also see how they blend into the flow of a course.
About blogs
A blog provides a place for students to express their thoughts and discuss course 
material. In a forum, you can restrict students from creating new threads. In a blog, 
students have the freedom to create new entries.
Combine blogs and wikis to complete the learning cycle
In a blog, entries and comments are organized chronologically. This 
makes a blog a good tool for publicly documenting and discussing 
a journey, or continuing a project. A wiki is organized as per topic. 
This makes it a good tool for categorizing and organizing knowledge. 
While you guide the students through a journey or project, you can 
have them blog about their experiences. At the conclusion, you can 
have them assimilate and organize their knowledge into a wiki.

Blogs and Wikis
[ 94 ]
Individual versus class blogs
Blogs can be owned by each individual student, or by the entire class. In an 
individual student blog, each student is given their own blog. Only that student 
can post in his/her blog. In a class blog, every student can create new posts. In 
both cases, students can comment on posts.
Blogs Course Tool link
On Course Menu, you can add a Course Tool link called Blogs:
When a user clicks on this link, it displays a page that lists all of the blogs in  
your course:

Chapter 5
[ 95 ]
In the preceding example, Coursewide Blog is available only from the Blogs page. 
However, a link to the Water Walks blog was also added to the Introduction to the 
Oceans (Demo for Blackboard Essentials Book) page:
Whenever you create a blog, a link to it will always appear on the Blogs page. 
If you want a link to it on the Course Page, you will need to add it to the page.
Creating a blog
By itself, the Blogs page is of no use. To give students a place to blog, you must 
create at least one blog. To create a blog, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Course Tools | Blogs.
2.	 The page displays all of the blogs in the course. If this is a new course,  
there are probably no blogs.
3.	 Click on the Create Blog button. The Create Blog page is displayed.

Blogs and Wikis
[ 96 ]
4.	 In the Blog Information area, enter the Name and Description fields for the 
blog. Students will see the name when the blog is listed on the Blogs page. 
They will not see the description until they click and select the blog.
5.	 In the Blog Availability area, set the availability of the blog. Even if you 
make this blog available to students, if you don't create a link to the blog, 
students will never see it.
6.	 For now, make the blog available and we'll create a link to it later.
7.	 Under Blog Participation, if you select Individual to All Students, each 
student will get their own blog. If you select Course, this will create just 
one blog, which all the students can post on.
8.	 Under Blog Settings, there are settings to enable users to edit and delete 
entries and posts. If you enable this, users can edit/delete only their own 
posts and comments.
9.	 Under Grade Settings, you can assign a number of grade points to the blog.
10.	 To save your work and create the blog, click on the Submit button.
Making blogs available to students
When you create a blog, a link to it will always appear on the Blogs page. If you want 
a link to it on a Course page, you will need to add it to the page. Each procedure is 
covered in the rest of the chapter.
Adding a link to the Blogs page
If you give students a link to the Blogs page, they will see a list of all of the blogs in 
the course.
To create a link to the Blogs page on Course Menu, perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Add Menu Item menu, select Create Tool Link:

Chapter 5
[ 97 ]
2.	 The Add Tool Link dialog box is displayed. In the Name field, enter 
the name for the link. Students will see this in Course Menu.
3.	 From the Type drop-down list, select Blog.
4.	 Mark it as Available to Users.
5.	 To save the link, click on the Submit button.
Remember that while the link you create will display whatever name you enter,  
the Discussion Board page will always have the title Blogs displayed at the top:

Blogs and Wikis
[ 98 ]
Creating a link to a blog
You can link directly to a blog. When a student clicks on the link, he/she is taken to 
the blog. Note that the thread crumbs at the top of the page show that the Blogs page 
is one level higher than this blog:
Students have a habit of exploring parts of the course that we might not be ready to 
reveal. So if there are blogs in the course that you don't want students to see yet, set 
their availability so they won't display on the Blogs page.
To add a link to a blog in Content Area, perform the following steps:
1.	 From Course Menu, select the Content Area to which you will add the link.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Add Interactive Tool | Blog.
3.	 The Create Link: Blog page is displayed.
4.	 Select the radio button for Link to a blog.
5.	 Select the blog you want to link to.
6.	 Click on the Next button.
7.	 Another page is displayed. On this page, you will enter the text and settings 
for the link.
8.	 In the Link Name field, enter the name for the link. This will be displayed to 
the user.
9.	 In the Text field, enter a description for the link. You might consider copying 
the description from the blog and pasting it here.

Chapter 5
[ 99 ]
10.	 Set Availability of the link.
11.	 Click on the Submit button. The link is added to the page.
You can also create a link to a blog in Course Menu. If you place the link in Course 
Menu, then the blog should be one that is relevant to all parts of the course. For 
example, you would probably not place a link to a blog that has been used for just 
one unit in the course, but you might place a link to the coursewide blog.
To add a link to a blog in Course Menu, perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Add Menu Item menu, select Create Course Link:
2.	 The Add Course Link dialog box is displayed. In the Name field, enter the 
name for the link. Students will see this in Course Menu.
3.	 Click on the Browse button. Another pop-up window is displayed, which 
shows all the assets in the course that you can link to:

Blogs and Wikis
[ 100 ]
4.	 Select the blog to which you will link. In our example, we will select  
Water Walks.
5.	 Mark it as Available to Users.
6.	 To save the link, click on the Submit button.
Know the name of the asset that you want to link to.
You can use this technique to link to any asset in your course. 
Look at the screenshot in step 3 of the preceding procedure, and 
you'll see that all of the Course Assets show up on the list of 
possible links. However, they all have the same icon. So, don't 
depend on being able to tell what kind of asset it is, from this list.
Managing a blog
Now that you have created a blog and your students are posting on it, you can 
start managing the blog. Blackboard offers several features for this.
Grading blogs
While you are creating a blog, under Grade Settings you can assign a number of 
grade points to the blog. For a forum, you can assign a grade for the entire forum, 
or just for one thread in the forum. For a blog, you can assign a grade (a number of 
points) for the entire blog.
There will probably be multiple students who contribute to a blog. When you grade 
a blog, you are giving a grade to just one student at a time.
To grade a blog, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the blog that needs to be graded.

Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
2.	 From the column on the right-hand side of the screen, select the student  
to be graded:

Blogs and Wikis
[ 102 ]
3.	 The system will display all of the entries and comments that the selected 
person has made in this blog:
4.	 Click on the Edit Grade button.

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
5.	 Enter a grade for this student, for this blog:
6.	 The student will see the note that you enter into the Feedback: field. It will 
be displayed, along with the grade, on the student's My Grades page:

Blogs and Wikis
[ 104 ]
7.	 The student will not see what you enter into the Grading Notes: field. It will 
be seen only by the teacher. For example, you could use this to leave a note 
for yourself or for the next teacher.
8.	 Click on the Save Grade button.
Even after saving the grade, you can go back and edit the grade. Just click on the 
Edit Grade button again. The history of the previous grades will be viewable to 
the instructor.
Later in the book, we'll see how the Grade Center works. From there, you can edit 
this grade.
Deleting and editing entries and comments
When you created a blog, the settings under Blog Settings could be used to enable 
users to edit and delete their own entries and comments. As the teacher, you can 
always edit/delete your students' entries/comments.
To edit/delete a blog entry/comment, perform the following steps:
1.	 While logged in as the teacher, select the blog and then the student.
2.	 To delete or edit a student's entry, click on the Menu icon next to the entry. 
A pop-up menu appears, with the options—Edit, Mark as New, and Delete:
What happens to comments when you delete a blog entry?
When you delete a blog entry, the comments underneath it 
are deleted as well.
3.	 To delete a blog comment:
°°
Click on the Comments: 2 link to reveal the comments underneath:

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
°°
Click on the Delete icon next to the comment that you want to delete:
°°
At the pop-up message asking if you want to delete the comment, 
click on it to confirm the deletion.
You can delete comments, but you cannot edit them.
When you delete a student's blog entry, and the student returns to the blog, the 
student might be confused by the missing entry. Instead of deleting blog entries, 
consider asking the student to edit them. Deleting a student's content can discourage 
further contributions from that student. If you absolutely must edit or delete the 
entry yourself, communicate with the student directly and explain why you want to 
do so. You can also consider replacing the content of the entry with something such 
as [This entry deleted by the teacher], as shown in the following screenshot:

Blogs and Wikis
[ 106 ]
About wikis
Blackboard enables your students to collaborate on a wiki. A wiki is usually a group 
writing project. While it is rare, you can create a separate wiki for each student. More 
commonly, you can separate students into groups, and then have a wiki for each 
group. So each wiki that you create can be for the entire class, for a group within the 
class, or for an individual.
In this section, we'll see how to create a wiki for the class. Groups are covered in 
Chapter 8, Working with Groups. After you know how to create and manage a class 
wiki, you will have the background needed to work with group wikis.
Just like every course has a Blogs page that lists all of the blogs in the course, and a 
Course Discussion page that lists all of the forums in the course, every course has a 
Wikis page that lists all of the wikis in the course. When you first create a course, a 
wiki might already be created for you. It depends upon how your administrator has 
set up the new course template.
Creating a wiki
By itself, the Wikis page is of no use. To give students a wiki, you must create at least 
one wiki on this page.
To create a wiki, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Course Tools | Wikis.
2.	 The page displays all of the wikis in the course. If this is a new course, there 
are probably no wikis.
3.	 Click on the Create Wiki button. The Create Wiki page is displayed.
4.	 In the Wiki Information area, enter the Name and Instructions fields for the 
wiki. Students will see the name when the wiki is listed on the Wikis page. 
They will not see the instructions until they click and select the wiki.
5.	 In the Wiki Participation area, you will determine if students can edit the 
wiki. Even if you make this wiki available to students, if you don't select 
Open to Editing, then students will be able to see it, but not edit it.
6.	 For now, make the wiki available, and we'll create a link to it later.
7.	 Under Grade Wiki, you can assign a number of grade points to the wiki.
8.	 To save your work and create the wiki, click on the Submit button.

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
So I created a wiki. Now what?
If you don't create a link to the wiki, your students will never see it. 
In a later section, you will see how to create a link to this wiki.
Adding a link to the Wikis page
If you give students a link to the Wikis page, they will see a list of all of the wikis 
in the course.
To create a link to the Wikis page on Course Menu, perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Add Menu Item menu, select Create Tool Link:
2.	 The Add Tool Link dialog box is displayed. In the Name field, enter the 
name for the link. Students will see this in Course Menu.
3.	 From the Type drop-down list, select Wikis.
4.	 Mark it as Available to Users.
5.	 To save the link, click on the Submit button.
Remember that while the link you create will display whatever name you enter,  
the Wikis page will always have the title Wikis displayed at the top.
To add a link to a wiki to a Content Area, perform the following steps:
1.	 From Course Menu, select a Content Area to which you will add the link.
2.	 From the Build Content menu, select Add Interactive Tool | Wiki.
3.	 The Create Link: Wiki page is displayed.
4.	 Select the radio button for Link to a wiki.
5.	 Select the wiki that you want to link to.

Blogs and Wikis
[ 108 ]
6.	 Click on the Next button.
7.	 Another page is displayed. On this page, you can see the Name and 
Description fields for the link. They are copied directly from the wiki. 
You can leave them as it is, or edit them.
8.	 In the Link Name field, enter the name for the link. This will be displayed 
to the user. It should already be filled in with the name of the wiki.
9.	 In the Text field, enter a description for the link. It should already be filled 
in with the description from the wiki. You can edit it or leave it as it is.
10.	 Set Availability of the link.
11.	 Click on the Submit button. The link is added to the page.
Summary
Both blogs and wikis offer a place for your students to build a body of knowledge. 
Since blog entries are ordered in time, blogs work best when you want the student 
to document the journey of building their knowledge. However, remember that 
Blackboard does not give you the ability to automatically gather all the blog entries 
about a topic in one place. So while it is easy to see the gathering of knowledge 
over time, it is not as easy to see the final result of that gathering. As wiki entries 
are organized as per page, they encourage the categorization and organization of 
knowledge. If seeing the result of the gathering of knowledge is more important  
than seeing the journey, then consider using a wiki.
One way to take advantage of both tools is to start by using a blog. Have the students 
blog about an area of study. Encourage (or require) them to read and comment on 
each other's entries. After students have built a significant body of knowledge in 
their blogs, make a coursewide wiki available to them. You can start creating pages 
in the wiki for the categories and subjects that they have blogged about. Then, have 
the students add their knowledge to the wiki.
In the next chapter, we'll cover the assignments activity.

Assignments
In this chapter, we will discuss how to create assignments where the student  
must submit or upload a material for the instructor to review. You will learn  
how to review and respond to the files that students submit.
In this chapter, you will learn the following:
• 
Creating an assignment, which has a file that the student must download
• 
Receiving notification that a student has submitted a completed assignment
• 
Grading the assignment
• 
Sending feedback to the student
About assignments
An assignment is essentially an activity where the instructor tells the student, 
"Go do this, and then submit proof that you've done it". Optional features enable  
the instructor to supply the student with a file, to upload a file, and to submit  
both feedback and comments. Blackboard will create a link in the assignment,  
for the student to upload material to the instructor.
Every assignment must have instructions and a student submission. The 
instructions are entered by the instructor when (s)he creates the assignment. 
The student submission can be material that the student types directly into the 
assignment-feedback form, or something that the student uploads (such as a  
word document or picture).
The instructor can give a student feedback on the student's submission. In return,  
the student can give the instructor feedback on the assignment. Instructors can  
also allow multiple submissions, so the student has multiple tries to get it right.  
No matter how many trials the student takes, or how many files the student  
uploads, the instructor will give only one grade to the student.

Assignments
[ 110 ]
Adding an assignment
To add an assignment to a Content Page, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Content Page to which you want to add an assignment.
2.	 Select Create Assessment | Assignment. The Create Assignment page 
is displayed.
3.	 Both the Name and the Instructions fields that you enter will be displayed 
on the page with the assignment, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the preceding example, the instructor tells the student to 
download a file. You might want to remind the students to 
create a folder on their computers to hold all the material 
that they download from the course.
4.	 Under Attached Files, you can add any files that you want the student to 
download and use in the assignment (this is optional). These can be files  
that you want the student to modify and then upload (such as a form to  
fill out), or files that contain instructions for an activity (such as instructions 
for performing an experiment), or source files that the student will use to 
create something (such as some raw video footage).
If the student will complete the assignment while (s)he is online, enter the 
instructions into the Instructions area as shown earlier. If the student will 
complete the assignment while (s)he is offline, consider supplying the  
student with printer-friendly instructions that (s)he can download.
Blackboard will allow the student to upload files up to 100 MB in size.
5.	 The Grading and Availability sections contain standard options.
6.	 If you enter Due Date for the assignment, it will not appear on the Content 
Page (see the preceding screenshot). However, it will appear in several other 
places. When the student enters the assignment, the due date will appear on 
the assignment page:

Chapter 6
[ 111 ]
The due date will also appear in the student's To Do block. Usually, the To 
Do block is added to the course's home page, and also to the student's home 
page. In the following screenshot, you can see the assignment in the To Do 
block of the course's home page. Because it was recently added, you can also 
see the assignment in the What's New block:

Assignments
[ 112 ]
And finally, Due Date will appear on the student's My Grades page:
The due date has no effect on the availability of the assignment, 
or the student's grade. It is for informational purposes only. If 
you want Blackboard to limit the time period for which students 
can submit an assignment, use the Availability setting to make 
the assignment available only during a specified time.
7.	 Under Recipients, determine if this assignment will be graded individually 
for each student, or for a group.
8.	 Click on Submit to save your work.
The assignment is added to the course. You don't need to do anything to make the 
assignment appear within the Assignments page and the To Do block. And, you 
can create a link to the assignment on the pages of your course.

Chapter 6
[ 113 ]
Responding to an assignment
Most of this book is written from the course creator's and instructor's point of view. 
But in this section, we will see an assignment from the student's point of view. 
This will enable you to determine how the choices you make while creating the 
assignment will affect your students' experience.
Not all assignments will require the student to download or upload files. However, 
these instructions include these steps so that you can see a more complete example  
of a student's experience:
1.	 Select the assignment. You might select it from Content Page that the 
assignment appears on; or select it from the To Do block, or the What's 
New block.
2.	 The student sees Name, Instructions, Due Date, Points Possible (if any), 
and Assignment Files (if any).
If the assignment has files that the student must download, 
consider mentioning this explicitly in the instructions, asking 
the student to click on the file to download it. Then there will be 
no doubt that the student knows how to start the assignment.
3.	 In our example, the student clicks on the assignment file. Note that the way in 
which the download happens will vary, based on the student's browser. For 
example, Internet Explorer will usually launch a pop-up window showing 
the download's progress, while Google Chrome will usually add a tab at the 
bottom of the browser window, showing the download's progress:

Assignments
[ 114 ]
4.	 The student will usually work on the file outside of Blackboard. To make it 
easier for the student, include the instructions for using that file in another 
file; that is, when the student downloads the file, (s)he should also be 
downloading the instructions for using the file:
5.	 In our example, the student will modify the file, and then upload it 
to the assignment. Note that the student can also include notes with  
the submission:

Chapter 6
[ 115 ]
6.	 Student submissions appear in the instructor's Grade Center, under 
Needs Grading:

Assignments
[ 116 ]
7.	 When the instructor clicks on the student's name, the grading page for that 
assignment is displayed. In this window, the instructor can offer feedback on 
that submission. Near the bottom of the page, there is an Instructor Notes 
section, where the instructor can enter notes that are visible only to the 
instructors of this course:
8.	 The Grade section for the student appears in the Instructor Feedback area 
of the assignment:

Chapter 6
[ 117 ]
Note that at this point, the student can start a new submission for the 
assignment. This is because, when the instructor created the assignment,  
(s)he allowed multiple submissions on the Creating Assignment page:
As you can see, an assignment that allows multiple submissions gives the 
instructor and student a chance to collaborate on the student's success.  
Allowing multiple attempts also enables the student to resubmit in case  
(s)he uploads the wrong file the first time.

Assignments
[ 118 ]
If you allow only a single attempt, and the student needs to resubmit the  
assignment, you must find the original attempt in the gradebook and clear 
that attempt. First, find the assignment in Grade Center and click on the 
icon next to Attempt:
9.	 From this pop-up menu, select View Grade Details. In our example, there is 
no grade for the attempt, but we still select View Grade Details. This brings 
up a window where all the attempts for this assignment are listed:
10.	 Click on the Clear Attempt button to delete the attempt from the record.

Chapter 6
[ 119 ]
Summary
In this example, we had a student download a file, work with it, and then upload  
the file into an assignment. But remember that assignments don't need to be done 
online. An assignment can also be done in the real, physical world. For example, 
you could instruct your students to build something and then bring it to class. Or, 
you could instruct them to make a video and upload it to another site, or contribute 
to www.wikipedia.org. The student doesn't need to upload anything for you to 
be able to grade the assignment because Blackboard's Grade Center enables you to 
give a grade to any assignment at any time. So whenever you need to instruct your 
students to perform some kind of independent action, consider using an assignment.
In the next chapter, we'll learn how to build and use tests.


Testing Students
Blackboard includes a robust testing feature. It is a flexible feature, so you can use 
tests as an assessment, and as a teaching tool.
Blackboard enables you to add several kinds of questions to your tests. You can also 
add media and descriptive pages. You can control the page breaks in a test, and 
create several kinds of feedback. All of these features are covered in this chapter. 
You could complete these steps in a different order. For example, you could create 
questions first, create the test, and then add the questions to the test. The process 
here is a common and easily understood method.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following:
• 
Creating a blank test
• 
Creating new questions
• 
Organizing questions into question pools
• 
Adding random blocks of questions to a test
• 
Adding question sets to a test
• 
Determining when to use random blocks, rather than question sets
Creating a test
Creating a test is a multipart process. The first part is to create a blank test. Next, you 
determine the behavior of questions using Test Question Settings. The next part is 
to create questions and add them to the test, using Test Canvas. The fourth part is to 
add the test to your course, and select settings for that occurrence of the test.

Testing Students
[ 122 ]
Creating a blank test
In this part of the process, you will create a blank test. Later, the test will need to be 
populated with questions and added to a page:
1.	 Navigate to the Content Page where you want to add the test.
2.	 Select Create Assessment | Test. The Create Test page is displayed.
3.	 Under the Add Test section, you can either select a test that has already 
been created in this course, or create a new test. In this example, we will 
select the Create button.
4.	 The Test Information page is displayed.
5.	 The Name and Description fields will be displayed on any page to which 
you add the test.
6.	 The Instructions field will be displayed after a student selects and enters 
the test.
7.	 Click on the Submit button. The Test Canvas page is displayed.
Determining the behavior of questions by 
using Question Settings
The Question Settings page determines how individual questions behave:
1.	 Click on the Question Settings button. The Test Question Settings page 
is displayed.
2.	 Selecting Provide feedback for individual answers enables you to create 
different feedback, which will be displayed to the student, for each answer  
of each question. You can use the feedback to explain why an answer is 
correct or incorrect. This is a good option if you want to make the test a 
learning experience.
3.	 The setting for Add images, files, and external links to questions enables 
you to attach these items to the questions. The setting for Add images, 
files, and external links to answers enables students to attach the items 
to their answers.
4.	 The Question Metadata setting enables you to add descriptive information to 
your questions. Students will never see this metadata. However, instructors 
will see it. This metadata can be used when instructors are searching for 
questions. In the following example, the instructor has assigned a category 
and a level of difficulty to a question:

Chapter 7
[ 123 ]
5.	 Under Scoring, you can specify the default points for each question in the test. 
However, you can change the number of points that each question is worth.
6.	 If you enable the setting for Specify random ordering of answers, be careful 
about writing answers like "All of the above", because the order of the 
answers will change.
7.	 To save your changes, click on the Submit button. This returns you to the 
Test Canvas page. You are now ready to create and add questions.
Adding and creating questions on Test Canvas
The process for creating questions changes according to the kind of question you are 
creating. In a later section, we will cover this process. Once you've created questions, 
you can then present them in random groups:
1.	 To create a new question, select Create Question, and then select the type 
of question you want to create. For more information about how to create 
questions, see the section Creating Questions, later in this chapter.
2.	 If you want to use randomized questions, see the section Random Blocks 
versus Question Sets, later in this chapter.
3.	 Save your test. You now have a complete test. However, it is not being 
displayed to the students.
Adding the test to a page in your course
You need to add the test to a page in your course so that students can access it:
1.	 To add the test to a Content Page, select Assessments | Test. On the 
Add Test page, select the test, and click on the Submit button.
2.	 The Test Options page is displayed. The Name and Description fields 
that you enter here will be displayed to the students.

Testing Students
[ 124 ]
Setting the Test Options page
The most common test options are implemented as follows:
1.	 Under Test Availability, you can choose Add a New Announcement for 
this Test. If you enable this, an announcement that you have added the test 
will appear in the Announcements block for the student. Note that it won't 
have the due date of the test, but just an announcement that it was added:
2.	 Under Due Date, if you select the checkbox and enter a date, the due date 
will be added to the student's To Do list:
3.	 Under Self-assessment Options, if you remove the check mark from Include 
this Test in Grade Center Score Calculations, then this test will only be for 
self assessment. It will not be counted towards the student's grade for the 
course. The instructor cannot see the student's answers.
4.	 Set the other options as desired, and then click on Submit.
Note that Test Options appears only when a test is added to a page.
Specific instructions for some of these steps are given in the sections that follow.

Chapter 7
[ 125 ]
Creating questions
Blackboard enables you to create many types of questions. The process for creating 
these questions is similar for all types. Some details change, based on the type 
of question. In the following screenshot, you can see the types of questions that 
Blackboard supports:
In this section, we will look at what is common to the process of creating all types 
of questions.
Navigating to the Test Canvas page
The Test Canvas page is where you add existing, and create new, questions.
If you are in the middle of creating a test, and you want to create a new question for 
that test, you are probably at the Test Canvas page. If so, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the Create Question drop-down list.
If you are not currently creating the test, you need to reopen the test before 
you can add questions to it.
2.	 From the main menu, select Course Tools | Tests, Surveys, and Pools. 
From the drop-down next to the test, select Edit.

Testing Students
[ 126 ]
Enter the type, title, and question text
Options such as type, title, and question text are universal for almost all question 
types, and can be entered as follows:
1.	 From the Create Question drop-down list, select the type of question that 
you are creating. The Create Question page will be displayed.
2.	 Enter the Question Title field for the question. When instructors select 
questions to add to tests, and see the grade reports for the questions, the 
instructor will see this title.
3.	 Enter the Question Text field. This is the question itself, which the students 
will see.
4.	 Immediately below Question Text, you will see fields for File, Action, 
External Link, and Link Name:
5.	 Note that you can attach a file to this question. If you do so, Blackboard 
will either display a link to the file, or display the file on the page with 
the question text. The Action drop-down determines whether the system 
displays a link or the actual file.

Chapter 7
[ 127 ]
6.	 If you add External Link to this question, Blackboard places the link below 
the question text. The link name is entered in the Link Name field.
Further down the page, under each answer, and also under 
each bit of feedback, you will again see the fields for File, 
Action, External Link, and Link Name. If you fill these in as an 
answer, they are displayed along with that answer. The student 
sees the file or link while looking at the answers. If you fill these 
in for feedback, the student sees them only if (s)he submits the 
corresponding answer. Make sure you know whether you are 
adding files and links to an answer, or to an answer's feedback.
Adding answers and answer feedback
For most types of questions, you enter answers that the student chooses or that are 
compared to the answer that the student enters; for example, True/False, Multiple 
Choice, Jumbled Sentence, and Matching. This section is for these types of questions. 
Other types of questions don't have a list of answers that the student chooses from; 
for example, Paragraph. If the question you are creating doesn't have Answer and 
Feedback fields, skip this section.
1.	 Under the Options section, there are several options that affect the behavior 
of the question.
2.	 Answer Numbering determines if the answers will be numbered or lettered.
3.	 Answer Orientation determines if the answers will be listed across the page 
(horizontally) or one after the other (vertically). If you intend to deliver this 
course on a device with a small screen, consider listing the answers vertically 
to avoid horizontal scrolling.
4.	 If this is a multiple-choice question, you can choose Allow Partial Credit for 
some answers.
5.	 If you choose Show Answers in Random Order, beware of creating 
questions with answers like "All of the above" or "The first two choices".
6.	 For Number of Answers, you are choosing how many answers to display in 
the editor, and not how many answers the question will have. The question 
will show as many answers as you will fill on this page. You can choose to 
display eight spaces for answers on this page, but if you fill in only three of 
them, the question will show three answers.
7.	 If there is a question where the user chooses an answer(s) from a list, then each 
answer will have a radio button or checkbox next to it. On the first answer, this 
is labeled Correct. Use this to indicate what the correct answer(s) is.

Testing Students
[ 128 ]
8.	 The Answers field contains the answer that the student will see. Notice that 
the editor enables you to enter and format text and equations for the answer:
9.	 Under Answers, you see fields for File, Action, External Link, and Link 
Name. If you fill these in for an answer, they are displayed along with that 
answer. The student sees the file or link while looking at the answers. By 
default, you cannot insert a link or image directly into the answer (note that 
the text editor for the Answers field doesn't have icons to insert them). But 
you can attach a link, image, or other file using these fields:

Chapter 7
[ 129 ]
You can enable the ability to insert images and links 
directly into questions and answers, under Question 
Settings. While on the Test Canvas page, look for this 
button in the upper-right corner of the page:
10.	 If there is a Response Feedback field, enter the feedback for this answer.
11.	 Once again, you will see the fields for File, Action, External Link, and Link 
Name. If you fill them in as a response, then they are displayed along with 
that response's feedback.
12.	 In the Feedback section of the question, you can create feedback that is 
displayed when any correct and/or incorrect answer is selected. These  
are especially useful for explaining the relevance of a question.
Adding categories, keywords, and notes
A common feature of questions is that you can tag them with metadata; that 
is, you can add information about the questions, such as category, topic, and 
keywords, as follows:
1.	 Under the Categories and Keywords section, you will see buttons for 
Categories, Topics, Levels of Difficulty, and Keywords. Adding these 
features makes it easier for yourself and others to find this question later.
Consider working with your site administrator and other users 
to develop categories, topics, and keywords that are meaningful 
to all the users in your organization. This information becomes 
more useful when everyone agrees on the meanings.

Testing Students
[ 130 ]
2.	 Under the Instructor Notes section, you can add notes that only other 
instructors will see. Students will not see this information.
3.	 To save your work, click on the Submit button.
4.	 Blackboard takes you back to the Test Canvas page. The question that 
you just added is displayed on the page:
5.	 You can continue adding questions, or go back to edit this question by 
clicking on the "check" sign next to it.
Other types of questions
The preceding example showed you a multiple-choice question. It demonstrated the 
common features of Blackboard test questions. The following sections tell you about 
some of the other types of questions available.

Chapter 7
[ 131 ]
Calculated formula questions
A calculated formula presents the student with a formula to solve. For each 
student, it can present different values for the variables. For example, a calculated 
formula question about the Pythagorean formula, could look similar to the 
following screenshot:
The variables in this question, 3 and 2, could be different for each student. 
Blackboard would calculate the correct answer for each set of unique variables.
Before we look at the step-by-step directions for creating a calculated formula, 
let's look at the individual pieces of the question. After we understand the pieces, 
we'll put them together into a finished question.
Suppose that we are testing our students on the Pythagorean theorem. We want  
to test the students on the following formula:
We'll ask Blackboard to substitute values for the variables, so that our students  
are presented with these formulas, as follows:
 and 
 and 
Notice that Blackboard substituted values for the variables a and b. We will ask 
the students to solve for c.
When you create a calculated formula question, you first write the question that 
the student will read. The question must contain the names of the variables that 
Blackboard will give values to. In our example, the question text must contain the 
variables a and b. So while creating the question, we would enter the following:

Testing Students
[ 132 ]
And when the question is displayed, the student will see a page similar to the 
following screenshot:
Notice that when we entered the question text, we put a and b in brackets:
When we put a variable in brackets, we are telling Blackboard that we want the 
system to replace that variable with a value. In the preceding example, when the 
system displayed the question, it replaced a with 3 and b with 2.
Notice also that the text which is not in brackets is displayed normally. The variable 
c is not in brackets, so the system does not give it any special treatment. It's just text.
We just established that when we put a variable in brackets, we are indicating that 
we want Blackboard to replace that variable with a value. But what value? While 
we are creating our question, we will specify a minimum and maximum value for 
each variable.
After we write the text of the question, we must give Blackboard the formula for 
calculating the answer. Whatever values Blackboard uses for the variables, when it 
plugs them into the formula we give, the result should be the correct answer.
Again, here is our equation: 
. Blackboard will plug in values for a and b. 
It will then calculate c². However, we don't want the student to enter c². We aren't 
asking the student to calculate c². We are asking the student to calculate c.
So how do we write the equation so that, when given a and b, Blackboard calculates 
the value of c? It is written as: 
. With this equation, when Blackboard plugs in 
values for a and b, it will calculate c. And then Blackboard can check the answer that 
the student enters against its calculation.

Chapter 7
[ 133 ]
This is called Answer Formula. While creating our question, we will need to enter 
this formula.
Let's look at the procedure step-by-step:
1.	 From the Create Question drop-down list, select Calculated Formula. 
The Create Question page will be displayed.
2.	 Enter Title for the question. When instructors select questions to add to tests, 
and when they see grade reports for questions, they see the question's title.
3.	 Enter Question Text. This is the question itself, which the students will see. 
When you enter the question text, put the variables that you want Blackboard 
to replace, in brackets:
4.	 Immediately below Question Text, you will see a field for Answer Formula. In 
this field, create the formula that Blackboard will use to calculate the answer:
In Question Text, which you declared to Blackboard, these letters in brackets 
will be the variables. In Answer Formula, you gave Blackboard the formula 
that it will plug those variables into, and calculate the answer.
5.	 Under Options, you will specify the following:
How close to the correct answer the student must be, to get full credit:

Testing Students
[ 134 ]
Whether you will allow partial credit:
If you do allow partial credit, then how close to the correct answer the  
student must be to get partial credit:
If the student gets partial credit, what percentage of the full credit the  
student will get:
6.	 Click on the Next button to proceed to the next page:
7.	 Under Define Variables, set Minimum Value and Maximum Value for the 
variable that you entered into Question Text. Also set the number of Decimal 
Places for Answer allowed. When Blackboard presents the question to the 
student, it will substitute values that are within the range you specify here 
for the variables.

Chapter 7
[ 135 ]
8.	 Under Answer Set Options, one of the things you will specify is how many 
unique combinations of variables Blackboard will generate. In the next step, 
you will see all of the combinations that are generated, and have the chance 
to delete any that you do not want.
9.	 Click on the Calculate button to generate the values for the variables:
Note that the answers are specified as X.X ± 0. The ± 0 means that the system 
requires an exact answer. This was specified on the first page of the question, 
under Options, in the field labeled Answer Range. If you want to change 
this, you can use the Go Back button to return to that page and change the 
tolerance for the answer.
10.	 If there are any combinations that you do not want to present to the student, 
click on the Remove button to remove them.
11.	 Under the Feedback section, you can enter feedback for the correct and 
incorrect answers.
12.	 Under the Categories and Keywords section, you will see buttons for 
Categories, Topics, Levels of Difficulty, and Keywords. You can use them 
to add metadata to your question.
13.	 Under the Instructor Notes section, you can add notes that only other 
instructors will see. Students will not see this information.
14.	 To save your work, click on the Submit button.
Calculated numeric
When presented with a calculated numeric question, the student must answer with 
a number. But unlike the calculated formula question, all students will see the same 
formula with the same numbers. Therefore, the correct answer will be the same for 
all the students.

Testing Students
[ 136 ]
Either/Or—True/False, Yes/No, Right/Wrong, 
Correct/Incorrect
This option can be used to create a True/False, Yes/No, Right/Wrong, or Correct/
Incorrect question. If you need to create a question that has only two choices, and 
you cannot use the answers given here, then you'll need to create a multiple-choice 
question and write your own answers.
Essay
The Essay question presents the student with a Question and Text field to enter an 
answer. Alternatively, it can present a sample answer. It must be graded manually. 
The student can type into the Answer field, or copy the answer from another 
document and paste it into the Answer field.
If you want the student to submit something that (s)he has already written, consider 
using a File Response question instead. Then, the student can just upload the 
document, instead of copying and pasting its contents.
File Response
Students answer a File Response question by uploading a file from their computer, 
or from Content Collection. It is graded manually.
A student can upload any kind of file, and not just file types that are recognized 
by Blackboard. In this case, Blackboard is just the tool that carries the file to the 
instructor. Think of it as similar to an attachment for an e-mail message.
Filling in the Blank and Multiple Blanks
In Blank and Multiple Blank questions, you write question text that has one or more 
blanks. The student must type the correct answer(s) into these blank(s).

Chapter 7
[ 137 ]
When you create the question, you specify where the blanks are using brackets,  
as shown in the following screenshot:
In the preceding example, we created two variables. One is called evap and 
the other is called cond. While creating the question, we will specify the correct 
answers for these variables. In the following example, note that we entered a 
common misspelling for the variable as the correct answer:
To the student, the question will look similar to what is shown in the following 
screenshot:
Hot Spot
A Hot Spot question presents the student with some question text in the Question 
Test field and an image. The student must click on the correct area of the image.
When creating this type of question, you will upload the image. Then, you will drag 
your mouse on top of the image to specify the hot spot. A hot spot must be a rectangle; 
no other shapes can be specified. There can be only one hot spot in the question.

Testing Students
[ 138 ]
As you drag your mouse to create the hot spot, Blackboard shows you the 
coordinates. From this, you can see how large the hot spot is, in pixels:
In the preceding example, the hot spot is 71 pixels wide and 13 pixels high. Most 
desktop monitors display between 96 and 120 pixels per inch. On most desktop 
monitors, this hot spot would be about 0.7 inches wide and 0.13 inches high. When 
creating a Hot Spot question, determine how large the image and the hot spot will 
be for your intended students. Will it be large enough so that your students can 
accurately click on the hot spot with the first click? You can use the following list 
of pixel sizes to determine what size of your images and hot spots will be shown: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_displays_by_pixel_density.
Jumbled Sentence
A Jumbled Sentence question displays a sentence with one or more drop-down lists 
embedded in the sentence. The user selects the correct word from the drop-down list. 
Some systems call this a cloze question.

Chapter 7
[ 139 ]
Matching
In a Matching question, the student must match items in one column to items in 
another column. You can include different numbers of questions and answers.  
It looks similar to what is shown in the following screenshot:
Multiple Answer and Multiple Choice
The Multiple Choice question requires the student to select one correct answer. 
Multiple Answer questions allow the student to select one or several correct answers.
In a multiple-choice question, you can allow partial credit. The partial credit for all  
of the correct answers must add up to 100 percent.
In a multiple-answer question, you can allow partial credit. In this case, the student 
would need to select all of the correct answers to get 100 percent. Your question will 
probably end with something such as "Select all the answers that apply".
In a multiple-answer question, you can also specify that several answers are 100% 
correct. In this case, the student would need to select just one of the correct answers 
to get 100%. Your question will probably end with something such as "Select any 
that apply".
Opinion Scale/Likert
Opinion Scale/Likert question is most often seen on surveys. Students choose an 
answer from a scale, which runs from lesser to greater. It could read something like, 
"For this statement, choose whether you: disagree strongly, disagree somewhat, 
agree somewhat, or agree strongly". While these questions are rarely used on tests, 
they are popular for surveys.

Testing Students
[ 140 ]
Ordering
The Ordering question type asks the student to place items in the correct order. The 
student does this by selecting numbers from the drop-down lists next to each item:
When writing Question Text, be sure to explain what the numbers mean.
Quiz Bowl
Quiz Bowl questions can be fun, but also difficult to write. You give the student an 
answer, and the student must respond by writing a question for that answer. For 
example, you might give the student an answer such as "ions". Then, you might 
expect the student to submit a question such as "What are charged atoms called?"
Quiz Bowl questions can be difficult to write because they are graded by the system. 
Therefore, you must tell the system what words and phrases you are looking for in 
the student's answer. The trick is to give the student an answer whose question is 
very specific. For example, suppose you gave the answer "rip current"; there is so 
much the student could write about rip currents, that it would be difficult to specify 
all of the key words and phrases that apply to it. In general, if the student is to write 
a long paragraph about a term or phrase, don't use that term or phrase as an answer 
to a Quiz Bowl. Limit the answers to items that have short definitions and very 
specific usage in your course.
Short Answer
A Short Answer question is like an essay question in two ways: the student enters 
(or pastes) the answer into a textbox. And, it must be evaluated manually by the 
instructor. The difference is that a Short Answer question requires you to specify  
the number of rows in the textbox that the student uses.
Random blocks versus question sets
While creating a test, you can choose to add a random block of questions, and/or 
a question set. Both features enable you to add a group of questions all at once. 
However, they meet different teaching needs.

Chapter 7
[ 141 ]
Before we talk about the difference between a question set and random block, let's 
look at the similarities:
• 
Both consist of a group of questions that you specify
• 
In both cases, when you add them to a test, you specify how many of the 
questions from the group the test should display
• 
Both give you an easy way to add a specific group of questions to a test, to 
randomize questions, and to reuse that group of questions on other tests
What is the difference then? Simply put, the main difference between random blocks 
and question sets, is the source of their questions.
Question pools, the source for random blocks
A question pool is a group of questions that are chosen from the course. You can 
filter the questions using multiple criteria. In the following screenshot, you can see 
the search criteria, which you can use when looking for questions to add to a pool 
to various categories—Pools, Tests, Question types, Categories, Topics, Levels of 
Difficulty, and Keywords:

Testing Students
[ 142 ]
A question pool can be exported out of your Blackboard system, and imported 
into another system. This makes them a good tool for sharing questions among 
Blackboard systems. Also, when you upload a batch of questions into Blackboard, 
you can upload them directly into a question pool. For example, if you purchase 
learning material and test questions from a vendor, you can upload the purchased 
questions into a question pool, so you will always know their source.
A question pool uses criteria to find a question from anywhere in your course. After 
finding questions, you select them individually for the pool. Until you deploy a pool 
in a test, you can change the questions that are in it. However, once a random block 
or question set that uses a question pool is deployed, the question pool can no longer 
be edited.
Now that we know more about question pools, let's clearly state the relationship 
between a question pool and a random block.
A random block will display a specified number of questions, from a selected 
question pool or pools.
In the previous section, we said that the main difference between random blocks 
and question sets is the source of their questions. Now that you know that a random 
block gets its questions from a pool(s), you can see that this is a limitation of random 
blocks. However, it can also make it easier to organize and reuse questions. For 
example, you could do the following:
1.	 Import questions from teaching material that you have purchased into 
a question pool, and then create a random block to use those purchased 
questions in a test.
2.	 Create a review test at the end of each chapter in a course. Then, put each 
chapter's questions into a question pool for that chapter. For the final test, 
add a random block for each chapter, which will bring in questions from  
that chapter's question pool.
In general, a random block is a method to put questions from a specific question 
pool(s) into a test. Use question pools to organize your questions into meaningful 
groups, and then use a random block to add questions from the pools to a test.
Question sets: fewer limits, greater choices
In a question set, you select individual questions from anywhere, not just from a 
pool. And, you select individual questions, not a pool. Until you deploy the question 
set, you can remove and add questions. After you've added all the questions you 
want for the set, add the set to a test and specify the number of questions you want 
to appear.

Chapter 7
[ 143 ]
The following screenshot shows the user creating a question set. Notice that the 
question set allows the user to pull questions from any pool, and any other test in 
the course. There is also all the other search criteria that you have when creating a 
question pool:
With a random block, you must first create a question pool to find the questions you 
want. Then, you add a random block to the test, which displays a specified number 
of questions from the question pool. With a question set, you do both of these at 
once. When you add the question set to a test, you use the preceding criteria to find 
the questions. You also specify how many of the questions to display to each student.
Which should I use: Random Block or 
Question Set?
In the following sections, you will see how to add random blocks and question sets 
to a course. But first, let's consider what we learned about question pools, random 
blocks, and question sets.

Testing Students
[ 144 ]
A question pool enables you to find questions from all over your course. It can be 
used as a source of questions in both random blocks and in question sets. It can be 
reused many times in a course.
A random block and a question set are both created in a test. They cannot be reused 
by other tests. As random blocks and question sets cannot be reused, question pools 
are the key to creating reusable groups of questions.
If you want to create a group of questions that can be reused on several tests in your 
course, create a question pool.
If you want to add a number of questions from an organized pool of questions to a 
test, the fastest way is to create a random block.
If you want to add questions that are not in a pool, use a question set.
As soon as a random block or question set that uses the pool is deployed in a test,  
the questions in that pool are set. They cannot be changed.
Now, let's learn how to create question pools, random blocks, and question sets.
Creating a question pool
When you build a question pool, you can create new questions or select existing 
questions to add to the pool as follows:
1.	 From the main menu, select Course Tools | Tests, Surveys, and Pools.
2.	 On the Tests, Surveys, and Pools page, select Pools.
3.	 On the Pools page, select Build Pool. The Pool Information page is displayed.
4.	 You must enter Name for the pool. The Description and Instructions fields 
are optional. These three items will be seen by the instructors, but not by 
the students.

Chapter 7
[ 145 ]
5.	 Click on the Submit button. The Pool Canvas: Oceans Questions page is 
displayed. On this page, you can do the following:
°°
Create new questions and add them to the pool. If you want to create 
a new question for the pool, select Create Question. There is more 
information about creating questions in a previous section, Creating 
Questions. Note that the questions you create for this pool are affected 
by Question Settings, which are accessed by clicking on the Question 
Settings button in the upper-right corner of the screen. For more 
information about Question Settings, see the Using Question Settings 
to determine the behavior of questions section, earlier in this chapter.
°°
Upload questions from another system, into the pool. These 
instructions will not cover uploading questions.
°°
Find existing questions and add them to the pool. To find existing 
questions to add to the pool, continue with the following steps.

Testing Students
[ 146 ]
6.	 Click on the Find Questions button. The Find Questions page pops up:
7.	 You can use several criteria to find questions for the pool. This includes 
searching other question pools. Select search criteria to display the questions 
that you want to include.
8.	 Click on the checkbox next to the questions that you want to include.

Chapter 7
[ 147 ]
9.	 Click on the Submit button. You are returned to the Question Pool canvas 
page. On this page, you will see Number of Questions, which you added 
to the pool.
The question pool is created, and ready for use. Remember that once this pool is added 
to a test and after the test is deployed, you cannot change the questions in the pool.

Testing Students
[ 148 ]
Creating a random block
A random block is created while you are editing a test:
1.	 From the Test Canvas page, select Reuse Questions | Create Random 
Block. The Create Random Block page is displayed as follows:
2.	 Click to place a check mark next to the pool or pools that you want to draw 
questions from. You must select at least one pool.
3.	 Select the question types that you want to draw from.
4.	 The results of your search are listed on the right-hand side of the page. Select 
the questions that you want to include in the random block.
5.	 Click on the Submit button. You are returned to the Test Canvas page. The 
random block is displayed on this page:

Chapter 7
[ 149 ]
6.	 The Total Questions field tells you how many questions are in the block. 
The Total Points field tells you how many points all the questions are worth, 
taken together. You can change the number of questions the block displays, 
and the number of points per question.
Note that when you create a random block, you don't need to give it a name or 
description. This is because this block will not exist outside of the test. It exists  
only on this test.

Testing Students
[ 150 ]
Creating Question Set
Question Set is created while you are editing a test. When you add a question to a 
test using the Question Set feature, you are linking to the question in a question pool. 
Until you deploy the test, the question does not exist in the test. It exists only in the 
pool. Therefore, if you change the question in the pool, before deploying the test, the 
change will be shown in the test. However, once you deploy the test, the question is 
"unlinked" from the pool. Once the test is deployed, changes to the original question 
in the question pool will no longer show up on the test:
1.	 From the Test Canvas page, select Reuse Questions | Create Question Set. 
The Create Question Set page is displayed:
2.	 Select the pools and tests from which you want to select the questions.
3.	 After selecting at least one pool or test, you can use the other search criteria. 
This is optional.

Chapter 7
[ 151 ]
4.	 The results of your search are listed on the right-hand side of the page. Select 
the questions that you want to include in the random block.
5.	 Click on the Submit button. You are returned to the Test Canvas page. 
Question Set is displayed on this page:
6.	 The Total Questions: field tells you how many questions are there in the 
block. The Total Points: field tells you how many points all the questions 
are worth, taken together. You can change the number of questions the  
block displays, and the number of points per question.
Note that when you create a random block, you don't need to give it a name or 
description. This is because the block will not exist outside of the test. It exists only 
on this test.

Testing Students
[ 152 ]
Summary
Question pools are the key to making groups of questions that can be reused. 
Random blocks give you an easy way of limiting the display of questions on a  
test to just a selected pool or pools. Question sets enable you to reuse questions  
from anywhere in your course, not just from pools.
When using random blocks and question sets, notice that you will determine the 
number of points assigned to each question in the block or set. If you want to set 
the number of points for each question individually, you should add the question 
individually, and not as part of a block or set.
In the next chapter, you'll learn about working with groups. You will see how to assign 
students to groups, grade them as a group, and communicate with them as a group.

Working with Groups
Blackboard enables you to place the students of a course into groups. When you 
group students, you gain some capabilities and get some limitations. You can use 
groups to organize the students who are in a course into teams, and also to separate 
students into different classes, while they use the same Blackboard course.
In this chapter, you will be learning the following topics:
• 
Creating groups
• 
Assigning students to groups
• 
Enabling students to choose their own groups
• 
Setting up the group setting for an activity
• 
Sending e-mails to all the members of a group
Some group activities are visible to everyone in the course. But only the members of 
the specified group can edit the activity. When a group activity is visible to everyone, 
but only group members can participate, it's as if everyone in the class can "watch" 
the group perform the activity.
Some group activities are visible only to members of the specified group. In this case, 
groups cannot see each other's work in the activity.
The visibility of a group activity is a default setting. It can be changed to allow or 
prevent people from outside the group to see the group's activity.
Like other activities, a group activity can be graded. When you give a grade for  
a group activity, everyone in the specified group gets the same grade. Once you 
enable the grading for a group activity, you cannot reverse that setting.
As of this writing, you can create a maximum of 99 groups per course. This is a limit 
of the system, and not a limit set by the site administrator.

Working with Groups
[ 154 ]
Creating groups
Blackboard enables you to create groups one at a time, and to create several groups at 
once. In Blackboard, creating several groups at once is called batch create. Also, you 
can automatically enroll the students in the group(s) randomly or manually, or allow 
students to enroll themselves. A student can be a member of several groups at once.
Creating a single group with manual 
enrollment
The following procedure is the most basic—to create one group and manually enroll 
students into it:
1.	 From the Course Management menu on the left menu bar, select Users and 
Groups | Groups.
2.	 Select Create Single Group | Manual Enroll. The Create Group page 
is displayed:
There is no notification when a student manually enrolls 
into a group that you have created. You will need to check 
the progress of enrollment by opening the group.
3.	 The Name and Description fields will be visible to the members of this 
group. You should use the Description field to inform students about the 
purpose of the group.
4.	 The options under Tool Availability determine which tools are available to 
the members of this group.
5.	 Your Blackboard installation might be configured to give each group certain 
tools, such as its own blog, forum, and group e-mail list:
°°
If you enable the setting for Blogs, then the group gets a blog. Each 
member of a group can create entries for the group's blog. All course 
members, including those not in the group, can read and comment on 
entries made in the group blog, but cannot create new entries.
°°
If you enable the setting for Discussion Board, then group members 
can create and manage their own forums, which are exclusive to  
the group.

Chapter 8
[ 155 ]
°°
If you enable the setting for Email, then group members can e-mail 
individual members or the entire group.
°°
If you enable the setting for File Exchange, then the group members 
and the teacher can exchange files in an area set aside just for this 
group. All members can add and delete files.
°°
When you add a group for Journal, all members of the group can 
view entries made by the other members. Students outside the group 
cannot see the group's journal.
°°
If you enable the setting for Tasks, then group members can create 
tasks that are assigned to the group as a whole. Any group member 
can complete a group task.
°°
If you enable the setting for Wikis, then the group gets a wiki. Each 
member of a group can create entries for the group's wiki. All course 
members, including those not in the group, can read entries made in 
the group wiki, but cannot create new entries.
6.	 Under the Membership section, select the students you want to put into 
this group:
7.	 Save it by clicking on the Submit button.

Working with Groups
[ 156 ]
The Groups page displays the group that you just created:
Creating a group with self enrollment
Allowing students to enroll themselves in a group is a good way to achieve 
the following:
• 
Enable students to choose sides in a debate (create a group for each side)
• 
Let students sign up for a field trip (create one group for the field trip)
• 
Encourage students to form study groups (create several groups and let  
the students sort out the membership, times, and locations)
The following procedure shows you how to create the group, and what it looks  
like from the student's point of view, when the student joins the group:
1.	 From the Course Management menu on the left menu bar, select Users 
and Groups | Groups.
2.	 Select Create Single Group | Self-Enroll. The Create Group page 
is displayed.

Chapter 8
[ 157 ]
3.	 The Name and Description fields will be visible to members of this group. 
You should use the Description field to inform the students about the 
purpose of the group.
4.	 The options under Tool Availability determine which tools are available to 
the members of this group:
°°
If you enable the setting for Blogs, then the group gets a blog. Each 
member of a group can create entries for the group's blog. All course 
members, including those not in the group, can read and comment on 
entries made in the group blog, but cannot create new entries.
°°
If you enable the setting for Discussion Board, then group members 
can create and manage their own forums, which are exclusive to  
the group.
°°
If you enable the setting for Email, then group members can e-mail 
individual members or the entire group.
°°
If you enable the setting for File Exchange, then the group members 
and the teacher can exchange files in an area set aside just for this 
group. All members can add and delete files.
°°
When you add a group for Journal, all members of the group can 
view entries made by the other members. Students outside the group 
cannot see the group's journal.
°°
If you enable the setting for Tasks, then group members can create 
tasks that are assigned to the group as a whole. Any group member 
can complete a group task.
°°
If you enable the setting for Wikis, then the group gets a wiki. Each 
member of a group can create entries for the group's wiki. All course 
members, including those not in the group, can read entries made in 
the group wiki, but cannot create new entries.
5.	 Under the Sign-Up Options section, enter a name and instructions for the 
sign-up sheet. The students will see these when they sign up for the group.
6.	 Also under the Sign-Up Options section, the Show Members setting will 
enable students to see other students who have chosen the same group.  
This is useful when you want them to organize themselves into teams.

Working with Groups
[ 158 ]
7.	 Save it by clicking on the Submit button.
The Groups page displays the group that you just created:
Now, let's add a link to the Course Menu so the student can see this group:
8.	 From Course Menu, select Add Menu Item | Tool Link.
9.	 From the Type drop-down list, select Groups.
10.	 Enter the Name field for the link.
11.	 Select the Available checkbox.
12.	 Click on the Submit button.
A link to the Groups page is added to the Course Menu. This will enable the 
students to get to the groups that you create for them:

Chapter 8
[ 159 ]
From the student's point of view— 
self-enrollment into a group
Now that the self-enrollment group is created, let's look at it from the student's point 
of view. The following instructions are written for the student:
1.	 From Course Menu, select the Groups link. The Groups page is displayed:
2.	 Notice that the student has two groups listed on this page. The Sandwalkers 
group was assigned by the teacher. The Field Trip to Aquarium group 
requires that the student sign up.
3.	 Click on the Sign Up button. The Sign Up Sheet page is displayed:
In the previous screenshot, the SignUp Sheet Instructions: group and 
its description are displayed. This was entered when the teacher created  
the group.

Working with Groups
[ 160 ]
4.	 Click on the Sign Up button.
5.	 The student is enrolled into the group, and taken back to the Groups page:
Notice that at the top of the page in the previous screenshot, the student sees a 
Success: message. A part of this message tells the student that The Group space is 
currently unavailable. This is because when the instructor was creating this group, 
under 1. Group Information, the instructor chose to make this a sign-up sheet only:
Because of this setting, all of the group tools (Blog, Journal, Wiki, Email, and so on) 
are unavailable. The instructor can always change this setting. For example, perhaps 
after the field trip, the instructor will make the group available to the students, and 
ask them to write in the group wiki about the trip.
Consider using the Announcements and/or Messages feature to tell your students 
that they need to sign up for a group.
Creating multiple groups at once
The feature that you use to create multiple groups at once is called group sets. 
When you create a group set, you will specify whether to use self, manual, or 
random enrollment. We have already seen how self and manual enrollments  
work. Let's create a group set using random enrollment:
1.	 From the Course Management menu on the left menu bar, select Users 
and Groups | Groups.
2.	 Select Create Group Set | Random Enroll:

Chapter 8
[ 161 ]
You can also create group sets with self enrollment and 
manual enrollment. Because we have already created 
groups with these kinds of enrollments, we are going to 
use random enrollment in these instructions.
The Create Random Enrollment Group Set page is displayed.
3.	 Just like when you create a single group, you will enter a name and 
description for the group. However, be aware that Blackboard is going  
to create several groups with the name that you enter, and it will add a 
number to the end of the name. Make sure that the Name field you enter 
will still make sense when Blackboard adds a number to the end of it:

Working with Groups
[ 162 ]
4.	 Under 2. Tool Availability, you will choose which tools are available to each 
group. Note that each group in the set will get its own copy of each tool that 
you select:
5.	 If you select Allow Personalization, individuals in the group will be able 
to customize the group space by adding personal modules such as What's 
New, change the layout of their group page, and also change the style of 
the group page.
6.	 In the Membership section, you will first choose how Blackboard creates 
the groups:

Chapter 8
[ 163 ]
If you select Number of Students per Group, Blackboard will put the 
number of students that you specify into each group. It will create as many 
groups as needed, to place every student into a group. Each group will have 
at least as many students as you specify. If there are students left over after 
creating the groups, the next setting will determine how to handle the extra 
students. For example, if you have 20 students, and you select three students 
per group, Blackboard will create six groups of three students. This will use 
18 of the students. There will be two students left over.
If you select Number of Groups, Blackboard will create the number of 
groups that you specify, and then divide the students as evenly as possible 
among these groups. If the number of students cannot be divided exactly 
by the number of groups, there will be students left over. The next setting 
will determine how to handle the extra students. For example, if you have 
20 students and you select six groups, Blackboard will create six groups  
of three students each. This will use 18 of the students. There will be 2  
students left over.
7.	 Also under Membership, you will specify what Blackboard will do with the 
extra students who are left after creating the groups.
8.	 Click on the Submit button to create the groups.
Blackboard will create the groups, name them, and return you to the Groups page:
Notice that Blackboard added a number to the end of each group's name.

Working with Groups
[ 164 ]
After you use the GroupSet feature to create multiple groups, you can always open a 
group and edit its membership manually. In the following screenshot, the instructor 
is editing the membership of the group Random Teams! 1, which was created in the 
previous procedure:
How group settings affect activities
At the beginning of this chapter, we said that applying a group to different kinds of 
activities has different effects on those who can participate in, and see the activities. 
When you create a group, Blackboard creates a number of tools for that group, by 
default. In the following screenshot, you can see the Sandwalkers group page, and 
the tools that Blackboard automatically added to this group:

Chapter 8
[ 165 ]
The exact tools available to a group depend upon how your Blackboard system  
is configured.
Note that Sally is a member of this group. Let's look at the group blog from a 
member's and non-member's point of view. First, here is the group blog from  
Sally's point of view:

Working with Groups
[ 166 ]
Notice that Sally has a Create Blog Entry button. She can both create entries, and 
comment on entries. Next to her entry, Are the crabs molting?, you can see an icon 
for a pull-down menu, which enables the student to edit her own blog entry:
Now, let's look at the blog from a non-member's point of view:
Note that the non-member does not have a Create Blog Entry button, so (s)he cannot 
add entries to the blog. However, there is a Comment button, which enables the 
non-member to add comments to an entry.

Chapter 8
[ 167 ]
As you can see, group blogs are open to non-members. So if you want a writing 
activity, which is open only to group members and closed to all others, you would 
need to override this default setting and deliberately close the blog to non-members. 
Also, while members can get to a group blog through the Groups page, non-members 
will not have that group on their Groups page. So for a non-member to access another 
group's blog, that non-member would need to go through the Blogs tool link on the 
Course Menu.
The following table lists group tools, and tells you who can participate and see these 
tools. This can help you choose the right tool for your situation:
Activity
When used with a group…
What effect does a group 
have on grading?
who can see it?
who can edit or 
submit it?
Assignment
Only the members of 
the group.
Any member of the 
group.
All members get the 
same grade.
File 
Exchange
Only the members of 
the group.
Any member of the 
group can submit, 
download, and 
delete any file in the 
group area.
Not applicable. If you're 
grading students on files 
that they submit, use 
Assignment instead.
Blog
All members of the 
course, even those 
not in the group.
Only members of 
the group can post 
entries to the blog. 
Everyone in the 
course can comment 
on the posts. 
All members get the 
same grade.
Discussion 
Board
Only the members of 
the group can see the 
group's Discussion 
Board.
Only the members 
of the group can 
contribute to the 
group's Discussion 
Board.
Posts can be graded. 
As the posts are made 
by individual group 
members, the individual, 
and not the group, 
receives the grade.
Journal
Only the members of 
the group can see the 
group's Journal.
Only the members 
of the group can 
contribute to the 
group's Journal.
All members get the 
same grade.

Working with Groups
[ 168 ]
Activity
When used with a group…
What effect does a group 
have on grading?
who can see it?
who can edit or 
submit it?
Wiki
All members of the 
course, even those 
not in the group. 
However, non-
members cannot edit 
group wiki entries. 
They can comment 
on the entries.
Only members of 
the group can edit a 
wiki. The following 
screenshot shows 
a member's view 
of the wiki. Notice 
the buttons for Edit 
Wiki Content and 
My Contribution.
All members get the 
same grade.
Tasks
Only the members of 
the group can see the 
group's Tasks.
Any member of the 
group can mark any 
Task as not started, 
in progress, or 
completed, as shown 
in the following 
screenshot.
Not graded.

Chapter 8
[ 169 ]
Sending e-mails to members of a group
The teacher can always use the groups Email tool to send an e-mail to the members 
of a group. The teacher finds this tool by selecting Groups from the main menu, and 
then clicking on the drop-down menu icon next to the name of the group:
Students can send e-mails to members of their group only if the teacher has enabled 
the Group Email tool for them. To enable this tool for your students, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 From the Groups page, next to the name of the group, select the drop-down 
menu icon:

Working with Groups
[ 170 ]
2.	 In the drop-down menu, select Email. The group's e-mail page is displayed:
3.	 Fill out the Email fields, and click on Submit to send your message.
This tool works in the same way for teachers and students alike.
Summary
Groups can be used to build a camaraderie, teach students how to collaborate, and 
encourage healthy competition. To successfully use groups for these purposes, 
you need to know how the group settings affect the activities. Even as you use the 
Groups function, remember that the students are still part of the whole class, and 
most of their activities and interactions will probably be as members of the whole.
In the next chapter, we'll focus on communicating with students using Email, 
Announcements, and Messages. You will see how these tools can be used along  
with the group settings.

Communicating with Students 
Using E-mails, Messages, 
and Announcements
Blackboard gives you several options for communicating with your students, 
as follows:
• 
E-mails
• 
Messages
• 
Announcements
Each of these has a place in your workflow and can fulfill different purposes. This 
chapter will help you understand these options, and show you how and when to  
use each method.
In this chapter you will learn how to:
• 
Send an e-mail to the external e-mail addresses of your students
• 
Send an internal Blackboard message to the students in your course
• 
Post an announcement on your students' home page
The difference between e-mails, 
messages, announcements, and alerts
When you send an e-mail to your students from within a Blackboard course, the 
e-mail is sent to the e-mail address that is in the student's profile. While the e-mail 
is sent from Blackboard, it comes from the e-mail address that is in your profile.

Communicating with Students Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements
[ 172 ]
When you send a message to your students, the message is sent from your 
Blackboard account, to their Blackboard accounts. They must log in to Blackboard  
to read the message.
An announcement is not automatically sent to a student in the way that an e-mail 
or message is sent. As an option, you can choose to have the system send an 
announcement to the recipients via e-mail. Announcements appear on the student's 
home page, in a section for announcements. Of course, the student must log in to see 
them. You can set a time limit for an announcement. That is, you can tell it to appear 
and disappear on specific dates and at specific times.
Alerts are automatically generated by Blackboard when you set a deadline for 
coursework. For example, if you set a deadline for an assignment, Blackboard will 
automatically generate an alert as the deadline approaches. Alerts appear on the 
student's home page, in a section for alerts.
Sending an e-mail to your students
Blackboard allows you to send an e-mail to your entire class, any student who is a 
member of a group, only selected groups, or only selected individuals. To send an 
e-mail from Blackboard, perform the following steps:
1.	 From the main menu on the left-hand side of the screen, select Course Tools.
2.	 Select Send Email.
3.	 Select the type of recipient:

Chapter 9
[ 173 ]
4.	 Select recipient(s) and enter the details of the e-mail, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
5.	 Click on the Submit button to send the e-mail.

Communicating with Students Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements
[ 174 ]
6.	 The recipient will receive an e-mail, which shows the e-mail address of the 
sender in the From section, as shown in the following screenshot:
Note that the To section now reads to undisclosed recipients. Blackboard will not 
reveal the e-mail addresses of the recipients to each other. This preserves the privacy 
of the people who receive an e-mail that is sent from Blackboard.
Sending messages
Blackboard allows you to send messages to selected individuals on your course. 
Unlike e-mail, it does not allow you to send messages to everyone with a specific 
role. For example, you cannot send a message to all the students, all the instructors, 
or all the teachers on a course. Instead, you must select them individually.
To send a message in Blackboard, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Course Tools | Messages.
2.	 On the Messages page, click on the Create Message button. The Compose 
Message page is displayed, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 175 ]
3.	 To select recipients, click on the To, Cc, and/or Bcc buttons, and select 
their names.
4.	 Enter the subject and body of your message in the Subject and Body 
sections, respectively.
5.	 Click on the Submit button to send your message.
The Messages page shows you the Inbox and Sent folders. Unlike the Email page, 
the Messages page gives you an easy way to see the communication that you have 
had with class members.
The Messages page is different for each course. Messages that 
you have sent and received in one course, will not show up on 
the Messages page of any other course that you are in.

Communicating with Students Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements
[ 176 ]
However, when composing a message, you do not have the option of selecting an 
entire group of people, or all those with a specific role in your course (such as all the 
instructors or all the students). Sending an e-mail gives you these choices.
Keep backups of your student communications!
Blackboard does not keep a backup or archive of sent messages 
or e-mails. If student contact is audited or in any way needed for 
reference, remember to keep copies of the e-mails in another system.
Posting announcements
By default, announcements appear on a student's home page. Announcements can 
be accessed from several places on the page. In this example, you can see that the 
Announcements tool is available under the Student Tools menu. Announcements 
are also available in the What's New block, where the Announcements block is 
displayed, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 177 ]
Once the student is inside our demonstration course, he/she will notice that the 
course also has an Announcements block on the course's Homepage, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Why you should add the Announcements block to your course's  
home page
In the preceding screenshot of the student's home page, there are three 
places where the student can access announcements. However, don't rely 
on this! That's because the student's home page can be edited by him/her. 
So the student could remove these tools from his/her home page. In the 
immediately preceding screenshot of the course's Homepage page, the 
My Announcements and What's New blocks cannot be removed by the 
students. They were placed there by the teacher, so you can rely on them 
being displayed when the student enters the course.

Communicating with Students Using E-mails, Messages, and Announcements
[ 178 ]
To send an announcement to your students, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Course Tools | Announcements.
2.	 Click on the Create Announcement button. The Create Announcement 
page is displayed, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 179 ]
3.	 Note that there is no place to select recipients for the announcement.  
The announcement that you create here will be displayed to all the  
course members.
4.	 In the Announcement Information section, enter the content of your 
announcement.
5.	 You can use Duration and select the Date Restricted option to display the 
announcement for a selected period of time. Outside of this time period, course 
members will not be able to see the announcement. The teacher, however, will 
be able to see all the announcements that were sent in this course.
6.	 Your Blackboard system might be configured to send an e-mail to the 
members of a course when an announcement is posted. Check with your 
system administrator. Some users might choose to suppress these e-mails.  
If they do, selecting Email Announcement will override their choice and 
send an e-mail to the students even if they have chosen to suppress them.
7.	 If your system is configured to send an e-mail when an announcement 
is posted, that e-mail will be sent immediately. This happens even if the 
announcement's date and time are restricted.
8.	 To post the announcement, click on the Submit button.
Summary
One of the key differences between messages and e-mails is the student's ability to 
see the history of their communication about a course. When you send an e-mail 
from Blackboard, that e-mail is sent to a student's e-mail account. This e-mail now 
exists outside of Blackboard. Even if the student is no longer enrolled in the course or 
if the course is closed, the student can refer back to his/her personal e-mail archive. 
When you send a message using Blackboard's message feature, the message exists 
only in that course. If the student is no longer enrolled in the course or if the course is 
closed, the student will not be able to retrieve the message. This can be a factor when 
deciding whether to use e-mail, or messages, to communicate with your students.
Announcements are useful when you want a message to have an expiration date. 
You can use them to remind students of upcoming events and deadlines.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to use Blackboard Collaborate to conduct live, 
web-based sessions with your students.


Using Collaborate/
CourseSites Live
Collaborate is Blackboard's application for holding live, web-based sessions with 
your students. Collaborate is a separate product from their Learning Management 
System (LMS) application, which is Blackboard Learn. Until now, this book has dealt 
only with the Blackboard LMS.
If your company has purchased Blackboard Learn, they might also have purchased 
Collaborate. You should check with your system administrator.
If you are using Blackboard's free site for educators—coursesites.com, 
Collaborate is part of their offering. On coursesites.com, Collaborate is labeled 
as CourseSites Live.
If your company has purchased Blackboard Learn, but not Collaborate, you can just 
open a free account on coursesites.com and use the CourseSites Live tool. You 
will need to recreate your students' accounts on coursesites.com, as it is a totally 
separate system from your company's LMS. But being able to hold online meetings 
might be worth the extra work for you.
Blackboard maintains detailed user guides for Collaborate. This chapter cannot take 
the place of those detailed guides. However, the pages in this chapter will get you 
started with using Collaborate's essential features.
For example, the September 2011 edition of Blackboard Collaborate Web Conferencing 
Moderator's Guide is over 330 pages long. It is organized by feature, so if you have 
a specific feature that you want to learn about, it is relatively easy to find that feature.

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 182 ]
This chapter is about one-tenth as long, so it cannot contain nearly as much detail. 
In addition to being much shorter, this chapter is organized chronologically. It takes 
you through the process of hosting a basic Collaborate session, from start to finish. 
For example, it's not until page 106 that the official Blackboard guide says, "Generally 
speaking, it is recommended that you configure your audio before the session begins". 
We will deal with configuring your audio in the Configuring audio and video section.
If you have access to two computers side by side, you can play the part of the teacher 
and a student, and follow along on your own computers. For example, you might 
want to try this if your institution has a computer lab.
During our demonstration session, we will show you how to:
• 
Make Collaborate available to your students
• 
Configure audio and video settings
• 
Share a PowerPoint slideshow
• 
Use whiteboard tools
• 
Use the chat feature
• 
Talk over audio
• 
Take your students on a web tour
• 
Share an application
Making your first online meeting a test 
session
Consider making your first online meeting a test session. During this session, you 
and your students will practice with the software. Before the session, you can send 
an agenda to your students, telling them exactly what will happen during the 
session, and what to do if they get lost or if Collaborate doesn't run properly for 
them. A sample agenda might look as follows:

Chapter 10
[ 183 ]
Our CourseSites Live Test Session
When we will meet: August 14, 2012, at 3 p.m. EST.
Where we will meet: From your home computer.
What you will need: Your computer, a built-in microphone or microphone 
that you can plug in, and at least a DSL or cable modem.
Who will meet: All of us! This is a compulsory activity.
How we will meet: Using the CourseSites Live tool.
At least two days BEFORE the test session (on August 11 or 12)
Using the same computer and browser (which you will use for our meeting),  
go to the following link (you should be able to just click it):
	
http://support.blackboardcollaborate.com/ics/support/ 
	
default.asp?deptID=8336&task=knowledge&questionID=1473.
This will bring you to a page where you can automatically test your setup to 
ensure it is compatible with Collaborate.
If there are any problems with the software, send a Blackboard Message to  
the teacher immediately!
DURING our test session
If you lose audio, use the chat feature to tell me. I will help you to troubleshoot.
Each student (including you!) will take turns to speak.
I will share a document with the class.
Each student will take turns to use the "whiteboarding" features to mark up  
the document.
I will send a poll question to the class. Everyone will respond.
And more!
AFTER our test session
If you had any problems during the test session and we did not get to solve 
them, send a message to me. We can schedule the time for another session.

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 184 ]
Making Collaborate available to you and your 
students
The Collaborate tool is always available to you, the teacher, under the Course Tools 
submenu. Adding it to Course Menu will make it available to your students and 
make it faster for you to access it. Perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Add Menu Item list, select Create Tool Link.
2.	 From the drop-down list where you select the tool that you want to add, 
select either CourseSite Live or Collaborate.
3.	 Enter the name for the collaboration tool.
4.	 Set the tool's availability.
5.	 Click on the Submit button. A link for the tool is added to Course Menu.
Launching the Collaborate tool
The first time that you or a student launch the Collaborate tool, you will be prompted 
to download and install the software. Perform the following steps:
1.	 From Course Menu, select the Collaborate tool.
2.	 Blackboard displays a launch page for the collaborate tool. If you've never 
launched it, the page displays a Launch button. If it has been launched 
before, it displays a Re-launch button. Click on the button.
3.	 Blackboard might prompt you to select your internet speed (Dial-up, 
DSL/Cable, and so on). If so, select one and continue.
4.	 Blackboard Collaborate will be launched in a new window or in a new tab, 
depending on your browser.
5.	 Collaborate is a Java application. If your browser launches Java 
automatically, Collaborate will run without prompting you. If your browser 
is configured to send a prompt before running Java applications, you will see 
a prompt like the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 185 ]
6.	 Click on OK in the dialog box to launch Collaborate. Blackboard will display 
a message telling you not to close the browser window until Collaborate 
has finished being launched. Then, Collaborate will be launched in its own 
window, as shown in the following screenshot:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 186 ]
You're ready to test your microphone and speakers.
Configuring audio and video
Definitely before you start your first session, and preferably before each session, you 
should configure your audio and video settings to ensure that they work. Perform 
the following steps:
1.	 From the Audio & Video panel, select the Start the audio setup wizard icon, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Audio Setup Wizard is launched in a new window. On a Windows or Linux 
computer, the next step will require you to select an input device:

Chapter 10
[ 187 ]
If your computer has only one input device, such as the built-in microphone 
in most laptops, only one will be displayed.
3.	 Select the input device and click on the OK button. The wizard will guide 
you to set the volume levels for your microphone and your speakers.
Showing a PowerPoint slideshow
If you want to show a PowerPoint slideshow, you have two options. First, you can 
use screen sharing; that is, you can run the slideshow in PowerPoint, while sharing 
your screen with the class. If you and your students have enough bandwidth, this 
will give you all the transitions and effects that you would get if you were showing 
the slideshow in person.
Your second option is to bring that PowerPoint slideshow into Collaborate, and 
let Collaborate convert and display it. Collaborate will convert each of your slides 
into a page, in a Collaborate whiteboard. The bad news is, the special effects and 
animations will be lost. The good news is, you and the students can mark up your 
slideshow using the whiteboard tools, as you discuss the presentation.
To bring a PowerPoint slideshow into Collaborate, perform the following steps:
1.	 Create your slideshow in PowerPoint. Save it, and close PowerPoint.  
When Collaborate converts the slideshow to its own format, it will  
require PowerPoint to be closed.
2.	 Select File | Open | Whiteboard. The Load File dialog box is displayed, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 188 ]
Notice that the Files of type: field checks for the PowerPoint files (*.ppt and 
*.pptx), by default.
3.	 Navigate to the directory where your slideshow is saved.
4.	 Select the slideshow and click on the Open button. You will see messages 
indicating that the slideshow is being converted:
5.	 The slideshow is displayed in Collaborate's main window:

Chapter 10
[ 189 ]
Let's explore some features on this page.
Notice that we are in Whiteboard mode. You have two visual clues. The Whiteboard 
icon is highlighted, as shown in the following screenshot:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 190 ]
And, from the View menu, Whiteboard is selected:
Our original slideshow had two slides. They have been converted into  
whiteboard pages:
Now that we are in Whiteboard mode, let's explore the whiteboard tools in  
the next section.
Using basic whiteboard tools
Collaborate's whiteboard offers an extensive list of tools. Let's look at the most  
basic, which you will use in most of your whiteboard sessions.
You already saw the previous and next buttons, which you use to go to different 
pages in your whiteboard:
To the right-hand side of these buttons, you will see the Show Page Explorer icon, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 191 ]
The page explorer shows you a thumbnail view of each page in the whiteboard. These 
pages are shown under the Main Room section, as shown in the following screenshot:
To show a page, double-click on its thumbnail image.
To rearrange the pages in your whiteboard, just drag-and-drop 
them in the page explorer.
To point out an item of interest, use one of the pointers from the toolbox:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 192 ]
When you click on any of the available pointers, the pointer will stay stuck where it 
was, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you click again, the pointer will move to a new location. You can have only one 
pointer at a time, and when you switch tools, the pointer will be removed from  
the page.
You can use the whiteboard's drawing tools to draw on any whiteboard page.  
They include, from top to bottom, the pen, textbox, filled rectangle or ellipse,  
hollow rectangle or ellipse, and straight line, as shown in the following screenshot:
Unlike the pointer, these marks don't disappear when you switch tools or pages. 
They remain until you select and delete them.
To select an object which you have placed on a whiteboard page, use the select tool 
from the top of the toolbox:

Chapter 10
[ 193 ]
When an object is selected, you can resize, move, or delete it.
There are other whiteboard tools, but these are the most basic.
Using the chat
Collaborate includes a basic chat feature. In the following screenshot, you can see 
that the teacher (the "moderator") has the option of having a chat with either the 
entire class or just the other moderators in the session:
Chat with all the
students and
moderators in the
room.
Chat with just the
moderators.
Any chat message that the student sends is, by default, shown to the entire class:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 194 ]
The teacher can start a private chat between a student and the teacher. In the 
PARTICIPANTS panel, right-click on a student's name. From the pop-up 
menu, select Send a Private Chat, as shown in the following screenshot:
The student can also start a private chat with the teacher or another student in the 
same way, by right-clicking on the teacher's or the student's name.
Why use a private chat?
Private chats can be useful when you want to do the following:
• 
Help a student who is having trouble with his/her audio 
or video
• 
Discreetly tell a student that their question or comment is  
not appropriate
• 
Give extra help or encouragement to a student, whom you 
know is having trouble with the topic
• 
Acknowledge an emoticon that the student has posted 
(more on emoticons in the next section)
You can save the transcript of a chat as a text file. Select File | Save | Chat…, and 
choose the location and filename of the text file.

Chapter 10
[ 195 ]
Using emoticons during a Collaborate 
session
When you are sending a text message to a friend, emoticons are those cute little faces 
that you add to the message to show your mood, for example 
. When you are 
teaching an online class, emoticons serve a more serious purpose. They take the place 
of the facial expressions and body language that you would get in a face-to-face class.
Collaborate allows the students to indicate their mood by selecting an emoticon from 
the list in the PARTICIPANTS panel. The following is a screenshot of Suzy Student 
1 indicating that she is confused at this point in the session:
The moderator and the other students will see the emoticon next to her name in  
the PARTICIPANTS panel, as shown in the following screenshot:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 196 ]
Emoticons are displayed for a few seconds, and then they disappear.
Emoticons are not just silly, smiley faces!
Encourage your students to use emoticons to communicate how 
they are feeling about the course. Make using them part of your 
practice session. Emoticons are no more inappropriate or intrusive 
than the facial expressions that we see in every face-to-face class.
Talking in Collaborate
There are two ways to talk in Collaborate. If your company has purchased the 
telephony feature, then you can use a telephone conference to talk with your students 
while having a Collaborate session. If you don't have the telephony feature (because 
your company hasn't purchased it or you are using Coursesites.com), you can use 
Collaborate's built-in audio feature. The audio feature works with your computer's 
microphone and speakers, and enables you to converse with your students. You 
don't need a telephone conferencing service. All you need is Collaborate, and the 
microphone/speakers that (probably) came with your computer.
In a previous section of this chapter, we went through the testing of our audio  
using Audio Setup Wizard. Now let's look at the Audio & Video panel:
The video panel shows the person who is, or
who was most recently, speaking. Because
video is not being used in this session, the
panel shows just the person's name.
This slider controls the volume of your
microphone. The more you turn it up, the
louder you sound to your listeners.
This slider controls the volume of your
speakers. The more you turn it up, the
louder other people sound to you.
To turn on your microphone, click on the Talk
button. The microphone icon inside the button
means your microphone is on, and transmitting
what you say. To turn your microphone off,
click on the button again. The microphone icon
will disappear.
When you see a microphone next to a student's
name, it means he/she has his/her microphone
turned on.

Chapter 10
[ 197 ]
To speak to your students, just click on the Talk button and start speaking. If everyone 
has gone through Audio Setup Wizard, they will hear what you are saying.
If a student leaves his/her microphone on, and you want to turn it off for him/her, 
right-click on the student's name and select Audio to remove the check mark from 
that ability. That will turn off their microphone:
Doing this will completely remove the ability for the student to use audio. To 
immediately restore the student's ability to use audio, right-click on the student's 
name again and select Audio. The student's microphone will still be off, but the 
student will be able to use it again.
Collaborate allows multiple people to speak at the same time. You can select the 
maximum number of simultaneous speakers. If anyone in the session has very 
limited bandwidth, you might need to limit the number of speakers. To do this,  
from the Audio and Video Options menu, select Maximum Simultaneous 
Talkers…, as shown in the following screenshot:
Audio is especially important when you are sharing your screen with your students, 
for example, to discuss the contents of the whiteboard, or a web tour or application 
that you are sharing.

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 198 ]
Taking your students on a web tour
Using the Web Tour feature, you can share web pages with your students. To begin  
a web tour, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Web Tour icon, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Enter the URL (web address) of a page that you want to show your students 
into the address field.
3.	 Press Enter.
The web page will be displayed in the main area of the students' Collaborate 
window, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 199 ]
During a web tour, every time you go to a new page you can make your students 
follow you to the new page. That happens when the Follow Me checkbox is selected, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
After you lead the students to a web page, the students can travel to other web pages. 
But every time that you go to a new page, the students are taken there with you.
Dropping your students on a web page with 
Web Push
During a web tour, your students usually follow you to each new web page that you 
display. And, the web pages are displayed in Collaborate's main window. With Web 
Push, you will launch your students' default browser and open a web page of your 
choice for them. If Web Tour is like a journey that you take together, Web Push is like 
dropping your students off at a destination. After that, they are on their own.
To send a web push to your students, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Web Tour icon, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 From the Options menu next to the URL field, select Open URL in 
Browser…, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 At the prompt, enter the web address of the page you want to open, and then 
click on the OK button.
A web push can be a good way to end a Collaborate session. You 
can drop the students off on a web page with links and information, 
which encourages them to explore the topic further.

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 200 ]
Sharing an application on your computer
Application sharing enables the teacher and students to share an application or 
their entire desktop with the participants. The shared application is displayed in 
Collaborate's main window. As the teacher, you can:
• 
Share an application or your entire desktop with the class
• 
Give and take back control of the application/desktop that you are sharing, 
to a student
• 
Give and take back the ability to share an application/desktop to a student
During a practice session with your students, you might want to practice each of 
these. You might also want to have students practice scaling the application so that  
it fits on their displays.
I recommend against sharing your entire desktop, unless you have a 
good reason to show everything. Students might have trouble fitting 
your desktop on their screens, and it's too easy to accidentally show a 
document name, stray folder, or other items that you don't want to share.
To share an application, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the application that you want to share. Resize its window so that it  
will fit on your students' screens with room around it.
2.	 In Collaborate, click the Application Sharing button. A list of the open 
applications is displayed:
Application
Sharing button

Chapter 10
[ 201 ]
Note that while Microsoft Word has three open documents in the 
application list, you must select the entire application. You cannot  
select just one of its windows.
3.	 Select the application and click on the Share button. A yellow frame 
will appear around the application that you select. You are now sharing  
this application.
In the example shown in the following screenshot, you can see that the 
teacher has selected to share Microsoft Word. Word has several documents 
open. The yellow frame is around all of the documents:

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 202 ]
The student is seeing all of these shared windows, inside the student's 
Collaborate window, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 If your students cannot see all that you are sharing, they can do three things 
to see more of the application. The students can:
a.	 Maximize the size of their Collaborate application.
b.	 Deselect Show Side Bar to hide the panels on the left-hand side, 
under the View menu. This makes more room for the main window.
c.	 Clear the check mark from the Scale To Fit checkbox. The application 
being shared will no longer be resized to fit in the student's 
Collaborate main window. Instead, it will be shown at its original 
size, even if all of it doesn't fit. The student might need to scroll 
around the screen.
5.	 If the application that you are sharing has several windows open and if  
you want to show just one of the windows, close or minimize the ones you 
don't want to share. The yellow sharing frame will shrink to surround just  
the window that you have left open. 

Chapter 10
[ 203 ]
Compare the following screenshot of one open window with the preceding 
screenshot that showed several windows open:
Giving a student the ability to share an 
application
As the moderator of a Collaborate session, you can give the ability to share an 
application to any of the participants. To give sharing privileges to a student, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 First, you must stop sharing your own application. If you are still sharing an 
application, your application sharing privileges will override any sharing 
privileges that you give to the student.

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 204 ]
2.	 Next to the student's name, select Application Sharing, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
At this point, you have given the student that ability to do application 
sharing. But now the student must perform several steps to begin sharing.
3.	 The student selects the Application Sharing icon. A list of the applications 
to be shared is displayed.
If the Application Sharing icon is not selectable, the 
student should select a different mode and then reselect 
the Application Sharing icon.
4.	 From the list, the student selects the application to be shared.
5.	 At any time, the teacher can remove the student's ability to share, by  
right-clicking the student's name again, and removing the check mark  
from Application Sharing.
Whiteboarding over a shared application
I must confess that the title of this section is not entirely honest. You can't use 
whiteboard tools to draw on top of a shared application! However, the ability to 
mark up and comment on a shared application is so useful that I will propose a 
workaround for you.
While sharing the application that you want to whiteboard on, click on the 
Screenshot icon on the yellow frame:

Chapter 10
[ 205 ]
Blackboard will take a screenshot of the window, bring you back to the Collaborate 
application, and place that screenshot on a whiteboard. In the example shown in 
the following screenshot, you can see that we are in the whiteboard mode and the 
whiteboard tools are available:
Now you can mark up the screenshot like any other whiteboard page.

Using Collaborate/CourseSites Live
[ 206 ]
When you are ready to resume application sharing, click on the Application Sharing 
icon and select Resume Sharing, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you want to save the marked-up whiteboard page for your students to refer 
to, select File | Save | Whiteboard. You can save it as a whiteboard file, a PDF 
document, or a PNG graphic. This is a good way to create a quick reference guide  
or study guide about the topic that you were sharing.
Summary
Collaborate (or CourseSites Live) is an excellent way to add a human touch to 
your online courses. You can use voice, emoticons, and chat to communicate  
with your students. Although this chapter did not discuss using video, that is  
also available to you.
There are several keys to successfully hosting a live session with your students. 
Many of them were implied in the previous instructions.
Before the session
Have your students test their systems first. Blackboard provides a free site where 
they can do this: http://support.blackboardcollaborate.com/ics/support/
default.asp?deptID=8336&task=knowledge&questionID=1473. Make this 
testing, and reporting to you that they did the test, an assignment in your course.
Make your first online meeting a practice session.
Have a welcome slide displayed so that students see it as soon as they enter the session.
If you're using audio, have some kind of audio greeting for students when they  
enter the session, so they won't wonder if their audio is working. You can play  
some music, talk with the students who have already joined, or just keep watch  
over the session, and make sure you greet everyone as soon as they join the session.

Chapter 10
[ 207 ]
During the session
Encourage students to use emoticons to communicate how they are feeling about  
the session.
Design your slideshows, shared applications, and other presentation material to fit 
inside the Collaborate's main window. Yes, it's true that students can maximize the 
window and even completely hide the sidebar. Most of them won't. And some of 
your students might have small displays (such as a netbook). Plan for it.
Let students use whiteboard tools to illustrate and clarify things during your 
discussion. Then, save one or more whiteboard pages as PDF or PNG files.  
They will make good reminders of your discussion.
After the session
At the end of the session, consider using Web Push to drop your students off on  
a web page that provides the starting point for their next actions.
After the session, use Blackboard's message or e-mail feature to send the students 
screenshots of the session, a summary, next steps, and any other follow-up 
information. Explicitly tell them what they learned and what is expected from them.
And most of all, have fun with the online session! It's a chance for you to step out from 
behind the online course, and interact with your students in a more personal way.


Grading Students
Blackboard's Grade Center is a spreadsheet that shows the students' grades, and 
calculations based on those grades. Only a user with the role of Instructor, Teaching 
Assistant, or Grader can access Grade Center.
In this chapter, we will show you how to:
• 
Find things that need to be graded
• 
Use Smart Views to view the gradebook
• 
Categorize graded items
• 
Manually override grades
• 
Prepare a report for grades
When a student wants to see his/her grades, the student selects the My Grades tool, 
and not Grade Center.

Grading Students
[ 210 ]
Blackboard automatically enters the grades for graded activities such as tests, 
assignments, graded posts in forums, and so on. Each graded activity gets a 
column in Grade Center. Each student gets a row in Grade Center. In the following 
screenshot, you can see that there are columns for graded activities, such as Where 
did you, Water Walks, and more. There is also a row for each student:
Notice the column labeled Total. This is a calculated column. Calculated columns 
can give you the total, average, and minimum/maximum for a group of selected 
grade columns.
While Blackboard adds a grade column for each graded activity in the course, you 
can also add your own grade columns. This would be useful if you were grading an 
activity or item that Blackboard has not added to Grade Center. For example, you 
might grade students on class participation. Class participation is not a Blackboard 
assignment, test, or other online activity. So if you want to grade it, you would need 
to add a column for it to the gradebook. You could also do this to grade attendance 
for a field trip.

Chapter 11
[ 211 ]
Viewing Grade Center
To view Grade Center, from the Course Management menu, select Grade Center. 
In the following screenshot, the user has then selected Full Grade Center:
In the menu on the left-hand side, note that under Full Grade Center, there are two 
more options—Assignments and Tests. These are Smart Views that were chosen by 
the user as favorites. They can also be set by the Blackboard administrator, and/or 
created by the user. We will discuss more about Smart Views later.
In a later section of this chapter, we will focus on how to customize your view of 
Grade Center.

Grading Students
[ 212 ]
Finding things that need to be graded
To see a list of the things that need grading, just select Grade Center | Needs 
Grading. Grade Center will display a list of the graded activities in your course, 
which have not been graded yet, as shown in the following screenshot:
You can sort the items by clicking on any column heading. Most useful might be 
Due Date, so you can grade the items that were recently due and make sure you 
have graded everything in a timely manner. You can also sort by the items by name. 
For example, you may be in the mood to grade a particular assignment; you can use 
the filter accordingly, to see only what you need.
One important limitation of the Needs Grading display is that only graded 
activities, which Blackboard automatically adds to the gradebook, appear in  
this display. That is, it shows only those items for which the student has  
submitted something in your course. 

Chapter 11
[ 213 ]
If you add a graded activity for which nothing is done in Blackboard, it will not appear 
here. For example, in Full Grade Center, shown in the following screenshot, you 
can see that students are graded on their attitude. This is a column that the teacher 
manually added to Grade Center. Attitude is not a Blackboard activity. Therefore, it 
does not appear in the Needs Grading display, shown in the preceding screenshot.
If you have added grade columns to Grade Center, don't depend on the Needs 
Grading display to tell you if those columns need to be graded. Instead, look for 
them in Full Grade Center.
We'll see how to enter grades in a later section.

Grading Students
[ 214 ]
Smart Views
Under the Current View drop-down menu, you will find a list of Smart Views under 
the Smart Views submenu, as shown in the following screenshot:
Smart View is a search condition. Blackboard comes with some Smart Views built in 
for you. Under Manage | Smart Views, you can build your own Smart View:

Chapter 11
[ 215 ]
Notice that Assignments and Tests are designated as favorites. That is why they 
appear under the Full Grade Center submenu, as shown in the following screenshot:
When you create your own Smart View, you will select the columns and search 
criteria that you want. I suggest that you become adept at creating new columns  
and filtering views before you try to create a new Smart View. Until then,  
experiment with the ones provided by Blackboard.
Creating Grading Periods
Note that, by default, there are no Grading Periods in your course: 

Grading Students
[ 216 ]
A Grading Period displays all of the grades that are due during a specific time 
period. In this example, we are creating a Grading Period that will display all  
those activities that are due to be graded in May:
When we choose Grading Period Dates, it looks like we are creating a search criteria. 
That is, it looks like this Grading Period will automatically find and display all of 
those activities that are due to be graded between May 1 and May 31, 2012. However, 
this is not the case.
After you create a Grading Period, you must manually place the graded activities 
into that Grading Period. This is done under Manage | Column Organization:

Chapter 11
[ 217 ]
As the teacher, you will need to ensure that the due dates that you display to the 
students, and the dates for the Grading Period match each other.
You cannot create Grading Periods with overlapping dates. For 
example, we cannot create a Grading Period for May, and another 
for June, and then another for May and June.

Grading Students
[ 218 ]
Creating categories
Blackboard gives you some categories to filter your Grade Center. These categories 
represent the kind of activities in your course:
The categories supplied by Blackboard automatically filter or search for activities  
that qualify for the category. However, when you create a category, you cannot 
create a search criteria for the new category. Instead, you'll need to manually  
assign columns to the category.
You might want to create categories for the types of knowledge in your course. In 
our example course, we could create categories for Observations, Memorization, and 
Analytical Thinking. We can assign the journal and wiki grades to the Observations 
category, our tests to the Memorization category, and grades for forum posts and 
assignments to the Analytical Thinking category.
You can create a new category under Manage | Categories. You can add a column 
into a category under Manage | Column Organization.
Smart Views, Grading Periods, Categories…this is getting confusing!
Smart Views, Statuses, and Categories are all independent filters. They 
work together to allow you to filter and see only the grade columns that 
you need. For a column to be shown, it must meet the criteria set by all 
of these. Grading Periods work by themselves. If you select a Grading 
Period, you cannot use Category or Status to filter the display.
If all this filtering is still confusing you, just switch between Full Grade 
Center and the filters that you are trying to understand. This will show 
you, by example, the effects that each filter has on the display of grades.

Chapter 11
[ 219 ]
Showing, hiding, and moving rows
Just like you can move and hide rows in a spreadsheet, you can manipulate the 
display of rows in Full Grade Center. Note that you cannot do this in the Needs 
Grading window. You must be in Full Grade Center to move and hide rows.
To move a row or rows to the top of the page, click the checkbox at the beginning 
of the row(s) and then click on the Move To Top button, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
To hide rows or show rows that were hidden, use Manage | Row Visibility. To sort 
by a column, click on the column name.
Some examples of filtering and finding
Let's look at some examples of using the filters in Grade Center. First, here is an 
example of the teacher displaying all the students who have not attempted Review 
Test yet. To do this, the teacher has selected Status as Not Attempted and Current 
View as Tests, as shown in the following screenshot:

Grading Students
[ 220 ]
Note that even though Suzy and Sally took one test, they did not take the 
second test. Therefore, their rows also appear when we search for tests that  
have not been attempted.
In this example, the teacher is displaying the Grading Period of May Grades. 
Notice that when displaying a Grading Period, the choices for Category and 
Status are not available:
In this example, the teacher has selected Status as Needs Grading. That is the only 
filter that the teacher is using:

Chapter 11
[ 221 ]
Assigning and entering grades
Now that you can find the items you want in Grade Center, it's time to give them 
grades. In general, there are two ways to give an item a grade. You can open the 
item, which will take you deeper into Grade Center where you will view just the 
item that you are grading. You would do this if you needed to examine the item 
before giving a grade. Or, you can enter a grade right into Grade Center. You 
would do this if you already knew the grade that you wanted to give.
Screen Reader Mode
In the following screenshot, Grade Center is in Screen Reader Mode. In this mode, 
you cannot enter grades directly into Grade Center. This is a fast way to locate items 
that you know need to be graded, and enter grades for them. You must select the item 
and select View Grade Details for that item, as shown in the following screenshot:

Grading Students
[ 222 ]
The Grade Details page looks slightly different for each kind of activity. However, 
its features and functions are consistent. In this example we will see the Grade 
Details page for a graded forum entry, as shown in the following screenshot:
The teacher clicks on the Edit Grade button and is presented with a pop-up window 
where he/she can enter the grade and details, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 223 ]
The Feedback field is visible to the student. The Grading Notes field is visible 
only to teachers and graders.
Manually overriding an automated grade
In the preceding example, the activity was manually graded. That is, the teacher 
had to look at the student's work to grade it. Some activities do not require manual 
grading. For example, a test that has only automatically graded questions doesn't 
require the teacher to assign a grade.
Even though Blackboard calculates a grade for some activities, such as tests, you  
can manually override the grade. Begin by selecting View Grade Details from the 
pop-up menu next to the item. 

Grading Students
[ 224 ]
In the following example, the teacher is going to manually override a grade for a test 
called Do you know the oceans?, as shown in the following screenshot:
This brings the teacher to the Grade Details page for that test. It looks a little different 
from the Grade Details page for the forum thread shown in the previous example:
Clicking on the Manual Override link displays a screen where the teacher can enter a 
new grade, leave feedback for the student, and enter a grading note for the teacher(s):

Chapter 11
[ 225 ]
In the preceding screenshot, notice the Grade History link on the right-hand 
side. When you override a calculated grade, it will be recorded under the item's 
grade history.

Grading Students
[ 226 ]
Entering all of the students' grades for an 
activity
If you want to grade all of the students who completed an activity, you can do this 
from a single page. From one page you will view a student's work, grade it, and 
move on to the next student who completed that activity.
In Grade Center, from the drop-down menu in the activity's column, select Grade 
Attempts, as shown in the following screenshot:
Some activities won't have Grade Attempts available in their drop-down menu. If 
that is the case, then open the drop-down menu next to a specific student's attempt 
and select Grade User Activity, as shown in the following screenshot:
In both cases, you will be taken to a page that displays the first student's attempt at 
the activity:

Chapter 11
[ 227 ]
Note that the buttons at the top of the page show you which student's work you are 
grading. They also enable you to move to the next and previous students.
The rest of the page shows the same information as if you were viewing the grade 
detail page for a single student. This is the fastest way to grade an assignment for all 
the students in your class.

Grading Students
[ 228 ]
Preparing a report for grades
Grade Center enables you to make calculations using the grade and to prepare a 
report for grades.
Adding a calculated column
A calculated column can display the average, weighted average, minimum/
maximum, or total for a group of columns. To determine which columns are used in 
the calculation, perform the following steps:
1.	 To create a calculated column, select Create Calculate Column from the menu 
bar in Grade Center. You will then select the type of calculation you want.
2.	 On the Create Column page, you select the columns to use in the calculation. 
You will also select other settings on this page.
3.	 After you create a column, it is added to the rightmost position in Grade 
Center. You will probably need to scroll to the right to find it. You might 
want to use Manage | Column Organization to reposition the column that 
you created.
Reporting versus downloading grades
The Reports menu option enables you to create and print reports that show data from 
Grade Center. If you have the ability to print PDF or XPS files, you can create a report 
for each student and e-mail that report to them. However, a limitation of the Report 
feature is that it creates only printed reports. You can read the data, but you cannot do 
anything with it.
If you want to analyze grade information, you might want to import it into Excel or 
another spreadsheet program. Looking at Grade Center, there is no "export" function 
apparent. However, under the Work Offline menu, there is a Download option. This 
option enables you to download all, or part of Grade Center to a text file. If your 
computer has Excel installed, it will probably offer to open that file in Excel as you 
download it.

Chapter 11
[ 229 ]
Summary
Blackboard's Grade Center offers you a lot of functionality from just one place. You 
can search, organize, enter, calculate, and report on grades from the Full Grade 
Center page. Use the Filters and Smart Views to ensure that you are viewing only 
the data you want. Use Grading Periods and categories to organize your grades. The 
Grade Attempts and Grade User Activity options will save you time by enabling 
you to grade all of the students' attempts at an activity, on one page. With so much 
information available in one place, it can be easy to lose sight of the big picture. This 
is especially true because Grade Center cannot be made to fill your entire monitor. 
Occasionally, you might want to download your entire gradebook to a spreadsheet 
and look at it in full screen mode, or even print it out on multiple sheets and look at 
it all at once. In general, Grade Center can be a good way to see where you are in the 
progress of the course, what has been done, what the students are attempting, and 
what needs to be done.


Index
A
activities
group settings, effects  164-168
students' grades, entering for  226, 227
alerts  172
announcements
about  7, 8, 172, 176
posting  176, 177
sending, to students  178, 179
Answer Formula  133
application
sharing, on computer  201, 202
application sharing
ability, for students  203, 204
assignment
about  22, 23, 109
creating  110-112
responding to  113-118
automated grade
manually, overriding  223, 224
B
batch create  154
Blackboard
about  27, 121, 153, 171, 209
announcements, posting  176, 177
announcements, sending  
to students  178, 179
blank test, creating  122
categories, creating  218
course home page  6, 7
e-mail, sending to students  172-174
e-mails, sending to group members  169, 170
groups, creating  154
messages, sending to students  174-176
questions, creating  125
tests, creating  121
video file, uploading  20
Blackboard, features
announcements  7, 8
assignment  22, 23
blog  16
content page  12-14
discussion board  8
forum  17, 18
gradebook  10-12
groups  24, 25
learning module  14, 15
video  19, 20
wiki  21
Blank Page
about  30
adding, to Content Area  33, 34
adding, to course  31-33
Blank Page tool  30
Blank question  136
blank test
creating  122
blog
about  16, 167
grading  100-104
link, creating to  98-100
managing  100
blog comments
deleting  104, 105
editing  104, 105
blog entry
deleting  104, 105
editing  104, 105

[ 232 ]
C
calculated column
adding, in Grade Center  228
calculated formula question  131-135
calculated numeric question  135
categories
creating  218
Collaborate
application sharing, for students  203, 204
application, sharing on computer  201, 202
whiteboarding, over shared application  
204-206
computer
application, sharing on  201, 202
content
adding, to Content Area  30
Content Area
about  27, 28
adding, steps  28, 29
Blank Page, adding  33, 34
content, adding  30
hiding  29
image, adding to  70
Learning Module, adding  37-42
Content Collections  51
Content Page  12-14
Correct/Incorrect question  136
course
Blank Page, adding  31-33
image, adding to  69
video, adding to  56
Course Asset
link, adding to  69
Course Menu
Course Tools, adding  47, 48
course page
test, adding to  123
Course Tools
about  44
adding, to Course Menu  47, 48
adding, to Home Page  48
Create Tool Link  46
D
Discussion Board
about  8, 167
link, creating to forum  84, 85
downloading grades
versus reporting  228
E
Either/Or question  136
e-mail
about  171
sending, to group members  169, 170
sending, to students  172-174
essay question  136
F
file
adding  52-54
adding, for download  50
versus item  50
File Response question  136
filters
using, in Grade Center  219, 220
forum
about  17, 18
link, creating to  84, 85
managing  86
posts, collecting  86-89
posts, grading  90, 91
Full Grade Center
rows, displaying  219
rows, hiding  219
rows, moving  219
G
Gradebook  10-12
Grade Center
about  209, 210
calculated column, creating  228
filters, using  219, 220

[ 233 ]
grades, assigning  221
grades, entering  221
grading list, searching  212, 213
reporting, on grades  228
Screen Reader Mode  221-223
Smart Views  214, 215
viewing  211
graded activities
placing, into Grading Period  216, 217
grades
assigning, in Grade Center  221
entering, in Grade Center  221
reporting on  228
Grading Periods
about  215
creating  216
dates, selecting  216
graded activities, placing into  216, 217
group
about  24, 25
creating  154
creating, with manual enrollment  154, 155
creating, with self enrollment  156-158
group activities  153
group members
e-mails, sending to  169, 170
group sets  160
group settings
affects, on activities  164-168
H
Home Page
Course Tool, adding  48
home page, BlackBoard  6, 7
Hot Spot question  137, 138
HTML editor
used, for composing page  34-36
I
image
adding, to Content Area  70
adding, to course  69
item
adding  54-56
versus file  50
J
Journal activity  167
Jumbled Sentence question  138
L
Learning Module
about  14, 15, 37
adding, to Content Area  37-42
learning path  37
Likert question  139
link
adding, to Course Asset  69
adding, to Wikis page  107, 108
creating, to blog  98-100
creating, to forum  84, 85
M
manual enrollment
single group, creating with  154, 155
Matching question  139
messages
about  172
sending, to students  174-176
Multiple Answer question  139
Multiple Blank question  136
Multiple Choice question  139
multiple groups
creating, at once  160-163
My Grades tool  10, 209
O
Opinion Scale question  139
Ordering question  140
P
page
composing, with HTML editor  34-36
posts
collecting, in forums  86-89
grading, in forum  90, 91

[ 234 ]
Q
question behavior
determining, with Question Settings page  
122, 123
question pool
about  141, 144
creating  144-147
questions
adding, on Test Canvas  123
answer feedback, adding  127-129
answers, adding  127-129
categories, adding  129, 130
creating  125
creating, on Test Canvas  123
keywords, adding  129, 130
notes, adding  129, 130
question sets
about  142, 150
creating  150, 151
versus random blocks  140-144
Question Settings
used, for determining question behavior  
122, 123
Question Settings page  122
question text  126, 127
question title  126, 127
question types
about  126-130
Blank  136
calculated formula  131-135
calculated numeric  135
Correct/Incorrect  136
Either/Or  136
essay  136
File Response  136
Hot Spot  137, 138
Jumbled Sentence  138
Likert  139
Matching  139
Multiple Answer  139
Multiple Blank  136
Multiple Choice  139
Opinion Scale  139
Ordering  140
Quiz Bowl  140
Right/Wrong  136
Short Answer  140
True/False  136
Yes/No  136
Quiz Bowl questions  140
R
random blocks
about  142-144
creating  148, 149
versus question sets  140-144
reporting
versus downloading grades  228
Right/Wrong question  136
rows
displaying, in Grade Center  219
hiding, in Grade Center  219
moving, in Grade Center  219
S
Screen Reader Mode, Grade Center  221-223
self-enrollment
group, creating with  156-158
viewing, from student's view  159, 160
Short Answer question  140
single group
creating, with manual enrollment  154, 155
Smart Views, Grade Center  214, 215
static course material  49
students
announcements, sending to  178, 179
e-mail, sending to  172-174
messages, sending to  174-176
students' grades
entering, for activity  226, 227
T
tasks  168
test
about  23
adding, to course page  123
creating  121
Test Canvas
questions, adding on  123
questions, creating on  123

[ 235 ]
Test Canvas page
about  125
navigating to  125
Test Options page
about  124
implementing  124
True/False question  136
U
uploaded files, in course  18, 19
V
video
about  19, 20
adding, to course  56
video file
uploading, into BlackBoard  20
Vimeo  19
W
whiteboarding
over shared application  204-206
wiki
about  21, 106, 168
creating  106, 107
Wikis page
link, adding to  107, 108
Y
Yes/No question  136
YouTube  19


Thank you for buying 
Blackboard Essentials for Teachers
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

[ 238 ]
Moodle 2.0 E-Learning Course 
Development
ISBN:  978-1-84951-526-9            Paperback: 344 pages
A complete guide to successful learning using Moodle
1.	
The new book and ebook edition of the best 
selling introduction to using Moodle for teaching 
and e-learning, updated for Moodle 2.0 
2.	
Straightforward coverage of installing 
and using the Moodle system, suitable for 
newcomers as well as existing Moodle users 
who want to get a few tips 
3.	
A unique course-based approach focuses 
your attention on designing well-structured, 
interactive, and successful courses 
4.	
Configure site settings, set up the front page, 
create user accounts, and create courses
Mastering Adobe Captivate 6.0
ISBN: 978-1-84969-244-1            Paperback: 340 pages
Create professional SCORM-compliant e-learning 
content with Adobe Captivate
1.	
Step by step tutorial to build three projects 
including a demonstration, a simulation and a 
random SCORM-compliant quiz featuring all 
possible question slides. 
2.	
Enhance your projects by adding interactivity, 
animations, sound and more 
3.	
Publish your project in a wide variety of 
formats enabling virtually any desktop and 
mobile devices to play your e-learning content 
4.	
Deploy your e-Learning content on a SCORM 
or AICC-compliant LMS
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

[ 239 ]
Sakai Courseware Management: 
The Official Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84719-940-9             Paperback: 504 pages
A comprehensive and pragmatic guide to using, 
managing, and maintaining Sakai in the real world
1.	
Covers working with Sakai tools, the 
administration workspace, and more 
2.	
Includes lots of ideas and best practices for 
teachers and trainers on using Sakai effectively 
3.	
Create instructional materials and design 
students' activities 
4.	
A step-by-step approach with practical 
examples, ample screenshots, and 
comprehensive content for a wide target 
audience 
WordPress for Education
ISBN: 978-1-84951-820-8            Paperback: 144 pages
Create interactive and engaging e-learning websites 
with WordPress
1.	
Develop effective e-learning websites that will 
engage your students 
2.	
Extend the potential of a classroom website 
with WordPress plugins 
3.	
Create an interactive social network and course 
management system to enhance student and 
instructor communication 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles


