Melanie Swan
Blockchain
BLUEPRINT FOR A NEW ECONOMY

E-COMMERCE
Blockchain
ISBN: 978-1-491-92049-7
US $24.99	
 CAN $28.99
Melanie Swan founded and participated 
in new markets startups GroupPurchase 
and Prosper, and developed virtual world 
digital asset valuation and accounting 
principles for Deloitte. She is an instructor 
at Singularity University and an Affiliate 
Scholar at the Institute for Ethics and 
Emerging Technologies.
Twitter: @oreillymedia
facebook.com/oreilly
Bitcoin is starting to come into its own as a digital currency, but the 
blockchain technology behind it could prove to be much more significant. 
This book takes you beyond the currency (“Blockchain 1.0”) and smart 
contracts (“Blockchain 2.0”) to demonstrate how the blockchain is 
in position to become the fifth disruptive computing paradigm after 
mainframes, PCs, the Internet, and mobile/social networking.
Author Melanie Swan, Founder of the Institute for Blockchain Studies, 
explains that the blockchain is essentially a public ledger with potential 
as a worldwide, decentralized record for the registration, inventory, and 
transfer of all assets—not just finances, but property and intangible assets 
such as votes, software, health data, and ideas.
Topics include:
■
■Concepts, features, and functionality of Bitcoin and the blockchain
■
■Using the blockchain for automated tracking of all digital 
endeavors
■
■Enabling censorship-resistant organizational models
■
■Creating a decentralized digital repository to verify identity
■
■Possibility of cheaper, more efficient services traditionally 
provided by nations
■
■Blockchain for science: making better use of the data-mining 
network
■
■Personal health record storage, including access to one’s own 
genomic data
■
■Open access academic publishing on the blockchain
This book is part of an ongoing O’Reilly series. Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking 
Digital Cryptocurrencies introduces Bitcoin and describes the technology 
behind Bitcoin and the blockchain. Blockchain: Blueprint for a New 
Economy considers the theoretical, philosophical, and societal impact of 
cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies.

Melanie Swan
Blockchain
Blueprint for a New Economy

978-1-491-92049-7
[LSI]
Blockchain
by Melanie Swan
Copyright © 2015 Melanie Swan. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are
also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For more information, contact our corporate/
institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Tim McGovern
Production Editor: Matthew Hacker
Copyeditor: Rachel Monaghan
Proofreader: Bob Russell, Octal Publishing, Inc.
Indexer: Wendy Catalano
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Ellie Volckhausen
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
February 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-01-22: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781491920497 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Blockchain, the cover image of a Hun‐
garian grey bull, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the information and
instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the author disclaim all responsibility
for errors or omissions, including without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of
or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open source
licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use
thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights. This book is not intended as financial advice. Please
consult a qualified professional if you require financial advice.

Table of Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  vii
1. Blockchain 1.0: Currency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Technology Stack: Blockchain, Protocol, Currency                                                      1
The Double-Spend and Byzantine Generals’ Computing Problems                          2
How a Cryptocurrency Works                                                                                         3
eWallet Services and Personal Cryptosecurity                                                           3
Merchant Acceptance of Bitcoin                                                                                  4
Summary: Blockchain 1.0 in Practical Use                                                                    5
Relation to Fiat Currency                                                                                              5
Regulatory Status                                                                                                            6
2. Blockchain 2.0: Contracts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Financial Services                                                                                                             11
Crowdfunding                                                                                                                  12
Bitcoin Prediction Markets                                                                                            13
Smart Property                                                                                                                 13
Smart Contracts                                                                                                               16
Blockchain 2.0 Protocol Projects                                                                                   18
Wallet Development Projects                                                                                         18
Blockchain Development Platforms and APIs                                                            19
Blockchain Ecosystem: Decentralized Storage, Communication, and
Computation                                                                                                                 19
Ethereum: Turing-Complete Virtual Machine                                                            21
Counterparty Re-creates Ethereum’s Smart Contract Platform                            22
Dapps, DAOs, DACs, and DASs: Increasingly Autonomous Smart Contracts      22
Dapps                                                                                                                             23
DAOs and DACs                                                                                                           24
iii

DASs and Self-Bootstrapped Organizations                                                            25
Automatic Markets and Tradenets                                                                             26
The Blockchain as a Path to Artificial Intelligence                                                     26
3. Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets. . . . . .  27
Blockchain Technology Is a New and Highly Effective Model for Organizing
Activity                                                                                                                           27
Extensibility of Blockchain Technology Concepts                                                  28
Fundamental Economic Principles: Discovery, Value Attribution,
and Exchange                                                                                                            28
Blockchain Technology Could Be Used in the Administration of All Quanta    29
Blockchain Layer Could Facilitate Big Data’s Predictive Task Automation         29
Distributed Censorship-Resistant Organizational Models                                        30
Namecoin: Decentralized Domain Name System                                                       31
Challenges and Other Decentralized DNS Services                                                32
Freedom of Speech/Anti-Censorship Applications: Alexandria and Ostel         33
Decentralized DNS Functionality Beyond Free Speech: Digital Identity             33
Digital Identity Verification                                                                                            34
Blockchain Neutrality                                                                                                  36
Digital Divide of Bitcoin                                                                                             36
Digital Art: Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary, Intellectual Property
Protection)                                                                                                                    37
Hashing Plus Timestamping                                                                                       37
Proof of Existence                                                                                                        38
Virtual Notary, Bitnotar, and Chronobit                                                                  40
Monegraph: Online Graphics Protection                                                                 41
Digital Asset Proof as an Automated Feature                                                          42
Batched Notary Chains as a Class of Blockchain Infrastructure                           42
Personal Thinking Blockchains                                                                                  43
Blockchain Government                                                                                                 44
Decentralized Governance Services                                                                          45
PrecedentCoin: Blockchain Dispute Resolution                                                      48
Liquid Democracy and Random-Sample Elections                                                49
Random-Sample Elections                                                                                          50
Futarchy: Two-Step Democracy with Voting + Prediction Markets                    51
Societal Maturity Impact of Blockchain Governance                                             52
4. Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency,
Economics, and Markets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
Blockchain Science: Gridcoin, Foldingcoin                                                                 53
Community Supercomputing                                                                                     54
Global Public Health: Bitcoin for Contagious Disease Relief                                55
iv 
| 
Table of Contents

Charity Donations and the Blockchain—Sean’s Outpost                                       55
Blockchain Genomics                                                                                                      55
Blockchain Genomics 2.0: Industrialized All-Human-Scale Sequencing
Solution                                                                                                                      57
Blockchain Technology as a Universal Order-of-Magnitude Progress Model    58
Genomecoin, GenomicResearchcoin                                                                        58
Blockchain Health                                                                                                            59
Healthcoin                                                                                                                     59
EMRs on the Blockchain: Personal Health Record Storage                                   59
Blockchain Health Research Commons                                                                   60
Blockchain Health Notary                                                                                           60
Doctor Vendor RFP Services and Assurance Contracts                                         61
Virus Bank, Seed Vault Backup                                                                                  61
Blockchain Learning: Bitcoin MOOCs and Smart Contract Literacy                      61
Learncoin                                                                                                                       62
Learning Contract Exchanges                                                                                    62
Blockchain Academic Publishing: Journalcoin                                                           63
The Blockchain Is Not for Every Situation                                                                   65
Centralization-Decentralization Tension and Equilibrium                                       66
5. Advanced Concepts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
Terminology and Concepts                                                                                            69
Currency, Token, Tokenizing                                                                                         70
Communitycoin: Hayek’s Private Currencies Vie for Attention                           71
Campuscoin                                                                                                                  72
Coin Drops as a Strategy for Public Adoption                                                         73
Currency: New Meanings                                                                                           74
Currency Multiplicity: Monetary and Nonmonetary Currencies                            74
Demurrage Currencies: Potentially Incitory and Redistributable                            75
Extensibility of Demurrage Concept and Features                                                 77
6. Limitations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  81
Technical Challenges                                                                                                       81
Business Model Challenges                                                                                            85
Scandals and Public Perception                                                                                     85
Government Regulation                                                                                                  87
Privacy Challenges for Personal Records                                                                     88
Overall: Decentralization Trends Likely to Persist                                                      89
7. Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91
The Blockchain Is an Information Technology                                                           92
Blockchain AI: Consensus as the Mechanism to Foster “Friendly” AI                93
Table of Contents 
| 
v

Large Possibility Space for Intelligence                                                                     93
Only Friendly AIs Are Able to Get Their Transactions Executed                         93
Smart Contract Advocates on Behalf of Digital Intelligence                                 94
Blockchain Consensus Increases the Information Resolution of the
Universe                                                                                                                     95
A. Cryptocurrency Basics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  97
B. Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
Endnotes and References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  105
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  123
vi 
| 
Table of Contents

Preface
We should think about the blockchain as another class of thing like the Internet—a compre‐
hensive information technology with tiered technical levels and multiple classes of applica‐
tions for any form of asset registry, inventory, and exchange, including every area of finance,
economics, and money; hard assets (physical property, homes, cars); and intangible assets
(votes, ideas, reputation, intention, health data, information, etc.). But the blockchain con‐
cept is even more; it is a new organizing paradigm for the discovery, valuation, and transfer
of all quanta (discrete units) of anything, and potentially for the coordination of all human
activity at a much larger scale than has been possible before.
We may be at the dawn of a new revolution. This revolution started with a new fringe
economy on the Internet, an alternative currency called Bitcoin that was issued and
backed not by a central authority, but by automated consensus among networked
users. Its true uniqueness, however, lay in the fact that it did not require the users to
trust each other. Through algorithmic self-policing, any malicious attempt to defraud
the system would be rejected. In a precise and technical definition, Bitcoin is digital
cash that is transacted via the Internet in a decentralized trustless system using a pub‐
lic ledger called the blockchain. It is a new form of money that combines BitTorrent
peer-to-peer file sharing1 with public key cryptography.2 Since its launch in 2009, Bit‐
coin has spawned a group of imitators—alternative currencies using the same general
approach but with different optimizations and tweaks. More important, blockchain
technology could become the seamless embedded economic layer the Web has never
had, serving as the technological underlay for payments, decentralized exchange,
token earning and spending, digital asset invocation and transfer, and smart contract
issuance and execution. Bitcoin and blockchain technology, as a mode of decentrali‐
zation, could be the next major disruptive technology and worldwide computing
paradigm (following the mainframe, PC, Internet, and social networking/mobile
phones), with the potential for reconfiguring all human activity as pervasively as did
the Web.
vii

Currency, Contracts, and Applications beyond Financial
Markets
The potential benefits of the blockchain are more than just economic—they extend
into political, humanitarian, social, and scientific domains—and the technological
capacity of the blockchain is already being harnessed by specific groups to address
real-world problems. For example, to counter repressive political regimes, blockchain
technology can be used to enact in a decentralized cloud functions that previously
needed administration by jurisdictionally bound organizations. This is obviously use‐
ful for organizations like WikiLeaks (where national governments prevented credit
card processors from accepting donations in the sensitive Edward Snowden situa‐
tion) as well as organizations that are transnational in scope and neutral in political
outlook, like Internet standards group ICANN and DNS services. Beyond these situa‐
tions in which a public interest must transcend governmental power structures, other
industry sectors and classes can be freed from skewed regulatory and licensing
schemes subject to the hierarchical power structures and influence of strongly backed
special interest groups on governments, enabling new disintermediated business
models. Even though regulation spurred by the institutional lobby has effectively
crippled consumer genome services,3 newer sharing economy models like Airbnb
and Uber have been standing up strongly in legal attacks from incumbents.4
In addition to economic and political benefits, the coordination, record keeping, and
irrevocability of transactions using blockchain technology are features that could be
as fundamental for forward progress in society as the Magna Carta or the Rosetta
Stone. In this case, the blockchain can serve as the public records repository for
whole societies, including the registry of all documents, events, identities, and assets.
In this system, all property could become smart property; this is the notion of encod‐
ing every asset to the blockchain with a unique identifier such that the asset can be
tracked, controlled, and exchanged (bought or sold) on the blockchain. This means
that all manner of tangible assets (houses, cars) and digital assets could be registered
and transacted on the blockchain.
As an example (we’ll see more over the course of this book), we can see the world-
changing potential of the blockchain in its use for registering and protecting intellec‐
tual property (IP). The emerging digital art industry offers services for privately
registering the exact contents of any digital asset (any file, image, health record, soft‐
ware, etc.) to the blockchain. The blockchain could replace or supplement all existing
IP management systems. How it works is that a standard algorithm is run over a file
(any file) to compress it into a short 64-character code (called a hash) that is unique
to that document.5 No matter how large the file (e.g., a 9-GB genome file), it is com‐
pressed into a 64-character secure hash that cannot be computed backward. The hash
is then included in a blockchain transaction, which adds the timestamp—the proof of
that digital asset existing at that moment. The hash can be recalculated from the
viii 
| 
Preface

underlying file (stored privately on the owner’s computer, not on the blockchain),
confirming that the original contents have not changed. Standardized mechanisms
such as contract law have been revolutionary steps forward for society, and block‐
chain IP (digital art) could be exactly one of these inflection points for the smoother
coordination of large-scale societies, as more and more economic activity is driven by
the creation of ideas.
Blockchain 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0
The economic, political, humanitarian, and legal system benefits of Bitcoin and
blockchain technology start to make it clear that this is potentially an extremely dis‐
ruptive technology that could have the capacity for reconfiguring all aspects of society
and its operations. For organization and convenience, the different kinds of existing
and potential activities in the blockchain revolution are broken down into three cate‐
gories: Blockchain 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0. Blockchain 1.0 is currency, the deployment of
cryptocurrencies in applications related to cash, such as currency transfer, remittance,
and digital payment systems. Blockchain 2.0 is contracts, the entire slate of economic,
market, and financial applications using the blockchain that are more extensive than
simple cash transactions: stocks, bonds, futures, loans, mortgages, titles, smart prop‐
erty, and smart contracts. Blockchain 3.0 is blockchain applications beyond currency,
finance, and markets—particularly in the areas of government, health, science, liter‐
acy, culture, and art.
What Is Bitcoin?
Bitcoin is digital cash. It is a digital currency and online payment system in which
encryption techniques are used to regulate the generation of units of currency and
verify the transfer of funds, operating independently of a central bank. The terminol‐
ogy can be confusing because the words Bitcoin and blockchain may be used to refer
to any three parts of the concept: the underlying blockchain technology, the protocol
and client through which transactions are effected, and the actual cryptocurrency
(money); or also more broadly to refer to the whole concept of cryptocurrencies. It is
as if PayPal had called the Internet “PayPal,” upon which the PayPal protocol was run,
to transfer the PayPal currency. The blockchain industry is using these terms inter‐
changeably sometimes because it is still in the process of shaping itself into what
could likely become established layers in a technology stack.
Bitcoin was created in 2009 (released on January 9, 20096) by an unknown person or
entity using the name Satoshi Nakamoto. The concept and operational details are
described in a concise and readable white paper, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic
Cash System.”7 Payments using the decentralized virtual currency are recorded in a
public ledger that is stored on many—potentially all—Bitcoin users’ computers, and
continuously viewable on the Internet. Bitcoin is the first and largest decentralized
Preface 
| 
ix

cryptocurrency. There are hundreds of other “altcoin” (alternative coin) cryptocur‐
rencies, like Litecoin and Dogecoin, but Bitcoin comprises 90 percent of the market
capitalization of all cryptocurrencies and is the de facto standard. Bitcoin is pseudon‐
ymous (not anonymous) in the sense that public key addresses (27–32 alphanumeric
character strings; similar in function to an email address) are used to send and
receive Bitcoins and record transactions, as opposed to personally identifying
information.
Bitcoins are created as a reward for computational processing work, known as
mining, in which users offer their computing power to verify and record payments
into the public ledger. Individuals or companies engage in mining in exchange for
transaction fees and newly created Bitcoins. Besides mining, Bitcoins can, like any
currency, be obtained in exchange for fiat money, products, and services. Users can
send and receive Bitcoins electronically for an optional transaction fee using wallet
software on a personal computer, mobile device, or web application.
What Is the Blockchain?
The blockchain is the public ledger of all Bitcoin transactions that have ever been exe‐
cuted. It is constantly growing as miners add new blocks to it (every 10 minutes) to
record the most recent transactions. The blocks are added to the blockchain in a lin‐
ear, chronological order. Each full node (i.e., every computer connected to the Bitcoin
network using a client that performs the task of validating and relaying transactions)
has a copy of the blockchain, which is downloaded automatically when the miner
joins the Bitcoin network. The blockchain has complete information about addresses
and balances from the genesis block (the very first transactions ever executed) to the
most recently completed block. The blockchain as a public ledger means that it is easy
to query any block explorer (such as https://blockchain.info/) for transactions associ‐
ated with a particular Bitcoin address—for example, you can look up your own wallet
address to see the transaction in which you received your first Bitcoin.
The blockchain is seen as the main technological innovation of Bitcoin because it
stands as a “trustless” proof mechanism of all the transactions on the network. Users
can trust the system of the public ledger stored worldwide on many different decen‐
tralized nodes maintained by “miner-accountants,” as opposed to having to establish
and maintain trust with the transaction counterparty (another person) or a third-
party intermediary (like a bank). The blockchain as the architecture for a new system
of decentralized trustless transactions is the key innovation. The blockchain allows the
disintermediation and decentralization of all transactions of any type between all par‐
ties on a global basis.
The blockchain is like another application layer to run on the existing stack of Inter‐
net protocols, adding an entire new tier to the Internet to enable economic transac‐
tions, both immediate digital currency payments (in a universally usable
x 
| 
Preface

cryptocurrency) and longer-term, more complicated financial contracts. Any cur‐
rency, financial contract, or hard or soft asset may be transacted with a system like a
blockchain. Further, the blockchain may be used not just for transactions, but also as
a registry and inventory system for the recording, tracking, monitoring, and transact‐
ing of all assets. A blockchain is quite literally like a giant spreadsheet for registering
all assets, and an accounting system for transacting them on a global scale that can
include all forms of assets held by all parties worldwide. Thus, the blockchain can be
used for any form of asset registry, inventory, and exchange, including every area of
finance, economics, and money; hard assets (physical property); and intangible assets
(votes, ideas, reputation, intention, health data, etc.).
The Connected World and Blockchain: The Fifth Disruptive
Computing Paradigm
One model of understanding the modern world is through computing paradigms,
with a new paradigm arising on the order of one per decade (Figure P-1). First, there
were the mainframe and PC (personal computer) paradigms, and then the Internet
revolutionized everything. Mobile and social networking was the most recent para‐
digm. The current emerging paradigm for this decade could be the connected world of
computing relying on blockchain cryptography. The connected world could usefully
include blockchain technology as the economic overlay to what is increasingly
becoming a seamlessly connected world of multidevice computing that includes
wearable computing, Internet-of-Things (IoT) sensors, smartphones, tablets, laptops,
quantified self-tracking devices (i.e., Fitbit), smart home, smart car, and smart city.
The economy that the blockchain enables is not merely the movement of money,
however; it is the transfer of information and the effective allocation of resources that
money has enabled in the human- and corporate-scale economy.
With revolutionary potential equal to that of the Internet, blockchain technology
could be deployed and adopted much more quickly than the Internet was, given the
network effects of current widespread global Internet and cellular connectivity.
Just as the social-mobile functionality of Paradigm 4 has become an expected feature
of technology properties, with mobile apps for everything and sociality as a website
property (liking, commenting, friending, forum participation), so too could the
blockchain of Paradigm 5 bring the pervasive expectation of value exchange func‐
tionality. Paradigm 5 functionality could be the experience of a continuously connec‐
ted, seamless, physical-world, multidevice computing layer, with a blockchain
technology overlay for payments—not just basic payments, but micropayments,
decentralized exchange, token earning and spending, digital asset invocation and
transfer, and smart contract issuance and execution—as the economic layer the Web
never had. The world is already being prepared for more pervasive Internet-based
money: Apple Pay (Apple’s token-based ewallet mobile app) and its competitors could
Preface 
| 
xi

be a critical intermediary step in moving to a full-fledged cryptocurrency world in
which the blockchain becomes the seamless economic layer of the Web.
Figure P-1. Disruptive computing paradigms: Mainframe, PC, Internet, Social-Mobile,
Blockchain8
M2M/IoT Bitcoin Payment Network to Enable the Machine Economy
Blockchain is a revolutionary paradigm for the human world, the “Internet of Indi‐
viduals,” and it could also be the enabling currency of the machine economy. Gartner
estimates the Internet of Things will comprise 26 billion devices and a $1.9 trillion
economy by 2020.9 A corresponding “Internet of Money” cryptocurrency is needed to
manage the transactions between these devices,10 and micropayments between con‐
nected devices could develop into a new layer of the economy.11 Cisco estimates that
M2M (machine-to-machine) connections are growing faster than any other category
(84 percent), and that not only is global IP traffic forecast to grow threefold from
2012 to 2018, but the composition is shifting in favor of mobile, WiFi, and M2M traf‐
fic.12 Just as a money economy allows for better, faster, and more efficient allocation
of resources on a human scale, a machine economy can provide a robust and decen‐
tralized system of handling these same issues on a machine scale.
Some examples of interdevice micropayments could be connected automobiles auto‐
matically negotiating higher-speed highway passage if they are in a hurry, microcom‐
pensating road peers on a more relaxed schedule. Coordinating personal air delivery
drones is another potential use case for device-to-device micropayment networks
where individual priorities can be balanced. Agricultural sensors are an example of
another type of system that can use economic principles to filter out routine irrele‐
vant data but escalate priority data when environmental threshold conditions (e.g.,
for humidity) have been met by a large enough group of sensors in a deployed swarm.
Blockchain technology’s decentralized model of trustless peer-to-peer transactions
means, at its most basic level, intermediary-free transactions. However, the potential
shift to decentralized trustless transactions on a large-scale global basis for every sort
xii 
| 
Preface

of interaction and transaction (human-to-human, human-to-machine, machine-to-
machine) could imply a dramatically different structure and operation of society in
ways that cannot yet be foreseen but where current established power relationships
and hierarchies could easily lose their utility.
Mainstream Adoption: Trust, Usability, Ease of Use
Because many of the ideas and concepts behind Bitcoin and blockchain technology
are new and technically intricate, one complaint has been that perhaps cryptocurren‐
cies are too complicated for mainstream adoption. However, the same was true of the
Internet, and more generally at the beginning of any new technology era, the techni‐
cal details of “what it is” and “how it works” are of interest to a popular audience.
This is not a real barrier; it is not necessary to know how TCP/IP works in order to
send an email, and new technology applications pass into public use without much
further consideration of the technical details as long as appropriate, usable, trustable
frontend applications are developed. For example, not all users need to see (much less
manually type) the gory detail of a 32-character alphanumeric public address.
Already “mainstream wallet” companies such as Circle Internet Financial and Xapo
are developing frontend applications specifically targeted at the mainstream adoption
of Bitcoin (with the goal of being the “Gmail of Bitcoin” in terms of frontend
usability—and market share). Because Bitcoin and ewallets are related to money,
there is obvious additional sensitivity in end-user applications and consumer trust
that services need to establish. There are many cryptocurrency security issues to
address to engender a crypto-literate public with usable customer wallets, including
how to back up your money, what to do if you lose your private key, and what to do if
you received a proscribed (i.e., previously stolen) coin in a transaction and now can‐
not get rid of it. However, these issues are being addressed by the blockchain indus‐
try, and alternative currencies can take advantage of being just another node in the
ongoing progression of financial technology (fintech) that includes ATMs, online
banking, and now Apple Pay.
Currency application adoption could be straightforward with trustable usable
frontends, but the successful mainstream adoption of beyond-currency blockchain
applications could be subtler. For example, virtual notary services seem like a no-
brainer for the easy, low-cost, secure, permanent, findable registration of IP, con‐
tracts, wills, and similar documents. There will doubtlessly remain social reasons that
people prefer to interact with a lawyer about certain matters (perhaps the human-
based advice, psychoanalysis, or validation function that attorneys may provide), and
for these kinds of reasons, technology adoption based exclusively on efficiency argu‐
ments could falter. Overall, however, if Bitcoin and the blockchain industry are to
mature, it will most likely be in phases, similar to the adoption pattern of the Internet
for which a clear value proposition resonated with different potential audiences, and
then they came online with the new technology. Initially, the Internet solved
Preface 
| 
xiii

collaborative research problems for a subgroup: academic researchers and the mili‐
tary. Then, gamers and avid recreational users came online, and eventually, everyone.
In the case of Bitcoin, so far the early adopters are subcultures of people concerned
about money and ideology, and the next steps for widespread adoption could be as
blockchain technology solves practical problems for other large groups of people, For
example, some leading subgroups for whom blockchain technology solves a major
issue include those affected by Internet censorship in repressive political regimes,
where decentralized blockchain DNS (domain name system) services could make a
big difference. Likewise, in the IP market, blockchain technology could be employed
to register the chain of invention for patents, and revolutionize IP litigation in the
areas of asset custody, access, and attribution.
Bitcoin Culture: Bitfilm Festival
One measure of any new technology’s crossover into mainstream adoption is how it
is taken up in popular culture. An early indication that the cryptocurrency industry
may be starting to arrive in the global social psyche is the Bitfilm Festival, which fea‐
tures films with Bitcoin-related content. Films are selected that demonstrate the uni‐
versal yet culturally distinct interpretations and impact of Bitcoin. The festival began
in 2013 and has late 2014/early 2015 dates in Berlin (where Bitfilm is based), Seoul,
Buenos Aires, Amsterdam, Rio, and Cape Town. Congruently, Bitfilm allows viewers
to vote for their favorite films with Bitcoin. Bitfilm produces the film festival and, in
another business line, makes promotional videos for the blockchain industry
(Figure P-2).
Figure P-2. Bitfilm promotional videos
Intention, Methodology, and Structure of this Book
The blockchain industry is nascent and currently (late 2014) in a phase of tremen‐
dous dynamism and innovation. Concepts, terminology, standards, key players,
norms, and industry attitudes toward certain projects are changing rapidly. It could
be that even a year from now, we look back and see that Bitcoin and blockchain tech‐
nology in its current instantiation has become defunct, superseded, or otherwise ren‐
dered an artifact of the past. As an example, one area with significant evolving change
is the notion of the appropriate security for consumer ewallets—not an insubstantial
xiv 
| 
Preface

concern given the hacking raids that can plague the cryptocurrency industry. The
current ewallet security standard is now widely thought to be multisig (using multiple
key signatures to approve a transaction), but most users (still early adopters, not
mainstream) have not yet upgraded to this level of security.
This book is intended as an exploration of the broader concepts, features, and func‐
tionality of Bitcoin and blockchain technology, and their future possibilities and
implications; it does not support, advocate, or offer any advice or prediction as to the
industry’s viability. Further, this text is intended as a presentation and discussion of
advanced concepts, because there are many other “Blockchain 101” resources avail‐
able. The blockchain industry is in an emergent and immature phase and very much
still in development with many risks. Given this dynamism, despite our best efforts,
there may be errors in the specific details of this text whereas even a few days from
now information might be outdated; the intent here is to portray the general scope
and status of the blockchain industry and its possibilities. Right now is the time to
learn about the underlying technologies; their potential uses, dangers, and risks; and
perhaps more importantly, the concepts and their extensibility. The objective here is
to provide a comprehensive overview of the nature, scope, and type of activity that is
occurring in the cryptocurrency industry and envision its wide-ranging potential
application. The account is necessarily incomplete, prone to technical errors (though
it has been reviewed for technical accuracy by experts), and, again, could likely soon
be out-of-date as different projects described here fail or succeed. Or, the entire
Bitcoin and blockchain technology industry as currently conceived could become
outmoded or superseded by other models.
The underlying sources of this work are a variety of information resources related to
Bitcoin and its development. The principal sources are developer forums, Reddit sub‐
groups, GitHub white papers, podcasts, news media, YouTube, blogs, and Twitter.
Specific online resources include Bitcoin industry conference proceedings on You‐
Tube and Slideshare, podcasts (Let’s Talk Bitcoin, Consider This!, Epicenter Bitcoin),
EtherCasts (Ethereum), Bitcoin-related news outlets (CoinDesk, Bitcoin Magazine,
Cryptocoins News, Coin Telegraph), and forums (Bitcoin StackExchange, Quora).
Other sources were email exchanges and conversations with practitioners in the
industry as well as my experiences attending conferences, Bitcoin workshops, Satoshi
Square trading sessions, and developer meetups.
This work is structured to discuss three different tiers in the way that the conceptuali‐
zation of Bitcoin and blockchain technology is starting to gel: Blockchain 1.0, 2.0, and
3.0. First, I cover the basic definitions and concepts of Bitcoin and blockchain tech‐
nology, and currency and payments as the core Blockchain 1.0 applications. Second, I
describe Blockchain 2.0—market and financial applications beyond currency, such as
contracts. I then envision Blockchain 3.0, meaning blockchain applications beyond
currency, finance, and markets. Within this broad category are justice applications
such as blockchain governance, uplifting organizations (like WikiLeaks, ICANN, and
Preface 
| 
xv

DNS services) away from repressive jurisdictional regimes to the decentralized cloud,
protection of IP, and digital identity verification and authentication. Fourth, I
consider another class of Blockchain 3.0 applications beyond currency, finance, and
markets, for which the blockchain model offers scale, efficiency, organization, and
coordination benefits in the areas of science, genomics, health, learning, academic
publishing, development, aid, and culture. Finally, I present advanced concepts like
demurrage (incitory) currency, and consider them in the greater context of the wide-
scale deployment of blockchain technology.
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that deliv‐
ers expert content in both book and video form from the
world’s leading authors in technology and business.
Technology professionals, software developers, web designers,
and business and creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their primary
resource for research, problem solving, learning, and certification training.
Safari Books Online offers a range of plans and pricing for enterprise, government,
education, and individuals.
Members have access to thousands of books, training videos, and prepublication
manuscripts in one fully searchable database from publishers like O’Reilly Media,
Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-Wesley Professional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que,
Peachpit Press, Focal Press, Cisco Press, John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan Kauf‐
mann, IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe Press, FT Press, Apress, Manning, New Riders,
McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, Course Technology, and hundreds more. For more
information about Safari Books Online, please visit us online.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at http://bit.ly/blockchain_1e.
xvi 
| 
Preface

To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to bookques‐
tions@oreilly.com.
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our web‐
site at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia
Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge Andreas M. Antonopoulos, Trent McConaghy, Steve
Omohundro, Piotr Piasecki, Justin Sher, Chris Tse, and Stephan Tual.
Preface 
| 
xvii


CHAPTER 1
Blockchain 1.0: Currency
Technology Stack: Blockchain, Protocol, Currency
Bitcoin terminology can be confusing because the word Bitcoin is used to simultane‐
ously denote three different things. First, Bitcoin refers to the underlying blockchain
technology platform. Second, Bitcoin is used to mean the protocol that runs over the
underlying blockchain technology to describe how assets are transferred on the
blockchain. Third, Bitcoin denotes a digital currency, Bitcoin, the first and largest of
the cryptocurrencies.
Table 1-1 demonstrates a helpful way to distinguish the different uses. The first layer
is the underlying technology, the blockchain. The blockchain is the decentralized
transparent ledger with the transaction records—the database that is shared by all
network nodes, updated by miners, monitored by everyone, and owned and con‐
trolled by no one. It is like a giant interactive spreadsheet that everyone has access to
and updates and confirms that the digital transactions transferring funds are unique.
The middle tier of the stack is the protocol—the software system that transfers the
money over the blockchain ledger. Then, the top layer is the currency itself, Bitcoin,
which is denoted as BTC or Btc when traded in transactions or exchanges. There are
hundreds of cryptocurrencies, of which Bitcoin is the first and largest. Others include
Litecoin, Dogecoin, Ripple, NXT, and Peercoin; the major alt-currencies can be
tracked at http://coinmarketcap.com/. 
Table 1-1. Layers in the technology stack of the Bitcoin blockchain
Cryptocurrency: Bitcoin (BTC), Litecoin, Dogecoin
Bitcoin protocol and client: Software programs that conduct transactions
Bitcoin blockchain: Underlying decentralized ledger
1

The key point is that these three layers are the general structure of any modern cryp‐
tocurrency: blockchain, protocol, and currency. Each coin is typically both a currency
and a protocol, and it may have its own blockchain or may run on the Bitcoin block‐
chain. For example, the Litecoin currency runs on the Litecoin protocol, which runs
on the Litecoin blockchain. (Litecoin is very slightly adapted from Bitcoin to improve
on a few features.) A separate blockchain means that the coin has its own decentral‐
ized ledger (in the same structure and format as the Bitcoin blockchain ledger). Other
protocols, such as Counterparty, have their own currency (XCP) and run on the Bit‐
coin blockchain (i.e., their transactions are registered in the Bitcoin blockchain
ledger). A spreadsheet delineating some of the kinds of differences between Crypto
2.0 projects is maintained here: http://bit.ly/crypto_2_0_comp.
The Double-Spend and Byzantine Generals’ Computing
Problems
Even without considering the many possible uses of Bitcoin and blockchain technol‐
ogy, Bitcoin, at its most fundamental level, is a core breakthrough in computer sci‐
ence, one that builds on 20 years of research into cryptographic currency, and 40
years of research in cryptography, by thousands of researchers around the world.13
Bitcoin is a solution to a long-standing issue with digital cash: the double-spend prob‐
lem. Until blockchain cryptography, digital cash was, like any other digital asset,
infinitely copiable (like our ability to save an email attachment any number of times),
and there was no way to confirm that a certain batch of digital cash had not already
been spent without a central intermediary. There had to be a trusted third party
(whether a bank or a quasibank like PayPal) in transactions, which kept a ledger con‐
firming that each portion of digital cash was spent only once; this is the double-spend
problem. A related computing challenge is the Byzantine Generals’ Problem, connot‐
ing the difficulty of multiple parties (generals) on the battlefield not trusting each
other but needing to have some sort of coordinated communication mechanism.14
The blockchain solves the double-spend problem by combining BitTorrent peer-to-
peer file-sharing technology with public-key cryptography to make a new form of
digital money. Coin ownership is recorded in the public ledger and confirmed by
cryptographic protocols and the mining community. The blockchain is trustless in
the sense that a user does not need to trust the other party in the transaction, or a
central intermediary, but does need to trust the system: the blockchain protocol soft‐
ware system. The “blocks” in the chain are groups of transactions posted sequentially
to the ledger—that is, added to the “chain.” Blockchain ledgers can be inspected pub‐
licly with block explorers, Internet sites (e.g., www.Blockchain.info for the Bitcoin
blockchain) where you can see a transaction stream by entering a blockchain address
(a user’s public-key address, like 1DpZHXi5bEjNn6SriUKjh6wE4HwPFBPvfx).
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Blockchain 1.0: Currency

How a Cryptocurrency Works
Bitcoin is money, digital cash, a way of buying and selling things over the Internet.
The Bitcoin value chain is composed of several different constituencies: software
developers, miners, exchanges, merchant processing services, web wallet companies,
and users/consumers. From an individual user’s perspective, the important elements
in transacting coin (I’ll use “coin” in the generic sense here) are an address, a private
key, and wallet software. The address is where others can send Bitcoin to you, and the
private key is the cryptographic secret by which you can send Bitcoin to others. Wal‐
let software is the software you run on your own computer to manage your Bitcoin
(see Figure 1-1). There is no centralized “account” you need to register with another
company; if you have the private key to an address, you can use that private key to
access the coin associated with that address from any Internet-connected computer
(including, of course, smartphones). Wallet software can also keep a copy of the
blockchain—the record of all the transactions that have occurred in that currency—as
part of the decentralized scheme by which coin transactions are verified. Appendix A
covers the practicalities of maintaining an altcoin wallet in more detail.
Figure 1-1. Bitcoin ewallet app and transferring Bitcoin (image credits: Bitcoin ewallet
developers and InterAksyon)
eWallet Services and Personal Cryptosecurity
As responsible consumers, we are not used to many of the new aspects of blockchain
technology and personal cryptosecurity; for example, having to back up our money.
Decentralized autonomy in the form of private keys stored securely in your ewallet
means that there is no customer service number to call for password recovery or pri‐
vate key backup. If your private key is gone, your Bitcoin is gone. This could be an
indication that blockchain technology is not yet mature enough for mainstream
adoption; it’s the kind of problem that consumer-facing Bitcoin startups such as Cir‐
cle Internet Financial and Xapo are trying to solve. There is opportunity for some
sort of standardized app or service for ewallet backup (for example, for lost, stolen,
How a Cryptocurrency Works 
| 
3

bricked, or upgraded smartphones or laptop/tablet-based wallets), with which users
can confirm exactly what is happening with their private keys in the backup service,
whether they self-administer it or rely on external vendors. Personal cryptosecurity is
a significant new area for consumer literacy, because the stakes are quite high to
ensure that personal financial assets and transactions are protected in this new online
venue of digital cash. Another element of personal cryptosecurity that many experts
recommend is coin mixing, pooling your coins with other transactions so that they
are more anonymous, using services like Dark Coin, Dark Wallet, and BitMixer.15 As
the marketplace of alternative currencies grows, demand for a unified ewallet will
likely rise, because installing a new and separate wallet is required for most
blockchain-related services, and it is easy to have 20 different ewallets crowding your
smartphone.
Despite their current clunkiness in implementation, cryptocurrencies offer many
great benefits in personal cryptosecurity. One of the great advantages is that block‐
chain is a push technology (the user initiates and pushes relevant information to the
network for this transaction only), not a pull technology (like a credit card or bank for
which the user’s personal information is on file to be pulled any time it is authorized).
Credit card technology was not developed to be secure on the Internet the way that
blockchain models are developing now. Pull technology requires having datastores of 
customer personal information that are essentially centralized honey pots, increas‐
ingly vulnerable to hacker identity theft attacks (Target, Chase, and Dairy Queen are
just a few recent examples of large-scale identity-theft vendor database raids). Paying
with Bitcoin at any of the 30,000 vendors that accept it as of October 2014 (e.g., Over‐
stock, New Egg, and Dell Computer; see https://bitpay.com/directory#/) means not
having to entrust your personal financial information to centralized vendor databa‐
ses. It might also possibly entail a lower transaction fee (Bitcoin transaction fees are
much lower than merchant credit card processing fees).
Merchant Acceptance of Bitcoin
At the time of writing, the main Bitcoin merchant processing solutions for vendors to
accept Bitcoin are BitPay and Coinbase in the United States, and Coinify in Europe.16
However, it is difficult for vendors, like the local café, to run two separate payment
systems (traditional and Bitcoin), so a more expedient future solution would involve
integrating Bitcoin payment into existing vendor payment networks. Mobile payment
functionality is also needed for quick point-of-sale Bitcoin purchases (for example, a
cup of coffee) via mobile phone. CoinBeyond and other companies focus on mobile
Bitcoin payments specifically, and BitPay and CoinBase have solutions for mobile
checkout. In one notable step forward, Intuit’s QuickBooks accounting software for
small businesses makes it possible for vendors to accept incoming Bitcoin payments
from CoinBase and BitPay with its PayByCoin module.17
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Blockchain 1.0: Currency

Summary: Blockchain 1.0 in Practical Use
Blockchain is already cash for the Internet, a digital payment system, and it may
become the “Internet of Money,” connecting finances in the way that the Internet of
Things (IoT) connects machines. Currency and payments make up the first and most
obvious application. Alternative currencies make sense based on an economic argu‐
ment alone: reducing worldwide credit card merchant payment fees from as much as
3 percent to below 1 percent has obvious benefits for the economy, especially in the
$514 billion international remittances market, where transaction fees can run from 7
to 30 percent.18 Furthermore, users can receive funds immediately in digital wallets
instead of waiting days for transfers. Bitcoin and its imitators could pave the way for
currency, trade, and commerce as we know it to be completely redefined. More
broadly, Bitcoin is not just a better version of Visa—it could also allow us to do things
we have not even thought of yet. Currency and payments is just the first application.19
The core functionality of blockchain currencies is that any transaction can be sourced
and completed directly between two individuals over the Internet. With altcoins, you
can allocate and trade resources between individuals in a completely decentralized,
distributed, and global way. With that ability, a cryptocurrency can be a programma‐
ble open network for the decentralized trading of all resources, well beyond currency
and payments. Thus, Blockchain 1.0 for currency and payments is already being
extended into Blockchain 2.0 to take advantage of the more robust functionality of
Bitcoin as programmable money.
Relation to Fiat Currency
Considering Bitcoin as the paradigm and most widely adopted case, the price of Bit‐
coin is $399.40 as of November 12, 2014. The price has ranged considerably (as you
can see in Figure 1-2), from $12 at the beginning of 2013 to a high of $1,242 per coin
on November 29, 2013 (trading higher than gold—$1,240 per ounce—that day).20
That peak was the culmination of a few factors: the Cyprus banking crisis (March
2013) drove a great deal of demand, for example. The price was also driven up by
heavy trading in China until December 5, 2013, when the Chinese government ban‐
ned institutions (but not individuals) from handling Bitcoin, after which the price
fell.21 In 2014, the price has declined gradually from $800 to its present value of
approximately $350 in December 2014. An oft-reported though disputed metric is
that 70 percent of Bitcoin trades are made up of Chinese Yuan.22 It is difficult to eval‐
uate how much of that figure indicates meaningful economic activity because the
Chinese exchanges do not charge trade fees, and therefore people can trade any
amount of currency back and forth for free, creating fake volume. Further, much of
the Yuan-denominated trade must be speculation (as is true for overall Bitcoin trade),
as there are few physical-world vendors accepting Bitcoin and few consumers using
the currency for the widespread consumption of goods and services.
Summary: Blockchain 1.0 in Practical Use 
| 
5

Figure 1-2. Bitcoin price 2009 through November 2014 (source: http://coinmarket
cap.com/currencies/bitcoin/#charts)
Some argue that volatility and price shifts are a barrier to the widespread adoption of
cryptocurrency, and some volatility-smoothing businesses have launched to address
this: Bitreserve, which locks Bitcoin deposits at fixed exchange rates;23 Realcoin’s
cryptocurrency, which is pegged to the US dollar (USD);24 and Coinapult’s LOCKS,
which allow purchasers to peg Bitcoin to the price of gold, silver, the US dollar, the
British pound, or the Euro.25 One of the first USD-pegged Bitcoin cryptocurrencies
was Ripple’s XRP/USD BitStamp, and there is also BitShares’ BitUSD. Others point
out that Bitcoin volatility is less than some fiat currency’s volatility and inflation
(making Bitcoin a better relative value choice), and that many operations of Bitcoin
are immediate transfers in and out of other currencies for which the volatility does
not matter as much in these spot rate (i.e., immediate) transactions.
Bitcoin’s market capitalization as of November 2014 is $5.3 billion (see http://coinmar
ketcap.com/), calculated as the current price ($399.40) multiplied by the available sup‐
ply (13,492,000 Bitcoin). This is already on the order of a small country’s GDP
(Bitcoin would rank as the 150th largest world economy on a list of 200). Unlike fiat
currencies for which governments can print more money, the money supply of Bit‐
coin grows at a predetermined (and capped) rate. New currency (in blocks) is being
issued at a regular and known pace, with about 13.5 million units currently outstand‐
ing, growing to a capped amount of 21 million units in 2040. At a price of roughly
$400 Bitcoin per dollar, Bitcoin is infeasible to use directly for daily purchases, and
prices and exchanges for practical use are typically denominated in subunits of milli‐
bitcoins (a thousandth of a Bitcoin; 1 mBTC = ~$0.40) and Satoshis (a millionth of a
Bitcoin; 1 Satoshi = ~$0.000004).
Regulatory Status
Government regulation is possibly one of the most significant factors as to whether
the blockchain industry will develop into a full-fledged financial-services industry. As
of October 2013, a handful of countries have completely banned Bitcoin: Bangladesh,
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Blockchain 1.0: Currency

Bolivia, Ecuador, Iceland (possibly related to using Auroracoin, instead), Kyrgyzstan,
and Vietnam. China, as mentioned, banned financial institutions from dealing in the
virtual currency as of December 2013, although trading volume in Chinese Yuan per‐
sists.26 Germany, France, Korea, and Thailand have all looked unfavorably on Bitcoin.
27 The European Banking Authority, Switzerland, Poland, Canada, and the United
States continue to deliberate about different Bitcoin-related issues.28 Countries try to
match up Bitcoin (and the concept of digital currencies) to their existing regulatory
structures, often finding that cryptocurrencies do not quite fit and ultimately con‐
cluding that cryptocurrencies are sufficiently different that new legislation might be
required. At present, some countries, like the UK, have classified Bitcoin as a cur‐
rency (and therefore not subject to VAT), whereas other countries, like Australia,
were not able to classify Bitcoin as a currency due to laws about nationalized issuance
(and Bitcoin therefore is subject to VAT or GST—the goods and services tax).29
In the United States, the Internal Revenue Service treats Bitcoin as property (like
stock) and not as money, meaning that users of Bitcoin are liable for capital gains
taxes on transactions.30 For taxation, virtual currencies are property, not currency.
However, nearly every other US government agency—including FinCEN (financial
crimes enforcement network), banking regulators, and the CFPB, SEC, CFTC, and
DOJ—regulate Bitcoin as a currency.31
Summary: Blockchain 1.0 in Practical Use 
| 
7


CHAPTER 2
Blockchain 2.0: Contracts
From its very beginning, complexity beyond currency and payments was envisioned
for Bitcoin; the possibilities for programmable money and contracts were baked into
the protocol at its invention. A 2010 communication from Satoshi Nakamoto indi‐
cates that “the design supports a tremendous variety of possible transaction types that
I designed years ago. Escrow transactions, bonded contracts, third-party arbitration,
multiparty signature, etc. If Bitcoin catches on in a big way, these are things we’ll want
to explore in the future, but they all had to be designed at the beginning to make sure
they would be possible later.”32 As we’ll see in Chapter 3, these structures could be
applied beyond financial transactions, to any kind of transaction—even “figurative”
ones. This is because the concepts and structure developed for Bitcoin are extremely
portable and extensible.
Blockchain 2.0 is the next big tier in the development of the blockchain industry, an
area of prodigious activity as of the fall of 2014.33 Because the Blockchain 2.0 space is
in development, there are many different categories, distinctions, and understandings
of it, and standard classifications and definitions are still emerging. Some of the ter‐
minology that broadly refers to the Blockchain 2.0 space can include Bitcoin 2.0, Bit‐
coin 2.0 protocols, smart contracts, smart property, Dapps (decentralized
applications), DAOs (decentralized autonomous organizations), and DACs (decen‐
tralized autonomous corporations).
Whereas Blockchain 1.0 is for the decentralization of money and payments, Block‐
chain 2.0 is for the decentralization of markets more generally, and contemplates the
transfer of many other kinds of assets beyond currency using the blockchain, from
the creation of a unit of value through every time it is transferred or divided.
An approximate technological metaphor for Bitcoin is that it is analogous to the pro‐
tocol stack of the Web. After the underlying Internet technology and infrastructure
was in place, services could be built to run on top of it—Amazon, Netflix, and
9

Airbnb—becoming increasingly sophisticated over time and always adding new ways
to take advantage of the underlying technology. Blockchain 1.0 has been likened to
the underlying TCP/IP transport layer of the Web, with the opportunity now avail‐
able to build 2.0 protocols on top of it (as HTTP, SMTP, and FTP were in the Internet
model). Blockchain 2.0 protocols either literally use the Bitcoin blockchain or create
their own separate blockchains, but are in the same cryptocurrency decentralized
technical architecture model of the three-layer stack: blockchain, protocol, and cur‐
rency. However, it is important to note that these “new Internet plumbing layers” are
very much still in development and any metaphor might become quickly outdated.
These analogies might be like calling Chrome a “Napster 2.0,” or Facebook or
AdBlock a “Web Browser 3.0.”
The key idea is that the decentralized transaction ledger functionality of the block‐
chain could be used to register, confirm, and transfer all manner of contracts and
property. Table 2-1 lists some of the different classes and examples of property and
contracts that might be transferred with the blockchain. Satoshi Nakamoto started by
specifying escrow transactions, bonded contracts, third-party arbitration, and multi‐
party signature transactions. All financial transactions could be reinvented on the
blockchain, including stock, private equity, crowdfunding instruments, bonds,
mutual funds, annuities, pensions, and all manner of derivatives (futures, options,
swaps, and other derivatives).
Table 2-1. Blockchain applications beyond currency (adapted from the Ledra Capital Mega
Master Blockchain List; see Appendix B)34
Class
Examples
General
Escrow transactions, bonded contracts, third-party arbitration, multiparty signature transactions
Financial transactions
Stock, private equity, crowdfunding, bonds, mutual funds, derivatives, annuities, pensions
Public records
Land and property titles, vehicle registrations, business licenses, marriage certificates, death
certificates
Identification
Driver’s licenses, identity cards, passports, voter registrations
Private records
IOUs, loans, contracts, bets, signatures, wills, trusts, escrows
Attestation
Proof of insurance, proof of ownership, notarized documents
Physical asset keys
Home, hotel rooms, rental cars, automobile access
Intangible assets
Patents, trademarks, copyrights, reservations, domain names
Public records, too, can be migrated to the blockchain: land and property titles, vehi‐
cle registrations, business licenses, marriage certificates, and death certificates. Digital
identity can be confirmed with the blockchain through securely encoded driver’s
licenses, identity cards, passports, and voter registrations. Private records such as
IOUs, loans, contracts, bets, signatures, wills, trusts, and escrows can be stored. Attes‐
tation can be executed via the blockchain for proof of insurance, proof of ownership,
10 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

and notarized documents. Physical asset keys (which is explored further in Chap‐
ter 3) can be encoded as digital assets on the blockchain for controlled access to
homes, hotel rooms, rental cars, and privately owned or shared-access automobiles
(e.g., Getaround). Intangible assets (e.g., patents, trademarks, copyrights, reserva‐
tions, and domain names) can also be protected and transferred via the blockchain.
For example, to protect an idea, instead of trademarking it or patenting it, you could
encode it to the blockchain and you would have proof of a specific cargo being regis‐
tered with a specific datetime stamp for future proof (as is discussed in “Digital Art:
Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary, Intellectual Property Protection)” on page
37).
Financial Services
A prime area for blockchain businesses is interfacing cryptocurrencies with tradi‐
tional banking and financial markets. Venture capital–backed Ripple Labs is using
blockchain technology to reinvent the banking ecosystem and allow traditional finan‐
cial institutions to conduct their own business more efficiently. Ripple’s payment net‐
work lets banks transfer funds and foreign exchange transactions directly between
themselves without a third-party intermediary, as is now required: “Regional banks
can now move money bilaterally to other regional banks without having to relay
those funds through an intermediary.”35 Ripple is also developing a smart contracts
platform and language, Codius. Another potential symbiosis between the traditional
banking industry and Bitcoin is exemplified by Spanish bank Bankinter’s Innovation
Foundation investment in Coinffeine, a Bitcoin technology startup that aims to make
it possible for end users to buy and sell Bitcoin directly without an exchange.36
Other businesses are also connecting Bitcoin to traditional financial and payments
market solutions. PayPal is an instructive example because its development as a plat‐
form has parallels with Bitcoin, and it is on the Bitcoin adoption curve itself. PayPal
was initially an innovative payments market solution outside of the traditional
financial-services market, like Bitcoin, but has since become a more formal business
within the regulated industry, collecting and validating detailed personal information
about its customers. PayPal had been known for being on the edge of financial inno‐
vation, but it then became more corporate focused and lost the possibility of provid‐
ing early market leadership with regard to Bitcoin. Now, PayPal has been
incorporating Bitcoin slowly, as of September 2014 announcing partnerships with
three major Bitcoin payment processors: BitPay, Coinbase, and GoCoin.37 Also in
September 2014, Paypal’s Braintree unit (acquired in 2013), a mobile payments pro‐
vider, is apparently working on a feature with which customers can pay for Airbnb
rentals and Uber car rides with Bitcoin.38
In the same area of regulation-compliant Bitcoin complements to traditional financial
services is the notion of a “Bitbank.” Bitcoin exchange Kraken has partnered with a
Financial Services 
| 
11

bank to provide regulated financial services involving Bitcoin.39 There is a clear need
for an analog to and innovation around traditional financial products and services for
Bitcoin—for example, Bitcoin savings accounts and lending (perhaps through user-
selected rules regarding fractional reserve levels). BTCjam is an example of such
decentralized blockchain-based peer-to-peer lending. Tera Exchange launched the
first US-regulated Bitcoin swaps exchange, which could make it possible for institu‐
tional and individual investors to buy Bitcoin contracts directly through its online
trading platforms. Part of the offering includes an institutional Bitcoin price index,
the Tera Bitcoin Price Index, to be used as the benchmark for trading USD/XBT con‐
tracts.40 In the same space, startup Vaurum is building an API for financial institu‐
tions to offer traditional brokerage investors and bank customers access to Bitcoin.
Another project is startup Buttercoin, a Bitcoin trading platform and exchange for
high-volume transactions (200,000–500,000 Bitcoin, or $70–$175 million), targeted
at a business clientele who has a need to complete large-scale Bitcoin transactions.41
Buttercoin is partnered with capital markets firm Wedbush Securities, itself one of the
first security analysts to cover Bitcoin and accept Bitcoin payments for its research.
Other ventures are more radically positioned against artificial unregulated monopo‐
lies in the current stock trading market infrastructure, like the Depository Trust
Company and the National Securities Clearing Corporation, or DTCC, which is
involved in the clearing and settlement of securities. Overstock CEO Patrick Byrne
and Counterparty created a new venture, Medici, announced in October 2014, to pro‐
vide a decentralized stock market for equity securities in the blockchain model.42
Crowdfunding
Another prime example of how financial services are being reinvented with
blockchain-based decentralized models is crowdfunding. The idea is that peer-to-
peer fundraising models such as Kickstarter can supplant the need for traditional
venture capital funding for startups. Where previously a centralized service like
Kickstarter or Indiegogo was needed to enable a crowdfunding campaign, crowd‐
funding platforms powered by blockchain technology remove the need for an inter‐
mediary third party. Blockchain-based crowdfunding platforms make it possible for
startups to raise funds by creating their own digital currencies and selling “crypto‐
graphic shares” to early backers. Investors in a crowdfunding campaign receive
tokens that represent shares of the startup they support.43
Some of the leading cryptocurrency crowdfunding platforms include Swarm, an
incubator of digital currency–focused startups that raised $1 million in its own
crowdfunding, completed in July 2014.44 Holding the company’s own cryptocurrency,
Swarmcoin, gives investors rights to the dividends from the startups in the incuba‐
tor’s portfolio.45 Swarm has five projects comprising its first class of funded applica‐
tions: Manna, a developer of smart personal drone networks; Coinspace, an operator
12 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

of a decentralized cryptocurrency workplace; Swarmops, a decentralized organiza‐
tional management software platform; Judobaby, a decentralized gaming platform;
and DDP, a decentralized dance-party entertainment concept.46 Another crowdfund‐
ing platform is Koinify, whose one project so far is the Gems decentralized social net‐
work. Koinify is linked with the Melotic wallet/asset exchange platform to curate a
decentralized application marketplace.47 Ironically, or perhaps as a sign of the symbi‐
otic times, Koinify raised $1 million in traditional venture capital finance to start its
crowdfunding platform.48 Another project is Lighthouse, which aims to enable its
users to run crowdfunding or assurance contracts directly from within a Bitcoin wal‐
let. In Japan, a Bitcoin crowdfunding site, bitFlyer, has launched as part of the general
crowdfunding site fundFlyer.49
Crowdfunding is a high-profile topic at Bitcoin industry conferences, and experts
argue over its legality. Opponents complain that there is currently no legal way to do
crowdfunding whereby one actually owns shares in the underlying organization, and
there may be different ways in which crowdfunding violates securities laws. The
workaround offered by crowdfunding platforms like Swarm and Koinify, as well as
one-off crowdfundings like Ethereum is to sell nonshare items, such as early access to
software. However, this is somewhat disingenuous because in many cases the market‐
ing still looks a lot like selling shares. The result is that there can be de facto investors
in cryptocurrency projects who are not getting much more than early access to open
source software. A better way to crowdfund cryptocurrency projects in a decentral‐
ized yet legal way, with more effective checks and balances, is needed.
Bitcoin Prediction Markets
One example of new tech with old tech is Bitcoin prediction markets like Predictious
and Fairlay.50 Bitcoin prediction markets offer a betting venue for the usual real-
world outcomes as prediction markets always have, such as elections, political legisla‐
tion, sports matches, and technology product releases, and also serve as a good
source of information about the developing blockchain industry. Bitcoin prediction
markets are one way to see what insiders think about Bitcoin’s future price directions,
the success of different altcoin and protocol 2.0 projects, and industry issues more
generally (e.g., technical development issues with Bitcoin, such as when there will be
a hard fork—significant change—of the code, and the level of difficulty of the mining
algorithm).
Smart Property
The blockchain can be used for any form of asset registry, inventory, and exchange,
including every area of finance, economics, and money; hard assets (physical prop‐
erty); and intangible assets (votes, ideas, reputation, intention, health data, and infor‐
mation). Using blockchain technology this way opens up multiple classes of
Bitcoin Prediction Markets 
| 
13

application functionality across all segments of businesses involved in money, mar‐
kets, and financial transactions. Blockchain-encoded property becomes smart prop‐
erty that is transactable via smart contracts.
The general concept of smart property is the notion of transacting all property in
blockchain-based models. Property could be physical-world hard assets like a home,
car, bicycle, or computer, or intangible assets such as stock shares, reservations, or
copyrights (e.g., books, music, illustrations, and digital fine art). An example of using
the blockchain to control and transfer limited-run artworks is Swancoin, where 121
physical-world artworks, crafted on 30 × 30 cm varnished plywood, are available for
purchase and transfer via the Bitcoin blockchain (see Figure 2-1).51 Any asset can be
registered in the blockchain, and thus its ownership can be controlled by whoever has
the private key. The owner can then sell the asset by transferring the private key to
another party. Smart property, then, is property whose ownership is controlled via the
blockchain, using contracts subject to existing law. For example, a pre-established
smart contract could automatically transfer the ownership of a vehicle title from the
financing company to the individual owner when all the loan payments have been
made (as automatically confirmed by other blockchain-based smart contracts). Simi‐
larly, mortgage interest rates could reset automatically per another blockchain-based
smart contract checking a prespecified and contract-encoded website or data element
for obtaining the interest rate on certain future days.
Figure 2-1. Swancoin: limited-circulation digital asset artwork (image credit: http://swan
coin.tumblr.com/)
The key idea of smart property is controlling ownership and access to an asset by
having it registered as a digital asset on the blockchain and having access to the pri‐
vate key. In some cases, physical-world hard assets could quite literally be controlled
with the blockchain. Smartphones could unlock upon reaffirming a user’s digital
identity encoded   in the blockchain. The doors of physical property such as vehicles
and homes could be “smartmatter”-enabled through embedded technology (e.g., soft‐
ware code, sensors, QR codes, NFC tags, iBeacons, WiFi access, etc.) so that access
could be controlled in real time as users seeking entry present their own hardware or
14 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

software token to match that of the asset. Absent preconfigured access tokens, when
the user submits a real-time access request, the blockchain smart contract could send
an acknowledgment or token access mechanism to the physical asset or user ewallet,
such as a one-use QR code to open a rental car or hotel room. Blockchain technology
offers the ability to reinvent identity authentication and secure access in ways that are
much more granular, flexible, and oriented to real-time demand than are currently
possible, elegantly integrating physical-world hardware technologies with digital
Internet-based software technologies.52
Smart property transacted with blockchains is a completely new kind of concept. We
are not used to having cryptographically defined property rights that are self-
enforced by code. The code is self-enforced by the technical infrastructure in the
sense that it is bound to operate based on the underlying code and cannot deviate. A
property transfer specified in the code cannot but occur as encoded. Blockchain-
based smart property thus contemplates the possibility of widespread decentralized
trustless asset management systems as well as cryptographically activated assets.
There could be widespread implications for the entire field of property law—or great
simplifications in that property ownership can be recorded on the property itself:
Trustless lending
The trustless networks feature of blockchain technology is a key enabler in the con‐
text of smart property and smart contracts. Making property smart allows it to be
traded with much less trust. This reduces fraud and mediation fees, but more impor‐
tantly affords a much greater amount of trade to take place that otherwise would
never have happened, because parties do not need to know and trust each other. For
example, it makes it possible for strangers to lend you money over the Internet, tak‐
ing your smart property as collateral, which should make lending more competitive
and thus credit cheaper.53 Further, there is the possibility that smart contracts exe‐
cuted in trustless networks could result in much less disputation. Contract disputes
in the United States (44%) and United Kingdom (57%) account for the largest type of
litigation, and might be avoided with more precision at the time of setting forth
agreements, and with automated enforcement mechanisms.54 Related to this, as cryp‐
tocurrency visionary and smart contracts legal theorist Nick Szabo points out, is the
general problem of poor (i.e., irrational) human decision making, which might be
improved with automated mechanisms like smart contracts.
Colored coins
One of the first implementations of smart property on the blockchain is colored
coins. Certain Bitcoins are “colored” or “tagged” as corresponding to a particular
asset or issuer via the transaction memo field in a Bitcoin transaction. The idea is
similar to giving someone a dollar bill with an IOU for another property asset (e.g., a
car) written on it. Thus, certain Bitcoins encode some other asset that can be securely
transacted with the blockchain. This model still requires some trust—in this case,
that the asset called out in the memo field will be deployed as agreed. Consequently,
colored coins are intended for use within a certain community, serving as loyalty
Smart Property 
| 
15

points or tokens to denote a range of physical and digital goods and services. The
basic idea is that colored coins are Bitcoins marked with certain properties to reflect
certain digital or physical assets so that more complex transactions can be carried out
with the blockchain. The transactions could be asset exchange, and also the conduct
of various activities within communities, such as voting, tipping, and commenting in
forums.55
Smart Contracts
A general sense of blockchain-based smart contracts emerges from the smart prop‐
erty discussion. In the blockchain context, contracts or smart contracts mean block‐
chain transactions that go beyond simple buy/sell currency transactions, and may
have more extensive instructions embedded into them. In a more formal definition, a
contract is a method of using Bitcoin to form agreements with people via the block‐
chain. A contract in the traditional sense is an agreement between two or more par‐
ties to do or not do something in exchange for something else. Each party must trust
the other party to fulfill its side of the obligation. Smart contracts feature the same
kind of agreement to act or not act, but they remove the need for one type of trust
between parties. This is because a smart contract is both defined by the code and exe‐
cuted (or enforced) by the code, automatically without discretion. In fact, three ele‐
ments of smart contracts that make them distinct are autonomy, self-sufficiency, and
decentralization. Autonomy means that after it is launched and running, a contract
and its initiating agent need not be in further contact. Second, smart contracts might
be self-sufficient in their ability to marshal resources—that is, raising funds by provid‐
ing services or issuing equity, and spending them on needed resources, such as pro‐
cessing power or storage. Third, smart contracts are decentralized in that they do not
subsist on a single centralized server; they are distributed and self-executing across
network nodes.56
The classic example used to demonstrate smart contracts in the form of code execut‐
ing automatically is a vending machine. Unlike a person, a vending machine behaves
algorithmically; the same instruction set will be followed every time in every case.
When you deposit money and make a selection, the item is released. There is no pos‐
sibility of the machine not feeling like complying with the contract today, or only par‐
tially complying (as long as it is not broken). A smart contract similarly cannot help
but execute the prespecified code. As Lessig reminds us, “code is law” in the sense
that the code will execute no matter what. This could be good or bad depending on
the situation; either way, it is a new kind of situation in society that will require a
heavy accommodation period if blockchain-based smart contracts are to become
widespread.
There are many considerations raised by smart contracts and systems of cryptograph‐
ically activated assets with regard to whether we need a new body of law and regula‐
tion that distinguishes between technically binding code contracts and our more
16 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

flexible legally binding human contracts.57 Contract compliance or breach is at the
discretion of human agents in a way that it is not with blockchain-based or any kind
of code-based contracts. Further, smart contracts impact not just contract law, but
more broadly the notion of the social contract within society. We need to determine
and define what kinds of social contracts we would like with “code law,” automatically
and potentially unstoppably executing code. Because it could be nearly impossible to
enforce smart contracts with law as currently enacted (for example, a decentralized
code swatch running after the fact is difficult to control, regulate, or sue for damages),
the legal framework is essentially pushed down to the level of the contract. The end‐
point is not lawlessness and anarchy, but that legal frameworks become more granu‐
lar and personalized to the situation. Parties agreeing to the contract could choose a
legal framework to be incorporated into the code. There could be multiple known,
vetted, “canned” legal frameworks, similar to Creative Commons licenses, such that
users pick a legal framework as a feature of a smart contract. Thus, there could be a
multiplicity of legal frameworks, just as there could be a multiplicity of currencies.
Contracts do not make anything possible that was previously impossible; rather, they
allow common problems to be solved in a way that minimizes the need for trust.
Minimal trust often makes things more convenient by taking human judgment out of
the equation, thus allowing complete automation. An example of a basic smart
contract on the blockchain is an inheritance gift that becomes available on either the
grandchild’s eighteenth birthday or the grandparent’s day of death. A transaction can
be created that sits on the blockchain and goes uninitiated until certain future events
are triggered, either a certain time or event. To set up the first condition—the grand‐
child receiving the inheritance at age 18—the program sets the date on which to ini‐
tiate the transaction, which includes checking if the transaction has already been
executed. To set up the second condition, a program can be written that scans an
online death registry database, prespecified online newspaper obituaries, or some
other kind of information “oracle” to certify that the grandparent has died. When the
smart contract confirms the death, it can automatically send the funds.58 The Daniel
Suarez science-fiction book Daemon implements exactly these kinds of smart con‐
tracts that are effected upon a character’s death.
Another use case for smart contracts is setting up automatic payments for betting
(like limit orders in financial markets). A program or smart contract can be written
that releases a payment when a specific value of a certain exchange good is triggered
or when something transpires in the real world (e.g., a news event of some sort, or the
winner of a sports match). Smart contracts could also be deployed in pledge systems
like Kickstarter. Individuals make online pledges that are encoded in a blockchain,
and if the entrepreneur’s fundraising goal is reached, only then will the Bitcoin funds
be released from the investor wallets. No transaction is released until all funds are
received. Further, the entrepreneur’s budget, spending, and burn rate could be
Smart Contracts 
| 
17

tracked by the subsequent outflow transactions from the blockchain address that
received the fundraising.
Blockchain 2.0 Protocol Projects
There are many next-generation blockchain technology development projects that
can be very loosely gathered under the header of Blockchain 2.0 protocol projects
(Table 2-2), although this label is not perfect. The intent of Table 2-2 is to list some of
the current high-profile projects, not to get into the descriptive details of how the
projects differ technically or conceptually.
Table 2-2. Sample list of Blockchain 2.0 projects (extended from Piotr Piaseki, http://bit.ly/cr
ypto_2_0_comp)
Bitcoin 2.0 project name and URL Project description
Technical note
Ripple
https://ripple.com/
Gateway, payment, exchange, remittance network;
smart contract system: Codius
Separate blockchain
Counterparty
https://www.counterparty.co/
Overlay protocol for currency issuance and exchange
Bitcoin blockchain overlay
Ethereum
http://ethereum.org/
General-purpose Turing-complete cryptocurrency
platform
Own blockchain, Ethereum
virtual machine
Mastercoin
http://www.mastercoin.org/
Financial derivatives
Bitcoin blockchain overlay
NXT
http://www.nxtcommunity.org/
Altcoin mined with proof-of-stake consensus model
Bitcoin blockchain overlay
Open Transactions
http://opentransactions.org/
Untraceable anonymous, no latency transactions
No blockchain; transactions
library
BitShares
http://bitshares.org/
Decentralized crypto-equity share exchange
Separate blockchain
Open Assets
https://github.com/OpenAssets
Colored coin issuance and wallet
Bitcoin blockchain overlay
Colored Coins
http://coloredcoins.org/
Bitcoin asset marking for digital/physical assets
Bitcoin blockchain overlay
Wallet Development Projects
Perhaps the primary category of applications being built atop blockchain protocols is
wallets. Wallets are obviously a core infrastructural element for cryptocurrencies,
because they are the mechanism for the secure holding and transfer of Bitcoin and
any cryptographic asset. Table 2-3 lists some of the different wallet projects and com‐
panies in development, with their name and URL and the underlying platform upon
which they are built.
18 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

Table 2-3. Sample list of cryptocurrency wallet projects
Project name
URL
Underlying infrastructure
Wallet projects
ChromaWallet
http://chromawallet.com/
Open Assets
CoinSpark
http://coinspark.org/
Open Assets
Counterwallet
https://counterwallet.io/
Counterparty
Wallet companies
Coinprism
https://www.coinprism.com/ Open Assets
Melotic
https://www.melotic.com/
Ability to trade curated digital assets (e.g., Storjcoin, LTBCoin) with Bitcoin
OneWallet
https://www.onewallet.io
Bitcoin marketplace and wallet
Blockchain Development Platforms and APIs
In addition to Blockchain 2.0 protocol projects, there are several developer platform
companies and projects offering tools to facilitate application development. Block‐
chain.info has a number of APIs for working with its ewallet software (it’s one of the
largest ewallet providers) to make and receive payments and engage in other opera‐
tions. Chain has interfaces to make calls to the data available in full blockchain nodes,
and standard information queries such as the Bitcoin balances by address and push
notifications when there is activity with a certain address. Stellar is a semidecentral‐
ized (maintained by gateway institutions, not miners) public ledger platform and uni‐
fied development environment (blockchain APIs, multisig APIs) linked to the Stripe
payment network.59 Related to Stellar are Block.io, Gem, and BlockCypher, which
have multisig wallet APIs.
More unified API development environments will be needed that include the many
diverse and growing parts of the blockchain ecosystem (storage, file serving, messag‐
ing, wallet interactions, mobile payments, identity confirmation, and reputation).
There is also an opportunity to link blockchain development environments out to
other major segments like the machine-to-machine (M2M) communication and
Internet-of-Things (IoT) networks infrastructure for rapid application development.
An example of an advanced integrated application of this kind envisioned for the far‐
ther future could be a smartwatch that can interact with smart-city traffic-sensor data
to automatically reserve and pay for lane space with a Bitcoin-denominated smart
contract.
Blockchain Ecosystem: Decentralized Storage,
Communication, and Computation
There is a need for a decentralized ecosystem surrounding the blockchain itself for
full-solution operations. The blockchain is the decentralized transaction ledger that is
Blockchain Development Platforms and APIs 
| 
19

part of a larger computing infrastructure that must also include many other functions
such as storage, communication, file serving, and archiving. Specific projects that are
developing solutions for the distributed blockchain ecosystem include Storj for any
sort of file storage (text, images, audio, multimedia); IPFS for file serving, link main‐
tenance, and storage; and Maidsafe and Ethereum for storage, communication, and
file serving. First, in terms of storage, perhaps the most obvious need is for secure,
decentralized, off-chain storage for files such as an electronic medical record (EMR)
or genome, or even any simple Microsoft Word document, which would not be
packed into the 40-byte (40-character) OP_RETURN field used for transaction anno‐
tation (even in the case of Florincoin’s 528-character annotation field). File storage
could either be centralized (like Dropbox or Google Drive) or could be in the same
decentralized architecture as the blockchain. The blockchain transaction that regis‐
ters the asset can include a pointer and access method and privileges for the off-chain
stored file.
Second, in the case of file serving, the IPFS project has proposed an interesting tech‐
nique for decentralized secure file serving. IPFS stands for InterPlanetary File System,
which refers to the need for a global and permanently accessible filesystem to resolve
the problem of broken website links to files, well beyond the context of blockchain
technology for the overall functionality of the Internet. Here, BitTorrent peer-to-peer
file-sharing technology has been merged with the tree and versioning functionality of
Git (initially applied to software but “confirmable versioning” as a concept being
more widely applicable to any digital asset). IPFS, then, is a global, versioned, peer-to-
peer filesystem, a system for requesting and serving a file from any of the multiple
places it might exist on the Web (versus having to rely on a central repository) per a
hash (unique code) that confirms the file’s integrity by checking that spam and viru‐
ses are not in the file.60 IPFS is congruent with the Bitcoin technical architecture and
ethos, rewarding file-sharing nodes with Filecoin.
Third, in the area of archiving, a full ecosystem would also necessarily include lon‐
gevity provisioning and end-of-product-life planning for blockchains. It cannot be
assumed that blockchains will exist over time, and their preservation and accessibility
is not trivial. A blockchain archival system like the Internet Archive and the Wayback
Machine to store blockchains is needed. Not only must blockchain ledger transac‐
tions be preserved, but we also need a means of recovering and controlling previously
recorded blockchain assets at later dates (that might have been hashed with propriet‐
ary algorithms) because it is likely that certain blockchains will go out of business.
For example, it is great that someone established proof-of-existence of her will on the
Bitcoin blockchain in 2014, but how can we know that the will can be rehashed and
authenticated in 60 years when it needs to be verified? If blockchains are to become
the lingua franca archival mechanism for the whole of a society’s documents, longev‐
ity, preservation, and access mechanisms need to be built into the value chain explic‐
itly. Further, the existence of these kinds of tools—those that archive out-of-use
20 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

blockchains and consider the full product lifecycle of the blockchain—could help to
spur mainstream adoption.
Ethereum: Turing-Complete Virtual Machine
Blockchain technology is bringing together concepts and operations from several
fields, including computing, communications networks, cryptography, and artificial
intelligence. In Satoshi Nakamoto’s original plan, there were three steps, only two of
which have been implemented in Bitcoin 1.0. These are the blockchain (the decen‐
tralized public transaction ledger) and the Bitcoin protocol (the transaction system to
move value between parties without third-party interaction). This has been fine for
the Blockchain 1.0 implementation of currency and payment transactions, but for the
more complicated tier of Blockchain 2.0 applications such as the recording and trans‐
fer of more complex assets like smart property and smart contracts, we need the third
step—a more robust scripting system—and ultimately, Turing completeness (the abil‐
ity to run any coin, protocol, or blockchain). Nakamoto envisioned not just sending
money from point A to point B, but having programmable money and a full feature
set to enable it. One blockchain infrastructure project aiming to deliver a Turing-
complete scripting language and Turing-complete platform is Ethereum.
Ethereum is a platform and a programming language for building and publishing dis‐
tributed applications. More fundamentally, Ethereum is a foundational general-
purpose cryptocurrency platform that is a Turing-complete virtual machine (meaning
that it can run any coin, script, or cryptocurrency project). Rather than being a block‐
chain, or a protocol running over a blockchain, or a metaprotocol running over a
protocol like other projects, Ethereum is a fundamental underlying infrastructure
platform that can run all blockchains and protocols, rather like a unified universal
development platform. Each full node in the Ethereum network runs the Ethereum
Virtual Machine for seamless distributed program (smart contract) execution. Ether‐
eum is the underlying blockchain-agnostic, protocol-agnostic platform for applica‐
tion development to write smart contracts that can call multiple other blockchains,
protocols, and cryptocurrencies. Ethereum has its own distributed ecosystem, which
is envisioned to include file serving, messaging, and reputation vouching. The first
component is Swarm (“Ethereum-Swarm,” not to be confused with the crowdfunding
site Swarm) as a decentralized file-serving method. A second component is Whisper
(“Ethereum-Whisper,” also not to be confused with other similarly named projects),
which is a peer-to-peer protocol for secret messaging and digital cryptography. A
third component is a reputation system, a way to establish reputation and reduce risk
between agents in trustless networks, possibly provided by TrustDavis,61 or ideas
developed in a hackathon project, Crypto Schwartz.62
Ethereum: Turing-Complete Virtual Machine 
| 
21

Counterparty Re-creates Ethereum’s Smart Contract Platform
In November 2014, Counterparty announced that it had ported the open source
Ethereum programming language onto its own platform.63 The implication was that
Counterparty re-created Ethereum on the existing blockchain standard, Bitcoin, so
that these kinds of smart contracts might be available now, without waiting for the
launch (and mining operation) of Ethereum’s own blockchain, expected in the first
quarter of 2015 as of November 2014.
The announcement was a sign of the dynamism in the space and the rapid innovation
that open source software enables (like most blockchain industry projects, both
Ethereum and Counterparty’s software is all open source). Any individual or any
other project can freely examine and work with the code of other projects and bring
it into their own implementations. This is the whole proposition of open source soft‐
ware. It means that good ideas can take seed more rapidly, become standardized
through iteration, and be improved through the scrutiny and contributions of others.
Ethereum and Counterparty both have deep visions for the future architecture of
blockchain technology and decentralization, and establishing the infrastructural lay‐
ers early in the process can help everyone progress to the next levels.64 Given the
functionality fungibility across some of the many protocols and platforms in the
blockchain industry, perhaps the biggest question is what kinds of value-added serv‐
ices will be built atop these infrastructural layers; that is, what is the Netscape, Ama‐
zon, and Uber of the future?
Dapps, DAOs, DACs, and DASs: Increasingly Autonomous
Smart Contracts
We can now see a progression trajectory. The first classes of blockchain applications
are currency transactions; then all manner of financial transactions; then smart prop‐
erty, which instantiates all hard assets (house, car) and soft assets (IP) as digital assets;
then government document registries, legal attestation, notary, and IP services; and
finally, smart contracts that can invoke all of these digital asset types. Over time,
smart contracts could become extremely complex and autonomous. Dapps, DAOs,
DACs, DASs, automatic markets, and tradenets are some of the more intricate con‐
cepts being envisioned for later-stage blockchain deployments. Keeping the descrip‐
tion here at a summary level, the general idea is that with smart contracts (Blockchain
2.0; more complex transactions than those related to payments and currency trans‐
fer), there could be an increasing progression in the autonomy by which smart con‐
tracts operate. The simplest smart contract might be a bet between two parties about
the maximum temperature tomorrow. Tomorrow, the contract could be automatically
completed by a software program checking the official temperature reading (from a
prespecified external source or oracle (in this example, perhaps Weather.com), and
22 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

transferring the Bitcoin amount held in escrow from the loser to the winner’s
account.
Dapps
Dapps, DAOs, DACs, and DASs are abbreviated terms for decentralized applications,
decentralized autonomous organizations, decentralized autonomous corporations,
and decentralized autonomous societies, respectively. Essentially this group connotes
a potential progression to increasingly complex and automated smart contracts that
become more like self-contained entities, conducting preprogrammed and eventually
self-programmed operations linked to a blockchain. In some sense the whole wave of
Blockchain 2.0 protocols is Dapps (distributed applications), as is Blockchain 1.0 (the
blockchain is a Dapp that maintains a public transaction ledger). Different parties
have different definitions of what constitutes a Dapp. For example, Ethereum defines
a smart contract/Dapp as a transaction protocol that executes the terms of a contract
or group of contracts on a cryptographic blockchain.65
Our working definition of a Dapp is an application that runs on a network in a dis‐
tributed fashion with participant information securely (and possibly pseudony‐
mously) protected and operation execution decentralized across network nodes.
Some current examples are listed in Table 2-4. There is OpenBazaar (a decentralized
Craigslist), LaZooz (a decentralized Uber), Twister (a decentralized Twitter), Bitmes‐
sage (decentralized SMS), and Storj (decentralized file storage).
Table 2-4. Sample list of Dapps
Project name and URL
Activity
Centralized equivalent
OpenBazaar
https://openbazaar.org/
Buy/sell items in local physical world
Craigslist
LaZooz
http://lazooz.org/
Ridesharing, including Zooz, a proof-of-movement coin
Uber
Twister
http://twister.net.co/
Social networking, peer-to-peer microblogging66
Twitter/Facebook
Gems
http://getgems.org/
Social networking, token-based social messaging
Twitter/SMS
Bitmessage
https://bitmessage.org
Secure messaging (individual or broadcast)
SMS services
Storj
http://storj.io/
File storage
Dropbox
Dapps, DAOs, DACs, and DASs: Increasingly Autonomous Smart Contracts 
| 
23

Project name and URL
Activity
Centralized equivalent
Swarm
https://www.swarm.co/
Koinify
https://koinify.com/
bitFlyer
http://fundflyer.bitflyer.jp/
Cryptocurrency crowdfunding platforms
Kickstarter, Indiegogo
venture capital funding
In a collaborative white paper, another group offers a stronger-form definition of a
Dapp.67 In their view, the Dapp must have three features. First, the application must
be completely open source, operate autonomously with no entity controlling the
majority of its tokens, and its data and records of operation must be cryptographi‐
cally stored in a public, decentralized blockchain. Second, the application must gener‐
ate tokens according to a standard algorithm or set of criteria and possibly distribute
some or all of its tokens at the beginning of its operation. These tokens must be nec‐
essary for the use of the application, and any contribution from users should be
rewarded by payment in the application’s tokens. Third, the application may adapt its
protocol in response to proposed improvements and market feedback, but all changes
must be decided by majority consensus of its users. Overall, however, at present every
blockchain project may have a slightly different idea of the exact technicalities of what
the term decentralized application comprises.
DAOs and DACs
A DAO (decentralized autonomous organization) is a more complex form of a decen‐
tralized application. To become an organization more formally, a Dapp might adopt
more complicated functionality such as a constitution, which would outline its gover‐
nance publicly on the blockchain, and a mechanism for financing its operations such
as issuing equity in a crowdfunding. DAOs/DACs (decentralized autonomous organi‐
zations/corporations) are a concept derived from artificial intelligence. Here, a decen‐
tralized network of autonomous agents perform tasks, which can be conceived in the
model of a corporation running without any human involvement under the control
of a set of business rules.68 In a DAO/DAC, there are smart contracts as agents run‐
ning on blockchains that execute ranges of prespecified or preapproved tasks based
on events and changing conditions.69 Not only would groups of smart contracts oper‐
ating on the blockchain start to instantiate the model of an autonomous corporation,
but the functions and operation of real physical-world businesses could be recon‐
ceived on the blockchain, as well. As Bitcoin currency transactions reinvent and make
the remittances market more efficient, DAOs and DACs could do the same for busi‐
nesses. A remittance operator might have many costs associated with physical plant
and locational jurisdiction, and so, too, do businesses, with local jurisdictional com‐
pliance such as business licensing, registration, insurance, and taxation at many
municipal and regulatory levels. Perhaps some of these functions could be reinvented
24 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

in a more efficient way or eliminated when moved to the blockchain, and every busi‐
ness could be truly global. Cloud-based, blockchain-based autonomous business enti‐
ties running via smart contract could then electronically contract with compliance
entities like governments to self-register in any jurisdictions in which they wanted to
operate. Every business could be a general universal business first, and a jurisdic‐
tional business later when better decisions can be made about jurisdictions. The same
could be true for individuals as general humans first, and citizens on demand later.
One example of the DAO/DAC concept in terms of automated smart contract opera‐
tion is Storj. As previously mentioned, Storj is a decentralized cloud storage platform
that completed a $461,802 crowdfunding in August 2014.70 Storj uses the Bitcoin
blockchain technology and peer-to-peer protocols to provide secure, private, and
encrypted cloud storage. There are two apps, DriveShare and MetaDisk, which
respectively enable users to rent out their unused hard disk space and store their files
on the Storj network. Purported methods for safely sharing unused hard disk space
have been developed by other community computing models like Folding@Home
and BOINC, whose software is used by SETI@Home. Of course, as with any dis‐
tributed project that involves opening your computer to others’ use, caveat emptor
applies, and participants in Storj or any similar project should satisfactorily inform
themselves of the security details. Storj’s altcoin token, Storjcoin X (SJCX), is a cryp‐
tocurrency that runs on the Counterparty protocol. The currency is used to purchase
space on the Storj network via Metadisk and compensate network DriveShare storage
providers. Storj is seen as a decentralized alternative to storage providers like Drop‐
box or Google; the company estimates that customers overpay for data storage by a
factor of 10 to 100, and that blockchain methods could provide cheaper, more secure,
and decentralized data storage.71
DASs and Self-Bootstrapped Organizations
Eventually there could be DASs (decentralized autonomous societies)—essentially
fleets of smart contracts, or entire ecosystems of Dapps, DAOs, and DACs operating
autonomously. An interesting concept related to intellectual property and new ideas
is the “self-bootstrapped organization.”72 This is a new business idea arising from the
blockchain or via a person, in which the project idea spins out to become a stand‐
alone entity with some standardized smart-contract, self-bootstrapping software to
crowdfund itself based on a mission statement; operate; pay dividends or other remu‐
neration back to crowdfunding investors; receive feedback (automated or orchestra‐
ted) through blockchain prediction markets and decentralized blockchain voting; and
eventually dissolve or have periodic confirmation-of-instantiation votes (similar to
business relationship contracts evergreening or calling for periodic reevaluations).
Automatic dissolution or reevaluation clauses could be critical in avoiding situations
like those described in Daniel Suarez’s science-fiction books Daemon and Freedom, in
Dapps, DAOs, DACs, and DASs: Increasingly Autonomous Smart Contracts 
| 
25

which the world economy ends up radically transformed by the smart-contract type
agents inexorably following their programmed code.
Automatic Markets and Tradenets
An automatic market is the idea that unitized, packetized, quantized resources (ini‐
tially like electricity, gas, bandwidth, and in the deeply speculative future, units of
synaptic potentiation in brains) are automatically transacted based on dynamically
evolving conditions and preprogrammed user profiles, permissions, and bidding
functions.73 Algorithmic stock market trading and real-time bidding (RTB) advertis‐
ing networks are the closest existing examples of automatic markets. In the future,
automatic markets could be applied in the sense of having limit orders and program
trading for physical-world resource allocation. Truly smart grids (e.g., energy, high‐
way, and traffic grids) could have automatic bidding functions on both the cost and
revenue side of their operations—for both inputs (resources) and outputs (custom‐
ers) and participation in automatic clearing mechanisms. A related concept is trade‐
nets: in the future there could be self-operating, self-owned assets like a self-driving,
self-owning car.74 Self-directing assets would employ themselves for trade based on
being continuously connected to information from the Internet to be able to assess
dynamic demand for themselves, contract with potential customers like Uber does
now, hedge against oil price increases with their own predictive resource planning,
and ultimately self-retire at the end of their useful life—in short, executing all aspects
of autonomous self-operation. Tradenets could even have embedded, automatically
executing smart contracts to trigger the building of new transportation pods based on
signals of population growth, demand, and business plan validity.
The Blockchain as a Path to Artificial Intelligence
We should think of smart contracts as applications that can themselves be decentral‐
ized, autonomous, and pseudonymously running on the blockchain. Thus, the block‐
chain could be one potential path to artificial intelligence (AI) in the sense that smart-
contract platforms are being designed to run at graduated stages of increasing
automation, autonomy, and complexity. With Dapps, DAOs, DACs, and DASs, there
could be many interesting new kinds of emergent and complex AI-like behavior. One
possible path is bringing existing non-AI and non-blockchain rule-based systems
onto the blockchain to further automate and empower their operations. This could
include systems like chaining together simple if-this-then-that (or IFTTT) behavior
and the open source Huginn platform for building agents that monitor situations and
act on your behalf. A second possible path is implementing programmatic ideas from
AI research fields such as Wolfram’s cellular automata, Conway’s Game of Life, Dori‐
go’s Ant Colony Optimization and Swarm Intelligence, Andy Clark’s embodied cogni‐
tive robots, and other general agent-based systems.
26 
| 
Chapter 2: Blockchain 2.0: Contracts

CHAPTER 3
Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond
Currency, Economics, and Markets
Blockchain Technology Is a New and Highly Effective
Model for Organizing Activity
Not only is there the possibility that blockchain technology could reinvent every cate‐
gory of monetary markets, payments, financial services, and economics, but it might
also offer similar reconfiguration possibilities to all industries, and even more
broadly, to nearly all areas of human endeavor. The blockchain is fundamentally a
new paradigm for organizing activity with less friction and more efficiency, and at
much greater scale than current paradigms. It is not just that blockchain technology is
decentralized and that decentralization as a general model can work well now because
there is a liquid enough underlying network with the Web interconnecting all
humans, including for disintermediated transactions: blockchain technology affords a
universal and global scope and scale that was previously impossible. This can be true
for resource allocation, in particular to allow for increasingly automated resource
allocation of physical-world assets and also human assets. Blockchain technology
facilitates the coordination and acknowledgment of all manner of human interaction,
facilitating a higher order of collaboration and possibly paving the way for human/
machine interaction. Perhaps all modes of human activity could be coordinated with
blockchain technology to some degree, or at a minimum reinvented with blockchain
concepts. Further, blockchain technology is not just a better organizational model
functionally, practically, and quantitatively; by requiring consensus to operate, the
model could also have greater liberty, equality, and empowerment qualitatively. Thus,
the blockchain is a complete solution that integrates both extrinsic and intrinsic and
qualitative and quantitative benefits.
27

Extensibility of Blockchain Technology Concepts
Blockchain technology can potentially unleash an important element of creativity and
invention in anyone who encounters the concepts in a broad and general way. This is
in the sense that it is necessary to understand the new ideas separately and together.
These include concepts such as public-key and private-key cryptography, peer-to-
peer file sharing, distributed computing, network models, pseudonymity, blockchain
ledgers, cryptocurrency protocols, and cryptocurrency. This calls into question what
might have seemed to be established definitions of traditional parameters of the
modern world like currency, economics, trust, value, and exchange. It is a require‐
ment and twenty-first-century skill set to understand these concepts in order to oper‐
ate in the blockchain technology environment. When you understand the concepts
involved, not only is it possible to innovate blockchain-related solutions, but further,
the concepts are portable to other contexts. This extensibility of blockchain-related
concepts may be the source of the greatest impact of blockchain technology as human
agents understand these concepts and deploy them in every venue they can imagine.
The Internet was a similar example of universality in application and extensibility of
the core technology concept; it meant that everything could be done in a new way—
quicker, with greater reach, in real time, on demand, via worldwide broadcast, at
lower cost. Blockchain technology is rich with new concepts that could become part
of the standard intellectual vernacular and toolkit.
Fundamental Economic Principles: Discovery, Value Attribution,
and Exchange
One broad way of thinking about the use of blockchain concepts is applying them
beyond the original context to see ways in which everything is like an economy, a
market, and a currency—and equally important, how everything is not like an econ‐
omy. This is a mindset that requires recognizing the fundamental properties of eco‐
nomics and markets in real-life situations. Blockchain technology helps elucidate that
everything we see and experience, every system in life, is economics to some degree: a
system for allocating resources. Furthermore, systems and interactions are economics
in that they are a matter of awareness and discovery, value attribution, and potential
interaction and exchange, and may include a mechanism for this exchange like a cur‐
rency or token, or even a simple exchange of force, energy, or concentration (as in
biological systems). This same basic economic structure could be said to exist univer‐
sally, whether in a collaborative work team or at a farmers’ market. The quantized
structure of blockchain technology in the form of ledger transaction-level tracking
could mean higher-resolution activity tracking, several orders of magnitude more
detailed and extensive than we are accustomed to at present, a time at which we are
still grateful for SKU-level tracking on a bill of materials.
28 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

Blockchain tracking could mean that all contributions to a system by all involved par‐
ties, no matter how minute, can be assessed and attributed in a seamless, automated
way, for later roll-up to the macro level—or not, because some community value sys‐
tems might dictate not having user contributions explicitly tracked. The ethos and
morality of tracking is a separate and interesting social-science topic to explore in the
blockchain studies research agenda more generally. However, one way that the
blockchain-based capacity for tracking could work is in the form of a “GitHub + Bit‐
coin” concept, for example, that tracks code contributions line by line over all revi‐
sions of a software code corpus over time. This is important, because economically
savvy rational agents participating in the system (i.e., currently humans) want to
assess the contributions they and others have made, and have these contributions
tracked and acknowledged for remuneration, reputation, status garnering, and other
rewards.
Blockchain Technology Could Be Used in the Administration of
All Quanta
What the blockchain could facilitate in an automated computational way is one uni‐
versal, seamless model for the coordinated activity of near-infinite numbers of trans‐
actions, a universal transaction system on an order never before imagined for human
activity. In some sense, blockchain technology could be a supercomputer for reality.
Any and all phenomena that can be quantized (defined in discrete units or packages)
can be denoted this way and encoded and transacted in an automated fashion on the
blockchain. Blockchain venture capitalist David Johnston’s summary and prognosti‐
cation of this dynamic is that anything that can be decentralized will be, showing his
belief in the inherent efficiency and benefit or superiority of the blockchain model.
Decentralization is “where water goes,” where water flows naturally, along the way of
least resistance and least effort. The blockchain could be an Occam’s razor, the most
efficient, direct, and natural means of coordinating all human and machine activity; it
is a natural efficiency process.
Blockchain Layer Could Facilitate Big Data’s Predictive Task
Automation
As big data allows the predictive modeling of more and more processes of reality,
blockchain technology could help turn prediction into action. Blockchain technology
could be joined with big data, layered onto the reactive-to-predictive transformation
that is slowly under way in big-data science to allow the automated operation of large
areas of tasks through smart contracts and economics. Big data’s predictive analysis
could dovetail perfectly with the automatic execution of smart contracts. We could
accomplish this specifically by adding blockchain technology as the embedded eco‐
nomic payments layer and the tool for the administration of quanta, implemented
through automated smart contracts, Dapps, DAOs, and DACs. The automated
Blockchain Technology Is a New and Highly Effective Model for Organizing Activity 
| 
29

operation of huge classes of tasks could relieve humans because the tasks would
instead be handled by a universal, decentralized, globally distributed computing sys‐
tem. We thought big data was big, but the potential quantization and tracking and
administration of all classes of activity and reality via blockchain technology at both
lower and higher resolutions hints at the next orders-of-magnitude progression up
from the current big-data era that is itself still developing.
Distributed Censorship-Resistant Organizational Models
The primary argument for Blockchain 1.0 and 2.0 transactions is the economic effi‐
ciency and cost savings afforded by trustless interaction in decentralized network
models, but freedom and empowerment are also important dimensions of the block‐
chain. Decentralized models can be especially effective at promoting freedom and
economic transfer in countries with restrictive political regimes and capital controls.
Freedom is available in the sense of pseudonymous transactions outside of the visibil‐
ity, tracking, and regulatory purview of local governments. This can be a significant
issue for citizens in emerging markets where local capital controls, government regu‐
lations, and overly restrictive economic environments make it much harder to engage
in a variety of standard activities, including starting new businesses. State economic
controls, together with a lack of trust in fiat currency, have been driving a lot of inter‐
est in cryptocurrencies.
The freedom attribute associated with blockchain technologies becomes more pro‐
nounced in Blockchain 3.0, the next category of application beyond currency and
market transactions. Through its global decentralized nature, blockchain technology
has the potential ability to circumvent the current limitations of geographic jurisdic‐
tions. There is an argument that blockchain technology can more equitably address
issues related to freedom, jurisdiction, censorship, and regulation, perhaps in ways
that nation-state models and international diplomacy efforts regarding human rights
cannot. Irrespective of supporting the legitimacy of nation-states, there is a scale and
jurisdiction acknowledgment and argument that certain operations are transnational
and are more effectively administered, coordinated, monitored, and reviewed at a
higher organizational level such as that of a World Trade Organization.
The idea is to uplift transnational organizations from the limitations of geography-
based, nation-state jurisdiction to a truly global cloud. The first point is that transna‐
tional organizations need transnational governance structures. The reach,
accessibility, and transparency of blockchain technology could be an effective trans‐
national governance structure. Blockchain governance is more congruent with the
character and needs of transnational organizations than nation-state governance. The
second point is that not only is the transnational governance provided by the block‐
chain more effective, it is fairer. There is potentially more equality, justice, and free‐
dom available to organizations and their participants in a decentralized, cloud-based
30 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

model. This is provided by the blockchain’s immutable public record, transparency,
access, and reach. Anyone worldwide could look up and confirm the activities of
transnational organizations on the blockchain. Thus, the blockchain is a global sys‐
tem of checks and balances that creates trust among all parties. This is precisely the
sort of core infrastructural element that could allow humanity to scale to orders-of-
magnitude larger progress with truly global organizations and coordination
mechanisms.
One activity for which this could make sense is the administration of the Internet.
Internet administration organizations have a transnational purview but are based in
nation-state localities. An example is ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers. ICANN manages Internet protocol numbers and namespaces,
coordinating the translation of www.example.com to the numeric IP address
93.184.216.119 for connection across the Internet.
Blockchain technology simultaneously highlights the issue of the appropriate admin‐
istration of transnational public goods and presents a solution. Wikipedia is a similar
transnational public good that is currently subject to a local jurisdiction that could
impose on the organization an artificial or biased agenda. It is possible that block‐
chain mechanisms might be the most efficient and equitable models for administer‐
ing all transnational public goods, particularly due to their participative, democratic,
and distributed nature.
A notable case in which jurisdictional nation-state entities were able to effect central‐
ized and biased control is WikiLeaks. In the Edward Snowden whistle-blowing case
in 2010, individuals were trying to make financial contributions in support of the
WikiLeaks organization but, strongarmed by centralized government agendas, credit
card payment networks and PayPal, refused to accept such contributions, and Wiki‐
Leaks was effectively embargoed.75 Bitcoin contributions, had they been possible at
the time, would have been direct, and possibly produced a different outcome. The
Electronic Freedom Foundation (EFF), a nonprofit organization that supports per‐
sonal freedoms, and other related organizations are similarly located in jurisdictional
locations at present, which could always mean the operation of curtailed agendas if
authorities were to exercise influence over the organization and individuals involved.
Namecoin: Decentralized Domain Name System
One of the first noncurrency uses of blockchain technology was to prevent Internet
censorship with Namecoin, an altcoin that can be used to verify Domain Name Sys‐
tem (DNS) registrations. Namecoin is an alternative DNS that is transnational and
cannot be controlled by any government or corporation. The benefit of a decentral‐
ized DNS is that it makes it possible for anyone worldwide who might be otherwise
suppressed or censored to publish information freely in the Internet.
Namecoin: Decentralized Domain Name System 
| 
31

Just as Bitcoin is a decentralized currency that cannot be shut down, Namecoin is the
basis for a decentralized DNS (i.e., web URLs).76 The idea is that URLs permanently
embedded in the blockchain would be resistant to the government seizing of
domains. The censorship issue is that in a URL such as google.com, centralized
authorities control the top-level domain, the .com portion (the United States con‐
trols .com URLs), and therefore can potentially seize and redirect the URL. Central‐
ized authorities control all top-level domains; for example, China controls all .cn
domains. Therefore, a decentralized DNS means that top-level domains can exist that
are not controlled by anyone, and they have DNS lookup tables shared on a peer-to-
peer network. As long as there are volunteers running the decentralized DNS server
software, alternative domains registered in this system can be accessed. Authorities
cannot impose rules to affect the operation of a well-designed and executed global
peer-to-peer top-level domain. The same Bitcoin structure is used in the implementa‐
tion of a separate blockchain and coin, Namecoin, for decentralized DNS.
Namecoin is not at present intended for the registration of all domains, but as a free
speech mechanism for domains that might be sensitive to censorship (for example, in
countries with limited political freedom). The top-level domain for Namecoin is .bit.
Interested parties register .bit domains with Namecoin. The actions necessary to reg‐
ister a new domain or to update an existing one are built in to the Namecoin proto‐
col, based on transaction type—for example, the “name_new” transaction at a cost of
0.01 NMC (Namecoin is convertible in/out of Bitcoin). Domains can be registered
directly with the Namecoin system or via a registration service like https://dotbit.me/.
Because the top-level domain .bit is outside the traditional operation of the Internet,
to facilitate viewing .bit websites, there are .bit proxy servers to handle DNS requests
in a browser, as well as Firefox and Chrome extensions. According to the Bitcoin
Contact website as of October 2014, there are 178,397 .bit domains registered, includ‐
ing, for example, wikileaks.bit. The key point is that .bit domains are a free-speech
mechanism, because now having the ability to view .bit websites means attempts to
silence those with a legitimate message will have less of a chance of succeeding. Just as
there are benefits to having decentralized currency transactions, there are benefits to
having many other kinds of decentralized transactions. 
Challenges and Other Decentralized DNS Services
Technical issues were found with the Namecoin implementation that left .bit domains
vulnerable to takeover (a bug that made it possible to update values if the transaction
input name matched the transaction output name, as well as new registrations to be
overridden).77 Developers have been remedying these issues. Other critics (as with
Bitcoin in general) point out how the key features of decentralized DNS services
(cheap and anonymous domain name creation, and a system that places domain
names out of the reach of central authorities) enable bad players and illegality.78 How‐
ever, an industry white paper counters these claims with examples of using the public
32 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

traceability feature of the blockchain ledger to apprehend criminals, and points out
that there are many legitimate uses of this technology.79
Meanwhile, other decentralized name services are in development, such as a simi‐
lar .P2P decentralized top-level domain from BitShares. The project points out how
the decentralized DNS model eliminates the certificate authority as the third-party
intermediary (which can leave URLs vulnerable to attack), and that a blockchain
model can also be more secure because you lose control of your domain only if you
share the private key.80 DotP2P has other features to improve DNS registry, such as
auction-like price discovery to counter domain-name squatting. Related to decentral‐
ized DNS services is digital identity confirmation services; in October 2014, BitShares
launched the KeyID service toward this end. KeyID, rebranded from Keyhotee, pro‐
vides an identification and email system on a decentralized blockchain for secure 
messaging and for secure authentication.81
Freedom of Speech/Anti-Censorship Applications: Alexandria
and Ostel
Alexandria is one example of a blockchain-based freedom-of-speech-promoting
project. It aims to create an unalterable historical record by encoding Twitter feeds to
a blockchain. Any tweets mentioning certain prespecified keywords (like Ukraine or
ebola) are encoded into the Alexandria blockchain using Florincoin, a cryptocurrency
based on Bitcoin and Litecoin with quick transaction processing (40 seconds) and a
longer memo annotation field (conceptually: Memocoin). This method captures
tweets that might be censored out later by takedown requests.82 Florincoin’s key ena‐
bling feature for this is transaction comments, a 528-character field for the recording
of both metadata and tweet content.83 The expanded commenting functionality could
be used more broadly for many kinds of blockchain applications, such as providing
metadata and secure pointers to genomic sequences or X-ray files. Another freedom-
oriented application is Ostel’s free encrypted Voice over IP (VoIP) telephony service,
because the United States National Security Agency (NSA) can listen in on other
services like Skype.84 Ostel is a nice example of David Brin’s bottom-up souveillance
counterweight85 to top-down NSA surveillance (of both traditional telephone calls
and Skype86).
Decentralized DNS Functionality Beyond Free Speech: Digital Identity
Beyond its genesis motivation to enable free speech and provide a countermeasure to
the centralized control of the Internet, there are other important uses of decentralized
DNS functionality in the developing Blockchain 3.0 ecosystem. The blockchain is
allowing a rethinking and decentralization of all Internet network operations—for
example, DNS services (Namecoin, DotP2P), digital identity (KeyID, and OneName
Namecoin: Decentralized Domain Name System 
| 
33

and BitID, which are discussed shortly), and network traffic communications (Open‐
Libernet.org, an open mesh network communications protocol).
One challenge related to Bitcoin, the Internet, and network communications more
generally is Zooko’s Triangle. This is the problem encountered in any system that
gives names to participants in a network protocol: how to make identifiers such as a
URL or a person’s handle (e.g., DeMirage99) simultaneously secure, decentralized,
and human-usable (i.e., not in the form of a 32-character alphanumeric string).87
Innovations and maturity in blockchain technology require having solutions to the
Zooko’s Triangle challenge. Namecoin functionality might offer such a solution.
 Namecoin is used to store URLs, but it can store any information. The core function‐
ality of Namecoin is that it is a name/value store system. Therefore, just as Bitcoin has
uses beyond currency, Namecoin has uses beyond DNS for storing information more
generally. Using the nondomain namespaces of Namecoin, we can store information
that would otherwise be hard to securely or conveniently exchange. A prime applica‐
tion for this is a resolution to Zooko’s Triangle, allowing continuously available
Internet-based digital identity confirmation of a public key (a 32-character alphanu‐
meric string) with a human-usable handle (DeMirage99) as digital identity services
like OneName and BitID allow.
Digital Identity Verification
OneName and BitID are examples of blockchain-based digital identity services. They
confirm an individual’s identity to a website. Decentralized digital verification serv‐
ices take advantage of the fact that all Bitcoin users have a personal wallet, and there‐
fore a wallet address. This could speed access to all aspects of websites,
simultaneously improving user experience, anonymity, and security. It can also facili‐
tate ecommerce because customers using Bitcoin-address login are already enabled
for purchase.
On the surface, OneName is an elegant Bitcoin-facilitating utility, but in the back‐
ground, it is a more sophisticated decentralized digital identity verification system
that could be extensible beyond its initial use case. OneName helps solve the problem
that 27- through 34-character Bitcoin addresses are (at the expense of being crypto‐
graphically sound) cumbersome for human users. Some other Bitcoin wallet services
and exchanges, like Coinbase, have allowed Bitcoin to be sent to email addresses for
some time. The OneName service is a more secure solution. With OneName, users
can set up a more practical name (like a social media handle) to use for Bitcoin trans‐
actions. After a user is registered with OneName, asking for payment is as easy as
adding a plus sign to your username (for example, +DeMirage99). OneName is an
open source protocol built on the Namecoin protocol that puts users in charge of
their digital identity verification, rather than allowing centralized social media sites
34 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

like Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter to be the de facto identity verification platform,
given that many websites have opted to authenticate users with social media APIs.88
A similar project is BitID, which allows users to log in to websites with their Bitcoin
address. Instead of “Login with Facebook,” you can “Connect with Bitcoin” (your Bit‐
coin address). BitID is a decentralized authentication protocol that takes advantage of
Bitcoin wallets as a form of identification and QR codes for service or platform access
points. It enables users to access an online account by verifying themselves with their
wallet address and uses a mobile device as the private-key authenticator.89
Another proposed digital identity verification business is Bithandle, which was devel‐
oped as a hackathon project. Bithandle offers short-handle registration, verification,
and ecommerce service. As with Onename and BitID, users can register an easy-to-
use handle—for instance, “Coinmaster”—that is linked to a wallet address via a pub‐
lic or private real-life identity check and a Bitcoin blockchain transaction. The service
offers ongoing real-time digital identity verification and one-click auto-enabled
ecommerce per “Login with Bitcoin” website access. An obvious problem with the
mainstream adoption of Bitcoin is the unwieldy 32-character Bitcoin address, or QR
code, needed to send and receive funds. Instead, Bithandle gives users the ability to
link a short handle to a Bitcoin address, which is confirmed initially with real-life
identity and looked up in the blockchain on demand at any future moment. Real-
time digital identity verification services could be quite crucial; already the worldwide
market size for identity authentication and verification is $11 billion annually.90
Specifically, how Bithandle works is that in the digital identity registration process,
participants register a Bitcoin username, an easy-to-use handle that can then be used
to “Login with Bitcoin” to websites. As mentioned, this is similar to the ability to
access websites by “Login with Facebook” or “Login with Twitter” but automatically
connects to a user’s Bitcoin address for proof of identity. When a user sets up a
Bithandle, his real-life identity is confirmed with Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, or
other services, and this can be posted publically (like OneName) or not (as OneName
does not allow), with the user’s Bithandle.
Later, for real-time digital identity verification, “Logging in with Bitcoin” means that
a Bithandle is already connected to a Bitcoin address, which securely facilitates ecom‐
merce without the user having to register an account and provide personal identity
and financial details. Bithandle thus helps streamline user interactions with websites
in several ways. First, websites do not have to maintain user account registries
(“honeypot” risks for hacking). Second, every user “Logging in with Bitcoin” is auto‐
matically enabled for one-click ecommerce purchases. Third, the Bithandle service
can provide real-time blockchain lookups to confirm user digital identity at any
future time on demand—for example, to reauthorize a user for subsequent purchases.
Digital Identity Verification 
| 
35

Blockchain Neutrality
Cryptography experts and blockchain developers and architects point out the impor‐
tance of designing the blockchain industry with some of the same principles that have
become baked in to the Internet structure over time, like neutrality. In the case of the
Internet, net neutrality is the principle that Internet service providers should enable
access to all content and applications regardless of the source and without favoring or
blocking particular products or websites. The concept is similar for cryptocurrencies:
Bitcoin neutrality means the ability for all persons everywhere to be able to easily
adopt Bitcoin. This means that anyone can start using Bitcoin, in any and every cul‐
ture, language, religion, and geography, political system, and economic regime.91 Bit‐
coin is just a currency; it can be used within any kind of existing political, economic,
or religious system. For example, the Islamic Bank of Bitcoin is investigating ways to
conduct Sharia-compliant banking with Bitcoin.92 A key point of Bitcoin neutrality is
that the real target market for whom Bitcoin could be most useful is the “unbanked,”
individuals who do not have access to traditional banking services for any number of
reasons, estimated at 53 percent of the worldwide population.93 Even in the United
States, 7.7 percent of households are forecast to be unbanked or underbanked.94
Bitcoin neutrality means access for the unbanked and underbanked, which requires
Bitcoin solutions that apply in all low-tech environments, with features like SMS pay‐
ment, paper wallets, and batched blockchain transactions. Having neutrality-oriented,
easy-to-use solutions (the “Twitter of emerging market Bitcoin”) for Bitcoin could
trigger extremely fast uptake in underbanked markets, continuing the trend of 31
percent of Kenya’s GDP being spent through mobile phones.95 There are different
SMS Bitcoin wallets and delivery mechanisms (like 37Coins96 and Coinapult, and
projects like Kipochi97 that are integrated with commonly used emerging-markets
mobile finance platforms like M-Pesa. A similar project is a mobile cryptowallet app,
Saldo.mx, which uses the Ripple open source protocol for clearing, and links people
living in the United States and Latin America for the remote payment of bills, insur‐
ance, airtime, credit, and products.
Digital Divide of Bitcoin
The term digital divide has typically referred to the gap between those who have
access to certain technologies and those who do not. In the case of cryptocurrencies,
if they are applied with the principles of neutrality, everyone worldwide might start to
have access. Thus, alternative currencies could be a helpful tool for bridging the digi‐
tal divide. However, there is another tier of digital divide beyond access: know-how. A
new digital divide could arise (and arguably already has in some sense) between those
who know how to operate securely on the Internet and those who do not. The princi‐
ples of neutrality should be extended such that appropriate mainstream tools make it
possible for anyone to operate anonymously (or rather pseudonymously), privately,
and securely in all of their web-based interactions and transactions.
36 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

Digital Art: Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary,
Intellectual Property Protection)
Digital art is another arena in which blockchain cryptography can provide a
paradigm-shifting improvement (it’s also a good opportunity to discuss hashing and
timestamping, important concepts for the rest of the book). The term digital art refers
to  intellectual property (IP) very generally, not just online artworks. Art is connoted
in the patenting sense, meaning “owned IP.” As we’ve discussed, in the context of digi‐
tal asset proof and protection, identity can be seen as just one application, although
one that might require more extensive specialty features. Whereas   digital identity
relies on users having a Bitcoin wallet address, digital asset proof in the context of
attestation services relies on the blockchain functionality of hashing and timestamp‐
ing. Attestation services (declaring something to be true, such as asset ownership) are
referred to as digital art. The main use of the term digital art in the blockchain indus‐
try is to refer to using the blockchain to register any form of IP (entirely digital or
representing something in the physical world) or conduct attestation services more
generally, such as contract notarization. The term is also used in the blockchain
industry to mean online graphics, images photographs, or digitally created artworks
that are digital assets, and thus IP to protect. 
Hashing Plus Timestamping
For attestation services, blockchain technology brings together two key functions: 
hashing and secure timestamping. Hashing is running a computing algorithm over
any content file (a document, a genome file, a GIF file, a video, etc.), the result of
which is a compressed string of alphanumeric characters that cannot be back-
computed into the original content. For example, every human genome file could be
turned into a 64-character hash string as a unique and private identifier for that con‐
tent.98 The hash represents the exact content of original file. Anytime the content
needs to be reconfirmed, the same hash algorithm is run over the file, and the hash
signature will be the same if the file has not changed. The hash is short enough to be
included as text in a blockchain transaction, which thus provides the secure time‐
stamping function of when a specific attestation transaction occurred. Via the hash,
the original file content has essentially been encoded into the blockchain. The block‐
chain can serve as a document registry.
The key idea is using cryptographic hashes as a form of asset verification and attesta‐
tion, the importance of which could be extremely significant. Blockchain hash
functionality could be a key function for the operation of the whole of society, using
the blockchain to prove the existence and exact contents of any document or other
digital asset at a certain time. Further, the blockchain attestation functionality of
hashing-plus-timestamping supports the idea of the blockchain as a new class of
information technology.
Digital Art: Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary, Intellectual Property Protection) 
| 
37

Blockchain attestation services more generally comprise all manner of services related
to document filing, storage, and registry; notary services (validation); and IP protec‐
tion. As articulated, these functions take advantage of the blockchain’s ability to use
cryptographic hashes as a permanent and public way to record and store information,
and also to find it later with a block explorer and the blockchain address pointer from
the blockchain as a universal central repository. The core functionality is the ability to
verify a digital asset via a public general ledger.
There are several blockchain-based attestation services in different stages of develop‐
ment or proof of concept, such as Proof of Existence, Virtual Notary, Bitnotar, Chro‐
nobit, and Pavilion.io. The specifics of how they might be different or similar are
emerging, and there is presumably a lot of functionality fungibility in that any of the
services can simply hash a generic file of any type. The first and longest-standing ser‐
vice, Proof of Existence, is described in detail next.  
Proof of Existence
One of the first services to offer blockchain attestation is Proof of Existence. People
can use the web-based service to hash things such as art or software to prove author‐
ship of the works.99 Founder Manuel Aráoz had the idea of proving a document’s
integrity by using a cryptographic hash, but the problem was not knowing when the
document was created, until the blockchain could add a trusted timestamping mecha‐
nism.100 Proof of Existence demonstrates document ownership without revealing the
information it contains, and it provides proof that a document was authored at a par‐
ticular time. Figure 3-1 shows a screenshot from the scrolling list of newly registered
digital assets with the Proof of Existence service.
Figure 3-1. “Last documents registered” digest from Proof of Existence
With this tool, the blockchain can be used to prove the existence and exact contents
of a document or other digital asset at a certain time (a revolutionary capability). Pro‐
viding timestamped data in an unalterable state while maintaining confidentiality is
perfect for a wide range of legal and civic applications. Attorneys, clients, and public
administrators could use the Proof of Existence blockchain functionality to prove the
38 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

existence of many documents including wills, deeds, powers of attorney, health care
directives, promissory notes, the satisfaction of a promissory note, and so on without
disclosing the contents of the document. With the blockchain timestamp feature,
users can prove that a document (like a will) they will be presenting to a court in the
future is the same unaltered document that was presented to the blockchain at a prior
point in time. These kinds of attestation services can be used for any kind of docu‐
ments and digital assets. Developers, for example, can use the service to create unique
hashes for each version of code that they create and later verify versions of their code,
inventors can prove they had an idea at a certain time, and authors can protect their
works.
The proof-of-existence function works in this way: first, you present your document
(or any file) to the service website; you’re then prompted to “click or drag and drop
your document here." The site does not upload or copy the content of the document
but instead (on the client side) converts the contents to a cryptographic digest or
hash. Algorithms create a digest, or a cryptographic string that is representative of a
piece of data; the digest created by a hash function is based on the characteristics of a
document. No two digests are the same, unless the data used to compute the digests is
the same. Thus, the hash represents the exact contents of the document presented.
The cryptographic hash of the document is inserted into a transaction, and when the
transaction is mined into a block, the block timestamp becomes the document’s time‐
stamp, and via the hash the document’s content has essentially been encoded into the
blockchain. When the same document is presented again, the same marker will be
created and therefore provide verification that the documents are the same. If, how‐
ever, the document has changed in any way, the new marker will not match the previ‐
ous marker. This is how the system verifies the document.101
One benefit of attestation services is how efficiently they make use of the blockchain.
Original documents are not stored on the blockchain, just their hash is stored, which
is accessible by private key. Whenever a proof of existence needs to be confirmed, if
the recomputed hash is the same as the original hash registered in the blockchain, the
document can be verified as unchanged. The hash does not need to (and cannot)
translate back into the document (hashes are only one-way; their security feature
makes back-computation impossible). The retrieval phase of proof-of-existence func‐
tionality can be thought of as a “content verification service.” Regarding longevity, the
crucial part is having the private key to the digital asset (the hash) that is registered on
the blockchain. This does mean trusting that whichever blockchain used will be
available in the future; thus, it would be good to select an attestation service that uses
a standard blockchain like the Bitcoin blockchain.
Limitations
Admittedly there are some limitations to hashing-plus-timestamping blockchain
attestation services. First, a blockchain is not required for timestamping, because
Digital Art: Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary, Intellectual Property Protection) 
| 
39

other third-party services provide this for free, whereas a small transaction fee (to
compensate miners) is required to post a digital asset attestation to the blockchain.
Also, blockchain transaction confirmations are not immediate; the time the docu‐
ment was added to the blockchain is recorded, not when the document was submit‐
ted; and the precise time of digital asset creation can be important in IP registration
services. Most problematically, timestamping does not prove ownership. However,
blockchain attestation services as currently envisioned are an important first step and
could be incorporated in 3.0 versions that include other elements in the blockchain
ecosystem. Some ideas propose including digital identity to prove ownership and a
non-blockchain-based timestamping element for “time document created.” A poten‐
tial technical limitation is the contention that the hash might be less secure when
you’re hashing very large documents (an 8-GB genome file, for example) compared
to small documents (a standard IOU contract), but this concern is unwarranted. The
scalability to any file size is the beauty of the hash structure, and it is the hash length
(typically 64 characters at present) that is the focus for security, and it could be made
longer in the future. The usual threats to hash technology—inverse hashes (an inverse
function to attempt to back-compute the hashed content) and collisions (two differ‐
ent files produce the same hash)—are limited in the way hashes are currently used in
blockchain.
Virtual Notary, Bitnotar, and Chronobit
Virtual Notary is another project that similarly conceptualizes the need and fulfill‐
ment of these kinds of blockchain attestation services. Like Proof of Existence, Virtual
Notary does not store files but instead provides a certificate that attests to the file’s
contents at the moment of submission. The service provides a certificate virtual
notary-type service for many different “file types” such as documents, web pages,
Twitter feeds, stock prices, exchange rates, weather conditions, DNS entries, email
address verifications, university affiliations, real estate values, statements and con‐
tracts, and random-number drawing. Files can be in any format, including Microsoft
Word, PDF, JPG, PNG, TXT, and PPT (Microsoft PowerPoint). The site generates a
certificate that can be downloaded from the site, and also offers the other side of the
service—examining existing certificates. Virtual Notary’s aim is to provide a digital,
neutral, dispassionate witness for recording online facts and conveying them to third
parties in a trustworthy manner, a critical resource as a larger fraction of our lives is
now digital.102 Two other blockchain timestamp projects are  Bitnotar and Chronobit.
A similar blockchain-based project for contract signing is Pavilion.io, which provides
the service much cheaper than Adobe EchoSign or DocuSign; contracts are free to
send and only one mBTC to sign.103 Two other virtual notary projects are Blocksign
and btcluck.
40 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

Monegraph: Online Graphics Protection
One digital-art protection project built and intended as a proof of concept using the
blockchain ledger Bitcoin 3.0 applications related to new methods of proof is Mone‐
graph, whose slogan is “because some art belongs in chains.” Using this (currently
free) application, individuals can facilitate the monetization of their online graphics—
digital media they have already created and posted on the Web—by registering their
assets. Just as Bitcoin verifies currency ownership, Monegraph verifies property own‐
ership; this is an example of the smart property application of the blockchain. Mone‐
graph could be a complementary service or feature for stock photo image and graphic
repository websites like Shutterstock or Getty Images, possibly adding future func‐
tionality related to image use enforcement and tracking.
Monegraph works in a two-step process using Twitter, Namecoin, and Monegraph.
Namecoin is used because it is an altcoin that can be used to verify DNS registrations
in an automated, decentralized way; any similar DNS confirmation service could be
used.104 First, to stake the claim, the user goes to http://www.monegraph.com/, gives it
permission to sign in to her Twitter account (via the standardized Twitter API OAuth
token), and supplies the URL of the graphic, upon which Monegraph automatically
tweets a link to that image in the correct format. Second, to record the title, after
Monegraph tweets the link to the image, it provides a block of code for the user to
copy and paste into the Namecoin client. The user initiates a new transaction in the
Namecoin wallet and adds the block of code as the key and value in the Namecoin
transaction (you can see the transaction here: http://bit.ly/monegraph_verification).
Only one copy of a digital image can ever have a valid Monegraph signature. Mone‐
graph images are just ordinary image files, so they can be duplicated and distributed
like any other images, but only the original file will pass validation against the Mone‐
graph system.
A related digital art and copyright protection project is Ascribe, which is aimed at
providing an underlying infrastructure for IP registry. The company is building what
it calls an “ownership layer” for digital property in the form of a service to register
and transfer copyright. Although existing copyright law offers creators protection
against infringement and the right to commercialize, there is no simple, global inter‐
face to register, license, and transfer copyright. The Ascribe service aims to address
this, registering a digital work with the service hashes and timestamping it onto the
blockchain. An earlier step in the registration process uses machine learning to detect
and resolve any prior-art challenges. Ownership rights can then be transferred, which
enables secondary markets for digital IP. The service handles digital fine art, photos,
logos, music, books, blog posts, tweets, 3D CAD files, and more. Users need no prior
knowledge of the intricacies of the blockchain, copyright law, or machine learning to
benefit from the service. The bulk of Ascribe’s users are marketplaces and white-label
web services that use Ascribe in the background, though individual users can use the
site directly, as well.  
Digital Art: Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary, Intellectual Property Protection) 
| 
41

Digital Asset Proof as an Automated Feature
In the future, digital asset protection in the form of blockchain registry could be an
automatically applied standardized feature of digital asset publication. For certain
classes of assets or websites, digital asset protection could be invoked at the moment
of publication of any digital content. Some examples could include GitHub commits,
blog posts, tweets, Instagram/Twitpic photos, and forum participations. Digital asset
protection could be offered just as travel insurance is with airline ticket purchases. At
account setup with Twitter, blogging sites, wikis, forums, and GitHub, the user could
approve micropayments for digital asset registration (by supplying a Bitcoin wallet
address). Cryptocurrency now as the embedded economic layer of the Web provides
microcontent with functionality for micropayment and microIPprotection. Crypto‐
currency provides the structure for this, whether microcontent is tokenized and
batched into blockchain transactions or digital assets are registered themselves with
their own blockchain addresses. Blockchain attestation services could also be
deployed more extensively not just for IP registry, but more robustly to meet other
related needs in the publishing industry, such as rights transfer and content licensing.
Batched Notary Chains as a Class of Blockchain Infrastructure
It is important to remember that this is only the outset of what could blossom into a
full-fledged blockchain economy with blockchain technology enabling every aspect
of human endeavor, the blockchain being like the Internet, and the blockchain as the
fifth wave of the Internet. In this vein, it is possible that all current blockchain-related
activity could be seen as early-stage prototypes looking back from some future
moment. What are piecemeal services now could be collected into classes of block‐
chain services.
From the point of view of overall design principles for the blockchain infrastructure,
we would expect to see these classes of sector-specific functionality arriving. Not just
separate blockchain notary services, but a new class of notary chains themselves as
part of the evolving blockchain infrastructure. Notary chains are an example of a
DAO/DAC, a more complicated group of operations that together perform a class of
functions incorporating blockchain technology. In this case, this is the idea of notary
chains as a class of blockchain protocols for attestation services. For example, it might
be more efficient to post batches of transactions as opposed to every individual trans‐
action (requiring the greater-than-zero mining cost). Notary blocks could be com‐
posed of the hashes of many digitally notarized assets; the blocks themselves could
then be hashed so that the notary block is the unit that is inscribed into the block‐
chain, making more efficient use of the system rather than every single digital artifact
that has been notarized. Because hashes are a one-way function, the existence of the
block-level hash in the Bitcoin blockchain constitutes proof of the existence of the
subhashes.105 Moving blockchain design into such an “industrial” DAO/DAC phase
brings up interesting questions about how the optimal mix of hierarchical and decen‐
42 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

tralized architectures will play out in large-scale design architectures. Factom is a
project developing the idea of batched transaction upload in blocks to the blockchain,
using the blockchain attestation/notary hash functionality to batch transactions as a
means of avoiding blockchain bloat.
Personal Thinking Blockchains
More speculatively for the farther future, the notion of blockchain technology as the
automated accounting ledger, the quantized-level tracking device, could be extensible
to yet another category of record keeping and administration. There could be “per‐
sonal thinking chains” as a life-logging storage and backup mechanism. The concept
is “blockchain technology + in vivo personal connectome” to encode and make useful
in a standardized compressed data format all of a person’s thinking. The data could be
captured via intracortical recordings, consumer EEGs, brain/computer interfaces,
cognitive nanorobots, and other methodologies. Thus, thinking could be instantiated
in a blockchain—and really all of an individual’s subjective experience, possibly even‐
tually consciousness, especially if it’s more precisely defined. After they’re on the
blockchain, the various components could be administered and transacted—for
example, in the case of a post-stroke memory restoration.
Just as there has not been a good model with the appropriate privacy and reward sys‐
tems that the blockchain offers for the public sharing of health data and quantified-
self-tracking data, likewise there has not been a model or means of sharing mental
performance data. In the case of mental performance data, there is even more stigma
attached to sharing personal data, but these kinds of “life-streaming + blockchain
technology” models could facilitate a number of ways to share data privately, safely,
and remuneratively. As mentioned, in the vein of life logging, there could be personal
thinking blockchains to capture and safely encode all of an individual’s mental perfor‐
mance, emotions, and subjective experiences onto the blockchain, at minimum for
backup and to pass on to one’s heirs as a historical record. Personal mindfile block‐
chains could be like a next generation of Fitbit or Apple’s iHealth on the iPhone 6,
which now automatically captures 200+ health metrics and sends them to the cloud
for data aggregation and imputation into actionable recommendations. Similarly, per‐
sonal thinking blockchains could be easily and securely recorded (assuming all of the
usual privacy concerns with blockchain technology are addressed) and mental
performance recommendations made to individuals through services such as Siri or
Amazon’s Alexa voice assistant, perhaps piped seamlessly through personal brain/
computer interfaces and delivered as both conscious and unconscious suggestions.
Again perhaps speculatively verging on science fiction, ultimately the whole of a soci‐
ety’s history might include not just a public records and document repository, and an 
Internet archive of all digital activity, but also the mindfiles of individuals. Mindfiles
could include the recording of every “transaction” in the sense of capturing every
Digital Art: Blockchain Attestation Services (Notary, Intellectual Property Protection) 
| 
43

thought and emotion of every entity, human and machine, encoding and archiving
this activity into life-logging blockchains.
Blockchain Government
Another important application developing as part of Blockchain 3.0 is blockchain 
government; that is, the idea of using blockchain technology to provide services tra‐
ditionally provided by nation-states in a decentralized, cheaper, more efficient, per‐
sonalized manner. Many new and different kinds of governance models and services
might be possible using blockchain technology. Blockchain governance takes advan‐
tage of the public record-keeping features of blockchain technology: the blockchain
as a universal, permanent, continuous, consensus-driven, publicly auditable, redun‐
dant, record-keeping repository. The blockchain could become both the mechanism
for governing in the present, and the repository of all of a society’s documents,
records, and history for use in the future—a society’s universal record-keeping sys‐
tem. Not all of the concepts and governance services proposed here necessarily need
blockchain technology to function, but there might be other benefits to implementing
them with blockchain technology, such as rendering them more trustworthy, and in
any case, part of a public record.
One implication of blockchain governance is that government could shift from being
the forced one-size-fits-all “greater good” model at present to one that can be tailored
to the needs of individuals. Imagine a world of governance services as individualized
as Starbucks coffee orders. An example of personalized governance services might be
that one resident pays for a higher-tier waste removal service that includes compost‐
ing, whereas a neighbor pays for a better school package. Personalization in govern‐
ment services, instead of the current one-size-fits-all paradigm, could be orchestrated
and delivered via the blockchain. One example of more granular government services
could be a situation in which smart cities issue Roadcoin to compensate passing-by
drivers for lost #QualityofLife in road construction projects. Likewise, there could be
Accidentcoin that those involved in an accident pay to similarly compensate passing-
by drivers for lost #QualityofLife; payment could be immediate, and shifted later as
insurance companies assess blame.
In science-fiction parlance, it could be said that franchulates as envisioned in Neal
Stephenson’s Snow Crash are finally on the horizon.106 Franchulates are the concept of
a combination of a franchise and consulate, businesses that provide fee-based
quasigovernmental services consumed by individuals as any other product or service,
a concept that blockchain governance could make possible. One attractive aspect of
the franchulates concept is the attitudinal shift: the idea that governments need to
become more like businesses and less of a default monopoly provider of government
services; they should have a more proactive relationship with consumer-citizens,
44 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

offering value propositions and services that are demanded and valued by different
market segments of constituents.
Another implication of blockchain governance is that one vision behind “government
on the blockchain” or “putting a nation on the blockchain” is that a more truly repre‐
sentative democracy might be obtained. One way of effectuating this is, rather than
having to rely on human agents as representatives, using blockchain smart contracts
and DACs. Having many fewer people involved in the governance apparatus could
potentially mean smaller, less costly government, less partisanship, and less special-
interest lobbyist-directed government. As blockchain technology makes financial sys‐
tems more efficient, squeezing the marginal cost down to zero, so too could
blockchain technology reconfigure the tasks of governance and public administra‐
tion. The costs savings of smaller government could proceed directly to Guaranteed
Basic Income initiatives, promoting equality and political participation in society and
easing the transition to the automation economy.
The advent of the blockchain and decentralized models calls into question more gen‐
erally the ongoing validity of population-sized pooled models like government and
insurance that have been de facto standards because other models were not yet possi‐
ble. However, pooled models might no longer make economic or political sense.
Consensus-driven models could be a superior solution economically and offer a more
representative and equitable way of interacting with reality, moving to an open frame
of eradicating situations of illiberty.107 The blockchain-as-an-information-technology
idea is further underscored in blockchain governance as a new, more efficient system
for organizing, administering, coordinating, and recording all human interactions,
whether business, government, or personal. The advent of blockchain technology
calls into question the more effective execution of government services, but also
government-backed rights, which in some cases by design do not (and should not)
respect individuality. So far, most projects have addressed only the governance serv‐
ices side, so there is an opportunity to develop interesting blockchain-based models
for rights enforcement.
Decentralized Governance Services
Choose your government and choose your services. This is the idea of putting the
nation-state on the blockchain, in the sense of offering borderless, decentralized,
opt-in blockchain-based governance services.108 These kinds of services could include
an ID system based on reputation, dispute resolution, voting, national income
distribution, and registration of all manner of legal documents such as land deeds,
wills, childcare contracts, marriage contracts, and corporate incorporations. In fact,
the blockchain—with its structure that accommodates secure identities, multiple con‐
tracts, and asset management—makes it ideal for situations such as marriage because
it means a couple can tie their wedding contract to a shared savings account (e.g., a
Blockchain Government 
| 
45

Bitcoin wallet) and to a childcare contract, land deed, and any other relevant docu‐
ments for a secure future together.109
Indeed, the world’s first blockchain-recorded marriage occurred at Disneyworld,
Florida, on October 5, 2014 (Figure 3-2). The marriage was submitted to the Bitcoin
blockchain, using the blockchain’s property of being an online public registry. The
vows were transmitted in the text annotation field, embedded in a Bitcoin transaction
of 0.1 Bitcoins ($32.50), to appear permanently in the blockchain ledger.110 Liberty.me
CEO Jeffrey Tucker officiated at the ceremony and discussed the further benefits of
denationalized marriage in the context of marriage equality, how marriage can be
more equitably and permissively recorded and recognized in a blockchain than in
many states and nations at present.111 One indication that the “blockchain as public
documents registry” has truly arrived would be, for example, if there were to be cor‐
responding Bitcoin prediction markets contracts for events in the couple’s life, such as
having children, purchasing real estate, and even potentially filing for divorce (which
would also be logged on the blockchain), and the inevitable social science research to
follow showing that blockchain marriages last longer (or not) than their religious or
civil counterparts.   
Figure 3-2. World’s first Bitcoin wedding, David Mondrus and Joyce Bayo, Disneyworld,
Florida, October 5, 2014 (image credit: Bitcoin Magazine, Ruben Alexander)
Blockchain-based governance systems could offer a range of services traditionally
provided by governments, all of which could be completely voluntary, with user-
citizens opting in and out at will. Just as Bitcoin is emerging as a better alternative to
fiat currency in some situations (cheaper, more efficient, easier to transmit, immedi‐
ately received, and a superior payments mechanism), the same could be true for
blockchain-based governance services. The same services a traditional “fiat” govern‐
ment carries out could be delivered in a cheaper, distributed, voluntary way by using
blockchain technology. The blockchain lends itself well to being a universal, perma‐
nent, searchable, irrevocable public records repository. All government legal docu‐
46 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

ments such as deeds, contracts, and identification cards can be stored on the
blockchain. Identity systems such as blockchain-based passports would need to ach‐
ieve critical mass adoption in order to be recognized, just as Bitcoin does in the case
of being recognized and being widely usable as money. One project that provides the
code for a blockchain-based passport system is the World Citizen project.112 The
project aims to create world citizenship through affordable decentralized passport
services by using available cryptographic tools (Figure 3-3).
Figure 3-3. The World Citizen Project’s Blockchain-based passport (image credit: Chris
Ellis)
A key point is that anyone worldwide can use decentralized government services; just
because you live in a particular geography should not restrict you to certain govern‐
ment services and mean that you have only one government provider. Governments
have been a monopoly, but with blockchain government services in the global
Internet-connected world, this need not be the case any longer. The possibility of
global currencies like Bitcoin and global government services bring up important
questions about the shifting nature of nation-states and what their role should be in
the future. A country might be something like a hometown, where you are from, but
not in sharp relief in day-to-day activities in a world where currency, finance, profes‐
sional activities, collaboration, government services, and record keeping are on the
blockchain. Further, Bitcoin provides a transition to a world in which individuals are
increasingly mobile between nation-states and could benefit from one overall gover‐
nance system rather than the host of inefficiencies in complying with multiple
nation-states. As is standard with cryptocurrency code, decentralized governance
software, too, would be open source and forkable, so that anyone can create his own
blockchain nation and government services in this collaborative platform for
DIYgovernance.
In the area of titling and deeds, as Bitcoin is to remittances, decentralized blockchain
government services is to the implementation of a property ownership registry, and
could be the execution of the detailed plans set forth by development economists
such as Hernando de Soto.113 Decentralized blockchain-based government services
Blockchain Government 
| 
47

such as public documents registries and titling could be a useful tool for scaling the
efforts already in place by organizations such as de Sotos’s Institute for Liberty and
Democracy, or ILD, which has programs to document, evaluate, and diagnose the
extralegal sector and bring it into alignment with the legal system. A universal
blockchain-based property registry could bring much-needed ownership documenta‐
tion, transferability, transactability, value capture, and opportunity and mobilization
to emerging markets where these structures do not exist or are nascent (and simulta‐
neously, potential business for its blockchain service cousin, dispute resolution). As
some countries in Africa were able to leapfrog directly to cellular telephone networks
without installing copper wire infrastructure (and some countries might be able to
leapfrog directly to preventive medicine with personalized genomics114), so too could
emerging-market countries leapfrog directly to the implementation of blockchain
property registries. Other blockchain government services could facilitate similar
leapfrogging—for example, speeding Aadhar’s (the world’s largest biometric data‐
base115) efforts in issuing national ID cards to the 25 percent of Indians who did not
have them, and helping to eliminate inefficiencies in national ID card programs due
to issues like ghost IDs and duplicate IDs.
PrecedentCoin: Blockchain Dispute Resolution
Another Blockchain 3.0 project focuses exclusively on using the blockchain for more
effective dispute resolution. Precedent is conceptually like “The People’s Court or
Judge Judy on the blockchain.” So far there has been no way to take advantage of a
centralized repository of precedents used to resolve disputes, so Precedent is develop‐
ing a concept, framework, altcoin, and community to implement a decentralized
autonomous legal procedure organization (as described in further detail in “The
Precedent Protocol Whitepaper.” Precedent’s “polycentric decentralized legal system”
makes it possible for individual users to pick the legal system and features they like,
emphasizing the ongoing theme of blockchain-enabled personalization of governance
and legal systems. The Precedent legal/dispute-resolution community is incentivized
to develop with the community coin, PrecedentCoin or nomos.
In the same way that a decentralized community of miners maintains the Bitcoin
blockchain by checking, confirming, and recording new transactions, so too func‐
tionally do “dispute precedent miners” in the Precedent community by entering new
disputes, resolved disputes, and precedents on the dispute resolution blockchain (the
blockchain entries are links to securely stored off-chain content with the dispute/
precedent details). Precedent runs as a blockchain metaprotocol overlay (structurally
like Counterparty). Proof of precedent is envisioned as part of the system’s consensus
mechanism (analogous to proof of work or proof of stake in Bitcoin mining). The
Precedent system is radically peer-to-peer; users dictate what it means for a dispute to
be justiciable (appropriate or suitable for adjudication), and they can fork the proto‐
col if new standards are deemed preferable. The tokenized altcoin, Precedentcoin or
48 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

nomos, is used for community economic functions like paying to submit a dispute to
the network and remunerating “miners” for community dispute resolution tasks
(conceptually like community “jurors” or “citizen dispute resolvers”).
It should be noted that, as the project points out in a white paper, “The Precedent
Protocol is strictly concerned with the justiciability of the dispute in question and is
wholly agnostic to the justness or fairness of the outcome.” Thus, there is potential
risk for abuse, in the form of buying or collectively achieving a strange or unfair deci‐
sion by consensus. The project aims to decide only the justiciability of a dispute—the
point of law, not the point of fact.
Liquid Democracy and Random-Sample Elections
Other blockchain governance efforts focus more directly on developing systems to
make democracy more effective. In the model of a DAS (distributed autonomous
society), there could be a need to set forth standardized principles for consensus-
based decentralized governance systems, and decentralized voting systems such as
that offererd by BitCongress.116 Other projects focus on other ideas such as delegative
democracy, a form of democratic control where voting power is vested in delegates, as
opposed to representatives (as many congressional and parliamentary models today).
One such project is Liquid Democracy, which provides open source software to facili‐
tate proposition development and decision making.
In the Liquid Democracy system, a party member can assign a proxy vote to any
other member, thereby assigning a personal delegate instead of voting for a represen‐
tative. A member can give her vote to another member for all issues, for a particular
policy area, or for only a particular decision for any length of time. That vote can be
rescinded at any time. Under this system, a person can become a delegate for multiple
members within a polity very quickly, wielding the political power normally reserved
for elected representatives as a result. But, a person can lose this power just as quickly.
This is the “liquid” in Liquid Democracy, a process that can also be referred to as
“transitive delegation.” If someone is respected as a trusted expert in a particular area,
he can gain members’ votes. As a result, every person within a Liquid Democracy
platform is a potential politician.117 There are clearly many potential issues with the
Liquid Democracy platform as currently set forth. One concern is stability and
continuity over time, which could be resolved with agent reputation mechanisms,
broadly confirmable and transferrable if stored in an accessible blockchain.
The idea of delegated decision making, supported and executed in blockchain-based
frameworks might have wide applicability beyond the political voting and policy
making context. For example, health is another area for which advocacy, advice, and
decision making are often delegated and poorly tracked with almost no accountabil‐
ity. Blockchain technology creates an opportunity for the greater accountability and
tracking of such delegation. For example, the bioethical nuances of delegated medical
Blockchain Government 
| 
49

decision making articulated in the book Deciding for Others, by Allen Buchanan,
could be implemented in Liquid Democracy structure.118 This could improve health
care–related decision making, and enable a system of decentralized advocacy, as
many individuals do not have adequate informed advisors on hand to act on their
behalf. In the farther future, cultural technologies such as the blockchain could
become a mechanism for applied ethics.
Liquid Democracy is also a proposition development platform. Any member can pro‐
pose a new idea. If enough other members support the proposition, it moves on to a
discussion phase, at which point it can be modified and alternatives put forward. Of
the proposals that are offered, those with enough support are put up for a vote. A
vote is made using the Schultz method of preferential voting, which ensures that
votes are not split by almost identical “cloned” proposals (like double-spend problem
for votes). All of this is coordinated in the online platform. The voting system can run
at different levels of transparency: disclosed identity, anonymity, or a hybrid system of 
authenticated pseudonymity. An unresolved issue is how binding decisions made by
the Liquid Democracy system might be and what enforcement or follow-up mecha‐
nisms can be included in the software. Perhaps initially Liquid Democracy could
serve as an intermediary tool for coordinating votes and indicating directional
outcomes.
Ideas for a more granular application of democracy have been proposed for years, but
it is only now with the Internet and the advent of systems like blockchain technology
that these kinds of complex and dynamic decision-making mechanisms become fea‐
sible to implement in real-world contexts. For example, the idea for delegative
democracy in the form of transitive voting was initially proposed by Lewis Carroll
(the author of Alice in Wonderland) in his book The Principles of Parliamentary
Representation.119 
Random-Sample Elections
In addition to delegative democracy, another idea that could be implemented with
blockchain governance is random-sample elections. In random-sample elections,
randomly selected voters receive a ballot in the mail and are directed to an election
website that features candidate debates and activist statements. As articulated by
cryptographer David Chaum,120 the idea is that (like the ideal of a poll) randomly
sampled voters would be more representative (or could at least include underrepre‐
sented voters) and give voters more time to deliberate on issues privately at home,
seeking their own decision-making resources rather than being swayed by advertis‐
ing.121 Blockchain technology could be a means of implementing random-sample
elections in a large-scale, trustable, pseudonymous way.
50 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

Futarchy: Two-Step Democracy with Voting + Prediction Markets
Another concept is futarchy, a two-level process by which individuals first vote on
generally specified outcomes (like “increase GDP”), and second, vote on specific
proposals for achieving these outcomes. The first step would be carried out by
regular voting processes, the second step via prediction markets. Prediction market
voting could be by different cryptocurrencies (the EconomicVotingCoin or
EnvironmentalPolicyVotingCoin) or other economically significant tokens. Predic‐
tion market voting is investing/speculating, taking a bet on one or the other side of a
proposal, betting on the proposal that you want to win. For example, you might buy
the “invest in new biotechnologies contract” as what you think is the best means of
achieving the “increase in GDP” objective, as opposed to other contracts like the
“invest in automated agriculture contract”). As with random-sampling elections,
blockchain technology could more efficiently implement the futarchy concept in an
extremely large-scale manner (decentralized, trusted, recorded, pseudonymous). The
futarchy concept is described in shorthand as “vote for values, bet on beliefs,” an idea
initially proposed by economist Robin Hanson,122 and expounded in the blockchain
context by Ethereum project founder Vitalik Buterin.123 This is a quintessential exam‐
ple of the potential transformative power of blockchain technology. There is the pos‐
sibility that voting and preference-specification models (like futarchy’s two-tiered
voting structure using blockchain technology) could became a common, widespread
norm and feature or mechanism for all complex multiparty human decision making.
One effect of this could be a completely new level of coordinated human activity that
is orders of magnitude more complex than at present. Of course, any new governance
structure including futarchy has ample room for abuse, and mechanisms for restrict‐
ing coercion and outright results hacking are incorporated to some degree but would
need to be improved upon in more robust models.
For the agreed-upon consensus necessary to register blockchain transactions, there
could be at least two models, and potentially many more in the future. The first con‐
sensus mechanism is the mining operation: with the aid of software, miners review,
confirm, and register transactions. The second consensus mechanism is prediction
markets. An event might be assumed to be true if enough independent unaffiliated
persons have voted their opinion that it is true in a prediction market. Truthcoin is
such a blockchain-based, trustless, peer-to-peer prediction marketplace that hopes to
resolve some problems with traditional prediction markets, such as bias in voters,
and integrate the prediction market concept with the remunerative coin and public
records structure of Bitcoin.124 Even farther, Truthcoin aims to provide a trustless ora‐
cle service, registering what might be relevant events of record in the blockchain.
Some examples of “information items” of interest would be the current interest rate,
the daily high temperature, and cryptocurrency daily high and low prices and trading
volume. For blockchain-based smart contract operations, independent oracles pro‐
viding information are a key component in the value chain. For example, blockchain-
Blockchain Government 
| 
51

based mortgage might have certain interest rate reset dates in the future that could be
automatically implemented upon having a trustable source of future information,
such as that registered in a blockchain by a reputable independent oracle, like Truth‐
coin.
Societal Maturity Impact of Blockchain Governance
A side benefit of blockchain governance is that it might force individuals and societ‐
ies to grow into a new level of maturity in how topics like governance, authority,
independence, and participation are conceptualized and executed. We are not used to
governance being a personal responsibility and a peer-to-peer system as opposed to
something externally imposed by a distant centralized institution. We are not used to
many aspects of blockchain technology, like having to back up our money, but we
learn appropriate savviness and new behaviors and conceptualizations when adopting
new technologies. We are not used to decentralized political authority and autonomy.
However, we have matured into the reception of decentralized authority in other con‐
texts. Authority floating freely has already happened in other industries such as infor‐
mation, wherein the news and publishing industry became decentralized with
blogging and the restructuring of the media industry. Entertainment is similar, with
corporate media properties existing alongside YouTube channels, and individuals
uploading their own content to the Web. The value chain has exploded into the long-
tail format, and individuals became their own taste makers and quality arbiters. A
crucial twenty-first-century skill is that individuals must examine content and think
for themselves about its quality and validity. The Bitcoin revolution is the same thing
happening now with currency, economics, finance, and monetary policy. It might
seem harder to let go of centralized authority in matters of government and econom‐
ics as opposed to culture and information, but there is no reason that social maturity
could not develop similarly in this context. 
52 
| 
Chapter 3: Blockchain 3.0: Justice Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

CHAPTER 4
Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination
Applications Beyond Currency,
Economics, and Markets
Blockchain Science: Gridcoin, Foldingcoin
As blockchain technology could revolutionize the operation of other fields, innova‐
tors are starting to envision how the concepts might apply to science. So far, the main
thread is related to peer-to-peer distributed computing projects for which individual
volunteers provide unused computing cycles to Internet-based distributed computing
projects. Two notable projects are SETI@home (the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelli‐
gence, which uses contributed computing cycles to help analyze radio signals from
space, searching for signs of extraterrestrial intelligence), and Folding@home (a Stan‐
ford University project for which computing cycles are used to simulate protein fold‐
ing, for computational drug design and other molecular dynamics problems). Per
blockchain technology, remunerative coin has been set up to reward participants in
both the SETI@home and Folding@home projects. For SETI@home, there is Grid‐
coin, which is the remunerative coin available to all BOINC (Berkeley Open Infra‐
structure for Network Computing) projects, the infrastructure upon which
SETI@home runs. For Folding@home, there is FoldingCoin, a Counterparty token
that runs and is exchangeable to the more liquid XCP cryptocurrency (and therefore
out to Bitcoin and fiat currency) via the Counterparty wallet (Counterwallet).
A more fundamental use of the blockchain for science could be addressing the waste‐
fulness of the mining network, which consumes massive amounts of electricity.
Instead of being used to crunch arbitrary numbers, perhaps the extensive processing
power could be applied to the more practical task of solving existing science
problems. However, a mining algorithm must meet very specific conditions, like gen‐
53

erating code strings or hashes that are easily verifiable in one direction but not in
reverse, which is not the structure of traditional scientific computing problems.125
There are some cryptocurrency projects trying to make blockchain mining scientifi‐
cally useful—for example, Primecoin, for which miners are required to find long
chains of prime numbers (Cunningham chains and bi-twin chains) instead of
SHA256 hashes (the random guesses of a specific number issued by mining software
programs based on given general parameters).126 There is an opportunity for greater
progress in this area to reformulate supercomputing and desktop grid computing
problems, which have been organized mainly in a massively parallel fashion, into a
mining-compatible format to take advantage of otherwise wasted computing cycles.127
Gridcoin, if not solving the problem of using otherwise wasted mining cycles, at least
tries to align incentives by encouraging miners to also contribute computing cycles:
miners are compensated at a much higher rate (5 GRC versus a maximum of 150
GRC) for mining a currency block when also contributing computing cycles. A typi‐
cal complaint about blockchain technology is the wastefulness of mining, both in
terms of unused computing cycles and electricity consumption. The media presents
estimates of power consumption such as “the Eiffel Tower could stay lit for 260 years
with the energy used to mine Bitcoins since 2009,”128 and that in 2013 Bitcoin mining
was consuming about 982 megawatt hours a day (enough to power 31,000 homes in
the United States, or half a Large Hadron Collider),129 at a cost of $15 million a day.130
However, the comparison metric is unclear; should these figures be regarded as a lit‐
tle or a lot (and what are the direct economic benefits of the Eiffel Tower and the
LHC, for that matter)? Bitcoin proponents counter that the blockchain model is
vastly cheaper when you consider the fully loaded cost of the current financial sys‐
tem, which includes the entire infrastructure of physical plant bank branch offices
and personnel. They point out that the cost to deliver $100 via the blockchain is
much cheaper than traditional methods. Still, there is concern over how Bitcoin could
eliminate its wasteful consumption of electricity for mining while continuing to
maintain the blockchain, and 3.0 innovations could be expected. One response is
cryptocurrencies that are apparently more energy efficient, such as Mintcoin.
Community Supercomputing
SETI@home and Folding@home are community supercomputing projects in the
sense that a community of individual volunteers contributes the raw resource of com‐
puting cycles; they are not involved in setting the research agenda. A more empow‐
ered model of community supercomputing would be using the resource-allocation
mechanism of the blockchain to allow noninstitutional researchers access to super‐
computing time for their own projects of interest. In a model like Kickstarter, indi‐
viduals could list projects requiring supercomputing time and find other project
collaborators and funders, soliciting and rewarding activities with appcoin or site‐
coin. An early project in this area, Zennet, has been announced which may allow
54 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

community users to specify their own supercomputing projects and access shared
desktop grid resources via a blockchain structure. Citizen science data analysis
projects are under way and were perhaps initially demonstrated in the example of
mass collaboration on open data sets in the book Wikinomics (2008).131 The difference
is in liberty extending: now using the blockchain means that these kinds of citizen
science projects can be deployed at much larger scale—in fact, the largest scale—at a
tier at which (per resource constraints) citizen scientists do not currently have access.
Wikinomics and other examples have documented the scientifically valid contribu‐
tions of citizen science as a channel.132 Projects such as DIYweathermodeling, for
example, could have the benefit of getting citizen scientists involved in contributing
evidence to large-scale issues like the climate change debate.
Global Public Health: Bitcoin for Contagious Disease Relief
Another application of blockchain health is in global public health, for the efficient,
immediate, targeted delivery of aid funds for supplies in the case of crises like Ebola
and other contagious disease breakouts.133 Traditional banking flows hamper the
immediacy of aid delivery in crisis situations, as opposed to Bitcoin, which can be
delivered immediately to specific publicly auditable trackable addresses. Individual
peer-to-peer aid as well as institutional aid could be contributed via Bitcoin. In
emerging markets (often with cellphone penetration or 70 percent or higher) there
are a number of SMS Bitcoin wallets and delivery mechanisms, such as 37Coins134
and Coinapult, and projects such as Kipochi135 that are integrated with commonly
used mobile finance platforms like M-Pesa (in Kenya, for example, 31 percent of the
GDP is spent through mobile phones136). Apps could be built on infectious disease
tracking sites like Healthmap and FluTrackers to include Bitcoin donation functional‐
ity or remunerative appcoin more generally.
Charity Donations and the Blockchain—Sean’s Outpost
Perhaps the world’s best-known Bitcoin-accepting charity is Sean’s Outpost, a home‐
less outreach nonprofit organization based in Pensacola, Florida. Capitalizing on the
trend of individuals receiving Bitcoin and not having any local venues to spend it in
or otherwise not knowing what to do with it, and Bitcoin startups needing to demo
how Bitcoin is sent on the Web, Sean’s Outpost has been able to raise significant
donor contributions and undertake projects like a nine-acre “Satoshi Forest” sanctu‐
ary for the homeless.137
Blockchain Genomics
The democratization and freedom-enhancing characteristics of the blockchain seen
in many projects also apply in the case of consumer genomics, which is the concept of
uplifting organizations to the blockchain (to the cloud in a decentralized, secure way)
Blockchain Genomics 
| 
55

to escape the limitations of local jurisdictional laws and regulation. That there is a
need for this does not necessarily signal illegal “bad players” with malicious intent;
rather, it indicates a lack of trust, support, relevance, and espousal of shared values in
local jurisdictional governments. Traditional government 1.0 is becoming outdated as
a governance model in the blockchain era, especially as we begin to see the possibility
to move from paternalistic, one-size-fits-all structures to a more granular personal‐
ized form of government. Genomics can be added to the list of examples of uplifting
transnational organizations to the decentralized blockchain cloud like ICANN, Wiki‐
Leaks, Twitter, Wikipedia, GitHub, and new business registrations as DACs. Transna‐
tional blockchain genomics makes sense in the context of the right to personal
information (the right to one’s own genetic information) being seen as a basic human
right, especially given the increasing cost feasibility per plummeting genomic
sequencing costs.
In one view, consumer genomics can be seen as a classic case of personal freedom
infringement. In many European countries and the United States, paternalistic gov‐
ernment policy (influenced by the centralized strength of the medical-industry lobby)
prevents individuals from having access to their own genetic data. Even in countries
where personal genomic information is used in health care, there is most often no
mechanism for individuals to get access to their own underlying data. In the United
States, prominent genomic researchers have tried to make a public case that the “FDA
[Food and Drug Administration] is overcautious on consumer genomics,”138 and
established in studies that there is no detrimental effect to individuals having access
to their own genomic data.139 In fact, the opposite might be true: in the humans-as-
rational-agents model, 80 percent of individuals learning of a potential genetic pre‐
disposition for Alzheimer’s disease modified their life-style behaviors (e.g., exercise
and vitamin consumption) as a result.140 Other news accounts continue to chronicle
how individuals are seeking their own genomic data and finding it useful—for exam‐
ple, to learn about Alzheimer’s and heart disease risk.141
As a result of paternalistic purview, and no clear government policies for the preven‐
tive medicine era, US-based consumer genomics services have closed (deCO‐
DEme142), directed their services exclusively toward a physician-permissioning model
(Pathway Genomics, Navigenics), or been forced to greatly curtail their consumer-
targeted services (23andMe143). In response, blockchain-based genomic services
could be an idea for providing low-cost genomic sequencing to individuals, making
the data available via private key.
One of the largest current transformational challenges in public health and medicine
is moving from the current narrowband model of “having only been able to treat
diagnosed pathologies” to a completely new data-rich era of preventive medicine for
which the goal is maintaining, prolonging, and enhancing baseline health.144 Such a
wellness era is now beginning to be possible through the use of personalized big data
as predictive information about potential future conditions. Personalized genomics is
56 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

a core health data stream for preventive medicine as well as individuals as knowl‐
edgeable, self-interested, action-taking agents.145
In fact, as of November 2014, a blockchain genomics project, Genecoin, has launched
an exploratory website to assess potential consumer interest, positioning the service
as a means of backing up your DNA.146
Blockchain Genomics 2.0: Industrialized All-Human-Scale Sequencing
Solution
At one level, there could be blockchain-enabled services where genomic data is
sequenced and made available to individuals by private key outside the jurisdiction of
local governments. However, at another higher level, as a practical matter, to achieve
the high-throughput sequencing needed for all seven billion humans, larger-scale
models are required, and blockchain technology could be a helpful mechanism for
the realization of this project. Individuals ordering their genomes piecemeal through
consumer genomic services is an initial proof of concept in some ways (and a health
literacy tool as well as a possible delivery mechanism for personal results and recom‐
mendations), but not an “all-human-scale” solution for sequencing. Blockchain tech‐
nology, in the form of a universal model for record keeping and data storage and
access (a secure, decentralized, pseudonymous file structure for data stored and
accessed in the cloud) could be the technology that is needed to move into the next
phase of industrialized genomic sequencing. This applies to genomic sequencing gen‐
erally as an endeavor, irrespective of the personal data rights access issue. Sequencing
all humans is just one dimension of sequencing demand; there is also the sequencing
of all plants, animals, crops, viruses, bacteria, disease-strain pathogens, microbiomes,
cancer genomes, proteomes, and so on, to name a few use cases.
There is a scale production and efficiency argument for blockchain-based transna‐
tional genomic services. To move to large-scale sequencing as a “universal human
society,” the scope and scale of sequencing and corresponding information processing
workloads suggests not just transnationality, but more important, heavy integration
with the cloud (genomic data is too big for current forms of local storage and manip‐
ulation), and the blockchain delivers both transnationality and the cloud. Transna‐
tional regional centers for genomic sequencing and processing and information
management of the sequenced files could be the best way to structure the industry
given the cost, expertise, equipment, and scale required. This could be a more effi‐
cient solution rather than each country developing its own capabilities. Blockchain
technology might be used to achieve a high-throughput level of industrialized
genomic sequencing—on the order of millions and billions of genomes, well beyond
today’s hundreds. In reality, blockchain technology might supply just one aspect of
what might be needed; other issues are more critical in achieving industrialized
genomic sequencing operations (information processing and data storage is seen as
the real bottleneck). However, the blockchain ecosystem is inventing many new
Blockchain Genomics 
| 
57

methods for other operational areas along the way and might be able to innovate in a
complementary manner for a full solution to industrial-scale genomic sequencing,
including recasting the problem in different ways as with decentralization concepts. 
Blockchain Technology as a Universal Order-of-Magnitude Progress
Model
Blockchain technology might be indicative of the kinds of mechanisms and models
needed to achieve the next orders-of-magnitude progress in areas like big data, mov‐
ing to what would currently be conceived as “truly-big-data,” and well beyond.
Genomic sequencing could be one of the first demonstration contexts of these
higher-orders-of-magnitude models for progress.
Genomecoin, GenomicResearchcoin
Even without considering the longer-term speculative possibilities of the complete
invention of an industrial-scale all-human genome sequencing project with the
blockchain, just adding blockchain technology as a feature to existing sequencing
activities could be enabling. Conceptually, this would be like adding coin functional‐
ity or blockchain functionality to services like DNAnexus, a whole-human genome
cloud-based storage service. Operating in collaboration with university collaborators
(Baylor College of Medicine’s Human Genome Sequencing Center) and Amazon Web
Services, the DNAnexus solution is perhaps the largest current data store of genomes,
having 3,751 whole human genomes and 10,771 exomes (440 terabytes) as of 2013.147
The progress to date is producing a repository of 4,000 human genomes, out of the
possible field of 7 billion humans, which highlights the need for large-scale models in
these kinds of big data projects (human whole-genome sequencing). The DNAnexus
database is not a public good with open access; only 300 worldwide preapproved
genomic researchers have permission to use it. The Genomic Data Commons148 is a
US-government-funded large-scale data warehouse and computational computing
project being assembled to focus on genomic research and personalized medicine. In
this case, the resource is said to be available to any US-based researcher. This is a
good step forward in organizing data into standard unified repositories and allowing
access to a certain population. A further step could be using an appcoin like Genome‐
coin to expand access on a grander scale as a public good fully accessible by any indi‐
vidual worldwide. Further, the appcoin could be the tracking, coordination, crediting,
and renumerative mechanism sponsoring collaboration in the Genome Data Com‐
mons community. Like the aforementioned Wikinomics example, the highest poten‐
tial possibility for discovery could be in making datasets truly open for diverse sets of
individuals and teams from a variety of fields and backgrounds to apply any kind of
model they might have developed.
58 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

One benefit of “Bitcoin/blockchain-as-economics” is that the technology automati‐
cally enables embedded economics as a feature in any system. In the genomic
sequencing and storage context, the economics feature could be used in numerous
ways, such as obtaining more accurate costs of research (blockchain economics as
tracking and accounting) and to remunerate data contributors (whether institutional
or individual) with Genomecoin or GenomicResearchcoin (blockchain economics as
micropayment remuneration). The economic/accounting tracking features of the
blockchain further allows now other foreseen capabilities of the blockchain, such as
attribution as an enabler for large-scale human projects (like attribution at the Git‐
Hub line item of committed code or digital asset IP-protected ideas). Attribution is a
crucial feature for encouraging individual participation in large-scale projects. 
Blockchain Health
In the future, there might be different kinds of blockchains (ledgers) for recording
and tracking different kinds of processes, and exchanging and providing access to
different kinds of assets, including digital health assets. Blockchain health is the idea
of using blockchain technology for health-related applications.149 The key benefit
behind blockchain health is that the blockchain provides a structure for storing
health data on the blockchain such that it can be analyzed but remain private, with an
embedded economic layer to compensate data contribution and use.150
Healthcoin
Healthcoin could more broadly be the coin or token for health spending, forcing
price discovery and rationalization across health services. Services in national health
plans could be denominated and paid in Healthcoin. This could help to improve eco‐
nomic inefficiencies rife within the health-services industry. Price transparency—and
a universal price list—could result, such that every time a certain health service is
performed, it costs 5 Healthcoin, for example, instead of the current system (in the
United States) where each consumer might pay a different amount that is a complex
calculation of the multipayor system connecting different insurers and plans.
EMRs on the Blockchain: Personal Health Record Storage
Personal health records could be stored and administered via blockchain like a vast
electronic electronic medical record (EMR) system. Taking advantage of the pseu‐
donymous (i.e., coded to a digital address, not a name) nature of blockchain
technology and its privacy (private key access only), personal health records could be
encoded as digital assets and put on the blockchain just like digital currency. Individ‐
uals could grant doctors, pharmacies, insurance companies, and other parties access
to their health records as needed via their private key. In addition, services for putting
EMRs onto the blockchain could promote a universal format, helping to resolve the
Blockchain Health 
| 
59

issue that even though most large health services providers have moved to an EMR
system, they are widely divergent and not sharable or interoperable. The blockchain
could provide a universal exchangeable format and storage repository for EMRs at a
population-wide scale.
Blockchain Health Research Commons
One benefit of creating standardized EMR repositories is exactly that they are reposi‐
tories: vast standardized databases of health information in a standardized format
accessible to researchers.  Thus far, nearly all health data stores have been in inacces‐
sible private silos—for example, data from one of the world’s largest longitudinal
health studies, the Framingham Heart Study. The blockchain could provide a stand‐
ardized secure mechanism for digitizing health data into health data commons,
which could be made privately available to researchers. One example of this is
DNA.bits, a startup that encodes patient DNA records to the blockchain, and makes
them available to researchers by private key.151
However, it is not just that private health data research commons could be established
with the blockchain, but also public health data commons. Blockchain technology
could provide a model for establishing a cost-effective public-health data commons.
Many individuals would like to contribute personal health data—like personal
genomic data from 23andMe, quantified-self tracking device data (FitBit), and health
and fitness app data (MapMyRun)—to data research commons, in varying levels of
openness/privacy, but there has not been a venue for this. This data could be aggrega‐
ted in a public-health commons (like Wikipedia for health) that is open to anyone,
citizen scientists and institutional researchers alike, to perform data analysis. The
hypothesis is that integrating big health data streams (genomics, lifestyle, medical his‐
tory, etc.) and running machine learning and other algorithms over them might yield
correlations and data relationships that could be helpful for wellness maintenance
and preventive medicine.152 In general, health research could be conducted more
effectively through the aggregation of personal health record data stored on the
blockchain (meaning stored off-chain with pointers on-chain). The economic feature
of the blockchain could facilitate research, as well. Users might feel more comfortable
contributing their personal health data to a public data commons like the blockchain,
first because it is private (data is encrypted and pseudonymous), and second for
remuneration in the form of Healthcoin or some other sort of digital token.
Blockchain Health Notary
Notary-type proof-of-existence services are a common need in the health industry.
Proof of insurance, test results, prescriptions, status, condition, treatment, and physi‐
cian referrals are just a few examples of health document–related services often
required. The “notary function” as a standard blockchain application is equally well
deployed in the context of blockchain health. Health documents can be encoded to
60 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

the blockchain as digital assets, which could then be verified and confirmed in sec‐
onds with encryption technology as opposed to hours or days with traditional tech‐
nology. The private-key functionality of the blockchain could also make certain
health services and results delivery, such as STD screening, more efficient and secure.
Doctor Vendor RFP Services and Assurance Contracts
Blockchain health could create more of a two-way market for all health services. Doc‐
tors and health practices could bid to supply medical services needed by patient-
consumers. Just as Uber drivers bid for driver assignments with customers, doctor
practices could bid for hip replacements and other needed health services—for exam‐
ple, in Healthcoin—at minimum bringing some degree of price transparency and
improved efficiency to the health sector. This bidding could be automated via trade‐
nets for another level of autonomy, efficiency, and equality.
Virus Bank, Seed Vault Backup
The third step of blockchain health as a standardized repository and a data research
commons is backup and archival, not just in the operational sense based on practi‐
tioner needs, but as a historical human data record. This is the use case of the block‐
chain as a public good. Blockchain backup could provide another security layer to the
physical-world practices of virus banks, gene banks, and seed vaults. The blockchain
could be the digital instantiation of physical-world storage centers like the Svalbard
Global Seed Vault (a secure seedbank containing duplicate samples of worldwide
plant seeds), and World Health Organization–designated repositories like the CDC
for pathogen storage such as the smallpox virus. A clear benefit is that in the case of
disease outbreaks, response time can be hastened as worldwide researchers are pri‐
vate key–permissioned into the genetic sequencing files of pathogens of interest. 
Blockchain Learning: Bitcoin MOOCs and Smart Contract
Literacy
Blockchain-based smart contracts could have myriad uses. One possibility is smart
literacy contracts. Bitcoin MOOCs (massive open online courses) and smart literacy
contracts encompass the idea of opening up emerging-market smart-contract learn‐
ing to all individuals worldwide the same way that traditional MOOCs opened up
educational courses to all individuals worldwide. Just as Bitcoin is reinventing the
remittances market and bringing about financial inclusion, so too the foreign aid
market can be reinvented with blockchain-based, peer-to-peer smart contracts. The
concept is like Kiva, Grameen microlending, or Heifer International 2.0, which could
include peer-to-peer financial aid, but more importantly allows the configuration of
peer-to-peer aid that is not currency-based but personal development-based. Block‐
chain Learning is decentralized learning contracts.
Blockchain Learning: Bitcoin MOOCs and Smart Contract Literacy 
| 
61

One way to improve literacy in emerging markets (perhaps the key metric for poverty
eradication) could be via decentralized smart contracts for literacy written between a
donor/sponsor peer and a learning peer. Much in the way that Bitcoin is the decen‐
tralized (very low fee charging, no intermediary) means of exchanging currencies
between countries, a decentralized contract system could be helpful for setting up
learning contracts directly with students/student groups in a similar peer-to-peer
manner, conceptually similar to a personalized Khan Academy curriculum program.
Learners would receive Bitcoin, Learncoin, or the local token directly into their digi‐
tal wallets—like 37Coins, Coinapolt, or Kipochi (used as Bitcoin or converted into
local fiat currency)—from worldwide peer donors, and use this to fund their educa‐
tion expenses at school or separately on their own. A key part of the value chain is
having a reporting mechanism (enabled and automated by Ethereum smart contracts,
for example) to attest to learner progress. Rules embedded in learning smart contracts
could automatically confirm the completion of learning modules through standar‐
dized online tests (including confirming the learner’s digital identity, such as with
short-handle names for Bitcoin addresses provided with services like OneName,
BitID, and Bithandle). Satisfying the learning contract could then automatically trig‐
ger the disbursement of subsequent funds for the next learning modules. Blockchain
learning contracts can be coordinated completely on a peer-to-peer basis between the
learner and the learning sponsor; and really directly with the automated software
contract. Again, the idea is like Kiva or Heifer International (i.e., peer-to-peer direct)
for blockchain literacy for individualized learning contracts.
Learncoin
Learncoin could be the currency of the smart contract literacy system, with schools,
student groups, or individuals issuing their own token: MthelieLearncoin, Huruma
Girls High School tokens, or PS 135 tokens (that all convert to Learncoin, and to Bit‐
coin). School fundraising in any area worldwide could be conducted with Learncoin
and LocalSchoolName tokens. Just as physician RFPs make the health services market
two-sided, students or student groups could post their open learning contracts (or
funding needs and budget) to a Learning Exchange, which could be fulfilled by
learning-funders on the other side of the transaction.
Learning Contract Exchanges
Learning contract exchanges could apply in a much broader sense—for example, as a
universal learning model. This could apply to government workforce retraining,
graduate students, and employees within corporations. Learning contract exchanges
could be a way of reinventing or improving the orchestration of the continuing pro‐
fessional education (CPE) programs required for many fields like law, information
technology, and medicine. Learning contracts in the development context could be
extended to many use cases in emerging markets. There could be many categories of
62 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

“literacy” contracts, such as basic reading for elementary school children, but also for
every area of education, such as vocational learning (technical literacy and agricul‐
tural literacy), business literacy, social literacy, and leadership literacy. 
Blockchain Academic Publishing: Journalcoin
As every category of organized human activity has moved onto the Internet and cur‐
rently has the possibility of being reinvented and made more efficient, fair, and other‐
wise attribute-enabled with the blockchain, so too could academic publishing be put
on the blockchain. There have been innovations toward openness in the academic
publishing field, such as open-access journals, which although they provide open
access to article content instead of keeping it behind a paywall, force authors to sup‐
port possibly prohibitive publication fees. So far, the Bitcoin convention of making
open source code available by publishing software for cryptocurrency blockchains
and protocols on GitHub has extended to some forms of “academic” publishing in the
area, too, as white papers are posted as “Readme files” on GitHub. For example, there
is blockchain venture capitalist David Johnston’s Dapp paper (“The General Theory
of Decentralized Applications”) and Factom’s concept for batching the notarization of
digital artifacts paper (the “Notary Chains” white paper).
An interesting challenge for academic publishing on the blockchain is not just having
an open-access, collaboratively edited, ongoing-discussion-forum journal per existing
examples, or open-access, self-published blockchain white papers on GitHub, but to
more fundamentally implement the blockchain concepts in blockchain journals. The
consideration of what a decentralized direct peer-to-peer model for academic pub‐
lishing could look like prompts the articulation of the functions that academic pub‐
lishing provides and how, if these are still required, they might be provided in
decentralized models. In terms of “publishing,” any manner of making content pub‐
licly available on the Web is publishing; one can easily self-publish on blogs, wikis,
Twitter, Amazon, and the like. A blockchain model in terms of decentralized peer-to-
peer content would be nothing more than a search engine linking one individual’s
interests with another’s published material. This is a decentralized peer-to-peer model
in the blockchain sense. So, academic (and other publishers) might be providing
some other value functions, namely vouching for content quality. Publishers provide
content curation, discovery, “findability,” relevancy, advocacy, validation, and status
ascribing, all of which might be useful attributes for content consumers. One way to
improve a centralized model with blockchain technology is by applying an economy
as a mechanism for making the incentives and reward structures of the system fairer.
Journalcoin could be issued as the token system of the publishing microeconomy to
reward contributors, reviewers, editors, commentators, forum participants, advisors,
staff, consultants, and indirect service providers involved in scientific publishing.
This could help improve the quality and responsiveness of peer reviews, as reviews
Blockchain Academic Publishing: Journalcoin 
| 
63

are published publicly, and reviewers are rewarded for their contribution. With Jour‐
nalcoin, reviewers can receive reputational and remunerative rewards, and more
transparency and exchange is created between authors, reviewers, and the scientific
community and public. ElsevierJournalcoin and SpringerJournalcoin, for example,
could be issued as metacoins, running on top of the Bitcoin blockchain, say as Coun‐
terparty assets, fully convertible at any time to Bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies.
A token-based coin such as Researchcoin could be used for individuals to collectively
indicate interest and purchase the rights to read a certain research paper that is other‐
wise buried behind a paywall. Medicinal Genomics envisions a multisig, Bitcoin-
based voting system for the public to indicate their demand to open source scientific
papers related to pandemic disease (which the public ironically funds in the first
place with tax dollars, yet cannot access).153 For example, individuals with a mutation
in the NPC1 gene have been found to be resistant to Ebola infection.154 This kind of
information could be easily used by empowered biocitizens to look up in their own
personalized genomic data to see if they have higher conferred resistance to Ebola or
other diseases such as HIV, which also has higher resistance in individuals with cer‐
tain genotypes.155 Although some are in favor of individuals having access to their
own data, others feel that they may read too much into it without appropriate medical
counsel. The Alzheimer’s disease study mentioned previously, however, does hint that
the benefits seem to outweigh the costs.
Related to Journalcoin, ExperimentalResultscoin could be another idea, implemented
in the context of science journals, to incentivize and reward science experiment repli‐
cations (helping to solve the problem of the 80 percent irreplicability of scientific
experimental results), the publishing of negative results and raw data (just 45 percent
are willing to make this available), and counter other biases in scientific publishing,
such as priming, duplicate results, and carelessness.156
Just as Bitcoin is a digital payment mechanism for transactions between humans but
could also empower the machine economy in machine-to-machine (M2M) and Inter‐
net of Things (IoT) payments, ExperimentalResultscoin could likewise serve as a
mechanism for incentives, coordination, and tracking science executed by both
humans and machines. Increasingly, both robotic lab aides and algorithmic programs
are facilitating and generating scientific discovery. Some examples include Lipson’s
computing algorithms that have distilled physical laws from experimental data,157
Muggleton’s microfluidic robot scientist,158 and Waltz and Buchanan’s AI scientific
partners.159
The 3.0 sense of applying blockchain technology to publishing would be having the
blockchain completely fulfill the functions of the publisher (like a “semantic Veri‐
sign,” vouching mechanism for qualitative content). A DAO/DAC/AI/VM model
might be able to use data-based metrics (like the number of reads both in general and
by affinity peers or colleagues, the number of comments, semantic keyword match‐
64 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

ing, and concept matching) to determine targeted content of quality and interest. The
micropayment aspect of the blockchain could be used to make this a fee-based ser‐
vice. The idea is semantic peer-to-peer search, integrating the social networking layer
(to identify peers) and adding blockchain economic and privacy functionality. Auto‐
matic nonpeer, nonhuman content-importance ascription models might also be a
possibility.
Another means of employing the blockchain in academic publishing could be using it
for plagiarism detection and avoidance, or better, for autocitation (an Ethereum
smart contract/DAO that does a literature search and automatically cites all related
work would be a tremendous time-saver). This could be accomplished through off-
chain indexed paper storage repositories linking the asset by key to the blockchain.
The blockchain could become the universal standard for the publication of papers,
and of the underlying raw data and metadata files, essentially creating a universal cat‐
aloging system and library for research papers. Blockchain economics could make
digital asset purchase of the papers easier by assigning every paper a Bitcoin address
(QR code) instead of requiring users to log in to publisher websites. 
The Blockchain Is Not for Every Situation
Despite the many interesting potential uses of blockchain technology, one of the most
important skills in the developing industry is to see where it is and is not appropriate
to use cryptocurrency and blockchain models. Not all processes need an economy or
a payments system, or peer-to-peer exchange, or decentralization, or robust public
record keeping. Further, the scale of operations is a relevant factor, because it might
not make sense to have every tiny microtransaction recorded on a public blockchain;
for example, blog-post tip-jar transactions could be batched into sidechains in which
one overall daily transaction is recorded. Sidechains are more broadly proposed as an
infrastructural mechanism by which multiblock chain ecosystems can exchange and
transfer assets.160 Especially with M2M/IoT device-to-device communication, there
are many open questions about the most effective ways to incorporate market princi‐
ples (if at all) to coordinate resources, incentivize certain goal-directed behavior, and
have tracking and payments remuneration. Even before we consider the potential
economic models for M2M/IoT payments, we must work out general coordination
protocols for how large swarms of devices can communicate, perhaps deploying con‐
trol system and scheduling software for these machine social networks, adding new
layers of communication protocols like a “chirp” for simple microcommunications
such as on, off, start, and stop.161
In the farther future, different classes of blockchains for different kinds of applica‐
tions could be optimized. Maybe there could be daily purchase blockchains for the
grocery store and coffee shop purchases, and others for large-ticket items like real
estate and automobiles. More stridently different functionality is needed for
The Blockchain Is Not for Every Situation 
| 
65

noneconomic-market blockchains, for government services, intellectual property reg‐
istration, notary services, science activities, and health-record keeping. The key ques‐
tion is distinguishing the economic principles needed for the different range of
functions with which blockchain technology could be helpful. However, not every
operation is one of value registration and exchange.
Not all of the ideas described need a blockchain; they do not require sequential, pub‐
lic, and distributed data storage. They could instead be implemented through other
technology such as cloud storage or distributed computing models more generally.
However, blockchain technology could be included to provide additional functional‐
ity, and further, it is not possible at present to see all of the potential future benefits
and uses of blockchain technology that might emerge.
Another reason that the blockchain is not for every situation is because we do not
want to “economify” everything. We do not want to reduce the qualitative aspects of
life to a purely and nakedly economic situation. The idea of a remunerative coin
accompanying many more situations and making the economics of situations more
explicit is welcome in some ways but repugnant in others. However, the broader con‐
ceptualization of economy evoked by blockchain technology invites a new considera‐
tion of the notions of transfer, exchange, and acknowledgment that is deeply
qualitative and could persist even as blockchain-enabled features do not (and should
not) become omnipresent.
Centralization-Decentralization Tension and Equilibrium
There is a mix of forces both toward centralization and decentralization operating in
the blockchain industry. In fact, it is the blockchain that has defined the landscape of
models to comprise those that are both centralized and decentralized. Aside from the
Internet, there have not been many large-scale standardized decentralization models
that have been readily conceptualized and used in different contexts to organize activ‐
ity. Even though decentralization is the core enabling functionality of blockchain
technology (the decentralized trustless cryptographic transaction recording system
and public ledger), there are also many centralization pressures. One is the centraliza‐
tion forces toward developing the standard plumbing layers of the blockchain econ‐
omy. The Bitcoin blockchain has 90 percent cryptocurrency market capitalization,
and some projects consider it safest and easiest to build protocol 3.0 ideas on this
installed base without having to mount a mining operation on a new altcoin block‐
chain. Mining is another area upon which there are many centralization pressures.
The fierce competition has driven mining from individuals with mining rigs to min‐
ing pools and custom ASICs such that a few large mining pools register most of the
new Bitcoin blocks and have started to reach the 51 percent threshold of controlled
hash power, which could result in a mining takeover. It remains to be seen how forces
66 
| 
Chapter 4: Blockchain 3.0: Efficiency and Coordination Applications Beyond Currency, Economics, and Markets

toward economic efficiency through centralization and trustless exchange through
decentralization will come to equilibrium.
Centralization-Decentralization Tension and Equilibrium 
| 
67


CHAPTER 5
Advanced Concepts
Terminology and Concepts
The blockchain economy is triggering the invention of many new ideas and the reap‐
propriation of existing concepts and terminology in innovative ways. It prompts
investigating the definition of terms that have been taken for granted and passed
unquestioned for years, such as money, currency, property, government, sovereignty,
and intellectual property. The questioning of underlying definitions and the reappro‐
priation of terms position these concepts more openly and accessibly for application
to current situations. Blockchain-related concepts are more actively in people’s minds
and ready to apply at the generalized level. For example, consider a library. At the
more generalized conceptual level, a library is a system of value exchange; there are
product and service offerings, like books and research, being taken up by those with
whom the value proposition resonates. New models like blockchain technology force
us to consider reality at the more generalized level of the concepts behind a specific
instantiation. This leads us to imagine other specific situations that could be realized
with those concepts. For example, a blockchain is a technology for decentralization.
Bitcoin is the instantiation of decentralization as a digital currency, but decentraliza‐
tion could be instantiated in many ways, such as smart property, delegate democracy
governance services, and community-based credit bureaus. In short, we start to see
the world of possibility, or the world as possibility, as French philosopher Deleuze
would say.162 Further, we need to have tools for realizing this possibility; in the gener‐
alized conceptualization process, blockchain-related concepts become ready at hand
or available to us, as Heidegger would say.163
In this fomentive environment, we can more easily create new conceptssuch as GoTo‐
Lunchcoin or Whatevercoin, applying a fuller conceptualization of coin in the crypto‐
currency sense to a new situation. A coin or apptoken becomes a signifier that
facilitates some application. I as a community member have earned some coin or
69

token by performing some service like mining (transaction ledger administration) or
via crowdfunding that I can burn, spend, or use in the network to acquire or con‐
sume something of value. In this sense, GoToLunchcoin is earned free time from
work completed in the morning that can now be spent in refreshing and re-
energizing. The economic principle of a cycle of resources expended and replenished
is invoked. In this more elemental mode of concept generation, we can more immedi‐
ately and intuitively understand the innovations of other ideas as we hear them. For
example, if we heard of Precedentcoin in the legal setting, it would be easy to quickly
intuit that it would likely be the apptoken or remunerative coin for performing the
function of establishing precedents, and that there is probably some sort of new
decentralized peer-based method for doing so.
New conceptualization can shift thinking back and forth between the levels of the
general and the specific. An example of specific versus general thinking is the notion
of an economy. An economy at the immediate, already-specified level is people buy‐
ing and selling things, but at the higher, more generalized conceptual level, it is the
production and consumption of things of value. Blockchain technology at the imme‐
diate, specified level is a decentralized public ledger for the recording of cryptocur‐
rency transactions. Blockchain technology at the higher, more generalized conceptual
level is a new class of thing like the Internet, a society’s public records repository, a
high-resolution tracking system for acknowledging human activity, a revolutionary
organizing paradigm for human collaboration, an anticensorship mechanism, a lib‐
erty and equality enhancement tool, and a new organizing model for the discovery,
transfer, and coordination of all quanta or discrete units of anything. These are just
some of the things that blockchain technology is at this higher level. Comprehending
blockchain technology at this more generalized level—with so many meanings of
“what it is” conceptually—helps to demonstrate its significant potential impact.
Currency, Token, Tokenizing
Currency is just one idea that the cryptoeconomy is forcing us to rethink. One tradi‐
tional dictionary definition of currency is “a system of money in general use in a par‐
ticular country.” This definition is already almost humorously and hopelessly
outdated by Bitcoin’s transnationality, not to mention that a “system of money” con‐
notes centralized top-down issuance and sovereign control over money supplies. A
secondary definition is perhaps more useful: “the quality or state of being used or
accepted by many people.” This claim is more applicable for cryptocurrencies, as we
notice that although there is nothing backing Bitcoin like a gold standard, there is
also nothing backing fiat currencies. What “backs” currency is the high adoption rate,
being accepted by many people, the populace buying into the illusion of the concept
of money. If more people were to accept the notion of cryptocurrencies and begin to
use and trust them, they too could become as liquid as fiat currencies.
70 
| 
Chapter 5: Advanced Concepts

Just as the term Bitcoin can be used in a threefold manner to denote the underlying
blockchain ledger, the Bitcoin transaction protocol, and the Bitcoin cryptocurrency,
the term currency is being employed similarly to mean different things. In the cryp‐
toeconomy context, one relevant way that the word currency is being used is in a gen‐
eralized sense to connote “a unit of value that can be earned and used in a certain
economic system,” which is then likely to be fungibly tradable into other economic
systems. The nomenclature coin could just as easily be token—that is, a digital token
or access or tracking mechanism for different activities. There could be Appcoin,
Communitycoin, Apptoken, or other terms all referring to different kinds of eco‐
nomic operations taking place within a community.
For example, the Counterparty currency (XCP) grants access to special features such
as the ability to issue new assets, like a new appcoin, with the Counterparty protocol
or economic system, that will be at any time convertible to XCP or Bitcoin, which is
therefore convertible to USD, EUR, CNY, or any other fiat currency. Similarly, 
LTBcoin is a Counterparty-enabled coin issued by the Let’s Talk Bitcoin media net‐
work to support its “local” economy. LTBcoin is used to transact incoming sponsor‐
ships, donations, and tips, and compensate outgoing listener rewards, community
participation acknowledgment, content creation, reviews, and other forms of contri‐
bution. LTBcoin functions in the context of its own local economy, and is always
immediately convertible to Bitcoin.164 Other currencies could have similar use in their
own local economies—“local” in the sense of interest community, not necessarily
geography. In fact, one benefit of cryptocurrencies is their potential use as a tool for
managing globally dispersed interest groups. Additionally, Communitycoin like the
BoulderFarmersMarketcoin could provide additional features in its locality beyond
just economic transactions, helping to build community cohesion and a more coordi‐
nated effort toward shared goals. Community cryptocoin could be a mechanism for
increasing the resolution of interest group activities by being a more specific means
of organizing and coordinating group behavior toward some goal.
Communitycoin: Hayek’s Private Currencies Vie for Attention
The explosion of altcoin and Communitycoin, tokens or coins enabling economic
function in a specific community context like the LTBcoin just described, suggests
that some of the aspects of the world envisioned by Austrian School economist Frie‐
drich Hayek might be coming to fruition. In Denationalization of Money, Hayek
advocates a competitive private market for money instead of an arbitrary government
monopoly.165 He articulates other foundational thinking for the blockchain industry
by arguing against Keynesian inflationary money in his essay The “Paradox” of Sav‐
ings,166 and points out the improved ability of vendors to respond in decentralized
markets.167 Regarding decentralized currency, Hayek posits a model in which finan‐
cial institutions each issue their own currency and compete to maintain the value of
their currencies through earnest productive activity.168 There can be multiple
Currency, Token, Tokenizing 
| 
71

concurrent currencies. This model could be deployed on a much wider basis in the
blockchain economy, with the possibility that not just every financial institution, but
every person, organization, and society, would issue their own currency or token
(which could have a completely legitimate use within its locality and always be fungi‐
bly convertible to other currencies like Bitcoin). The idea would be to let a million
currencies bloom; everyone could have their own coin, or multiple coins, just like
everyone has their own blog, Twitter, and Instagram account. An example of this is 
Tatianacoin, a musical artist coin issued by singer-songwriter Tatiana Moroz on the
Counterparty protocol (@tatianacoin). Just as everyone became an author in the
information revolution and their own personal health advocate in the genomic revo‐
lution, now everyone can become their own banker in the blockchain revolution.
Some groups of currencies could and should compete, whereas other classes of cur‐
rencies could coexist cooperatively as complements in discrete and separate venues.
Campuscoin
Some of the most obvious communities with their own economies for which cur‐
rency issuance makes sense are business and university campuses. There should be an
open source, templated solution for any university (administrators and student
groups alike) to easily issue Campuscoin (e.g., ASUcoin). The same templated altcoin
issuance could extend to groups within these communities, like DeltaChiCoin or
NeuroscienceConferenceCoin, to support any specific group’s activities. The Cam‐
puscoin issuance template could have specific prepackaged modules. First, there
could be a module for buying and selling assets within the local community, an
OpenBazaar- or Craigslist-like asset exchange module. Second, there could be a shar‐
ing economy module, a decentralized model of Airbnb for dorm rooms, Getaround
for transportation including cars and bikes, and LaZooz peer-based ride sharing.
Third, there could be a consulting or “advisory services” module for all manner of
advice, mentoring, coaching, and tutoring related to classes, departments, majors,
and careers. Recent graduates could earn Campuscoin by consulting to job-seeking
seniors with specific services like advice and mock interviews; freshmen could pro‐
vide counsel to high school seniors; and former students in a class could provide
advice to current students. Campuscoin could provide a remunerative mechanism for
these activities, which have been supplied on a volunteer basis and thus have been
scarce where they could be abundant. By providing remuneration and acknowledg‐
ment, Campuscoin could provide a much more dynamic and connected network of
those who have had similar experiences. In addition to remunerative economics,
Campuscoin can be used to connect communities. A fourth module could be a “peer-
to-peer learning network” for notes sharing, book sharing (solving the problem that a
certain book is checked out until the end of the term), finding team members, form‐
ing study groups, studying for tests, and providing other kinds of support. Fifth, there
could be a RealJobs module connecting local employers with students for topical
72 
| 
Chapter 5: Advanced Concepts

internships and jobs with industry exposure and job force readiness training, all in a
rewards-structured environment.
There are several efforts under way to support students learning about and using
cryptocurrencies on university campuses. The student-founded Campus Cryptocur‐
rency Network counts 150 clubs in its network as of September 2014 and is a primary
resource for students interested in starting campus cryptocurrency clubs. In the
future, this network could be the standard repository for templated Campuscoin
applications. Likewise, students founded and operate theBitcoin Association of Berke
ley and organized their first hackathon in November 2014. MIT, with the MIT Bitcoin
Project, has made a significant commitment to encourage the use and awareness of
cryptocurrency among students, and it plans to give half a million dollars’ worth of
Bitcoin to undergraduates. Students were invited to claim their $100 of Bitcoin per
person in October 2014.169 Stanford University has made an effort to develop cryp‐
tography courses, which it offers for free online.
Coin Drops as a Strategy for Public Adoption
The MIT Bitcoin Project is effectively a coin drop, the simultaneous distribution of
Bitcoin to entire populations to spur mainstream learning, trust, and adoption. A
similar but larger-scale coin drop, the BitDrop, is scheduled for the Caribbean island
nation of Dominica for March 14, 2015, as part of the Pi Day mathematical festival.
Bitcoin will be sent by SMS via Coinapult to all 70,000 residents.170 The goal is to cre‐
ate the world’s largest and highest density Bitcoin community. The project began as a
brainstorming exercise to facilitate adoption and put Bitcoin into the hands of as
many people as possible. Dominica was chosen as optimal because the country has a
relatively small population, a high cellular telephony penetration rate, and a position
as a regional education center, and it is the center of an active intraisland, intracur‐
rency trade and remittance economy. Bitcoin ATMs and merchant point-of-sale
(POS) systems are to be installed as part of the project to help foster ongoing use of
Bitcoin after the coin drop.
Coin drops or airdrops have been used in other situations; for example, “Nationcoin”
has been used to shore up national identity. Iceland targeted residents with free cryp‐
tocurrency in the Auroracoin project, and similar efforts include Scotcoin, Spaincoin,
and Greececoin, although there does not appear to have been a high degree of ongo‐
ing activity with these Nationcoin cryptocurrencies.171 One reason that Ecuador ban‐
ned Bitcoin was because it plans to launch its own national cryptocurrency.172
Nationcoin could help bolster a sentiment of national patrimony, especially as many
Eurozone nations have suffered from European Central Bank regulation impositions
as a result of participating in the Euro. The same kind of Nationcoin benefits could be
available in the idea of Tribecoin as the patrimony-supporting coin issuance of native
peoples. The Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota was the first American
Currency, Token, Tokenizing 
| 
73

Indian tribe to launch its own cryptocurrency, MazaCoin, using the tribal nation’s
sovereignty to set its own rules on cryptocurrencies.173
Currency: New Meanings
The key point is that the term currency could begin to mean different things in the
cryptoeconomy context, especially much more than in the basic money sense of serv‐
ing as a payment mechanism for goods and services. A second important sense of the
word currency in the cryptoeconomy context is emerging as “something of value that
can be usefully deployed in some situation,” or, as described previously, “a unit of
value that can be earned and used in a certain economic system.” There is the general
idea of a token, currency, or appcoin allowing access to certain features of an eco‐
nomic system. Having Bitcoin, for example, allows access to performing transactions
on the blockchain. Privileges are accorded to users in some cases just by their holding
Bitcoin, as this confirms ownership, and in other cases by their actually spending the
Bitcoin. Considering currency more broadly in these ways starts to widen its applica‐
bility to many other situations. A currency is a token of value that can be earned and
deployed. A currency stores value and is transmissible. This generalized definition
supports the claim that there can be many nonmonetary currencies that are con‐
ceived in the same structure. For example, reputation is a unit of value that can be
earned and deployed in certain situations; it is a nonmonetary currency in the sense
that it is a proxy for status or some kinds of tasks that a person can do. Likewise,
health is a commodity of value that may be earned and can be deployed in specific
situations. This broader notion of currency as an earnable and deployable commodity
extends to many other nonmonetary currencies beyond reputation and health, such
as intention, attention, time, ideas, and creativity.
Currency Multiplicity: Monetary and Nonmonetary
Currencies
Altcoin multiplicity is just one venue of currency multiplicity in the modern world.
More broadly, we are living in an increasingly multicurrency society with all kinds of
monetary and nonmonetary currencies. First, there is currency multiplicity in the
sense of monetary currency in that there are many different fiat currencies (USD,
CNY, EUR, GBP, etc.). Second, there are many other nonfiat, non-blockchain-based
currencies like loyalty points and airline miles; one estimate is that there are 4,000
such altcurrencies.174 Now there is also a multiplicity of blockchain-based cryptocur‐
rencies like Bitcoin, Litecoin, and Dogecoin. Beyond monetary currencies, there is
currency multiplicity in nonmonetary currencies too (as just discussed), such as rep‐
utation, intention, and attention.175
Market principles have been employed to develop metrics for measuring nonmonet‐
ary currencies such as influence, reach, awareness, authenticity, engagement, action
74 
| 
Chapter 5: Advanced Concepts

taking, impact, spread, connectedness, velocity, participation, shared values, and
presence.176 Now, blockchain technology could make these nonmonetary social cur‐
rencies more trackable, transmissible, transactable, and monetizable. Social networks
could become social economic networks. For example, reputation as one of the most
recognizable nonmonetary currencies has always been an important intangible asset,
but was not readily monetizable other than indirectly as an attribute of labor capital.
However, social network currencies can now become transactable with web-based
cryptocurrency tip jars (like Reddcoin) and other micropayment mechanisms that
were not previously feasible or transnationally scalable with traditional fiat currency.
Just as collaborative work projects such as open source software development can
become more acknowledgeable and remunerable with GitHub commits and line-item
contribution tracking, cryptocurrency tip jars can provide a measurable record and
financial incentive for contribution-oriented online activities. One potential effect of
this could be that if market principles were to become the norm for intangible
resource allocation and exchange, all market agents might begin to have a more intu‐
itive and pervasive sense and demonstration of exchange and reciprocity. Thus, social
benefits such as a more collaborative society could be a result of what might initially
seem to be only a deployment of economic principles.
Demurrage Currencies: Potentially Incitory and
Redistributable
Currency is one such core concept in blockchain technology that is being stretched,
extended, and reunderstood: currency as a digital token, a facilitation mechanism for
quantized transfer. Within the notion of currency is the idea of a demurrage currency.
Demurrage means carrying cost—that is, the cost to carry an asset. The term origina‐
ted in the freight and shipping industry to indicate the extra charge or cost associated
with the detention in port of a vessel by the ship owner, as in loading or unloading,
beyond the time allowed or agreed upon. In the cryptocurrency sense, demurrage can
mean being deflationary (value losing) over time, thus incitory (stimulatory) in that it
incites some form of action taking (i.e.; spending) in the shorter term to realize value
before it is lost. The currency itself thus encourages economic activity. Demurrage,
then, is the compact concept of an attribute, the idea of an automatic motivating or
incitory property being built in to something. Further, another aspect of demurrage
currencies (or really all digital network–based asset allocation, tracking, interaction,
and transaction structures) is the notion of periodic automatic redistribution of the
currency (the resource) across all network nodes at certain prespecified times, or in
the case of certain events. Demurrage features could become a powerful and standard
currency administration tool.
Freicoin and Healthcoin are two examples of uses of a demurrage currency with a
built-in mechanism for action taking in the form of spending. Demurrage currencies
Demurrage Currencies: Potentially Incitory and Redistributable 
| 
75

might be ideal for the implementation of Guaranteed Basic Income initiatives (GBIs),
systems whereby all citizens or residents of a country would regularly receive an
allowance—a sum of money sufficient to meet basic living expenses. GBIcoin or Frei‐
coin could be a straightforward currency for basic living expenses that runs out or
resets on a periodic basis such as weekly, monthly, or annually to keep the system
streamlined and efficient without artificial overhangs created by hoarding. The
money would be more like a coupon, expiring after certain amounts of time. The cur‐
rency loses value, so the incentive is to spend it or just not use it.
A GBIcoin like Freicoin would likely not be the only currency, but would be a special-
use currency, like Healthcoin, and would exist in the context of a Hayekian comple‐
mentary or multicurrency society. This is the idea of having multiple currencies (not
just multiple asset classes), but different currencies for different purposes. The Frei‐
coin Cashcoin might be like a debit card for short-term consumable basic living
expenditures. Spending could be in one coin and savings in another. Different classes
of coins could have features adapted to specific contexts for savings, investment, and
real estate transactions, and so on. The concept of GBIcoin or Freicoin is essentially a
Spendcoin, Cashcoin, or Debitcoin that could be denominated in the basic national
currency (Nationcoin) like UScoin or Americoin for supporting basic day-to-day liv‐
ing expenses, or perhaps more administratively efficient at the state level in Statecoin,
like NYcoin.
More broadly, complementary currency systems and multicurrency systems are just
the application of the same phenomenon that has been used to reinvent many other
areas of modern life. Multicurrency systems are the granularification of currency,
finance, and money; the seemingly infinite explosion of long-tail power-law personal‐
ization and choice making that has come to coffee (Starbucks), books and movies
(Amazon, Netflix), information (blogs, Twitter), learning (YouTube, MOOCs), and
relationships (polyamory). Now is merely the advent of these various systems of per‐
sonalized multiplicity coming to money and finance.
Healthcoin  could be similarly conceived as a demurrage currency. Health-services
spending could be denominated in Healthcoin. In the United States, many health
plans such as Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) and Cafeteria Plans are already
demurrage currencies in that they are set up to expire each year. The system resets, so
strange bubbles and artificialities are not introduced. All national health services
could be denominated and paid in Healthcoin.
In addition to the potential value loss and therefore “incentive to spend” aspect of a
demurrage currency, another feature of a demurrage currency, which could be a fea‐
ture of any cryptocurrency, is the possibility of periodic redistribution across network
nodes. This also incentivizes currency holders to spend out the currency. At the more
extreme end, and as an indication of connecting currency operations to policy objec‐
76 
| 
Chapter 5: Advanced Concepts

tives, this feature could provide the means for a society to periodically redistribute
income across the populace.
An obvious limitation of managed demurrage currency systems is that because enter‐
prising human agents are the constituents, it is likely, if incentives were not aligned,
that they would find all manner of clever mechanisms and loopholes to circumvent
the system—for example, to get around the antihoarding property of a demurrage
currency if there were some benefit or perceived benefit to hoarding. However, the
goal would be to appropriately align incentives, and really to move into a world in
which circumvention incentives would be irrelevant because the currency distribu‐
tion system would be able to meet the panoply of personalized needs a society has
with money for basic expenditure. The certainty of GBIcoin, Freicoin, or Cashcoin
reissuance in subsequent time periods, assuming not inconsequentially that the sys‐
tem is stable and that there is trust in the system, could create a mindset of abun‐
dance, which together with the demurrage or value-losing aspect of the currency
obviates the need for hoarding and antiscarcity measures. This would be a conceptu‐
alization of money and the means of meeting basic survival needs that is unpreceden‐
ted in human history—a trustable source of having basic needs met such that
individuals do not even have to think about this. The great potential benefit of having
basic survival needs met could be that it might usher in not just an era of abundance,
but also free up human cognitive surplus to work on other higher-order interests,
challenges, and concerns, thus architecting a new era of human society, collaboration,
and productivity.177
Extensibility of Demurrage Concept and Features
The action-incitory and dynamic redistribution features of a demurrage currency are
not just useful for developing special-purpose currencies in a multicurrency society,
but, like many blockchain concepts, potentially extensible on a much broader basis
beyond the context of currency, economics, and financial systems. The presupposi‐
tion is that many things are in some way a currency, an economy, or a network, and
that we are living in an increasingly multicurrency society, literally for monetary sys‐
tems and also in the sense of currency, reputation, intention, attention, and ideas as
currency.
In this framework, we can see that Fitbit and smartwatch are demurrage health cur‐
rencies. A demurrage currency is an action-inciting currency, a stimulatory currency,
because it gets you to do something. Fitbit is a demurrage (action-inciting) health
currency, a currency that prompts you to take action. The demurrage (incitory)
mechanism is that perhaps in the evening, you see a notification on your Fitbit or
smartwatch telling you that you have taken 19,963 steps today, thus encouraging you
to reach 20,000; the way that Fitbit and smartwatch present information is a demur‐
rage mechanism that encourages you to take action. Thus, health as a demurrage
Demurrage Currencies: Potentially Incitory and Redistributable 
| 
77

currency can be used as a design principle in developing technology to facilitate
action taking that is in the interest of the agent.
The dynamic redistribution property of the demurrage concept can also be applied to
many other contexts, such as when resources are distributed across networks. Net‐
works are an increasingly pervasive feature of the modern world. A clear use case for
the demurrage dynamic redistribution feature is in the case of resource allocation
through automatic networks or tradenets. Here, more efficient, larger, more scalable,
more trackable systems are sought for the distribution of consumable resources like
gas and electricity, transportation quanta (i.e., Uber/LaZooz, self-driving vehicles, or
automated pod transport systems envisioned in the farther future), clean water, food,
health-care services, relief aid, crisis-response supplies, and even emotional support
or mental-performance coaching (for individuals permissioned in consumer EEG
rigs). This is the idea of using the demurrage concept in other network systems to
dynamically, automatically redistribute resources for optimization. The concept is
combining networks and demurrage currency to enable new functionality like
dynamic automatic redistribution across network nodes and enable the predictive
and on-demand smart clustering of resources where needed. Some examples are pre‐
dicting and delivering an increased load of Ubers and cabs to the airport when more
flights are due to arrive, and preparing available electricity units on hotter days and
fuel oil units on colder days. This is the idea of automatic resource redistribution in
smart networks, possible using demurrage as a design element.
There are other examples of deploying the demurrage concept in smart networks. 
Health is itself a network and a demurrage currency; an earnable and spendable com‐
modity; a linked, continually autoredistributing enabler operating fractally at multi‐
ple organizational levels, among synapses, cells, organisms/humans, and societies. We
can start to see the body and brain as a Dapp, DAO, or DAC where already many sys‐
tems are automatically operating at the unconscious level, and where more systems
like cognitive enhancement, preventive medicine, and pathology treatment could be
explicitly managed with Dapp AI systems. This concept combines a demurrage
resource-allocation system with a Dapp, enabling the functionality of the automatic
redistribution of any resource commodity within a system. This could be useful, for
example, in the case of neural potentiation in a brain, increasing nerve impulses
along pathways, for which systemwide resource redistribution could optimize perfor‐
mance. We want to redistribute and equalize potentiation capability among synapses
in a physical brain with our cognitive enhancement technology or in an artificial
intelligence or software-simulated brain. Different kinds of brain-based resources—
such as potentiation capability, optogenetic excitation (manipulating living cells with
inserted genetically adapted proteins and light), or transcranial direct stimulation—
could be the demurrage currencies targeted for redistribution across a brain or mind‐
file. Another example of demurrage redistribution in the health context could be for
cellular resources such as oxygen, waste removal nanobots, and circulating
78 
| 
Chapter 5: Advanced Concepts

lab-on-chips as the physical enablement currencies of the body. Likewise, ideas could
be the redistributable currency of collaborative teams, and liberty, trust, and compas‐
sion the currency of society. Bitcoin is already effectuated as a demurrage currency
and smart network resource allocation mechanism in the sense of redistributing the
currency of liberty across society.
Demurrage Currencies: Potentially Incitory and Redistributable 
| 
79


CHAPTER 6
Limitations
The blockchain industry is still in the early stages of development, and there are
many different kinds of potential limitations. The classes of limitations are both inter‐
nal and external, and include those related to technical issues with the underlying
technology, ongoing industry thefts and scandals, public perception, government reg‐
ulation, and the mainstream adoption of technology.
Technical Challenges
A number of technical challenges related to the blockchain, whether a specific one or
the model in general, have been identified.
The issues are in clear sight of developers, with different answers to the challenges
posited, and avid discussion and coding of potential solutions. Insiders have different
degrees of confidence as to whether and how these issues can be overcome to evolve
into the next phases of blockchain industry development. Some think that the de
facto standard will be the Bitcoin blockchain, as it is the incumbent, with the most
widely deployed infrastructure and such network effects that it cannot help but be the
standardized base. Others are building different new and separate blockchains (like
Ethereum) or technology that does not use a blockchain (like Ripple). One central
challenge with the underlying Bitcoin technology is scaling up from the current max‐
imum limit of 7 transactions per second (the VISA credit card processing network
routinely handles 2,000 transactions per second and can accommodate peak volumes
of 10,000 transactions per second), especially if there were to be mainstream adoption
of Bitcoin.178 Some of the other issues include increasing the block size, addressing
blockchain bloat, countering vulnerability to 51 percent mining attacks, and imple‐
menting hard forks (changes that are not backward compatible) to the code, as sum‐
marized here:179
81

Throughput
The Bitcoin network has a potential issue with throughput in that it is processing
only one transaction per second (tps), with a theoretical current maximum of 7 tps.
Core developers maintain that this limit can be raised when it becomes necessary.
One way that Bitcoin could handle higher throughput is if each block were bigger,
though right now that leads to other issues with regard to size and blockchain bloat.
Comparison metrics in other transaction processing networks are VISA (2,000 tps
typical; 10,000 tps peak), Twitter (5,000 tps typical; 15,000 tps peak), and advertising
networks (>100,000 tps typical).
Latency
Right now, each Bitcoin transaction block takes 10 minutes to process, meaning that
it can take at least 10 minutes for your transaction to be confirmed. For sufficient
security, you should wait more time—about an hour—and for larger transfer
amounts it needs to be even longer, because it must outweigh the cost of a double-
spend attack (in which Bitcoins are double-spent in a separate transaction before the
merchant can confirm their reception in what appears to be the intended transac‐
tion). Again, as the comparison metric, VISA takes seconds at most.
Size and bandwidth
The blockchain is 25 GB, and grew by 14 GB in the last year. So it already takes a long
time to download (e.g., 1 day). If throughput were to increase by a factor of 2,000 to
VISA standards, for example, that would be 1.42 PB/year or 3.9 GB/day. At 150,000
tps, the blockchain would grow by 214 PB/year. The Bitcoin community calls the size
problem “bloat,” but that assumes that we want a small blockchain; however, to really
scale to mainstream use, the blockchain would need to be big, just more efficiently
accessed. This motivates centralization, because it takes resources to run the full
node, and only about 7,000 servers worldwide do in fact run full Bitcoind nodes,
meaning the Bitcoin daemon (the full Bitcoin node running in the background). It is
being discussed whether locations running full nodes should be compensated with
rewards. Although 25 GB of data is trivial in many areas of the modern “big data” era
and data-intensive science with terabytes of data being the standard, this data can be
compressed, whereas the blockchain cannot for security and accessibility reasons.
However, perhaps this is an opportunity to innovate new kinds of compression algo‐
rithms that would make the blockchain (at much larger future scales) still usable, and
storable, while retaining its integrity and accessibility. One innovation to address
blockchain bloat and make the data more accessible is APIs, like those from Chain
and other vendors, that facilitate automated calls to the full Bitcoin blockchain. Some
of the operations are to obtain address balances and balances changes, and notify
user applications when new transactions or blocks are created on the network. Also,
there are web-based block explorers (like https://blockchain.info/), middleware appli‐
cations allowing partial queries of blockchain data, and frontend customer-facing
mobile ewallets with greatly streamlined blockchain data.
82 
| 
Chapter 6: Limitations

Security
There are some potential security issues with the Bitcoin blockchain. The most wor‐
risome is the possibility of a 51-percent attack, in which one mining entity could grab
control of the blockchain and double-spend previously transacted coins into his own
account.180 The issue is the centralization tendency in mining where the competition
to record new transaction blocks in the blockchain has meant that only a few large
mining pools control the majority of the transaction recording. At present, the incen‐
tive is for them to be good players, and some (like Ghash.io) have stated that they
would not take over the network in a 51-percent attack, but the network is insecure.
181 Double-spending might also still be possible in other ways—for example, spoofing
users to resend transactions, allowing malicious coders to double-spend coins.
Another security issue is that the current cryptography standard that Bitcoin uses,
Elliptic Curve Cryptography, might be crackable as early as 2015; however, financial
cryptography experts have proposed potential upgrades to address this weakness.182
Wasted resources
Mining draws an enormous amount of energy, all of it wasted. The earlier estimate
cited was $15 million per day, and other estimates are higher.183 On one hand, it is the
very wastefulness of mining that makes it trustable—that rational agents compete in
an otherwise useless proof-of-work effort in hopes of the possibility of reward—but
on the other hand, these spent resources have no benefit other than mining.
Usability
The API for working with Bitcoind (the full node of all code) is far less user-friendly
than the current standards of other easy-to-use modern APIs, such as widely used
REST APIs.
Versioning, hard forks, multiple chains
Some other technical issues have to do with the infrastructure. One issue is the prolif‐
eration of blockchains, and that with so many different blockchains in existence, it
could be easy to deploy the resources to launch a 51-percent attack on smaller chains.
Another issue is that when chains are split for administrative or versioning purposes,
there is no easy way to merge or cross-transact on forked chains.
Another significant technical challenge and requirement is that a full ecosystem of
plug-and-play solutions be developed to provide the entire value chain of service
delivery. For example, linked to the blockchain there needs to be secure decentralized
storage (MaidSafe, Storj), messaging, transport, communications protocols, name‐
space and address management, network administration, and archival. Ideally, the
blockchain industry would develop similarly to the cloud-computing model, for
which standard infrastructure components—like cloud servers and transport
systems—were defined and implemented very quickly at the beginning to allow the
industry to focus on the higher level of developing value-added services instead of the
core infrastructure. This is particularly important in the blockchain economy due to
the sensitive and complicated cryptographic engineering aspects of decentralized
Technical Challenges 
| 
83

networks. The industry is sorting out exactly how much computer network security,
cryptography, and mathematics expertise the average blockchain startup should
have—ideally not much if they can rely on a secure infrastructure stack on which this
functionality already exists. That way, the blockchain industry’s development can be
hastened, without every new business having to reinvent the wheel and worry about
the fact that its first customer-facing ewallet was not multisig (or whatever the current
industry standard is, as cryptographic security standards will likely continue to
iterate).
Some of the partial proposed solutions to the technical issues discussed here are as
follows:
Offline wallets to store the majority of coins
Different manner of offline wallets could be used to store the bulk of consumer cryp‐
tocoins—for example, paper wallets, cold storage, and bit cards.
Dark pools
There could be a more granular value chain such that big crypto-exchanges operate
their own internal databases of transactions, and then periodically synchronize a
summary of the transactions with the blockchain—an idea borrowed from the bank‐
ing industry.
Alternative hashing algorithms
Litecoin and other cryptocurrencies use scrypt, which is at least slightly faster than
Bitcoin, and other hashing algorithms could be innovated.
Alternatives to proof of work for Byzantine consensus
There are   many other consensus models proposed—such as proof of stake, hybrids,
and variants—that have lower latency, require less computational power, waste fewer
resources, and improve security for smaller chains. Consensus without mining is
another area being explored, such as in Tendermint’s modified version of DLS (the
solution to the Byzantine Generals’ Problem by Dwork, Lynch, and Stockmeyer),
with bonded coins belonging to byzantine participants.184 Another idea for consensus
without mining or proof of work is through a consensus algorithm such as Hyper‐
ledger’s, which is based on the Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance algorithm.
Only focus on the most recent or unspent outputs
Many blockchain operations could be based on surface calculations of the most
recent or unspent outputs, similar to how credit card transactions operate. “Thin
wallets” operate this way, as opposed to querying a full Bitcoind node, and this is how
Bitcoin ewallets work on cellular telephones. A related proposal is Cryptonite, which
has a “mini-blockchain” abbreviated data scheme.
Blockchain interoperability
To coordinate transactions between blockchains, there are several side chains projects
proposed, such as those by Blockstream.
84 
| 
Chapter 6: Limitations

Posting bond deposits
The security of proposed alternative consensus mechanisms like Tendermints’s DLS
protocol (which requires no proof-of-work mining) could be reinforced with struc‐
tural elements such as requiring miners to post bond deposits to blockchains. This
could help resolve the security issue of the “nothing at stake in short time ranges”
problem, where malicious players (before having a stake) could potentially fork the
blockchain and steal cryptocurrency in a double-spend attack.185 Bond deposits could
be posted to blockchains like Tendermint does, making it costly to fork and possibly
improving operability and security.
REST APIs
Essentially secure calls in real time, these could be used in specific cases to help usa‐
bility. Many blockchain companies provide alternative wallet interfaces that have this
kind of functionality, such as Blockchain.info’s numerous wallet APIs.
Business Model Challenges
Another noted challenge, both functional and technical, is related to business models.
At first traditional business models might not seem applicable to Bitcoin since the
whole point of decentralized peer-to-peer models is that there are no facilitating
intermediaries to take a cut/transaction fee (as in one classical business model). How‐
ever, there are still many worthwhile revenue-generating products and services to
provide in the new blockchain economy. Education and mainstream user-friendly
tools are obvious low-hanging fruit (for example, being targeted by Coinbase, Circle
Internet Financial, and Xapo), as is improving the efficiency of the entire worldwide
existing banking and finance infrastructure like Ripple—another almost “no brainer”
project, when blockchain principles are understood. Looking ahead, reconfiguring all
of business and commerce with smart contracts in the Bitcoin 2.0 era could likely be
complicated and difficult to implement, with many opportunities for service provid‐
ers to offer implementation services, customer education, standard setting, and other
value-added facilitations. Some of the many types of business models that have devel‐
oped with enterprise software and cloud computing might be applicable, too, for the
Bitcoin economy—for example, the Red Hat model (fee-based services to implement
open source software), and SaaS, providing Software as a Service, including with cus‐
tomization. One possible job of the future could be smart contract auditor, to confirm
that AI smart contracts running on the blockchain are indeed doing as instructed,
and determining and measuring how the smart contracts have self-rewritten to maxi‐
mize the issuing agent’s utility.
Scandals and Public Perception
One of the biggest barriers to further Bitcoin adoption is its public perception as a
venue for (and possible abettor of) the dark net’s money-laundering, drug-related,
Business Model Challenges 
| 
85

and other illicit activity—for example, illegal goods online marketplaces such as Silk
Road. Bitcoin and the blockchain are themselves neutral, as any technology, and are
“dual use”; that is, they can be used for good or evil. Although there are possibilities
for malicious use of the blockchain, the potential benefits greatly outweigh the poten‐
tial downsides. Over time, public perception can change as more individuals them‐
selves have ewallets and begin to use Bitcoin. Still, it must be acknowledged that
Bitcoin as a pseudonymous enabler can be used to facilitate illegal and malicious
activities, and this invites in-kind “Red Queen” responses (context-specific evolution‐
ary arms races) appropriate to the blockchain. Computer virus detection software
arose in response to computer viruses; and so far some features of the same constitu‐
tive technologies of Bitcoin (like Tor, a free and open software network) have been
deployed back into detecting malicious players.
Another significant barrier to Bitcoin adoption is the ongoing theft, scandals, and
scams (like so-called new altcoin “pump and dump” scams that try to bid up new alt‐
coins to quickly profit) in the industry. The collapse of the largest Bitcoin exchange at
the time, Tokyo-based MtGox, in March 2014 came to wide public attention. An
explanation is still needed for the confusing irony that somehow in the blockchain,
the world’s most public transparent ledger, coins can disappear and still remain lost
months later. The company said it had been hacked, and that the fraud was a result of
a problem known as a “transaction malleability bug.” The bug allowed malicious
users to double-spend, transferring Bitcoins into their accounts while making MtGox
think the transfer had failed and thus repeat the transactions, in effect transferring
the value twice.186 Analysts remain unsure if MtGox was an externally perpetrated
hack or an internal embezzlement. The issue is that these kinds of thefts persist. For
example, recent headlines inform us that the Moolah CEO disappeared with $1.4 mil‐
lion in Bitcoin (October 2014),187 $2 million of Vericoin was stolen (July 2014),188 and
$620,000 was stolen in a Dogecoin mining attack (June 2014).189
Blockchain industry models need to solidify and mature such that there are better
safeguards in place to stabilize the industry and allow both insiders and outsiders to
distinguish between good and bad players. Oversight need not come from outside;
congruently decentralized vetting, confirmation, and monitoring systems within the
ecosystem could be established. An analogy from citizen science is realizing that
oversight functions are still important, and reinforce the system by providing checks
and balances. In DIYgenomics participant-organized research studies, for example,
the oversight function is still fulfilled, but in some cases with a wholly new role rele‐
vant to the ecosystem—independent citizen ethicists—as opposed to traditional top-
down overseers (in the form of a human-subjects research Institutional Review
Board).190 Other self-regulating industries include movies, video games, and comic
books.
There is the possibility that the entire blockchain industry could just collapse (either
due to already prognosticated problems or some other factor as yet unforeseen).
86 
| 
Chapter 6: Limitations

There is nothing to indicate that a collapse would be impossible. The blockchain
economy does have a strong presence, as measured by diverse metrics such as coin
market capitalizations, investment in the sector, number of startups and people work‐
ing in the sector, lines of GitHub code committed, and the amount of “newspaper
ink” devoted to the sector. Already the blockchain industry is bigger and better estab‐
lished than the previous run at digital currencies (virtual-world currencies like the
Second Life Linden dollar). However, despite the progress to date and lofty ideals of
Bitcoin, maybe it is still too early for digital currency; maybe all of the right safe‐
guards and structures are not yet in place for digital currencies to go fully main‐
stream (although Apple Pay, more than any other factor, may pave the way to full
mainstream acceptance of digital currencies). Apple Pay could quite possibly be
enough for the short term. It will be a long time before Bitcoin has the same user-
friendly attributes of Apple Pay, such as latency of confirmation time.
Government Regulation
How government regulation unfolds could be one of the most significant factors and
risks in whether the blockchain industry will flourish into a mature financial services
industry. In the United States, there could be federal- and state-level legislation; delib‐
erations continue into a second comment period regarding a much-discussed New
York Bitlicense.191 The New York Bitlicense could set the tone for worldwide regula‐
tion. On one hand, the Bitcoin industry is concerned about the extremely broad,
wide-reaching, and extraterritorial language of the license as currently proposed. The
license would encompass anyone doing anything with anyone else’s Bitcoins, includ‐
ing basic wallet software (like the QT wallet).192 However, on the other hand, regula‐
ted consumer protections for Bitcoin industry participants, like KYC (know your
customer) requirements for money service businesses (MSBs), could hasten the
mainstream development of the industry and eradicate consumer worry of the hack‐
ing raids that seem to plague the industry.
The deliberations and early rulings of worldwide governments on Bitcoin raise some
interesting questions. One issue is the potential practical impossibility of carrying out
taxation with current methods. A decentralized peer-to-peer sharing economy of
Airbnb 2.0 and Uber 2.0 run on local implementations of OpenBazaar with individu‐
als paying with cryptocurrencies renders traditional taxation structures impossible.
The usual tracking and chokehold points to trace the consumption of goods and serv‐
ices might be gone. This has implications both for taxation and for the overall meas‐
urement of economic performance such as GDP calculations, which could have the
beneficial impact of drawing populaces away from being overly and possibly incor‐
rectly focused on consumption as a wellness metric. Instead, there could be an over‐
haul of the taxation system to a consumption-based tax on large-ticket visible items
such as hard assets (cars, houses). Chokehold points would need to be easily visible
Government Regulation 
| 
87

for taxation, a “tax on sight” concept. A potential shift from an income tax–based sys‐
tem to a consumption tax–based system could be a significant change for societies.
A second issue that blockchain technology raises with regard to government regula‐
tion is the value proposition offered by governments and their business model. Some
argue that in the modern era of big data, governments are increasingly unable to keep
up with their record-keeping duties of recording and archiving information and
making data easily accessible. On this view, governments could become obsolete
because they cannot fund themselves the traditional way—by raising taxes. Block‐
chain technology could potentially help solve both of these challenges, and could at
minimum supplement and help governments do their own jobs better, eventually
making classes of government-provided services redundant. Recording all of a soci‐
ety’s records on the blockchain could obviate the need for entire classes of public ser‐
vice. This view starkly paints governments as becoming redundant with the
democratization of government features of the blockchain.
However, just as there might be both centralized and decentralized models to coordi‐
nate our activities in the world, there could likely be roles for both traditional govern‐
ment and new forms of blockchain-based government. There might still be a role for
traditional centralized governments, but they will need to become economically
rationalized, with real value propositions that resonate with constituencies, shrink
costs, and demonstrate effectiveness. There could be hybrid governments in the
future, like other industries, where automation is the forcing function, and the best
“worker” for the job is a human/algorithmic pairing.193 Perfunctory repetitive tasks
are automated with blockchain registries and smart contracts, whereas government
employees can move up the value chain.
Privacy Challenges for Personal Records
There are many issues to be resolved before individuals would feel comfortable stor‐
ing their personal records in a decentralized manner with a pointer and possibly
access via the blockchain. The potential privacy nightmare is that if all your data is
online and the secret key is stolen or exposed, you have little recourse. In the current
cryptocurrency architecture, there are many scenarios in which this might happen,
just as today with personal and corporate passwords being routinely stolen or databa‐
ses hacked—with broad but shallow consequences; tens of thousands of people deal
with a usually minor inconvenience. If a thorough personal record is stolen, the
implications could be staggering for an individual: identity theft to the degree that
you no longer have your identity at all.
88 
| 
Chapter 6: Limitations

Overall: Decentralization Trends Likely to Persist
However, despite all of the potential limitations with the still-nascent blockchain
economy, there is virtually no question that Bitcoin is a disruptive force and that its
impact will be significant. Even if all of the current infrastructure developed by the
blockchain industry were to disappear (or fall out of popularity, as virtual worlds
have), much of their legacy could persist. The blockchain economy has provided new
larger-scale ideas about how to do things. Even if you don’t buy into the future of Bit‐
coin as a stable, long-term cryptocurrency, or blockchain technology as it is currently
conceived and developing, there is a very strong case for decentralized models.
Decentralization is an idea whose time has come. The Internet is large enough and
liquid enough to accommodate decentralized models in new and more pervasive
ways than has been possible previously. Centralized models were a good idea at the
time, an innovation and revolution in human coordination hundreds of years ago,
but now we have a new cultural technology, the Internet, and techniques such as dis‐
tributed public blockchain ledgers that could facilitate activity to not only include all
seven billion people for the first time, but also allow larger-scale, more complicated
coordination, and speed our progress toward becoming a truly advanced society. If
not the blockchain industry, there would probably be something else, and in fact
there probably will be other complements to the blockchain industry anyway. It is just
that the blockchain industry is one of the first identifiable large-scale implementa‐
tions of decentralization models, conceived and executed at a new and more complex
level of human activity.
Overall: Decentralization Trends Likely to Persist 
| 
89


CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This book has tried to demonstrate that blockchain technology’s many concepts and
features might be broadly extensible to a wide variety of situations. These features
apply not just to the immediate context of currency and payments (Blockchain 1.0),
or to contracts, property, and all financial markets transactions (Blockchain 2.0), but
beyond to segments as diverse as government, health, science, literacy, publishing,
economic development, art, and culture (Blockchain 3.0), and possibly even more
broadly to enable orders-of-magnitude larger-scale human progress.
Blockchain technology could be quite complementary in a possibility space for the
future world that includes both centralized and decentralized models. Like any new
technology, the blockchain is an idea that initially disrupts, and over time it could
promote the development of a larger ecosystem that includes both the old way and
the new innovation. Some historical examples are that the advent of the radio in fact
led to increased record sales, and ereaders such as the Kindle have increased book
sales. Now, we obtain news from the New York Times, blogs, Twitter, and personalized
drone feeds alike. We consume media from both large entertainment companies and
YouTube. Thus, over time, blockchain technology could exist in a larger ecosystem
with both centralized and decentralized models.
There could be a large collection of both fiat currencies and cryptocurrencies existing
side by side. In his book Denationalization of Money, economist Friedrich Hayek
envisions complementary currencies competing for consumer attention. He saw mul‐
tiple currencies at the level of financial institutions, but as everyone now has their
own news outlets through their own blog, Twitter account, YouTube channel, and
Instagram handle, so too could there be arbitrarily many cryptocurrencies, at the
level of individuals or special interest groups and communities. Each of these crypto‐
currencies could exist in its local economy, fully relevant and valid for value exchange
and economic operation in that local context, like the Let’s Talk Bitcoin community
91

coin, musical artistÕs Tatianacoin, or community coin in your local farmers market,
DIY maker lab, or school district. The local token would likely always be readily con‐
vertible out to more liquid cryptocurrencies and fiat currencies. This is the multiplic‐
ity and abundance property of blockchain technology. Blockchain technology could
enable currency multiplicity in the form of many currencies potentially existing side
by side, conceived with more granularity than fiat currencies, each for use in specific
situations. The overall effect could be promoting a mindset of abundance as opposed
to scarcity in regard to the concept of money, particularly if simultaneously accompa‐
nied by Guaranteed Basic Income (GBI) initiatives that covered basic survival needs
for all individuals and thus enabled a higher-level cognitive focus. Currency could be
reconceptualized in the context of what kinds of actions it enables in a community as
opposed to exclusively being a means of obtaining and storing value.
The Blockchain Is an Information Technology
Perhaps most centrally, the blockchain is an information technology. But blockchain
technology is also many other things. The blockchain as decentralization is a revolu‐
tionary new computing paradigm. The blockchain is the embedded economic layer
the Web never had. The blockchain is the coordination mechanism, the line-item
attribution, credit, proof, and compensation rewards tracking schema to encourage
trustless participation by any intelligent agent in any collaboration. The blockchain
“is a decentralized trust network.”194 The blockchain is Hayek’s multiplicity of private
complementary currencies for which there could be as many currencies as Twitter
handles and blogs, all fully useful and accepted in their own hyperlocal contexts, and
where Communitycoin issuance can improve the cohesion and actualization of any
group. The blockchain is a cloud venue for transnational organizations. The block‐
chain is a means of offering personalized decentralized governance services, sponsor‐
ing literacy, and facilitating economic development. The blockchain is a tool that
could prove the existence and exact contents of any document or other digital asset at
a particular time. The blockchain is the integration and automation of human/
machine interaction and the machine-to-machine (M2M) and Internet of Things
(IoT) payment network for the machine economy. The blockchain and cryptocur‐
rency is a payment mechanism and accounting system enabler for M2M communica‐
tion. The blockchain is a worldwide decentralized public ledger for the registration,
acknowledgment, and transfer of all assets and societal interactions, a society’s public
records bank, an organizing mechanism to facilitate large-scale human progress in
previously unimagined ways. The blockchain is the technology and the system that
could enable the global-scale coordination of seven billion intelligent agents. The
blockchain is a consensus model at scale, and possibly the mechanism we have been
waiting for that could help to usher in an era of friendly machine intelligence.
92 
| 
Chapter 7: Conclusion

Blockchain AI: Consensus as the Mechanism to Foster “Friendly” AI
One forward-looking but important concern in the general future of technology is
different ways in which artificial intelligence (AI) might arise and how to sponsor it
such that it engenders a “friendly” or benevolent relationship with humans. There is
the notion of a technological singularity, a moment when machine intelligence might
supersede human intelligence. However, those in the field have not set forth any sort
of robust plan for how to effect friendly AI, and many remain skeptical of this possi‐
bility.195 It is possible that blockchain technology could be a useful connector of
humans and machines in a world of increasingly autonomous machine activity
through Dapps, DAOs, and DACs that might eventually give way to AI. In particular, 
consensus as a mechanism could be instrumental in bringing about and enforcing
friendly AI.
Large Possibility Space for Intelligence
Speculatively looking toward the longer term, there might be a large possibility space
of intelligence that includes humans, enhanced humans, different forms of human/
machine hybrids, digital mindfile uploads, and different forms of artificial intelli‐
gence like simulated brains and advanced machine learning algorithms. The block‐
chain as an information technology might be able to ease the future transition into a
world with multiple kinds of machine, human, and hybrid intelligence. These intelli‐
gences would likely not be operating in isolation, but would be connected to commu‐
nications networks. To achieve their goals, digital intelligences will want to conduct
certain transactions over the network, many of which could be managed by block‐
chain and other consensus mechanisms.
Only Friendly AIs Are Able to Get Their Transactions Executed
One of the unforeseen benefits of consensus models might be that they could possibly
enforce friendly AI, which is to say cooperative, moral players within a society.196 In
decentralized trust networks, an agentÕs reputation (where agents themselves remain
pseudonymous) could be an important factor in whether his transactions will be exe‐
cuted, such that malicious players would not be able to get their transactions executed
or recognized on the network. Any important transaction regarding resource access
and use might require assent by consensus models. Thus, the way that friendly AI
could be enforced is that even bad agents want to participate in the system to access
resources and to do so, they need to look like good agents. Bad agents have to resem‐
ble good agents enough in reputation and behavior that they become indistinguisha‐
ble from good agents because both behave well. A related example is that of
sociopaths in real-life society who exist but are often transparent because they are
forced into good player behavior through the structure and incentives of society. Of
course, there are many possible objections to the idea that the blockchain structure
The Blockchain Is an Information Technology 
| 
93

could enforce friendly AI: bad agents might build their own smart networks for
resource access, they might behave duplicitously while earning trust, and so on. This
does not change the key point of seeing blockchain technology as a system of checks
and balances for incentivizing and producing certain kinds of behavior while
attempting to limit others. The idea is to create Occam’s razor systems that are so use‐
ful in delivering benefits that it pays to play well, where the easiest best solution is to
participate. Good player incentives are baked into the system.
Some of the key network operations that any digital intelligence might want to exe‐
cute are secure access, authentication and validation, and economic exchange. Effec‐
tively, any network transaction that any intelligent agent cares about to conduct her
goals will require some form of access or authentication that is consensus-signed,
which cannot be obtained unless the agent has a good—which is to say benevolent—
reputational standing on the network. This is how friendly AI might be effectuated in
a blockchain consensus-based model.
Smart Contract Advocates on Behalf of Digital Intelligence
Not only could blockchain technology and consensus models be used potentially to
obtain friendly AI behavior, the functionality might also be employed the other way
around. For example, if you are an AI or a digitally uploaded human mindfile, smart
contracts could possibly serve as your advocate in the future to confirm details about
your existence and runtime environment. Another long-standing problem in AI has
been that if you are a digital intelligence, how can you confirm your reality environ‐
ment—that you still exist, that you are sufficiently backed up, that you are really run‐
ning, and under what conditions? For example, you want to be sure that your data
center has not shoved you onto an old DOS-based computer, or deleted you, or gone
out of business. Smart contracts on the blockchain are exactly the kind of universal
third-party advocate in future timeframes that could be used to verify and exercise
control over the physical parameters of reality, of your existence as a digital intelli‐
gence. How it could work is that you would enact smart contracts on the blockchain
to periodically confirm your runtime parameters and decentralized back-up copies.
Smart contracts allow you to set up “future advocacy,” a new kind of service that
could have many relevant uses, even in the current practical sense of enforcing elder
rights.
Speculatively, in the farther future, in advanced societies of billions of digital intelli‐
gences living and thriving in smart network systems, there would need to be sophisti‐
cated oracles, information arbiters accessed by blockchain smart contracts or some
other mechanism. The business model could be “oracles as a service, a platform, or
even as a public good.” The Wikipedia of the future could be a blockchain-based ora‐
cle service to look up the current standard for digital mindfile processing, storage,
and security, given that these standards would likely be advancing over time. “You are
running on the current standard, Windows 36,” your smart contract advocate might
94 
| 
Chapter 7: Conclusion

inform you. These kinds of mechanisms—dynamic oracle services accessible by
smart contracts on universal public blockchains—could help to create a system of
checks and balances within which digital intelligences or other nonembodied entities
could feel comfortable not only in their survival, but also in their future growth.
Blockchain Consensus Increases the Information Resolution of the
Universe
In closing, there is ample opportunity to explore more expansively the idea of the
blockchain as an information technology, including what consensus models as a core
feature might mean and enable. A key question is what is consensus-derived informa‐
tion; that is, what are its properties and benefits vis-à-vis other kinds of information?
Is consensus-derived information a different kind or form of information? One way
of conceiving of reality and the universe is as information flows. Blockchain technol‐
ogy helps call out that there are at least three different levels of information. Level one
is dumb, unenhanced, unmodulated data. Level two could be posed as socially recom‐
mended data, data elements enriched by social network peer recommendation, which
has been made possible by networked Internet models. The quality of the informa‐
tion is denser because it has been recommended by social peers. Now there is level
three: blockchain consensus-validated data, data’s highest yet recommendation level
based on group consensus-supported accuracy and quality. Not just peer recommen‐
dations, but a formal structure of intelligent agent experts has formed a consensus
about the quality and accuracy of this data. Blockchain technology thus produces a
consensus-derived third tier of information that is higher resolution in that it is more
densely modulated with quality attributes and simultaneously more global, more ega‐
litarian, and freer flowing. The blockchain as an information technology provides
high-resolution modulation regarding the quality, authenticity, and derivation of
information.
Consensus data is thus data that comes with a crowd-voted confirmation of quality, a
seal of approval, the vote of a populace standing behind the quality, accuracy, and
truth value of the data, in its current incarnation effectuated by a seamless automated
mining mechanism. The bigger questions are “What can a society do with this kind
of quality of data?” or more realistically, “What can a society do with this kind of
widespread mechanism for confirming data quality?” Thinking of the benefits of
consensus-derived information only helps to underline that blockchain technology
might be precisely the kind of core infrastructural element as well as scalable infor‐
mation authentication and validation mechanism necessary to scale human progress
and to expand into a global and eventually beyond-planetary society. The speculative
endgame vision is that the universe is information, where the vector of progress
means transitioning toward higher-resolution information flows. Information may be
conserved, but its density is not. Even beyond conceiving of blockchain technology as
The Blockchain Is an Information Technology 
| 
95

a core infrastructural element to scale the future of human progress, ultimately it
might be a tool for increasing the information resolution of the universe.
96 
| 
Chapter 7: Conclusion

APPENDIX A
Cryptocurrency Basics
Bitcoin and other altcoins are digital cash, a way of buying and selling things over the
Internet. The first step is establishing a digital wallet, either via a browser-based web
wallet or by downloading a desktop or smartphone wallet from Blockchain.info,
Mycelium, Coinbase, Electrum, or other Bitcoin wallet providers. Your Bitcoin
address as well as your public and private keys are generated automatically when you
set up your wallet. Your Bitcoin address is typically an identifier of 26 to 34 alphanu‐
meric characters, beginning with the number 1 or 3, that represents a possible desti‐
nation for a Bitcoin payment—for example, 1JDQ5KSqUTBo5M3GUPx8vm9134eJRosLoH,
represented like this string of characters or as a QR code. (This example Bitcoin
address is the tip jar of an informative podcast covering blockchain technology called
Let’s Talk Bitcoin.) Your Bitcoin address is like your email address; people with your
email address can send you email; people with your public-key wallet address can
send you Bitcoins.
Because Bitcoin is digital cash, your wallet does not contain the actual cash (thus the
term wallet is a bit of a misnomer). Your wallet has your address, public and private
keys, and a record of the amount of Bitcoin you control on the blockchain ledger, but
not any actual cash. Your wallet should be kept as safe as any traditional wallet to pro‐
tect your private keys; anyone with access to them has access to controlling or spend‐
ing or transferring your Bitcoin. You should not give your private keys to any other
party, or store them at an exchange (poor private-key security has been one of the
contributing factors in Bitcoin-related thefts and scams).
With your address, anyone can send you Bitcoins (just as anyone can send you email
with your email address). To send someone else Bitcoins, you need his address and
the private-key part of your wallet where the software checks that you have control
over the Bitcoins you would like to spend or transfer. To send someone Bitcoins, you
scan his wallet address QR code or otherwise obtain his address characters or QR
97

code (e.g., by email or SMS). The sender scans the QR code address of the receiver’s
wallet and uses the wallet application to enter additional information about the trans‐
action, such as amount, transaction fee (usually affirming the amount prespecified by
the wallet software), and any other parameters to send the receiver Bitcoins. When
the sender submits the transaction, a message is broadcast from the owner of the
sending address to the network that x number of coins from that address now belong
to the new address. This operation is authorized by the sender’s private key; if that
wallet does not have the private key corresponding to those coins, the coins cannot be
spent. A bona fide transaction is received nearly immediately in the receiver’s wallet
application, with an “unconfirmed” status. It then takes about 10 minutes for the
transaction to confirm and be inscribed in the blockchain per blockchain miners. So,
for large purchases such as a car or real estate, you would want to wait to see the
transaction confirmed, but you wouldn’t bother to do so for a coffee purchase.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101
When the wallet is initialized or set up for the first time, an address, public key, and
private key are automatically generated. Bitcoin is based on public-key encryption,
meaning that you can give out the public key freely but must keep the private key to
yourself.
Bitcoin addresses are created by the software picking a random number and creating
a public/private key pair (per the current standard, Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm, or ECDSA) that is mathematically related, and confirmed at the time of
spending the Bitcoin. This startup operation generates the private key, but additional
steps are required to generate the Bitcoin address. The Bitcoin address is not simply
the public key; rather, the public key is further transformed for more effective use. It
is cycled through additional encryption protocols (like SHA-256 and RIPEMD-160),
a hashing operation (transforming a string of characters into a shorter fixed-length
value or key that represents the original string), and administrative operations
(removal of similar-looking characters, like lowercase L and uppercase I, and 0 and
O; adding a checksum to the end; and adding an identifying number to the beginning
of the address—for most Bitcoin addresses, this is a 1, indicating it is a public Bitcoin
network address).
It is infeasible though technically possible that two different people could generate the
same Bitcoin address. In such a case, both would be able to spend the coins on that
particular address. The odds of this happening are so small, however, that it is almost
99.9999999999 percent impossible. A Bitcoin wallet can contain multiple addresses
(one security procedure is using or generating a new address for each transaction),
and one or more private keys, which are saved in the wallet file. The private keys are
mathematically related to all Bitcoin addresses generated for the wallet.
98 
| 
Appendix A: Cryptocurrency Basics

In Bitcoin, a private key is usually a 256-bit number (although some wallets might use
between 128 and 512 bits), which can be represented in one of several ways. Here is
one example of a private key in hexadecimal format (256 bits in hexadecimal is 32
bytes, or 64 characters in the range 0–9 or A–F):
E9 87 3D 79 C6 D8 7D C0 FB 6A 57 78 63 33 89 F4
45 32 13 30 3D A6 1F 20 BD 67 FC 23 3A A3 32 62
Here is another example of a private key and its corresponding public address:
Private key:
79186670301299046436858412936420417076660923359050732094116068951337164773779
Public address:
1EE8rpFCSSaBmG19sLdgQLEWuDaiYVFT9J
Doing some sort of back calculation to derive the private key from the public key is
either impossible (per the hashing operation, which is one-way only, or other techni‐
ques) or prohibitively expensive (tremendous computing power operating over a
longer time than would be necessary to confirm the transaction). Only the address is
needed to receive Bitcoins, whereas the public/private key pair is required to send
Bitcoins.
Cryptocurrency Basics 
| 
99


APPENDIX B
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List
New York–based venture capital firm Ledra Capital has an ongoing attempt to brain‐
storm and enumerate the wide range of potential uses of blockchain technology.
Some of these categories include financial instruments; public, private, and semipub‐
lic records; physical asset keys; intangibles; and other potential applications:
I. Financial instruments, records, and models
1. Currency
2. Private equities
3. Public equities
4. Bonds
5. Derivatives (futures, forwards, swaps, options, and more complex variations)
6. Voting rights associated with any of the preceding
7. Commodities
8. Spending records
9. Trading records
10. Mortgage/loan records
11. Servicing records
12. Crowdfunding
13. Microfinance
14. Microcharity
101

II. Public records
15. Land titles
16. Vehicle registries
17. Business license
18. Business incorporation/dissolution records
19. Business ownership records
20. Regulatory records
21. Criminal records
22. Passports
23. Birth certificates
24. Death certificates
25. Voter IDs
26. Voting
27. Health/safety inspections
28. Building permits
29. Gun permits
30. Forensic evidence
31. Court records
32. Voting records
33. Nonprofit records
34. Government/nonprofit accounting/transparency
III. Private records
35. Contracts
36. Signatures
37. Wills
38. Trusts
39. Escrows
40. GPS trails (personal)
IV. Other semipublic records
41. Degree
42. Certifications
43. Learning outcomes
102 
| 
Appendix B: Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

44. Grades
45. HR records (salary, performance reviews, accomplishment)
46. Medical records
47. Accounting records
48. Business transaction records
49. Genome data
50. GPS trails (institutional)
51. Delivery records
52. Arbitration
V. Physical asset keys
53. Home/apartment keys
54. Vacation home/timeshare keys
55. Hotel room keys
56. Car keys
57. Rental car keys
58. Leased cars keys
59. Locker keys
60. Safety deposit box keys
61. Package delivery (split key between delivery firm and receiver)
62. Betting records
63. Fantasy sports records
VI. Intangibles
64. Coupons
65. Vouchers
66. Reservations (restaurants, hotels, queues, etc.)
67. Movie tickets
68. Patents
69. Copyrights
70. Trademarks
71. Software licenses
72. Videogame licenses
73. Music/movie/book licenses (DRM)
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List 
| 
103

74. Domain names
75. Online identities
76. Proof of authorship/proof of prior art
VII. Other
77. Documentary records (photos, audio, video)
78. Data records (sports scores, temperature, etc.)
79. Sim cards
80. GPS network identity
81. Gun unlock codes
82. Weapons unlock codes
83. Nuclear launch codes
84. Spam control (micropayments for posting)
104 
| 
Appendix B: Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

Endnotes and References
1 Kayne, R. “What Is BitTorrent?” wiseGEEK, December 25, 2014. http://www.wise
geek.com/what-is-bittorrent.htm#didyouknowout.
2 Beal, V. “Public-key encryption.” Webopedia. http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/P/
public_key_cryptography.html.
3 Hof, R. “Seven Months After FDA Slapdown, 23andMe Returns with New Health
Report Submission.” Forbes, June 20, 2014. http://www.forbes.com/sites/roberthof/
2014/06/20/seven-months-after-fda-slapdown-23andme-returns-with-new-health-
report-submission/.
4 Knight, H. and B. Evangelista. “S.F., L.A. Threaten Uber, Lyft, Sidecar with Legal
Action.” SFGATE, September 25, 2041. http://m.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/S-F-L-A-
threaten-Uber-Lyft-Sidecar-with-5781328.php.
5 Although it is not strictly impossible for two files to have the same hash, the number
of 64-character hashes is vastly greater than the number of files that humanity can
foreseeably create. This is similar to the cryptographic standard that even though a
scheme could be cracked, the calculation would take longer than the history of the
universe.
6 Nakamoto, S. “Bitcoin v0.1 Released.” The Mail Archive, January 9, 2009. http://
www.mail-archive.com/cryptography@metzdowd.com/msg10142.html.
7 ———. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” (publishing data unavaila‐
ble) https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
8 Extended from: Sigal, M. “You Say You Want a Revolution? It’s Called Post-PC Com‐
puting.” Radar (O’Reilly), October 24, 2011. http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/10/post-pc-
revolution.html.
9 Gartner. “Gartner Says the Internet of Things Installed Base Will Grow to 26 Billion
Units By 2020.” Gartner Press Release, December 12, 2013. http://www.gartner.com/
newsroom/id/2636073.
10 Omohundro, S. “Cryptocurrencies, Smart Contracts, and Artificial Intelligence.”
Submitted to AI Matters (Association for Computing Machinery), October 22, 2014.
http://steveomohundro.com/2014/10/22/cryptocurrencies-smart-contracts-and-
artificial-intelligence/.
11 Dawson, R. “The New Layer of the Economy Enabled by M2M Payments in the
Internet of Things.” Trends in the Living Networks, September 16, 2014. http://ross
dawsonblog.com/weblog/archives/2014/09/new-layer-economy-enabled-m2m-
payments-internet-things.html.
105

12 Petschow, K. “Cisco Visual Networking Index Predicts Annual Internet Traffic to
Grow More Than 20 Percent (Reaching 1.6 Zettabytes) by 2018.” Cisco Press Release,
2014. http://newsroom.cisco.com/release/1426270.
13 Andreessen, M. “Why Bitcoin Matters.” The New York Times, January 21,
2014. 
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/01/21/why-bitcoin-matters/?
_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0.
14 Lamport, L., R. Shostack, and M. Pease. (1982). “The Byzantine Generals Problem.”
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 4, no. 3: 382–401; Philipp
(handle). (2014). “Bitcoin and the Byzantine Generals Problem—A Crusade Is
Needed? 
A 
Revolution?” 
Financial 
Cryptography. 
http://
financialcryptography.com/mt/archives/001522.html; Vaurum (handle name). (2014).
“A Mathematical Model for Bitcoin.” (blog post). http://blog.vaurum.com/a-
mathematical-model-for-bitcoin/.
15 Cipher (handle name). “The Current State of Coin-Mixing Services.”
Depp.Dot.Web, May 25, 2014. http://www.deepdotweb.com/2014/05/25/current-state-
coin-mixing-services/.
16 Rizzo, P. “Coinify Raises Millions to Build Europe’s Complete Bitcoin Solution.”
CoinDesk, September 26, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/coinify-raises-millions-build-
europes-complete-bitcoin-solution/.
17 Patterson, J. “Intuit Adds BitPay to PayByCoin.” Bitpay Blog, November 11,
2014. http://blog.bitpay.com/2014/11/11/intuit-adds-bitpay-to-paybycoin.html.
18 Hajdarbegovic, N. “Deloitte: Media ‘Distracting’ from Bitcoin’s Disruptive Poten‐
tial.” CoinDesk, June 30, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/deloitte-media-distracting-
bitcoins-disruptive-potential/; Anonymous. “Remittances: Over the Sea and Far Away.”
The Economist, May 19, 2012. http://www.economist.com/node/21554740.
19 Levine, A.B. and A.M. Antonopoulos. “Let’s Talk Bitcoin! #149: Price and Popular‐
ity.” Let’s Talk Bitcoin podcast, September 30, 2014. http://letstalkbitcoin.com/blog/
post/lets-talk-bitcoin-149-price-and-popularity.
20 Kitco News. “2013: Year of the Bitcoin.” Forbes, December 10, 2013. http://
www.forbes.com/sites/kitconews/2013/12/10/2013-year-of-the-bitcoin/.
21 Gough, N. “Bitcoin Value Sinks After Chinese Exchange Move.” The New York
Times, December 18, 2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/19/business/interna
tional/china-bitcoin-exchange-ends-renminbi-deposits.html?_r=0.
22 Hajdarbegovic, N. “Yuan Trades Now Make Up Over 70% of Bitcoin Volume.”
CoinDesk, September 5, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/yuan-trades-now-make-70-
bitcoin-volume/.
106 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

23 Vigna, P. “CNET Founder Readies Bitreserve Launch in Bid to Quell Bitcoin Vola‐
tility.” The Wall Street Journal, October 22, 2014. http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/
2014/10/22/cnet-founder-readies-bitreserve-launch-in-bid-to-quell-bitcoin-volatility/.
24 Casey, M.J. “Dollar-Backed Digital Currency Aims to Fix Bitcoin’s Volatility
Dilemma.” The Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2014. http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/
2014/07/08/dollar-backed-digital-currency-aims-to-fix-bitcoins-volatility-dilemma/.
25 Rizzo, P. “Coinapult Launches LOCKS, Aiming to Eliminate Bitcoin Price Volatil‐
ity.” CoinDesk, July 29, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/coinapult-launches-locks-tool-
eliminate-bitcoin-price-volatility/.
26 Yang, S. “China Bans Financial Companies from Bitcoin Transactions.” Bloomberg,
December 5, 2013. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-12-05/china-s-pboc-bans-
financial-companies-from-bitcoin-transactions.html.
27 Orsini, L. “A Year in Bitcoin: Why We’ll Still Care About the Cryptocurrency Even
If It Fades.” ReadWrite, December 30, 2013. http://readwrite.com/2013/12/30/bitcoin-
may-fade-2014-prediction.
28 Bitcoin Embassy. “Andreas M. Antonopoulos Educates Senate of Canada About Bit‐
coin.” 
YouTube, 
October 
8, 
2014. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=xUNGFZDO8mM.
29 Robertson, M. and R. Bramanathan. “ATO Ruling Disappointing for Bitcoin in
Australia.” Lexology, August 21, 2014. http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?
g=aee6a563-ab32-442d-8575-67a940527882.
30 Hern, A. “Bitcoin Is Legally Property, Says US IRS. Does That Kill It as a Cur‐
rency?” The Guardian, March 31, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/technology/
2014/mar/31/bitcoin-legally-property-irs-currency. See also: http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
drop/n-14-21.pdf.
31 U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2014). “Virtual Currencies: Emerging
Regulatory, Law Enforcement, and Consumer Protection Challenges. GAO-14-496.”
Published: May 29, 2014. Publicly released: June 26, 2014. http://www.gao.gov/prod
ucts/GAO-14-496. Pages 12–20 explain how each of the relevant federal agencies
(FinCEN, banking regulators, CFPB, SEC, CFTC, and DOJ) conduct supervision of
Bitcoin or virtual currency or related enforcement. See also: “Virtual Economies and
Currencies: Additional IRS Guidance Could Reduce Tax Compliance Risks.” http://
www.gao.gov/products/GAO-13-516.
32 Nakamoto, S. “Re: Transactions and Scripts: DUP HASH160 ... EQUALVERIFY
CHECKSIG.” 
Bitcointalk, 
June 
17, 
2010. 
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?
topic=195.msg1611#msg1611.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
107

33 Swanson, T. “Blockchain 2.0—Let a Thousand Chains Blossom.” Let’s Talk Bitcoin!,
April 
8, 
2014. 
http://letstalkbitcoin.com/blockchain-2-0-let-a-thousand-chains-
blossom/.
34 “The Mega-Master Blockchain List,” posted March 11, 2014, Ledra Capital, http://
ledracapital.com/blog/2014/3/11/bitcoin-series-24-the-mega-master-blockchain-list.
35 Casey, M.J. “Ripple Signs First Two U.S. Banks to Bitcoin-Inspired Payments Net‐
work.” The Wall Street Journal, September 24, 2014. http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/
2014/09/24/ripple-signs-first-two-u-s-banks-to-bitcoin-inspired-payments-network/.
36 Prisco, G. “Spanish Bank Bankinter Invests in Bitcoin Startup Coinffeine.” Crypto‐
Coins News, updated November 17, 2014. https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/spanish-
bank-bankinter-invests-bitcoin-startup-coinffeine/.
37 Mac, R. “PayPal Takes Baby Step Toward Bitcoin, Partners with Cryptocurrency
Processors.” Forbes, September 23, 2014. http://www.forbes.com/sites/ryanmac/
2014/09/23/paypal-takes-small-step-toward-bitcoin-partners-with-cryptocurrency-
processors/.
38 Bensinger, G. “eBay Payments Unit in Talks to Accept Bitcoin.” The Wall Street Jour‐
nal, August 14, 2014. http://online.wsj.com/articles/ebay-payment-unit-in-talks-to-
accept-bitcoin-1408052917.
39 Cordell, D. “Fidor Bank Partners with Kraken to Create Cryptocurrency Bank.”
CryptoCoins News, updated November 2, 2014. https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/
fidor-bank-partners-kraken-create-cryptocurrency-bank/.
40 Casey, M.J. “TeraExchange Unveils First U.S.-Regulated Bitcoin Swaps Exchange.”
The Wall Street Journal, September 12, 2014. http://teraexchange.com/news/
2014_9_12_Tera_WSJ.pdf.
41 Rizzo, P. “Buttercoin Bids to Take US Business from Global Bitcoin Exchanges.”
CoinDesk, November 5, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/buttercoin-bids-take-us-
business-global-bitcoin-exchanges/. See also: https://www.wedbush.com/sites/default/
files/pdf/2014_11_14_Buttercoin_WEDBUSH.pdf.
42 Metz, C. “Overstock.com Assembles Coders to Create a Bitcoin-Like Stock Market.”
Wired, October 6, 2014. http://www.wired.com/2014/10/overstock-com-assembles-
coders-build-bitcoin-like-stock-market/.
43 Ayral, S. “Bitcoin 2.0 Crowdfunding Is Real Crowdfunding.” TechCrunch, October
17, 
2014. 
http://techcrunch.com/2014/10/17/bitcoin-2-0-crowdfunding-is-real-
crowdfunding/.
44 Hofman, A. “Bitcoin Crowdfunding Platform Swarm Announces First Decentral‐
ized Demo Day.” Bitcoin Magazine, September 30, 2014. http://bitcoinmagazine.com/
108 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

16890/bitcoin-crowdfunding-platform-swarm-announces-first-decentralized-demo-
day/.
45 Casey, M.J. “BitBeat: Apple Loves Bitcoin Again, Maybe.” The Wall Street Journal,
June 30, 2014. http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2014/06/03/bitbeat-apple-loves-bitcoin-
again-maybe/.
46 Higgins, S. “Crowdfunding Platform Swarm Announces First Class of Startups.”
CoinDesk, October 17, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/swarm-first-class-startups-
crowdfunding-platform/.
47 Rizzo, P. “How Koinify and Melotic Plan to Bring Order to Crypto Crowdsales.”
CoinDesk, November 14, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/koinify-melotic-plan-bring-
order-crypto-crowdsales/.
48 Higgins, S. “Koinify Raises $1 Million for Smart Corporation Crowdfunding Plat‐
form.” CoinDesk, September 17, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/koinify-1-million-
smart-corporation-crowdfunding/.
49 Southurst, J. “BitFlyer Launches Japan’s First Bitcoin Crowdfunding Platform.”
CoinDesk, September 10, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/bitflyer-launches-japans-
first-bitcoin-crowdfunding-platform/.
50 Swan, M. “Singularity University Live Prediction Markets Simulation and Big Data
Quantitative Indicators.” Slideshare, updated July 11, 2014. http://www.slideshare.net/
lablogga/singularity-university-live-prediction-markets-simulation-big-data-indicators.
51 No relation to this author!
52 Swan, M. “Identity Authentication and Security Access 2.0.” Broader Perspective
blog, April 7, 2013. http://futurememes.blogspot.com/2013/04/identity-authentication-
and-security.html.
53 Szabo, N. “Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Networks.” First
Monday, September 1, 1997. http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/
548/469 as expounded by Hearn, M. (2014). Bitcoin Wiki. https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/
Smart_Property.
54 Swanson, T. Great Chain of Numbers: A Guide to Smart Contracts, Smart Property,
and Trustless Asset Management.
55 Hajdarbegovic, N. “Coinprism Releases Colored Coins Android App for Mobile
Asset Transfer.” CoinDesk, October 20, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/coinprism-
mobile-wallet-colored-coins/.
56 De Filippi, P. “Primavera De Filippi on Ethereum: Freenet or Skynet? The Berkman
Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University.” YouTube, April 15, 2014.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=slhuidzccpI.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
109

57 Ibid.
58 GSB Daily Blog. “Bitcoinomics, Chap. 11: The Future of Money and Property or the
Gospel Of Layers.” GoldSilverBitcoin, August 18, 2013. https://www.goldsilverbit
coin.com/future-of-money-bitcoinomic/.
59 Carney, M. Growing Pains: Stellar Stumbles Briefly Amid Its Launch of a New
Crypto-Currency Platform.” PandoDaily, August 5, 2014. http://pando.com/
2014/08/05/growing-pains-stellar-stumbles-briefly-amid-its-launch-of-a-new-crypto-
currency-platform/.
60 Benet, J. “IPFS—Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System (DRAFT 3).”
Accessed 2014. (no publishing or posting data available) http://static.benet.ai/t/
ipfs.pdf.
61 Atkin, A. “TrustDavis on Ethereum.” Slideshare, June 19, 2014. http://www.slide
share.net/aatkin1971/trustdavis-on-ethereum.
62 Galt, J. “Crypto Swartz Will Get You Paid for Your Great Content.” The CoinFront,
June 23, 2014. http://thecoinfront.com/crypto-swartz-will-get-you-paid-for-your-great-
content/.
63 Prisco, G. “Counterparty Recreates Ethereum on Bitcoin.” CryptoCoins News,
updated 
November 
12, 
2014. 
https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/counterparty-
recreates-ethereum-bitcoin/. See also: “Counterparty Recreates Ethereum’s Smart Con‐
tract Platform on Bitcoin.” Counterparty Press Release. http://counterparty.io/news/
counterparty-recreates-ethereums-smart-contract-platform-on-bitcoin/.
64 Swan, M. “Counterparty/Ethereum: Why Bitcoin Topped $450 Today (Was Under
$350 Last Week).” Broader Perspective blog, November 12, 2014. http://future
memes.blogspot.com/2014/11/counterpartyethereum-why-bitcoin-topped.html.
65 “DEV PLAN,” Ethereum, accessed 2014, https://www.ethereum.org/pdfs/Ethereum-
Dev-Plan-preview.pdf.
66 Finley, K. “Out in the Open: An NSA-Proof Twitter, Built with Code from Bitcoin
and BitTorrent.” Wired, January 13, 2014. http://www.wired.com/2014/01/twister/.
67 Johnston, D. et al. “The General Theory of Decentralized Applications, DApps.”
GitHub, June 9, 2014. https://github.com/DavidJohnstonCEO/DecentralizedApplica
tions.
68 Babbitt, D. “Crypto-Economic Design: A Proposed Agent-Based Modeling Effort.”
SwarmFest 2014: 18th Annual Meeting on Agent-Based Modeling & Simulation. Uni‐
versity of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. June 29 through July 1, 2014. http://
www3.nd.edu/~swarm06/SwarmFest2014/Crypto-economicDesignBabbit.pdf.
69 Butarin, V. “Bootstrapping a Decentralized Autonomous Corporation: Part I.” Bit‐
coin Magazine, September 19, 2013. http://bitcoinmagazine.com/7050/bootstrapping-a-
110 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

decentralized-autonomous-corporation-part-i/; Bontje, J. “Ethereum—Decentralized
Autonomous Organizations.” Slideshare, April 9, 2014. http://www.slideshare.net/
mids106/ethereum-decentralized-autonomous-organizations; Ethereum (EtherCasts).
“Egalitarian DAO Contract Explained.” YouTube, April 3, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q_gxDytSvuY.
70 Spaven, E. “Cloud Storage Startup Storj Raises 910 BTC in Crowdsale.” CoinDesk,
August 22, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/cloud-storage-startup-storj-raises-910-btc-
crowdsale/.
71 Marckx, C. “Storj: Next-Generation Cloud Storage Through the Blockchain.” Cryp‐
toCoins News, updated April 11, 2014. https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/storj-next-
generation-cloud-storage-through-the-blockchain/.
72 Levine, A.B. “Application Specific, Autonomous, Self-Bootstrapping Consensus
Platforms.” Bitsharestalk forum, January 1, 2014. https://bitsharestalk.org/index.php?
topic=1854.0.
73 Swan, M. “Automatic Markets.” Broader Perspective blog, August 23, 2009. http://
futurememes.blogspot.com/2009/08/automatic-markets.html.
74 Hearn, M. “Future of Money (and Everything Else).” Edinburgh Turing Festival.
YouTube, August 23, 2013. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pu4PAMFPo5Y.
75 Moshinsky, B. et al. “WikiLeaks Finds Snowden Cash Bump Elusive.” Bloomberg
Businessweek, July 11, 2013. http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-07-11/
wikileaks-finds-snowden-cash-bump-elusive.
76 Gilson, D. “What Are Namecoins and .bit Domains?” CoinDesk, June 18, 2013.
http://www.coindesk.com/what-are-namecoins-and-bit-domains/.
77 ———. “Developers Attempt to Resurrect Namecoin After Fundamental Flaw Dis‐
covered.” CoinDesk, October 28, 2013. http://www.coindesk.com/namecoin-flaw-
patch-needed/.
78 Wong, J.I. “Trend Micro Report Finds Criminals Unlikely to Abuse Namecoin.”
CoinDesk, 
July 
18, 
2014. 
http://www.coindesk.com/trend-micro-report-finds-
criminals-unlikely-abuse-namecoin/.
79 McArdle, R. and D. Sancho. “Bitcoin Domains: A Trend Micro Research Paper.”
Trend Micro, accessed 2013 (publishing data unavailable). http://www.trendmi
cro.com.au/cloud-content/us/pdfs/security-intelligence/white-papers/wp-bitcoin-
domains.pdf.
80 Michael J. “Dotp2p Demo Video.” YouTube, July 10, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?feature=youtu.be&v=qeweF05tT50&app=desktop.
81 BTC Geek. “Bitshares DNS KeyID Starts Trading.” BTC Geek blog, accessed 2014
(publishing data unavailable). http://btcgeek.com/bitshares-dns-keyid-starts-trading/.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
111

82 Twitter. “Tweets Still Must Flow.” Twitter Blog, January 26, 2012. https://blog.twit
ter.com/2012/tweets-still-must-flow.
83 Dollentas, N. “Exclusive Q&A with Joseph Fiscella: Florincoin and Decentralized
Applications.” Bitoinist.net, June 22, 2014. http://bitcoinist.net/exclusive-qa-with-
joseph-fiscella-florincoin-and-decentralized-applications/.
84 Chaffin, B. “The NSA Can Listen to Skype Calls (Thanks to Microsoft).” The Mac
Observer, July 11, 2013. http://www.macobserver.com/tmo/article/the-nsa-can-listen-
to-skype-calls-thanks-to-microsoft; Goodin, D. Encrypted or Not, Skype Communica‐
tions Prove ‘Vital’ to NSA Surveillance.” Ars Technica, May 13, 2014. http://
arstechnica.com/security/2014/05/encrypted-or-not-skype-communications-prove-vital-
to-nsa-surveillance/.
85 Brin, D. The Transparent Society: Will Technology Force Us to Choose Between Pri‐
vacy and Freedom? Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books Group, 1999.
86 Chaffin, B. “The NSA Can Listen to Skype Calls (Thanks to Microsoft).” The Mac
Observer, July 11, 2013. http://www.macobserver.com/tmo/article/the-nsa-can-listen-
to-skype-calls-thanks-to-microsoft.
87 Dourado, E. “Can Namecoin Obsolete ICANN (and More)?” The Ümlaut, February
5, 2014. http://theumlaut.com/2014/02/05/namecoin-icann/.
88 Rizzo, P. “How OneName Makes Bitcoin Payments as Simple as Facebook Sharing.”
CoinDesk, 
March 
27, 
2014. 
http://www.coindesk.com/onename-makes-bitcoin-
payments-simple-facebook-sharing/.
89 Higgins, S. “Authentication Protocol BitID Lets Users ‘Connect with Bitcoin.’” Coin‐
Desk, May 7, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/authentication-protocol-bitid-lets-users-
connect-bitcoin/.
90 Rohan, M. “Multi-Factor Authentication Market Worth $10.75 Billion by 2020.”
Markets and Markets, accessed 2014 (publishing data unavailable). http://
www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/multi-factor-authentication.asp.
91 Antonopoulos, A.M. “Bitcoin Neutrality.” Bitcoin 2013 Conference, May 18, 2013,
San 
Jose, 
CA. 
YouTube, 
June 
10, 
2013. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=BT8FXQN-9-A.
92 Senbonzakura (handle name). “Islamic Bank of Bitcoin.” Bitcoin Forum, June 24,
2011. https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=21732.0.
93 Chaia, A. et al. “Half the World Is Unbanked.” McKinsey & Co, March 2009. http://
mckinseyonsociety.com/half-the-world-is-unbanked/.
94 “2013 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households,” U.S.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, updated October 28, 2014, https://
www.fdic.gov/householdsurvey/.
112 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

95 Mims, C. “M-Pesa: 31% of Kenya’s GDP Is Spent Through Mobile Phones.” Quartz,
February 27, 2013. http://qz.com/57504/31-of-kenyas-gdp-is-spent-through-mobile-
phones/.
96 Cawrey, D. “37Coins Plans Worldwide Bitcoin Access with SMS-Based Wallet.”
CoinDesk, May 20, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/37coins-plans-worldwide-bitcoin-
access-sms-based-wallet/.
97 Rizzo, P. “How Kipochi Is Taking Bitcoin into Africa.” CoinDesk, April 25, 2014.
http://www.coindesk.com/kipochi-taking-bitcoin-africa/.
98 It is not impossible that two files could produce the same hash, but the chance is
one in trillions of trillions or more.
99 Cawrey, D. “How Bitcoin’s Technology Could Revolutionize Intellectual Property
Rights.” 
CoinDesk, 
May 
8, 
2014. 
http://www.coindesk.com/how-block-chain-
technology-is-working-to-transform-intellectual-property/.
100 Kirk, J. “Could the Bitcoin Network Be Used as an Ultrasecure Notary Service?”
Computerworld, May 23, 2013. http://www.computerworld.com/article/2498077/
desktop-apps/could-the-bitcoin-network-be-used-as-an-ultrasecure-notary-
service-.html.
101 Morgan, P. “Using Blockchain Technology to Prove Existence of a Document.”
Empowered Law, accessed 2014. http://empoweredlaw.wordpress.com/2014/03/11/
using-blockchain-technology-to-prove-existence-of-a-document/.
102 Sirer, EG. “Introducing Virtual Notary.” Hacking, Distributed, June 20, 2013. hack‐
ingdistributed.com/2013/06/20/virtual-notary-intro/.
103 Goss, L. “The High School Startup Using Blockchain Technology.” BitScan, August
27, 
2014. 
https://bitscan.com/articles/the-high-school-startup-using-blockchain-
technology.
104 Cawrey, D. “How Monegraph Uses the Block Chain to Verify Digital Assets.” Coin‐
Desk, May 15, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/monegraph-uses-block-chain-verify-
digital-assets/.
105 Snow, P. “Notary Chains” (white paper). https://github.com/NotaryChains/.
106 Stephenson, N. Snow Crash. New York: Spectra, 1992. See also: http://every
thing2.com/title/Franchulate.
107 Swan, M. “Illiberty in Biohacking, Personal Data Rights, Neuro-diversity, and the
Automation Economy.” Broader Perspective blog, March 2, 2014. http://future
memes.blogspot.fr/2014/03/illiberty-in-biohacking-personal-data.html.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
113

108 Prisco, G. “Bitcoin Governance 2.0: Let’s Block-chain Them.” CryptoCoins News,
updated October 13, 2014. https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/bitcoin-governance-2-0-
lets-block-chain/.
109 Hofman, A. “Couple to Get Married on the Bitcoin Blockchain at Disney Bitcoin
Conference.” Bitcoin Magazine, September 23, 2014. http://bitcoinmagazine.com/
16771/couple-get-married-bitcoin-blockchain-disney-bitcoin-conference/.
110 Marty, B. “Couple Make History with World’s First Bitcoin Wedding.” PanAm Post,
October 7, 2014. http://panampost.com/belen-marty/2014/10/07/couple-make-history-
with-worlds-first-bitcoin-wedding/.
111 Ploshay, E. “A Word from Jeffrey Tucker: Bitcoin Is Not a Monetary System.” Bit‐
coin Magazine, January 3, 2014. http://bitcoinmagazine.com/9299/word-jeffrey-tucker-
bitcoin-monetary-system/.
112 McMillan, R. “Hacker Dreams Up Crypto Passport Using the Tech Behind Bit‐
coin.” Wired, October 30, 2014. http://www.wired.com/2014/10/world_passport/; Ellis,
C. “World Citizenship Project Features in Wired Magazine.” Blog post, November 1,
2014. http://chrisellis.me/world-citizenship-project-features-in-wired-magazine/.
113 De Soto, H. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books, 2003.
114 Swan, M. “Crowdsourced Health Research Studies: An Important Emerging Com‐
plement to Clinical Trials in the Public Health Research Ecosystem.” J Med Internet
Res 14, no. 2 (2012): e46.
115 Mishra, P. “Inside India’s Aadhar, the World’s Biggest Biometrics Database.” Tech‐
Crunch, December 6, 2013. http://techcrunch.com/2013/12/06/inside-indias-aadhar-
the-worlds-biggest-biometrics-database/.
116 Deitz, J. “Decentralized Governance Whitepaper.” Quora, May 21, 2014. http://
distributed-autonomous-society.quora.com/Decentralized-Governance-Whitepaper.
117 Ramos, J. “Liquid Democracy: The App That Turns Everyone into a Politician.”
Shareable, January 20, 2014. http://www.shareable.net/blog/liquid-democracy-the-app-
that-turns-everyone-into-a-politician.
118 Buchanan, A.E. Deciding for Others: The Ethics of Surrogate Decision Making (Stud‐
ies in Philosophy and Health Policy). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
119 Carroll, L. The Principles of Parliamentary Representation. London: Harrison and
Sons, 1884. https://archive.org/details/ThePrinciplesOfParliamentaryRepresentation;
Black, D. “The Central Argument in Lewis Carroll’s The Principles of Parliamentary
Representation.” Papers on Non-market Decision Making 3, no 1 (1967): 1–17.
114 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

120 Chaum, D. “Random-Sample Elections: Far Lower Cost, Better Quality and More
Democratic.” Accessed 2012 (publishing data unavailable). www.rs-elections.com/
Random-Sample%20Elections.pdf.
121 Davis, J. “How Selecting Voters Randomly Can Lead to Better Elections.” Wired,
May 16, 2012. www.wired.com/2012/05/st_essay_voting/.
122 Hanson, R. “Futarchy: Vote Values, but Bet Beliefs.” Accessed 2013 (publishing
data unavailable). http://hanson.gmu.edu/futarchy2013.pdf.
123 Buterin, V. “An Introduction to Futarchy [as Applied with Blockchain Technol‐
ogy].” Ethereum blog, August 21, 2014. https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/21/
introduction-futarchy/.
124 Cruz, K. “The Truth Behind Truthcoin.” Bitcoin Magazine, September 25, 2014.
http://bitcoinmagazine.com/16748/truth-behind-truthcoin/.
125 Wagner, A. “Putting the Blockchain to Work For Science!” Bitcoin Magazine, May
22, 
2014. 
http://bitcoinmagazine.com/13187/putting-the-blockchain-to-work-for-
science-gridcoin/.
126 Buterin, V. “Primecoin: The Cryptocurrency Whose Mining Is Actually Useful.”
Bitcoin Magazine, July 8, 2013. http://bitcoinmagazine.com/5635/primecoin-the-
cryptocurrency-whose-mining-is-actually-useful/.
127 Myers, D.S., A.L. Bazinet, and M.P. Cummings. “Expanding the Reach of Grid
Computing: Combining Globus-and BOINC-Based Systems.” Center for Bioinfor‐
matics and Computational Biology, Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, Uni‐
versity of Maryland, February 6, 2007 (Draft). http://lattice.umiacs.umd.edu/
latticefiles/publications/lattice/myers_bazinet_cummings.pdf.
128 Clenfield, J. and P. Alpeyev. “The Other Bitcoin Power Struggle.” Bloomberg Busi‐
nessweek, April 24, 2014. http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-04-24/bitcoin-
miners-seek-cheap-electricity-to-eke-out-a-profit.
129 Gimein, M. “Virtual Bitcoin Mining Is a Real-World Environmental Disaster.”
Bloomberg, April 12, 2013. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-04-12/virtual-
bitcoin-mining-is-a-real-world-environmental-disaster.html.
130 Worstall, T. “Fascinating Number: Bitcoin Mining Uses $15 Million’s Worth of
Electricity Every Day.” Forbes, December 3, 2013. http://www.forbes.com/sites/timwor
stall/2013/12/03/fascinating-number-bitcoin-mining-uses-15-millions-worth-of-
electricity-every-day/.
131 Tapscott, D. and A.D. Williams. Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes
Everything. New York: Penguin Group, 2008.
132 Anonymous. “EteRNA.” Scientific American, (publishing data unavailable). http://
www.scientificamerican.com/citizen-science/eterna/.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
115

133 Vigna, P. and M.J. Casey. “BitBeat: Could Bitcoin Help Fight the Ebola Crisis?” The
Wall Street Journal, October 8, 2014. http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2014/10/08/
bitbeat-could-bitcoin-help-fight-the-ebola-crisis/.
134 Cawrey, D. “37Coins Plans Worldwide Bitcoin Access with SMS-Based Wallet.”
CoinDesk, May 20, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/37coins-plans-worldwide-bitcoin-
access-sms-based-wallet/.
135 Rizzo, P. “How Kipochi Is Taking Bitcoin into Africa.” CoinDesk, April 25, 2014.
http://www.coindesk.com/kipochi-taking-bitcoin-africa/.
136 Mims, C. “M-Pesa: 31% of Kenya’s GDP Is Spent Through Mobile Phones.” Quartz,
February 27, 2013. http://qz.com/57504/31-of-kenyas-gdp-is-spent-through-mobile-
phones/.
137 Buterin, V. “Sean’s Outpost Announces Satoshi Forest, Nine-Acre Sanctuary for the
Homeless.” Bitcoin Magazine, September 9, 2013. http://bitcoinmagazine.com/6939/
seans-outpost-announces-satoshi-forest/.
138 Green, R. and N.A. Farahany. “Regulation: The FDA Is Overcautious on Consumer
Genomics.” Nature, January 15, 2014. http://www.nature.com/news/regulation-the-fda-
is-overcautious-on-consumer-genomics-1.14527.
139 Wright, C. et al. “People Have a Right to Access Their Own Genetic Information.”
Genomes Unzipped: Personal Public Genomes, November 3, 2011. http://genomesun
zipped.org/2011/03/people-have-a-right-to-access-their-own-genetic-information.php.
140 Green, R.C. et al. “Disclosure of APOE Genotype for Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease.”
New 
England 
Journal 
of 
Medicine 
361 
(July 
16, 
2009):245–54. 
http://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0809578 and discussed in further detail at
http://www.genomes2people.org/director/.
141 Regalado, A. “The FDA Ordered 23andMe to Stop Selling Its Health Tests. But for
the Intrepid, Genome Knowledge Is Still Available.” MIT Technology Review, October
19, 
2014. 
http://www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/531461/how-a-wiki-is-
keeping-direct-to-consumer-genetics-alive/.
142 DeCODEme. “Sales of Genetic Scans Direct to Consumer Through deCODEme
Have Been Discontinued! Existing Customers Can Access Their Results Here Until
January 1st 2015.” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DeCODE_genetics.
143 Castillo, M. “23andMe to Only Provide Ancestry, Raw Genetics Data During FDA
Review.” CBS News, December 6, 2013. http://www.cbsnews.com/news/23andme-to-
still-provide-ancestry-raw-genetics-data-during-fda-review/.
144 Swan, M. “Health 2050: The Realization of Personalized Medicine Through
Crowdsourcing, the Quantified Self, and the Participatory Biocitizen.” J Pers Med 2,
no. 3 (2012): 93–118.
116 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

145 ———. “Multigenic Condition Risk Assessment in Direct-to-Consumer Genomic
Services. Genet Med 12, no. 5 (2010): 279–88; Kido, T. et al. “Systematic Evaluation of
Personal Genome Services for Japanese Individuals.” Nature: Journal of Human Genet‐
ics 58 (2013):734–41.
146 Tamblyn, T. “Backup Your DNA Using Bitcoins.” Huffington Post UK, October 30,
2014. 
http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/10/30/genecoin-genome-backup-
bitcoin_n_6076366.html.
147 Grens, K. “Cloud-Based Genomics.” The Scientist, October 28, 2013. http://
www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/38044/title/Cloud-Based-Genomics/.
148 Jiang, K. “University of Chicago to Establish Genomic Data Commons.” University
of Chicago News, December 2, 2014. http://news.uchicago.edu/article/2014/12/02/
university-chicago-establish-genomic-data-commons.
149 Swan, M. “Blockchain Health—Remunerative Health Data Commons & Health‐
Coin RFPs.” Broader Perspective blog, September 28, 2014. http://futurememes.blog
spot.com/2014/09/blockchain-health-remunerative-health.html.
150 HL7 Standards. “20 Questions for Health IT #5: Bitcoin & Blockchain Technology.”
HL7 
Standards, 
September 
8, 
2014. 
http://www.hl7standards.com/blog/
2014/09/08/20hit-5/.
151 Zimmerman, J. “DNA Block Chain Project Boosts Research, Preserves Patient
Anonymity.” CoinDesk, June 27, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/israels-dna-bits-
moves-beyond-currency-with-genes-blockchain/.
152 Swan, M. “Quantified Self Ideology: Personal Data Becomes Big Data.” Slideshare,
February 
6, 
2014. 
http://www.slideshare.net/lablogga/quantified-self-ideology-
personal-data-becomes-big-data.
153 Levine, A.B. “Let’s Talk Bitcoin! #158: Ebola and the Body Blockchain with Kevin J.
McKernan.” Let’s Talk Bitcoin podcast, November 1, 2014. http://letstalkbitcoin.com/
blog/post/lets-talk-bitcoin-158-ebola-and-the-body-blockchain.
154 McKernan, K. “Niemann-Pick Type C & Ebolavirus: Bitcoin Community Comes
Together to Advocate and Fund Open Source Ebolavirus Research.” Medicinal
Genomics, accessed 2014 (publishing data unavailable). http://www.medicinalgenom
ics.com/niemann-pick-type-c-and-ebola/.
155 Anonymous. “The Evolving Genetics of HIV: Can Genes Stop HIV?” The Tech
Museum of Innovation, (publishing data unavailable). http://genetics.thetech.org/origi
nal_news/news13.
156 Anonymous. “Unreliable Research. Trouble at the Lab.” The Economist, October 17,
2013 
(paywall 
restricted). 
http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21588057-
scientists-think-science-self-correcting-alarming-degree-it-not-trouble.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
117

157 Schmidt, M. and H. Lipson. “Distilling Free-Form Natural Laws from Experimen‐
tal Data.” Science 324, no. 5923 (2009): 81–5. http://creativemachines.cornell.edu/sites/
default/files/Science09_Schmidt.pdf; Keim, B. “Computer Program Self-Discovers
Laws of Physics.” Wired, April 2, 2009. http://www.wired.com/2009/04/newtonai/.
158 Muggleton, S. “Developing Robust Synthetic Biology Designs Using a Microfluidic
Robot Scientist. Advances in Artificial Intelligence—SBIA 2008.” Lecture notes in
Computer 
Science 
5249 
(2008):4. 
http://link.springer.com/chapter/
10.1007/978-3-540-88190-2_3.
159 Waltz, D. and BG Buchanan. “Automating Science.” Science 324, no. 5923 (2009):
43–4. http://www.sciencemag.org/content/324/5923/43.
160 Higgins, S. “Sidechains White Paper Imagines New Future for Digital Currency
Development.” Coindesk, October 23, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/sidechains-
white-paper-ecosystem-reboot/; Back, A. et al. “Enabling Blockchain Innovations with
Pegged Sidechains.” Accessed 2014 (publishing data unavailable). http://www.block
stream.com/sidechains.pdf.
161 daCosta, F. Rethinking the Internet of Things: A Scalable Approach to Connecting
Everything. New York: Apress, 2013.
162 Deleuze, G. Cinema 2: The Time-Image. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1989.
163 Heidegger, M. Being and Time. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics,
1927.
164 Crackerhead (handle name). “Mining LTBCoin.” BitcoinTalk.org forum, July 27,
2014. https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=712944.0.
165 von Hayek, F.A. Denationalization of Money: An Analysis of the Theory and Practice
of Concurrent Currencies. London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1977.
166 ———. “The ‘Paradox’ of Saving.” Economica, no. 32 (1931).
167 Blumen, R. “Hayek on the Paradox of Saving.” Ludwig von Mises Institute, January
9, 2008. http://mises.org/daily/2804.
168 Ferrara, P. “Rethinking Money: The Rise Of Hayek’s Private Competing Curren‐
cies.” Forbes, March 1, 2013. http://www.forbes.com/sites/peterferrara/2013/03/01/
rethinking-money-the-rise-of-hayeks-private-competing-currencies/.
169 Wong, J.I. “MIT Undergrads Can Now Claim Their Free $100 in Bitcoin.” Coin‐
Desk, October 29, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/mit-undergrads-can-now-claim-
free-100-bitcoin/.
118 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

170 Rizzo, P. “70,000 Caribbean Island Residents to Receive Bitcoin in 2015.” Coin‐
Desk, August 28, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/70000-caribbean-island-residents-
receive-bitcoin-2015/.
171 Cawrey, D. “Auroracoin Airdrop: Will Iceland Embrace a National Digital Cur‐
rency?” CoinDesk, March 24, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/auroracoin-airdrop-
iceland-embrace-national-digital-currency/.
172 Khaosan, V. “Ecuador: The First Nation to Create Its Own Digital Currency.”
CryptoCoins News, updated August 1, 2014. https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/
ecuador-first-nation-create-digital-currency/.
173 Hamill, J. “The Battle of Little Bitcoin: Native American Tribe Launches Its Own
Cryptocurrency.” Forbes, February 27, 2014. http://www.forbes.com/sites/jasperhamill/
2014/02/27/the-battle-of-little-bitcoin-native-american-tribe-launches-its-own-
cryptocurrency/.
174 Lietaerm, B. and J. Dunne. Rethinking Money: How New Currencies Turn Scarcity
into Prosperity London: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2013.
175 Swan, M. “Social Economic Networks and the New Intangibles.” Broader Perspec‐
tive blog, August 15, 2010. http://futurememes.blogspot.com/2010/08/social-economic-
networks-and-new.html.
176 ———. “New Banks, New Currencies, and New Markets in a Multicurrency
World: Roadmap for a Post-Scarcity Economy by 2050.” Create Futures IberoAmér‐
ica, Enthusiasmo Cultural, São Paolo Brazil, October 14, 2009.
177 ———. “Connected World Wearables Free Cognitive Surplus.” Broader Perspective
blog, October 26, 2014. http://futurememes.blogspot.com/2014/10/connected-world-
frees-cognitive-surplus.html.
178 Lee, T.B. “Bitcoin Needs to Scale by a Factor of 1000 to Compete with Visa. Here’s
How to Do It.” The Washington Post, November 12, 2013. http://www.washington
post.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2013/11/12/bitcoin-needs-to-scale-by-a-factor-of-1000-
to-compete-with-visa-heres-how-to-do-it/.
179 Spaven, E. “The 12 Best Answers from Gavin Andresen’s Reddit AMA.” CoinDesk,
October 21, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/12-answers-gavin-andresen-reddit-ama/.
180 Prashar, V. “What Is Bitcoin 51% Attack, Should I Be Worried?” BTCpedia, April
21, 2013. http://www.btcpedia.com/bitcoin-51-attack/.
181 Rizzo, P. “Ghash.io: We Will Never Launch a 51% Attack Against Bitcoin.” Coin‐
Desk, June 16, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/ghash-io-never-launch-51-attack/.
182 Courtois, N. “How to Upgrade the Bitcoin Elliptic Curve.” Financial Cryptography,
Bitcoin, Crypto Currencies blog, November 16, 2014. http://blog.bettercrypto.com/?
p=1008.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
119

183 Ibid.
184 Kwon, J. “Tendermint: Consensus Without Mining” Accessed 2014 (white paper).
http://tendermint.com/docs/tendermint.pdf.
185 ———. “Tendermint Consensus Proposal.” Bitcoin forum, November 20, 2014.
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=866460.0. See also tendermint.com/posts/
security-of-cryptocurrency-protocols/.
186 Anonymous. “The Troubling Holes in MtGox’s Account of How It Lost $600 Mil‐
lion in Bitcoins.” MIT Technology Review, April 4, 2014. http://www.technologyre
view.com/view/526161/the-troubling-holes-in-mtgoxs-account-of-how-it-lost-600-
million-in-bitcoins/.
187 Collier, K. “Moolah CEO Accused of Disappearing with $1.4 Million in Bitcoin.”
Daily Dot, October 21, 2014. http://www.dailydot.com/politics/moolah-dogecoin-alex-
green-ryan-kennedy-ryan-gentle-millions-missing-mintpal/.
188 Pick, L. “Nearly $2 Million Worth of Vericoin Stolen from MintPal, Hard Fork
Implemented.” Digital Currency Magnates, July 15, 2014. http://dcmagnates.com/
nearly-2-million-worth-of-vericoin-stolen-from-mintpal-hard-fork-considered/.
189 Greenberg, A. “Hacker Hijacks Storage Devices, Mines $620,000 in Dogecoin.”
Wired, June 17, 2014. http://www.wired.com/2014/06/hacker-hijacks-storage-devices-
mines-620000-in-dogecoin/.
190 Swan, M. “Scaling Crowdsourced Health Studies: The Emergence of a New Form
of Contract Research Organization.” Pers Med. 9, no. 2 (2012): 223–34.
191 Reitman, R. “Beware the BitLicense: New York’s Virtual Currency Regulations
Invade Privacy and Hamper Innovation.” Electronic Frontier Foundation, October
15, 2014. https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/10/beware-bitlicense-new-yorks-virtual-
currency-regulations-invade-privacy-and-hamper.
192 Santori, M. “What New York’s Proposed Regulations Mean for Bitcoin Businesses.”
CoinDesk, July 18, 2014. http://www.coindesk.com/new-yorks-proposed-regulations-
mean-bitcoin-businesses/.
193 Cowen, T. Average Is Over: Powering America Beyond the Age of the Great Stagna‐
tion. New York: Dutton Publishing, 2013.
194 Antonopoulos, A.M. Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Crypto-Currencies. Sebas‐
topol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2014.
195 Bostrom, N. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford, UK: Oxford Uni‐
versity Press, 2014.
120 
| 
Ledra Capital Mega Master Blockchain List

196 Swan, M. “Blockchain-Enforced Friendly AI.” Crypto Money Expo, December 5,
2014. 
http://cryptomoneyexpo.com/expos/inv2/#schedule 
and 
http://youtu.be/
qdGoRep5iT0/.
Public/Private-Key Cryptography 101 
| 
121


Index
A
address, 3
Airbnb, 87
Alexandria, 33
altcoin, 5
altcoin wallet, 3
alternative currencies, 5-6, 97-104
anti-censorship, 33
APIs, 19
Aráoz, Manuel, 38
archiving, 20
art (see digital art)
artificial intelligence (AI), 26, 93-95
artworks, 14
(see also digital art)
Ascribe, 41
autocitation, 65
automated digital asset protection, 42
automatic markets, 26
autonomy, 16
B
bandwidth, 82
banking industry (see financial services)
betting, 13, 18
big data, 29
.bit domains, 32
"Bitbank", 11
Bitcoin
colored coins, 15
concept, vii
digital divide of, 36
M2M/IoT payment network, xii
MOOCs, 61
neutrality, 36
origins and applications overview, ix
and popular culture, xiv
pricing, 5
terminology, 71
Web metaphor, 9
Bitcoin Association of Berkeley, 73
Bitcoin terminology, 1
BitDrop, 73
Bitfilm Festival, xiv
bitFlyer, 23
Bithandle, 35
BitID, 34-35
Bitmessage, 23
BitMixer, 4
Bitnotar, 40
BitPay, 4, 11
Bitreserve, 6
BitShare, 6, 18
BitTorrent, 2, 20
block chain cryptography, 2
block explorers, 2
Block.io, 19
Blockchain 1.0, 1-7
(see also currency)
practical use, 5-7
technology stack, 1-2
Blockchain 2.0, 9-26
(see also contracts)
applications beyond currency, 10-11
origins and applications overview, 9-11
protocol projects, 18
Blockchain 3.0, 27-52
(see also justice applications)
123

academic publishing, 63-65
(see also publishing, academic)
for censorship-resistant governance, 30
consumer genomics applications, 55-59
(see also genomics, consumer)
decentralized DNS system, 31-34
digital art, 37-44
(see also digital art)
digital identity verification, 34-36
freedom and empowerment potential of,
30-31
health-related applications, 59
(see also health)
and Internet administration, 31
learning applications, 61-63
(see also learning and literacy)
science applications, 53-55
as transnational governance structure, 30-31
blockchain application progression, 22
blockchain archival system, 20
blockchain attestation services, 37-44
(see also digital art)
automated digital asset protection, 42
benefits, 39
Bitnotar, 40
Chronobit, 40
contract services, 40
hashing and timestamping, 37-40, 42
limitations, 39
notary chains, 42
personal thinking chains, 43-44
Proof of Existence, 38-40
Virtual Notary, 40
blockchain development platforms, 19
blockchain ecosystem, 19-21
blockchain government, 44-52
(see also governance)
blockchain interoperability, 84
blockchain neutrality, 36
blockchain technology, 27-30
administrative potential of, 29
and artificial intelligence, 26, 93-95
application to fundamental economic prin‐
ciples, 28-29
applications for, vii-ix, xii-xiv
appropriate uses, 65-66
as complementary technology, 91
capabilities of, 92
concept and overview, x-xii
and consensus models, 93-96
extensibility of, 28
for facilitating big data predictive task auto‐
mation, 29
future applications, 93-96
limitations of (see limitations)
organizational capabilities, 27
tracking capabilities, 28-29
blockchain-recorded marriage, 45
BlockCypher, 19
BOINC, 25
bond deposit postings, 85
Brin, David, 33
BTCjam, 12
business model challenges, 85
Buttercoin, 12
Byrne, Patrick, 12
C
Campus Cryptocurrency Network, 73
Campuscoin, 72-73
censorship, Internet (see decentralized DNS
system)
Chain, 19
challenges (see see limitations)
charity donations, 55
China, 5
ChromaWallet, 18
Chronobit, 40
Circle Internet Financial, 3
Codius, 11
coin drops, 73
coin mixing, 4
coin, defining, 69, 71
Coinapult, 55
Coinapult LOCKS, 6
Coinbase, 4, 11
CoinBeyond, 4
Coinffeine, 11
Coinify, 4
Coinprism, 18
Coinspace, 12
CoinSpark, 18
colored coins, 15, 18
community supercomputing, 54
Communitycoin, 71-72
complementary currency systems, 76
concepts, redefining, 69-70
consensus models, 93-96
124 
| 
Index

consensus-derived information, 95
contagious disease relief, 55
contracts, 9-26
(see also smart contracts)
crowdfunding, 12-13
financial services, 11-12
marriage, 45
prediction markets, 13
smart property, 13-16
wallet development projects, 18
copyright protection, 41
Counterparty, 18, 22
Counterparty currency (XCP), 71
Counterwallet, 18
crowdfunding, 12-13
cryptocurrencies
benefits of, 71
cryptosecurity, 4
eWallet services, 3
mechanics of, 3-4
merchant acceptance, 4
cryptosecurity challenges, 4
cryptowallet, 36
currency, 1-7, 70-79
Campuscoin, 72-73
coin drops, 73
Communitycoin, 71-72
cryptocurrencies, 3-4
decentralizing, 71
defining, 70-71, 74
demurrage, 75-79
double-spend problem, 2
fiat currency, 5-6
monetary and nonmonetary, 74-75
new meanings, 74
technology stack, 1-2
currency mulitplicity, 74-75
D
DAOs, 24-25
DAOs/DACs, 24-25, 42, 45
Dapps, 23-24, 78
Dark Coin, 4
dark pools, 84
Dark Wallet, 4
DASs, 25
DDP, 12
decentralization, 16, 66
decentralized applications (Dapps), 23-24
decentralized autonomous organization/corpo‐
ration (DAO) (see DAOs/DACs)
decentralized autonomous societies (DASs), 25
decentralized autonomy, 3
decentralized DNS, 31-34
challenges of, 32
and digital identity, 33-34
DotP2P, 33
decentralized file storage, 20
decentralized secure file serving, 20
deeds, 47
demurrage currencies, 75-79
action-incitory features, 77
limitations of, 77
digital art, 37-44
(see also blockchain attestation services)
hashing and timestamping, 37-40
online graphics protection, 41
digital cryptography, 21, 98
digital divide, defining, 36
digital identity verification, 10, 14, 18, 34-36,
40, 47, 50, 62, 88
dispute resolution, 48
DIYweathermodeling, 55
DNAnexus, 58
Dogecoin, 1, 74, 86
DotP2P, 33
double-spend problem, 2
DriveShare, 25
dynamic redistribution of currency (see demur‐
rage currency)
E
education (see learning and literacy)
Electronic Freedom Foundation (EFF), 31
EMR (electronic medical record) system, 59
Ethereum, 13, 18, 19, 21-22
eWallet services, 3
ExperimentalResultscoin, 64
F
Fairlay, 13
fiat currency, 5-6
file serving, 20, 21
file storage, 20
financial services, 6, 11, 27, 87
Fitbit, 43, 60, 77
Florincoin, 33
Folding@Home, 25, 53, 54
Index 
| 
125

franculates, 44
freedom of speech, 32, 33
(see also decentralized DNS system)
Freicoin, 75
fundraising (see crowdfunding)
futarchy, 51-52
G
GBIcoin, 76
GBIs (Guaranteed Basic Income initiatives), 76
Gems, 19, 23
Genecoin, 57
Genomecoin, 58
Genomic Data Commons, 58
genomic sequencing, 57-59
GenomicResearchcoin, 59
genomics, consumer, 55-59
Git, 20
GitHub, 63, 75
global public health, 55
GoCoin, 11
GoToLunchcoin, 70
governance, 44-52
decentralized services, 45-48
dispute resolution, 48
futarchy, 51-52
Liquid Democracy system, 49-50
personalized governance services, 44
random-sample elections, 50
societal maturity impact of blockchain gov‐
ernance, 52
government regulation, 6, 87-88
Gridcoin, 53-54
H
hashing, 37-40, 42, 84
Hayek, Friedrich, 71, 76, 91, 92
health, 59-61
as demurrage currency, 78
doctor vendor RFP services, 61
health notary services, 60
health research commons , 60
health spending, 59
healthcare decision making and advocacy,
50
personal health record storage, 59
virus bank and seed vault backup, 61
Healthcoin, 59, 75
I
identity authentication, 4, 10, 14, 15, 18, 34-36,
40, 45, 50, 62, 88
Indiegogo, 12, 24
industry scandals, 86
infrastructure needs and issues, 83
inheritance gifts, 17
intellectual property, 41
(see also digital art)
Internet administration, 31
Internet Archive, 21, 43
Internet censorship prevention (see Decentral‐
ized DNS system)
Intuit Quickbooks, 4
IP protection, 38
IPFS project, 20
J
Johnston, David, 29
Journalcoin, 63
Judobaby, 12
justice applications
for censorship-resistant organizational
models, 30-31
digital art, 37-44
(see also digital art, blockchain attesta‐
tion services)
digital identity verification, 10, 14, 18,
34-36, 40, 47, 50, 62, 88
freedom of speech/anti-censorship, 33
governance, 44-52
(see also governance)
Namecoin, 31-34, 41
(see also decentralized DNS)
K
Kickstarter, 12, 54
Kipochi, 36, 55, 62
Koinify, 12, 23
Kraken, 11
L
latency, 18, 82, 84, 87
LaZooz, 23, 72, 78
Learncoin, 62
learning and literacy, 61-63
learning contract exchanges, 62
Ledra Capital, 10, 101
126 
| 
Index

legal implications
crowdfunding, 13
smart contracts, 16
lending, trustless, 15
Lighthouse, 13
limitations, 81-89
business model challenges, 85
government regulation, 87-88
personal records privacy challenges, 88
scandals and public perception, 85-87
technical challenges, 81-85
Liquid Democracy system, 49-50
Litecoin, 1, 2, 33, 74, 84
literacy (see learning and literacy)
LTBcoin, 18, 71
M
M2M/IoT infrastructure, xii, 19, 64-65, 92
Maidsafe, 19, 83
Manna, 12
marriage, blockchain recorded, 45
Mastercoin, 18
mechanics of cryptocurrencies, 3
Medici, 12
mega master blockchain list, 101-104
Melotic, 13, 18
merchant acceptance, 4
merchant payment fees, 5
messaging, 21, 23, 33, 83
MetaDisk, 25
mindfiles, 43
MIT Bitcoin Project, 73
Monegraph, 41
money (see currency)
MOOCs (massive open online courses), 61
Moroz, Tatiana, 72
multicurrency systems, 76
N
Nakamoto, Satoshi, 9, 10
Namecoin, 31-34, 41
Nationcoin, 73, 76
notary chains, 42
notary services, 38, 60
NSA surveillance, 33
NXT, 1, 18
O
offline wallets, 84
OneName, 34-35
OneWallet, 18
online graphics protection, 41-41
Open Assets, 18
Open Transactions, 18
OpenBazaar, 23, 87
Ostel, 33
P
passports, 47
PayPal, 2, 11, 31
peer-to-peer lending, 12
Peercoin, 1
personal cryptosecurity, 3
personal data rights, 56
personal mindfile blockchains, 43
personal thinking chains, 43-44
physical asset keys, 11, 15
plagiarism detection/avoidance, 65
Precedent, 48, 70
prediction markets, 13, 25, 46, 51-52
Predictious, 13
predictive task automation, 29
privacy challenges, 88
private key, 3
Proof of Existence, 38-39
proof of stake, 18, 48, 84
proof of work, 48, 83-85
property ownership, 14
property registration, 47
public documents registries, 48
public health, 20, 55
public perception, 85-87
public/private key cryptography, 98-99
publishing, academic, 63-65
pull technology, 4
push technology, 4
R
random-sample elections, 50
Realcoin, 6
redistribution of currency (see demurrage cur‐
rency)
regulation, 87-88
regulatory status, 6
reputation vouching, 21
Index 
| 
127

Researchcoin, 64
REST APIs, 85
Ripple, 1, 6, 18
Ripple Labs, 11
Roadcoin, 44
S
Saldo.mx, 36
scandals, 86
science, 53-55
community supercomputing, 54
global public health, 55
Sean's Outpost, 55
secret messaging, 21
security issues, 83
self-bootstrapped organizations, 25
self-directing assets, 26
self-enforced code, 15
self-sufficiency, 16
SETI@home, 53, 54
size and bandwidth, 82
smart contracts, 16-18, 94
automatic markets and tradenets, 26
Counterparty, 22
DAOs/DACs, 24-25
Dapps, 23-24
DASs, 25
Ethereum, 21
increasingly autonomous, 22-26
smart literacy contracts, 61-63
smart property, 13-16, 41
smartwatch, 77
Snowden, Edward, 31
social contracts, 17
social network currencies, 75
Stellar, 19
stock market, 12
Storj, 19, 23, 83
Stripe, 19
supercomputing, 54
Svalbard Global Seed Vault, 61
Swancoin, 14
swaps exchange, 12
Swarm, 12, 23
Swarm (Ethereum), 21
Swarmops, 12
T
Tatianacoin, 72
technical challenges, 81-85
Tendermint, 84
Tera Exchange, 12
terminology, 69-70
37Coins, 55
throughput, 82
timestamping, 37-40
titling, 47
tradenets, 26
transaction fees, 5
Tribecoin, 73
trustless lending, 15
Truthcoin, 51
Turing completeness, 21
Twister, 23
Twitter, 41
U
Uber, 87
unbanked/underbanked markets, 36
usability issues, 83
V
value chain composition, 3
versioning issues, 83
Virtual Notary, 40
voting and prediction, 51-52
W
wallet APIs, 19
wallet companies, 18
wallet software, 3
wasted resources, 83
Wayback Machine, 21
Wedbush Securities, 12
Whatevercoin, 69
WikiLeaks, 31
Wikinomics, 55
World Citizen project, 47
X
Xapo, 3
Z
Zennet Supercomputer, 54
Zooko's Triangle, 34
128 
| 
Index

About the Author
Melanie Swan is the Founder of the Institute for Blockchain Studies and a Contem‐
porary Philosophy MA candidate at Kingston University London and Université
Paris VIII. She has a traditional markets background with an MBA in Finance from
the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, and work experience at Fidel‐
ity and JP Morgan. She has a new markets background as an entrepreneur and advi‐
sor to startups GroupPurchase and Prosper, and developed virtual world digital asset
valuation and accounting principles for Deloitte. She was involved in the early stages
of the Quantified Self movement, and founded DIYgenomics in 2010, an organiza‐
tion that pioneered the crowdsourced health research study. She is an instructor at
Singularity University, an Affiliate Scholar at the Institute for Ethics and Emerging
Technologies, and a contributor to the Edge’s Annual Essay Question.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Blockchain is a Hungarian grey bull, a breed of domestic
bull once thought to have been brought into central Europe from beyond the Carpa‐
thian mountains during the 9th-century beginnings of the Hungarian conquest. It is
now known only that the breed existed in great numbers by the beginning of the 15th
century, when it was already being exported in large quantities to other cities in
Europe.
The toughness and adaptability of the Hungarian grey breed have made its oxen val‐
uable as draft animals for centuries. It survives well in conditions of great freedom
and so is suited to grazing on ample pasture lands. It reportedly acclimates well to a
wide range of climates, and Hungarian grey heifers are reputed to be less likely to
experience dystocia, or calving difficulty.
Elimination of pastures in the late 19th and early 20th centuries represented the first
in a series of threats to the Hungarian grey’s existence. Farm mechanization in the
same period relaxed demand for the breed’s abilities as a draft animal, and attempts to
upgrade the Hungarian grey by crosses with other central European cattle further
reduced the number in existence. Since a 1962 count put the number of Hungarian
grey bulls alive at 6, however, enlightened breeding efforts have restored the stock to a
population sufficient for maintaining genetic diversity. Largely restricted to national
parks in Hungary, the breed now serves as an important genetic resource.
Many of the animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them are important to
the world. To learn more about how you can help, go to animals.oreilly.com.
The cover image is from Cassell’s Natural History. The cover fonts are URW Type‐
writer and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion Pro; the heading font is
Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the code font is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.

