
On Dialogue
“People say, ‘All we really need is love.’ If there were
universal love, all would go well. But we don’t appear to
have it. So we have to ﬁnd a way that works.”
David Bohm, On Dialogue
“One of my scientiﬁc ‘gurus’.”
The Dalai Lama
“Underlying many of the problems of humanity is our
inability to even talk about our problems. On Dialogue
offers tools that facilitate a true exchange of ideas
between people.”
Paavo Pylkkänen
“An openness to the irreducible nature of the whole in
both science and art summarizes the timeless philo-
sophical stance of David Bohm. The delight to have
On Creativity and On Dialogue made into Routledge
Classics has special relevance to our era of fracture,
contention, and public duplicity.”
Lynn Margulis, University of Massachusetts-Amherst


David
Bohm
On Dialogue
With a new preface by Peter M. Senge
Edited by Lee Nichol
London and New York

First published 1996
by Routledge
First published in Routledge Classics 2004
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
© 1996 Saral Bohm, for the original material by David Bohm; Lee Nichol
for selection and editorial matter.
Preface to Routledge Classics edition © 2004 Peter M. Senge
Typeset in Joanna by ReﬁneCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
ISBN10: 0–415–33641–4
–
ISBN13: 978 0–415–33641–3

CONTENTS
Preface to the Routledge Classics Edition
vii
Foreword
xv
Acknowledgements
xxix
On Communication
1
1
On Dialogue
6
2
The Nature of Collective Thought
55
3
The Problem and the Paradox
70
4
The Observer and the Observed
79
5
Suspension, the Body, and Proprioception
83
6
Participatory Thought and the Unlimited
96
7
Bibliography
110
Index
111


PREFACE TO THE ROUTLEDGE CLASSICS EDITION
Re-reading today David Bohm’s essay “On Dialogue” is, for me,
like unwrapping a precious present. So, it was not only an honor
but a wonderful opportunity to be asked to write a preface to
this new edition of Bohm’s classic article.
I ﬁrst met David and Saral Bohm at MIT in mid-1989, during
the time period when the talks that were the basis for this essay
were being given. We talked for several hours about dialogue. I
have often wished that the meeting had been recorded, because
I have the distinct recollection of hearing so much that made
deep sense and knowing that I would remember little. The ﬁne
grains of David’s perceptions could not be held by the coarse
weave of my mind. My feeling is that much of what was elusive
to me then is laid out here and hopefully many of us are now
more prepared for it.
Since that meeting, there have been many serious eﬀorts
to practice dialogue in complex settings,1 and the idea has
1 The research done through MIT and in the SoL network is presented in
W. Isaacs (1999) Dialogue and the Art of Thinking Together: A Pioneering Approach to
Communicating in Business and in Life, New York: Currency.

gained considerable cachet. Meetings of many sorts are billed
as dialogues: “stakeholder dialogues,” “cross-sector dialogues,”
“civic dialogues.” For example, when Koﬁ Annan and his col-
leagues established the UN Global Compact to foster collabor-
ation among corporations to elevate social, environmental, and
labor standards around the world, one key element was “policy
dialogue” encouraging corporate, labor and civil society organ-
izations “to pursue innovative solutions to complex problems.”2
Within many organizations, serious eﬀorts have been made to
integrate dialogue practices into day-to-day operations – for
example, simple practices like “check-ins” and “check-outs:”
hearing, in turn, each person’s thoughts and feelings in a group
at the outset or closing of meetings. In one of the world’s largest
multinational corporations, a senior vice president has hosted
“agenda-less” dialogue meetings monthly for several years, as a
way of signaling the need to nurture “collective leadership.”
All of this signals a growing recognition that the complex
problems our organizations and societies face demand a deeper
listening and a more open communication than has been the
norm. “Win-lose” politics and hierarchical authority are simply
not adequate for confronting global climate change, the growing
gap between rich and poor, and the dilemmas of genetic tech-
nology. People “speaking at one another” will not foster the
mutual understanding, shared aspirations, and networks of col-
laborative action needed. Alternatives must be found, both
within and among institutions of all sorts.
This growing interest in dialogue is why the re-publication of
this talk is so timely – especially if it leads to broader appreci-
ation of what dialogue meant to Bohm and of what sorts of
changes it might catalyze. For him dialogue was not just a better
way to have more productive conversations, although he was
supportive of this aim. It was not just a way to foster reﬂective-
2 See www.globalcompact.org
preface to the routledge classics edition
viii

ness, which he also endorsed. It certainly was not just a method
for improving the eﬀectiveness of businesses and other main-
stream organizations, a goal about which he was deeply ambiva-
lent, because he knew that helping such organizations become
more eﬀective often meant accelerating established and prob-
lematic patterns of global industrial development.
For Bohm, the “tacit ground” is what holds a society together,
and here is where the changes he hoped to encourage must
unfold. “Thought is emerging from the tacit ground,” he says,
“and any fundamental change in thought will come from the
tacit ground.” Repeatedly, he stresses that a society that works
requires a “coherent” tacit ground, and that this is missing today.
“Shared meaning is really the cement that holds society together,
and you could say that the present society has very poor quality
cement . . . The society at large has a very incoherent set of mean-
ings. In fact, this set of ‘shared meanings’ is so incoherent that it
is hard to say that they have any real meaning at all.”
Appreciating what real dialogue was about for Bohm starts
with appreciating what he meant by incoherence. This is an
unusual term for a social critic, even less for a social activist,
but a natural one for a physicist. A laser generates extraordinary
energy because of the coherence of the light, which may require
no more generating power than an “incoherent” light bulb. But,
what does this analogy mean in the social world?
In his talk, Bohm often returns to the challenge in dialogue of
simply allowing multiple points of view to be. Our habits are so
strong to defend our view, to agree with views that correspond
with our own, and to disagree with those that diﬀer, that simply
allowing diverse views to stand can be almost impossibly dif-
ﬁcult. “The thing that mostly gets in the way of dialogue,” he
says, “is holding to assumptions and opinions, and defending
them.” This instinct to judge and defend, embedded in the self-
defense mechanisms of our biological heritage, is the source of
incoherence.
preface to the routledge classics edition
ix

Our personal meaning starts to become incoherent when it
becomes ﬁxed. The incoherence increases when past meaning is
imposed on present situations. As this continues, yesterday’s
meaning becomes today’s dogma, often losing much of its ori-
ginal meaningfulness in the process. When this happens collect-
ively, societies become governed by shadows, hollowed out
myths from the past applied as inviolate truths for the present.
This leads to incoherence on a large scale, patterns of thinking
and acting that separate people from one another and from the
larger reality in which they are attempting to live.
Unchecked incoherence grows into absurdity. Bohm tells a
story about a psychiatrist working with a disturbed young girl
who refused to talk to anyone, until she ﬁnally exploded, telling
him she would not talk to him “because I hate you.” When he
asked her how long she would continue to hate him, she said
“forever.” When he asked her “how long will you hate me for-
ever?” the absurdity of her attitude suddenly hit her and she burst
out laughing and the anger was broken. But absurdity widely
shared by a culture may be less easy to see – like pretending that
economies can continue to grow forever in material production
(and waste) on a ﬁnite planet, or that unilateral approaches can
achieve national security in a world with increasingly deadly and
accessible weapons technologies, or that the pace of life can be
speeded up indeﬁnitely – as one teenager put it, “people running
faster and faster to get to where no one wants to go.”
Put diﬀerently, the core problem, Bohm realized, is that we do
not know how to live together in a changing world. We only
know how to live based on truths from the past, which today
inevitably results in one group attempting to impose their truths
on another. It is easy for us to see this in others – for example, in
fanatical “terrorists”, radical fundamentalists aimed at over-
throwing modern democratic societies. But, how is this diﬀerent
from “democratic fundamentalists” seeking to impose their truth
as the one right way to live? Bohm realized that defending core
preface to the routledge classics edition
x

beliefs and the resulting incoherence was endemic in the modern
world. He tells a poignant story about Einstein and Bohr, two men
who shared a warm friendship early in their lives but who could
not speak with one another in their later years, “because they had
nothing to talk about. They couldn’t share any meaning, because
each one felt his meaning was true.” If such entrenchment can
aﬄict two such brilliant minds, who among us is immune?
Conversely, collective coherent ways of thinking and acting
only emerge when there is truly a ﬂow of meaning, which starts
with allowing many views, an approach that defensiveness pre-
cludes. But coherence is a way of living rather than a ﬁxed state,
and Bohm knew very well the challenge it represented.
First, as a scientist, Bohm appreciated that society’s incoher-
ence cannot be divorced from the very Western scientiﬁc ration-
alism that we hold sacrosanct in the modern world. Although
most scientists would decry the very notion of fundamentalism,
the way the scientiﬁc establishment functions in the larger soci-
ety belies scientists’ espoused openness. “In a way,” Bohm says,
“science has become the religion of the modern age. It plays the
role that religion used to play of giving us truth.” This intel-
lectual fundamentalism is largely invisible to us because it is
embedded deeply in cultural assumptions that most members of
modern society share and which we do not know how to
challenge. From our earliest schooling, we learn of scientists as
the people who tell us “how things really work.” The problem,
for Bohm, stems from the way contemporary science “is predi-
cated on the concept . . . [of] arriving at . . . a unique truth. The
idea of dialogue is thereby in some way foreign to the current
structure of science, as it is with religion.” Bohm knew that the
quest for “unique truth” carries the potential to divide rather
than connect people. As Chilean biologist Humberto Maturana
says, “when one human being tells another human what is ‘real,’
what they are actually doing is making a demand for obedience.
They are asserting that they have a privileged view of reality.”
preface to the routledge classics edition
xi

For Bohm, dialogue oﬀered a diﬀerent path to truth, indeed a
diﬀerent notion of truth. “We will never come to truth unless
the overall meaning is coherent,” he says. Out of creating a larger
ﬁeld of more coherent shared meaning, truly new and penetrat-
ing understandings may emerge, often unexpectedly. “Truth
does not emerge from opinions,” says Bohm, “it must emerge
from something else – perhaps from a freer movement of this
tacit mind.” He continues, “we have to get meanings coherent if
we are to perceive truth, or to take part in truth.”
This odd phrase, “take part in truth,” points to, what seems to
me, Bohm’s second foundational idea: what it means to under-
stand wholes. Reductionist science has great power in under-
standing isolated things, and in applying this knowledge to create
new things like new technologies. But its eﬃcacy hinges on its
being able to fragment or isolate its subject matter. It fails and
may become actively dysfunctional when confronted by wholes,
by the need to understand and take eﬀective action in a highly
interdependent context. This is why the modern world is full of
increasingly stunning technological advances and an increasing
inability to live together.
The fundamental problem here, according to Bohm, is that
“the whole is too much. There is no way by which thought can
hold the whole, because thought only abstracts; it limits and
deﬁnes.” This idea of abstracting versus appreciating wholes was
conveyed beautifully by Hebrew existentialist philosopher Martin
Buber, in speaking of what it means to take in the whole of a
person, to see a person as “a Thou:”3
If I face a human being as my Thou, . . . he is not a thing among
things, and does not consist of things . . . Thus human being is
not a He or She, bounded from every other He or She, . . . but
3 M. Buber, I and Thou, translated by Ronald Gregor Smith, Scribner Classics,
Simon & Schuster, New York: 2000, 23–4.
preface to the routledge classics edition
xii

with no neighbor, and whole in himself, he is Thou and ﬁlls the
heavens.
Just as the melody is not made up of notes nor the verse of
words nor the statue of lines, but these must be tugged and
dragged till their unity has been scattered into these many
pieces, so with the man (mensch) to whom I say Thou. I can
take out from him the color of his hair, or of his speech, or of
his goodness. I must continually do this. But each time he
ceases to be Thou.
Bohm believed that the alternative way toward understanding
a whole arises through participation rather than abstraction. “A
diﬀerent kind of consciousness is possible among us, a participa-
tory consciousness.” In a genuine dialogue, “each person is partici-
pating, is partaking of the whole meaning of the group and also
taking part in it.” This is not necessarily pleasant, as Bohm
warns. The present state of the systems in which we live almost
inevitably contains great pain as well as great beauty, deep anger
as well as unconditional love. If we separate ourselves from
whatever is within the whole, we cannot take part in it – and we
return to abstracting, judging and defending: “I am not like that
person,” or “he is bad and I am good,” or “she does not see
what is happening and I do.”
Herein lies the ﬁrst gateway to generating dialogue and mov-
ing toward a more coherent tacit ground. To take part in truth
we must see our part in it. There are no “good guys” and “bad
guys” separate from ourselves. As members of modern society,
we all participate in creating the forces that give rise to what
exists, both what we value and what we abhor. The poet Maya
Angelou tells a story of her reconciliation and awakening. As a
teenager, a member of her extended family raped her. Ultim-
ately, coming to terms with this meant seeing that the emotions
and violence that drove her rapist existed within her as well.
When she tells this story, Angelou often ends by quoting
preface to the routledge classics edition
xiii

Terence Afar, an African brought to ancient Rome as a slave and
then eventually freed, “I am a human being. Nothing that is
human is foreign to me.” This is what it means to take part in
truth.
In short, David Bohm’s basic aim was a diﬀerent and more
viable way of living together. He knew that, in a world of grow-
ing interdependence, people who cannot do this are headed
inevitably toward escalating conﬂict. As a physicist, his life had
been dedicated to understanding a participatory universe where
meaning is continually unfolding. As a human being, he believed
that the present crisis oﬀered a unique opportunity to bring that
same sort of understanding into the center of human aﬀairs.
It is easy to dismiss Bohm as a romantic idealist – by his own
assessment, he envisioned “a kind of culture which, as far as I
can tell, has never really existed . . . (except perhaps) very long
ago.” But my experiences over the past ﬁfteen years with both
the possibility and challenge of dialogue leads me to see him
quite diﬀerently. I would call David Bohm an extreme realist. He
knew that no society has ever faced the sort of global predica-
ment we face, and that we are not likely to muddle through
without radical changes in our way of being – together.
P M. S
SL (S  O L)  MIT
J 13, 2004
preface to the routledge classics edition
xiv

FOREWORD
On Dialogue is the most comprehensive documentation to date of
the process David Bohm referred to simply as “dialogue.” This
revised and expanded edition of the original booklet of the same
name is intended to serve both as a practical working manual for
those interested in engaging in dialogue, as well as a theoretical
foundation for those interested in probing into the deeper
implications of Bohm’s dialogical world view. While the exercise
of dialogue is as old as civilization itself, in recent times a profu-
sion of practices, techniques, and deﬁnitions has arisen around
the term “dialogue.” Though none of these approaches can lay
claim to being the “correct” view, it is indeed possible to dis-
tinguish the various views, and to clarify what is intended by
each. To this end, the current edition of On Dialogue illuminates
the underlying meaning, purpose, and uniqueness of David
Bohm’s work in this ﬁeld.
As conceived by Bohm, dialogue is a multi-faceted process,
looking well beyond typical notions of conversational parlance
and exchange. It is a process which explores an unusually wide

range of human experience: our closely held values; the nature
and intensity of emotions; the patterns of our thought processes;
the function of memory; the import of inherited cultural myths;
and the manner in which our neurophysiology structures
moment-to-moment experience. Perhaps most importantly, dia-
logue explores the manner in which thought – viewed by Bohm as
an inherently limited medium, rather than an objective represen-
tation of reality – is generated and sustained at the collective
level. Such an inquiry necessarily calls into question deeply held
assumptions regarding culture, meaning, and identity. In its
deepest sense, then, dialogue is an invitation to test the viability
of traditional deﬁnitions of what it means to be human, and
collectively to explore the prospect of an enhanced humanity.
Throughout his career as a theoretical physicist, Bohm made
note of the fact that, in spite of claims to pursue “truth,” scien-
tiﬁc endeavor was often infected with personal ambition, a rigid
defense of theory, and the weight of tradition – all at the expense
of creative participation toward the common goals of science.
Based in part on such observations, he frequently remarked that
the general lot of mankind was caught in a similar web of con-
tradictory intentions and actions. These contradictions, he felt,
lead not only to bad science, but to all variety of social and
personal fragmentation. In Bohm’s view, such fragmentation
cuts across cultural and geographical distinctions, pervading
the whole of humanity to such an extent that we have become
fundamentally acclimated to it.
To illustrate the signiﬁcance of fragmentation, Bohm often
used the example of a watch that has been smashed into random
pieces. These pieces are quite diﬀerent from the parts that have
gone into the making of the watch. The parts have an integral
relationship to one another, resulting in a functional whole. The
fragments, on the other hand, have no essential relationship.
Similarly, the generic thought processes of humanity incline
toward perceiving the world in a fragmentary way, “breaking
foreword
xvi

things up which are not really separate.” Such perception, says
Bohm, necessarily results in a world of nations, economies, reli-
gions, value systems, and “selves” that are fundamentally at odds
with one another, despite topically successful attempts to impose
social order. One primary intent of Bohm’s dialogue, then, is to
shed light on the activity of this fragmentation – not only as
theoretical analysis, but also as a concrete, experiential process.
On its surface, dialogue is a relatively straightforward activity.
A group of ﬁfteen to forty people (Bohm’s suggestions regard-
ing numbers varied) voluntarily convene in a circle. After some
initial clariﬁcation as to the nature of the process, the group is
faced with how to proceed. As the group has convened with no
preset agenda, settling into an agreeable topic (or topics) may
take some time, and generate some frustration. In these early
stages, a facilitator is useful, but the facilitator role should be
relinquished as quickly as possible, leaving the group to chart its
own course. Experience has shown that if such a group con-
tinues to meet regularly, social conventions begin to wear thin,
and the content of sub-cultural diﬀerences begins to assert itself,
regardless of the topic du jour. This emergent friction between
contrasting values is at the heart of dialogue, in that it allows the
participants to notice the assumptions that are active in the
group, including one’s own personal assumptions. Recognizing
the power of these assumptions and attending to their “virus-
like” nature may lead to a new understanding of the fragmentary
and self-destructive nature of many of our thought processes.
With such understanding, defensive posturing can diminish,
and a quality of natural warmth and fellowship can infuse
the group.
If this all sounds a bit too pat, a bit too formulaic, it is. While
the accumulated experience of many people in many diﬀerent
parts of the world shows that this unfolding can in fact occur, it
is by no means a guaranteed result. The movement of a dialogue
group is rarely from point A to point B. Rather, the movement is
foreword xvii

more typically recursive, with unexpected dynamic shifts fol-
lowing periods of frustration, boredom, and agitation, in a
perpetual cycle. Even then, the creative potential of the dialogue
– its capacity to reveal the deeper structures of consciousness
depends upon sustained, serious application by the participants
themselves. In the dialogue, a very considerable degree of atten-
tion is required to keep track of the subtle implications of one’s
own assumptive/reactive tendencies, while also sensing similar
patterns in the group as a whole. Bohm emphasized that such
attention, or awareness, is not a matter of accumulated know-
ledge or technique, nor does it have the goal of “correcting”
what may emerge in the dialogue. Rather, it is more of the
nature of relaxed, nonjudgmental curiosity, its primary activity
being to see things as freshly and clearly as possible. The nurturing
of such attention, often bypassed in more utilitarian versions of
dialogue, is a central element in Bohm’s approach to the process.
Concerns about the seemingly intractable incoherence of
human thought led Bohm to engage in explorations with various
individuals who entertained similar views. Prominent among
these was the Indian educator and philosopher, J. Krishnamurti.
Two themes in particular were of shared concern, and emerged
as additional components in Bohm’s view of dialogue: the pro-
spect that the problems of thought are fundamentally collective,
rather than individual; and the paradox of “the observer and
the observed,” which implies that traditional methods of intro-
spection and self-improvement are inadequate for comprehend-
ing the true nature of the mind.
Bohm also inquired into the nature of communication and
dialogue with the English psychiatrist, Dr Patrick de Mare.
Among the many ideas de Mare had been exploring in group
contexts, two were to ﬁgure prominently in Bohm’s evolving
conception of dialogue. The notion of “impersonal fellowship”
suggests that authentic trust and openness can emerge in a group
context, without its members having shared extensive personal
foreword
xviii

history. In addition, the theory of the “microculture” proposes
that a sampling of an entire culture can exist in a group of
twenty or more people, thereby charging it with multiple views
and value systems.
At the same time that Bohm was involved in these ongoing
explorations, he traveled throughout Europe and North America
with his wife Saral, conducting seminars on topics both scien-
tiﬁc and philosophical. One such seminar, in the spring of 1984
in Mickleton, England, provided an opening for the emergence
of two further aspects of dialogue – the notion of shared mean-
ing within a group, and the absence of a preestablished purpose
or agenda. Bohm described the signiﬁcance of the seminar in the
following way.
The weekend began with the expectation that there would be a
series of lectures and informative discussions with emphasis
on content. It gradually emerged that something more import-
ant was actually involved – the awakening of the process of
dialogue itself as a free ﬂow of meaning among all the partici-
pants. In the beginning, people were expressing ﬁxed positions,
which they were tending to defend, but later it became clear
that to maintain the feeling of friendship in the group was
much more important than to maintain any position. Such
friendship has an impersonal quality in the sense that its estab-
lishment does not depend on close personal relationship
between participants. A new kind of mind thus begins to come
into being which is based on the development of a common
meaning that is constantly transforming in the process of the
dialogue. People are no longer primarily in opposition, nor can
they be said to be interacting, rather they are participating in
this pool of common meaning which is capable of constant
development and change. In this development the group has
no pre-established purpose, though at each moment a purpose
which is free to change may reveal itself. The group thus begins
foreword
xix

to engage in a new dynamic relationship in which no speaker is
excluded, and in which no particular content is excluded. Thus
far we have only begun to explore the possibilities of dialogue
in the sense indicated here, but going further along these lines
would open up the possibility of transforming not only the
relationship between people, but even more, the very nature of
consciousness in which these relationships arise.1
We ﬁnd here a pivotal deﬁnition: dialogue is aimed at the
understanding of consciousness per se, as well as exploring the
problematic nature of day-to-day relationship and communica-
tion. This deﬁnition provides a foundation, a reference point if
you will, for the key components of dialogue: shared meaning;
the nature of collective thought; the pervasiveness of fragmenta-
tion; the function of awareness; the microcultural context;
undirected inquiry; impersonal fellowship; and the paradox of
the observer and the observed. The breadth of view indicated by
these various elements hints at the radical nature of Bohm’s
vision of dialogue. As Bohm himself emphasized, however, dia-
logue is a process of direct, face-to-face encounter, not to be
confused with endless theorizing and speculation. In a time of
accelerating abstractions and seamless digital representations, it
is this insistence on facing the inconvenient messiness of daily,
corporeal experience that is perhaps most radical of all.
David Bohm continued to reﬁne his notions of dialogue until
his death in 1992, bringing forth new material in his last years.
In addition, a considerable body of his work exists, dating back
as far as 1970, which has direct bearing on the development of
dialogue and its theoretical underpinnings. Selections from these
materials are brought together in this volume for the ﬁrst time,
providing an extended survey of Bohm’s work in the ﬁeld.
1 David Bohm (1987) Unfolding Meaning, London: Routledge, p. 175.
foreword
xx

The material derives from two distinct contexts. The ﬁrst and
fourth chapters, “On Communication” and “The Problem
and the Paradox,” are speciﬁc essays authored by Bohm in 1970
and 1971 respectively. Both were originally published in the
Bulletin of the Krishnamurti Foundation Trust of England. The
remainder of the material is drawn primarily from seminars and
small group meetings held in Ojai, California between 1977 and
1992. The book, then, is a combination of extemporaneous pre-
sentation and intentional, considered essays. Its intent is to pro-
vide a general introduction to dialogue, and to oﬀer reference
chapters that correspond with some of the central themes in the
theory of dialogue. Thus, the reader may use the second chapter,
“On Dialogue,” as a primer, while referring to other chapters for
deeper exploration of issues addressed only topically in the
dialogue essay.
The ﬁrst chapter, “On Communication,” oﬀers insight into
Bohm’s early formulations of the meaning of dialogue, particu-
larly the manner in which sensitivity to “similarity and diﬀerence”
enters the work of the scientist, the artist, and communication at
the day-to-day level. The essay is prescient in its treatment of
“listening,” an issue that is frequently misunderstood in the
process of dialogue. “Listening” in dialogue is often taken to
mean thorough, careful, empathic sensitivity to the words and
meanings of group members. While this is indeed a part of dia-
logue, Bohm here outlines a listening of a diﬀerent order, a listen-
ing in which the very mis-perception of one’s spoken intent can
lead to new meaning that is created on the spot. Grasping this
point is essential for an understanding of what Bohm eventually
referred to as the “ﬂow of meaning” in dialogue.
“On Dialogue,” the second chapter, provides a comprehensive
overview and rationale of the dialogue process, with practical
and procedural matters being addressed in detail. Certain fun-
damentals of dialogue – suspension, sensitivity, the impulse
of “necessity” – are introduced and explained. In addition, the
foreword
xxi

diﬃculties that may emerge in a dialogue are surveyed, and
suggestions oﬀered as to how these diﬃculties can actually be
used to deepen understanding of the process itself. Bohm also
presents what he calls the “vision of dialogue” – the prospect
that our tendency to fall prey to mindless group activity can be
transformed to intelligent collective fellowship, if only we will
face the actual nature of the problems that exist between us.
In “The Nature of Collective Thought,” Bohm proposes that a
“pool of knowledge” – both tacit and overt – has accumulated
throughout human evolution. It is this pool of knowledge, says
Bohm, that gives rise to much of our perception of the world,
the meanings we assign to events, and indeed our very sense of
individuality. Such knowledge, or thought, moves independent
of any individual, or even any particular culture – very much like
a virus. From this perspective, our attempts to solve our prob-
lems through highly personalized analysis, or by attributing
malignant qualities to “other” groups or individuals, are of
limited validity. What is called for, says Bohm, is to begin to
attend to the movement of thought in a new way, to look in
places we have previously ignored. Using the analogy of a river
that is being perpetually polluted at its source, Bohm points out
that removing the pollution “downstream” cannot really solve the
problem. The real solution lies in addressing what is generating
the pollution at the source.
To illustrate one aspect of this generative pollution of thought,
Bohm explores the manner in which perceptual input is fused
with memory to produce representations that guide us in our
moment-to-moment experience. The construction of these rep-
resentations, which is both natural and necessary, is nonetheless
a process that lies at the heart of collective incoherence. Accord-
ing to Bohm, the essential diﬃculty here is that we automatically
assume that our representations are true pictures of reality, rather
than relative guides for action that are based on reﬂexive,
unexamined memories. Once we have assumed that the repre-
foreword
xxii

sentations are fundamentally true, they “present” themselves as
reality, and we have no option but to act accordingly. What is
suggested is not that we attempt to alter the process of representa-
tion (which may be impossible), but that we carefully attend to
the fact that any given representation – instinctively perceived as
“reality” – may be somewhat less than real, or true. From such a
perspective we may be able to engage a quality of reﬂective intel-
ligence – a kind of discernment that enables us to perceive and
dispense with fundamentally false representations, and become
more exacting in the formation of new ones. Perhaps the greatest
challenge, says Bohm, is to attend to those representations which
are tacitly formed and upheld at the collective level.
In “The Problem and the Paradox,” Bohm points out that
when operating in the practical or technical realm, we typically
proceed by deﬁning a problem we wish to deal with, then sys-
tematically apply a solution. But in the realm of relationship,
whether inwardly or externally, the posing of a “problem” to be
solved creates a fundamentally contradictory structure. Unlike
practical problems, where the “thing” to be solved has indepen-
dence from us (e.g., improving the design of ocean-going
vessels), psychological diﬃculties have no such independence. If
I realize that I am susceptible to ﬂattery, and pose this as a
problem to be solved, I have made an internal distinction
between “myself” and “susceptibility to ﬂattery” which in fact
does not exist. Inwardly, I then seem to consist of at least two
parts: an urge to believe the ﬂattery, and an urge not to believe
the ﬂattery. I am thus proceeding on the basis of a contradiction,
which will result in a cycle of confused attempts to “solve” a
“problem” whose nature is quite unlike that of a technical prob-
lem. Bohm suggests that what is occurring is in fact a paradox, not
a problem. As a paradox has no discernible solution, a new
approach is required, namely, sustained attention to the paradox
itself, rather than a determined attempt to eradicate the
“problem.” From Bohm’s perspective, the confusion between
foreword xxiii

problem and paradox operates at all levels of society, from the
individual to the global.
“The Observer and the Observed” continues the inquiry into
the paradoxical nature of inner experience. Speciﬁcally, Bohm
addresses the phenomenon of a “central entity,” a “self,” which
observes and acts upon itself. For example, if I see that I am
angry, then “I” may try to alter “my anger.” At this point, a
distinction has occurred: there is the observer – “I,” and the
observed – “anger.” Bohm suggests that this observer is primar-
ily a movement of assumptions and experiences – including
anger – but is attributed the status of “entity” through habit, lack
of attention, and cultural consensus. This sense of an inner entity
carries extremely high value; consequently, a protective mechan-
ism is set in place that allows the “observer” to look both
inwardly and outwardly at all variety of “problems,” but does
not allow sustained consideration of the nature of the observer itself.
This limitation on the mind’s scope of activity is seen to be yet
another factor in the generic incoherence of thought.
“Suspension, the Body, and Proprioception” is an exploration
of various aspects of awareness that have the potential to cut
through the confusion produced by the weight of collective
opinion, ill-founded representations, and the illusion of the
observer and the observed. Bohm suggests that both on one’s
own and in the context of a dialogue, it is possible to “suspend”
assumptions. For example, if you feel that someone is an idiot, to
suspend you would (a) refrain from saying so outwardly and (b)
refrain from telling yourself you should not think such things. In
this way, the eﬀects of the thought, “You are an idiot” (agitation,
anger, resentment) are free to run their course, but in a way that
allows them to simply be seen, rather than fully identiﬁed with.
In other words, suspending an assumption or reaction means
neither repressing it nor following through on it, but fully
attending to it.
In the activity of suspension, the role of the body is of
foreword
xxiv

central importance. If a strong impulse is suspended, it will
inevitably manifest physically – increased blood pressure,
adrenalin, muscular tension, and so on. Likewise, a spectrum of
emotions will emerge. In Bohm’s view, these components –
thoughts, emotions, bodily reactions – are in fact an unbroken
whole. However, they sustain one another by appearing to be
diﬀerent – a thought here, a pain in the neck there, and an
observer somehow struggling to manage it all. Underlying this
activity is a further assumption that the entire diﬃculty is caused
by something “other,” something “out there.”
Bohm then suggests that “proprioception of thought” may be
capable of directly penetrating this cycle of confusion. Physio-
logically, proprioception provides the body with immediate
feedback about its own activity. One can walk up and down
steps, for example, without having to consciously direct the
body’s movement. Further, one can make clear distinctions
between what originates within one’s body, and what has come
from outside. If you move your own arm, you do not have the
mistaken impression that someone else has moved it for you.
Currently, however, we lack such immediate feedback about the
movement of thought. Often, therefore, we perceive a diﬃculty to
originate outside ourselves, when in fact it is primarily a con-
struction of thought. Bohm proposes that, with suspension as a
basis, the movement of thought can become proprioceptive,
much as the body does.
“Participatory Thought and the Unlimited” inquires into the
relationship between what Bohm refers to as “literal thought”
and “participatory thought.” Literal thought is practical and
result-oriented, its aim being to form discrete, unequivocal pic-
tures of things “just as they are.” Scientiﬁc and technical thought
are contemporary variants of literal thought.
Bohm suggests that while literal thought has been predomin-
ant since the inception of civilization, a more archaic form of
perception, formed over the whole of human evolution, remains
foreword xxv

latent – and at times active – in the structure of our conscious-
ness. This he refers to as “participatory thought,” a mode of
thought in which discrete boundaries are sensed as permeable,
objects have an underlying relationship with one another, and
the movement of the perceptible world is sensed as participating
in some vital essence. Even today, says Bohm, many tribal
cultures maintain aspects of participatory thought.
While acknowledging that such thought is susceptible to pro-
jection and error, Bohm nonetheless maintains that at its core,
participatory thought is capable of perceiving strata of relation-
ships that are generally inaccessible from a “literal” perspective.
Indeed, Bohm suggests that the perspective of participatory
thought is not unlike his own vision of the implicate order, in
which the phenomena of the manifest world are understood as
temporary aspects of the movement of a deeper natural order, in
a process of perpetual “enfolding” and “unfolding.” The essen-
tial point to consider, says Bohm, is that both literal thought and
participatory thought have virtues and limitations. He makes an
appeal for a renewed inquiry into the proper relationship
between the two, suggesting that dialogue is uniquely suited to
such an exploration.
Finally, Bohm raises doubts as to whether any form of
thought can apprehend what he refers to as the “unlimited.” As
the very nature of thought is to select limited abstractions from
the world, it can never really approach the “ground of our
being” – that which is unlimited. Yet at the same time, human
beings have an intrinsic need to understand and relate to the
“cosmic dimension” of existence. To address this apparent dis-
juncture in our experience, Bohm proposes that attention, unlike
thought, is potentially unrestricted, and therefore capable of
apprehending the subtle nature of the “unlimited.”
While the language of such exploration is necessarily meta-
phorical and inferential, Bohm nonetheless insisted that sus-
tained inquiry into the nature of consciousness and the “ground
foreword
xxvi

of being” is essential if we are to have some prospect of bringing
an end to fragmentation in the world. It was his ﬁrm belief that
this fragmentation is rooted in the incoherence of our thought
processes, not in immutable laws of nature. He refused to place
limitations on where the inquiry into this incoherence may lead,
or to draw sharp distinctions between the individual, collective,
and cosmic dimensions of humanity. In this respect, dialogue –
always a testing ground for the limits of assumed knowledge –
oﬀers the possibility of an entirely new order of communication
and relationship with ourselves, our fellows, and the world we
inhabit.
L N
J S, N M
N 1995
foreword xxvii


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The editor would like to express his gratitude to Paul and Sherry
Hannigan for their good humor, technical support, and com-
mentary in the preparation of the manuscript; to Saral Bohm,
Claudia Krause-Johnson, and Mary Helen Snyder for reading
early drafts; to Arleta Griﬀor for unearthing “On Communica-
tion,” and to James Brodsky and Phildea Fleming for conceiving
the original booklet.
Very special thanks to Saral Bohm, Arthur Braverman, Theresa
Bulla-Richards, Adrian Driscoll, David Moody, and Lynn Powers
for their support at critical junctures in the eﬀort to present
David Bohm’s work to the widest possible reading public.


1
ON COMMUNICATION
During the past few decades, modern technology, with radio,
television, air travel, and satellites, has woven a network of
communications which puts each part of the world into almost
instant contact with all the other parts. Yet, in spite of this world-
wide system of linkages, there is, at this very moment, a general
feeling that communication is breaking down everywhere, on an
unparalleled scale. People living in diﬀerent nations, with diﬀer-
ent economic and political systems, are hardly able to talk to
each other without ﬁghting. And within any single nation, dif-
ferent social classes and economic and political groups are
caught in a similar pattern of inability to understand each other.
Indeed, even within each limited group, people are talking of a
“generation gap,” which is such that older and younger mem-
bers do not communicate, except perhaps in a superﬁcial way.
Moreover, in schools and universities, students tend to feel that
their teachers are overwhelming them with a ﬂood of informa-
tion which they suspect is irrelevant to actual life. And what
appears on the radio and television, as well as in the newspapers

and magazines, is generally at best a collection of trivial and
almost unrelated fragments, while at worst, it can often be a
really harmful source of confusion and misinformation.
Because of widespread dissatisfaction with the state of aﬀairs
described above, there has been a growing feeling of concern to
solve what is now commonly called “the problem of communi-
cation.” But if one observes eﬀorts to solve this problem, he will
notice that diﬀerent groups who are trying to do this are not
actually able to listen to each other. As a result, the very attempt
to improve communication leads frequently to yet more confu-
sion, and the consequent sense of frustration inclines people
ever further toward aggression and violence, rather than toward
mutual understanding and trust.
If one considers the fact that communication is breaking
down and that in the present context eﬀorts to prevent this from
happening generally tend to accelerate the breakdown, he may
perhaps pause in his thinking, to give opportunity to ask
whether the diﬃculty does not originate in some more subtle
way that has escaped our mode of formulating what is going
wrong. Is it not possible that our crude and insensitive manner
of thinking about communication and talking about it is a major
factor behind our inability to see what would be an intelligent
action that would end the present diﬃculties?
It may be useful to begin to discuss this question by consider-
ing the meaning of the word “communication.” This is based
on the Latin commun and the suﬃx “ie” which is similar to “ﬁe,”
in that it means “to make or to do.” So one meaning of “to
communicate” is “to make something common,” i.e., to convey
information or knowledge from one person to another in as
accurate a way as possible. This meaning is appropriate in a wide
range of contexts. Thus, one person may communicate to
another a set of directions as to how to carry out a certain
operation. Clearly, a great deal of our industry and technology
depends on this kind of communication.
on communication
2

Nevertheless, this meaning does not cover all that is signiﬁed
by communication. For example, consider a dialogue. In such a
dialogue, when one person says something, the other person
does not in general respond with exactly the same meaning as
that seen by the ﬁrst person. Rather, the meanings are only similar
and not identical. Thus, when the second person replies, the ﬁrst
person sees a diﬀerence between what he meant to say and what
the other person understood. On considering this diﬀerence, he
may then be able to see something new, which is relevant both to
his own views and to those of the other person. And so it can go
back and forth, with the continual emergence of a new content
that is common to both participants. Thus, in a dialogue, each
person does not attempt to make common certain ideas or items of
information that are already known to him. Rather, it may be said
that the two people are making something in common, i.e., creat-
ing something new together.
But of course such communication can lead to the creation of
something new only if people are able freely to listen to each
other, without prejudice, and without trying to inﬂuence each
other. Each has to be interested primarily in truth and coherence,
so that he is ready to drop his old ideas and intentions, and be
ready to go on to something diﬀerent, when this is called for. If,
however, two people merely want to convey certain ideas or
points of view to each other, as if these were items of informa-
tion, then they must inevitably fail to meet. For each will hear
the other through the screen of his own thoughts, which he
tends to maintain and defend, regardless of whether or not they
are true or coherent. The result will of course be just the sort of
confusion that leads to the insoluble “problem of communica-
tion” which has been pointed out and discussed earlier.
Evidently, communication in the sense described above is
necessary in all aspects of life. Thus, if people are to cooperate
(i.e., literally to “work together”) they have to be able to create
something in common, something that takes shape in their
on communication
3

mutual discussions and actions, rather than something that is
conveyed from one person who acts as an authority to the
others, who act as passive instruments of this authority.
Even in relationships with inanimate objects and with
nature in general, something very like communication is
involved. Consider, for example, the work of an artist. Can it
properly be said that the artist is expressing himself, i.e., literally
“pushing outward” something that is already formed inside of
him? Such a description is not in fact generally accurate or
adequate. Rather, what usually happens is that the ﬁrst thing the
artist does is only similar in certain ways to what he may have in
mind. As in a conversation between two people, he sees the
similarity and the diﬀerence, and from this perception some-
thing further emerges in his next action. Thus, something new is
continually created that is common to the artist and the material
on which he is working.
The scientist is engaged in a similar “dialogue” with nature
(as well as with his fellow human beings). Thus, when a scientist
has an idea, this is tested by observation. When it is found (as
generally happens) that what is observed is only similar to what
he had in mind and not identical, then from a consideration of
the similarities and the diﬀerences he gets a new idea which is in
turn tested. And so it goes, with the continual emergence of
something new that is common to the thought of scientists and
what is observed in nature. This extends onward into practical
activities, which lead to the creation of new structures that
are common to man and to the overall environment in which
he lives.
It is clear that if we are to live in harmony with ourselves and
with nature, we need to be able to communicate freely in a
creative movement in which no one permanently holds to or
otherwise defends his own ideas. Why then is it so diﬃcult
actually to bring about such communication?
This is a very complex and subtle question. But it may perhaps
on communication
4

be said that when one comes to do something (and not merely
to talk about it or think about it), one tends to believe that one
already is listening to the other person in a proper way. It seems
then that the main trouble is that the other person is the one
who is prejudiced and not listening. After all, it is easy for each
one of us to see that other people are “blocked” about certain
questions, so that without being aware of it, they are avoiding
the confrontation of contradictions in certain ideas that may be
extremely dear to them.
The very nature of such a “block” is, however, that it is a kind
of insensitivity or “anesthesia” about one’s own contradictions.
Evidently then, what is crucial is to be aware of the nature of
one’s own “blocks.” If one is alert and attentive, he can see for
example that whenever certain questions arise, there are ﬂeeting
sensations of fear, which push him away from consideration of
these questions, and of pleasure, which attract his thoughts and
cause them to be occupied with other questions. So one is able to
keep away from whatever it is that he thinks may disturb him.
And as a result, he can be subtly defending his own ideas, when
he supposes that he is really listening to what other people have
to say.
When we come together to talk, or otherwise to act in com-
mon, can each one of us be aware of the subtle fear and pleasure
sensations that “block” his ability to listen freely? Without this
awareness, the injunction to listen to the whole of what is said
will have little meaning. But if each one of us can give full
attention to what is actually “blocking” communication while
he is also attending properly to the content of what is communi-
cated, then we may be able to create something new between us,
something of very great signiﬁcance for bringing to an end the
at present insoluble problems of the individual and of society.
on communication
5

2
ON DIALOGUE
The way we start a dialogue group is usually by talking about
dialogue – talking it over, discussing why we’re doing it, what it
means, and so forth. I don’t think it is wise to start a group
before people have gone into all that, at least somewhat. You can,
but then you’ll have to trust that the group will continue, and
that these questions will come out later. So if you are thinking of
meeting in a group, one thing which I suggest is to have a
discussion or a seminar about dialogue for a while, and those
who are interested can then go on to have the dialogue. And you
mustn’t worry too much whether you are or are not having
dialogue – that’s one of the blocks. It may be mixed. So we will
discuss dialogue for a while – what is its nature?
I give a meaning to the word “dialogue” that is somewhat
diﬀerent from what is commonly used. The derivations of words
often help to suggest a deeper meaning. “Dialogue” comes from
the Greek word dialogos. Logos means “the word,” or in our case
we would think of the “meaning of the word.” And dia means
“through” – it doesn’t mean “two.” A dialogue can be among

any number of people, not just two. Even one person can have a
sense of dialogue within himself, if the spirit of the dialogue is
present. The picture or image that this derivation suggests is of a
stream of meaning ﬂowing among and through us and between us.
This will make possible a ﬂow of meaning in the whole group,
out of which may emerge some new understanding. It’s some-
thing new, which may not have been in the starting point at all.
It’s something creative. And this shared meaning is the “glue” or
“cement” that holds people and societies together.
Contrast this with the word “discussion,” which has the same
root as “percussion” and “concussion.” It really means to break
things up. It emphasizes the idea of analysis, where there may be
many points of view, and where everybody is presenting a dif-
ferent one – analyzing and breaking up. That obviously has its
value, but it is limited, and it will not get us very far beyond our
various points of view. Discussion is almost like a ping-pong
game, where people are batting the ideas back and forth and the
object of the game is to win or to get points for yourself. Possibly
you will take up somebody else’s ideas to back up your own –
you may agree with some and disagree with others – but the
basic point is to win the game. That’s very frequently the case in
a discussion.
In a dialogue, however, nobody is trying to win. Everybody
wins if anybody wins. There is a diﬀerent sort of spirit to it. In a
dialogue, there is no attempt to gain points, or to make your
particular view prevail. Rather, whenever any mistake is dis-
covered on the part of anybody, everybody gains. It’s a situation
called win-win, whereas the other game is win-lose – if I win,
you lose. But a dialogue is something more of a common
participation, in which we are not playing a game against each
other, but with each other. In a dialogue, everybody wins.
Clearly, a lot of what is called “dialogue” is not dialogue in
the way that I am using the word. For example, people at the
United Nations have been having what are often considered to
on dialogue
7

be dialogues, but these are very limited. They are more like
discussions – or perhaps trade-oﬀs or negotiations – than dia-
logues. The people who take part are not really open to question-
ing their fundamental assumptions. They are trading oﬀ minor
points, like negotiating whether we have more or fewer nuclear
weapons. But the whole question of two diﬀerent systems is not
being seriously discussed. It’s taken for granted that you can’t
talk about that – that nothing will ever change that. Consequently
their discussions are not serious, not deeply serious. A great deal
of what we call “discussion” is not deeply serious, in the sense
that there are all sorts of things which are held to be non-
negotiable and not touchable, and people don’t even want to talk
about them. That is part of our trouble.
Now, why do we need dialogue? People have diﬃculty com-
municating even in small groups. But in a group of thirty or
forty or more, many may ﬁnd it very hard to communicate
unless there is a set purpose, or unless somebody is leading it.
Why is that? For one thing, everybody has diﬀerent assumptions
and opinions. They are basic assumptions – not merely superﬁcial
assumptions – such as assumptions about the meaning of life;
about your own self-interest, your country’s interest, or your
religious interest; about what you really think is important.
And these assumptions are defended when they are chal-
lenged. People frequently can’t resist defending them, and they
tend to defend them with an emotional charge. We’ll discuss that
in more detail later, but I’ll give an example now. We organized a
dialogue in Israel a number of years ago. At one stage the people
were discussing politics, and somebody said, just in passing,
“Zionism is creating a great diﬃculty in good relations between
Jews and Arabs. It is the principal barrier that’s in the way.” He
said it very quietly. Then suddenly somebody else couldn’t
contain himself and jumped up. He was full of emotion. His
blood pressure was high and his eyes were popping out. He said,
“Without Zionism the country would fall to pieces!”
on dialogue
8

That fellow had one basic assumption, and the other person
had another one. And those two assumptions were really in
conﬂict. Then the question is, “What can you do?” You see,
those are the kinds of assumptions that are causing all the
trouble politically, all over the world. And the case I just
described is relatively easier than some of the assumptions that
we have to handle in politics. The point is that we have all sorts
of assumptions, not only about politics or economics or
religion, but also about what we think an individual should do,
or what life is all about, and so forth.
We could also call these assumptions “opinions.” An opinion
is an assumption. The word “opinion” is used in several senses.
When a doctor has an opinion, that’s the best assumption that he
can make based on the evidence. He may then say, “Okay, I’m
not quite sure, so let’s get a second opinion.” In that case, if he is
a good doctor he does not react to defend his assumption. If the
second opinion turns out to be diﬀerent from his, he doesn’t
jump up with an emotional charge, such as the fellow did on the
question of Zionism, and say, “How can you say such things?”
That doctor’s opinion would be an example of a rational sort of
opinion. But most are not of that nature – mostly they are
defended with a strong reaction. In other words, a person iden-
tiﬁes himself with them. They are tied up with his investment in
self-interest.
The point is that dialogue has to go into all the pressures that
are behind our assumptions. It goes into the process of thought
behind the assumptions, not just the assumptions themselves.
DIALOGUE AND THOUGHT
It is important to see that the diﬀerent opinions that you have are
the result of past thought: all your experiences, what other
people have said, and what not. That is all programmed into
your memory. You may then identify with those opinions and
on dialogue
9

react to defend them. But it doesn’t make sense to do this. If the
opinion is right, it doesn’t need such a reaction. And if it is
wrong, why should you defend it? If you are identiﬁed with it,
however, you do defend it. It is as if you yourself are under attack
when your opinion is challenged. Opinions thus tend to be
experienced as “truths,” even though they may only be your
own assumptions and your own background. You got them
from your teacher, your family, or by reading, or in yet some
other way. Then for one reason or another you are identiﬁed
with them, and you defend them.
Dialogue is really aimed at going into the whole thought
process and changing the way the thought process occurs col-
lectively. We haven’t really paid much attention to thought as a
process. We have engaged in thoughts, but we have only paid atten-
tion to the content, not to the process. Why does thought
require attention? Everything requires attention, really. If we ran
machines without paying attention to them, they would break
down. Our thought, too, is a process, and it requires attention,
otherwise it’s going to go wrong.
I’ll try to give some examples of the diﬃculty in thinking, in
thought. One of these diﬃculties is fragmentation, which originates
in thought – it is thought which divides everything up. Every
division we make is a result of how we think. In actuality, the
whole world is shades merging into one. But we select certain
things and separate them from others – for convenience, at ﬁrst.
Later we give this separation great importance. We set up separ-
ate nations, which is entirely the result of our thinking, and then
we begin to give them supreme importance. We also divide
religions by thought – separate religions are entirely a result of
how we think. And in the family, the divisions are in thought.
The whole way the family is set up is due to the way we think
about it.
Fragmentation is one of the diﬃculties of thought, but there
is a deeper root, which is that thought is very active, but the
on dialogue
10

process of thought thinks that it is doing nothing – that it is just
telling you the way things are. Almost everything around us has
been determined by thought – all the buildings, factories, farms,
roads, schools, nations, science, technology, religion – whatever
you care to mention. The whole ecological problem is due to
thought, because we have thought that the world is there for us
to exploit, that it is inﬁnite, and so no matter what we did, the
pollution would all get dissolved away.
When we see a “problem,” whether pollution, carbon
dioxide, or whatever, we then say, “We have got to solve that
problem.” But we are constantly producing that sort of problem –
not just that particular problem, but that sort of problem – by
the way we go on with our thought. If we keep on thinking that
the world is there solely for our convenience, then we are going
to exploit it in some other way, and we are going to make
another problem somewhere. We may clear up the pollution, but
may then create some other diﬃculty, such as economic chaos,
if we don’t do it right. We might set up genetic engineering, but
if ordinary technology can produce such vast diﬃculties,
imagine the kind of thing genetic engineering could get us into
– if we go on with the same way of thinking. People will be
doing genetic engineering for whatever suits their fancy and the
way they think.
The point is: thought produces results, but thought says it
didn’t do it. And that is a problem. The trouble is that some of
those results that thought produces are considered to be very
important and valuable. Thought produced the nation, and it
says that the nation has an extremely high value, a supreme
value, which overrides almost everything else. The same may be
said about religion. Therefore, freedom of thought is interfered
with, because if the nation has high value it is necessary to
continue to think that the nation has high value. Therefore
you’ve got to create a pressure to think that way. You’ve got to
have an impulse, and make sure everybody has got the impulse,
on dialogue
11

to go on thinking that way about his nation, his religion, his
family, or whatever it is that he gives high value. He’s got to
defend it.
You cannot defend something without ﬁrst thinking the defense.
There are those thoughts which might question the thing you
want to defend, and you’ve got to push them aside. That may
readily involve self-deception – you will simply push aside a lot
of things you would rather not accept by saying they are wrong,
by distorting the issue, and so on. Thought defends its basic
assumptions against evidence that they may be wrong.
In order to deal with this, we have got to look at thought,
because the problem is originating in thought. Usually when
you have a problem, you say, “I must think about it to solve it.”
But what I’m trying to say is that thought is the problem. What,
therefore, are we going to do? We could consider two kinds of
thought – individual and collective. Individually I can think of
various things, but a great deal of thought is what we do
together. In fact, most of it comes from the collective back-
ground. Language is collective. Most of our basic assumptions
come from our society, including all our assumptions about
how society works, about what sort of person we are supposed
to be, and about relationships, institutions, and so on. Therefore
we need to pay attention to thought both individually and
collectively.
In a dialogue, people coming from diﬀerent backgrounds typ-
ically have diﬀerent basic assumptions and opinions. In almost
any group you will probably ﬁnd a great many diﬀerent assump-
tions and opinions of which we are not aware at the moment. It
is a matter of culture. In the overall culture there are vast num-
bers of opinions and assumptions which help make up that cul-
ture. And there are also subcultures that are somewhat diﬀerent
from one another according to ethnic groups, or to economic
situations, or to race, religion, or thousands of other things.
People will come to such a gathering from somewhat diﬀerent
on dialogue
12

cultures or sub-cultures, with diﬀerent assumptions and opin-
ions. And they may not realize it, but they have some tendency to
defend their assumptions and opinions reactively against evi-
dence that they are not right, or simply a similar tendency to
defend them against somebody who has another opinion.
If we defend opinions in this way, we are not going to be able
to have a dialogue. And we are often unconsciously defending our
opinions. We don’t usually do it on purpose. At times we may be
conscious that we are defending them, but mostly we are not.
We just feel that something is so true that we can’t avoid trying
to convince this stupid person how wrong he is to disagree
with us.
Now, that seems the most natural thing in the world – it seems
that that’s inevitable. Yet if you think of it, we can’t really organ-
ize a good society if we go on that basis. That’s the way
democracy is supposed to work, but it hasn’t. If everybody has a
diﬀerent opinion, it will be merely a struggle of opinions. And
the one who is the strongest will win. It may not necessarily be
the right one; it may be that none of them are right. Therefore,
we won’t be doing the right thing when we try to get together.
This problem arises whenever people meet for dialogue, or
legislators try to get together, or businessmen try to get together,
or whatever. If we all had to do a job together, we would likely
ﬁnd that each one of us would have diﬀerent opinions and
assumptions, and thus we would ﬁnd it hard to do the job. The
temperature could go way up. In fact, there are people facing this
problem in large corporations. The top executives may all have
diﬀerent opinions, hence they can’t get together. So the com-
pany doesn’t work eﬃciently, it starts to lose money and
goes under.
There are some people who are trying to form groups where
top business executives can talk together. If politicians would
do that, it would be very good. Religious people would be
the hardest to get together. The assumptions of the diﬀerent
on dialogue
13

religions are so ﬁrmly embedded that I don’t know of any case of
two religions, or even subgroups of any given religion, where
they ever got together once they had split. The Christian church,
for instance, has been talking about trying to get together for
ages and it stays about the same all the time. They talk and they
appear to get a little bit closer, and then it never happens. They
talk about unity and oneness and love, and all that, but the other
assumptions are more powerful; they are programmed into us.
Some religious people are trying to get together; they are really
sincere – they are as serious as they can be – but it seems that
they cannot do it.
Scientists also get into the same situation. Each one may hold
to a diﬀerent view of the truth, so they can’t get together. Or
they may have diﬀerent self-interests. A scientist who is working
for a company that produces pollution may have a certain self-
interest in proving that the pollution is not dangerous. And
somebody else might have self-interest in proving that it is
dangerous. And perhaps then somewhere there is an unbiased
scientist who tries to judge it all.
Science is supposed to be dedicated to truth and fact, and
religion is supposed to be dedicated to another kind of truth,
and to love. But people’s self-interest and assumptions take over.
Now, we’re not trying to judge these people. Something is hap-
pening, which is that assumptions or opinions are like computer
programs in people’s minds. Those programs take over against
the best of intentions – they produce their own intentions.
We could say, then, that a group of about twenty to forty
people is almost a microcosm of the whole society – like the
groups we have just looked at, it has a lot of diﬀerent opinions
and assumptions. It is possible to have a dialogue with one per-
son or with two, three, or four, or you can have the attitude of
the dialogue by yourself, as you weigh all the opinions without
deciding. But a group that is too small doesn’t work very well. If
ﬁve or six people get together, they can usually adjust to each
on dialogue
14

other so that they don’t say the things that upset each other –
they get a “cozy adjustment.” People can easily be very polite to
each other and avoid the issues that may cause trouble. And if
there is a confrontation between two or more people in such a
small group, it seems very hard to stop it; it gets stuck. In a larger
group, we may well start out politely. After a while, though,
people can seldom continue to avoid all the issues that would be
troublesome. The politeness falls away pretty soon. In a group of
less than about twenty it may not, because people get to know
each other and know the rough edges that they have to avoid.
They can take it all into account; it’s not too much. But in a
group of forty or ﬁfty it is too much.
So when you raise the number to about twenty, something
diﬀerent begins to happen. And forty people is about as many as
you can conveniently arrange in a circle – or you might put two
circles concentrically. In that size group, you begin to get what
may be called a “microculture.” You have enough people com-
ing in from diﬀerent subcultures so that they are a sort of
microcosm of the whole culture. And then the question of cul-
ture – the collectively shared meaning – begins to come in. That
is crucial, because the collectively shared meaning is very
powerful. The collective thought is more powerful than the
individual thought. As we said, the individual thought is
mostly the result of collective thought and of interaction with
other people. The language is entirely collective, and most of the
thoughts in it are. Everybody does his own thing to those
thoughts – he makes a contribution. But very few change them
very much.
The power of the group goes up much faster than the number
of people. I’ve said elsewhere that it could be compared to a
laser. Ordinary light is called “incoherent,” which means that it
is going in all sorts of directions, and the light waves are not in
phase with each other so they don’t build up. But a laser pro-
duces a very intense beam which is coherent. The light waves
on dialogue
15

build up strength because they are all going in the same direction.
This beam can do all sorts of things that ordinary light cannot.
Now, you could say that our ordinary thought in society is
incoherent – it is going in all sorts of directions, with thoughts
conﬂicting and canceling each other out. But if people were to
think together in a coherent way, it would have tremendous
power. That’s the suggestion. If we have a dialogue situation – a
group which has sustained dialogue for quite a while in which
people get to know each other, and so on – then we might have
such a coherent movement of thought, a coherent movement of
communication. It would be coherent not only at the level we
recognize, but at the tacit level, at the level for which we have only
a vague feeling. That would be more important.
“Tacit” means that which is unspoken, which cannot be
described – like the knowledge required to ride a bicycle. It is
the actual knowledge, and it may be coherent or not. I am propos-
ing that thought is actually a subtle tacit process. The concrete
process of thinking is very tacit. The meaning is basically tacit.
And what we can say explicitly is only a very small part of it. I
think we all realize that we do almost everything by this sort of
tacit knowledge. Thought is emerging from the tacit ground,
and any fundamental change in thought will come from the tacit
ground. So if we are communicating at the tacit level, then
maybe thought is changing.
The tacit process is common. It is shared. The sharing is not
merely the explicit communication and the body language and
all that, which are part of it, but there is also a deeper tacit
process which is common. I think the whole human race knew
this for a million years; and then in ﬁve thousand years of civil-
ization we have lost it, because our societies got too big to carry
it out. But now we have to get started again, because it has
become urgent that we communicate. We have to share our con-
sciousness and to be able to think together, in order to do intelli-
gently whatever is necessary. If we begin to confront what’s
on dialogue
16

going on in a dialogue group, we sort of have the nucleus of
what’s going on in all society. When you are by yourself you
miss quite a bit of that; even one-on-one you don’t really get it.
ENGAGING IN DIALOGUE
A basic notion for a dialogue would be for people to sit in a
circle. Such a geometric arrangement doesn’t favor anybody; it
allows for direct communication. In principle, the dialogue
should work without any leader and without any agenda. Of
course, we are used to leaders and agendas, so if we were to start
a meeting without a leader – start talking and have no agenda, no
purpose – I think we would ﬁnd a great deal of anxiety in not
knowing what to do. Thus, one of the things would be to work
through that anxiety, to face it. In fact, we know by experience
that if people do this for an hour or two they do get through it
and start to talk more freely.
It may be useful to have a facilitator to get the group going,
who keeps a watch on it for a while and sort of explains what’s
happening from time to time, and that kind of thing. But his
function is to work himself out of a job. Now, that may take time.
It may be that people must meet regularly and sustain the dia-
logue. That form might be to meet week after week, or bi-
weekly or whatever, and sustain it a long time – a year or two or
more. In that period, all those things we mentioned would come
out. And people would begin to learn really to depend less and
less on the facilitator – at least that’s the idea behind it. Now, the
whole of society has been organized to believe that we can’t
function without leaders. But maybe we can. That’s the sugges-
tion. Of course, it’s an experiment. We can’t guarantee that it is
going to happen. But that is what takes place in any new venture
– you consider all the evidence, you consider what’s the best
idea, what to say about it, what your theories about it are, and
then you go ahead and try it.
on dialogue
17

At the beginning of a dialogue we would not expect that
personal problems or questions would enter into it. If people
sustained the dialogue week after week, or month after month,
then maybe they could. Everything can enter, but the people have
to get to know each other and trust each other and establish that
relationship of sharing. It would be too much to expect to start
with that. And in fact, a personal problem may not be all that
important anyway; although if someone has one, the group
could consider it. There is no reason why they couldn’t; how-
ever, I don’t think we would begin with that, at least not often.
The group is not mainly for the sake of personal problems; it’s mainly a cultural
question. But the personal could come into the group, because
personal problems and culture get mixed up.
It is important to understand that a dialogue group is not a
therapy group of some kind. We are not trying to cure anybody
here, though it may happen as a byproduct. But that’s not our
purpose. Dr Patrick de Mare, a friend of mine who has gone into
this, calls it “socio-therapy,” not individual therapy. The group
is a microcosm of society, so if the group – or anyone – is
“cured,” it is the beginning of the larger cure. You can look at it
that way if you like. That’s limited, but still it’s a way to look at it.
Nor is this a so-called “encounter group,” which is aimed at a
particular type of therapy where people’s emotions, and so
forth, can come up. We are not particularly aiming for that, but
we are not saying that emotions should never come up, because
in certain cases, if people confront each emotionally it will bring
out their assumptions. In the dialogue people should talk dir-
ectly to one another, one to one, across the circle. Then the time
would come, if we got to know each other a bit and could trust
each other, when you could speak very directly to the whole
group, or to anybody in it.
Some time ago there was an anthropologist who lived for a
long while with a North American tribe. It was a small group of
about ﬁfty people. The hunter-gatherers have typically lived in
on dialogue
18

groups of twenty to forty. Agricultural group units are much
larger. Now, from time to time that tribe met like this in a circle.
They just talked and talked and talked, apparently to no purpose.
They made no decisions. There was no leader. And everybody
could participate. There may have been wise men or wise
women who were listened to a bit more – the older ones – but
everybody could talk. The meeting went on, until it ﬁnally
seemed to stop for no reason at all and the group dispersed. Yet
after that, everybody seemed to know what to do, because they
understood each other so well. Then they could get together in
smaller groups and do something or decide things.
In the dialogue group we are not going to decide what to do
about anything. This is crucial. Otherwise we are not free. We
must have an empty space where we are not obliged to
do anything, nor to come to any conclusions, nor to say anything
or not say anything. It’s open and free. It’s an empty space. The
word “leisure” has that meaning of a kind of empty space.
“Occupied” is the opposite of leisure; it’s full. So we have here a
kind of empty space where anything may come in – and after we
ﬁnish, we just empty it. We are not trying to accumulate any-
thing. That’s one of the points about a dialogue. As Krishnamurti
used to say, “The cup has to be empty to hold something.”
We see that it is not an arbitrary imposition to state that we
have no ﬁxed purpose – no absolute purpose, anyway. We may
set up relative purposes for investigation, but we are not wedded
to a particular purpose, and are not saying that the whole group
must conform to that purpose indeﬁnitely. All of us might want
the human race to survive, but even that is not our purpose. Our
purpose is really to communicate coherently in truth, if you
want to call that a purpose.
You could say that generally our culture goes in for large
groups of people for two reasons. One is for entertainment and
fun. The other is to get a useful job done. Now, I’m going to
propose that in a dialogue we are not going to have any agenda,
on dialogue
19

we are not going to try to accomplish any useful thing. As soon
as we try to accomplish a useful purpose or goal, we will have an
assumption behind it as to what is useful, and that assumption is
going to limit us. Diﬀerent people will think diﬀerent things are
useful. And that’s going to cause trouble. We may say, “Do we
want to save the world?” or “Do we want to run a school?” or
“Do we want to make money?” Whatever it may be. That’s also
going to be one of the problems in corporate dialogues. Will
they ever give up the notion that they are there primarily to
make a proﬁt? If they could, this would be a real transformation
of mankind. I think that many business executives in certain
companies are feeling unhappy and really want to do something
– not merely to save the company. Just as we are, they are
unhappy about the whole world. It’s not that all of them are
money-grubbing or exclusively proﬁt-oriented.
When a dialogue group is new, in general people talk around
the point for a while. In all human relations nowadays, people
generally have a way of not directly facing anything. They talk
around things, avoiding the diﬃculties. This practice will
probably continue within a dialogue group. If you keep the
group going for a while though, that tendency begins to break
down. At a dialogue one evening a fellow spoke up, saying,
“Okay, we’re all talking about philosophy. Can I read this
nice bit of philosophy I brought?” And some people said,
“No.” So he didn’t read it. It seemed a bit of a shock, but it
worked out.
It all has to be worked out. People will come to a group with
diﬀerent interests and assumptions. In the beginning they may
have negotiation, which is a very preliminary stage of dialogue.
In other words, if people have diﬀerent approaches, they have to
negotiate somehow. However, that is not the end of dialogue; it
is the beginning. Negotiation involves ﬁnding a common way of
proceeding. Now, if you only negotiate, you don’t get very far –
although some questions do have to be negotiated.
on dialogue
20

A great deal of what nowadays is typically considered to be
dialogue tends to focus on negotiation; but as we said, that is a
preliminary stage. People are generally not ready to go into the
deeper issues when they ﬁrst have what they consider to be a
dialogue. They negotiate, and that’s about as far as they get.
Negotiation is trading oﬀ, adjusting to each other and saying,
“Okay, I see your point. I see that that is important to you. Let’s
ﬁnd a way that would satisfy both of us. I will give in a little on
this, and you give in a little on that. And then we will work
something out.” Now, that’s not really a close relationship, but it
begins to make it possible to get going.
So the suggestion is that people could start dialogue groups in
various places. The point would not be to identify with the
group, but rather, what is important is this whole process. You
might say, “This is a wonderful group,” but it’s actually the
process that counts.
I think that when we are able to sustain a dialogue of this sort
you will ﬁnd that there will be a change in the people who are
taking part. They themselves would then behave diﬀerently, even
outside the dialogue. Eventually they would spread it. It’s like the
Biblical analogy of the seeds – some are dropped in stony
ground and some of them fall in the right place and they pro-
duce tremendous fruit. The thing is that you cannot tell where
or how it can start. The idea here, the communication here, the
kind of thought we’re having here, is a kind of seed which may
help this to come about. But we mustn’t be surprised if many of
these groups are abortive and don’t get going. That doesn’t mean
it can’t happen.
The point is not to establish a ﬁxed dialogue group forever,
but rather one that lasts long enough to make a change. If you
keep holding it for too long it may become caught up in habits
again. But you have to keep it up for a while, or else it won’t
work. It may be valuable to keep the dialogue going for a year or
two, as we said, and it is important to sustain it regularly. If you
on dialogue
21

sustain it, all these problems will arise; it cannot avoid bringing
out the deep assumptions of the people who are participating.
The frustration will arise, the sense of chaos, the sense that it’s
not worth it. The emotional charge will come. The fellow with
the assumptions about Zionism probably wanted to be very
polite. But suddenly somebody said something that outraged
him, and he couldn’t control himself. It’s going to happen that
the deep assumptions will come to the surface, if we stick with
it. But if you understand that you do nevertheless have to stick
with it, then something new will come.
Now, dialogue is not going to be always entertaining, nor is it
doing anything visibly useful. So you may tend to drop it as soon
as it gets diﬃcult. But I suggest that it is very important to go on
with it – to stay with it through the frustration. When you think
something is important you will do that. For example, nobody
would climb Mount Everest unless for some reason he thought it
was important, as that could also be very frustrating and not
always entertaining. And the same is true if you have to make
money, or do all sorts of things. If you feel that they are neces-
sary, you do them.
I’m saying that it is necessary to share meaning. A society is a
link of relationships among people and institutions, so that we
can live together. But it only works if we have a culture – which
implies that we share meaning; i.e., signiﬁcance, purpose, and
value. Otherwise it falls apart. Our society is incoherent, and
doesn’t do that very well; it hasn’t for a long time, if it ever did.
The diﬀerent assumptions that people have are tacitly aﬀecting
the whole meaning of what we are doing.
SUSPENDING ASSUMPTIONS
We have been saying that people in any group will bring to it
their assumptions, and as the group continues meeting, those
assumptions will come up. Then what is called for is to suspend
on dialogue
22

those assumptions, so that you neither carry them out nor
suppress them. You don’t believe them, nor do you disbelieve
them; you don’t judge them as good or bad. Normally when you
are angry you start to react outwardly, and you may just say
something nasty. Now suppose I try to suspend that reaction.
Not only will I now not insult that person outwardly, but I will
suspend the insult that I make inside of me. Even if I don’t insult
somebody outwardly, I am insulting him inside. So I will sus-
pend that, too. I hold it back, I reﬂect it back. You may also think
of it as suspended in front of you so that you can look at it – sort
of reﬂected back as if you were in front of a mirror. In this way I
can see things that I wouldn’t have seen if I had simply carried
out that anger, or if I had suppressed it and said, “I’m not angry”
or “I shouldn’t be angry.”
So the whole group now becomes a mirror for each person.
The eﬀect you have on the other person is a mirror, and also the
eﬀect the other person has on you. Seeing this whole process is
very helpful in bringing out what’s going on, because you can
see that everybody’s in the same boat.
What’s required then is that we notice the connection
between the thoughts going on in the dialogue, the feelings in
the body, and the emotions. If you watch, you’ll see from the
body language, as well as from the verbal language, that every-
body’s in much the same boat – they’re just on opposite sides.
The group may even polarize so that two very powerful groups
are against each other. But one of the things we’re aiming for is
that this should come out. We’re not trying to suppress it.
Therefore, you simply see what the assumptions and reactions
mean – not only your own, but the other people’s as well. We
are not trying to change anybody’s opinion. When this meeting is
over, somebody may or may not change his opinion. This is part
of what I consider dialogue – for people to realize what is on each
other’s minds without coming to any conclusions or judgments.
Assumptions will come up. And if you hear somebody else who
on dialogue
23

has an assumption that seems outrageous to you, the natural
response might be to get angry, or get excited, or to react in some
other way. But suppose you suspend that activity. You may not
even have known that you had an assumption. It was only because
he came up with the opposite one that you ﬁnd out that you have
one. You may uncover other assumptions, but we are all suspend-
ing them and looking at them all, seeing what they mean.
You have to notice your own reactions of hostility, or what-
ever, and you can see by the way people are behaving what their
reactions are. You may ﬁnd, as with anger, that it could go so far
that the meeting could blow up. If temperatures do rise, then
those who are not completely caught up in their particular opin-
ions should come in to defuse the situation a bit so that people
could look at it. It mustn’t go so far that you can’t look at it. The
point is to keep it at a level where the opinions come out, but
where you can look at them. Then you may have to see that the
other person’s hostility provokes your own. That’s all part of the
observation, the suspension. You become more familiar with
how thought works.
THE IMPULSE OF NECESSITY
We’ve been discussing dialogue and thought, and the import-
ance of giving attention to the whole process – not merely to the
content of all the diﬀerent opinions and views – and to how we
hold it all together. Also we’re all watching the process of how it
aﬀects us, our feelings and states of the body, and how other
people are aﬀected. This is really something of crucial import-
ance, to be listening and watching, observing, to give attention
to the actual process of thought and the order in which it hap-
pens, and to watch for its incoherence, where it’s not working
properly, and so on. We are not trying to change anything, but just being
aware of it. And you can notice the similarity of the diﬃculties within a group to
the conﬂicts and incoherent thoughts within an individual.
on dialogue
24

I think that as we do this we will ﬁnd that certain kinds of
thoughts play a greater role than other kinds. One of the kinds
that is most important is the thought of necessity. What is neces-
sary cannot be otherwise; it’s just got to be that way. It is interest-
ing that the word necessary has a Latin root, necesse, meaning “don’t
yield.” It really means “what cannot be turned aside.” Ordinarily
as we go through life, problems come up and they can be turned
aside, or if they can’t be turned aside then we turn aside, and that
is the way we resolve things. But then there may arise a necessity,
as I said, which cannot be turned aside; but we may have our own
necessity which also cannot be turned aside. Then we feel frus-
trated. Each necessity is absolute, and we have a conﬂict of abso-
lute necessities. Typically, it may come up that your own opinion
cannot be turned aside, nor can the other person’s, and you feel
the other person’s opinion working within you, opposing you.
So each person is in a state of conﬂict.
Necessity creates powerful impulses. Once you feel that some-
thing is necessary, it creates an impulse to do it or not to do it,
whatever it may be. It may be very strong and you feel com-
pelled, propelled. Necessity is one of the most powerful forces –
it overrides all the instincts eventually. If people feel something
is necessary, they’ll even go against the instinct of self-
preservation and all sorts of things. In the dialogue, both indi-
vidually and collectively – this is important – the conﬂicts come
up around this notion of necessity. All the serious arguments,
whether in the family or in the dialogue, are about diﬀerent
views of what is absolutely necessary. Unless it takes that form, then
you can always negotiate it and decide what has ﬁrst priority,
and adjust it. But if two things are absolutely necessary you
cannot use the usual way of negotiation. That is the weak point
about negotiation. When two diﬀerent nations come up and
each one says, “I’m sovereign, and what I say has to go: it’s
absolutely necessary,” then there is no answer unless they can
change that.
on dialogue
25

The question is what to do if there is a clash of two absolute
necessities. The ﬁrst thing that happens is that we get this emo-
tional charge and we can build up powerful feelings of anger,
hate, frustration, as I described before. As long as that absolute
necessity remains, nothing can change it, because in a way each
person says that they have a valid reason to stick to what they’ve
got, and they have a valid reason to hate the other person for
getting in the way of what is absolutely necessary: “He rather
obstinately and stupidly refuses to see this,” and so on. One may
say that it’s regrettable that we have to kill all these people, but it is
absolutely necessary, in the interests of the country, the religion,
or whatever it may be. So you see the power of that notion.
So in the dialogue we are expecting the notions of absolute
necessity to come up, to clash with each other. People avoid that,
because they know that there’s going to be trouble and they skirt
those questions. But if we sustain the dialogue it’s going to come
up. The question is what happens then.
We discussed previously that something can happen, if people
will stay with it, which will change their whole attitude. At a
certain moment we may have the insight that each one of us is
doing the same thing – sticking to the absolute necessity of his
idea – and that nothing can happen if we do that. If so, it may
raise the question “Is it absolutely necessary? So much is being
destroyed just because we have this notion of it being absolutely
necessary.” Now if you can question it and say, “Is it absolutely
necessary?” then at some point it may loosen up. People may say,
“Well, maybe it’s not absolutely necessary.” Then the whole
thing becomes easier, and it becomes possible to let that conﬂict
go and to explore new notions of what is necessary, creatively.
The dialogue can then enter a creative new area. I think this
is crucial.
What about these notions of necessity which we have to set
up or discover? If an artist just puts on his paint in arbitrary
places, you would say there wasn’t anything to it; if he just
on dialogue
26

follows somebody else’s order of necessity, he’s mediocre. He’s
got to create his own order of necessity. Diﬀerent parts of the
form he is making must have an inner necessity or else the thing
has not really much of a value. This artistic necessity is creative.
The artist has his freedom in this creative act. Therefore, freedom
makes possible a creative perception of new orders of necessity. If you can’t
do that, you’re not really free. You may say you’re doing what-
ever you like and that’s your impulse, but I think we’ve seen that
your impulses can come from your thoughts. For example, the
thought of what is necessary will make an impulse, and people
who are in international conﬂict will say our impulse is to go to
war and get rid of these people who are in our way, as if that
were freedom. But it isn’t. They’re being driven by that thought.
So doing what you like is seldom freedom, because what you
like is determined by what you think and that is often a pattern
which is ﬁxed. Therefore we have a creative necessity which we
discover – you can discover individually or we can do so collect-
ively in the group – of how to operate in a group in a new way.
Any group which has problems really has got to solve them
creatively if they’re serious problems. It can’t just be by trade-
oﬀs and negotiations of the old ways.
I think this is one of the key points, then – to realize when you
come to an assumption, that there is an assumption of absolute
necessity which you’re getting into, and that’s why everything is
sticking.
PROPRIOCEPTION OF THOUGHT
You can see the whole scope of this question of dialogue giving
attention to thought may look rather elementary or simple in the
beginning, but it actually gets to the root of our problems and
opens the way to creative transformation.
We come back to the realization that the thing which has gone
wrong with thought is basically, as I said before, that it does
on dialogue
27

things and then says or implies that it didn’t do them – that they
took place independently, and that they constitute “problems.”
Whereas what you really have to do is to stop thinking that way
so that you stop creating that problem. The “problem” is insol-
uble as long as you keep on producing it all the time by your
thought. Thought has to be in some sense aware of its con-
sequences, and presently thought is not suﬃciently aware of
its consequences. That ties up with something similar in
neurophysiology called proprioception, which really means “self-
perception.” The body can perceive its own movement. When
you move the body you know the relation between intention
and action. The impulse to move and the movement are seen to
be connected. If you don’t have that, the body is not viable.
We know of a woman who apparently had a stroke in the
middle of the night. She woke up and she was hitting herself.
People came in and turned on the light and that’s what they
found. What happened was that her motor nerves were working,
but her sensory nerves were no longer working. So she probably
touched herself, but she didn’t know that she’d touched herself,
and therefore she assumed that somebody else was touching her
and interpreted that as an attack. The more she defended, the
worse the attack got. The proprioception had broken down. She
no longer saw the relation between the intention to move and
the result. When the light was turned on, proprioception was
established in a new way, by sight.
The question is: can thought be proprioceptive? You have the
intention to think, which you’re not usually aware of. You think
because you have an intention to think. It comes from the idea
that it is necessary to think, that there’s a problem. If you watch,
you’ll see an intention to think, an impulse to think. Then comes
the thought, and the thought may give rise to a feeling, which
might give rise to another intention to think, and so on. You’re
not aware of that, so the thought appears as if it were coming by
itself, and the feeling appears to be coming by itself, and so on.
on dialogue
28

That gives the wrong meaning, as in the case of the woman we
talked about just now. You may get a feeling that you don’t like
from a thought, and then a second later say, “I’ve got to get rid of
that feeling,” but your thought is still there working, especially
if it’s a thought that you take to be absolutely necessary.
In fact, the problems we have been discussing are basically all
due to this lack of proprioception. The point of suspension is to help
make proprioception possible, to create a mirror so that you can see the results of
your thought. You have it inside yourself because your body acts as
a mirror and you can see tensions arising in the body. Also other
people are a mirror, the group is a mirror. You have to see your
intention. You get an impulse to say something and you see it
there, the result, at almost the same time.
If everybody is giving attention, then there will arise a new
kind of thought between people, or even in the individual,
which is proprioceptive, and which doesn’t get into the kind of
tangle that thought gets into ordinarily, which is not proprio-
ceptive. We could say that practically all the problems of the
human race are due to the fact that thought is not proprio-
ceptive. Thought is constantly creating problems that way and then
trying to solve them. But as it tries to solve them it makes it
worse because it doesn’t notice that it’s creating them, and the
more it thinks, the more problems it creates – because it’s not
proprioceptive of what it’s doing. If your body were that way
you would very quickly come to grief and you wouldn’t last
very long. And it may be said that if our culture were that way,
our civilization would not last all that long, either. So this is
another way in which dialogue will help collectively to bring
about a diﬀerent kind of consciousness.
COLLECTIVE PARTICIPATION
All of this is part of collective thought – people thinking
together. At some stage we would share our opinions without
on dialogue
29

hostility, and we would then be able to think together; whereas
when we defend an opinion we can’t. An example of people
thinking together would be that somebody would get an idea,
somebody else would take it up, somebody else would add to it.
The thought would ﬂow, rather than there being a lot of diﬀerent
people, each trying to persuade or convince the others.
In the beginning, people won’t trust each other. But I think
that if they see the importance of the dialogue, they will work
with it. And as they start to know each other, they begin to trust
each other. It may take time. At ﬁrst you will just come into the
group bringing all the problems of the culture and the society.
Any group like this is a microcosm of society – it has all sorts of
opinions, people not trusting each other, and so on. So you
begin to work from there. People talk at ﬁrst in a perhaps rather
trivial way, and then later less trivially. Initially they talk about
superﬁcial issues, because they’re afraid of doing more, and then
gradually they learn to trust each other.
The object of a dialogue is not to analyze things, or to win an
argument, or to exchange opinions. Rather, it is to suspend your
opinions and to look at the opinions – to listen to everybody’s
opinions, to suspend them, and to see what all that means. If we
can see what all of our opinions mean, then we are sharing a
common content, even if we don’t agree entirely. It may turn out that
the opinions are not really very important – they are all assump-
tions. And if we can see them all, we may then move more
creatively in a diﬀerent direction. We can just simply share the
appreciation of the meanings; and out of this whole thing, truth
emerges unannounced – not that we have chosen it.
If each of us in this room is suspending, then we are all doing
the same thing. We are all looking at everything together. The
content of our consciousness is essentially the same. Accord-
ingly, a diﬀerent kind of consciousness is possible among us, a
participatory consciousness – as indeed consciousness always is, but
one that is frankly acknowledged to be participatory and can go
on dialogue
30

that way freely. Everything can move between us. Each person is
participating, is partaking of the whole meaning of the group
and also taking part in it. We can call that a true dialogue.
Something more important will happen if we can do this, if
we can manage it. Everybody will be sharing all the assumptions
in the group. If everybody sees the meaning together, of all the
assumptions, then the content of consciousness is essentially the
same. Whereas if we all have diﬀerent assumptions and defend
them, each person is then going to have a diﬀerent content,
because we won’t really take in the other person’s assumptions.
We’ll be ﬁghting them, or pushing them away – trying to
convince or persuade the other person.
Conviction and persuasion are not called for in a dialogue.
The word “convince” means to win, and the word “persuade” is
similar. It’s based on the same root as are “suave” and “sweet.”
People sometimes try to persuade by sweet talk or to convince by
strong talk. Both come to the same thing, though, and neither of
them is relevant. There’s no point in being persuaded or con-
vinced. That’s not really coherent or rational. If something is
right, you don’t need to be persuaded. If somebody has to
persuade you, then there is probably some doubt about it.
If we could all share a common meaning, we would be par-
ticipating together. We would be partaking of the common
meaning – just as people partake of food together. We would be
taking part and communicating and creating a common mean-
ing. That would be participation, which means both “to partake
of” and “to take part in.” It would mean that in this participation
a common mind would arise, which nonetheless would not
exclude the individual. The individual might hold a separate
opinion, but that opinion would then be absorbed into the
group, too.
Thus, everybody is quite free. It’s not like a mob where the
collective mind takes over – not at all. It is something between the
individual and the collective. It can move between them. It’s a
on dialogue
31

harmony of the individual and the collective, in which the
whole constantly moves toward coherence. So there is both a
collective mind and an individual mind, and like a stream, the
ﬂow moves between them. The opinions, therefore, don’t matter
so much. Eventually we may be somewhere between all these
opinions, and we start to move beyond them in another direc-
tion – a tangential direction – into something new and creative.
A NEW CULTURE
A society is a link of relationships that are set by people in order
to work and live together: rules, laws, institutions, and various
things. It is done by thinking and agreeing that we are going to
have them, and then we do it. And behind that is a culture,
which is shared meaning. Even to say that we want to set up a
government, people must agree to a common meaning of what
kind of government they want, what’s good government, what’s
right, and so on. Diﬀerent cultures will produce diﬀerent func-
tions of government. And if some people don’t agree, then we
have political struggle. When it goes further, it breaks down into
civil war.
I am saying society is based on shared meanings, which con-
stitute the culture. If we don’t share coherent meaning, we do
not make much of a society. And at present, the society at large
has a very incoherent set of meanings. In fact, this set of “shared
meanings” is so incoherent that it is hard to say that they have
any real meaning at all. There is a certain amount of signiﬁcance,
but it is very limited. The culture in general is incoherent. And
we will thus bring with us into the group – or microcosm or
microculture – a corresponding incoherence.
If all the meanings can come in together, however, we may be
able to work toward coherence. As a result of this process, we
may naturally and easily drop a lot of our meanings. But we
don’t have to begin by accepting or rejecting them. The important
on dialogue
32

thing is that we will never come to truth unless the overall
meaning is coherent. All the meanings of the past and the pres-
ent are together. We ﬁrst have to apprehend them, and just let
them be; and this will bring about a certain order.
If we can work this through, we will then have a coherent
meaning in the group, and hence the beginning of a new kind of
culture – a culture of a kind which, as far as I can tell, has never
really existed. If it ever did, it must have been very long ago –
maybe in some groups in the primitive Stone Age conditions. I
am saying that a genuine culture could arise in which opinions
and assumptions are not defended incoherently. And that kind of
culture is necessary for the society to work, and ultimately for
the society to survive.
Such a group might be the germ or the microcosm of the
larger culture, which would then spread in many ways – not
only by creating new groups, but also by people communicating
the notion of what it means.
Also, one can see that it is possible that this spirit of the
dialogue can work even in smaller groups, or one-on-one, or
within the individual. If the individual can hold all of the mean-
ings together in his own mind, he has the attitude of the dia-
logue. He could carry that out and perhaps communicate it, both
verbally and non-verbally, to other people. In principle, this
could spread. Many people are interested in dialogue now. We
ﬁnd it growing. The time seems to be ripe for this notion, and it
could perhaps spread in many diﬀerent areas.
I think that something like this is necessary for society to
function properly and for society to survive. Otherwise it will all
fall apart. This shared meaning is really the cement that holds
society together, and you could say that the present society has
some very poor-quality cement. If you make a building with
very low-quality cement, it cracks and falls apart. We really need
the right cement, the right glue. And that is shared meaning.
on dialogue
33

DIFFICULTIES IN DIALOGUE
We have talked about the positive side of dialogue. However, this
attempt at dialogue can be very frustrating. I say this not only
theoretically, but also from experience. We’ve mentioned some
of the diﬃculties: it’s frustrating to have all these opinions; there
may be anxiety. Besides that, you will ﬁnd other problems in
trying to have a dialogue in a group of any size. Some people want
to assert themselves; that’s their way of going about things. They
talk easily and they become dominant. They may have an image of
themselves as dominant, and they get a certain amount of security
out of it, a lift out of it. Other people, however, do not have such
great self-esteem in this area; they tend to hold back, especially
when they see somebody who is dominant. They are afraid that
they’ll make fools of themselves, or something of the kind.
There are various roles that people adopt. Some people adopt
the dominant role, some adopt the role of the weak, powerless
person who can be dominated. They sort of work together, with
each other. Those “roles,” which are really based on assump-
tions and opinions, will also interfere with the operation of
dialogue. So a person has built some assumptions about himself,
whether it’s one way or the other. Also, since his childhood
people have told him that that’s what he is, that he is this way or
that way. He has had bad experiences or good experiences, and it
all built up. These are some of the problems which will arise
when we try to have a dialogue.
A further diﬃculty is you ﬁnd that very often there is an
impulse or pressure, a compulsion almost, to get in there quickly
and get your point of view across, particularly if you are one of
the “talkers.” Even if you’re not, you have that pressure, but
you’re holding back because you’re frightened. Therefore, there
is no time for people to absorb what has been said, or to ponder
it. People feel under pressure to get in, and people feel left
out. The whole communication breaks down for this very
on dialogue
34

elementary reason. This is nothing deep at all, but still we have
got to address it. Very often when you don’t give space in a
group, everybody jumps in right away with whatever he has in
his mind. But at the same time, you shouldn’t be mulling it over
in your mind – picking on one point and turning it over – while
the conversation goes on to something else. If you stop to think
about one point, by the time you have thought about it the
group has moved on, and what you were going to say is now
irrelevant. As you were thinking, “What does all that mean and
what shall I say about it?” it became too late, because the topic
has changed. So there is sort of a subtle situation in between,
where you are not jumping in too fast, nor holding back too
much. There may be silent periods, and so on.
So while we don’t have “rules” for the dialogue, we may learn
certain principles as we go along which help us – such as that we
must give space for each person to talk. We don’t put this as a
rule; rather we say that we can see the sense of it, and we are
learning to do it. So we see the necessity or value of certain
procedures that help.
Also, if someone wants the group to accomplish his idea or
purpose, it would probably start a conﬂict. The dialogue is aimed
for those people who can commonly agree that this is the way to
go about it. If people don’t agree that this is the way to go about
it, then there is no reason to be in it. Frequently you ﬁnd that as
the dialogue goes on and the group continues, some people
leave and others come in. There are those who feel, “Well, this is
not for me.”
Now, how are you going to deal with the frustrations within
the group? As we said before, things may make you angry or
frustrated or may frighten you. Your assumptions may be
revealed and challenged, and you may ﬁnd the opinions of
others to be outrageous. Also, people may be frightened and
anxious if there is no leader and no topic and nothing “to do.”
So you have to get through all of that.
on dialogue
35

These are the problems that are going to arise – that have
arisen in all the groups that I’ve seen. And you can expect that
they are almost inevitable, and may ask, “Then what is the point
in going on with all of this?” So we must explore that.
THE VISION OF DIALOGUE
Let me give what I call a “vision of dialogue.” You don’t have to
accept it, but it may be a way to look at it. Let’s suppose we stick
with this, and we face the emotional charge – all this irritation,
all this frustration – which actually can develop into hate if very
powerful assumptions are there. We could say that hate is a
neurophysiological, chemical disturbance of a very powerful
kind, which is now endemic in the world. Wherever you look,
you see people hating each other. So suppose you stick with this.
You may get an insight, a shared insight, that we’re all in the
same position – everybody has an assumption, everybody is
sticking to his assumption, everybody is disturbed neuro-
chemically. The fundamental level in people is the same; the
superﬁcial diﬀerences are not so important.
It’s possible to see that there’s a kind of “level of contact” in
the group. The thought process is an extension of the body
process, and all the body language is showing it, and so on.
People are really in rather close contact – hate is an extremely
close bond. I remember somebody saying that when people are
in really close contact, talking about something which is very
important to them, their whole bodies are involved – their
hearts, their adrenalin, all the neurochemicals, everything. They
are in far closer contact with each other than with some parts of
their own bodies, such as their toes. So, in some sense there is
established in that contact “one body.” And also, if we can all
listen to each other’s opinions, and suspend them without judg-
ing them, and your opinion is on the same basis as anyone else’s,
then we all have “one mind” because we have the same content – all
on dialogue
36

the opinions, all the assumptions. At that moment the diﬀerence
is secondary. Then you have in some sense one body, one mind.
It does not overwhelm the individual. There is no conﬂict in the
fact that the individual does not agree. It’s not all that important
whether you agree or not. There is no pressure to agree or
disagree.
The point is that we would establish, on another level, a kind
of bond, which is called impersonal fellowship. You don’t have
to know each other. In England, for example, the football crowds
prefer not to have seats in their football stands, but just to stand
bunched against each other. In those crowds very few people
know each other, but they still feel something – that contact –
which is missing in their ordinary personal relations. And in war
many people feel that there’s a kind of comradeship which they
miss in peacetime. It’s the same sort of thing – that close con-
nection, that fellowship, that mutual participation. I think people
ﬁnd this lacking in our society, which gloriﬁes the separate indi-
vidual. The communists were trying to establish something else,
but they completely failed in a very miserable way. Now a lot of
them have adopted the same values as we have. But people are
not entirely happy with that. They feel isolated. Even those who
“succeed” feel isolated, feel there’s another side they are
missing.
I am saying that this is a reason for dialogue. We really do need
to have it. This reason should be strong enough to get us through
all the frustration we talked about. People generally seem ready
to accept frustration with anything that they regard as important.
Doing your job or making money, for example, is often frustrat-
ing; it produces anxiety. Yet people will say, “That is important!
We have to stick with it.” They feel that way about all sorts of
things. I’m saying that if we regard dialogue as important, as
necessary, we will say about it as well, “We will stick to it.” But if
we don’t think it is necessary, we might say, “Okay, what’s
the point? This is too much trouble. Let’s give it up. It’s not
on dialogue
37

producing anything.” You see, you have to explore anything new
for a while. In science, or anywhere, you usually have to go
through a period where you are not getting anywhere while you
are exploring. It can, nevertheless, be very discouraging.
If we can all suspend carrying out our impulses, suspend our
assumptions, and look at them all, then we are all in the same
state of consciousness. And therefore we have established the
thing that many people say they want – a common conscious-
ness. It may not be very pleasant, but we have got it. People tend
to think of common consciousness as “shared bliss.” That may
come; but if it does, I’m saying that the road to it is through this.
We have to share the consciousness that we actually have. We can’t
just impose another one. But if people can share the frustration
and share their diﬀerent contradictory assumptions and share
their mutual anger and stay with it – if everybody is angry
together, and looking at it together – then you have a common
consciousness.
If people could stay with power, violence, hate, or whatever it
is, all the way to the end, then it would sort of collapse – because
ultimately they would see that we are all the same. And con-
sequently they would have participation and fellowship. People
who have gone through that can become good friends. The
whole thing goes diﬀerently. They become more open and trust-
ing to each other. They have already gone through the thing that they are
afraid of, so the intelligence can then work.
There’s a story I would like to relate in this connection. I knew
a man in London who had been a child psychiatrist. He told me
that somebody once brought to him a girl about seven years old
who was very disturbed. She refused to talk to anybody. They
brought her hoping that he would help to get her talking. So he
tried for about an hour and got nowhere. Finally, getting
exasperated, he said, “Why don’t you talk to me?” She answered,
“Because I hate you.” He thought that he had to bring time into
this somewhere to defuse it. So he said, “How long will you hate
on dialogue
38

me?” She said, “I’ll hate you forever.” He was then a bit worried,
so he brought time in again. He asked, “How long will you hate
me forever?” Then she burst out laughing and the whole thing
was broken. The energy which had been there was now avail-
able. The absurdity of the thing was shown to her – that the
thing was incoherent. She was saying that she was going to hate
him forever, and she could see that that wouldn’t really be so;
and if that’s not so, then the idea that she has got to go on with
the hatred is not necessary either.
When you have anger, it has a reason, or a cause. You say that
you are angry because of this, this, or that. It builds up to rage
and hate, at which point it no longer has a particular reason
anymore – it just sustains itself. That energy of hate is sort of
locked up, and then it’s looking for an occasion to discharge.
The same holds with panic. You are usually aware of a reason for
your fear, but by the time you get to panic it goes on by itself.
However, the sort of energy that goes around at that level may
also in a vague way be the kind of energy we are talking about
for creativity – namely, an energy without a reason.
But there is a great deal of violence in the opinions that we are
defending. They are not merely opinions, they are not merely
assumptions; they are assumptions with which we are identiﬁed
– which we are therefore defending, because it is as if we are
defending ourselves. The natural self-defense impulse, which we
got in the jungle, has been transferred from the jungle animals
to these opinions. In other words, we say that there are some
dangerous opinions out there – just as there might be dangerous
tigers. And there are some very precious animals inside us
that have to be defended. So an impulse that made sense physic-
ally in the jungle has been transferred to our opinions in our
modern life. And in a dialogue, we get to be aware of that in a
collective way.
As long as we have this defensive attitude – blocking and
holding assumptions, sticking to them and saying, “I’ve got to
on dialogue
39

be right,” and that sort of thing – then intelligence is very
limited, because intelligence requires that you don’t defend an
assumption. There is no reason to hold to an assumption if there
is evidence that it is not right. The proper structure of an
assumption or of an opinion is that it is open to evidence that it
may not be right.
That does not mean that we are going to impose the opinions of the group. In
this way the collective can often be troublesome. The group may
act like a conscience, inducing powerful guilt feelings in its
members, because we are all so built that we tend to regard what
everybody agrees on as true. Everybody may or may not have a
diﬀerent opinion – it is not that important. It isn’t necessary that
everybody be convinced to have the same view. This sharing of
mind, of consciousness, is more important than the content of
the opinions. And you may see that these opinions are limited
anyway. You may ﬁnd that the answer is not in the opinions at
all, but somewhere else. Truth does not emerge from opinions; it
must emerge from something else – perhaps from a more free
movement of the tacit mind. So we have to get meanings coher-
ent if we are going to perceive truth, or to take part in truth. That
is why I say the dialogue is so important. If our meanings are
incoherent, how are we going to participate in truth?
I think this new approach could open the way to changing the
whole world situation – ecologically, and in other ways. For
instance, the ecological movement, the “green movement,” is
now in danger of fragmenting and splitting, because many of
those groups have diﬀerent opinions about how to deal with the
problems. So they can wind up ﬁghting each other as much as
they ﬁght for the ecology. Consequently, it seems particularly
urgent that the green movement get into dialogue.
People concerned with the ecology are clearly aware of some
of our planetary problems, but I think that many of them may
not be as aware of their assumptions and tacit thought processes.
I think it is important to call attention to this explicitly in a clear
on dialogue
40

way, so that it becomes clear what the basic problem is. These
kinds of activities go together. Cleaning up the rivers and plant-
ing trees and saving the whales should go together with dia-
logue, and with seeing the general problem of thought. They all
belong together, because any one of those activities by itself is
not enough. If we all just talk about thought and think about
thought for a long while, the whole planet may be destroyed in
the meantime. But I think that dialogue will work in this
tacit level of mental process, where the most signiﬁcant things
take place.
There are situations where people have diﬀering assumptions
and opinions, where one faction is interested and the other isn’t.
Still, somehow, we have got to have a dialogue. Even if one
faction won’t participate, we who are willing can participate in a
dialogue between our thought and their thought. We can at least
dialogue among ourselves as far as we can, or you may by your-
self. That is the attitude of dialogue. And the further this attitude
could spread, the more I think it would help to bring order. If we
really could do something creative, it might still aﬀect other
people on a tacit level. It would really communicate at the tacit
level, both with words and beyond words. But if we keep on
repeating the same old story, then it won’t happen.
This notion of dialogue and common consciousness suggests
that there is some way out of our collective diﬃculties. And we
have to begin at the grass roots, as it were, not to begin at the top
of the heap with the United Nations or with the President. I
know that there are people in the US State Department who
are familiar with this idea of dialogue, which shows how these
ideas do percolate and may even reach the highest levels. This
indicates that things can communicate very fast in this modern
world – though that may look very insigniﬁcant at ﬁrst. In
three to ﬁve steps it might reach all sorts of levels. Just as the
destructive things communicate, so this idea of dialogue could
communicate, too.
on dialogue
41

As we ourselves stay with the frustrations of dialogue, the
meaning of what we are doing may be much more than will
appear at ﬁrst sight. In fact, we could say that instead of being
part of the problem, we become part of the solution. In other
words, our very movement has the quality of the solution; it is
part of it. However small it is, it has the quality of the solution
and not the quality of the problem. However big the larger
movement is, it has the quality of the problem, not of the solu-
tion. Accordingly, the major point is to start something which
has the quality of the solution. As I have said, we don’t know
how fast or slowly it would spread. We don’t know how fast a
movement in the mind – in the thought process and beyond the
thought process, this sharing together – will spread.
People sometimes say, “All we really need is love.” Of course,
that’s true – if there were universal love, all would go well. But we
don’t appear to have it. So we have to ﬁnd a way that works. Even
though there may be frustration and anger and rage and hate and
fear, we have to ﬁnd something which can take all that in.
To illustrate the point, here is a story about the two leading
physicists of this century, Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr.
Einstein remembered that when he ﬁrst met Bohr, he felt close to
him. He wrote of a feeling of love for him. They talked physics in
a very animated way, and so on. But they ﬁnally came upon a
point where they had two diﬀerent assumptions, or opinions,
about what was the way to truth. Bohr’s judgments were based
on his view of quantum theory, and Einstein’s on his view of
relativity. They talked it over again and again in a very patient
way, with all goodwill. It went on for years, and neither of them
yielded. Each one just repeated what he had been saying before.
So ﬁnally they found that they weren’t getting anywhere, and
they gradually drifted apart. They didn’t see each other for a long
time after that.
Then one year, both of them were at the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton, but they still didn’t meet each
on dialogue
42

other. A mathematician named Herman Weyl said, “It would be
nice if they got together. It’s a pity that they don’t.” So he
arranged a party to which Einstein and Bohr and their respective
students were invited. Einstein and his associates stayed at one
end of the room, and Bohr and his associates stayed at the other
end. They couldn’t get together because they had nothing to talk
about. They couldn’t share any meaning, because each one felt
his meaning was true. How can you share if you are sure you
have truth and the other fellow is sure he has truth, and the
truths don’t agree? How can you share?
Therefore, you have to watch out for the notion of truth.
Dialogue may not be concerned directly with truth – it may
arrive at truth, but it is concerned with meaning. If the meaning
is incoherent you will never arrive at truth. You may think, “My
meaning is coherent and somebody else’s isn’t,” but then we’ll
never have meaning shared. You will have the “truth” for your-
self or for your own group, whatever consolation that is. But we
will continue to have conﬂict.
If it is necessary to share meaning and share truth, then we
have to do something diﬀerent. Bohr and Einstein probably
should have had a dialogue. I’m not saying that they could have
had one, but in a dialogue they might have listened properly to
each other’s opinion. And perhaps they both would have sus-
pended their opinions, and moved out beyond relativity and
beyond quantum theory into something new. They might have
done that in principle, but I don’t think that this notion of
dialogue had occurred to scientists then.
Science is predicated on the concept that science is arriving at
truth – at a unique truth. The idea of dialogue is thereby in some
way foreign to the current structure of science, as it is with
religion. In a way, science has become the religion of the mod-
ern age. It plays the role which religion used to play of giving us
truth; hence diﬀerent scientists cannot come together any more
than diﬀerent religions can, once they have diﬀerent notions of
on dialogue
43

truth. As one scientist, Max Planck, said, “New ideas don’t win,
really. What happens is that the old scientists die and new ones
come along with new ideas.” But clearly that’s not the right way
to do it. This is not to say that science couldn’t work another
way. If scientists could engage in a dialogue, that would be a
radical revolution in science – in the very nature of science.
Actually, scientists are in principle committed to the concepts
involved in dialogue. They say, “We must listen. We shouldn’t
exclude anything.”
However, they ﬁnd that they can’t do that. This is not only
because scientists share what everybody else shares – assump-
tions and opinions – but also because the very notion which has
been deﬁning science today is that we are going to get truth. Few
scientists question the assumption that thought is capable of
coming to know “everything.” But that may not be a valid
assumption, because thought is abstraction, which inherently
implies limitation. The whole is too much. There is no way by
which thought can get hold of the whole, because thought only
abstracts; it limits and deﬁnes. And the past from which thought
draws contains only a certain limited amount. The present is not
contained in thought; thus, an analysis cannot actually cover the
moment of analysis.
There are also the relativists, who say that we are never going
to get at an absolute truth. But they are caught in a paradox of
their own. They are assuming that relativism is the absolute
truth. So it is clear that people who believe that they are arriving
at any kind of absolute truth can’t make a dialogue, not even
among themselves. Even diﬀerent relativists don’t agree.
So we can see that there is no “road” to truth. What we are
trying to say is that in this dialogue we share all the roads and we
ﬁnally see that none of them matters. We see the meaning of all
the roads, and therefore we come to the “no road.” Underneath,
all the roads are the same because of the very fact that they are
“roads” – they are rigid.
on dialogue
44

We’ve said that in a dialogue there will be frustrations, but
you might become better friends if you can get through all that.
Not that we demand aﬀection. We don’t demand friendship; we
don’t demand anything, though friendship may come. If you see
other people’s thought, it becomes your own thought, and you treat it as your own
thought. And when an emotional charge comes up, you share all the emotional
charges, too, if they aﬀect you; you hold them together with all the thoughts.
Often, when there is an emotional charge somebody can come
in to defuse the issue a bit so that it doesn’t run away – as the
child psychiatrist defused it with his asking, “How long will you
hate me forever?” Or some other sort of humor may defuse the
issue, or something else – some appropriate remark which you
can’t foresee.
Sometimes you may ﬁnd that you are about to raise a ques-
tion, but someone else brings it up. In such a case, that thought
is probably latent in the group as a whole, implicit. And one
person may say it, or somebody else may say it. Then another
person may pick it up and carry it along. If the group is really
working, that would be thinking together – common participa-
tion in thinking – as if it were all one process. That one thought
is being formed together. Then, if somebody comes up with
another assumption, we all listen to that, we share that meaning.
Now that would be the “vision of dialogue.”
SENSITIVITY IN DIALOGUE
What we have been discussing has not been common in human
society, although it is really what is necessary if the society is to
cohere. If people would do this in government or in business or
internationally, our society would work diﬀerently. But then,
that requires sensitivity – a certain way of knowing how to come
in and how not to come in, of watching all the subtle cues and
the senses and your response to them – what’s happening inside
of you, what’s happening in the group. People may show what is
on dialogue
45

happening to them in the stance of their body – by their “body
language” – as well as by what they say.
They are not trying to do this purposefully, but you will ﬁnd
that it develops. That’s part of the communication. It will be
non-verbal as well as verbal. You’re not trying to do it at all. You
may not even be aware that it is happening.
Sensitivity is being able to sense that something is happening,
to sense the way you respond, the way other people respond, to
sense the subtle diﬀerences and similarities. To sense all this is
the foundation of perception. The senses provide you with
information, but you have to be sensitive to it or you won’t see
it. If you know a person very well, you may pass him on the
street and say, “I saw him.” If you are asked what the person
was wearing, however, you may not know, because you didn’t
really look. You were not sensitive to all that, because you
saw that person through the screen of thought. And that was not
sensitivity.
So sensitivity involves the senses, and also something beyond.
The senses are sensitive to certain things to which they respond,
but that’s not enough. The senses will tell you what is happen-
ing, and then the consciousness must build a form, or create
some sense of what it means, which holds it together. Therefore,
meaning is part of it. You are sensitive to the meaning, or to the
lack of meaning. It’s perception of meaning, if you want to put it
that way. In other words, it is a more subtle perception. The
meaning is what holds it together. As I said, it is the “cement.”
Meaning is not static – it is ﬂowing. And if we have the meaning
being shared, then it is ﬂowing among us; it holds the group
together. Then everybody is sensitive to all the nuances going
around, not merely to what is happening in his own mind. From
that forms a meaning which is shared. And in that way we can
talk together coherently and think together. Whereas generally
people hold to their assumptions, so they are not thinking
together. Each one is on his own.
on dialogue
46

What blocks sensitivity is the defense of your assumptions
and opinions. But if you are defending your opinions, you don’t
judge yourself and say, “I shouldn’t be defending.” Rather, the
fact is that you are defending, and you then need to be sensitive
to that – to all the feelings in that, all the subtle nuances. We are
not aiming for the type of group that condemns and judges, and
so forth – we can all realize that that would get in the way. So
this group is not going to judge or condemn. It is simply going
to look at all the opinions and assumptions and let them surface.
And I think that there could then be a change.
Krishnamurti said that “to be” is to be related. But relation-
ship can be very painful. He said that you have to think/feel out
all your mental processes and work them through, and then that
will open the way to something else. And I think that is what can
happen in the dialogue group. Certain painful things can happen
for some people; you have to work it all out.
We once had a dialogue in Sweden, in which the group
seemed to divide itself into two factions. There were a lot of
“New Age” people, and from the beginning they began to talk
about the virtues of love and the fact that the place was full of
love all around, that it was all love everywhere. Part of the group
remained silent for a while, but in the next hour they started to
talk. They intimated that the love talk was all sentimental non-
sense and didn’t mean anything. Then one fellow got so excited
that he couldn’t stand it, and he walked out. He eventually came
back, and they ﬁnally got together again. Polarization had taken
place, which is a typical diﬃculty that can arise. Someone
noticed the polarization happening and said with a bit of good
humor, “There are two groups here – the love group and the
hate group.” That broke the tension a little, and the two sides
could then begin to talk. They didn’t necessarily convince each
other, but each was able to see the meaning of the other side’s
position, and the two polarized groups were able to talk to
each other.
on dialogue
47

Now, that was a more important point than whether they
convinced each other. They might ﬁnd that they both have to
give up their positions so that something else can come about. It
was not important whether one favored love or one favored hate
or another favored being suspicious and careful and somewhat
cynical, or whatever. Really, underneath they were similar,
because they both had rigid positions. Loosening that position,
then, was the key change.
On the whole, you could say that if you are defending your
opinions, you are not serious. Likewise, if you are trying to avoid
something unpleasant inside of yourself, that is also not being
serious. A great deal of our whole life is not serious. And society
teaches you that. It teaches you not to be very serious – that there
are all sorts of incoherent things, and there is nothing that can be
done about it, and that you will only stir yourself up uselessly by
being serious.
But in a dialogue you have to be serious. It is not a dialogue if
you are not – not in the way I’m using the word. There is a story
about Freud when he had cancer of the mouth. Somebody came
up to him and wanted to talk to him about a point in psych-
ology. The person said, “Perhaps I’d better not talk to you,
because you’ve got this cancer which is very serious. You may
not want to talk about this.” Freud’s answer was, “This cancer
may be fatal, but it’s not serious.” And actually, of course, it was
just a lot of cells growing. I think a great deal of what goes on in
society could be described that way – that it may well be fatal,
but it’s not serious.
LIMITED DIALOGUE
Sometimes people feel a sense of dialogue within their families.
But a family is generally a hierarchy, organized on the principle
of authority which is contrary to dialogue. The family is a very
authoritative structure, based on obligation, and that sort of
on dialogue
48

thing. It has its value, but it is a structure within which it might
be diﬃcult to get dialogue going. It would be good if you could
– perhaps that could happen in some families. In general it is
diﬃcult, though, because there is no place in the dialogue for
the principle of authority and hierarchy. We want to be free of
hierarchy and authority as we move. You must have some author-
ity to “run” things; that’s why we say that if you have a “pur-
pose,” then you are bound to bring in some authority some-
where. But in dialogue, insofar as we have no purpose and no
agenda and we don’t have to do anything, we don’t really need to
have an authority or a hierarchy. Rather, we need a place where
there is no authority, no hierarchy, where there is no special
purpose – sort of an empty place, where we can let anything be
talked about.
As we said, you can also have a dialogue in a more limited way
– perhaps with a purpose or a goal in mind. It would be best to
accept the principle of letting it be open, because when you limit
it, you are accepting assumptions on the basis of which you limit
it – assumptions that may actually be getting in the way of free
communication. So you are not looking at those assumptions.
However, if people are not ready to be completely open in
their communication, they should do what they can. I know
some university professors who are interested in applying the
principles of dialogue to corporate problems. One of them
recently had a meeting with the executive oﬃcers of a corpor-
ation that makes oﬃce furniture. They wanted to have this sort
of meeting, because they knew that they were not functioning
eﬃciently and that they couldn’t agree. The higher oﬃcers had
all sorts of assumptions that blocked everything. So they asked
him to come in. He started a dialogue which they found very
interesting, and now they want to have a whole series of them.
Naturally, that sort of dialogue will be limited – the people
involved do have a deﬁnite purpose, which is limiting – but even
so, it has considerable value. The principle is at least to get people
on dialogue
49

to come to know each other’s assumptions, so they can listen to
their assumptions and know what they are. Very often people get
into problems where they don’t really know what the other per-
son’s assumption is, and they react according to what they think
it is. That person then gets very puzzled and wonders: what is he
doing? He reacts, and it all gets very muddled. So it is valuable if
they can at least get to realize each other’s assumptions.
The professor told me about two interesting cases. One
involved a company which had trouble with people in the
higher executive branches who were not very happy and were
not getting on with each other. The company’s usual way of
solving it was to oﬀer them a higher salary, sort of a sweetener,
and a lot of mediocre people were given the very highest pos-
sible positions. It went on and on, and pretty soon there were so
many people with high salaries that the company couldn’t aﬀord
it; they were failing. They said, “What can we do? Well, we’ve
got to have somebody who’s tough, who will tell these people,
‘You have to accept another position.’ ” The negotiator that they
used explained the new policies by saying, “The company just
can’t aﬀord it.” But he was avoiding the issue. He was not
straightforwardly saying, “This whole approach is wrong.” Now,
if the company is to work eﬃciently, there must be a mutual
agreement that they are not going to give a person a higher
position just to alleviate a psychological problem between
people. That’s not a right way to proceed. Everybody should
understand that that is not the right way of working, otherwise
the company won’t succeed. Therefore, a dialogue was needed
so that they could really begin talking with each other in order
to come to see clearly the salient points: “That’s the way we are
thinking, that’s where the problems are coming from, and that’s
the way we have to go.” So within the framework of assuming
that the company has to survive, there was a limited kind of
dialogue – not the kind we ultimately want to have here, but still
it was good in some way.
on dialogue
50

Now, I am suggesting that the human race has got to do that.
We could say that the human race is failing for the same sort of
reason that the company was failing.
The second case involved the negotiating group itself, the
university people whose specialty it is to go into companies and
help solve these problems. They were organizing a meeting
among themselves with the same purpose – just so they could
talk. They had a series of meetings where it happened that two of
their people could never quite meet on any issue. One of them
constantly had the assumption that the right thing to do was to
bring out the trouble – to confront somebody with it. And the
other person had the opposite assumption, which was that you
shouldn’t do that. He wanted other people to draw him out. He
felt that he couldn’t say something unless other people created
the space for him to talk, and drew him out. The ﬁrst fellow
wouldn’t do that, he did the opposite. So they couldn’t meet.
The whole thing went on for a long time in confusion, with the
one person waiting to be drawn out, and the other person not
understanding that this was the case. Finally they got to talking,
and each one actually brought up childhood experiences which
were behind his assumptions – and then it opened up.
The fellow who was working as facilitator during this time
did very little. In fact, several of the people appealed to the
facilitator and said, “Why don’t you talk?” The facilitator may
come in from time to time and comment on what is going on
or what it all means. In a more general group he should eventu-
ally be able to be just a participant. Probably in the company
group this wouldn’t work, though; he couldn’t become just a
participant – such a group has too limited an objective.
This second example might be an illustration of when the
personal may have to come into the general, because in certain
cases there are blocks due to particular assumptions that the
person got hold of in childhood, or in some other way. And in
this example, they were ﬁnally able to uncover those assumptions.
on dialogue
51

They weren’t trying to heal each other, or to do therapy; never-
theless, it had a therapeutic eﬀect. But that’s a secondary thing.
Some people feel that that type of corporate dialogue is only
furthering a corrupt system. However, there is a germ of some-
thing diﬀerent. I think that if you go into society, you will ﬁnd
that almost everything is involved in this corrupt game. So it
doesn’t accomplish anything to dismiss it all. The executives
have got to make the company work; and in fact, if all these
companies would work more eﬃciently we would all be a lot
better oﬀ. It’s partly because they are in such a mess that we are
in trouble, that society is ineﬃcient, that the whole thing is
falling apart. If the government and the companies could all
work eﬃciently, we wouldn’t be so wasteful, even though that
by itself wouldn’t solve all the problems.
For the society to be working right, all those things have got
to work eﬃciently and coherently. If we look at what is going on
in the world today, in this or in any country, we can say that it is
not working coherently. Most companies are not really working
coherently. And slowly the thing is sinking. I think that if you
can get this notion across in whatever situation – the germ of the
notion of dialogue – if you can get people to look at it, it’s a step.
You could say that heads of state are not likely to have the kind of
dialogue that we are talking about. But if they will have any kind
at all, if they’ll begin to accept this principle, it’s a step. It may
make a change; for instance, the kind of waste of energy which
is going on in the production of armaments could be cut down.
If we could stop the tremendous amount that’s being spent on
armaments – let’s say a trillion dollars a year – that could be used
for ecological regeneration and all sorts of constructive things.
And possibly some of that might happen. Those political ﬁgures
who are more aware of the ecological problem might, for
instance, make the President more aware of it, if they would
really talk. Not that we can expect the politicians to solve
the problems we face. But I’m saying that if there’s a slight
on dialogue
52

movement toward something more open, the rate of destruction
will slow down. If we go on at this rate, we may have very little
time to do anything.
We can’t do anything at the level of presidents or prime minis-
ters. They have their own opinions. But the various ideas ﬁlter, as
we’ve said. Somehow the notion of something a little bit like
dialogue has ﬁltered to that level, and it may have an eﬀect; that’s
all I am saying. I think that in the US government there are some
people who are more this way, and some people who are more
the other way. We don’t know how it is going to come out, but
there is a certain movement toward something more open. I
don’t say that it is going to solve the whole thing; I am saying
that if it slows down the destruction, that’s important, because un-
less the destruction is slowed down to give time for something
new to emerge, it will be too late.
There may be no pat political answer to the world’s problems.
However, the important point is not the answer – just as in a
dialogue, the important point is not the particular opinions –
but rather the softening up, the opening up of the mind, and
looking at all the opinions. If there is some sort of spread of that
attitude, I think it can slow down the destruction.
So we’ve said that it is crucial to be able to share our judg-
ments, to share our assumptions, to listen to each other’s
assumptions. In the case of Einstein and Bohr it didn’t lead to
violence that they did not; but in general, if somebody doesn’t
listen to your basic assumptions you feel it as an act of violence,
and then you are inclined to be violent yourself. Therefore, this
is crucial both individually and collectively. Dialogue is the col-
lective way of opening up judgments and assumptions.
BEYOND DIALOGUE
We should keep in mind, nonetheless, that the dialogue – and in
fact, all that we’ve been talking about – is not only directed at
on dialogue
53

solving the ills of society, although we do have to solve those ills.
We would be much better oﬀ if we didn’t have them. If we
survive and we want to have a worthwhile life, we have to deal
with those problems. But ultimately that’s not the entire story.
That’s only the beginning. I’m suggesting that there is the possi-
bility for a transformation of the nature of consciousness, both
individually and collectively, and that whether this can be solved
culturally and socially depends on dialogue. That’s what we’re
exploring.
And it’s very important that it happens together, because if
one individual changes it will have very little general eﬀect. But
if it happens collectively, it means a lot more. If some of us come
to the “truth,” so-called, while a lot of people are left out, it’s
not going to solve the problem. We would have another conﬂict
– just as there is conﬂict between diﬀerent parts of the Christian
faith or the Muhammadan faith or various others, even though
they all believe in the same God, the same prophet or the same
savior.
Love will go away if we can’t communicate and share mean-
ing. The love between Einstein and Bohr gradually evaporated
because they could not communicate. However, if we can really
communicate, then we will have fellowship, participation,
friendship, and love, growing and growing. That would be the
way. The question is really: do you see the necessity of this
process? That’s the key question. If you see that it is absolutely
necessary, then you have to do something.
And perhaps in dialogue, when we have this very high energy
of coherence, it might bring us beyond just being a group that
could solve social problems. Possibly it could make a new change
in the individual and a change in the relation to the cosmic. Such
an energy has been called “communion.” It is a kind of participa-
tion. The early Christians had a Greek word, koinonia, the root of
which means “to participate” – the idea of partaking of the whole
and taking part in it; not merely the whole group, but the whole.
on dialogue
54

3
THE NATURE OF
COLLECTIVE THOUGHT
What are the troubles of the world? They seem so many that we
can hardly begin even to list them. We can see wars going on,
starvation, torture, pillage, disease, all sorts of dirty tricks played
in politics. We have a kind of polarization between East and West
– the West professes the value of the individual and freedom,
and the East professes the value of the collective society,
with everybody being taken care of. We have the North/South
polarization – the North is more wealthy and the South less so.
There’s tremendous trouble in Africa and South America and
southern parts of Asia; there’s very great poverty and indebted-
ness and a breakdown of the economy and general chaos in
what’s going on there.
With advancing technology you have the possibility that
nuclear bombs will perhaps be available to all sorts of dictators,
even in relatively small nations. There are biological and chem-
ical weapons, and other kinds of weapons that have not yet been
invented, but surely will. And we have the danger of ecological

destruction – destruction of agricultural land and forests, pollu-
tion, the change of climate, and many other things. There could
be a real ecological disaster within not too long a period of time
if people keep doing whatever they’re doing. Then we have the
growth of crime and violence everywhere – drugs and so on –
indicating that people are very unhappy and not satisﬁed. I don’t
need to multiply it. The list could be extended almost
indeﬁnitely.
Why have we accepted this state of aﬀairs which is so destruc-
tive and so dangerous and so conducive to unhappiness? It seems
we’re mesmerized in some way. We go on with this insanity and
nobody seems to know what to do or say. In the past people used
to hope that some solution would appear, such as democracy or
socialism or something else, perhaps religion; but this hopeful
state of mind is very much weakened now because it has not
worked out at all. I am suggesting that underneath it there’s
something we don’t understand about how thought works.
In the beginning of the process of civilization, thought was
regarded as a very valuable thing. And it still is. Thought has
done all the things which we are proud of. It has built our cities
(we shouldn’t be so proud of them, I suppose). It has created
science and technology, and has been very creative in medicine.
Practically all of what has been called nature has been arranged
by thought. Yet thought also goes wrong somehow, and pro-
duces destruction. This arises from a certain way of thinking,
i.e., fragmentation. This is to break things up into bits, as if they
were independent. It’s not merely making divisions, but it is
breaking things up which are not really separate. It’s like taking
a watch and smashing it into fragments, rather than taking it
apart and ﬁnding its parts. The parts are parts of a whole, but
the fragments are just arbitrarily broken oﬀ from each other.
Things which really ﬁt, and belong together, are treated as
if they do not. That’s one of the features of thought that’s going
wrong.
the nature of collective thought
56

In the past, people may not have noticed this, and may have
thought only that “knowledge is power” and ignorance is bad.
But there’s a certain danger in knowledge and in thought, which
people haven’t paid enough attention to. Thought may have
started to go wrong thousands or tens of thousands of years ago
– we don’t know. But now technology has gone so far that it has
really become deadly. If you imagine a thousand years of what’s
going on now, what will happen? Will there not be some catas-
trophe or another? Therefore, with the growth of technology the
human race is faced with a tremendous crisis, or challenge. We
have got to do something about this thought process – we can’t
just let it go on destroying us. But then, what do you do about it?
You can’t cut out thought – clearly we couldn’t do without it.
And you can’t just select all the bad thoughts and cut them out.
So we have to go into it more deeply. I say this is not an obvious
thing – it’s very subtle and it goes very deep. We want to get to
the root of it, to the base, to the source of it.
Imagine a stream which is being polluted near the source. The
people downstream don’t know about that, so they start remov-
ing bits of pollution, trying to purify their water, but perhaps
introducing more pollution of another kind as they do so. What
has to be done, therefore, is to see this whole stream, and get to
the source of it. Somewhere, at the source of thought, it is being
polluted – that is the suggestion. Pollution is being diverted into
the stream, and this is happening all the time. You could say, in
one sense, the wrong step was when people ﬁrst started pouring
pollution in. But the fact that we have kept on pouring it in is
the main point – it’s pouring in all the time. Therefore, the
source is not in time – not back in ancient times, when it may
have started – but rather the source is always now. That’s what we
have to look into.
I would say further that we want to see something about
thought: we not only want to talk about thought and think about
thought, but we want to see something about how thought
the nature of collective thought
57

actually works – beyond the word. You may not know what I
mean by that. I mean that thought is a real process, and that we
have got to be able to pay attention to it as we pay attention to
processes taking place outside in the material world, in the
world that we can see. We may not know what that means, to pay
attention to thought. Neither our culture, nor indeed hardly any
culture, is able to give much help on that, and yet that is crucial.
Everything depends on thought – if thought goes wrong, we’re
going to do everything wrong. But we are so used to taking it for
granted that we don’t pay any attention to it.
If you say, “This is too big for me,” in one sense that’s true. In
another sense, I say it’s not. If you say the crisis is only the ex-
ternal phenomenon – what’s going on in the outside world – then
it’s very big. It’s like this: suppose you have a dam which has not
been constructed properly, and it slowly erodes away. Then it sud-
denly goes, and that wall of water is running down. Indeed, you’re
not going to be able to stop it at that moment. But the question is
– what about the process which is constantly making the wrong
kind of dam and letting it erode? What’s going on deeper down?
The real crisis is not in these events which are confronting us,
like wars and crime and drugs and economic chaos and poll-
ution; it’s really in the thought which is making it – all the time.
Each person can do something about that thought, because he’s
in it. But one of the troubles we get into is to say, “It’s they who
are thinking all that, and I am thinking right.” I say that’s a
mistake. I say thought pervades us. It’s similar to a virus – some-
how this is a disease of thought, of knowledge, of information,
spreading all over the world. The more computers, radio, and
television we have, the faster it spreads. So the kind of thought
that’s going on all around us begins to take over in every one of
us, without our even noticing it. It’s spreading like a virus and
each one of us is nourishing that virus.
Do we have a kind of immune system that stops it? The only
way to stop it is to recognize it, to acknowledge it, to see what it
the nature of collective thought
58

is. If any one of us starts to look at that, then we are looking at
the source of the problem. It’s the same in all of us. We may
imagine that the source of the problem is that somebody “over
there” is thinking these wrong thoughts – or that a lot of people
are. But the source of the problem is much deeper. It is that
something is going wrong in the whole process of thought,
which is collective, which belongs to all of us.
A key assumption that we have to question is that our thought
is our own individual thought. Now, to some extent it is. We
have some independence. But we must look at it more carefully.
It’s more subtle than to say it’s individual or it’s not individual.
We have to see what thought really is, without presuppositions.
What is really going on when we’re thinking? I’m trying to say
that most of our thought in its general form is not individual. It
originates in the whole culture and it pervades us. We pick it up
as children from parents, from friends, from school, from
newspapers, from books, and so on. We make a small change in
it; we select certain parts of it which we like, and we may reject
other parts. But still, it all comes from that pool. This deep
structure of thought, which is the source, the constant source –
timeless – is always there. It’s not that we go back in time to ﬁnd
its origin, but rather that it’s constantly working. This deep struc-
ture of thought is what is common, and this is what we have to
get at. We will have to come to see that the content of thought
and the deep structure are not really separate, because the way
we think about thought has an eﬀect on its structure. If we think,
for example, that thought is coming from me individually, this
will aﬀect how thought works. So we have to look at both
content and structure.
We have the sense that we “know” all sorts of things. But we
could say that perhaps it is not “we,” but knowledge itself which
knows all sorts of things. The suggestion is that knowledge –
which is thought – is moving autonomously: it passes from one
person to another. There is a whole pool of knowledge for the
the nature of collective thought
59

whole human race, like diﬀerent computers that share a pool of
knowledge. This pool of thought has been developing for many
thousands of years, and it is full of all sorts of content. This
knowledge, or thought, knows all of that content, but it doesn’t know
what it is doing. This knowledge knows itself wrongly: it knows
itself as doing nothing. It therefore says, “I am not responsible for
any of these problems. I’m just here for you to use.”
All of this thought, which is based on what one has been
thinking, is clearly coming from memory. You build up know-
ledge through experience, through practice. You think about it,
you organize it, it goes into memory and becomes knowledge.
Part of that knowledge is skill, through practice – that too is a
kind of memory, somewhere in the body or in the brain. It’s all
part of one system. In this connection, there is what Michael
Polanyi has called tacit knowledge – the knowledge which you can’t
state in words, but which is there. You know how to ride a
bicycle, but you can’t state how. If a bicycle is falling, you have to
turn it in the direction it’s falling in order to make it come up.
Mathematically, there is a formula that shows that the angle to
which you turn is related in a certain way to the angle at which
you’re falling. This is what you’ll actually do, but you don’t work out
the formula. Your whole body does countless movements that you
can’t describe, and it makes it all work. That’s tacit knowledge.
It’s a kind of knowledge you’ve got, without which you could
do nothing. It’s a continuation from the past of something that
you learned. So we have experience, knowledge, thought,
emotion, practice – all one process.
Further, in our language we have a distinction between
“thinking” and “thought.” “Thinking” implies the present tense
– some activity going on which may include critical sensitivity
to what can go wrong. Also there may be new ideas, and perhaps
occasionally perception of some kind inside. “Thought” is the
past participle of that. We have the idea that after we have been
thinking something, it just evaporates. But thinking doesn’t
the nature of collective thought
60

disappear. It goes somehow into the brain and leaves something
– a trace – which becomes thought. And thought then acts
automatically. So thought is the response from memory – from
the past, from what has been done. Thus we have thinking and
thought.
We also have the word “feeling.” Its present tense suggests the
active present, that the feeling is directly in contact with reality.
But it might be useful to introduce the word “felt,” to say there
are “feelings” and “felts.” That is, “felts” are feelings which have
been recorded. A traumatic experience in the past can make you
feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic feelings
are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that come up are
really from the past, they’re “felts.” But if they are just a record-
ing being replayed, they don’t have as much signiﬁcance as if
they were a response to the present immediate situation.
It’s really very important to see that our culture gives us a
wrong lead about thoughts and felts. It constantly tends to
imply that they could be separated and that one could control
the other. But thoughts and felts are one process; they are not
two. They both come from the memory; in the memory they
are probably all mixed. Memory also aﬀects the physical body.
It aﬀects the sensations. You can produce states of stress in
the body from memory of states of stress. Therefore, when
memory acts you cannot separate the intellectual function, the
emotional function, the chemical function, the muscular
function – because this tacit knowledge is also a kind of memory –
they’re all there.
Neuroscientiﬁc studies of brain structure suggest that thought
originates somewhere in the outer cortex of the brain – in the
prefrontal lobes – and that the emotional center is deeper down.
There is a very thick bundle of nerves connecting them, and in
this way they should be closely related; there is a lot of evidence
that they are. Consider the primitive reﬂex to ﬁght or to run or
to freeze. There was a nice example of how this works under
the nature of collective thought
61

modern conditions in a television program which, among other
things, showed an airport controller who is angry at his boss. His
boss is mistreating him. He can’t run, because he has to stay
there. He can’t ﬁght his boss. And he can’t just stop and freeze
and do nothing. Meanwhile, the brain is pouring neuro-
chemicals into the system, as if he were being attacked in the jungle. This
process is stirring up the body and making it all work rather
badly, and also preventing rational thought because such
thought requires a nice, quiet brain. The more he thinks, the
worse it gets. He’ll get thoughts which lead him further astray
and make more trouble.
It would be interesting to trace the evolution and show the
steps that brought this all about. As a theory, you could say that
our “new brain,” with the forebrain and the cortex which
allows for complex thought, developed rather rapidly; and there-
fore it did not come into a harmonious relationship with what
was there before. The older functions of the brain, such as emo-
tions and so on, could respond to the immediate fact of the
animal’s environment: run, ﬁght, or freeze. Then came the activ-
ity of this new cortex, which could project images of all kinds
which were very realistic; but the “old brain” had never learned
very well how to tell the diﬀerence between an image and real-
ity, because it had no need to. It had never been surrounded by a
structure that would produce a lot of images. It was like a dog
that would never have to imagine another dog when it wasn’t
looking at it.
When we evolved to the chimpanzee – which could think of
other chimpanzees even when they were not there – then the
image of the other chimpanzee could produce the same reaction
as the chimpanzee itself. This began to confuse the new part of
the brain, due to “ﬁght, run, freeze,” reactions, neurochemicals,
and so on. The new brain couldn’t get things straight, and it
further tangled up the old brain. It all began to build up a series
of entrained mistakes, one after another.
the nature of collective thought
62

So perhaps this is one of the ways we got to where we are. The
thing to notice is that the major environment of the old brain is
now, not nature, but the new brain, because nature is now ﬁltered
through the new brain. Civilization tends to make this worse –
that’s clear. As civilization develops, you have to have a bigger
society with rules, authority, police, jails, armies. You build up a
tremendous amount of stress. And the further civilization goes,
by and large, the greater the stress. It has been that way for
millennia, and we haven’t solved the problem of what to do
about it.
You could ask, “Why don’t people see this clearly? It seems a
very present danger and yet it seems people can’t see it.” They
don’t see it because of this thought process, which is collective
as well as individual. The thoughts, the fantasies, and the collect-
ive fantasies are entering perception. Myths are collective fan-
tasies, and every culture has its myths. Many of them are entering
perception as if they were perceived realities. Everybody has a
somewhat diﬀerent way in which this happens, and we don’t
actually see the fact. That is the fact: that we don’t see the fact.
There is a higher order of fact – which is that we are not seeing
the direct fact. This is the fact from which we must start.
I think we can get a further insight into why concepts and
images have such a powerful eﬀect, if we more fully consider that
thought is able to provide a representation of what we experience.
“Representation” is a very appropriate word here, because it just
says “re-present” – to present again. Thus, we may say that percep-
tion presents something, and that thought re-presents it in abstraction.
A map is a kind of representation. The map is obviously much
less than the territory it represents. This abstraction is advanta-
geous because it focuses on what may be important for our
purposes, with all the unnecessary detail left out. It is structured
and organized in a way which may be helpful and relevant.
Therefore, a representation is not just a concept – it’s really a
number of concepts together.
the nature of collective thought
63

Another example would be the case of someone giving a talk
– there forms in the minds of those who listen a representation
of whatever is meant. In listening to someone who is describing
something, some sort of representation will form in your mind
– in the imagination perhaps – as if it were perceived. It will not
be the same as the thing itself – it will be very abstract compared
with it. It will highlight certain points, which may be of interest
compared to the original perception, and so on. We are
constantly forming re-presentations in this way.
But the thing to notice – the key point – is that this representa-
tion is not only present in thought or in imagination, but it fuses
with the actual perception or experience. In other words, the representa-
tion fuses with the “presentation,” so that what is “presented”
(as perception) is already in large part a re-presentation. So it
“presents again.” You then get what we might call a “net presen-
tation,” which is the result of the senses, of thought, and pos-
sibly some insight. It all comes together in one net presentation.
The way you experience something, therefore, depends on how
you represent it – or mis-represent it.
If you represent yourself to yourself as noble and capable and
honest, that representation enters the perception of yourself.
That’s how you perceive yourself. Now, somebody else gives
another representation – which is that you are dishonest and
stupid – and this goes in, too, and aﬀects your “perception” of
yourself. And that shakes up the whole neurophysiological sys-
tem in a very disturbing way. Thought is then under pressure to
represent the situation in a better light – and there you see the
beginning of self-deception.
We generally do not notice the connection between represen-
tation and presentation – the two-way connection. Thought
seems to lack the ability to see that this is happening. The process
is unconscious, implicit, tacit – we don’t know exactly how it
happens. But we can see that something happens in which
thought mixes these up. Imagine the information coming in
the nature of collective thought
64

from the senses and being organized in the brain, but then
another stream of information comes in from thought, and the
two mix in the whole. The net presentation is a result of the two.
The important point is that we are not aware that this is hap-
pening. The human race by and large has seldom known this – if
ever. Perhaps a few people have known it, but by and large we go
ahead without being aware of it. We’re not saying that this pro-
cess is bad or good. What’s wrong with it is not that it takes
place, but rather that we are not aware of it.
Now, we couldn’t do without the connection between repre-
sentation and presentation. In order to take action toward some-
thing, it’s not enough to represent it only in imagination or
thought. You must actually feel it to be present in your percep-
tion. Take the example of a forest. It could be represented as a
source of lumber, and it would then be presented to a lumber-
man in that way. To the artist it could be represented as some-
thing worth painting. To someone who wants to take a walk, it
would be represented as a place he could enjoy himself walking
along the path. There are countless representations of the forest,
which will present the forest in diﬀerent ways.
What is not represented as interesting generally does not hold
your interest. If it is not represented as valuable and interesting,
it is not presented in that way, and therefore it doesn’t hold the
interest. And in some cases you should represent it according to
your interest. You may say, “I need to represent it in a certain
way to do something.” It will therefore hold your interest and
attention while you’re doing it. Now, none of this is wrong. In
fact, all of it is absolutely necessary. Unless something is pre-
sented in that way, you can’t take action. You can’t just act from
the abstract representation in the imagination. You have got to
act from the concrete presentation.
But the lack of awareness of this process is crucial. If someone
says, “People of this category are bad,” and you accept that, then
the representation of thought enters the presentation of perception. Once you’ve
the nature of collective thought
65

accepted that, it goes into implicit, tacit thought. The next
moment, when you see a person of that kind, it comes up as a
presentation. The “badness” is perceived as inhering in him. It is
not that you say, “I know that somebody has told me that these
people are bad, and they may be bad or they may be good. I’d
better look and see.” But rather, what they “are” is apparently
right “there.” From there on, you think about that as if it were
entirely an independent fact – independent of thought.
Thought then begins apparently to prove itself, and to create
“facts” which are not really facts. The Latin root of the word
“fact” means “what has been made,” as in “manufacture.” In
some sense we have to establish a fact, but this sort of fact is
being made wrongly. This is a fact which is, so to speak, not
being properly manufactured. It’s being made in the wrong way
because we are mixing up thought into that “fact,” and not
knowing that we are doing it. It’s necessary to let thought enter
the fact, but we fail to notice that this is happening. If we say it’s a
“pure” fact, which is just “there,” we will give it tremendous
value, and say, “How can you deny the fact? You can see what
sort of people they are.”
It is important to see that most of our representations arise
collectively, and that gives them greater power. If everybody
agrees on something, we take that as evidence that it’s right, or
that it could be right. This then creates a pressure on us – we
don’t want to get out of the consensus. This means that we are
constantly under pressure to accept any particular representa-
tion, and to see it that way. For example, what we call the “self”
is represented in a certain way, and therefore presented in a
certain way. This representation is basically collective, in the
sense that the general properties of the self are determined col-
lectively, and particular details are determined individually. The
consensus all over the world is that you have a self, because all
the evidence is that you’ve got one. It’s on your birth certiﬁcate –
you’ve got a name, you’re identiﬁed. In many countries you
the nature of collective thought
66

have an identity card. You’ve got a bank account, you’ve got
land, you’ve got a profession, and so on. All of this is represent-
ing what you are, and therefore it is presenting what you are.
Another example would be a rainbow – everybody sees the
same rainbow. There’s a collective representation of the rainbow
– we all have a consensus about it. But physics, which looks at
things “literally,” says, “No, there is no rainbow. There are a lot
of droplets of water, the sun is in back of you and it’s being
reﬂected and refracted oﬀ the water and forming colors. In
seeing this, each person is forming his own perception of a
rainbow. It happens they all look very similar, therefore they all
think they’re all looking at the same rainbow.” (You could also
argue that by adopting that view you are taking physics as the real
thing.) The point, though, is that a lot of our collective represen-
tations – a country, a religion, General Motors, the ego – are of
the same quality as the rainbow. A great many things which we
take as solid reality are very similar to the rainbow. In fact, it’s
not wrong to do that. The diﬃculty arises because we do not
realize that this is happening, and we therefore give the represen-
tation the value of independent fact. If we could see it happen-
ing, it would produce no problem at all. We would then be able
to value the “fact” for whatever it is. But in our current
approach, we are able to take “facts” which have very little value,
and value them very highly.
We’ve applied this notion to a few simple cases, many of
which are outside of us. But going further, getting more of a
feeling for this notion, you begin to see how it works inside of
us and between us – in communication and in dialogue. You see
that this question of representation is crucial in our com-
munication. Suppose people meet in a group, bringing certain
representations about what other people are like, or what they
themselves are like. As the group communicates, these represen-
tations may get shaken, and change; the presentation changes,
and therefore the whole relationship changes. Our relationship
the nature of collective thought
67

depends on how we present other people to ourselves, and how
we present ourselves to other people. And all of that depends on
the general collective representations.
When things are going smoothly there is no way to know that
there’s anything wrong – we have already made the assumption
that what’s going on is independent of thought. When things
are represented, and then presented in that way, there is no way
for you to see what is happening – it’s already excluded. You
cannot pay attention to what is outside the representation.
There’s tremendous pressure not to; it’s very hard. The only time
you can pay attention to it is when you see there is trouble –
when a surprise comes, when there’s a contradiction, when
things don’t quite work.
However, we don’t want to view this process as a “problem,”
because we have no idea how to solve it – we can’t project a
solution. One of our representations is that everything we do is
in time. We project a goal and we ﬁnd the means to achieve the
end. Therefore everything in the world is presented that way – as
something that could be handled in that way. We should, then,
think of this as a question, or a diﬃculty – seeing that things are
not working right. We’re beginning to see where it’s going
wrong, though perhaps not yet being able to really change it. But
we’re starting to get some sort of feeling for where it’s going
wrong – namely, that a lot of what we take to be fact is not
really fact.
This implies a diﬀerent way of seeing the world – it implies
that our whole way of seeing the world could change. We see the
world according to the general collective representations circu-
lating around our society and culture, and insofar as these could
be dropped, then we may change, because the world is presented
diﬀerently. If you are presented to me as a dangerous person,
then I will shrink back – I can’t help it. But if I represent you
diﬀerently, then my whole approach is diﬀerent. Further, we
have to be careful about mis-representation. We could say, “We
the nature of collective thought
68

are all loving one another, everything is solved.” That would
then be presented, and we would get a nice glow; however, this
would be based on a mis-representation. But this doesn’t change
the fact that any real change in presentation – any genuine change
– is a change of being.
We could consider a representation which is current in our
society, such as, “You have to take care of yourself ﬁrst, you have
to watch out – people are dangerous – you can’t trust them,”
and so on. This will produce a response, not only outwardly but
also inwardly. The entire neurochemistry develops accordingly,
as does the tension in the body. Now, it’s true that the world is
dangerous, but we are looking at this wrongly. It’s dangerous
not because people are intrinsically dangerous, but because of
mis-representation that has generally been accepted. We have to
see the right reason. Therefore, we don’t approach such people
as intrinsically dangerous, but as people who are the victims of
mis-representation.
Changing this representation then opens the way to further
change. We don’t say it’s going to be easy, or hard – we don’t
know – but it opens up the way, it opens up a big perspective. If
we could learn to see thought actually producing presentations
from representations, we would no longer be fooled by it – it
would be like seeing the trick of a magician. As long as you don’t
see what the magician is doing, it seems like magic. But if you
had a direct insight into the trick, it could change everything.
Many worlds are possible – it all depends on representation,
especially the collective representation. To make a “world” takes
more than one person, and therefore the collective representa-
tion is the key. It’s not enough merely for one person to change
his representation. That’s ﬁne, but we’re saying that the real
change is the change of collective representations.
the nature of collective thought
69

4
THE PROBLEM AND
THE PARADOX
We have been looking at the vast range of problems facing
humanity. These go on proliferating indeﬁnitely, eventually
leading on toward disorders of world-wide scope. On con-
templating this general situation, one may even sometimes have
a sense of being confronted by diﬃculties beyond the possibility
of resolution by human intelligence and co-operative endeavor.
In this mass of contradiction and confusion, one ﬁnds a very
curious common denominator: i.e., that everyone appears to
agree that what is actually confronting us is a set of problems.
Generally speaking, one does not ﬁnd that people have con-
sidered the question of whether the word “problem,” with all
that it signiﬁes, provides an adequate description of what is
going wrong in human aﬀairs. Yet, if one goes into the meaning
of the word, one can see good reason to raise such a question,
and to suspect that the attempt to treat our current diﬃculties as
“problems” may be one of the more important factors prevent-
ing these diﬃculties from being properly brought to an end.

The root of “problem” is a Greek word whose meaning is “to
put forward.” Indeed, this is the essential signiﬁcance of the
word: i.e., to put forward for discussion or questioning an idea
that is suggested toward the resolution of certain diﬃculties or
inadequacies. Thus, if one needs to reach a certain destination,
one may suggest taking a train, and one can discuss the problem
of meeting the train on time, paying for the ticket, etc. Similarly,
sailing ships were seen to be a slow and unreliable means of
transport, and so men put forth the idea of driving ships by steam,
thus giving rise to the problem of how to realize this idea tech-
nically and how to carry it out practically. More generally, it is clear
that a large part of our practical and technical activities are cen-
tered on work aimed at solving a wide range of such problems.
However, when one puts forth an idea in the form of a prob-
lem, there are certain largely tacit and implicit presuppositions
which must be satisﬁed if the activity is to make sense. Among
these is of course the assumption that the questions raised are
rational and free of contradiction. Sometimes, without our
noticing it, we accept absurd problems with false or self-
contradictory presuppositions. In the practical and technical
realm, however, we can usually sooner or later detect that our
question is absurd, and we then drop the “problem” as meaning-
less. Thus, for a long time, people sought to invent a machine
capable of perpetual motion, but with the development of scien-
tiﬁc understanding it became clear that this would be in contra-
diction with the basic laws of physics, and so the search for such
a machine has ceased.
All of this is fairly clear in the practical and technical domain.
But now, what is to be done when one goes on to consider
psychological problems and problems of human relationship?
Does it make sense to formulate problems of such a kind? Or is
this domain not one in which the presuppositions behind the
questions put forth for discussion are false, self-contradictory,
and absurd?
the problem and the paradox
71

Consider, for example, a man who suddenly realized that he
was very susceptible to ﬂattery. He might well put forth the idea
that he ought to be immune to ﬂattery, and then he would of
course have the problem of overcoming his tendency to “fall”
for anyone who told him how wonderful a person he was. It
takes only a little consideration, however, to see that this “prob-
lem” is based on absurd presuppositions. For example, the ori-
gin of the wish to be ﬂattered is often a deep sense of being
inadequate, which is so painful that awareness of its very exist-
ence is largely suppressed, except for certain moments in which
criticisms or some other indications of a similar nature
momentarily call attention to this very unpleasant feeling. As
soon as someone comes along and tells such a person that, after
all, he is good, capable, wise, beautiful, etc., then the deadening
sense of suppressed pain disappears, to be replaced by a buoyant
feeling of pleasure and well-being. Along with this goes a ten-
dency to believe that he is being told the truth: for otherwise, of
course, there would be no such release. In order to “defend”
himself from the “danger” of discovering that it is not the truth,
such a person is then ready to believe all that he is told by the
other person, and thus, as is well known, he opens himself to the
possibility of being taken advantage of in countless ways.
In essence, what goes wrong in ﬂattery is a subtle kind of self-
deception. If such a person were then to put forth “the problem”
of how he can stop deceiving himself, the absurdity of this pro-
cedure would become self-evident. For it is clear that even if he
tries hard and makes an eﬀort to overcome his tendency to self-
deception, this very eﬀort will be infected with the wish for a
pleasurable release from pain that is at the origin of the whole
tendency in the ﬁrst place. So he will almost certainly deceive
himself about the question of whether he has overcome self-
deception or not.
More generally, one can say that when something goes wrong
psychologically, it is confusing to describe the resulting situation
the problem and the paradox
72

as a “problem.” Rather, it would be better to say that one was
confronted by a paradox. In the case of the man who is susceptible
to ﬂattery, the paradox is that he apparently knows and under-
stands the absolute need to be honest with himself and yet he
feels an even stronger “need” to deceive himself, when this
helps to release him from an unbearable sense of inadequacy and
to substitute instead a sense of inward rightness and well-being.
What is called for in such a case is not some procedure that
“solves his problem.” Rather, it is to pause and to give attention
to the fact that his thinking and feeling is dominated, through
and through, by a set of self-contradictory demands or “needs”
so that as long as such thinking and feeling prevail, there is no
way to put things right. It takes a great deal of energy and ser-
iousness to “stay with” an awareness of this fact, rather than to
“escape” by allowing the mind to dart into some other subject,
or otherwise lose awareness of the actual state of aﬀairs. Such
attention, going immensely beyond what is merely verbal or
intellectual, can actually bring the root of the paradox into
awareness, and thus the paradox dissolves when its nullity and
absurdity are clearly seen, felt, and understood.
It has to be emphasized, however, that as long as a paradox is
treated as a problem, it can never be dissolved. On the contrary,
the “problem” can do nothing but grow and proliferate in ever-
increasing confusion. For it is an essential feature of thought that
once the mind accepts a problem, then it is appropriate for the
brain to keep on working until it ﬁnds a solution. This feature is
indeed necessary for proper rational thinking. Thus, if a person
were confronted by a real problem (e.g., the need to obtain
food) and dropped it before it was adequately solved, the result
could be disastrous. In any case, such a mode of operation would
indicate an unhealthy ﬂightiness or lack of seriousness. On the
other hand, if the mind treats a paradox as if it were a real
problem, then since the paradox has no “solution,” the mind is
caught in the paradox forever. Each apparent solution is found to
the problem and the paradox
73

be inadequate, and only leads on to new questions of a yet more
muddled nature. Thus, a paradox which has taken root early in
life (e.g., that arising out of a situation in which a child is made
to feel a sense of inadequacy) may continue for the whole of a
person’s life, always changing in detail, growing more and more
confused, but remaining the same in essence. And when the
person becomes aware of the disorder in his mind, but describes
this disorder as a problem, then this very step makes the activity
around the paradox both more intense and more confused.
Clearly, then, it is important to see the diﬀerence between a
problem and a paradox, and to respond to each of these in a way
that is appropriate to it.
This distinction is important, not only psychologically for the
individual, but also for human relationships, and ultimately for
establishing a proper order of society. Thus, one can see that it is
wrong to describe a breakdown in human relationships as a
problem. For example, it is now widely found that parents and
children cannot communicate freely and easily. The paradox is
that all concerned seem to understand their common humanity
and mutual dependence, which imply the need to be open to
each other, while nevertheless, each person feels that his own
particular “needs” are being ignored or rejected by the other, so
that he is “hurt” and reacts with a “defense mechanism” pre-
venting him from really listening to what the other person
means to say.
A similar paradox operates broadly throughout the whole of
society, between diﬀerent age groups, races, social classes,
nations, etc. Thus, consider the prevailing tendency toward
nationalism. People in each nation apparently understand the
need for common human feeling and truthfulness in com-
munications. Yet, when the nation is in danger, so strong is the
reaction of fear and aggression that everyone is immediately
ready to cease to treat the enemy as human (e.g., each side is
ready to use bombs, killing children on the other side, when
the problem and the paradox
74

individually they would be horriﬁed at the notion of child mur-
der). And at home, they accept a censorship, which implies that
they agree to take what is false as true, because they believe such
self-deception to be necessary for the survival of the nation.
Nationalism is thus seen to be rooted in a tremendous paradox.
It therefore makes no sense to treat nationalism as a problem.
The absurdity of such a procedure becomes evident if one puts
forth the question of how one can be ready to annihilate chil-
dren of another nationality and yet love children of one’s own
nationality. Such a question has no answer, and indeed the
attempt to ﬁnd an answer can only lead to further confusion.
What is needed is that people be ready to give serious and sus-
tained attention to a paradoxical pattern that has come to dom-
inate their thinking and feeling.
Such paradoxical patterns go far beyond even questions of
society and human relationships, and are indeed present in the
whole of human thought and language. Since all that we do is
shaped and formed by our modes of thinking and com-
munication, these patterns based on paradoxes tend to bring
about confusion in every phase of life.
Ultimately, this very pervasive set of patterns may be seen to
grow out of a certain “root” paradox. To help bring out what
this root paradox is, one may ﬁrst consider the fact that ordinar-
ily, thought has some external object or state of aﬀairs for its
content. For example, one may think of a chair, a house, a tree, a
storm, the Earth in its orbit, etc. All of these share the character-
istic that they are essentially independent of the process of
thought which goes on in our minds, while at the same time this
process of thought is essentially independent of the content (i.e.,
our thoughts are free to take this content or to leave it, and
instead to range over some other content, which observation
may indicate to be relevant).
Evidently, such relative independence of the mode of activity
of thought from its content is appropriate when one is engaged
the problem and the paradox
75

in thinking about practical and technical subjects. However,
when one begins to think about himself, and especially about his
own thoughts and feelings, then if one observes carefully, he will
ﬁnd that this approach leads to a paradoxical pattern of activity.
The paradox is that whereas one is treating his own thinking and
feeling as something separate from and independent of the
thought that is thinking about them, it is evident that in fact there
is, and can be, no such separation and independence.
Take, for example, the case of the man who is susceptible to
ﬂattery, because of a suppressed memory of a painful feeling of
inadequacy. This memory is itself part of his thinking, and vice
versa, all his subsequent thinking is conditioned by the memory,
in such a way that it will accept what is false as true, if to do this
seems to relieve the remembered sense of pain even mom-
entarily. So the thinking process is not separate from or
independent of its content. Therefore, when such a person puts
forth the problem of trying to control or overcome his tendency
to deceive himself, then he is caught in the “root paradox”; i.e.,
that the activity of his thought is controlled by the very thing that
it appears to be trying to control.
For ages, men have generally realized that thinking and feeling
are commonly infected with greed, violence, self-deception,
fear, aggressiveness, and other forms of reaction that lead to
corruption and confusion. For the most part, however, all of this
has been regarded as a problem, and thus men have sought to
overcome or control the disorder in their own nature in count-
less ways. For example, all societies have instituted a set of pun-
ishments, aimed at frightening people into right behavior, along
with a set of rewards aimed at enticing them toward the same
end. Because this has proved to be inadequate, men have further
set up systems of morals, and ethics, along with various religious
notions, with the hope that these would enable people, of their
own accord, to control their “wrong” or “evil” thoughts and
feelings. But this, too, has not really produced the desired result.
the problem and the paradox
76

And indeed since the disorder in man’s nature is the outcome of
a paradox, no attempt to treat it as a problem can bring this
disorder to an end. On the contrary, such attempts will generally
add to the confusion and thus, in the long run, they may even
produce more harm than good.
At present, mankind is faced with an almost explosive rate of
increase of the sort of diﬃculties that arise out of the attempt to
treat the disorder in his own thinking and feeling as if this were a
problem. Thus, it is now more urgent than ever that we give
attention not only to this outward state of aﬀairs, but also to the
inward dullness and non-perceptiveness which allows us to go
on failing to notice the paradox in thinking and feeling in which
the outward confusion has its deep origin. Each human being
has to see that the very feelings and ideas which he is inclined to
identify with his “innermost self” are involved in paradox,
through and through. A mind caught in such paradox will
inevitably fall into self-deception, aimed at the creation of illu-
sions that appear to relieve the pain resulting from the attempt to
go on with self-contradiction. Such a mind cannot possibly see
the relationships of the individual and of society as they really
are. And thus, the attempt to “solve one’s own problems” and
“to solve the problems of society” will in fact be found to
propagate the existing confusion, rather than to help bring it to
an end.
Of course, this does not mean that all working toward the
establishment of order in the life of the individual and of society
should now be dropped, in favor of concentration on the dis-
order in the mind that prevents the ending of our general dif-
ﬁculties. Rather, the inward work and the outward work go hand
in hand. But it has to be kept in mind that through centuries of
habit and conditioning, our prevailing tendency is now to sup-
pose that “basically we ourselves are all right” and that our
diﬃculties generally have outward causes, which can be treated
as problems. And even when we do see that we are not in order
the problem and the paradox
77

inwardly, our habit is to suppose that we can point fairly def-
initely to what is wrong or lacking in ourselves, as if this were
something diﬀerent from or independent of the activity of
thinking in which we formulate the “problem” of correcting
what is in error.
As has been seen, however, the very process of thought with
which we consider our personal and social “problems” is con-
ditioned and controlled by the content which it seems to be
considering so that, generally speaking, this thought can neither
be free nor even really honest. What is called for, then, is a deep
and intense awareness, going beyond the imagery and intel-
lectual analysis of our confused process of thought, and capable
of penetrating to the contradictory presuppositions and states of
feeling in which the confusion originates. Such awareness
implies that we be ready to apprehend the many paradoxes that
reveal themselves in our daily lives, in our larger-scale social
relationships, and ultimately in the thinking and feeling that
appear to constitute the “innermost self” in each one of us.
In essence, therefore, what is needed is to go on with life in its
wholeness and entirety, but with sustained, serious, careful
attention to the fact that the mind, through centuries of con-
ditioning, tends, for the most part, to be caught in paradoxes,
and to mistake the resulting diﬃculties for problems.
the problem and the paradox
78

5
THE OBSERVER AND
THE OBSERVED
Normally we don’t see that our assumptions are aﬀecting the
nature of our observations. But the assumptions aﬀect the way
we see things, the way we experience them, and, consequently,
the things that we want to do. In a way, we are looking through
our assumptions; the assumptions could be said to be an obser-
ver in a sense. The meaning of the word “observe” you could get
from deﬁning “observation” as “gathering with the eye,” or
“listening” as “gathering with the ear.” That is, everything in the
room you are in is gathered together and comes to the pupil of
the eye, the retina, and to the brain; or it may also come through
the ear. So the observer is what gathers: it selects and gathers the
relevant information and organizes it into some meaning and
picture. And that is what’s done by the assumptions in thought.
According to what you assume, you will collect and gather cer-
tain information as important and put it together in a certain
way, in a certain structure.

Therefore, the assumptions are functioning as a kind of
observer. When we observe we forget that, and we are looking
without taking that into account. But this “observer” profoundly
aﬀects what it is observing, and is also aﬀected by what it is
observing – there is really very little separation between them. If
the emotions are what are being observed, then the “observing”
assumptions are profoundly aﬀected by the emotions, and the
emotions are profoundly aﬀected by the assumptions. On the
other hand, if you say the emotions are the observer, and are
determining the way things are organized, then the assumptions
will be the observed. Either way, the observed is profoundly
aﬀected by the observer, and the observer by the observed – they
really are one cycle, one process. The separation between them is
not very signiﬁcant.
If, on the other hand, I observe a chair on the other side of the
room, what’s going on in me is not very much aﬀected by the
chair; and what’s going on in the chair is not profoundly
aﬀected by me. We could say in that case that the observer is
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the observed. But when looking at
your emotions or looking at your thoughts, that cannot be the
case. Similarly, when looking at society or looking at another
person, what you see depends on your assumptions, and you
will get an emotional reaction from that person which enters
you and aﬀects the way you see.
Therefore, at a certain stage the distinction between the obser-
ver and the observed cannot be maintained, or as Krishnamurti
used to say, the observer is the observed. If you don’t put the two
together, the observer and the observed – if you don’t put the
assumptions together with the emotions – then the whole thing
will be wrong. If I say I am going to look into my mind but I
don’t consider my assumptions, then the picture is wrong because
the assumptions are looking. That is a common problem of intro-
spection. You say, “I am going to look at myself inwardly,” but
the assumptions are not looked at – the assumptions are looking.
the observer and the observed
80

You could imagine a television program on the observer and
the observed. There would be one person who would be the
observer, and the other would be the observed. They would go
through all the motions, so that one was quite carefully looking
at the other, and the other was somewhat uncomfortable being
looked at. You would get a feeling that the observer was looking
at the observed. That’s just the sort of thing going on in the
mind: thought is producing an image of an observer and an
image of the observed, and it’s attributing itself to a thinker who
is producing the thought and doing the observing. It’s also
attributing its being to the observed at the same time, just as we
do ordinarily with regard to the body.
Just as I can observe the room that I am in, I can observe my
body. But I also know that I am my body, and I experience this in
another way, through sensations. This experience is then re-
produced inwardly, through imagination and fantasy, as the
observer and the observed. And as with the body, this is felt to be
reality, the reality of the self.
This is a suggestion as to how it may work – that thought has
come to attribute itself to an image of an observer, a thinker. This
gives it much greater authority, because it has then apparently
come from a being who should know what to think. On the other
hand, if it’s just going mechanically, it might have no more
signiﬁcance than a computer. But if you imagined there was a
little being inside the computer, this too would take on much
greater authority.
Consider the case of a blind man and his stick. If he holds the
stick tightly when he is tapping, he feels the stick is “me” – he
feels that he contacts the world at the end of the stick. If he holds
the stick loosely, the stick is not me, but my hand is me. But then
he may think, “My hand is not me, ‘I’ want to move ‘my’ hand.”
Therefore, there is something further inside that is still me,
which is moving my hand. He keeps going more and more
inward, taking oﬀ more and more, and saying, “That’s not me,
the observer and the observed
81

that’s not me – I am going to look at these things, they are not
essential to ‘me.’ ” And he may get the feeling of the internal
organs, the sense of the muscles, and think, “They are not me – I
am just looking somewhere inside.” And he could go on, peel-
ing oﬀ the layers of the onion until he got to the very essence,
the center, which at some point would really be “me.” At some
point he would say, “There must be some essential innermost
‘me’ that sort of looks at everything.” That’s the way people are
thinking – everybody feels that way.
I am suggesting, however, that thought is a system belonging
to the whole culture and society, evolving over history, and it
creates the image of an individual who is supposed to be the
source of thought. It gives the sense of an individual who is
perceived and experienced. This would be conducive to the next
step, which is for thought to claim that it only tells you the way
things are and then the individual inside decides what to do with
the information – he chooses. This is the picture which emerged
gradually; thought tells you the way things are, and then “you”
choose how to act from that information.
You may look at this and try to reason and see what is wrong.
You begin to doubt, saying, “Whatever is behind this is doubt-
ful.” But very often, the ﬁrst questions you ask will contain the
very presupposition that should be doubted. As an example, I
may question some belief, but I may question it through what
amounts to another belief. So you have to be sensitive to the
whole of what you are doing. What happens is that it seems that
there is a “doubter” who doubts. Somewhere “back in the back”
is somebody who is observing what is wrong, but he is not being
observed. The very “wrong” things which he should be looking at
are in the one who is looking, because that is the safest place to
hide them. Hide them in the looker, and the looker will never
ﬁnd them.
the observer and the observed
82

6
SUSPENSION, THE BODY, AND
PROPRIOCEPTION
We are trying to get deeper, to the very essence of the whole
process that is behind the self, or the observer. The general dif-
ﬁculty that one has – in both listening and looking – is that if
there is listening through a “listener,” then we are not listening.
Some part of you steps back and listens to the rest. If there is
listening without a listener, then that is similar to observing
without an observer. Everybody can do that on certain occasions
– you take an action, and you are not observing yourself while
you are doing it. You just do it. But then on other occasions you
ﬁnd it hard to do this. So really we have come to the question of
what is needed to go deeply into observation, so that you can
look at yourself without a “looker,” or listen to yourself, or other
people, without a “listener.”
The ﬁrst point is, what are we going to look at or listen to in
connection with this issue? Suppose we have aggression or
resistance. If a person is aggressive, he ﬁrst acts – he may act
physically, or with words, or with gestures and expressions – in

some way he acts. Now, he doesn’t know that he is acting when
he acts. He doesn’t know he is being aggressive, he just thinks, “I
am right,” or, “I have been attacked, this is necessary.” He
doesn’t feel it as aggression. Then at some point he may notice
what is happening. He may think, “I am aggressive, I mustn’t
be aggressive.” That suppresses the action, which means that
you are still aggressive, against yourself. So it hasn’t changed. The
observer of aggression is pervaded with aggression. Therefore,
nothing happens.
There is another action, which is neither to carry out the
aggression, nor to turn it against yourself by suppressing it.
Rather, you may suspend the activity, allowing it to reveal itself, to
ﬂower, to unfold, and so you see the aggression and its actual
structure inside of you. Movements are taking place inside of
you – physical feelings – the heartbeat, the blood pressure, the
way you breathe, the way your body feels tense; and also the
kinds of thoughts that go along with these feelings. You can
observe these things, be aware of them, and of their connection.
Ordinarily all those feelings and bodily reactions are taken to be
one thing, and the thoughts something else, unconnected. But as
you become aware of the connection, it becomes more clear that
they are not independent of one another.
The human race doesn’t do a great deal of suspension of this
sort. I think that it is a natural potential, but that we have not
developed in such a way as to favor it very much. Our develop-
ment has been more toward a kind of immediate impulsive
response that is favorable to violence. For example, you may
often be in a situation where you think that a violent reaction is
going to pay. Or you may say, “Society says one ought not to be
violent. I will try not to be violent.” But meanwhile you con-
tinue the thoughts that are making you violent. Either way you
don’t get anywhere. Violence thus constantly tends to grow. It
goes into the “program,” into the memory. The more you are
violent, the more you leave a program for violence; then it
suspension, the body, and proprioception
84

becomes more and more automatic. I think that is one major
factor. There is also a hereditary factor, which is that we may have
some tendency to respond with force where we should suspend.
But even in the jungle, force is not called for all the time. In fact,
mostly suspension is what is called for, and force only occasion-
ally. To survive there, you really would have to learn suspension.
In the process of suspension, you may notice two things. First,
that physical reactions are being produced by thought, and
therefore are not as signiﬁcant as they would be if they were not
being produced by thought. The tremendously excited state of
your body, which seems one of the reasons why you should
do something, is no longer as signiﬁcant as you had thought.
Second, you can get direct evidence that the thoughts are aﬀect-
ing the feelings and the feelings are aﬀecting the thoughts without
passing through “me.”
The ordinary picture is that the only connection between
thoughts, feelings, and actions is the central entity who does it
all and experiences it all. That is one idea of how everything is
connected up, and that is why the “central entity” is felt to be so
important: everything goes through him. He is at their source,
their center. But in fact you can get evidence that thoughts and
feelings move as processes on their own; they are not being run
by “me.” They are not being produced by the me, and they are
not being experienced by the me.
There is, however, some self-reference built into the whole
system. There is what is called proprioception, or “self-perception.”
Physically, a person is aware immediately that he has moved a
part of his body. If some outside force suddenly moved your
arm, you could tell that that is diﬀerent from having moved it
yourself. The nerves are built so as to be able to know that. In this
connection, there was a woman who suﬀered a stroke while she
was asleep, and she woke up apparently being attacked by some-
body. But when the light was turned on, she was hitting herself.
Her sensory nerves had been damaged, but not the motor
suspension, the body, and proprioception
85

nerves; therefore she had no way of knowing she was hitting
herself. Consequently she assumed that something else was
hitting her, and the more she struggled against the “assailant,”
the more she was hitting herself. So there is proprioception in
the body – the distinction between actions which originate in the
body, and those which originate outside, is perceived as a
functional diﬀerence. In this light, the notion that there is a self
as a kind of center, the body as a center of activity, is natural.
Animals obviously have it too, and they can make that distinc-
tion. We can therefore say that this notion of “I” cannot be
entirely wrong, or it probably would never have arisen.
The question is: how does this natural, useful distinction turn
into the contradictions of the ego? Something that was correct
and useful has somehow developed in a way which has gone
wrong. Thought lacks proprioception, and we have got to learn,
somehow, to observe thought. In the case of observing the body,
you can tell that observation is somehow taking place – even when
there is no sense of a distinct observer.
Is it possible for thought similarly to observe itself, to see what
it is doing, perhaps by awakening some other sense of what
thought is, possibly through attention? In that way, thought may
become proprioceptive. It will know what it is doing and it will
not create a mess. If I didn’t know what I was doing when I
made an outward physical action, everything would go wrong.
And clearly, when thought doesn’t know what it is doing, then
such a mess arises. So let us look further – ﬁrst at suspension,
then at proprioception.
I want to emphasize again that with anger, violence, fear –
with all those things, there can be suspension. If we suspend
anger, then we are going to see that anger has certain thoughts
and assumptions that keep it going. If you accept those assump-
tions, you will go on being angry. Or you could say, “I shouldn’t
be angry. I’m not angry, really.” Then you would lose awareness
of being angry while you remain angry. That would be
suspension, the body, and proprioception
86

suppressing awareness. You would still be violent. What is called
for is not suppressing the awareness of anger, nor suppressing
nor carrying out its manifestations, but rather, suspending them
in the middle at sort of an unstable point – as on a knife-edge –
so that you can look at the whole process. That is what is
called for.
So the ﬁrst point is: is it possible to suspend the action with-
out suppressing it? If you ﬁnd it is not possible, then you observe the
process of suppression without suppressing the suppression – without telling
yourself you’re not suppressing. In addition, you may ﬁnd that
there is an observer who is suspending the action. Then you
observe the suspension – you observe that there is an eﬀort to
suspend the action. The point is, there is no formula for this. I
am not suggesting a formula or a prescription, but a point of
departure for an inquiry. We cannot tell exactly where it is going
to lead. You will perhaps ﬁnd that you can’t stop this thing
rolling. But then you will ﬁnd that there is some other thing you
are doing, and at a certain stage somehow that can be suspended.
At that point you will ﬁnd you can look.
Another approach could be that you get an outburst of anger
and it cools down. It simmers down, but it’s still there. You put it
in abeyance because something more important comes up, but
the anger is still there, ready to come up. You can then call it up
on purpose by trying to ﬁnd the words that express the reason for
being angry. You can go over the thoughts that actually come to
you. Then when you have a thought that carries great force –
somebody has frightened you or hurt you, and you say, “I’m
hurt” – watch what happens. This is much harder than watching
a thought which carries lesser force.
What is behind the hurt is a previous thought which says,
“I’m not hurt, I’m feeling pretty good.” It all depends on certain
kinds of things: “My friends must think of me in a certain way;
this must be this way (and so on), and then I can feel fairly
good.” That’s in the background. It’s not conscious, but it’s
suspension, the body, and proprioception
87

there. And then somebody says, “You’re an idiot. You’re no good
at all.” This new thought comes in which produces an opposite,
bad feeling, and there’s a shock. At ﬁrst you don’t know what it
is. Watch that. The content of the thought behind it is, “What in
the world has happened?” You’ll begin to see that this is very
habitual. Your explanation is that you’ve been hurt. That explan-
ation is duly displayed as pain. Since it’s supremely important,
the pain is very great. That all happens in a ﬂash – the machinery
has been set up, and it explodes. If you can’t watch it in the
moment that it actually happens, you can watch it afterwards –
you can recall it. Recall it by the words: go over the words which
hurt you, and see what happened.
You will ﬁnd that the words which ﬁrst hurt you will hurt you
again. You can see how that comes about. You will ﬁnd all sorts
of subsidiary thoughts like, “I trusted him and he betrayed me.”
Or, “I gave him everything and look what he does.” There are a
million such thoughts. The thing to do is to ﬁnd the words
which express what’s going on, and see what those words do –
not for the purpose of ﬁnding the content of the words, but for
the purpose of seeing what they do. There is a diﬀerence between
thinking about the hurt, and thinking the hurt. Thinking about the
hurt is saying that the hurt is “out there,” and I form abstractions
about it, like a table. Therefore, I’m not doing anything, because
the hurt isn’t like a table – it’s me. The other way is to think the hurt,
which is to go through the thought and let it produce whatever
it’s going to do, which means to let it stand in the body and in
consciousness without being suppressed and without being car-
ried out. Suspend the activity in both directions, and just simply
let it reveal itself, and see it.
Now, in order to get a clearer picture of the meaning of pro-
prioception, I’ll ﬁrst discuss coherence, incoherence, and the
tacit process of thought. Incoherence means that your intentions
and your results do not agree. Your action is not in agreement
with what you expect. You have contradiction, confusion, and
suspension, the body, and proprioception
88

you have self-deception in order to cover it up. Some incoher-
ence is inevitable, because knowledge is not perfect. All know-
ledge is limited, because it is an abstraction from the whole. It
consists only of what you have learned up to this point. As
knowledge is always limited in this way, it is going to have the
possibility of being incoherent. The incoherence shows up when
knowledge is applied, when you act according to knowledge. Or
it can show up when you try to work something out through
knowledge. If your attitude is a proper one, you say, “Okay. I
acknowledge the incoherence. I will let go of my past know-
ledge. Let me ﬁnd out.” You ﬁnd out what is wrong and change
it. But if you defend that knowledge, you are oﬀ on a wrong
track. There is no reason to defend knowledge, but people are
caught up all the time in defending it.
On the other hand, we sense coherence as order, beauty,
harmony. But if somebody only looks at order, beauty, and
harmony, he could easily start fooling himself and say that every-
thing is working nicely – it’s all orderly, harmonious, and beau-
tiful. So we need the “negative” sense of incoherence – which is
the road to coherence. If a person is sensitive to incoherence, he
begins acknowledging it, and then ﬁnding out what its source is.
Coherence is evidently of tremendous value to us. It has to be,
because incoherent functioning is really very dangerous. In add-
ition, we are built so that we somehow appreciate coherence. It
is part of life. If your life is totally incoherent, you might feel that
it is hardly worthwhile. So we have a sense of value built in, but
our values have become mixed up. As thought developed over
the ages, it produced incoherent values which muddle us. For
instance, if we have a desire for coherence we can go about it
wrongly and simply try to impose coherence, rather than discover-
ing the incoherence and dropping it. This is a kind of violence,
and therefore a further extension of incoherence.
I suggest that the movement toward coherence is innate, but
our thought has muddled it. A highly incoherent response is on
suspension, the body, and proprioception
89

the program in memory. We don’t know how to get at it or what
it means – and it has become more and more entangled as time
has gone on. Coherence includes the entire process of the mind
– which includes the tacit processes of thought. Therefore, any
change that really counts has to take place in the tacit, concrete
process of thought itself. It cannot take place only in abstract
thought.
This tacit, concrete process is actual knowledge, and it may be
coherent or not. In the case of riding a bicycle, if you don’t
know how to ride, then the knowledge isn’t right – the tacit
knowledge is not coherent in the context of trying to ride the
bike, and you don’t get the intended result. The incoherence
becomes clear – you fall when you want to ride. Physically, tacit
knowledge is where the action is coming from. And physical
change depends on changing the tacit response.
Therefore, changing the abstract thought is one step, but
unless it also changes the way the body responds, it won’t be
enough. Someone could say, “You’re not doing it right. You’re
turning in the wrong direction. You should turn to the direction
you’re falling, but your instinct is making you turn the other
way.” All of that would help, but eventually it has to come into
the tacit. You need the tacit knowledge which you get by actually
riding, and then you are sort of correcting the previous know-
ledge. There is a movement in that tacit knowledge moves and ﬁnds
a result in the direction you have been aiming for, it then con-
tinues – it goes in that direction some more. That’s the way it
learns, until you ﬁnally ﬁnd yourself riding the bicycle. You may
be guided by the abstract map, but you need the tacit knowledge
as well.
The question is: can we do this in thought as well as in bicycle
riding? I am proposing that thought – to think – is actually a tacit
process more subtle than riding the bicycle. The concrete pro-
cess of thinking is very tacit. At the actual level where thinking
emerges in the tacit process, it is a movement. In principle, that
suspension, the body, and proprioception
90

movement could be self-aware. I suggest that there is a po-
ssibility for self-awareness of thought – that the concrete, real
process of the movement of thought could be self-aware, without
bringing in a “self” who is aware of it.
“Proprioception” is a technical term – you could also say
“self-perception of thought,” “self-awareness of thought,” or
“thought is aware of itself in action.” Whatever terms we use, I
am saying: thought should be able to perceive its own move-
ment, be aware of its own movement. In the process of thought
there should be the awareness of that movement, of the intention to
think, and of the result which that thinking produces. By being
more attentive, we can be aware of how thought produces a
result outside ourselves. And then maybe we could also be atten-
tive to the results it produces within ourselves. Perhaps we could
even be immediately aware of how it aﬀects perception.
If you move your body, you are aware immediately that you
have moved it. It is not a kind of conscious cognizance, but
rather it’s almost unconscious. You know that you have moved it,
that something else has not moved it. There is an awareness
between your impulse to act and the act itself.
Physically when you make a move, you have to know
immediately what the result is, without thought, without think-
ing, so that there is no time-lag in the feedback. If it takes a lot of
time it won’t work. This is essential for survival. Thus, proprio-
ception is built into the physical movements of the body. And it
can be improved – athletes and dancers learn to make it better –
but it is not perfect in anybody, because for many of your
movements you are not aware of what you are doing. But still it
is there.
What about thought? You have the impulse to think. Then
thought occurs, and all sorts of things happen – “felts” occur,
the body gets tense, and so on. But if you don’t see the connec-
tion, it would be like the woman who thought someone else
was hitting her. She did something, and thought she didn’t do
suspension, the body, and proprioception
91

it – that somebody else did it. To get that wrong is all the diﬀer-
ence in the world. As an example, suppose you see someone you
don’t like, and begin to think, “What a terrible person he is. I
can’t stomach him.” That thought might be almost automatic –
you don’t even put it in words. But you could get a pain in the
stomach. You might then say, “Something is wrong with my
stomach.” Your heart-rate may change, or other things may hap-
pen. Emotions may arise as you think of that person who hurt
you and didn’t have any regard for you. You say, “Well, I have
deep gut feelings about this, which must really be valid.” That’s a
failure of proprioception in thought.
In this connection, there is a device that can measure the
resistance of the skin, which shows changes according to your
emotional state. If somebody says something to you causing you
to react, two or three seconds later a needle jerks – it takes that
time for the impulse to work its way down from the brain
through the nervous system. You may not even notice you had
some sort of emotional reaction – although if you had a strong
one you will notice it – but it aﬀects you either way. If it gets
strong enough to be noticed you will say, “I had a gut feeling.”
Now, the person said something to you two or three seconds
ago, but you don’t see the connection. You don’t connect it, and
you say, “There is a deep gut feeling, which is a sign that I’m
justiﬁed in being angry.” You use the feeling to justify the anger,
and you say, “Here is an independent gut feeling, which shows
that I’m perceiving something. It shows that my anger is right.”
Then those thoughts arouse more feeling, and so on and on.
Without proprioception, you cannot get this right.
Later, you can ﬁgure it out and say, “I can see that it was my
thought that did it.” But by that time, everything is stirred up
and you can’t get it straight. Whereas if you had proprioception
of thought, you would immediately say, “Well, I had the
impulse to think, I thought something, and then came that feel-
ing. It was caused in that way, and therefore that is all it means.”
suspension, the body, and proprioception
92

But if you get the feeling that it does not come from a thought,
then it will tacitly be taken to mean a direct perception of
reality.
I think that there is a natural potential for spontaneous pro-
prioception of thought. The mind may have proprioception
built in, the same way that the body has – in the tacit process
there is self-awareness. That may be the very nature of mind. But it is
very subtle. It has been inhibited; otherwise you would say,
“Okay, there’s a thought that builds up an image that’s frighten-
ing, or uncomfortable. But since it’s just an image, it’s not very
important.” Instead you say, “I mustn’t think of that.” Or you
don’t even consider what’s happening – you just start moving
away. You can’t keep your mind on it. It jumps, attention goes to
something else, or you forget. You constantly forget, getting
senses of anesthesia or dullness. The brain is producing all that to
prevent you from getting into that painful thought – it is trying
to protect you from what it regards as something very bad.
The essential thing is that the body process is a movement,
beginning with an impulse and going on to a result, and you sense
it as it develops. Now thought is also a movement – if it is a process,
it is also a movement. But thought doesn’t treat itself as a move-
ment. It treats itself as truth – as just being there, telling you the
way things are. In principle the movement of thought could be
self-aware, except that all this muddle is going on, so it can’t
work. It’s like the lights of Las Vegas, which prevent you from
seeing the universe. You might think that those lights are the
most important thing in the world, because they are so powerful
and they ﬁll your consciousness. But something very subtle may
be far more important.
In this respect, there is a further way we can look at this which
gives some insight: that is to look at thought as a system of
reﬂexes. A reﬂex means that when a certain thing happens, some-
thing else happens automatically. We have a lot of reﬂexes, and
they can be conditioned. For instance, dogs have a reﬂex that
suspension, the body, and proprioception
93

makes them salivate when they see food. Pavlov did an experiment
where he rang a bell while showing food to a dog. He did this
many times, and after a while the dog would salivate without
seeing food, just from hearing the bell. That is the basic form of
conditioning – to repeat something quite often. You can see the
conditioning of reﬂexes all the time – a great deal of our routine
learning consists in establishing conditioned reﬂexes. When you
learn to drive a car, you are trying to condition your reﬂexes so
that they will be appropriate.
Elementary thoughts may take the form of a series of reﬂexes.
If somebody asks you your name, you have an immediate
answer. It’s a reﬂex. With a more diﬃcult question there’s a way
the mind searches in the memory for answers. A “searching
reﬂex” is set up – the mind searches the memory, ﬁnds an
answer that may seem to ﬁt, and then that answer comes out and
you can see whether it ﬁts or not. I suggest that this whole
system is a set of reﬂexes – that thought is a very subtle set of
reﬂexes which is potentially unlimited; you can add more and
more, and you can modify your reﬂexes. Even the whole logical
process, once it’s committed to memory, becomes a set of
reﬂexes. And that’s what I want to call “thought” – which
includes the emotions, the bodily state, the physical reaction,
and everything else.
Thought, then, is part of a material process. It goes on in the
brain, the nervous system, the whole body – it’s all one system.
Thought can be conveyed by material processes such as radio
waves, television, or writing. In talking, sound goes out and
conveys thought. Within the body, thought is conveyed by ner-
vous system signals; there is a code of some sort which we don’t
know too well. I’m saying that thought is a material process – it
has reﬂexes that just go on by themselves. If you have an insight
or perception that this is true, then this will actually aﬀect you.
An insight or perception of truth may deeply aﬀect the material
process, which includes all the reﬂexes. But if we have merely
suspension, the body, and proprioception
94

intellectual or inferential knowledge of what is going on, then it
doesn’t touch this process deeply.
Matter may be inﬁnitely subtle. Science doesn’t know all about
it, and probably never will. But matter is not just mechanical.
Therefore, it could respond to perception in very deep and sub-
tle ways which may be beyond what science could even trace;
there could be a change. That’s the notion: that insight or per-
ception will aﬀect the whole thing. It not only aﬀects the inferen-
tial understanding, but it also aﬀects the chemical level, the tacit
level – everything.
The point is that we have the possibility of insight. Suppose
we ask ourselves, “Do we have it as an insight that thought is a
material process, or that thought always participates in per-
ception?” If we have that insight, then that may remove some of the
barriers. But our whole set of reﬂexes, our tacit knowledge, is
against that. It says, “Thought is not a material process.” Our ﬁrst
reﬂex is: “Thought is far beyond matter, or separated from mat-
ter somehow. It has some spiritual truth or signiﬁcance.” This
notion has been conditioned into us as a reﬂex.
Now, however, we’re saying that thought is a material process
and thought participates – which means the notion that thought
is only telling you what things are is not really a serious option.
If that comes as an insight, or if you get the insight that thought is not
proprioceptive but requires proprioception, then that could begin to touch
the synapses in the brain which hold those reﬂexes.
suspension, the body, and proprioception
95

7
PARTICIPATORY THOUGHT
AND THE UNLIMITED
In early human cultures, and to some extent even now, there has
existed what has been called “participatory thought.” People in
such cultures felt that they were participating in some of the
things that they saw – that everything in the world was partici-
pating, and that the spirit of things was all one. Eskimos, for
instance, apparently had a belief that there were many, many
seals, but that each one was a manifestation of the one seal – the
spirit of the seal. That is, the one seal was manifesting as the
many. Therefore, they could pray to this spirit of the seal to
manifest so they could have something to eat. I think that some
American Indians looked at the buﬀalo in that way. Such people
felt that they were participating in nature, and in some way they
were keenly aware of the participation of their thought.
We might now say, “That’s a silly way to look at it – it’s
obviously many diﬀerent seals.” We’ve developed a more object-
ive kind of thought which says, “We want to have a thought
about something where we don’t participate, where we think

about it and know just what it is.” But this modern way is a
diﬀerent way of thought. To the Eskimos it looks one way, and to
us it looks another way.
Another way to illustrate participatory thought is to imagine
that we are talking together. I see you, and I hear you; these are
very diﬀerent experiences. But my actual experience is that the
person I see is the person I hear – they are one and the same. It is
a way of thought that puts them together. Likewise you could say,
“The breath that is going on in me is the spirit which is the
Great Spirit or the universal spirit. And the heart, the lungs, the
stomach are participating in the whole thing.” That would be
very similar to the way the participatory cultures thought.
Participatory thought is a diﬀerent way of perceiving and
thinking, and that is the way we were for more or less a million
years. In the last ﬁve thousand years we have turned it around,
and our present language says, “That’s all nonsense. We won’t
pay attention to that at all.” This kind of thought, which we
largely favor nowadays, has been called “literal thought.”
Literal thought aims at being a reﬂection of reality as it is – it
claims just to tell you the way things are. We tend to say that’s the
best kind of thought. Technical thought, for instance, aims to be
literal. Such thought intends to be unambiguous; it may not
succeed, but it aims that way – to know something as exactly
what it is. Owen Barﬁeld has compared such literal thought to
idol worship. If you make an idol, it may stand in at ﬁrst for some
force which is greater than itself, or for some spiritual energy.
But gradually the idol is taken to be it – literally; and therefore
you give supreme value to that object. We could say that in a way
we are worshiping our words and our thoughts, insofar as they
claim to be descriptions or statements about reality just as it is. In
fact, they cannot do that – we are giving them too high a value.
They can cover some of reality, but they don’t cover “all.”
Cultures that used a great deal of participatory thought
probably also used literal thought for practical activities, but the
participatory thought and the unlimited
97

things that deeply mattered to them mostly involved participa-
tory thought. Tribes would have a totem – certain animals with
which they were identiﬁed – and say, “The tribe and the totem –
we are identical.” The thought is that they and the totem are
participating together in some sort of energy or spirit. Or they
may even say that all of existence is participating in a universal
spirit or matter. Just as I say that the person I hear is the person I
see, so they say the totem is the tribe. You contact the tribe
through the totem, or contact the totem through a person, or
through the people as a whole.
It is very interesting to put yourself in that place, to try to
think that way. I suggest that we are constantly doing participa-
tory thought anyway, that it has never gone away. An example
would be that when my country is attacked, I am attacked. We
are then doing exactly that kind of thought. We say, “I am my
country. When you cross that boundary, you have hit me.” We
do a great deal of that kind of thought, but we claim we are not
doing it. Literal thought claims we are not doing it at all. There-
fore, it is incoherent. Explicitly we have given supreme value to
literal thought, while in fact we are also tacitly giving supreme
value to participatory thought. So it’s all very muddled. Literal
thought took over in conscious awareness and made technology
possible, and in many ways it was of tremendous advantage to
do that. At the same time, participatory thought somehow went
into the shade; it got eclipsed, but it remained underground.
Now what does this word “participation” mean? It really has
two meanings. The earliest meaning was, “to partake of,” as you
partake of food – people all eating from the common bowl,
partaking of bread or whatever it is. Symbolically, or even actu-
ally, to these early people it meant partaking of the source. They
felt that the totem and they themselves partook of this energy;
this created a sense of oneness. In western culture, this meaning
persisted until the Middle Ages. The second meaning is “to
partake in,” to make your contribution. In modern times this has
participatory thought and the unlimited
98

become the major meaning. It means that you are accepted, you
are being taken into the whole. You can’t take part in something
unless that thing in some sense accepts your participation. Taken
together, these ways of thinking do not create a separation of
object and subject. As implicit thought, this would create a sense
or feeling of being together – that boundaries are not really separations,
but that they are there for descriptive purposes.
In the Middle Ages, Thomas Aquinas used the idea of partici-
pation constantly. He would say that the subject of the sentence
participates in the object. He would also say that the light we see
on the earth participates in the sun. The light is there in the pure
quality in the sun, and we are partaking of it here. That’s a way
of thinking which has been common over a tremendous part of
our human development, and we should really get the ﬂavor of
it. That way of thinking would not lead anybody to plunder the
planet. We are partaking of the planet, and to plunder it would
be absurd. Deep down in the unconscious such thinking must be
part of us all, because the human race has had maybe a million
years of that way of thinking, and a comparatively short time in
which literal thought has been dominant.
Participatory thought sees that everything partakes of every-
thing. It sees that its own being partakes of the earth – it does not
have an independent being. It’s the same as to say we are nour-
ished by the earth. Suppose we consider food – you partake of
food, literally. That food, which looks like a separate object,
becomes you. Where does it become you? How can it become
you? At what stage? Where do you draw the line? As you can see,
something is wrong with looking at the food as literally a separ-
ate object. Such literal thought tends to fragment, while the
participatory thought tends to bring things together.
But participatory thought has some aspects that are very
inadequate, or even dangerous. For example, in some tribes, the
word for “human being” was the same as the word for a member
of that tribe. When they met another tribe, the very word
participatory thought and the unlimited
99

suggested that the other tribe was not human. They might have
known in some sense they were, but the power of such words is
enormous. Therefore, that tribe may not have been able to
include other tribes in their “participation;” it would break
down at that point, and they would begin fragmentary thinking.
Another example would be the beer cellars in the time of
Hitler’s Germany. People would sit in the beer cellars and sing,
with great participation and comradeship, “We’re all friends
together, we’re going to go out and conquer the world and it
will all be wonderful.” But when it came to the action, it wasn’t
so wonderful. So you can see that this notion of participatory
thought is not necessarily a formula for perfect happiness.
Half a million years ago people didn’t really need much literal
thought. They lived in small groups of hunter-gatherers; they all
knew one another, and developed literal thought only for simple
technical purposes. But then came the agricultural revolution,
and larger societies developed. These societies needed much
more organization and order and technology, and they had to
use much more literal thought. They organized society by say-
ing, “You belong here, you do this, you do that.” They began,
therefore, to treat everything as a separate object, including other people. They
used people as means to an end. The further civilization went,
the more these societies went into this area of using thought as a
means to an end.
Such thought then entered into the relationship between
countries. Each country treated the other country as an object,
which was to be controlled, or fought over, or defeated. There
was a constant spread of the practical, technical form of thought
into more and more areas. Participation itself became frag-
mentary, and receded; it withdrew into a limited area, which got
more limited all the time. Perhaps people had it in the family or
in certain rituals – in the sense of the city, or the country, or the
religion or God – but more and more things were going on
which were “worldly,” as they said.
participatory thought and the unlimited
100

However, participation is absolutely necessary if anything is to
be done collectively. But currently it isn’t working right, because
it’s muddled up with literal thought. Therefore, we’ve got to
understand the distinction between participatory thought and
literal thought. How to draw that distinction is not clear, because
to some extent we need literal thought even internally, psycho-
logically. And to some extent we need the participatory thought
outwardly. So we can’t draw the line all that clearly – we have to
learn about this. I think we need to understand more deeply why
we’re getting into this trouble.
Consider the organization of any sort of contemporary
bureaucracy or hierarchy. In such an organization, people are
treated as objects: they have to do this and this and this, and be
related in that way. Literal thought knows the person by his
function – he is whatever you call him – a worker, a banker, this
or that. That sets up the social hierarchy – people are isolated
from each other, and the participation is very limited.
So you once again have this same problem – that you have
created the object. In such a view, the world is made of objects,
literally. We treat other people as objects, and eventually you
must treat yourself as an object, saying, “I must ﬁt in here, and I
must do this and be that and become better,” or whatever. But
“society” is not an objective reality – period. It is a reality created by all the
people through their consciousness. It has some “objective” features you
can point to once people have created it, particularly because
there are so many taking part – it is statistical. The same thing
happens in physics. If you try to measure one atom exactly, you
can’t do it – it participates. But if you take a statistical array of
atoms, you can get an average that is objective. It comes out the
same no matter who does it, or when. The average comes out,
but the individual atom does not. And in society you can also get
average behaviors, which are often predictable. But they are
not very signiﬁcant, compared with the thing that really moves
us and makes the society come into being. Individually and
participatory thought and the unlimited 101

collectively – together – we have a consciousness which creates this
society, and sustains it with thought, intellect, feeling, and so on.
Similarly, in a dialogue group you could say that everybody is
diﬀerent – “I am here, you are there, you know this, I know
that,” and so on. But we could also say that participation is
taking place, which means everybody is partaking of whatever is
going on, and also maybe making a contribution. Even if you
don’t make a visible contribution, you’re still partaking, and
taking part in some way. All the thoughts, feelings, views, opin-
ions come in, and they are growing in us, even as we think we
are resisting them. We are particularly aﬀected by the thought,
“That’s his view, and this is mine” – which is false. All the views are
just thought. Wherever thought is, it is just thought – it is all one.
It’s similar to the Eskimos saying, “It’s all one seal,” only this
seems even more so. Here we have an example where that kind
of participatory view really works. Thought is all one, manifest-
ing in all sorts of places and with all sorts of speciﬁc content. So
the spirit of a dialogue is important in facing this question of
literal and participatory thought, even though we realize that we
are going in a direction which a very large part of the culture
doesn’t agree with at all.
But as long as we stick only to this literal thought, there is no
room in it for participation. We think only of external mechan-
ical relationships. We think the self is there as an object, and that
everything comes from this self. I would propose, however, that
in true participation, thought may establish distinctions, but
there is participation between those distinctions – between people,
between thought and feeling, between anything. I will say:
ultimately the nature of all the world is that it is all mutual
participation – everything is everything. That is what was meant
in my book, Wholeness and the Implicate Order. It’s another way of
looking at things – to say everything “enfolds” everything.
Ultimately, the ground of everything is the en-folded, and the un-
folded is just a display, or a show of the enfolded.
participatory thought and the unlimited
102

I think one of the fundamental mistakes of the human race has
been to say that when you have ﬁnished with a thought, it’s
gone. But it hasn’t gone – it has “folded back” into the rest of
consciousness. You don’t know it’s there any more, but it is still
there; it may unfold again, or unfold in another form. So there’s
a constant process of unfolding from the background of con-
sciousness into the foreground, and then back again. There
could also be feelings that unfold as thoughts. And then the
thoughts go back and give rise to more feelings, and movements
of the body, and so on. It’s a constant process. Perhaps we could
say that it never “began” and will never end, because it goes
back into nature, all the way back, as far as you can go. The
human race, and all living species, have “unfolded” from the
environment.
In this connection, I want to discuss three dimensions of the
human being. One is the individual, just by himself. The individual
body is in certain ways separate from others – although not
totally, because it merges with air and light and food. There is no
place where the body really ends – its boundary is relative. We
can’t say that when an oxygen molecule comes into the body, it
suddenly becomes alive, and that when it leaves as carbon
dioxide it’s dead. We must say that there is really no sharp end to
the body. And perhaps we can’t even say where life begins and
ends, but rather that the body is a sort of “focus” of life at a
certain place. Nonetheless, each individual has peculiar features
– physical features, due to heredity, DNA, and the rest; and cer-
tain mental features: experiences, background, capacities, and so
on. In addition, he has a self-image, by which he tries to identify
himself.
Then we have the collective dimension of the human being,
where we have a considerable number of people – a society and
a culture. That has a qualitatively new feature: it has great power,
both potentially and actually. In dialogue we discuss how to
bring that power to some sort of coherence and order.
participatory thought and the unlimited 103

And then there’s a third dimension – the cosmic dimension,
which is the sphere of man’s immersion in nature, the cosmology
of science and of religion. Human beings have always had that in
mind, from the most ancient, prehistoric times. Nature is sensed
as something beyond the individual or society. In the early days,
as we have said, there was animism – people felt that everything
was animate, that it had a spirit, and they were participating
in all that. But as people moved away from nature into cities
and onto farms (even the farm is quite far from wild nature),
they began to feel the need for the cosmic, and they may have
introduced various ways of trying to fulﬁll that need. In those
very early times there was art, which probably had a sort of
cosmic connection, and there followed notions of religion and
philosophy – attempting to make a connection that way.
That has persisted, but large numbers of people no longer
believe in the assumptions of religion. Religion has left us, we
have moved very far away from nature, and philosophy has
become confused. In modern society, science attempts to con-
nect us to the cosmos to some extent; but it is limited, and most
people can’t understand it all that well anyway. Therefore, the
connection to the cosmic dimension seems to be rather lost. But
I think that people want to come back into that cosmic dimen-
sion. It is an essential dimension of the human being, along with
the individual and the collective dimensions.
We could say that the bond of our connection to the cosmos
has been broken. It has been suggested in various pieces of
literature that we are at the “end of nature.” Originally we
thought of nature as vast, beyond that which human beings
could do anything about. But now we can see that we are at the
point of being able to destroy it. Tribal cultures have said, “The
earth is our mother – we have to take care of the mother;” now
people say, “No, that’s not how it is. We’ve got to exploit the
earth.” And this change of our relationship with nature – this
ending of the bond with nature – has another eﬀect. People used
participatory thought and the unlimited
104

to say, “Well, I know things are pretty bad here, but nature is
‘out there,’ and it’s still okay.” Now, however, the luxury of that
view is gone. We can no longer rely on nature as being limitless.
Once people realize that, it makes a very big psychological
change. It’s like somebody saying, “You can’t count on your
mother any more. You’re on your own.” That’s the sort of situ-
ation we’re in – whether nature survives or not may well depend
on us. Thus, there is a new orientation implied there: that we are
really responsible for all of this planet. The question is then:
what is the ground of that? What are we?
What is our nature? From what inner resources can we draw,
to be that responsible? What is our being that would allow us to
be responsible? What would be the ground of that possibility?
We have not generally thought of ourselves as that sort of being.
It’s like somebody who grows up thinking mother or father will
take care of him. Then he sees, “Well, now it’s changed. It’s the
other way around.”
Some people think we can survive by organizing nature, by
ﬁnding species of trees and plants that can live despite the pol-
lution – producing new species through genetic engineering, or
some other means. They think that we could industrialize our
world so much that nature itself is industrialized – we might
even call it the “nature industry.” We now have the entertain-
ment industry, and practically have a culture industry and an
education industry; similarly, we could have the nature industry.
We could try simultaneously to conserve nature and to make it
proﬁtable. Maybe technology could open that up; we can’t know.
It looks a little dubious, but perhaps it is possible. But then,
where would that leave us? What kind of a life would that be?
That would be “participatory,” but not a kind of participation
that seems good.
We are playing a bigger and bigger part in this whole
thing, and we have got to take this into account. We have to
consider that nature has an almost religious signiﬁcance in our
participatory thought and the unlimited 105

psyche – that taking this new attitude has a very great implica-
tion for the human being. So, part of the cosmic dimension is
man’s attitude toward nature. But there is something beyond
even that – not merely the cosmos as we see it through the
telescope or looking out at the night sky. I think there is a
ground beyond that. I want to suggest that there is something
beyond limit, something not ﬁnite.
Living in ordinary society, you may give priority to money, to
your country, or to whatever else you may be doing. You have all
sorts of things to which you could give priority, and diﬀerent
people do it diﬀerently. However, if you give ﬁrst priority to
only those things, then you cannot be giving it to what may be
unlimited. Your brain is eﬀectively saying that there isn’t any such
thing as the unlimited. But in a participatory view, the sug-
gestion is that we have the unlimited as the ground of everything –
that our true being is unlimited. Then the question arises – is there
a possibility of consciousness actually contacting the true being?
I think everybody knows what the question means. People have
gone into it in many, many ways over the ages.
However, there seems to be something in the structure of
thought in civilization which tends to claim that we are going to
get to know everything, and control it all. But we should ask: is it in
the nature of thought to be able to know everything – since
thought is abstraction, which inherently implies limitation? Or
put diﬀerently: is the whole ﬁeld of thought – experience, know-
ledge, tacit thought – is that ﬁeld limited? A great deal of our culture
would say that it is not limited. The assumption is that no matter
what happens, by approaching it through thought, knowledge,
and skill of application, we can deal with it. Now, I say that this
assumption will go into implicit, tacit thought – and then it
means that no matter what happens, you’re going to think. That
assumption is very dynamically active – it’s a universal as-
sumption, an assumption about “all.” It is extremely powerful,
with extremely great value, and it will “work.” It will tend to
participatory thought and the unlimited
106

take precedence over almost anything. You will ﬁnd, therefore,
that you are automatically thinking about everything, because
the assumption is at work that thinking is not only possible, and
at least potentially relevant, but that it’s the only way.
I am proposing, however, that the ﬁeld of thought is limited. I
am also suggesting that there is the “unlimited,” which contains
the limited. This “unlimited” is not just in the direction of going
to greater and greater distances out to the end of the universe;
but much more importantly, it is also going into more and more
subtlety. As we’ve seen, however, our attention tends to be
limited by the tacit thoughts as to what has value, what’s worth
being attended to. If you don’t attend to something, then you
don’t perceive it – it doesn’t exist as far as you’re concerned. But
attention is not intrinsically restricted – it could widen out and go
into any form. It may well be that attention is, as it were, a kind
of relation between the limited and the unlimited – at least
potentially so. There may be a limited kind of attention, such as
concentration, as well as an unlimited kind – the fundamental
kind. Through such attention, we could move into more and
more subtle levels of the implicate order – the more general
levels of the whole process. At these general levels, consciousness
in one person diﬀers very little from consciousness in another.
Those implicit, tacit thoughts that are the foundation of
consciousness are shared by all.
It may be that one of the brain’s functions could be to be
sensitive to more and more subtle levels of being; the brain could
then function more as an antenna to pick up such levels, rather
than as something that would be only the “initiator” of action. As
long as the brain is following only its own internal goals, then it
will be occupied; and that’s necessary in certain contexts. But if
we consider that it’s also necessary to reach or contact the
unlimited, then there must be a silence – a lack of occupation.
I think that most of our experience is in the implicate order,
but we have been learning through society not to value it; we
participatory thought and the unlimited 107

have learned to put the main value on the explicate, outward
order, which is useful for the purposes we generally have in
mind – making a living and doing this and that. So we need to
establish a place somewhere, where we can have leisure, as it
were, to go into this. The word leisure has a root meaning “emp-
tiness” – an empty space of some sort – an empty space of time
or place, where there is nothing occupying you. You might
begin by looking at nature, where there are minimal distractions.
Then, if a group of people really trusted each other and had a
right spirit of fellowship, something like that may arise in a
dialogue.
If you had a considerable number of people who really could
see through this, they would have an eﬀect immensely beyond
any one person. We don’t really know how much impact this
will have, but there are real possibilities. There is currently a
great deal of cynicism and pessimism about the human race,
which has its point. But this cynicism can easily become false.
The human race has great possibilities, which are being
destroyed by some rather trivial things.
Getting to the root of all this belongs to all of mankind: we
have something which can, potentially, produce a revolution. It
depends on the intensity and the energy. It seems that the key is
that we are going to have to pay attention to this whole thing.
However, we may pay attention to something quite well, but
then everything seems to go to pieces when there is trouble. At
that point, instead of condemning ourselves, we’ve got to ﬁnd
out how that distraction was part of the same process. Studying
the distractions is part of the process of learning; it is crucial to
see these things in the presence of distractions, as well as in a
quiet place. I think that when you get strong enough, as it were,
that you can stand ﬁrm in a distracting environment, then you’re
strong enough to begin to look at the inﬁnite – but the inﬁnite
might be so powerful that its eﬀects would distract you if you
looked at it too quickly.
participatory thought and the unlimited
108

I think, then, that there is the possibility of the transformation
of consciousness, both individually and collectively. It’s import-
ant that it happen together – it’s got to be both. And therefore
this whole question – of communication and the ability to
dialogue, the ability to participate in communication – is crucial.
participatory thought and the unlimited 109

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barﬁeld, Owen (1965) Saving the Appearances, New York: Harcourt, Brace
& World.
Bohm, David (1980) Wholeness and the Implicate Order, London:
Routledge.
—— (1987) Unfolding Meaning, London: Routledge.
—— (1994) Thought as a System, London: Routledge.
—— (1996) Ojai Seminar Transcripts, 1986–1989, Ann Arbor, Mich.:
University Microﬁlms International.
—— and Edwards, Mark (1991) Changing Consciousness, San Francisco,
Calif.: Harper San Francisco.
—— and Krishnamurti, J. (1985) The Ending of Time, San Francisco, Calif.:
Harper & Row.
de Mare, Patrick, Piper, Robin, and Thompson, Sheila (1991) Koinonia,
London: Karnac.
Krishnamurti, Jiddu (1969) Freedom from the Known, New York: Harper &
Row.
—— (1979) The Wholeness of Life, San Francisco, Calif.: Harper & Row.
Polanyi, Michael (1966) The Tacit Dimension, Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

INDEX
n after page number represents footnotes
absolute necessities 26
Afar, T. xiv
agenda: absence xix
aggression 83–4
agricultural revolution (1700–1850)
100
airport controller/angry boss 62
American Indians 96
Angelou, M. xiii–iv
animism 104
Annan, K. viii
anthropologists 18
anxiety 17, 34–6, 37
Aquinas, T. (1225–1274) 99
armaments production 52
artist: expression 4
assumptions 8–9, 23
atom: measurement 101
attention xxv
authority: and hierarchy 49
Barﬁeld, O. 97
beer cellars 100
beyond dialogue 53–4
Biblical analogy 21
bicycle: riding 90
blind man: stick 81–2
blocked 5
body language xxv, 23, 46
Bohm, S. vii
Bohr, N. (1885–1962) xi, 42, 54
brain 92, 107; structure 61; see also
mind
Buber, M. xii
bureaucratic organisations 101
business executive 20–1
child psychiatrist 38

childhood inadequacy 74
Christian church 14
Christians 54
circle: geometric arrangement 17
civilization 56, 63
coherence 89–90
collective leadership viii
collective mind 32
collective participation 29–32
collective representations: world
68
common consciousness 38
communication xx, 1–5;
representation 67; tacit 41
company: psychological problem
50
conditioned reﬂex 93–4, 95
conditioning 94; mind 78
consciousness: transformation
109; unfolding 103
conviction 31
corporate problems 49
cosmic dimension 104, 106
crime 56
culture 12, 22; myths xvi; Stone Age
33; see also micro-culture;
subcultures
de Mare, P. xviii, 18
democracy 13
democratic fundamentalists x
dialogos 6
dialogue xx, 3; difﬁculties 34–6;
engaging in 17–22; group xvii, 18;
limited 48–53; sensitivity 45–8;
thought 9–17; vision xxii, 36–45
Dialogue: The Art of Thinking
Together (Isaacs) viin
discussion 7
dominant role 34
ecological problems 11
ecological regeneration 52
ecology 56
education 1
Einstein, A. (1879–1955) xi, 42, 54
emotional state: skin 92
emotions xvi, 18, 45
encounter group 18
England: football crowds 37
Eskimos 96, 102
evolution 62
existentialist philosophy xii
facilitator 51; group 17; role xvii
fact: Latin root 66
family 10; authoritative structure 48
feeling 61
ﬁght/ﬂight 61–2
ﬁnite planet x
ﬂattery 72
football crowds: England 37
fragmentation xvi, xvii, 10, 56
freedom 27
Freud, S. (1856–1939) 48
generation gap 1
genetic engineering 11
Germany 100
green movement 40
group 32, 40; agricultural 19;
facilitator 17; hunter-gatherer
18; large 19; microcosm of
society 14; polarization 47; trust
30
hate 36, 38, 39
hereditary factors 85
hierarchy and authority 49
human race: great possibilities 108;
problems 29
index
112

I and Thou (Buber) xiin
impersonal fellowship xviii
impulse of necessity 24–7
inadequacy: childhood 74
incoherence 15, 32, 88–9; society ix,
x
individual: mind 32; physical
features 103
intelligence: reﬂective xxiii
interdependent context xii
Isaacs, B. viin
knowledge: power 57
koinonia 54
Krishnamurti, J. xviii, 19, 47, 80
language see body language
Las Vegas: lights 93
laser ix, 15
leaders: society 17
leisure 19, 108
listener 83
listening xxi, 79
literal thought xxv, 97, 98, 99
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) vii
Maturana, H. xi
meaning see shared meaning
memory xvi, 61
microculture 15; theory xix
mind: collective/individual 32;
conditioning 78
mis-representation 69
morals/ethics 76
nationalism 74, 75
nations 10, 11
Nature of Collective Thought
(Bohm) xxii
necessity: thought 25
negotiation 20–1, 25
net presentation 64
neurophysiology 28, 36
new culture 32–3
North American tribe 18
North–South divide 55
nuclear weapons 55
observe 79–82
Ojai (California) xxi
opinions 9, 40, 44
paradox 73, 74, 75, 76
participation 98
participatory consciousness xiii,
30
participatory thought xxvi,
96–109
Pavlov, I. (1849–1936) 94; dog
experiment 93–4
perception 63; see also
proprioception
personal meaning ix
personal problems 18
persuasion 31
physical features: individual 103
physicist xiv
physics 101
Planck, M. (1858–1947) 44
polarization: east/west 55
Polayni, M. (1891–1976) 60
policy dialogues viii
pollution 57; see also ecological
problems
power: knowledge 57
prefrontal lobes 61
presentation 64
primitive reﬂex 61
problem: Greek word 71
index 113

proprioception 83–95; of thought
27–9; thought xxv
psychiatrist x
psychological problems 71;
company 50
rainbow 67
reality: self 81
reﬂective intelligence xxiii
reﬂex: conditioned 93–4, 95
religion xi, 10, 11, 13, 104
representation 63, 64;
communication 67
root paradox 76
science xi, xii, 38, 43, 44
scientists 14; dialogue with nature
4
self 66; reality 81
self-deception 64
self-perception see proprioception
shared meaning ix, xix, 32, 33, 43,
46
skin: emotional state 92
slave xiv
social classes 1
society 22, 32, 101; incoherence ix,
x; leaders 17
socio-therapy 18
Stone Age: culture 33
stress 63
stroke: woman 28, 85
subcultures 12, 15
suppression 87
suspending assumptions 22–4
suspension xxiv, 83–95
Sweden 47
tacit 16; communication 41; ground
ix
tacit knowledge 60, 61, 90
technical thought 97
technology: growth 57
thinking 60–1
thought xvi, 27, 56, 60–1, 75, 94, 97;
deep structure 59; dialogue 9–17;
incoherence xxvii; individual and
collective 12; necessity 25;
pollution xii; proprioception xxv,
27–9; spread 58
totem 98
tribal cultures xxv, 104
tribes 98, 99; see also American
Indians
trust: group 30
truth xii, xvi, 3
United Nations (UN) 7, 41; Global
Compact viii
United States of America (USA):
State Department 41
violence 56, 84
Weyl, H. 43
whole xii, xiii
Wholeness and the Implicate Order
(Bohm) 102
win-lose politics viii
woman: stroke 28, 85
world 69; collective representations
68
world wide web (www.) viiin
Zionism 8, 9
index
114

