
 
THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM
In Thought as a System, best-selling author David Bohm takes
as his subject the role of thought and knowledge at every
level of human affairs, from our private reflections on
personal identity to our collective efforts to fashion a
tolerable civilization.
Elaborating upon principles of the relationship between
mind and matter first put forward in Wholeness and the
Implicate Order, Professor Bohm rejects the notion that our
thinking processes neutrally report on what is ‘out there’ in
an objective world. He explores the manner in which
thought actively participates in forming our perceptions,
our sense of meaning and our daily actions. He suggests
that collective thought and knowledge have become so
automated that we are in large part controlled by them,
with a subsequent loss of authenticity, freedom and order.
In conversations with fifty seminar participants in Ojai,
California, David Bohm offers a radical perspective on an
underlying source of human conflict, and inquires into the
possibility of individual and collective transformation.
The late David Bohm was Emeritus Professor at Birkbeck
College, University of London. He was the author of many
articles and books including Causality and Chance in Modern
Physics, Wholeness and the Implicate Order and The Undivided
Universe (with Basil Hiley).

This page intentionally left blank.

THOUGHT AS A
SYSTEM
David Bohm
This is a transcription of a seminar held in Ojai, California
from 31 November to 2 December 1990. It has been edited by
Professor Bohm.
London and New York

First published 1992
by David Bohm Seminars
This edition first published 1994
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
© 1994 Sarah Bohm
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2004.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
Bohm, David.
Thought as a system/David Bohm
p. cm.
Includes index.
1. Philosophy of mind. 2. Knowledge, Theory of. I. Title
BD418.3.R64 1994
128′.2–dc20 93–46728
ISBN 0-203-20224-4 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-26616-1  (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0-415-11980-4 (hbk)
ISBN 0-415-11030-0 (pbk)

David Bohm died in 1992.
This book is dedicated to his memory.

This page intentionally left blank.

 
CONTENTS
  
Foreword
 
ix
  
Acknowledgements
 
xvii
  
Friday evening
 
1
  
Saturday morning
 
43
  
Saturday afternoon
 
89
  
Sunday morning
 
147
  
Sunday afternoon
 
189
  
Index
 
244

This page intentionally left blank.

 
FOREWORD
In Thought as a System theoretical physicist David Bohm
takes as his subject the role of thought and knowledge at
every level of human affairs, from our private reflections on
personal identity to our collective efforts to fashion a
tolerable civilization. Elaborating upon principles of the
relationship between mind and matter first put forward in
Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Dr Bohm rejects the notion
that our thinking processes neutrally report on what is ‘out
there’ in an objective world. He explores the manner in
which 
thought 
actively 
participates 
in 
forming 
our
perceptions, our sense of meaning and our daily actions. He
suggests that collective thought and knowledge have
become so automated that we are in large part controlled by
them, with a subsequent loss of authenticity, freedom and
order. In three days of conversation with fifty seminar
participants in Ojai, California, Dr Bohm offers a radical
perspective on an underlying source of human conflict, and
inquires into the possibility of individual and collective
transformation.
In Bohm’s view, we have inherited a belief that mind (or
thought) is of an inherently different and higher order than
matter. This belief has nurtured a faith in what we call objectivity
—the capacity to observe and report neutrally on some
object or event, without having any effect on what we are
looking at, or without being affected by it. Historically, this
perspective has given us a scientific and cultural world
view in which isolated, fragmentary parts mechanically
interact with one another. Bohm points out that this

fragmentary view corresponds to ‘reality’ in significant
respects, but suggests that we have overextended our faith
in the objectivist perspective. Once we make the critical
(and false) assumption that thought and knowledge are not
participating in our sense of reality, but only reporting on
it, we are committed to a view that does not take into
account the complex, unbroken processes that underlie the
world as we experience it.
To help bring into focus thought’s participatory nature,
Bohm undertakes an extensive redefinition of thought itself.
To begin with, thought is not fresh, direct perception. It is
literally that which has been ‘thought’—the past, carried
forward into the present. It is the instantaneous display of
memory, a superimposition of images onto the active, living
present. On the one hand, this memory is what allows us to
perform even the simplest of tasks, such as getting dressed
in the morning. On the other hand, memory is also
responsible for various aspects of fear, anxiety or
apprehension, and the actions that proceed from these
memories. Thought, then, is also inclusive of feelings, in the
form of latent emotional experiences. Not only negative,
painful emotions are folded into thought, but pleasurable
ones as well. Indeed, the whole spectrum of emotions as we
typically experience them is seen by Bohm as thought-related.
The manner in which feeling and thought interpenetrate
one another is central to Bohm’s view of the functioning of
consciousness. Throughout the mind and body, he says,
they form a structure of neurophysiological reflexes.
Through repetition, emotional intensity and defensiveness,
these reflexes become ‘hard-wired’ in consciousness, to such
an extent that they respond independently of our conscious
choice. If, for example, someone tells you that a member of
your family is both ugly and stupid, you will most likely
have instantaneous surges of adrenalin and blood pressure
that are inseparable from your thought: ‘He is wrong! He is
rude and malicious for saying such things!’ The thought
‘He is wrong!’ will tend to justify and perpetuate the bodily
x THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

surges. Likewise, the surges will tend to certify the thought.
In time, the experience will fade, but it is effectively stored
in the memory and becomes ‘thought’. There it waits to be
instantly recalled the next time a similar situation is
encountered.
In addition to emotions and reflexes, Bohm includes human
artifacts in his definition of thought. Computer systems,
musical 
instruments, 
cars, 
buildings—these 
are 
all
illustrations of thought in its fixed, concrete form. From
Bohm’s perspective, to make a fundamental separation
between thought and its products would be the equivalent
of suggesting that whether a person is male or female is a
separate phenomenon from the genetic process that
determined the sex to begin with. Such a separation would
in fact illustrate the very fragmentation under examination.
Finally, Bohm posits that thought and knowledge are
primarily collective phenomena. Our common experience is
that we have personal thoughts that come from our
individual ‘self’. Bohm suggests that this is a culturally
inherited sensibility that overemphasizes the role of isolated
parts. He inverts this view, noting that the ‘flow of
meaning’ between people is more fundamental than any
individual’s particular thoughts. The individual is thus seen
as an idiosyncrasy (literally, ‘private mixture’) of the
collective movement of values, meanings and intentions.
The essential relevance of Bohm’s redefinition of thought is
the proposal that body, emotion, intellect, reflex and artifact
are now understood as one unbroken field of mutually
informing thought. All of these components interpenetrate
one another to such an extent, says Bohm, that we are
compelled to see ‘thought as a system’—concrete as well as
abstract, active as well as passive, collective as well as individual.
Our traditional world view, in an attempt to maintain a
simple, orderly image of cause and effect, does not take into
account these subtler aspects of thought’s activity. This
leads to what Bohm calls a ‘systemic fault’ in the whole of
thought. The issue here, says Bohm, is that ‘thought doesn’t
FOREWORD xi

know it is doing something and then struggles against what
it is doing’. For example, flattery is a pleasing experience
which usually sets up a reflex of receptivity toward the one
who flatters. If Jane fails to flatter John when he expects her
to, or takes advantage of him in some unpleasant way, John
will attribute his subsequent bad feelings to something Jane
did. He fails to see that he participated in constructing the
reflex that produced not only the good feelings, but the bad
ones as well. A similar process of incoherence is at work in
the 
nation-state. 
When 
the 
United 
States 
attributes
diabolical characteristics to various Middle East countries
that thwart its easy access to oil, it is not taking into account
its own central involvement in an international petroleum-
based economy which quite naturally gives inordinate
power to those who possess crude oil. In this case, the
reflexive response may be war. The feature common to both
examples is the sense of being in control with an
independent response: ‘I will get even with her’ or ‘we
must demonstrate where the real power lies’. In Bohm’s
view, the real power is in the activity of thought. While
independence and choice appear to be inherent in our
actions, we are actually being driven by agendas which act
faster than, and independent of, our conscious choice. Bohm
sees the pervasive tendency of thought to struggle against
its own creations as the central dilemma of our time.
Consequently, we must now endeavour not only to apply
thought, but to understand what thought is, to grasp the
significance of its immediate activity, both in and around us.
Is it possible, then, to be aware of the activity of thought
without acquiring a new agenda, namely, the intention to
‘fix’ thought? Can we suspend our habit of defining and
solving problems, and attend to thought as if for the first
time? Such open learning, says Bohm, lays the foundation
for an exploration of proprioception. Proprioception (literally,
‘selfperception’) is that which enables us to walk, sit, eat, or
engage in any other daily activity without having
constantly to monitor what we are doing. An instantaneous
xii THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

feedback system informs the body, allowing it to act
without conscious control. If we wish to scratch a mosquito
bite on the back of our leg, it is proprioception that allows
us to scratch the bite without (a) looking at our hand, (b)
looking at our leg or (c) having the mistaken impression
that someone else is scratching our leg.
Dr Bohm points out that while proprioception of the body
comes naturally, we do not seem to have proprioception of
thought. If, however, mind and matter are indeed a
continuum, it is reasonable to explore the extension of
physiological proprioception into the more subtle material
activity of thought. Bohm suggests that the immediacy and
accuracy of bodily proprioception are inhibited at the level
of thought due to the gross accumulation of reflexes,
personified in the image of a ‘thinker’—an interior entity
who seems to look out on the world, as well as looking
inwardly at emotions, thoughts and so on. This thinker,
says Bohm, is a product of thought, rather than a
transcendental entity; and the thinker is steadfastly
committed to preserving some variation of its own reflexive
structure. Here the state of open learning is crucial for new
understanding. If the reflexive structure can be simply
attended to, rather than acted upon (as the thinker would be
inclined to do), then the momentum which drives the
reflexes is already being dissipated. In this vein, Bohm
outlines a series of practical experiments which call into
awareness the interplay of words and feelings in the
formation of reflexes. This conjunction of open learning and
concrete experiments with the thought-feeling dynamic
suggests the beginning of proprioception of thought.
Such proprioception is intimately related to that which Dr
Bohm refers to as ‘insight’. We often associate insight with
the ‘a-ha!’ phenomenon of having suddenly grasped the
significance of some puzzle or problem. Bohm’s notion of
insight includes such particular instances, but extends to a
much more general, and generative, level of application. He
sees insight as an active energy, a subtle level of intelligence
FOREWORD
xiii

in the universe at large, of a different order from that which
we commonly experience in the mind/matter domain. He
suggests that such insight has the capacity to directly affect
the structure of the brain, dispelling the ‘electrochemical
fog’ generated by accumulated reflexes. Quite unlike the
memoryladen structure of a ‘thinker’ operating upon
thought, proprioception provides a medium of appropriate
subtlety for the activity of such insight. In this way,
learning, proprioception and insight work together, with
the potential to reorder our thought processes and bring
about a general level of coherence unavailable through
thought alone.
While all these experiments can be undertaken by
individuals, Bohm points to a complementary mode of
inquiry through the process of group dialogue. He suggests
that such meetings have no advance agenda, other than the
intention to explore thought. And though a facilitator may
be useful in the beginning, the meetings should be free of
authority so that people speak directly to one another. In
groups of twenty to forty people, the systemic and reflexive
nature of thought can come clearly into focus, eliciting a
wide range of responses from the participants. Self-images,
assumptions and prejudices may all emerge, often with
their attendant emotions—defensiveness, anger, fear and
many others. The virtue of such an approach, says Bohm, is
that the group may be able to detect the flow of meaning
passing amongst its members. This meaning may be the
content of some particular subject; it may also be the
quickened pulses that pass through the group as the result
of conflict between two or more members. Such dialogue
holds out the possibility of direct insight into the collective
movement of thought, rather than its expression in any
particular individual. Bohm suggests that the potential for
collective intelligence inherent in such groups could lead to
a new and creative art form, one which may involve
significant numbers of people and beneficially affect the
trajectory of our current civilization.
xiv THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Throughout Thought as a System Dr Bohm emphasizes that
the model of thought he puts forward is propositional. Not
only does he deny any final knowledge of these issues for
himself; he claims that no such knowledge is even possible.
Such knowledge would be thought, which can only make
approximate representations. Dr Bohm often invoked
Alfred Korzybski’s observation that any object of thought
(including, for Bohm, thought itself) is both ‘more than
what we think, and different’. None the less, as we do rely
to a great extent on images and representations, a relatively
accurate map of the processes of thought, based on clear
observation and sound inferences, is surely more desirable
than a flawed map. It was Dr Bohm’s intention that Thought
as a System be approached as just such a propositional map,
to be tested against direct life experiences, and measured by
its veracity and its usefulness in reducing conflict and
sorrow in the world at large.
Lee Nichol
Ojai, California
September, 1993
FOREWORD xv

This page intentionally left blank.

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Since 1986 David Bohm went to Ojai, California, each year to
give what came to be known as the David Bohm Seminars.
These seminars were arranged by a small group of people
without whom this book could not have been written, for it
is an account of the 1990 seminar. David valued their help
and friendship very much and I want to thank them on his
behalf. They are Michael Frederick, Booth Harris, David
Moody, Lee Nichol and Joe Zorskie. Also, a special thanks to
Phildea Fleming and James Brodsky who transcribed, edited
and printed these transcripts making them available to all
who took part in the seminars. They were in constant
telephone contact with David, going into all aspects of the
editing of the audio-tapes and making it possible for him
then to do the final editing.
None of this would have happened without all the
participants to the seminars who became our friends over
the years and the many other people involved. My thanks
to them too. I would also like to thank the Directors and
Board of the Oak Grove School in Ojai. The library there
made the ideal setting for the seminars.
Lastly, I want to thank David Stonestreet of Routledge for
his constant active interest in David Bohm’s work and his
unfailing help to me.
Sarah Bohm

This page intentionally left blank.

 
FRIDAY EVENING
David Bohm: We have more people at this seminar than
we’ve had before, a number of whom are here for the first
time. I’ll try not to be too repetitious, but we must go over
some of the old ground. And we hope there will be some
new material.
These meetings have been concerned with the question of
thought and what it has been doing in the world.
By way of review, we all know that the world is in a
difficult situation and has been basically for a long time;
that we now have many crises in various parts of the world.
We have the fact that there is nationalism all over. People
seem to have all sorts of hatreds, such as religious hatred or
racial hatred, and so on. There is the ecological crisis, which
goes on and off the back burner, and there is the continuing
economic crisis developing. People seem unable to get
together to face the common problems, such as the
ecological one or the economic one. Everything is
interdependent; and yet the more interdependent we get,
the more we seem to split up into little groups that don’t
like each other and are inclined to fight each other and kill
each other, or at least not to cooperate.
So one begins to wonder what is going to happen to the
human race. Technology keeps on advancing with greater
and greater power, either for good or for destruction. And
it seems that there is always this danger of destruction. No
sooner does the rivalry between the West and the East sort
of dissolve away than other conflicts pop up elsewhere.
1

And doubtless others will come up later, and on it goes. It’s
sort of endemic; it’s not just something that occasionally
happens. It’s in the whole situation.
I think we are all familiar with this situation. And with
technology advancing you have the possibility that nuclear
bombs will perhaps soon be available to all sorts of
dictators, even in relatively small nations. There are
biological weapons and chemical weapons, and other kinds
of weapons that haven’t yet been invented but surely will.
And then there is the economy to consider. Either we go
into a depression, which will help save the ecology, or we
go into a boom, which will momentarily make us happy but
will eventually ruin the ecology. I mean, the faster we go
into prosperity, the faster we create all of these other problems.
It seems that whichever way you turn, it doesn’t really
work. Why not? Is there any way out? Can you imagine
that a hundred or two hundred or five hundred years of
this won’t lead to some gigantic catastrophe, either to the
ecology or in some other way? Perhaps more wars, who
knows?
People have been dealing with this piecemeal—looking at
symptoms, saying that we’ve got to solve this problem or
that problem or that problem. But there is something
deeper, which people haven’t been considering, that is
constantly generating these problems. We can use the
analogy of a stream, where people are pouring pollution
upstream at the same time they are trying to remove it
downstream. But as they remove it they may be adding
more pollution of a different kind.
What is the source of all this trouble? That is really what
we have been concerned with in all these dialogues of the
past few years. I’m saying that the source is basically in
thought. Many people would think that such a statement is
crazy, because thought is the one thing we have with which
to solve our problems. That’s part of our tradition. Yet it
looks as if the thing we use to solve our problems is the
source of our problems. It’s like going to the doctor and
2 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

having him make you ill. In fact, in 20 per cent of medical
cases we do apparently have that going on. But in the case
of thought, it’s far over 20 per cent.
I’m saying the reason we don’t see the source of our
problems is that the means by which we try to solve them
are the source. That may seem strange to somebody who
hears it for the first time, because our whole culture prides
itself on thought as its highest achievement. I’m not
suggesting that the achievements of thought are negligible;
there are very great achievements in technology, in culture
and in various other ways. But there is another side to it
which is leading to our destruction, and we have to look at that.
Now I’ll try to say what is wrong with thought. I’ll just
give a brief summary and then we might start talking about
it, if you like.
One of the obvious things wrong with thought is
fragmentation. Thought is breaking things up into bits which
should not be broken up. We can see this going on. We see
that the world is broken up into nations—more and more
nations. Russia no sooner got rid of the communist
dictatorship than it began breaking up into a lot of little bits
which obviously are unable to manage, and they started
fighting each other. That’s a source of concern. It’s a
concern for the whole world. There are new nations all over
the world. During the second World War, nationalism
developed in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. They said
‘Lithuania for the Lithuanians, Latvia for the Latvians,
Armenia for the Armenians’, and so on.
Nationalism has broken things up, and yet the world is
all one. The more technology develops, the more people
depend on each other. But people try to pretend that it’s not
so. They say that the nation is sovereign, that it can do what
it likes. And yet it can’t. The United States can’t do what it
likes because it depends a lot on other countries for things
of all sorts—on the Middle East for oil, apparently on Japan
for money. And Japan obviously can’t do what it likes.
Those are just some examples.
FRIDAY EVENING 3

It seems very hard for human beings to accept seriously
this simple fact of the effect of fragmentation. Nations fight
each other and people kill each other. You are told that for
the nation you must sacrifice everything. Or you sacrifice
everything for your religious differences. People split into
religious groups. They split into racial groups and say that’s
all important. Inside each nation there are various splits.
People are divided up into sections and into all kinds of
interests. The division goes on down to the level of the
family, inside families and so forth. People are supposed to
be getting together, but they can’t seem to.
You can see that nations are established by thought. The
boundary of the nation is invented by thought. If you go to
the edge of the nation, there’s nothing to tell you that it is a
boundary, unless somebody makes a wall or something. It’s
the same land; the people may often be not very different.
But what is one side or the other seems all important. It’s
thought that ‘makes it so’.
I was informed that most of the nations of the Middle
East were invented either by the British or the French,
whose various bureaucrats drew lines and determined the
boundary of this nation, that nation, that nation. And there
they were. So then they have to fight each other.
In other words, what we are doing is establishing
boundaries where really there is a close connection—that’s
what is wrong with fragmentation. And at the same time
we are trying to establish unity where there isn’t any, or not
very much. We say we’re all one inside the boundary. But
when you look at these groups, they are not actually all
one. They are fighting each other inside the boundary as
much as they are fighting outside.
We can also consider professional groups. In science, for
instance, every little speciality is fragmented from every
other one. People hardly know what is happening in a
somewhat different field. And it goes on. Knowledge is
fragmented. Everything gets broken up.
4 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Thus we have false division and false unification.
Thought is pretending that there is a sharp division outside
and that everything is unified inside, when it’s really not so.
This is a fictional way of thinking. But to go on with this
fictional way of thinking seems to be very important, so
important that the actual fact that it is wrong, the fact that
it’s not that way at all, is ignored.
It seems strange. Why should people do such a strange
thing? It really could be thought of as irrational at the very
least, or perhaps crazy. So much trouble, which may even
prevent our survival, is created out of such small things.
The more general difficulty with thought is that thought
is very active, it’s participatory. And fragmentation is itself a
symptom of the more general difficulty. Thought is always
doing a great deal, but it tends to say that it hasn’t done
anything, that it is just telling you the way things are. But
thought affects everything. It has created everything we see
in this building. It has affected all the trees, it has affected
the mountains, the plains and the farms and the factories
and science and technology. Even the South Pole has been
affected because of the destruction of the ozone layer,
which is basically due to thought. People thought that they
wanted to have refrigerant—a nice safe refrigerant—and
they built that all up by thinking more and more about it.
And now we have the ozone layer being destroyed.
Thought has produced tremendous effects outwardly.
And, as we’ll discuss further on, it produces tremendous
effects inwardly in each person. Yet the general tacit
assumption in thought is that it’s just telling you the way
things are and that is not doing anything—that ‘you’ are
inside there, deciding what to do with the information. But
I want to say that you don’t decide what to do with the
information. The information takes over. It runs you.
Thought runs you. Thought, however, gives the false
information that you are running it, that you are the one
who controls thought, whereas actually thought is the one
which controls each one of us. Until thought is understood—
FRIDAY EVENING 5

better yet, more than understood, perceived—it will actually
control us; but it will create the impression that it is our
servant, that it is just doing what we want it to do.
That’s the difficulty. Thought is participating and then
saying it’s not participating. But it is taking part in
everything. 
Fragmentation is a particular case of that. Thought is
creating divisions out of itself and then saying that they are
there naturally. The divisions between nations are regarded
as being ‘just there’, but obviously they were invented by
people. People have come to accept those divisions and that
made them be there. The same holds for the divisions
between 
religions. 
Every 
religion 
was 
invented 
by
somebody’s thinking that he had a certain idea about God
that was right and true. Eventually people thought that
other religions weren’t right, that other religions were
inferior, perhaps even heretical or evil or wrong, that they
could fight them, try to suppress them and destroy them.
There were vast religious wars. And we may still have
more coming, in spite of all the development of the
enlightenment, knowledge and science and technology. In
fact, science and technology now seem, at least equally well,
to serve those who are perhaps at a more Mediaeval stage
as it serves those who regard themselves as more advanced.
Anybody 
can 
use 
science 
and 
technology 
without
fundamentally altering his own frame of mind which
governs how they are used.
I’m saying thought has the character that it is doing
something and saying it isn’t doing it. Now, we really have
to go into that, to discuss it a great deal, because what
thought is actually doing is very much more subtle than
what I’ve described—that’s only the beginning.
Another problem of fragmentation is that thought divides
itself from feeling and from the body. Thought is said to be
the mind; we have the notion that it is something abstract
or spiritual or immaterial. Then there is the body, which is
very physical. And we have emotions, which are perhaps
6 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

somewhere in between. The idea is that they are all
different. That is, we think of them as different. And we
experience them as different because we think of them as different.
But thought is not different from emotion. We’ll discuss
this in more detail later; but for a very elementary example,
if you think that a certain person has treated you badly you
may get angry. Suppose that somebody keeps you waiting
for a couple of hours. You can get angry thinking: ‘What
does he mean treating me like this? He has no concern, no
consideration for me.’ You can think of various things: ‘He’s
always doing this, he treats me badly’, and so on. By
thinking that way you can get very angry. Then if he comes
and explains that the train was late, the anger goes. This
shows that the emotion was influenced by thought. By
changing your thought, the anger fades.
So thought at least can sustain those feelings. The thought
of something pleasant will make you feel good. The
thought that you are doing great will make you feel good inside
—all the good feelings will come out. Or the thought that
you have done something wrong may make the adrenalin
flow, may make you feel guilty. If somebody says you are
guilty, which is a thought, then you can feel very miserable.
Feelings are tremendously affected by thoughts. And
obviously thoughts are tremendously affected by feelings,
because if you are angry you don’t think clearly. Likewise,
if you have a feeling of pleasure in something you may find
yourself reluctant to give up that idea which gives you
pleasure, even if it is wrong—you engage in self-deception.
There’s a good physical reason that feelings and thoughts
affect each other; you can see it in the structure of the brain.
There is an intellectual centre in the cortex, the outer layers
of the brain. And deeper down there is an emotional centre.
Between them is a very thick bundle of nerves, by which
they communicate very closely. So they are connected.
There was a famous case in the nineteenth century of a man
who had an iron pin driven through his brain by an
explosion. He apparently recovered from this, and he was
FRIDAY EVENING 7

physically more or less normal. But although he had been a
very levelheaded man, after he recovered he was totally
unbalanced emotionally, and intellectually he couldn’t
maintain any very consistent line of thought. The breaking
of the connection between the emotional and the intellectual
centres prevented the system from functioning.
The intellectual centre will normally tell whether an
emotion is appropriate or not. That is what happens in the
example of being angry about somebody’s delaying you
two hours, and then coming along and saying ‘The train
was late.’ If you believe him, then the intellectual centre
says ‘there’s no longer any good reason to be angry’. And
the emotional centre duly says ‘OK, no reason, I give up my
anger’. And vice versa—the emotional centre may send
information saying that there is danger, or there is this or
that, and the intellectual centre picks it up and tries to find
out what is the danger. It thinks.
Those centres are intimately and closely related. The very
wish to think must come from an emotion or from an
impulse to think. They are really almost two sides of the
same process. But our language separates them and our
thought separates them into fragments. I’m saying that
emotion and intellect are closely connected, but we
introduce into our thought a very sharp division—just like
the one between nations—where there really isn’t such a
division. We’re introducing a fictional way of thinking
about this situation. If our thinking is fictional, it will
mislead us.
It is worth repeating what I’ve said the last few years—
that in our language we have a distinction between
‘thinking’ and ‘thought’. ‘Thinking’ implies the present tense
—some activity going on which may include critical
sensitivity to what can go wrong. Also there may be new
ideas, and perhaps occasionally perception of some kind
inside. ‘Thought’ is the past participle of that. We have the
idea that after we have been thinking something, it just
evaporates. But thinking doesn’t disappear. It goes
8 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

somehow into the brain and leaves something—a trace—
which 
becomes 
thought. 
And 
thought 
then 
acts
automatically. The example I gave about the person who
kept you waiting shows how thought reinforces and
sustains anger; when you have been thinking for a while, ‘I
have a good reason to be angry’, the emotion is there and
you remain angry. So thought is the response from memory—
from the past, from what has been done. Thus we have
thinking and thought.
We also have the word ‘feeling’. Its present tense
suggests the active present, that the feeling is directly in
contact with reality. But it might be useful to introduce the
word ‘felt’, to say there are feelings and ‘felts’. That is, ‘felts’
are feelings which have been recorded. You may remember
pleasure that you once had, and then you get a sense of
pleasure. If you remember pain you had you may get a
sense of pain. A traumatic experience in the past can make
you feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic
feelings are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that
come up are really from the past, they’re ‘felts’. By failing to
make this distinction we often give too much importance to
some feelings which actually don’t have that much
significance. If they are just a recording being replayed,
they don’t have as much significance as if they were a
response to the present immediate situation.
Often you may respond according to the way you felt a
long time ago, or the way you became used to feeling in the
past. In effect you could be saying ‘when I was a child, a
certain situation made me feel uncomfortable’, and then
when any similar situation arises in the present you feel
uncomfortable. You get that discomfort because you don’t
see that it doesn’t mean anything. But it does seem to mean
a great deal, and it affects you.
So not only is there a false division between thinking and
feeling, but also between feelings and ‘felts’, and the whole
state of the body. You can see that the way you think can
get adrenalin flowing. You can get neurochemically affected
FRIDAY EVENING 9

all over the body. For example, if you are in an area which
you think is dangerous and you see a shadow, your
thought says that there are people around who might attack
you, and then you immediately get a feeling of fear. Your
adrenalin starts flowing, your muscles tense, your heart
beats rapidly—just from the knowledge that there may be
assailants in the neighbourhood. As soon as you look and
say ‘it’s a shadow’, those physical symptoms subside. There
is a profound connection between the state of the body and
the way you think. If people are constantly worried and
under stress about their jobs or something, they may stir up
their stomachs too much and get ulcers and various other
things. It’s well known. The state of the body is very
profoundly tied to thought, affected by thought, and vice
versa. That’s another kind of fragmentation we have to
watch out for.
All of this will tend to introduce quite a bit of confusion,
or what I call ‘incoherence’, into thinking or into action
because you will not get the results you expect. That’s the
major sign of incoherence: you want to do something but it
doesn’t come out the way you intend. That’s usually a sign
that you have some wrong information somewhere. The
right approach would be to say; ‘Yes, that’s incoherent. Let
me try to find out the wrong information and change it.’
But the trouble is, there is a lot of incoherence in which
people don’t do that.
For instance, perhaps somebody likes to be flattered and
he then finds that the person who flatters him can take
advantage of him. It happens again and again and again.
He doesn’t want that, but it happens. There is an
incoherence there because it’s not his intention to be taken
advantage of. But he has another intention he doesn’t think
about, which is that he wants the glow of feeling that comes
from the flattery. You can see that one implies the other,
because if he accepts the flattery then he also will accept a
lot of other things the person says or does. He can be taken
advantage of. Therefore, he has both a conscious intention,
10 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

and another one which is going against it. That’s a very
common situation.
It is the same with nationalism. People didn’t set up
nations in order to suffer the way they’ve suffered—to
suffer endless wars and hate and starvation and disease and
annihilation and slavery and whatnot. When they set up the
nations it was not their intention to do that. But that’s what
has happened. And it would inevitably happen. The point
is that people rarely look at the nation and ask, ‘what’s it all
about?’ Rather, they say ‘at all costs we’ve got to go on with
this nation, but we don’t want these consequences’. And
they struggle against the consequences while they keep on
producing the situation.
This is another major feature of thought: thought doesn’t
know it is doing something and then it struggles against what it
is doing. It doesn’t want to know that it is doing it. And it
struggles against the results, trying to avoid those
unpleasant results while keeping on with that way of
thinking. That is what I call sustained incoherence. There is
also simple incoherence, which we can’t avoid having
because thoughts are always incomplete—thought can
never be complete, as we’ll discuss later. But when we find
that what is happening is contradictory or confused or isn’t
doing what we expect, then we should change our thoughts
to reflect what is happening. And in simple situations we
do. When it comes to things that matter to us, though, it
seems we generally don’t. Now this is rather odd, because
the things that matter are where we ought to be especially
coherent. However, we feel we can afford to be coherent
only in the things that don’t matter too much—which is
another kind of incoherence.
Nobody has the intention of producing this sort of
situation. We are producing these situations contrary to our
conscious intentions because there is another resistance
going on of which we’re not very conscious. So whenever
we intend to do something we often unconsciously have a
resistance trying to prevent us from doing it. That’s
FRIDAY EVENING 11

obviously a big waste of energy, and it is very destructive.
It means we will produce problems without end which
have no solution.
In the recent past the East and the West have got together
for various reasons. But for various other reasons, people
were sending a lot of arms into the Middle East over the
years. It was not their intention to produce an impossible
situation with Iraq. They said; ‘Well, we’re sending arms to
the Middle East. We want to make money. We have a
certain national policy to maintain. There are many
reasons.’ And then it all added up to a very dangerous
situation. If there had been no arms sent there, it would not
have been so serious. Also, in 1973 it was plainly brought
out that the West is very dependent on oil from the Middle
East, which is a very unstable region. For a while people
began to use their oil and their energy more efficiently.
Gradually they became less concerned with doing so. And
then later they say; ‘Look! Surprise. We now depend on
them. Half of the oil of the world is theirs. If that goes we’re
all finished.’
Clearly it is not people’s intention to produce these
situations. Rather, they may say, ‘we don’t want this
situation, but there are a lot of other things we’ve got to
have’. But those things will produce these situations.
There’s an incoherence there.
We are constantly producing situations and things which
we don’t intend and then we say ‘look, we’ve got a
problem’. We don’t realize that it is our deeper, hidden
intentions which have produced it, and consequently we
keep on perpetuating the problem. Even now very little is
being done, as far as I can see, about using energy more
efficiently and thus becoming less dependent on Middle
Eastern oil—which would remove much of the whole
problem.
So we must ask ‘why do we have this incoherence?’
Nobody wants these situations, and yet the things people
think they want will inevitably produce them. It is thought
12 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

that makes people say ‘that’s necessary’. Therefore, thought
has come to this kind of incoherence.
Now, that is really a kind of introduction. Maybe we
should talk a little about it for a while.
Questioner: I’m unclear on the point about the difference
between thinking and thought. Are you proposing that we
slide from thinking into thought without being aware that
we are doing it?
Bohm: Yes. It’s automatic, because when we’ve been
thinking, that thinking gets recorded in the brain and
becomes thought. I’ll discuss later how that thought is an
active set of movements, a reflex. But suppose you keep
telling very young children that people of a certain group
are no good, no good, no good. Then later on it becomes
thought which just springs up—‘they’re no good’. In fact,
you hardly notice that you are thinking, that there is any
thought even. 
Q: Right now, in conversation with this group, while you’re
talking there’s a process of thinking which is, as you
explained, more alive in the present. And then this other
stuff is happening, which is thought. We don’t seem to have
the ability to distinguish the two.
Bohm: No, we don’t seem to distinguish the two.
Sometimes we do though, because sometimes we say, ‘I
thought that before’. But generally we may miss the
distinction. And with feeling it’s even harder to see that
distinction between the past feeling coming up—I call it the
‘felt’—and something which would be an active present
feeling.
Q: I wonder how much of the fracturing is taught in the
Newtonian and Christian models. Is this actually the brain’s
FRIDAY EVENING 13

behaviour, its normal natural behaviour? I remember in
grade schools being taught to fracture, classify and
disorganize, to take things apart. And my interior was
violently against it because I saw this whole knotted skein
as an uneducated person. So I’m wondering whether the
brain naturally wants to fracture and analyse, or is it part of
the way we teach ourselves?
Bohm: It is to some extent partly the result of the way we
are taught. But I think there is some tendency in thought to
build this up constantly.
Q: Do you think it is partly intrinsic in the nature of the brain?
Bohm: Not of the brain, but of the way thought has
developed. A certain amount of analysis is necessary for
clarity of thought; some distinctions have to be made. But
we carry them too far without knowing. We slip over. And
once we carry them too far, then we start assuming they are
just ‘what is’, and that becomes part of our habit.
Q: How do we recognize where the edge is, before slipping
over too far?
Bohm: That’s a very subtle question, and we want to go
into that carefully during this whole seminar. To get free of
that is much more than just recognizing that difference.
Something much deeper is involved. What we have to do
first is to get some notion of what sort of trouble we’re in now.
We started out saying the trouble is that the world is in
chaos, but I think we end up by saying that thought is in
chaos. That’s each one of us. And that is the cause of the
world’s being in chaos. Then the chaos of the world comes
back and adds to the chaos of thought.
14 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Are you saying that thought has a kind of possessive
quality which stays, gets stuck, and then becomes habitual?
And we don’t see this?
Bohm: I think that whenever we repeat something it
gradually becomes a habit, and we get less and less aware
of it. If you brush your teeth every morning, you probably
hardly notice how you’re doing it. It just goes by itself. Our
thought does the same thing, and so do our feelings. That’s
a key point.
Q: Isn’t the employment of thought in the psychological
sense synonymous with corruption?
Bohm: Why do you say that?
Q: Are there not only two states: corruption and innocence? 
Bohm: Are you saying that thought by itself is incapable of innocence?
Q: In the psychological sense it seems so.
Bohm: It may seem so. But the question is whether it is
actually so. That’s the question we’re trying to explore.
We’ll admit the fact that it seems so; it has that appearance.
Now the question is: what is actually the case? We have to
explore this, and it will take some digging into. We can’t
simply take the way things seem and just work on that,
because that would be another kind of mistake thought makes
—taking the surface and calling it the reality.
Q: I think what you said is really interesting. I see that if I
have the intention to go somewhere but take the wrong
road, it’s no problem. The next time I find out what the
right road is, change the information, and take a different
road. But I often have the intention to do something
FRIDAY EVENING 15

personally and collectively and it doesn’t work out. Yet I
don’t know what’s wrong. I can’t seem to change the information.
What I’m especially interested in is how there’s a sense of
‘me’ separate from the information and from the intention. I
feel as though I’m the subjective being who can change it,
and yet I can’t seem to; or the world can’t seem to. This
sense of ‘me’ separate from the information—would that be
something interesting to explore?
Bohm: That’s another subtle question, and we will try to get
into it during this whole period.
We have that feeling, as you say. But we shouldn’t
necessarily accept what seems to be. If we accept ‘what
seems to be’ as ‘what is’, then we can’t inquire. I mean, if
what seems to be were perfectly coherent, then I’d say ‘all
right, why question it?’ But since it is highly incoherent, I
would say there is a good reason to question it. That would
be common sense in ordinary areas of life. It does seem that
all that is happening—we all want to do things and we
can’t do what we want. Something else seems to happen
which stops us.
Some of the people who are running corporations are
getting interested in this question because they have the
same problem. I know some people who are working in this
area, and they find that when their boards get together they
can’t seem to agree and they can’t get the results they
intend. That’s one of the reasons they are sinking a bit.
A fellow named Peter Senge has written a book called The
Fifth Discipline. He has analysed some of these questions. I
don’t say that he’s got to the bottom of it, but it’s
interesting. His analysis shows that very often there are
problems because people are not following the effect of
their thoughts—that when they think something and
something is done, it then spreads out to other companies,
and then it comes back a bit later as if it were something
else independent. They treat it as an independent problem
and they keep on, thereby making it worse because they
16 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

keep on doing the same thing. So their way of thinking is
creating a problem. It takes some time for the problem to
get back to them; and by that time they’ve lost track of it
and they say ‘here’s a problem’. Then they think some more
and produce more of that problem, or else change the
problem a bit into another one that’s worse, or whatever.
The point is that they are not following the effects of their
thought. They are not aware of the fact that thought is
active and participating.
When you are thinking something, you have the feeling
that the thoughts do nothing except inform you the way
things are and then you choose to do something and you do
it. That’s what people generally assume. But actually, the
way you think determines the way you’re going to do
things. Then you don’t notice a result comes back, or you
don’t see it as a result of what you’ve done, or even less do
you see it as a result of how you were thinking. Is that clear?
So all these problems that I’ve described—that whole
depressing series of them—are the result of the way we’ve
been thinking. But people don’t see that. They say, ‘We’re
just thinking. Out there are the problems. The thinking is
telling us about those problems—what they are.’
Q: Suppose I see a situation in which it seems so very
obvious that a whole group of people are acting very
incoherently. I think I see very clearly that they’re being
incoherent, and then I start to act to correct that. But if I’m
not noticing that my own thinking may be incoherent, then
my action won’t be coherent.
Bohm: You may be caught in the same thing. And even if
not, how will you actually correct it? Unless their thinking
changes their action won’t be corrected. Now, nothing you
do can change their thinking, except communication to
them that they’re incoherent—communication which they
will accept and understand. Otherwise you are trying to
meet thought with force, which is really a kind of violence.
FRIDAY EVENING 17

If you say ‘out there are some people behaving incoherently
and I will try to make them behave coherently’, then you’re
using force. But they keep on thinking the same old way. If
you’re more powerful than they are, they will do what you
want for a while—until you get to be a little weak, and then
they’ll get back at you.
Q: I would like to explore this: thought comes in from the
outside, comes into our awareness, takes over, takes
possession—and maybe collectively takes possession and
we go to war. But we don’t see this because thought is
possessive, like magic. It takes over.
Bohm: Yes, it takes over. And why does it take over? There
are two levels of this point. One is to describe what
happens as far as we can see outwardly. The second is to
see the source of it, because unless we see the source it will
never change. 
Q: How can we explore the source?
Bohm: Well, that’s what this weekend is about. But I think
it’s important to see what the question is. The first thing is
to see that there is a question which needs to be explored.
Q: Can thought be aware of itself?
Bohm: That’s also a subtle question. On the surface it
appears that thought would not be aware of itself, if
thought is just memory.
Let’s say, however, that we need some kind of awareness
of what thought is doing—that seems clear—but which we
don’t have, generally speaking. I’ve used the word
‘proprioception’ in previous seminars to mean ‘self-
perception of thought’, and we’ll come to that as we go
along. It may be that thought can be aware of itself. But it
18 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

would take us rather longer than we have to get into that
this evening, so for the present I think we should look at
the thing in sort of a general way.
It doesn’t look entirely impossible that we could
approach this question somehow, but it is a very difficult
question. I would suggest that one reason why it is difficult
is that there is a fault in the process of thought.
What I mean by ‘thought’ is the whole thing—thought,
‘felt’, the body, the whole society sharing thoughts—it’s all
one process. It is essential for me not to break that up,
because it’s all one process; somebody else’s thoughts
become my thoughts, and vice versa. Therefore it would be
wrong and misleading to break it up into my thought, your
thought, my feelings, these feelings, those feelings. For
some purposes that’s all right, but not for the purpose we’re
talking about now.
I would say that thought makes what is often called in
modern language a system. A system means a set of
connected things or parts. But the way people commonly
use the word nowadays it means something all of whose
parts are mutually interdependent—not only for their
mutual action, but for their meaning and for their existence.
A corporation is organized as a system—it has this
department, that department, that department. They don’t
have any meaning separately; they only can function
together. And also the body is a system. Society is a system
in some sense. And so on.
Similarly, thought is a system. That system not only
includes thoughts, ‘felts’ and feelings, but it includes the
state of the body; it includes the whole of society—as
thought is passing back and forth between people in a
process by which thought evolved from ancient times.
A system is constantly engaged in a process of
development, change, evolution and structure changes, and
so forth, although there are certain features of the system
which become relatively fixed. We call this the structure.
You can see that in an organization there’s a certain
FRIDAY EVENING 19

structure. Then sometimes that structure begins to break up
because it doesn’t work, and people may have to change it.
We have some structure in thought as well—some
relatively fixed features. Thought has been constantly
evolving and we can’t say when that structure began. But
with the growth of civilization it has developed a great
deal. It was probably very simple thought before
civilization, and now it has become very complex and
ramified and has much more incoherence than before.
So we have this system of thought. Now, I say that this
system has a fault in it—a systemic fault. It’s not a fault here,
there or there, but it is a fault that is all throughout the
system. Can you picture that? It’s everywhere and nowhere.
You may say ‘I see a problem here, so I will bring my
thought to bear on this problem’. But ‘my’ thought is part
of the system. It has the same fault as the fault I’m trying to
look at, or a similar fault.
We have this systemic fault; and you can see that this is
what has been going on in all these problems of the world—
such as the problems that the fragmentation of nations has
produced. We say: ‘Here is a fault. Something has gone
wrong.’ But in dealing with it, we use the same kind of
fragmentary thought that produced the problem, just a
somewhat different version of it; therefore it’s not going to
help, and it may make things worse. You may say that you
see all these things going on and then ask ‘what shall I do?’
You try to think about it, but by now your thought is
pervaded by this systemic fault. Then what does that call for?
Q: Is it that the whole system has been polluted?
Bohm: That’s one way of looking at it, yes. Something has
happened in the entire system which makes the thought wrong
—the whole process in the system is not straight. There
may be bits which are all right, but it doesn’t stay. It’s
somewhat like the way they used to talk of an egg which
20 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

was rotten only in parts. There might be some parts which
haven’t gone rotten, but the rot will spread.
We can get some relatively clear thought in science. But
even there it is not entirely clear because scientists are
worried about their prestige and status, and so on.
Sometimes they won’t consider ideas that don’t go along
with their theories or with their prejudices. Nevertheless,
science is aimed at seeing the fact, whether the scientist
likes what he sees or not—looking at theories objectively,
calmly, and without bias. To some extent, relatively
coherent thought has been achieved better in science than in
some other areas of life. Some results flowed out of science
and technology which are quite impressive—a great power
was released.
But now we discover that whenever the time comes to use
science we just forget the scientific method. We just say that
the use of what scientists have discovered will be
determined by the needs of our country, or by my need to
make money, or by my need to defeat that religion or
merely by my need to show what a great powerful person I
am. So we see that relatively unpolluted thought has been
used to develop certain things, and then we always trust to
the most polluted thought to decide what to do with them.
That’s part of the incoherence.
Q: Are you saying that we are in this pollution and we can’t
see our true intentions?
Bohm: We don’t see that our intentions are incoherent—
that perhaps they are arising out of the pollution.
Q: I think as individuals we strive to resolve these things in ourselves
—what are our intentions as individuals? What causes us to
act the way we do? And at the same time I see that part of
the global problems you described are a different kind of
problem which individuals haven’t faced. For example,
individuals want to survive and want to reproduce. That’s
FRIDAY EVENING 21

no longer possible in the sense that it was in the past,
because a lot of our problems are due to having too many
people. We’re supposed to be working on this as
individuals and somehow collectively realizing that we
can’t do the same basic things individuals used to need to
do, realizing that something has to be changed.
Bohm: Yes, that’s quite true, but we can’t seem to do it.
People trying to get together to deal with these things don’t
seem to be able to get very far. Take the ecological pollution
or the change of climate. Very little has been done to deal
with those problems. A lot of good words have been
produced by various governments, but when it comes to
putting a lot of money behind their words they haven’t
gone very far. Those very good intentions are counteracted
by another set of intentions, or a whole bunch of sets of intentions
—such as we can’t interfere with this, or we can’t interfere
with that or we’ve got to allow this and that and the other.
And then it all adds up to very little.
So it’s the same incoherence. The intentions which we
profess are blocked by another set that we not only don’t
profess but may not know fully that we have. We may not
want to know.
Q: It seems we have to become aware of certain
assumptions, which we aren’t even aware we have. We
need to question what assumptions in the system we are
taking for granted and how we operate all the time, because
there’s something we’re not noticing which is limiting our
ability to make our intentions happen, both individually
and collectively.
Bohm: I think that we’re not really aware of what is
happening in this system which I’ve called ‘thought’. We
don’t know how it works. We hardly know it is a system;
it’s not part of our culture even to admit that it is a single
system.
22 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Would you explain the system again? You said thought
has a systemic flaw, but you’re also including the emotions.
What else are you including?
Bohm: The state of the body, the emotions, and also the
whole society—the culture, the way we pass information
between us, and so on.
Q: When you say ‘the state of the body’, are you also
including the organs of the body?
Bohm: Yes, the organs are affected by it.
Q: Are you saying that the whole thing is a closed system?
Bohm: No, I wouldn’t say it’s entirely closed. A system isn’t
necessarily closed. It can be open to various influences of
things coming in and out. That’s the whole idea of a
system. It’s not necessarily closed, but it has a certain
stability of structure. It tends to sustain and maintain its
structure, so that when something from the outside comes
in it reacts in such a way as to avoid basic change.
Q: But I’m hoping you’re going to say that there is a
possibility of opening up the structure, or seeing it.
Bohm: There is, yes. I’m not saying the system is everything
there is. I’m saying that the system pervades our whole
activity. It’s like something pervading our activity; but that
doesn’t mean that it’s all there is. Do you get the
distinction? The system has become so pervasive, however,
that it may be almost all that we are able to see much of the time.
Q: Can you say what is not part of the system?
FRIDAY EVENING 23

Bohm: We could say for one thing, that perhaps there is
some kind of perception or intelligence which is deeper,
which is able to see this incoherence. The system itself
could not see its incoherence very far, because it would
distort it. But I’m suggesting that there is a capacity to see
the incoherence.
As we’ve said, to a certain extent the system is necessary.
We need this system of thought for all sorts of purposes.
But it has developed a fault. Now there is, I say, an
intelligence or a perception which goes beyond memory.
There’s a lot beyond this system. The system is actually
only a very tiny part of reality; but it looms very large.
Unless you actually see the thing I’m talking about, what I
say will be incorporated into the system as an image. Is it
clear what the problem is? This system tends to incorporate
everything. Anything repeated several times becomes part
of the system. Also somebody may have an insight and
then that may easily become part of the system.
Q: Do you exclude intuition from the system? 
Bohm: It depends on what you mean by ‘intuition’. I think
the system is able to imitate a kind of intuition. It may give
a memory of intuition, which feels a bit like intuition.
Q: But intuition would not be part of the system, would it?
Bohm: Not if it were truly so. I’m saying there is
‘perception’ or ‘insight’ or ‘intelligence’ which may not be
part of the system. There are various things you can call it,
which we’ll try to bring out as we go along. Whatever we
call it, let’s say for now that I don’t think it is part of the
system. That way we are keeping our possibilities open,
and we may see some evidence that the system is not everything.
24 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Aren’t there times an action takes place as a result of
what you might call non-self-serving thought—not trying to
impose it on someone—where there’s a strong element of
compassion and love in that particular thought? Then the
fragmentation of thought is not really necessarily a part of
that activity.
Bohm: If there were such compassion and love then I
would say it’s not part of the system, clearly. But, of course,
a lot of what is felt to be compassion and love is actually
part of the system, because once again such experiences,
when repeated, become a habit. Thought can produce
experiences without our being aware that they are
produced by thought. It is this deceptive feature of thought
that we have to watch out for. The worst confusion takes
place in the question of what is not part of the system,
because if you confuse part of the system as not being part
of the system then you’re lost. So you have to be very
careful about that. It’s no use just saying that love will take
care of everything. People have said that for ages, but it
hasn’t done it. The Christian religion was based on the idea
that God is love. They said that there is one God who is
pure love, and Christ, and so on. Nevertheless, the
Christians fought not only other religions but they also
fought each other violently. They carried out very violent
religious wars lasting centuries and did terrible things. Now
I’m sure these people didn’t intend to get into that; they
had another intention. But because of the way they were
thinking about their religion they couldn’t help it.
Theological ideas, for example, took over from ideas of
love. Or there was a question of the religion being
connected with the monarchy or power, or whatever. So
violence doesn’t stop merely by saying, ‘we’ll act based on
love’, because that can become just an idea that gets
absorbed into the system.
FRIDAY EVENING 25

Q: If all I’ve ever known in my whole life lies within the
system, then any notion of there being anything outside of
that is only a notion of the system. And I can’t have any
idea what that would mean.
Bohm: We don’t know what it means, but we have to
entertain the idea. I think we have to be careful not to paint
ourselves into a corner here—to say that everything is in
the system and there is no way out of it.
Q: I’m just saying I might get the notion that I could
visualize something which was outside.
Bohm: That would still be inside. That becomes the most
dangerous source of confusion, because then you say ‘that’s
outside, it’s all right’. In such a way thought produces
something which seems to be outside, and it doesn’t notice
that it is doing so. That’s one of the basic mistakes. Thought
produces something and says, ‘I didn’t produce it. It’s really
there.’
Q: Are you saying that using thought to establish
boundaries leads to fragmentation; rather we should see the
difference between what is the system and what is not the
system? 
Bohm: If we could see it. But the question is how we are
going to see it.
Q: There have been a lot of times when people have had
insights into particular systems, or become aware of
something and made a major change. There was a time
before science became established when people believed in
magic, and then came science. There are a lot of cases like
that, where people did have a radical change in a limited
sphere. I wonder if looking at how they did it in a
26 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

particular area would be useful or relevant to getting to the
root of this whole system.
Bohm: Do you have something in mind?
Q: Well for one thing, how did human beings manage to go
from never having science to having science?
Bohm: That’s an interesting point. How was it possible for
scientific knowledge to develop which was quite contrary to
the previous culture? That required what I like to call
insight. I can give you several examples. From the time of
the ancient Greeks up through the Middle Ages people
believed that the earth was at the centre of the universe and
that there were seven crystal spheres of increasing
perfection. The seventh one was the perfect one. The basic
idea was an order of increasing perfection, and the idea that
each thing is striving to reach its right place. It was a highly
organic view of the universe. Accordingly, they said:
‘Celestial bodies, being perfect, should move in perfect
figures. The only perfect figure is a circle, therefore those
bodies ought to be moving in circles.’ Then when they
found that the planets didn’t do so they tried to save the
appearances, saying: ‘well, it’s not actually a circle, but we
can make it up out of circles on top of circles—circles called
epicycles.’ That is, when they found that the belief wasn’t
working too well they tended to move to save it rather than
to question it seriously.
Gradually evidence accumulated, especially after the end
of the Middle Ages, that there wasn’t a great difference
between heavenly and earthly matter. The moon, for
instance, had a lot of irregular features on it; it wasn’t very
perfect. Not only the earth, but also other planets had
satellites. And so on. There wasn’t a lot of evidence that
heavenly matter and earthly matter were all that different.
But still the idea persisted that heavenly matter was
basically different. ‘It’s heavenly, it’s perfect, it belongs up
FRIDAY EVENING 27

there. It stays up there where it belongs.’ And for a time,
everybody was satisfied.
There was enough evidence by the time of Newton, or
even before, to question that seriously, and some people
may have done so. But there is sort of an unconscious level
where it still works, saying: ‘Why does the moon stay up in
the sky? It’s only natural. It’s celestial matter, it stays up
where it belongs.’ Nobody worries about why it isn’t
falling. Now, that explanation may have made sense in
ancient times, and there was an old habit in the mind not to
question it—just to take it for granted. By the time of
Newton, however, there was enough evidence to question it.
The story is, whether it’s true or not I don’t know, that
Newton was watching an apple fall and had an insight. The
question may have been in his mind, ‘why isn’t the moon
falling?’ And he suddenly had the answer: ‘The moon is
falling. That’s the force of universal gravitation. Everything
is falling towards every thing.’ And then he had to explain
why the moon doesn’t reach the ground, which he was able
to do later by some calculation showing that it was also
going outward. Because it was far away it was moving
away from the earth in a fast orbit that kept it off the
ground while it was still falling.
So he must have had an insight at that moment, which
broke that old mould of thought. Previously, nobody
bothered with the question of why the moon wasn’t falling,
because it seemed so natural that the celestial matter stayed
where it belonged. The key point of the insight was to
break the old mold of thought. From there on it was not
very difficult to go to the new thought, because you could
say that if the moon is falling then there is universal gravitation
—everything is falling. And you could then go on from there.
There were other cases of that kind, and together they led
to our more modern view. But now this more modern view
is just as rigidly fixed as the ancient view was, and it would
take something to break that too. People now tend to say
that this is the absolute truth, final, no more really basic
28 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

questions need to be asked that might perhaps throw some
doubt on the whole framework underlying modern science—
as happened with the older Greek and Mediaeval
frameworks several centuries ago. Of course Newton’s
insight only broke the pattern in some limited domain. It
didn’t break the pattern in this vast area that we’ve been
talking about. In other words, all these insights in science
were ultimately assimilated within the general system of
thought.
What I’m suggesting is that there is quite general insight
that is possible which can break an old mode of thought.
We’ll come back to this again. We have to really look at it.
We have to think about an area first, and then see what we
can see. That opens the way to something else.
Q: When you say we have to think about it, isn’t that the
system doing the thinking?
Bohm: It may be or may not be. I think we shouldn’t
prejudge the issue. I’m saying it may be possible in a flash
for some real thinking suddenly to take place. It must
happen occasionally, or else where would we be? We
would never have got anywhere at all. If we always used
the kind of thought we use in nationalism to deal with
practical problems we would have been dead long ago.
Q: Would it be correct to say that Newton’s insight was
seeing that the natural state of everything is not motionless? 
Bohm: Yes. But even before the insight into gravitation
there was already another insight, which was that the
natural state of things is to be in motion, to which Galileo
also contributed. I didn’t give the full story of it. I focused
on one point of gravitation.
FRIDAY EVENING 29

Q: What you were saying is very interesting in that Newton
was able to pose a question which he wasn’t supposed to
ask. And then the pattern of thinking was broken.
Bohm: Well, that can happen when people are generally
asking wrong questions and then somebody comes along
and asks a right question. A wrong question is one which
already assumes the very thing that ought to be questioned.
It’s called ‘begging the question’. Before Newton, people in
physics were generally asking wrong questions because
they were not aware of the importance of the question of
why the moon isn’t falling. They might have asked: ‘Why is
the moon going from here to there? Why is this planet
going in this particular set of epicycles?’, and so on. Those
would have been wrong questions because they would
have tacitly assumed that planets move in the sphere in
which they belong. To do this was, of course, not relevant
to the actual situation. So because they didn’t question that
whole structure, they may have been led to ask a lot of
other questions which had no great meaning and thus get
into deeper confusion. Your questions contain hidden
assumptions; that’s the point. Therefore, when you question
the question itself, you may be questioning a deeper
assumption. But that’s done non-verbally. Do you see what
I mean? To question the question eventually has to be a non-
verbal act, which you can’t describe.
Q: And that may break all the patterns?
Bohm: Yes, somehow it breaks the pattern.
Now, the suggestion is that this pattern of the system is
not something with which we are stuck. It may not be
absolutely inevitable; there are signs that it could break.
Q: What do you mean when you say that questioning the
question has to be non-verbal?
30 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: If I say I have a question which may contain
assumptions that should be questioned, I could question
them verbally. But what would lead me to question my
question? Eventually I can put it into words; but I’m saying
the first step, the first flash of insight, is non-verbal.
Q: Are perceptions in the absence of thought, and then
thought becomes a product of that?
Bohm: Yes, thought is affected by the perceptions. It takes a
new turn by those perceptions.
Q: If insight isn’t thought then what is it?
Bohm: We really have to go into that carefully. How would
we answer that? Thought cannot adequately answer it. But
then on the other hand, thought could still say something
about it which might help us toward the question. We’re
not trying to say thought is always the culprit or always
bad. It can also in many cases be right, not only technically
but in other areas. However, I think that the kind of
thought that would come in a thing like this, is a sudden
feeling of waking up a bit.
Q: On the inside, is there an unlimited pool of insight with
which any one of us could be in touch?
Bohm: Again, how would I answer that? I’m trying to say
‘look at the question’. I’m saying that this is a matter of
learning to question the question. Do you have an
assumption that I could tell you ‘yes’ or ‘no’? If I can’t tell
you, then what are we going to do?
Q: Look at the question.
FRIDAY EVENING 31

Bohm: Yes. Don’t answer it right away. Newton took a long
time before he even got to the question, and he was quite bright.
Q: Can a perception take place that helps us to see how
impatient we are; how thought likes to have answers and
explanations too fast?
Bohm: We can look at that, too. Why do we want the
answer right away?
Q: To get on with another question.
Bohm: Is that right? That means we’re not interested in the
question. If our real interest is to get on with another
question, then we’re not going to do this one very well.
Q: But that’s what we do.
Q: Maybe it’s like a computer, which wants to have
information and conclusions right away. Maybe it’s the
nature of the machinery of thought.
Bohm: Well, that may be. But then we have to ask ‘why do
we allow ourselves to be subjugated by this machinery?’ 
Q: Could it be that getting an answer quickly makes us feel
oriented and gives the sensation of security?
Bohm: But you could have said the same about Newton—
that he may have wanted the answer right away. The
question about the moon may have been disturbing. Even
in science to raise fundamental questions can be very
disturbing. Somebody could feel, ‘I’d like to have the
answer to this right away, and get out of this unpleasant
state of disturbance’, and he would never get anywhere.
32 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Generally it’s uncomfortable not to know something.
Bohm: Yes. But then, Newton must have been in some state
of not knowing. And I don’t say only Newton; other
scientists must have been for a period in some state of not
knowing, or some state of confusion or incoherence or
possibly some other unpleasant feelings. But I think
Newton worked on it for quite a while. He must have gone
through long periods which needn’t have been always
pleasant.
Q: Then to some extent we have to sustain the incoherence,
not to get rid of it immediately?
Bohm: Yes, it’s a mistake to think that you have got rid of
the incoherence before you have in fact done so. Otherwise
the system can create the appearance or the seeming of
getting rid of it. The system seems to want to relive the
pressure without actually getting to the root of the thing.
That’s again the same problem, the same flaw, in another way
—the same fault that we’ve been talking about. It’s
pervasive in the system. The system doesn’t stay with the
difficult problem that produces unpleasant feelings. It’s
conditioned somehow to move as fast as it can toward more
pleasant feelings, without actually facing the thing that’s
making the unpleasant feeling.
Q: The thing about unpleasant feelings and confusion might
be something that we learn. I’ve seen a child attempting to
do some sort of puzzle, who tries without any sense of
confusion or pain, just with interest—attempting again and
again and again until maybe finally he succeeds. So does
learning come out of a willingness to face something that
does not have an immediate answer but is just sort of held
in abeyance?
FRIDAY EVENING 33

Bohm: That may well be, but we have to consider the state
of the system which has evolved with our civilizations over
thousands and thousands of years: we have a lot of bad
experiences one way or another connected with not having
the answers, and consequently there is a reaction
immediately—we want the answer right away. It’s the
memory of all the unpleasant experiences of not having the
answer. Those ‘felts’ bob up.
Q: Children are pushed to have the solution.
Bohm: They’re rewarded if they have the right solution and
they face a certain amount of unpleasantness if they don’t
have it. The educational system does that, the whole
economic system does that, as does the political system.
Everything has grown up to do that. By now that is part of
this system of thought we’ve been discussing. Therefore, we
have to say ‘here we are in the system, and what are we
going to do with it?’ If we have unpleasantness, we might
say; ‘We shouldn’t have it. It would be good not to have it.’
But just saying this doesn’t change anything. Rather we
need to say; ‘What are we going to do with it? What will be
our response?’
Q: Can we get sensitivity to that here? 
Bohm: We’ll see if we can.
Q: It seems that it’s not just an intellectual thing. Even
listening to our voices here, there’s a tone in the way we
talk to each other which implies that what we are saying is
literally so, rather than ideas or abstractions. And the child
picks that up and it becomes ‘I know. I know.’
Bohm: So can we face it here? Is there any unpleasantness
in this group with regard to facing the uncertainty, or the
34 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

unknown? You’ll perhaps notice that there is a tremendous
movement away. The system is set up to move away from
awareness of that. Now, by inference—by just thinking
about it clearly—we can see that it makes no sense to keep
on doing that and the result must be real disaster. We could
say ‘my intention is not to do it’. But you will still find
yourself doing it. You have a resistance coming from
something else—from the system.
Q: Would part of the fault in the system be that we do not
understand what is the role of incoherence in learning and
in the system? We either try to get out of it immediately or
else we stay in it indefinitely. We don’t seem to find the
golden means of the middle way, letting incoherence unfold
itself sufficiently for us to understand what’s going on.
Bohm: Sometimes we do. I think we understand perfectly
well how that works because everybody does it in areas
which are not too important to him.
Q: Then we need sensitivity to see what it means.
Bohm: Yes, but the system is not sensitive. The system
interferes with sensitivity. It destroys it. 
Q: I don’t understand why we do not see the incoherence.
Bohm: Do we see it or don’t we see it? It’s a bit puzzling
isn’t it? Sometimes it seems we see it. In an elementary
technical sense when somebody sees incoherence and it’s
not worrying him or frightening him he may actually learn
from it, as was said. People do use incoherence. They begin
to look at it if they’re not too worried about it. But when
people find that it’s something important to them then they
can’t seem to do it.
FRIDAY EVENING 35

Q: Is it that we have to re-educate our system—that when
we’re in a state of confusion or anxiety of not having an
answer, we have to understand that there may be another
possibility? It seems as though we have to actually
articulate that possibility for the system, before even
attempting to experience it.
Bohm: How would you do that?
Q: We have been educated to have an answer. All my life,
as soon as the teacher asks a question, if I have the answer
I’m a good kid. And then I hear for the first time that if I do
not have the answer I’m a good kid. So the system is
broadening to include something new which I never even
conceived would be a possibility: it’s OK to be confused, it
might even be interesting. If I’m anxious it’s usually hard
for me not to want to find an answer, but hearing that
anxiety is OK may in itself reduce the anxiety.
Bohm: That may help in some cases. But when you’re really anxious
—say if you have some situation involving real danger to
you or your interest—I don’t think it would always work.
Nowadays people may be anxious about losing their jobs,
for example, and they could become very anxious about
that. It might help relax the mind a bit to think ‘well, being
anxious is all right’. But I’m not sure that many could
sustain this for a long time if it proved to be necessary.
I would like to make this point: it’s not merely that you
have heard that this is all right, but you must have seen that
it’s all right. It would be still part of the system if you
merely took my word that it is all right; unless, having
actually heard it, you saw that it made sense.
Q: Are you saying we need to have a display?
36 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: You have to see that it makes sense—that allowing
anxiety to be there would be the coherent way to function
or operate. If you’re anxious you need to say: ‘I’m anxious.
That’s part of the whole situation.’ But then you have to
notice that the system is conditioned to move away from
that. And you have to be aware of that as well.
Therefore, by saying all this we have begun to move. By
seeing it—seeing that it makes sense and is coherent—then a
certain movement has begun, loosening up the system. So it
shows that this system is not a monolithic rock wall; it’s in
fact not very solid at all, although it looks extremely solid.
Q: You’re asking whether we can learn to become more learning-
oriented individually and collectively, rather than ‘I know’
oriented?
Bohm: That’s part of it. And another part is looking into
impulses and feelings and anxieties which push us away
from that. Instead of saying ‘It’s terrible, I’m anxious; I
must quickly find some thought to relieve the anxiety’, I
now say ‘Anxiety is perfectly normal and is to be expected
in this situation’.
Q: It’s an opportunity to learn. 
Bohm: It’s an opportunity to learn, yes. And this is a
reversal of most of our culture.
Now, don’t just accept this. If you see this makes sense
and is coherent, that doesn’t prove it is right but at least it
suggests that it’s a good approach.
Q: What you shunned before suddenly becomes valuable,
at least as an opportunity.
Bohm: Yes. Krishnamurti used to use words like that,
saying that envy or sorrow was a jewel. Then people would
FRIDAY EVENING 37

ask, ‘How can he say such things? They’re terrible things.’
But the point is that if you look at it differently you can see
that this is just what you’ve got to learn—what is actually
going on, what it means. And the very fact that you have
all this going on, which you don’t really want, is a sign that
there is incoherence.
Q: Do we attract to ourselves whatever we need to learn?
Bohm: Well, rather we acknowledge that things which we
think we ought to get rid of are actually the clue to what
we need to learn. Our whole culture and our whole instinct
have told us that these are things we have to get rid of as
quickly as we can. But now I’ve suggested reasons why
maybe they are the source, the clue, for learning. In other
words, from there we can begin to learn.
Q: And we never do learn because we don’t look at them?
Bohm: That’s one reason. There are probably a lot of other
reasons. It is part of the system; our whole culture is part of
the system, saying that we should get rid of pain or
uncertainty as quickly as we can. And in addition, there is
some instinctive tendency in that direction anyway—to get
rid of whatever is painful.
That makes sense in certain areas, such as with a
toothache. You have to deal with the tooth, to stop the pain.
But even there it could be wrong. If your only intention was
to get rid of the pain, you might just use various drugs to
relieve the pain until the tooth decayed. If the pain is an
indicator that something is wrong, it should be looked at in
that way—something which is not coherent is going on.
It’s very hard to get this straight, but the pain is in some
way a sign, a result of a certain kind of incoherence.
Biological pain may also very often be such a sign. In the
tooth there is some bacterial process going on which is
38 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

attacking the cells, and that is not coherent with the healthy
operation of the body. Pain is a warning of that. So pain in
general could be looked at that way.
There are people who cannot feel pain, and they really
hurt themselves all the time. Their pain nerves are
damaged. In fact, leprosy seems to be an instance of that.
The pain nerves are damaged by the disease. It’s an attack
on the nerves, which prevents one from feeling pain, so that
these people destroy their muscles by using too much force.
It’s been observed, watched carefully, that the destruction
of leprosy comes from people using too much force in
everything they do. They cannot tell how much force they
are using, and they can be observed using fantastic
amounts of force which destroy the whole system.
Thus, you can see that pain has a necessary function. And
the instinctive wish to get rid of the pain—which works on
the animal level—is not appropriate here with thought.
That instinct is not good enough. Something much more
deep and subtle is needed.
Q: Pain could also be a thought.
Bohm: Well, thought can be painful. The thought of what
an idiotic thing you’ve done, or what a fool you’ve made of
yourself could be very painful.
Q: Or in other cases pain could be more like a perception,
something not so much coming from thought.
Bohm: But even so, that pain is something to be perceived.
Even if it comes from thought there is a perception needed
in order to learn.
Q: The pain doesn’t seem to come from thought though.
The pain is something I generate in me in response to the thought.
FRIDAY EVENING 39

Bohm: But it’s part of the generalized thought, in the sense
I’m using the word—of the whole bodily response.
Q: If I didn’t understand that, I would try to use my
thought to solve the problem of the pain which I am
generating through my thinking. Whereas I am, in a sense,
causing myself pain in response to the thought—
unbeknownst to myself.
Bohm: Yes. You’re hurting yourself; that is a simple way to
put it.
Q: Once the thought or the image is there, isn’t the response
often immediate? I mean, it’s not that we are doing it to
ourselves so much as that the thought itself seems to bring
physical pain.
Bohm: That’s part of this generalized process. I’m trying to
say that thought is never just thought, it’s also the bodily
state, the feeling, the nerves. Whatever is going on in the
intellectual part connects with everything else. It flows out
so fast that you can’t keep it in one place. A thought of a
certain kind will produce either pleasure or pain—or at
least a memory of one of those feelings.
Q: Didn’t you say that it’s an immediate thing, that it is
directly wired into the nervous system?
Bohm: Well, it could take a second or two before you feel
the pain. It takes a second or two for the nerve impulses to
get down to the solar plexus where you might feel the pain.
And you don’t realize that what you are feeling in the body
has been stimulated by your thought, so you say ‘I feel fear
in the pit of my stomach’, or ‘my heart is broken’, or
something like that.
40 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

I’m trying to get across the picture that this is one
unbroken process. In a sense ‘I’ am not doing anything—it’s
going on by itself. But the tacit assumption of thought is
that ‘I’ am doing everything and thought is just telling me
the way things are.
Q: No, the thought is ‘the pain is being done to me’. You
say something, and therefore I am hurt. And I actually feel
physically hurt.
Bohm: But this thought is double. The thought is that the
thinking is being done by me, and the pain is being done to
me by you.
Q: You’re saying that the pain is being done by me?
Bohm: By the same thought that does it all in the first place.
Q: Is it so fast because the emotion mediates the process? 
Bohm: Emotion is very fast, that’s true. The emotional
centre is hit very quickly. But then there is another centre
down in the solar plexus that takes longer; it may take two
or three seconds.
There is an instrument called a polygraph. An electrode is
attached to your finger and measures your skin resistance.
When your autonomic nervous system is working, the
machine deflects. If somebody says something disturbing to
you, the needle deflects about three seconds later. It takes a
few seconds for the impulse to get down the spinal column;
it’s in the pipeline for a few seconds, and then it operates.
But since you don’t see it going down the pipeline, you say
that it worked independently—that it was a gut feeling,
very important, or straight from the heart. Now, there may
be gut feelings, or feelings straight from the heart, but
FRIDAY EVENING 41

memory can produce something very similar. That’s where
the difficulty is.
It is getting late. During the night you may want to go
over this and think or feel it. We could start tomorrow by
discussing whatever you may learn.
42 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

 
SATURDAY MORNING
Bohm: We discussed a number of points yesterday. We
talked about the depressing state of the world, and the
many problems confronting the individual and the society.
We considered the notion that the source of all these
problems is thought —that they are symptoms of something
deeper, which is the whole process. We were saying that
thought is not merely the intellectual activity; rather it is
one connected process which includes feeling and the body,
and so on. Also, it passes between people—it’s all one
process all over the world.
I suggested that we call that process a ‘system’—a whole
system in which every part is dependent on every other
part. I also suggested that there is a kind of systemic flaw
which is pervasive. So when we see something wrong with
a part of this system, we bring another part to bear to try to
correct it; but doing so will just add more, very similar
troubles. We went on to say that it’s not possible to solve
our problems that way—rather, they may get worse instead
of better—and that these troubles throughout the world
have been going on for thousands of years.
Also, we said that when you try to look at what’s going
on inside you when all this is happening you may get
unpleasant feelings such as pain or fear; and that instinct, as
well as the whole culture, leads you to move away from
looking at it. But it is necessary to stay with it somehow, in
spite of the difficulty of doing so. That was what we were
43

discussing at the end—that it is really worth doing because
in this way we may learn something about how it all goes.
Now, I thought that people might have a few points to
raise about what we’ve been talking about before we go on.
Q: During your conversation yesterday I assumed I was
understanding what you were relating to us. But then there
would be spaces of not understanding. When I went home I
couldn’t sleep. Finally I took a pad and pencil and wrote
about ten or fifteen questions. After that I felt better, and
fell asleep. Did my brain need that order and questioning,
or whatever it came to?
Bohm: It’s possible that the whole discussion leaves
questions and the mind brings them up. If you’re puzzled
by something then it won’t let you go. The major point is
whether you are looking into what is going on and
perceiving the incoherence—seeing what it means for yourself.
Q: What she just said might suggest that this is more of a
psychosomatic process than we realize. We tend to think of
it as a mental process, whereas maybe there’s more
involved that that. Maybe we have to keep an awareness
for that other aspect of it.
Bohm: As I pointed out, we were saying yesterday that it is
one system; the thoughts, the body, the emotions and also
other people, are all part of one system. And when you
raise questions intellectually they may affect the non-
intellectual parts or vice versa—the other elements affect
the intellect. Therefore you have to see it as one system.
That’s the crucial point, because otherwise you will never
be able to deal with it. If it is one system you deal with all
the parts.
44 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Is it possible to fit the concept of addiction into what you
were saying? I think of addiction as including not only
physical addiction to things like drugs and alcohol but also
various kinds of thought addiction. There are supposedly
positive and negative ones. A negative thought addiction
might be racism. A positive one could be the whole legion
of books that have been written in the area of ‘the power of
positive thinking’. Is this thought addiction part of the
incoherence 
you’re 
speaking 
about, 
or 
can 
it 
be
manipulated in positive ways?
Bohm: If you engage in positive thinking to overcome
negative thoughts, the negative thoughts are still there
acting. That’s still incoherence. It’s not enough just to
engage in positive thoughts when you have negative
thoughts registered, because they keep on working and will
cause trouble somewhere else.
I’ll just say a few words about addiction. One point is
that when you take a substance such as morphine, it acts by
covering up certain nerves or pain receptors so you don’t
feel pain. Now, the body can create natural substances of
similar molecular structure, called ‘endorphins’, which do
the same—perhaps even better. In fact, people say that
sometimes soldiers who have been badly wounded in battle
feel no pain. They have a lot of endorphins at the time, and
only later do they feel pain. So that has a useful function in
that it helps them to survive.
But it is also possible for thoughts—reassuring thoughts
or pleasant thoughts—to produce endorphins. And then
you could in some sense become addicted to those
thoughts, saying ‘I’ won’t give them up; even if they’re
wrong I’ll believe them to be true’. You can’t bear the idea
that what you want to think might not be true, because that
would remove the endorphins and then the pain would
start coming back.
So you can say that there is a kind of addiction in the
thought process which is possible. In fact, it’s one of the
SATURDAY MORNING 45

things 
that 
holds 
us. 
The 
thought 
process 
is
neurophysiological as well as intellectual and emotional. It
has physical and chemical elements. Medical investigators
have demonstrated this when they do various scans of the
brain. Every time you think, the blood distribution shifts all
around and all sorts of changes occur inside; there are
electrical brain waves that can be measured. Thus thought
has, 
at 
the 
very 
least, 
a 
certain 
basis 
in 
this
neurophysiological process; it can never be separated from
it. That’s something we have to keep in mind. And that
process is part of the system we’re talking about. Also, if
you physically alter that process—by putting drugs into
your body, for example—you’ve altered the system.
Q: Is there a space where a new thought comes in that’s not
conditioned, which enables us to have a dialogue?
Bohm: We will discuss dialogue later. For now I’ll say that
there may be a space, but we can start the dialogue without
considering that question and then discover whether there
is that space.
One point I wanted to emphasize last night was that we
don’t want to regard this system as an absolutely fixed
monolithic thing which you can never break into. It’s
actually not all that solid. It has chinks and lets some things
through, therefore there is an opportunity to do something.
You can’t control it, but opportunities do come up.
Q: What are the effects of the process of ‘positive thinking’
on our health? Wouldn’t there be a schizophrenic duality
between the fact of our negative thoughts and the illusion
of the positive thinking?
Bohm: If somebody wants to engage in positive thinking
it’s only because he is already caught up in negative
thinking. He wants to overcome that with positive thinking.
46 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

But the best he can hope for is to fill his mind with positive
thoughts so that the negative thoughts go into abeyance
and don’t bother him so much. 
Q: The thoughts go to the basement and stay there.
Bohm: Yes, they’re there; they are waiting. And when the
person somehow feels weak or frightened or something
happens, out they come; he hasn’t actually dealt with those
negative thoughts which are registered in his memory.
People only say things like ‘cheer up’ to somebody who’s
already depressed. If he’s depressed for some trivial reason
that may be all right, but if he has some less trivial reason it
won’t go away. He may cheer up for a while, but the
depression will come back. At the very best it’s not a real
solution, and at the worst it could bring in various
endorphins and make him addicted to false thoughts, and
so on. It is not a solution. We have to get deeper than that.
Q: Are you saying that we have a psychology in which our well-
being is based on having affirming images, and that that
psychology could never stand up as a real base for
wellbeing because sooner or later we’re going to get
negative images?
Bohm: Yes, so long as we take these images seriously. If we
can be cheered up by positive images we can be depressed
by negative ones. As long as we accept images as realities
we are in that trap, because you can’t control the images.
You may be getting some nice positive images from the
people around you and then along comes somebody who
gives you an extremely negative image. Then the very
channels which made you feel good because of the positive
image enable you to feel bad because of the negative image.
SATURDAY MORNING 47

Q: It seems you’re implying that in order to be really
attentive to what’s going on with thought, people would
have to do so in depth. The psychological world would be
the shadow side of the personality or the angry dogs in the
basement—what in psychology is called ‘guilt’. It is always
buried underneath and we’re seeing it in other people.
Bohm: We have to let anything come up which is going to
come up. But the point is that we have a mechanism for
preventing it from coming up. The brain is already
conditioned to keep it down. We have to understand that process.
Q: And that’s culturally reinforced.
Bohm: Yes, it’s always being reinforced. Let’s say that
things which are relevant would otherwise come up in
consciousness, but there is a whole mechanism to keep
them down.
Q: A kind of suppression happens even in some areas that
are considered good. Some people won’t accept anything
nice being said to them because they don’t see themselves
as being good.
Bohm: It’s all the same whether you say that you’re
wonderful or that you’re guilty. It’s just one image instead
of the other. The fundamental process is not different
whether you say ‘I’m the greatest and the best’, or you say
‘I’m the worst, I’m guilty of everything’. It is the same
process and the difference is rather secondary. If you say
you are the best, somebody is going to come along to
question that. And people often, for all sorts of complicated
reasons in their past, find it easier to accept guilt.
Q: Is it worth questioning the process of either? Don’t we
have to get underneath that whole process and see that any
48 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

image we have is not based on reality? So it’s not a question
of whether I should believe in the negative or the positive;
it’s understanding the whole thing in one piece. 
Bohm: That’s right. It is one system—the positive and the
negative. The positive and the negative are two sides of the
system. Anything positive is implicitly negative, and vice
versa. Let’s try to look at that.
Somewhere in the middle of the brain there are
pleasurepain centres. Researchers have access to those
centres in animals. I once saw an article which showed a
picture of a cat looking very pleased when they touched a
pleasure centre either electrically or chemically. Then when
they touched it a little stronger the cat looked very
frightened. When they touched it a little stronger still, it
looked enraged but somewhat pleased at the same time.
Rage was pleasure.
What they said was that every time you stir up pleasure,
all the pain centres around also come in to compensate.
Every time you stir up pain the pleasure centres come in.
There is always a mixture of the two. It’s a very complex
feeling. Suppose you stub your toe: you feel pain, but
meanwhile the pleasure centres are set to work to overcome
that. And when the pain goes away you then feel pleasure—
it’s left over. In other words, the pain has died away and
the pain centres are quiet for a moment. But the pleasure
centres take a bit longer to quiet because they were stirred
up a little later, so one turns into the other. Likewise, the
sense of fear and the sense of security will turn into each other.
Then the process gets more complex because we
introduce words about it, saying ‘this is pleasure, that is
pain’. We’ve introduced this way of saying that things are
either 
pleasurable 
or 
painful. 
If 
something 
is 
not
pleasurable, the implication is that it might be painful. Or if
you are losing the pleasure you had before, then there is an
implied loss—there is pain. On the other hand, if you think
that the pain is over then you are pleased by that. So
SATURDAY MORNING 49

pleasure directly implies pain, and pain implies pleasure.
You can’t separate the two—either at the level of chemistry
or at the level of the intellect, or anywhere else.
The attempt to have constant pleasure must fail, because
the pleasure centres get worn out. And the pain centres,
having been stimulated to balance them, will then start to
come in strongly. Thus there is no way to get pleasure
constantly. If you were to try to do it I think you would
discover that it would become painful. Pleasure is always a
transitory phenomenon.
The pleasure-pain reaction is generally appropriate for
the animal, but you can see that for thought it is not. The
criterion for coherent thought is that it is true and correct.
But if you can get pleasure or pain from thought then
coherent thought is no longer functioning. Rather, the
criterion has become whether the thought gives pleasure or
pain, consequently that thought becomes destructive. If
thought can be determined by pleasure or pain, that’s
already the beginning of a lot of trouble. And we get
conditioned by that. We’ll come back to all this a bit later.
Q: The endorphin feeling seems to be the best that we can
do without transforming into another state of being. We
seem to prefer to be in that, and spend our lives looking for
ways to be able to keep the endorphins active.
Bohm: Anything that would give endorphins would be
equivalent to taking morphine, or even better. You’d feel
good for the time being. But you can’t maintain the
endorphins forever; it’s bound to change. There are, for
example, other chemicals which can cause anxiety, and
there are still others that cause other reactions. They all go
on to the receptors in a way you can’t control. Therefore
that process of pursuing constant pleasure is not really
going to work. If you look at it you will find that the
attempt to control the endorphins is not coherent.
50 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: I find that out; still, the other state beyond doesn’t seem
to arrive.
Bohm: The ‘other state’ is projected by this system. If we
start by assuming that there is another state then we have
already gone into the system, because the projected image
of another state is also producing endorphins. We have to
see that the only right way to do it would be to say that we
want to see what is—what is correct, what is true, what is coherent.
Q: That’s not the same as seeking pleasure?
Bohm: No. But even if you do get pleasure from it, fine,
except that your seeing may get distorted. I’m saying the
key point is that this process is not coherent; none of it has
any meaning—whether you have pleasure or pain or fear or
whatever. When the process has sustained incoherence then
it all has no meaning. Somebody may get great pleasure by
deluding himself, an extreme case being ‘I’m God’ or ‘I’m
Napoleon’. And if he deludes himself sufficiently, perhaps
he could keep out all evidence to the contrary. But you
can’t maintain this forever without destructive consequences.
So the attempt to live by pleasure or endorphins is not
coherent. We are caught up in a process, in a system which
isn’t making sense. That’s the first thing to notice. Then
what do we do? I think we have to understand this process better.
Q: Does being aware of the system already bypass the
chemistry, and therefore the thought is not getting hooked
up into the chemistry of the endorphins?
Bohm: To some extent. But probably you would find it
would get hooked up later anyway, because something
would happen that comes in too fast or too powerfully.
SATURDAY MORNING 51

Q: I didn’t mean forever; but at the moment when you are
watching this process unfolding, maybe you’ve, in a way,
gone out the back door—away from the fear of the pain and
the need for the endorphins. 
Bohm: Let’s say you may have begun to move on another
level; or there may be another level that is awakening,
which is not controlled by the system. That’s a possibility.
Q: Aren’t we starting this enquiry with the notion that ‘I’
am inquiring, ‘I’ have ‘my’ endorphins, and so forth? Right
there might be a tremendous assumption.
Bohm: Yes, but we have to say all that. I am all the content
of the system, but at the same time I may have a potential
for more. That’s all we can say. We’re not assuming. We are
exploring —do we have the potential for more than the
content of the system?
Q: ‘What’ inquires might have nothing to do with endorphins.
Bohm: There may be a potential beyond the system. If it’s
true inquiry, then perhaps it is beyond the system. But
don’t assume it, because then it will be part of the system.
Every assumption goes into the system.
There’s another way we can look at this which gives
some insight: that is to look at thought as a set of reflexes.
Now, what is a reflex? ‘Reflex’ means ‘to bend back’, ‘to
turn back’—the same as ‘reflect’. If you hit your bone at the
knee, the knee will jerk. What happens is that the nerves
carrying the signal meet somewhere; they cross over,
perhaps in the spine, and go out as a signal to make your
knee jerk. That’s one of the most elementary reflexes.
We have a lot of reflexes, and they can be conditioned.
For instance, dogs have a reflex that makes them salivate
when they see food. A reflex means that when a certain
52 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

thing happens, as a result something else happens
automatically. Pavlov did an experiment where he rang a
bell while showing food to a dog. He did this many times,
and after a while the dog would salivate without seeing
food, just from hearing the bell. Perhaps the bell reminded
the dog of the food, or perhaps eventually it skipped that
stage and the bell just made the dog salivate directly. But
the reflex was conditioned by the bell; in other words, it
was subject to another condition.
That is the basic form of conditioning—to repeat
something quite often. It somehow leaves a mark in the
system, in the nerves, and then a reflex has been altered.
You can see the conditioning of reflexes all the time. In fact,
a great deal of our routine learning consists in establishing
conditioned reflexes. As an example, when you learn to
drive a car, you are trying to condition your reflexes so that
they will be appropriate. It’s the same when you learn to write
—you don’t want to have to think all the time of how
you’re going to form the letters—or when you learn to walk
or to do various other things. So certain reflexes are
established and conditioned.
We’ve said that when we have a thought it registers in
the memory. It registers in the form of a reflex. Memories
often take that form—you see something and it reminds
you of something or it makes you do something or it makes
you see something in a certain way. Those are a kind of
reflex. And conditioned reflexes can affect the feelings.
Somebody may say something to you, and you get a certain
feeling in response to what was said. It may frighten you,
which could affect your adrenalin, and that could affect
your thoughts; then one thought leads to another and that
leads to another. You get a chain of thought.
You could say that elementary thoughts may take the
form of a series of reflexes—such as, if somebody asks you
your name you have an immediate answer. It’s a reflex.
With a more difficult question there’s a way the mind
searches in the memory for answers; there is a ‘searching
SATURDAY MORNING 53

reflex’ set up—the mind searches the memory, finds an
answer that may seem to fit, and then that answer comes
out and you can see whether it does fit or not.
I’m proposing that this whole system works by a set of reflexes
—that thought is a very subtle set of reflexes which is
potentially unlimited; you can add more and more and you
can modify your reflexes. Suppose like a logician you say:
‘All swans are white. This bird is a swan therefore this bird
is white.’ But then you modify this by saying ‘I’ve seen that
some swans may not be white.’ And so on. Even the whole
logical process, once it’s committed to memory, becomes a
set of reflexes. You think logically by a set of reflexes. There
may be a perception of reason beyond the reflexes, but
anything perceived becomes sooner or later a set of reflexes.
And that’s what I want to call ‘thought’—which includes
the emotion, the bodily state, the physical reaction and
everything else.
I say that it’s useful to look at this as a system of reflexes.
A reflex just operates, as we’ve seen in the case of the
kneejerk. However, we don’t usually think that thought is
like the knee-jerk reflex. We think we are controlling
thought and producing thought. That way of thinking is
part of our whole background. But I’m suggesting that it’s
not generally so—that a vast part of our thought just comes
out from the reflex system. You only find out what the
thought is after it comes out. Now, this really overturns a
great deal of the way we look at the mind or the personality
or our entire cultural background.
So it’s worth pondering that this whole system, which we
are calling ‘thought’, works as a system of reflexes. The
question is: can you become aware of the reflex character of thought
—that it is a reflex, that it is a whole system of reflexes
which is constantly capable of being modified, added to,
changed? And we could say that as long as the reflexes are
free to change then there must be some kind of intelligence
or perception, something a bit beyond the reflex, which
would be able to see whether it’s coherent or not. But when
54 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

it gets conditioned too strongly it may resist that
perception; it may not allow it. Is that clear what I mean?
The point is that these reflexes serve us if they are not too
rigid. And if they don’t work, if they are incoherent, we can
drop them or they may drop themselves. On the other
hand, when the reflex gets very strong and rigid it won’t be dropped.
I think there is a neurophysiological chemical reason for
that. Every thought involves some change in the chemistry
of the system. A strong thought with a lot of emotion, for
instance, involves a bigger change. Or a constant repetition
builds up the change. And both together make a very
powerful effect. It’s been observed that the nerves in the
brain don’t quite touch each other, but there are synapses
which connect them. Researchers say that experience,
perception, 
thought, 
and 
so 
on, 
establish 
synapse
connections. We may assume that the more you repeat a
pattern, the stronger those connections become; and after a
while they get very strong, very hard to shake. You could
say that something happens in the chemistry, in the
physics, in the neurophysiological process. So this is not
purely an intellectual problem or an emotional problem or
even 
a 
physical 
problem. 
Rather, 
the 
reflexes 
get
conditioned very strongly, and they are very hard to change.
And they also interfere. A reflex may connect to the
endorphins and produce an impulse to hold that whole
pattern further. In other words, it produces a defensive
reflex. Not merely is it stuck because it’s chemically so well
built up, but also there is a defensive reflex which defends
against evidence which might weaken it. Thus it all
happens, one reflex after another after another. It’s just a
vast system of reflexes. And they form a ‘structure’ as they
get more rigid.
Q: Isn’t this the evolution of learning? Isn’t this also how
our bodies have evolved?
SATURDAY MORNING 55

Bohm: It may be. But now the question is: are those reflexes
coherent? According to the theory of evolution, incoherent
systems don’t last very long. This is called ‘natural
selection’. In thought, however, we seem to be able to keep
up these incoherent systems of reflexes, at least quite a
while. Sometimes the people who have them might not live
very long, but in our society we have arranged conditions
where we can go on with a lot of incoherence without
actually leading to a selection process. The point is that
reflexes can become incoherent and get stuck because of all
these mechanisms.
Q: If you had to use another word for incoherence, what
would it be?
Bohm: ‘Inconsistency’, ‘Conflict’. What is incoherent may
show up as contradiction, as stress.
Q: Inappropriate?
Bohm: Inappropriate, yes, if it’s sustained. What I mean is
that if there is sustained incoherence, it just keeps on going
in spite of the fact that there is evidence which would show
that it’s incoherent. Now, we could say that an intelligent
response on seeing incoherence would be to stop it, to
suspend it and begin to look out for the reason for the
incoherence and then to change it. But I say there is a
defensive incoherence. An incoherent train of thought
which gets attached to the endorphins will typically defend
itself, because you will feel very uncomfortable when it is
questioned; the questioning starts to remove the endorphins.
Q: Is there an analogy between incoherence and cancer?
Bohm: Cancer is an incoherent growth. It’s incoherent with
the whole system of the body, and it grows on its own. For
56 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

some reason the cancer is not accepting whatever system
the body uses to keep itself in order; it defends itself against
it, and in fact even mobilizes the body to support it. I’ve
read that certain kinds of cancers can send out chemicals to
the body which cause the body to grow blood vessels to
feed the cancer, which is a highly incoherent process from
the point of view of the body. 
Q: From that standpoint, any form of disease would be the
same thing.
Bohm: Yes, a kind of incoherence. It’s incoherent with the
organism as a whole.
Q: Could we say that stress would be a crystallization of
the system?
Bohm: Stress would be a lot of conflict resulting from this
incoherence. You can see that it affects the chemistry, not
only in the brain but all over the body, and produces
further changes which keep on accumulating.
Q: Can we use the word ‘reaction’ with reflexes? Are these
reflexes all physiological or is the reaction psychological?
Bohm: I want to emphasize that it is not just psychological.
Every reaction is also neurophysiological. That’s why I
prefer to call it a reflex. Every reaction of thought is always
simultaneously emotional, neurophysiological, chemical
and everything else. It is all one system. In some cases that
may not be important, but there is always a slight effect at
the very least. And when there’s a powerful conditioning
then the effect is very great. I mean, when you just have a
thought such as ‘the cup is on the table’ it’s a rather minor
effect; but some physical effect is going on just to say that.
SATURDAY MORNING 57

Q: Could we say that anything we do or think that is out of
harmony with the whole would be incoherence?
Bohm: It depends on what we mean by ‘the whole’. It’s
hard to give a positive definition, but the basic sign of
incoherence is that you’re getting some result which you
don’t intend and don’t want. And the other signs are
contradiction, conflict, stress, all those things.
Q: Confusion?
Bohm: Confusion, yes.
Q: And also our action to try to get out of the confusion
would be incoherent?
Bohm: We may have an inappropriate action. Within the
system, the action to get out is part of the trouble.
Q: A moment ago it was asked whether anything out of
harmony with the whole would be incoherence. But it
seems we couldn’t know what the whole actually is, and
incoherence could only be in less than the whole.
Bohm: Some part is not coherent with the rest, yes.
Q: We’ve established limits within the whole. Perhaps our
craziness as human beings might really be part of a greater
coherence, by eliminating the species because it’s such a
reprehensible one.
Bohm: If you take a great enough whole then it’s coherent.
That is, the universe as a whole is coherent, and anything
incoherent we do is just part of the coherence of the
58 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

universe when we look at it that way, even though if we do
something crazy we will get a result we don’t want.
Q: So out of our level of incoherence we might try to
become 
coherent, and that might 
be part of the
incoherence? 
Bohm: You could say that in the universe as a whole there’s
no reason to say there is incoherence. But we, in our
particular structure, are not coherent. And a species that is
not coherent either with itself or with its environment
doesn’t survive. That’s part of the coherence of the
universe. It is precisely because the universe is coherent
that an incoherent species doesn’t survive.
Q: Questioning our incoherence may also be part of our
coherence. It could be the universal coherence that’s
stepping in and saying: ‘Wait a minute. This isn’t working.’
Bohm: It could be that that’s part of it too. The question is
then: which is going to prevail—this questioning or the old
conditioning habits?
Q: Would you say that at the moment of conception, each
human being is pretty much predestined to have this
incoherence?
Bohm: I think it’s built into the nature of thought that this
is a possibility. And by now we have built up a society and
a culture which implants it in everybody, even if it were not
there. But because thought is reflex, the minute there were
creatures who could think that much, there was the
possibility that thought wouldn’t behave coherently.
Now, I’ve outlined to you the possibility of conditioning
the reflex—by repetition, by powerful emotions, by
defensive methods, and other ways. And when it’s strongly
SATURDAY MORNING 59

conditioned, the reflex could get stuck. Then there would
come a time when that reflex was no longer appropriate but
it wouldn’t be able to change; therefore, that would
produce incoherence. If something changes and the reflex
doesn’t, you have incoherence.
Q: What would you call death in relation to life? 
Bohm: From the point of view of the species, death is part
of this whole process. You could say that species have
evolved in such a way that individual members last a
certain time. Perhaps a certain kind of species would be
better able to survive if the individuals didn’t last too long.
Other kinds could last longer.
Q: Doesn’t it all end in death?
Bohm: It depends on what you mean by ‘all’.
Q: Eventually—in the terms of time.
Bohm: But the universe doesn’t end in death. This present
universe may itself change, but perhaps there’s something
beyond that. So it’s more accurate to say that any particular
thing will end in death.
The question of death is very long and subtle, and we
might get to it more, later. For the moment we can say that
any material structure is always changing and cannot last
forever. We need to ask whether our attitude toward death
is coherent or not. There is no point asking whether death is
coherent or not; death is just a fact. However, our attitude
may not be coherent; maybe that’s why death disturbs us so
much.
Q: What are the criteria for coherence?
60 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: There’s no unique criterion for coherence, but you
have to be sensitive to incoherence. And as we’ve said, the
test for incoherence is whether you’re getting the results
you don’t want.
Q: Then it’s incoherent to have two things which are
opposing each other? 
Bohm: That’s right. You can see that as contradiction and
conflict and confusion. Coherence is sensed as harmony,
order, beauty, goodness, truth, and all that everybody wants.
Q: Is the incoherence in the DNA, and are we born with that?
Bohm: Not this particular incoherence in thought. The
possibility of our thinking is somehow in the DNA; as is the
possibility that the thinking could go wrong, given a set of
circumstances which will condition it to go wrong. And
somehow in the history of the human race that has
happened. We don’t know whether it was inevitable. But
considering the nature of our brain, we can see that it looks
likely that this sort of thing could happen.
Q: Maybe that is why a Hitler is born.
Bohm: Well, it’s also the society. It’s the incoherence in the
system as a whole which produced Hitler. It was not only
his genes, but also he grew up in the Austrian society
which had some very nasty incoherent features at the time.
For instance, Hitler was beaten mercilessly by his father and
he ran away when he was young. And he was beaten when
he came back. Also, many people say that Hitler thought he
had a Jewish ancestor, and this disturbed him because he
hated the Jews so much. All of this must have muddled him
up very badly.
SATURDAY MORNING 61

So you can see there are all sorts of factors which added
in. Maybe if they hadn’t been there he would have been
different. Who knows? That particular genetic structure
born into that particular crazy society produced Hitler.
Perhaps somewhere else it would have produced something
else. Maybe in some other situation he would have been a
great genius, because he did have some kind of ability. 
Q: Would you say that any form of violence or disturbance
would be incoherent?
Bohm: According to the dictionary ‘violence’ means ‘the
undue use of force’. And that’s a kind of incoherence. If
you’re using force where force is not called for, that’s
incoherent. For example, if a problem arises in thought and
you use force to try to solve it, that is uncalled for.
Therefore, the attempt to deal with social problems by force
is incoherent, because the problems all arise in thought.
And violence will never solve the problem in thought.
Q: Do you think our cosmology is coherent?
Bohm: Probably not. No thought is fully coherent. The
nature of thought is such that it is partial. We will discuss
that later. But when we discover incoherence, our attitude
can be either to move toward coherence or to defend the incoherence.
The kind of incoherence I’m talking about is the defence
of the first kind of incoherence. Suppose you get used to
certain reassurances of security and those reassurances give
you endorphins. Then if evidence comes up that you’re not
so secure, you may reject that evidence. Not looking at the
evidence is evidence of incoherence. As I’ve pointed out,
there is a defence against seeing incoherence; and it is
incoherent to defend against seeing incoherence. Now, that
is the kind of incoherence I’m talking about, because you
62 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

will never get rid of all incoherence in thought. Do you see
what I mean?
Q: There’s a defence against seeing incoherence because it
interrupts the cosmology or belief system which we’ve all
been imprinted with.
Bohm: It’s much more complex than that. Our thoughts and
beliefs have been connected to the endorphins, and when
we question them we start removing a lot of endorphins
from the brain. And suddenly the brain cells are jangling
terribly, saying ‘Quick, do something to stop this’. But the
thing to do is to reject that.
Q: It seems, though, that we can’t look at our cosmology.
Bohm: You can look at it. But that’s only part of it; it’s not
the whole of it.
You cannot separate one part of the system from the
other. If we had our brains working properly we could
learn some cosmology and say: ‘Yes, how interesting. A
good chance to find a new cosmology.’ But on the other
hand, if we get a lot of comfort out of our cosmology, the
brain cells will suddenly jangle and erupt when we try to
question it; they won’t give us a chance to look at it.
Q: Is envy a sign of incoherence?
Bohm: Envy is the same sort of thing. It’s a comparison
with somebody and saying that he has something I need or
want. And then that makes you feel uncomfortable. Perhaps
it removes a lot of endorphins from your brain cells. In any
event, you get a very great discomfort and say ‘the way to
get back my sense of well being and comfortable feeling is
to get what he has’. The potential for producing envy is an
integral part of the brain, but it isn’t necessary that envy be
SATURDAY MORNING 63

actualized all the time. If we can begin to see the process
which is making envy, then the envy can come to an end.
Q: What about people who seem to glory and delight in
misery? Is that producing some kind of endorphins also?
Bohm: They’re probably getting some kind of pleasure out
of it, although it’s a very twisted kind of thought that gives
pleasure from misery. But there are all sorts of ways to
produce endorphins.
Q: Are you differentiating now between feeling bad and
feeling good, saying they’re not the same?
Bohm: No. I’m saying that you can feel either good or bad
for twisted reasons.
Q: Is there a difference though?
Bohm: If the reasons are twisted then there’s no difference.
But if you feel genuinely good then that’s different. Or you
may feel bad because you’re not physically well, and so on.
I think that the question of making good or bad feeling
the key to your thought process is part of the incoherence.
The question is: what about coherence in truth? Doesn’t that
take precedence?
Q: Then we’re not saying coherence is good and
incoherence is bad. We’re just saying that is what they are
according to their own thing?
Bohm: We’re saying that there is a second order of
incoherence which avoids facing the first order; this second
order avoids facing evidence of incoherence. And also we’re
saying that that will produce all sorts of consequences
64 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

which are destructive. Now, if you don’t mind destructive
consequences, OK go ahead.
Q: The only reason I bring this up is that we might get the
notion in our thinking that incoherence is bad and it
shouldn’t happen, rather than that it’s a conflict which
apparently wants to resolve itself. We’re not in a position to
say good or bad.
Bohm: Well, morals have no place at this stage. We’re just
trying to get a clear perception of all this. But you will
discover that, in fact, you don’t want to be constantly
getting results which you don’t want. At some stage you
will discover that incoherence is producing all sorts of
things you don’t want, and perhaps you would like to get
rid of it, or at least get rid of that second-order kind.
Q: A good clue would be to look at any form of violence,
such as a person defending himself or wanting to change
something that’s frustrating. That would be a clue. That is
incoherence right there.
Bohm: That’s right. There are all sorts of clues. You have to
become sensitive to those clues.
The principal thing to notice is that your incoherent
actions are reflexes. You are not doing them on purpose.
You don’t know that you are doing them. It’s the same as
the way your knee jerks when you hit it, whether you like it
or not. Similarly, when something touches those reflex
conditionings, you just jerk. It produces the result which
you don’t want. So consciously you’re trying to get ‘A’, but
the reflex jerks and gives you ‘B’. And you say: ‘I don’t
want “B”.’ You don’t know where it’s coming from, so you
fight ‘B’ while you keep on with the reflex that produces it.
Do you see that that’s where the problem is?
SATURDAY MORNING 65

Q: Are we talking about the possibility of an interval? If
you attack me negatively, I could hold my reaction in
abeyance. Is that a way to deal with this process?
Bohm: You could try that. But I’m suggesting that we’re
engaging in learning about this. We don’t know yet what to
do with it. We have to be interested in learning for its own
sake, because if we have any other sake it’s going to enter
the conditioning.
You will find, nevertheless, that you do want to learn for
the sake of making things better. But then you have to say
‘well, that is also another reflex’. One reflex brings up
another. So you say: ‘I’ve understood now; and I’ve learned
that doing things for the purpose of making things better
may be a trap—it doesn’t work in this area.’ I’ve learned
that, but I still do it because the reflexes still work. Then
you need to say ‘I have to learn about those reflexes which
are diverting me’. What’s characteristic of this is that I seem
to understand that point but the reflexes continue.
However, from what we said you will see that it’s
inevitable that that happens, because we first understand it
on a certain abstract level—we haven’t touched those
reflexes. It’s similar to the fact that you don’t change the knee-
jerk reflex just by saying ‘I understand that my knee jerks
whenever you hit it’.
How are we going to change the reflexes? That’s the
question. Understanding is important, but it will not be
enough.
Q: Maybe something deeper happens after this intellectual
understanding.
Bohm: It may, but very generally people find that it doesn’t
work. I’m saying we have to go deeper somehow;
something more is needed. We’ll come to the possibility
later that somebody may get an understanding so deep that
it does touch the reflexes, and then the thought process will
66 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

change. But usually the understanding is a verbal
understanding or an intellectual understanding or an
image. That doesn’t mean that it has no value, but it means
that it is still too abstract.
Q: 
Maybe 
some 
‘homework’ 
is 
needed 
for 
the
understanding to go deeper. 
Bohm: That’s it, some ‘homework’ which will make it touch
the reflexes. Unfortunately, we’re often taught in school that
when you have understood something abstractly you have
understood it completely. But even there, when the time
comes to put what you’ve learned into practice you often can’t.
The thing we need to notice is that when we try this and
it doesn’t work, the first response may be: ‘It doesn’t work.
I give up.’ But in anything where you are serious you don’t
do that. If you’re serious about something you say: ‘Well,
OK it didn’t work. Why not?’
Q: I wonder if part of our difficulty is that we’re imbued
with the notion that we can understand, whereas the
understanding you are referring to might have nothing to
do with anything I know about or can grasp. Actual
understanding might be something operating in an entirely
different level and one would never say that one understood.
Bohm: There is some confusion about understanding; let’s
put it that way. We have to get further into the question of
what it means.
People may see things they are doing wrong, but then
when they’re not paying attention they find themselves
doing them anyway. And I think the reason for that is
simple: this system consists of a set of reflexes, and that’s
exactly what reflexes do. For instance, if you brush your
teeth in the morning you follow a routine. But you may
very often start doing things as a routine when it is not the
SATURDAY MORNING 67

right occasion to do so. And if you pay attention you may
find it’s not working, and you say ‘here’s an incoherence’.
You then stop.
So I think we need to pay attention. And if we think of
thoughts as reflexes, it will help us to understand the
system better and it will also begin to point to another level.
The reflexes are on the level of the neurophysiology and the
chemistry. The thought process is also chemistry; but it’s a
very much more subtle abstract level—the intellectual part
of the thought process does not directly touch the reflexes.
Q: You can’t think your knee not to jerk.
Bohm: Right.
Q: We are still on the sophist and intellectual level.
Attention is really a potential to take us deeper.
Bohm: Yes, we have to get the kind of attention that will
take us deeper.
But I do think that it’s valuable to draw this ‘intellectual
map’. In any case the intellect has to be clear, because we
already have a large number of unclear intellectual maps
about this thought process. The whole culture has given us
a lot of maps. For example, it’s been said that thought and
feeling and the chemistry are all different. That’s a map
which is misleading. There are a lot of maps of that kind
which are wrong. What we need to do is to get somewhat
free of those and to develop a more coherent map, although
that alone is not going to do it.
Q: Isn’t part of the problem the fact that the initial reflex is conditioned?
Bohm: Yes, but that’s the nature of reflexes—to get
conditioned when you repeat them. They will inevitably
produce ‘carry-on’ effects.
68 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Suppose you intellectually understood this process, but
that initial reflex was still so enticing that you can’t drop it.
Bohm: 
That’s 
the 
problem. 
You 
can 
intellectually
understand it, but it still carries on. The enticement is part
of the reflex, it’s the chemical part of the reflex. The reflex
produces endorphins or some other chemical, which will
produce a sense of enticement.
Q: Then seeing deeper is a matter of perspective?
Bohm: I think that it’s a bit more than that. Let’s try to go
into it as we go along.
We will have a break now.
Bohm: I’d like to extend this whole idea a little further. We
inevitably have a kind of thought about thought, an
intellectual map of the thought process which is sort of
endemic; it’s spread all through our culture—we pick it up
here and there. For instance, saying ‘think positively’ is a
kind of intellectual idea about thought, implying that you
should control thought in order to deal with depression.
There are all sorts of ideas circulating around.
I’m suggesting that we need to present some sort of map
of thought which may be more coherent than the unspoken
map implicit in our culture, because if we are being guided
by incoherent ideas which are already part of our reflex
system we will go wrong. And we can’t just choose not to
go wrong, because those incoherent ideas are already part
of the reflex system. Therefore, the first step is at least to
look at some other ideas which may be more coherent.
Later we’ll have to ask whether anything can really touch
the reflexes, because if there is no way to affect them then
we’re stuck.
Now, I want to add something to this notion of reflex.
One of the most powerful thoughts people have is the
SATURDAY MORNING 69

thought of necessity. It is much more than a thought. The
word ‘necessary’ means ‘it cannot be otherwise’, and the
Latin root means ‘don’t yield’. It suggests the emotional-
physical stance of resisting, holding. That’s the other side of
the reflex system: when you say ‘it cannot be otherwise’, in
effect you’re saying: ‘It has got to be this way. I have to
keep it this way.’ You have a hold. Something that is
necessary is a very powerful force which you can’t turn
aside. Yet you may say ‘I have to turn it aside’. Thus we
establish an order of necessity, saying ‘this turns aside for
that, and this for that’.
This notion of necessity is crucial to our whole ordering
of thought; as is its opposite, which is contingency.
‘Contingency’ means ‘what can be otherwise’. If something
can be otherwise, its meaningful to try to change it. If it
cannot be otherwise, then there’s no use trying. This will
have a tremendous effect. If you think something is
impossible to do, you are bringing in necessity by saying
that it necessarily can’t be done. Therefore, you can’t do it
and you will not try. So the assumption that something is
impossible may well trap you into making it impossible. On
the other hand, you may assume something is possible
which is not, and just batter your head on a stone wall.
We have to get straight on what is necessity and what is
contingency. And in each situation this is what you’re
doing all the time. You’re trying to assess the necessity and
contingency. We may see an object and say ‘this will not
turn aside from my hand’. I don’t expect my hand to go
through the object; if it went through I’d be very surprised.
As an illustration, there was an exhibition of holography
which projected a very realistic image of a ship, and two
people came in who evidently didn’t know anything about
it. One woman came over and decided to take hold of the
ship and her hand went through it. She didn’t understand
and there was a look of horror on her face. And she said to
her companion ‘let’s get out of here’.
70 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

We count on the notion of necessity, saying: ‘This will
stand up. This will be stable. This cannot be turned aside.’
We count on the earth being something that won’t turn
aside. And when it shakes we find it very disturbing—
psychologically as well as physically.
The point is that the notion of necessity and contingency
is always operating. Everybody is using it all the time
without even thinking about doing so; it becomes part of
our reflexes. And this is important, because this also is
connected with our idea of reality—things which are real
won’t be turned aside. They will sort of resist; they’re
pushing, and so on. Now, there are various ways of testing
for reality. Things we consider real are stable, they resist,
they have a kind of internal necessity that holds. The whole
idea of reality is bound together with the concept of
necessity, as in the example I just gave: if your hand goes
through the ship it’s a sign that it is not real.
The notion of reality is also clearly very important in our
whole psychic make-up. The difference between being real
or unreal or illusory is crucial. So the notion of necessity
creates a powerful reflex—‘it really has to be that way’. If
we not only add emotion and repetition to the reflex, but also
add the notion of necessity, the reflex becomes very powerful
—especially if we say ‘it’s always necessary’. Something
may be necessary some of the time, but then it may have to
turn aside at another time. But if we say ‘it’s always
necessary’, that means it is absolutely necessary, it cannot
turn aside. For instance, if we say that the nation is
sovereign, then that becomes absolute necessity and there’s
no way of turning that aside. And if two nations assert their
sovereignty in the same place, what can they do? There is
no way to turn aside, and therefore they have to fight. Or
two religions in the same way—‘God is absolute necessity’,
and ‘God has got to be this way and not that way’.
There are similar questions all through life. Wherever
people are finding it hard to get along you will discover
that they have different assumptions as to what is necessary
SATURDAY MORNING 71

or absolutely necessary. If you look at it you can see that
that’s what they’re fighting about. One feels this is
necessary and the other that, and they cannot turn aside.
Negotiation is an attempt to make people turn aside for
each other and to adjust and adapt, which admits that there
is some contingency in what they thought was necessary.
The question of dialogue, which we’re going to get into,
is involved very much in what you assume to be necessary.
The assumptions of what is necessary are what prevent
dialogue. They create a set of reflexes to defend with
absolute force. They give power to the reflex.
The instinct of self-preservation is generally regarded as a
very powerful set of reflexes built in by a set of genes, but
the notion of absolute necessity will override that every
time. You may say ‘my instinct is to preserve life’. But if the
country says ‘it’s absolutely necessary to risk it’, then you
have to risk it. Most people will feel that way. Or if you say
‘God demands it’, then the demands of God may override
all the instincts. Or whatever it is. Your ambition may
override the instincts, if it’s absolutely necessary to achieve
your ambition.
There’s a tremendous force in this. This notion of
necessity is not merely intellectual. It involves everything. It
involves the chemistry, which means that all the adrenalin
you need will be released when you have to defend your
assumptions of necessity. Whatever is needed will be made
available. And then too, this may have a very valuable side
to it. If you are ever going to accomplish anything, you
need some of that sense of necessity. If you don’t think
something is very necessary you won’t have much energy
to do it. You could say that nobody ever went through
difficulties to accomplish anything without feeling that it
was necessary. So if you feel that going into thought is
necessary then perhaps it will continue against the
difficulty. On the other hand, you may feel that some crazy
incoherent thing is absolutely necessary and go on with that.
72 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Therefore, it’s important to pay attention to these notions
of necessity—what is assumed to be necessary and
absolutely so, and how it moves you. You begin to notice
that. You get that feeling of urge. You’re impelled; you have
an impulse to act. ‘Impelled’ means ‘being pushed from
within’. Sometimes you are being compelled, which is a bit stronger
—a compulsive urge. Or propelled. Or perhaps even
repelled. But it’s all the same process—it’s necessity at
work, giving a push.
Thus you feel an impulse and you say ‘that’s me, having
an impulse’. You don’t see that there is a system involving
the thought beneath the impulse. And your intentions may
arise in that system. Thus researchers have made electrical
measurements 
and 
shown 
that 
there 
is 
some
electrochemical process in the brain that precedes your
conscious intention. The impulse is coming from the whole
system. It’s built up.
Now, it’s important to see that this is all connected,
because this is not a place where it’s correct to break up
things and to separate them. In some cases it is correct to
separate things—such as saying that the table is separate
from the chair because one can move independently of the
other. But when things are tightly connected then we
shouldn’t separate them in our minds. We may distinguish
certain things for the sake of convenience. The word
‘distinguish’ means ‘to mark apart’. A distinction is merely
a mark which is made for convenience; it doesn’t mean that
the thing is broken. It’s like a dotted line, whereas when we
represent something as divided it’s a solid line. So in our
minds we should draw dotted lines between thinking and
feeling and chemistry and so on, not solid lines. Likewise, it
would be good to draw only a dotted line between
countries as well—because actually it’s a distinction, rather
than a division of two different things which are independent.
We have to be able to think of this clearly; even though,
as I said, that by itself won’t really change the reflexes. But
if we don’t think of it clearly then all our attempts to get
SATURDAY MORNING 73

into this will go wrong. Clear thinking implies that we are
in some way awakened a little bit. Perhaps there is
something beyond the reflex which is at work—in other
words, something unconditioned.
The question is really: is there the unconditioned? If
everything is conditioned, then there’s no way out. But the
very fact that we are sometimes able to see new things
would suggest that there is the unconditioned. Maybe the
deeper material structure of the brain is unconditioned, or
maybe beyond. We’ll discuss that later. It doesn’t matter at
this stage where it is, as long as it could act. If there is the
unconditioned, 
which 
could 
be 
the 
movement 
of
intelligence, then there is some possibility of getting into this.
We are saying that, perhaps unbeknownst to us, the
unconditioned may have operated a little. We’re not trying
to say that the conditioning is absolutely solid and frozen,
all and forever; that’s the point. And if we are going to do
this sort of thing that we’re doing, to be coherent we at least
have to suppose that there may be the unconditioned. If we
don’t suppose that, it may be then that we are totally
incoherent in our very attempt to do it. If we say that there
cannot be the unconditioned, then it would be foolish for us
to try to do anything with the conditioning. Is that clear?
Q: If we made such a statement, we would have assumed a
tremendous position of knowing.
Bohm: If we once assume that there cannot be the
unconditioned, then we’re stuck. On the other hand, if we
assume that there is the unconditioned, again we are going
to 
be 
stuck—we 
will 
produce 
an 
image 
of 
the
unconditioned in the system of conditioning, and mistake
the image for the unconditioned. Therefore, let’s say that
there may be the unconditioned. We leave room for that.
We have to leave room in our thought for possibilities.
74 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Wouldn’t we have to say more, in the sense that thought
could never know that there is only the conditioned? It
would be way past its bounds for thought to make such a
statement.
Bohm: Yes, it’s incoherent for thought to make that
statement. It’s fairly evident that thought doesn’t know that
much. If thought merely sticks to what it knows, it has no
way of saying there is no unconditioned, nor can it safely
say there is the unconditioned. Now that means what? That
we don’t know. But we may say we suspect that there is the
unconditioned —we have seen evidence that there may be.
We can go into this more, later. 
Q: Is evidence of the unconditioned sometimes seen in creativity?
Bohm: Yes, some evidence. You could say the fact of
creativity suggests that there is the unconditioned. But it
doesn’t prove it, because some people in artificial
intelligence would say that what you consider creativity is
merely a much deeper form of conditioning which you
don’t see.
Q: Even that would be better than the conditioning we have
now.
Q: But that would just amount to expanding our limitations.
Bohm: We might still get incoherence. And incoherence
with creativity has become more dangerous than without it.
Without having created all these modern scientific things,
we might be much safer. Thus, if we were still at the Stone
Age level we could go on with our incoherence. We would
be quite safe with our incoherence; we wouldn’t have the
means of doing very much. We could probably survive
indefinitely. Actually, the evidence is that the Stone Age
SATURDAY MORNING 75

people were more coherent than we are anyway. At least
their attitude to nature was more coherent. But even if they
were as incoherent as we are they could probably survive,
because they could not do that much damage.
But our creative technology challenges us. We have to be
coherent. At least we have to move towards coherence, or
else all sorts of disasters may occur.
Q: Can I work on my conditioning intellectually by
realizing, for instance, that I don’t feel good when
somebody yells at me? Can I look at that without having
expectations of the end result, of what it would be like if I
didn’t have this conditioning, and just let it be? 
Bohm: But what happens then? Suppose you say ‘I don’t
feel good when somebody yells at me’. Then you ask ‘why
not?’. What’s the answer?
Q: I have to look within to see if there’s any connection of
similar groups of memories, that it’s not really that
particular person who’s yelling but any person who’s yelling.
Bohm: You have a general assumption there, don’t you?
That you are the sort of person who should not be yelled at,
that it’s absolutely necessary that nobody should yell at
you. That seems to be the assumption. I think it’s worth
fishing around to try to put the assumption into words. It’s
important to get it into words, because otherwise you miss it
—the brain is set up to hide the assumption.
Q: My understanding is that they have a right to yell.
Bohm: But not at you.
Q: No, that doesn’t matter. What matters is why I am
reacting to it.
76 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: Let’s say that before you got that far the first thing
you found was that you were disturbed by somebody
yelling at you. And now say why.
Q: Because it didn’t make me feel good.
Bohm: But why is that? The feelings are bound up with the thoughts
—we just said it’s all one system. So maybe there is a
thought that’s behind it.
Q: The thought is ‘I’m not good’. 
Bohm: But why is that? If somebody yells, that doesn’t
prove you’re not good.
Q: I believe that because of my conditioning.
Bohm: I’m saying that then you have another thought
further back—which you may have forgotten from your
parents—which says that whenever they thought you were
no good they yelled at you. Accordingly you have an
assumption in there, that ‘whenever anybody yells at me it
means that I’m no good’. And whenever I’m no good I feel
uncomfortable. That’s another reflex. Those two work
together as a reflex: whenever anybody yells at me it means
I’m no good, and whenever I’m no good it means I can’t
feel good. Now, those two thoughts are working in the chemistry.
Q: And I don’t like what it does to me.
Bohm: You don’t like that chemical effect; it’s very
disturbing. It makes sense that that chemical is disturbing. I
mean, we can’t criticize that.
SATURDAY MORNING 77

Q: I’m asking if I can have a perception that can make the
needle jump the groove in my memory into a space where
that programming is cancelled.
Bohm: Well, that’s what we’re exploring: can it be done?
But what’s implied is that there has to be an electrochemical
change in the brain. To reach an intellectual conclusion is
not enough. We have a certain set of thoughts which have
begun to point to the problem. And we have that same
problem as before—that that alone is not enough to change
the reflex.
Q: I realize now that it is the chemical part rather than the
intellectual part that makes me feel uncomfortable. 
Bohm: Yes, but it doesn’t change. If somebody yells at you,
you might still feel uncomfortable.
Q: But my experience has been that by realizing it, I’m
letting the yelling come through. I’m feeling it in my body,
not resisting it. And by not resisting it, it desensitizes the
old misfiring of the synapses, or whatever, and it sort of
reverses the process of what originally made me feel bad.
Bohm: It may. You can explore that. If you can stay with
that, it may well do something like that.
Q: And suppose that happens, and I understand not only
intellectually but also physically. Then a change is taking
place. Do I then move to another conditioning?
Bohm: You may. There are a vast number of reflexes and
we’ve only looked at that one. We have to get further,
because one reflex gives rise to another and another. Behind
these are all sorts of different reflexes ready to operate, and
78 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

some of those may even bring back or recreate the reflex
you think you’ve eliminated.
Suppose you say: ‘OK, somebody yelled at me. And I can
already begin to see the chemistry and all that, and I don’t
respond so much.’ But you may have further assumptions
which say: ‘Whenever I’m too disturbed I can do nothing
about it. I’ve just got to let it take hold of me.’ Some people
have that assumption; it’s a common one. If the disturbance
is extremely powerful then I have to let it take hold; that’s
necessity. So that assumption could also come in later—
suddenly somebody who is very important to you really
yells and it happens again beyond a certain intensity and
the reflexes sort of take over again. That may happen; I
don’t say it will.
Q: When she has had that experience of the yelling
activating the chemistry, and if she has, together with that,
a proper description of what is taking place, hasn’t she then
pointed in a new direction—even though someone else’s
yelling may cause her to react? She has been shifted.
Bohm: Yes, there’s a shift in direction. It’s a step, but still
there may be more.
Q: However, people who have had that experience are
never the same, even though they still react. They have a
new opening, wouldn’t you say?
Bohm: That opening can be lost if you don’t keep it up. It
requires sustained work.
Q: I don’t think that means much has happened, only that
the rigidity of the assumptions of the conditioning may be
loosening a little bit and the person can feel more comfortable.
SATURDAY MORNING 79

Bohm: A certain move has happened, but what I want to
say is that we have to go very much further.
Q: Sometimes we can fool ourselves. We have, especially in
this environment of people who are interested in these
questions, the tendency to get very quickly into another
assumption, saying: ‘I’ve changed. Something happened in
me and I’m transformed.’
Bohm: That would be an unjustified conclusion, without
any evidence backing it up. That’s the kind of thought that
goes wrong—we jump to a conclusion, which gives
pleasure or whatever. I’m saying you could just look at it;
it’s a step from which you could learn something. 
Q: Provided the correct description accompanies it.
Bohm: You have to put it correctly in words, because the
trouble is in the verbal sphere anyway—which has then
affected the chemistry and all that. And in addition, all the
other stuff is being carefully hidden by the reflexes; so if
you don’t get it into words it’s not likely you are going to
see it.
The problem is not just the feelings or the reflexes, and so
on; it’s the relation between all that and the words. The
thought which was underlying the words was: ‘Whenever
anybody yells at me it means I’m bad.’ Now, that is an
assumption 
of 
necessity. 
‘Whenever’ 
is 
always; 
it’s
something that is always so. That’s why it’s such a
powerful concept. You often don’t see the power of the
assumption of necessity. So if you don’t put it in words the
reflex merely happens and you don’t see the general
assumptions back of it. But if you do put it in words you
can see clearly: ‘Whenever anybody yells at me it means I’m
bad.’ You need to put it in words and say ‘that’s the way I
think’. And then you will get a feeling of that. But notice
80 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

the assumption of necessity—that whenever anybody yells
at me it’s absolutely necessary to feel that I’m bad.
Q: It seems you can reflect on it in this way, and then
you’re changing the focus from ‘they shouldn’t yell at me’
to ‘what’s going on in the mind that’s making it so terrible
or 
that’s 
creating 
the 
reaction 
from 
my 
hidden
assumptions?’. But is there some key to get behind the
whole system of reflexes, rather than just examining each
one and saying what the assumption behind each reflex is?
Bohm: We have to explore that. We examine it not in the
spirit of trying to get rid of this or that reflex in particular,
but rather in the spirit of learning more about the whole
system, so maybe we learn something which can then be
extended. 
Q: It seems to me that the description needed wasn’t simply
‘I don’t want people to yell at me and that bothers me’.
Rather: ‘Up to that point I believed that the disturbance in
me was caused by someone “out there” saying something
to me; and now I see that in response to words, I generate a
disturbance in me.’
Bohm: But I didn’t even do it. You could put it like this: ‘I
have a set of reflexes that did it, which came because I had
concluded from a number of cases that it was absolutely
necessary to feel bad whenever somebody yelled—that it
was the right thing to do, that it was inevitable’, and so on.
That was the thought; and therefore whenever somebody
yelled, the reflex simply worked—just like the knee-jerk.
Q: Then it isn’t so much what we say; what is important is
how we say it. Isn’t that so?
Bohm: The yelling conveys a message.
SATURDAY MORNING 81

Q: But in seeing that, haven’t I in some sense shifted from
thinking that the problem was external to me?
Bohm: You began to look at the real source of the problem,
which is your own reflex. What you are pointing out is that
I also had another reflex before; and whenever this
happened, I added another reflex saying that this all has
originated outside—that that’s where the blame or the
cause lies. So you see how the reflexes all work together. In
order to prevent you from seeing the real cause of the thing,
the reflex system has developed an explanation of why you
feel bad—which is that somebody outside has done
something to you. That’s a rationalization.
Q: This seems to indicate that the problem was always
within thought, not outside. Therefore it’s just a projection. 
Bohm: Yes. If your reflexes hadn’t worked, nothing would
have happened. If somebody says something bad to you in
a language you don’t understand, nothing happens.
Q: The tone of the voice sometimes may convey the meaning.
Bohm: Yes, yelling will work in any language. But
somebody can say something to you very quietly which
also means the same thing and you will feel bad, unless you
don’t understand what he says.
The point is then that you have to watch. It’s crucial. Say,
for instance, that you have a valid reason which makes it
necessary for you to feel bad or to get angry or to be
frightened or pleased, or whatever. Those feelings will
affect the chemistry, and then the notion of necessity puts
all the power behind it. You don’t notice how often it’s
there implicitly rather than explicitly. Thus, it’s very
important to get it there explicitly so that you really see it is
82 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

there, because the whole system is set up to prevent you
from seeing it.
Freud used to talk about repression of unpleasant
memories and traumatic memories. And you might ask:
‘How could this be? You must first remember something in
order to be able to repress it.’ It seems to be paradox. But
it’s not a paradox, because our memory always has a vast
content. A lot of it comes up which is irrelevant, and we
have a lot or reflexes set up to try to select what is relevant,
even in normal healthy memory. Now, those same reflexes
can be set up to repress, to push down this unpleasant
material. 
They 
simply 
respond 
to 
that 
material
automatically, like the kneejerk, and get it down; you don’t
need to do anything in particular. The whole system is set
up to do that sort of thing, so it’s really very hard just to
look in there and see anything. But if you get a hint or a
clue and can then put it in words, you can begin to see at
least what the thought is. And you watch what the words
do to your chemistry.
Q: Something happens to thought when we express it. It
makes it solid, it makes it real, we relate to it. If I don’t
express it, thought can take over my mind and I lose ‘me’;
but if I bring it out it becomes more real and then I can look
at it.
Bohm: Yes, it’s implicit when you don’t put it in words,
and it can do all sorts of things. But now make it explicit
and then you can at least see that thought is doing it. So
you’re getting some perception. By bringing it out you can
see that this is what is happening, whereas if you don’t
make it explicit you can’t see that thought is involved at all.
And therefore you say ‘this is an emotional problem’, or
‘somebody out there has done it’. You give various
explanations.
SATURDAY MORNING 83

Q: As you put it into words, though, isn’t it just as
important to be aware or connected to the response in the
body directly?
Bohm: That’s what I mean; I’m saying to watch not only the
words. When you say the words—the true words
expressing the way you really think—your body is going to
respond. You may say ‘I’ve been hurt by that person; I’m
very angry’, and then you find out in words, ‘I’m angry
because he did this and this and this; and when anybody
does this and this and this to me it’s only right and
necessary for me to get angry or hurt, or whatever’. Then if
you have found the right words, and you watch, you will
see that the body responds. That will be a nice
demonstration of how the system works.
Q: Do you mean words like ‘I’ve been hurt’?
Bohm: The words which express the real thought behind
your hurt. Suppose you say: ‘I trusted that person. He was
my friend and I counted on him and then he said those
terrible things about me. It’s completely unjustified. It’s
traitorous behaviour. This was really something that was
not justified, not right. Worse—he betrayed me, he attacked
me, he had no reason to do this.’ You think of all those
words and you will see the effect on the body. If you have
found the right words, if you have found the words which
express the way you are actually thinking, the body will be affected.
Q: At first we have an intellectual anger, and as we express
it the body picks it up and we find out we’re emotionally
angry. And the next thing you know our voice is getting
loud, or whatever.
Bohm: And then you find that you’re physically angry;
namely, you tense all over the body. And if you stay with it
84 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

you find you will finally get the impression that this is
nothing but a physical process. That’s crucial, because
you’ll see this means that thought is part of the physical
processes of the body, a very subtle part.
Q: It seems I can reflect on some disturbing emotion I’ve
had and discover this underlying assumption of necessity.
But often, even though I can say intellectually that it isn’t
really necessary, there’s still a strong feeling that it is. I
don’t want to let go of it.
Bohm: That’s the reflex. What I’m suggesting won’t cure it.
It is in the chemistry, it’s not only in the intellect. This is
being done to learn and not to change anything, because if
you’re trying to change anything it won’t work. That is
crucial to see.
So you find the words which do this and see how those
feelings are affected and how the body is affected—just
simply to learn. It may make a bad feeling go away; if so,
fine. But it’s not the purpose to make it go away.
Q: Then we’re trying to get some perception into the
process? 
Bohm: Yes. In fact, if it goes away too easily you will miss
seeing it and you won’t have a chance to learn how it works.
Q: The purpose is learning, not changing.
Bohm: Not changing. Something may change you when
you learn, but that’s a by-product.
Q: Our conditioning tells us it’s not nice to be angry, it’s not
acceptable to cry. And when we do fill up with emotion our
conditioning tells us we’re not supposed to feel that.
SATURDAY MORNING 85

Bohm: That’s the same thing. The conditioning is what
we’ve been talking about. The conditioning is what makes
us angry and the conditioning says ‘you shouldn’t be
angry’. It’s all the same. Then you may find that you have
to put that in words, saying ‘I believe it’s absolutely
necessary for me not to be angry’, and begin to look at that.
So those are more words. The point is that this is a system,
and it sort of spreads out and out and out. Therefore, you
don’t expect to get it all right away by this procedure.
Q: We can’t really ever expect anything, in the sense that
any trying to move in there and take hold of something
would be part of the system moving. And what you’re
suggesting lies outside of the system.
Bohm: Yes. I’m saying that we don’t try to do anything.
We’re just learning—aware, attentive, learning.
Q: Is that implying that the way we are in the system is like
being in some sort of a hypnotic trance?
Bohm: That’s exactly what hypnosis is. Hypnosis is the use
of the word to operate the system. You accept the word of
the hypnotist as to what is necessary, and then that’s all
there is to it.
Q: When we are aware of the system as a whole—of the
physiological process, the psychological process, the whole
thing—the description seems to be accurate. It comes out of
that awareness. But when the intellect wants to find the
right word to describe the process, my experience has been
that it doesn’t work as well.
Bohm: I’m not suggesting you do that at this stage. I’m
saying to find the word that makes the process go with full
strength. It’s like saying: ‘I’ve got a piece of machinery. I
86 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

want to make it go slowly so I can look at it—not spin with
tremendous speed so I can’t see it, nor just stand still so I
don’t see how it works.’
Q: Do we find what the button is?
Bohm: The button is the word.
Q: I still don’t understand the button. Is it having just a
very accurate description? Is that what you’re saying?
Bohm: What we need is a correct description of the way you
are actually thinking. Usually we don’t put in words the
way we really think. We won’t admit to ourselves the real
nature of our thoughts. If you are hurt you usually say ‘he
hurt me’, or ‘I’m hurt’, or ‘I’m not hurt’. You say all sorts of
things. Those words will just lead you astray, because they
will not be the thoughts which are actually working. They
will just muddle it up.
Suppose we say: ‘I don’t know exactly the words, but I’m
going to experiment and try to find them—the words which
express the thoughts that are really working, which are now
only implicit. I want to make them explicit.’ It may be that
when I use those words, I feel worse. Therefore, my instinct
is not to use them. But I say ‘no, this is necessary, really
necessary, truly necessary to get into this’.
Q: We dig until we find the words.
Bohm: Yes. So I say: ‘It’s truly necessary. I’ve seen why it is
necessary. The fact that it hurts a little doesn’t matter.’ If
you had a toothache you would go to the dentist and it
could hurt; but you would say that it’s necessary for him to
drill or whatever, otherwise your tooth will decay.
Likewise, you say: ‘OK, I’m going to dig a bit. It may hurt,
but it doesn’t matter. I want to find out what is going on.’
SATURDAY MORNING 87

Q: Can you give an example of what you mean by ‘finding
the words’?
Bohm: Suppose you are angry and say: ‘I’m angry. He kept
me waiting two hours. What did he mean by keeping me
waiting so long? He takes me for granted. He doesn’t
consider my value at all. He does whatever he pleases. He
probably had something better to do and he ignored me.
He kept me waiting here and my time is valuable. He just
doesn’t consider me properly.’ Depending on what it is,
you find the words which express the real reason which
seems to make it necessary to be angry—to justify it, make
it right and necessary. ‘Anybody would be angry in this
case. Anybody treated this way would be angry. It’s
absolutely necessary and universal. I’m really right.’ And so
on.
Maybe we should stop now and resume this afternoon.
88 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

 
SATURDAY AFTERNOON
Bohm: At the end of the morning session we were
discussing what we called a ‘system’, and saying that it
seems valuable to try to learn something about this system.
We said that the core of this system is really thought,
though it involves all aspects of our being. We talked about
the way the system works, and said that through
observation you may be able to see this process happening
and thereby learn something about it. Also, we were saying
that with all sorts of emotional disturbances, such as anger,
you could first find the words which will stir up the
disturbance so that you can then get something to observe.
In this way you can learn about the relationship between
the word, the thought and all that follows—the feeling, the
state of the body and so on. Of course, in doing that you are
suspending the anger—holding it in front of you, so to
speak. It’s not so strong that you feel you absolutely must
express it, nor are you keeping it hidden.
So you’re beginning to get acquainted with the system,
with how it really works. However, if you don’t have that
element of accurate language or an accurate representation
in thought, then you don’t see the system because the core
of it is missing. Thought generally has it that you just ‘see’
what is happening; then the next thought comes along and
says ‘what is happening is something that is independent of
thought ’. And thus you get caught in that same fault again.
The point is that you have to see this, to be actually seeing
that this is happening—that thought is behind this system.
89

Otherwise the system seems to stand by itself, independent
of thought.
Take any company, such as General Motors, as an
example of something organized by thought. We have the
thought that it exists and has a certain structure. But it is
that very thought which ties the factories and everything
else together as a company. What we consider to be General
Motors is entirely organized by thinking. Except for that
thought—I mean, unless people believed that it existed—it
wouldn’t exist. There might be the factories and buildings
and all, but people wouldn’t know what they’re supposed
to be doing or how they’re supposed to be related, and so
forth. The thought is at the core of it, and there is a whole
system which develops out of that.
Now, we want to be able to see our system of reflexes in
operation; and I’m suggesting that we have to have it there
in front of us to see it, but suspend our reactions.
The second point about the use of language is that after
you see something about how the system is working, you
should also put that into words, because you want to
inform the thought process of what you have seen. In other
words, you may see something; but if the thought process
doesn’t know about it it will just go on as before. The
thought process itself doesn’t ‘see’. It can only get
information. Its typical way of getting information—on
such an abstract level anyway—is from words. Therefore,
I’m saying that it is essential to use words to elicit this
thing, to make it visible to thought; and also we may then
use words to state what we have seen. But we don’t want to
do it the other way around—to say ‘this is the way it is’,
and then to see it that way. If it’s done that way it leads to
trouble, to illusion, which I’m going to discuss as we go
along. This is a key point.
Are there any further questions before we go on?
90 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Are you saying that words will bring out memory, and
that memory creates objects? By using the word, are we
objectifying the memory? 
Bohm: No. By using the word we are not only bringing out
the memory, but we’re producing the actual state which we
are trying to explore—such as anger. We find the words
which will bring up that previous anger that is still
simmering. You’ve forgotten about it perhaps; however, it’s
still there on the reflexes, ready to spring again into action
any time something of that nature happens. And if it does
happen, it will happen so fast that you may not get a look
at it. But if, instead of waiting for something to happen, you
bring it up by using the right words, then you do have time
to look at it. And one of the big things you will be able to
look at is that the words are doing it. If the words were not
there you would miss the main point. That means that
thought is doing it. The words represent thought.
Q: If we think that we’re not using words, are we still using
words but just missing the fact that we’re using them? Or
are we thinking in some kind of other language?
Bohm: There may be another language. There may be an
image language. There is an implicit thought which ‘goes
without saying’. It says implicitly ‘whenever anything like
this happens, I’ve got to react in this way’. That’s the
thought. It just reacts. And remember that the thought
spreads out into all the other reflexes; therefore the thought
is still going on in another form. For example, if I wrote it
out on paper it would still be the thought but in another
form. It can take many, many forms. It could be put on a
television set. It could be carried by radio waves. It can be
carried by all the reflexes. They’re all part of that thought.
They are different forms of that one thought. It’s very
important to see this—that this thought goes out and
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 91

spreads all over the world. Other people pick it up and they
make it part of their reflexes. But it’s all thought.
The point is that the words are a way of bringing the
thought into evidence, whereas often it works implicitly
without your being aware of it. If you have a reflex that a
certain kind of food disgusts you, you will get a sense of
disgust when you see or smell it. But that disgust could
have been programmed into you by some sort of words
very early in childhood. That’s still thought. That
expression of disgust is basically thought. That’s what
controls it, that’s what makes it happen. It’s on the reflexes.
So thought spreads all over the place in many, many
different forms.
Q: We’re just not aware of it.
Bohm: Part of the reason we’re not aware of it is because of
our culture, which tells us that thought is only intellectual
and therefore it’s no use looking after this other stuff. We
might become aware of it if it weren’t for that.
Q: By doing this, can we focus and see our real intention,
not just what we are telling ourselves?
Bohm: We can see what is really happening, and see that
this happening is producing part of our intention. If there is
a valid necessary reason to be angry or to be impelled to do
something, then you will get that intention out of the
thought. If you say ‘it’s necessary for me to do my job’, you
find yourself getting the intention to do it. The intention can
flow out of the thought, so the intention is still part of the thought.
Q: You said that we need to put what we’ve understood
into words, and then communicate it to the thought
process. How do we keep that from becoming another system?
92 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: There is a danger that it will happen. We’ll have to
discuss later how this may happen and what could be done
with this. But I’m saying it is necessary—that the thought
process will not know what has been seen without some
way of translating it into thought. 
Q: Anyway, isn’t one of the ideas to bring out the
assumptions that are already in the thought structure? So it
won’t harm that much if they go back in, because they’re
already in there.
Bohm: Well, we’re bringing out the assumption and we
may then form a new reflex and make a habit of it. We
could go wrong again. But I’m saying that we’re just
learning about it now; we’re going into it, we’re not
actually trying to change it. That’s the crucial point. If we
once think we are trying to change it then we get into all
the tangle of questions. But we’re saying that whatever
happens is grist for the mill. And if it happens that you
form a new reflex, then you can learn about that.
Q: A lot of times I look at it the other way around—that
we’re not aware of the intentions out of which the thoughts
come. It seems a little strange to me to put the emphasis on
the thought.
Bohm: Many of our intentions are reflexive; they just come
out automatically. They’re coming from reflexes, whose
basis is thought. The intention is implicit in the thought. You
will be impelled to do something if something is
‘necessary’. If somebody says ‘you must do it, it’s necessary
to do it’, or ‘doing this will give you something you really
want’, then from that thought you will get the intention to
do it.
We have the picture that there is ‘somebody’ inside us
who is given all this information and then decides to have
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 93

the intention to do something based on that. I’m suggesting,
however, that that is not so.
Q: I’m thinking of cases where the person for some reason
has to do something and then will generate thoughts that
justify it. 
Bohm: That’s the next step. He may have one thought
saying ‘I must do this’. He has another thought saying ‘it
would be wrong to do it’. And he gets a third thought
which justifies it anyway. The whole thing is one reflex
after another. I think we have to see this system just
working, working, working. Now, perhaps somehow
intelligence can come in and get us out of this. But I’m
saying that as long as the system works, you don’t know
what is happening any more than you know why your leg
should jump when the knee bone is hit.
Q: Are you saying that the system is working by itself
reflexively, mechanically, but it gives the impression that
there’s a ‘me’ as a centre?
Bohm: Yes. The system contains a reflex which produces
the thought that it is I who am doing everything. It has a
very elaborate system of covering up what is happening.
We’ll go into that, but it will take some time to do so; and I
think we should go on from here if nobody has any urgent question.
I wanted to say more about thought. Thought is
incomplete. The thought of the table doesn’t cover all about
the table. It picks up a few points about it. But clearly the
table actually involves a vast number of things—its atomic
constitution, all sorts of structure inside the material, how
it’s all related to everything, and so on. Our thought of it as
a table is a simplification, or an ‘abstraction’.
One way of looking at it is to say that thought provides a
representation of what you’re thinking about—the way an
94 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

artist makes a picture which represents somebody but isn’t
somebody at all. Sometimes a few little lines are enough to
represent that person, but clearly the person is far more
than that; there is an immense amount which is not in the
representation. 
Likewise, 
thought 
does 
not 
provide
complete information or a complete picture or account of
the thing it is supposed to be about. The thought of the
table has only a few salient features, and also it’s somewhat
ambiguous; the thought of ‘table’ includes a lot of possible
things that might be tables, such as all sorts of strange
shapes and sizes. And then, occasionally, something comes
along which you wouldn’t expect to be used as a table.
Thought is constantly adding different forms and shapes
and such.
The example I’ve given is that the word ‘table’ calls up a
representation in your mind of an image of some sort of
typical table. There are countless forms an actual table
could take. When you see an object which fits one of those
forms or somewhere between those forms you may
immediately recognize it; or if it is similar to those forms,
even in some vague way, then it may still call up the notion
of table, or the word ‘table’. You can see that that’s a kind
of reflex. The various representations of ‘table’ are all put
together. So when you look at a table there is a reflex in
your mind. You don’t actually utter the word ‘table’, but
there’s a potential reflex: ‘that’s a table’. If somebody were
to ask you, you would immediately say ‘that is a table’. The
information is there in your mind, already on tap.
Therefore, a thing is recognized by the fact that it would
fit a particular representation—it would be one of the
possible forms of that representation. And any form of that
will operate the reflex, and consequently you recognize it.
Then when you think about it, you can think of all the
things that are attributed to it and associated with it, and
also connect up to other reflexes. Everything you think
about is connected to reflexes which will involve what you
can do with it. In the example of the table, the
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 95

representation of the table in your mind is connected to
reflexes involving what you can do to the table—that you
can put things on it, or whatever. So you are already
automatically ready to put something on there if the
occasion arises.
Can you see how it’s all connected up? The intellectual
reflexes and the visual reflexes and the emotional and the
physical and the chemical and everything are all connected
up, so that you are ready immediately to take action. If it
turns out that the object is not a table, it won’t do what you
expect. Then you say that it’s incoherent. And if your mind
is working right you say: ‘Something is wrong. I’ve got to
change something.’
That’s the way thought works. It gives you vast amounts
of connected, logically interrelated information. Also, the
symbol is somewhat open, it’s ambiguous. The word ‘table’
is the symbol, whose meaning is ambiguous. It can include
all sorts of other things. It has a tremendous potential for
connecting things up.
You could say that the earliest thoughts before there was
language would probably have involved images. Somebody
raised that question: that before a child can use words, it
probably uses vaguely defined images to stand in for the
things it’s thinking about. For instance, animals will see a
part of an object and expect the whole, and so will very
young children. It seems clear that part of the object can call
up the whole, or objects that are vaguely similar could call
up the whole class. It makes a reflex—that symbol makes a
new reflex which connects all the other reflexes. Everyone
of these objects that the symbol can stand in for has in itself
a set of reflexes of what you can do with it, and that symbol
connects it all. It’s another reflex which connects all those reflexes.
So you begin to see thought organizing itself into a very
complex, rich structure. I’ve hardly begun to touch on it; it
includes thought, logic, reason, etc. You form very abstract
symbols. For example, we talked today about the symbol of
necessity and contingency—the two words. If you ask ‘what
96 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

are they?’ you are unable to imagine what they are. I mean,
you have no picture of what is necessity or what is
contingency, but you have a vast number of things with
which those words will connect. And any time you want to
bring order into what you are seeing, one of the things you
have to do is sort out what is necessary and what is
contingent in that particular situation.
Another set of very abstract things is the general and the
particular. The general is the reflex of inclusive and the
particular narrows it down. And you treat things by the
general and the particular. This table is something general,
but the particular is also worked out; the table is made of
wood, it is a certain shape, it’s right here, and so forth.
There are a vast number of things. And if you were to try to
find out how all this thought process works, you could
probably spend a lifetime and still not get there.
I say this to show that thought is not just the culprit, that
thought is not pure wickedness. We have this whole very
subtle and very complex structure—which we probably
know very little about—that does everything for us.
Thought is part of a system which includes all our reflexes,
our relations to other people, all that we do, all our society,
and everything. But it has a flaw in it.
As I said, thought works by representation—by a symbol
and by a representation. A symbol stands in for the thing. A
word is a symbol. You can use simplified images as
symbols. The Chinese ideographic language came originally
from pictures, and they were finally simplified and became
mere symbols. But the alphabetic symbol is still more
powerful, because it need have no resemblance whatsoever
to what it represents. It’s far more flexible. Such is the
power of language.
You have innumerable symbols, and the symbol produces
a representation; it presents the thing again, as it were. It
gives you a kind of feeling for it. You can, for instance,
represent a human face by a circle with two dots and a little
triangle for the nose and then a mouth. If the mouth is
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 97

curved up it represents a smiling, happy person; if the
mouth is curved down it represents somebody who is
unhappy and frowning. If you look at that, you will get the
feeling of a smiling, happy person or a frowning person. It’s
a kind of representation of the meaning of the thing.
And representations can get more and more detailed,
become more like artists’ pictures. They may be diagrams,
they may be blueprints, they may be all types of things.
That’s all thought taking different forms. Every one of those
things is thought. You have to keep all that in mind.
Q: This level below the verbal, is it another system of symbols
—pictures, perhaps? 
Bohm: Pictures or lines. Very simplified pictures, or even
blobs. Just enough there to stand in for something.
And it would seem to me that a child who doesn’t yet
talk could probably do quite a bit of thinking through that.
For example, the psychologist Piaget claims that a child
who sees an object disappear behind something and then
reappear acts as if he thought that the object had vanished
and a new object had appeared. And at some stage he
learns that it is the same object; but to do that he must have
a symbol for that object, because he doesn’t yet talk. He
could have a vague picture of a blob—he doesn’t have to
have the exact picture of the object.
So there’s a kind of preverbal symbol, and there may be
others that we don’t know about. Language is on top of all
this. But when we learn to talk we forget this, and we don’t
recognize that these symbols are still part of our thought.
They seem to be something else.
Q: Is this what you were speaking about earlier in terms of
bringing these things up into the verbal and understanding
them?
98 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: At least getting a look at them.
Q: As you talk about this it seems that it’s true, that there’s
this whole underlying level of pictures going on.
Bohm: And feelings as well. You see, Einstein didn’t talk
until he was fairly old. And he said that a lot of his thought
consisted of feelings he couldn’t describe, which may have
taken the place of a certain amount of verbal thought.
Therefore you might imagine that a little child sometimes
represents things by feelings.
Q: When you start to bring these up and verbalize them it
seems to elicit some level of clarity. They may be missed
otherwise. But are we to be selective about this? It seems to
be going on all the time. Can we constantly be bringing
these up?
Bohm: No, we can’t. We’re just learning about it. We’re not
trying to do anything. It’s crucial to see that we’re not trying
to achieve an objective; we don’t have a programme or a
goal that we could define. We are learning. I’m trying to
say that here is something we didn’t know about this
process. It may be relevant, it may not. The fact that we
know it may turn out to be helpful in some context. And
we may be able to observe some of it by bringing it up. By
bringing it into words we might get a connection to some of
the other aspects of the process and get a better feeling for
how it is working. One of the troubles is that this thought
process is going on and we don’t know at all how it’s
working. And when we don’t know how it is working we
very quickly regard it as something else: as non-thought.
Q: What we’re doing is making a better map.
Bohm: Yes.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 99

As I’ve pointed out, one of the key difficulties has always
been that thought does something and then says that what
it is doing is not thought. Thought creates a problem and
then tries to do something about it while continuing to
make the problem, because it doesn’t know what it is
doing. It’s all a bunch of reflexes working.
Remember that ‘thought’ is a past particle. It’s what has
been registered in the memory. That registration is through
a set of reflexes; so whenever a form appears which fits that
whole set, that symbolic representation will stand in for
whatever fits actually being perceived. For example, if it fits
the representations that would be brought up by the word
‘table’ then you get all the reflexes to the table right away,
which makes it very useful. But you can also make a
mistake and make a wrong movement; then you are
incoherent and you have to say: ‘OK, it’s wrong. I’ve got to
go over it.’
I’m discussing how thought would properly work—and
does in fact work in many areas—first, to show that
thought is not all bad; and second, because to understand
what has gone wrong we should have some understanding
of how it would work when it is right.
Q: Is this the difference between thinking and thought as
you described earlier?
Bohm: Thought just works automatically. But when you’re
thinking, you are ready to see when it doesn’t work and
you’re ready to start changing it. ‘Thinking’ means that
when the thing isn’t working, something more is coming in—
which is ready to look at the situation and change the
thought if necessary.
Q: Is thinking an element that’s outside of thought?
100 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: It’s a bit beyond thought. Let’s put it that thinking is
not purely the past; it’s not purely a set of reflexes in the past.
Q: Would thinking be more ‘of the moment’, more
energized, and thought more passive in the past?
Bohm: The past is active. That’s the trouble. The past is not
really the past—it’s the effect of the past in the present. The
past has left a trace in the present.
Q: Then the thinking would be even more energized? 
Bohm: Yes. The thinking will be more energized because
thinking is more directly in the present, because it includes
the incoherence that thought is actually making. It may also
include allowing new reflexes to form, new arrangements,
new ideas. If the reflexes are all somewhat open and flexible
and changeable, then it will work nicely.
Q: If I understand you clearly, you’re saying that by
looking at these primal feelings and thoughts and images,
we have a certain opportunity to look at them again with
more energy.
Bohm: Yes. We see them right there, and we are able to
look at them with something which may be beyond the
conditioning. Then the way we look would not be entirely
conditioned, therefore we say it’s more alive, or whatever.
We’re saying that we need to look in this way because it is
very important to come into actual contact with this system
which really rules our lives. It’s very necessary—I’ve
explained all the good things it can do, and how it works
when it works properly, and so on.
Q: Can thought deceive us that it’s thinking when it is not
really thinking?
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 101

Bohm: It can deceive us about anything and everything.
There is no limit to its power of deception. You could say
that every trick we know, thought knows in the next
moment. If we see a trick, then in the next moment thought
has it there in the reflexes. In other words, thought is us—
thought is not different from us.
Q: We are the deceivers and we are the deception.
Bohm: Yes, thought can do all that deception. But I’ve
discussed how thought works when it is not deceiving. And
it gets into this trouble which comes for many reasons. It’s
hard to analyse it. One reason is that ultimately the
chemistry is too rigid, all these connections are too rigid. Or
you could say that there is the thought of absolute
necessity, which provides a hold on the whole thing. But
they all work together.
Q: How is absolute necessity different?
Bohm: There could be a view of absolute necessity as just a
perception, saying that at this moment you clearly have to
do a particular action. But suppose you also say ‘it’s
absolutely necessary for me to achieve my ambition, or to
do various things’. That may be the past—it may be this
whole system saying that.
So 
we 
have 
this 
situation: 
thought 
provides
representations, which we can produce, outside or inside, as
symbols that we can communicate, and which also hold
everything together and connect everything.
Q: And the mass media?
Bohm: The mass media carry them all. They disseminate
them. That’s a good word—‘disseminate’. The symbols act
like seeds. The media scatter them, and then those
102 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

representations all become seeds of further reflexes. For the
people who receive them they become new reflexes—they
take root and become new reflexes. That’s all a system.
And you can see that thought is inherently going to be
incomplete. 
It 
can 
at 
best 
provide 
an 
abstract
representation, it will not contain the thing itself. The thing
itself is not only more than could be contained in the
representation; but additionally, thought is not always
right. The thing itself is always in some way different from
what we think it is. It is never exactly what we think.
Also, some of our thought is mistaken when extended.
For example, people believed that Newton’s laws would
hold forever because they held for several hundred years.
And yet quantum theory and relativity came in and
overturned them. During the late nineteenth century, Lord
Kelvin, one of the leading theoretical physicists, said that it
was no use for young people to go into theoretical physics.
He said that the major discoveries of physics were finished,
and that what was left was only a matter of refinements
and the next decimal points. However, the thing didn’t
work out that way. Nevertheless, some physicists now talk
about a ‘theory of everything’. They don’t have it but they
say that they’re going to have it, they expect it.
Thought is always trying to claim that it knows
everything. It has that tendency in it, and we have to say
why. This is a very dangerous tendency, which leads to self-
deception. It doesn’t leave open the unknown. It doesn’t
leave open that the thought is only a representation. And
you must leave room in your thought for something more
and something different. Healthy thought requires that it
intrinsically be built so that it always has room for that. I’m
saying that whatever the representation is, it could be
something more and something different. At most we could
say that as far as we know a certain representation may be
accurate. That leaves room for something more and
something different. Now, that would be healthy thought,
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 103

proper thought. Orderly thought would have to have that
form and structure.
But a great deal of our thought doesn’t have that. For
example, religious thought often doesn’t have it. A lot of
our political thought doesn’t have it. Even a lot of our
scientific thought, as I’ve just explained, doesn’t have it.
That’s a crucial point: one of the ways thought goes wrong
is that it claims, implicitly at least, to be able to know everything
—that it could get rid of uncertainty and get rid of the
unknown. There is this drive in thought to say that it will
eventually get hold of everything. I don’t know whether
that drive has always been there; but it is there, and as
civilization develops it seems to get even stronger.
Such thought gives a sense of security. A lot of thought is
aimed at increasing our security. And in a legitimate way it
does provide for greater security. We use thought to store
up food, to acquire shelter, and do various other things. But
then thought gradually begins to extend and say: ‘I not only
need that kind of security, I need other kinds. I need
emotional security. I need relational security. I need to know
—to be sure of everything.’ And once thought has security,
that provides for the endorphins to coat the pain nerves and
you feel good. But as soon as that’s questioned, the
endorphins are removed and the nerves get all excited and
there is a drive to think the thoughts that will give you
security, saying ‘I know it all’. That’s part of the reflex system.
Therefore, can we stay with the fact that thought does not
know it all? There is always uncertainty, at least as far as
we 
can 
see. 
There 
is 
always 
the 
unknown. 
Our
representations are adequate only up to a point.
For instance, a circular table looks like an ellipse from
various directions. But we know that those are all different
appearances of a single circular form. So we represent the
table as a circle. We say ‘that’s what it is, a solid circle’. But
then scientists come along and say ‘That’s mostly empty
space; it is atoms moving around. It’s really quite different
from the solid circular object it appears to be. It’s only very
104 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

roughly a circle. A cloud might look like a circle, but it’s
not.’ Thus according to these scientists the essence is now
the atoms; the circle is only an appearance. But then, ideas
about the atom itself have changed over the years.
Originally, the word ‘atom’ meant something that couldn’t
be cut. Then later physicists said an atom is made of
electrons and protons and neutrons and mostly empty space
—the atom is only an appearance and these other particles
are the essence. And then came quarks. And then came
other things.
You could wonder if they are ever going to finish this, or
whether it’s always just a representation—which may be
adequate or not. That is, it may be a correct representation
up to a point. If it’s correct it will guide us coherently, to
the extent that it is correct. But at some stage, since
representation is incomplete, it must cease to guide us
coherently; and then we need to change our thought.
So we do not expect to find some eternal truth about the
nature of matter. The nature of matter as far as we can see
could be infinite, unlimited—qualitatively as well as
quantitatively. There is no valid reason why we should
think of matter as limited. In the nineteenth century people
thought that it was limited in one way. In the twentieth
century we now have different ideas. And in the twenty-
first or the twenty-second they may think entirely
differently, and they will look for a new final theory which
could be very different from what we have now. And then
it might go on and on. But there is no justification for that.
It’s not the right way to think. To think that way is going to
mix up the thought process.
Q: You’re saying that knowing can never be absolute?
Bohm: Yes. I’ve focused on matter where we have the most
solid knowledge with science, and that cannot be absolute.
And then if we go into society and into the psyche, and so
forth, that seems far less definite than the scientific
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 105

knowledge of matter. Thus we are saying knowledge is
limited, because knowledge is only a representation.
Knowledge may be adequate, but it is not the thing itself,
whatever that may be. It is not ‘that which is’.
Q: We could just call it a view, one of many different views.
Bohm: Yes. It’s an appearance or a view, but knowledge is
also a representation in the sense that you can bring it up
again and again. It is a reflex which gives rise to a view.
Q: We have to keep it open, rather than as a closed
conclusion. 
Bohm: That’s right. But then you have to admit that we are
not going to get the whole of it—that the unknown is
always open. It must be that the unknown is far beyond the
known, immensely beyond the known. The point is:
knowledge is limited. And the proper application of this
system of knowledge requires that knowledge know that it
is limited.
Q: Are you describing two ways of thinking—one that
limits and solidifies and may be practical in a certain way,
and another way that is always open?
Bohm: The way that is open is the most practical, because
the way that is open includes relative solidification to any
degree that may work. We say ‘this table is relatively solid,
I admit it’. But I don’t say ‘It’s absolutely solid’. You could
find an atomic structure in there -it’s mostly empty space. If
you light a fire, that table turns into gas. The explanation
for that is that the atoms are held together by forces, and
then when the temperature goes up they just come apart.
They go into space.
106 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Therefore, you’d have to say that this table is not
absolutely solid. The idea is that it is solid is a
representation. I gave the example that it looks solid, you
expect it to be solid, your reflexes are set for it to be solid.
But if this table were instead a very good laser image, you
would be ready to put a glass on it and the glass would go
through. And then you would say that the representation
was inaccurate.
Q: What is it that allows us to see our conclusions in
different areas of life where we are no longer learning,
where we’ve come to an opinion?
Bohm: Opinions may be all right. They are assumptions.
We may make assumptions as long as we know that they
are assumptions. 
Q: But what allows us to see those opinions and those
conclusions that we have?
Bohm: I think the question is the other way around. Why
don’t we see them? Why do we think that they are true?
Q: Well, if we tried to programme ourselves to learn about
every aspect of ourselves, it seems that would also be just
part of the system.
Bohm: You can’t do it as a programme. I’m saying there
may be an unconditioned capacity or potential in us to look
at this and see what it is. That’s what I’m suggesting. We
leave that open. I think it’s essential for healthy thought to
leave that open; because if you don’t, then you’ve implied
that it’s all conditioned and hence there is no way out.
Q: We can’t know because of the constant change. We only
think we know. There are no absolutes.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 107

Bohm: We never know absolutely. We always can know
relatively. It’s a fairly good notion that this is a table, it will
support objects. I know that. I cannot, however, say the
ultimate absolute about it—what it will be like after it
changes in time, and so on. Thus we have relative knowledge
—relative to certain conditions and circumstances. But the
notion that we know the whole thing, or that we have
absolute knowledge, will not work.
Also, as you were saying, things change. And knowledge
is limited to the past. We extend our knowledge from the
past toward the future, we project it. And very often that
works. We can make a provisional assumption that what
we know is going to work. But the key thing is that it’s
open. If it doesn’t work, then we’re ready to see it isn’t
working and change it. 
Q: When I look at that table there’s a certain ‘knowing’ of it
as a table. But together with that there is a feeling of it as a table.
Bohm: Yes, you can feel it. You expect it to be solid, and all
the rest.
Q: But within me, together with the representation, comes a
feeling of realness.
Bohm: Yes. Reality.
Q: And it seems to me that the feeling is what makes it
solid. It’s the feeling aspect of the table that locks the doors.
Bohm: But the representation is a set of reflexes all tied
together, which includes the feeling and the visual
appearance and all that. The word ‘table’ ties it all together—
it stands in for all of that. So now you get a sense that this
table is going to be solid, which may be mistaken or may be right.
108 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

The mind starts to attribute various qualities to the table,
partly according to the way things have gone in the past
and partly by what is observed now. There is an example
we have used many times. If you see a telephone on a
television screen and you hear a ringing noise, then your
mind attributes the sound to the telephone in the television
image—it seems to be coming from there. That’s how you
see it. And yet if nobody answers the phone in the image,
you then can say that it may be coming from the next room
and then you will see it differently. The sense of its being
there inside of the television or in the next room comes
from the way the thought is working. The set of reflexes can
attribute and create the feeling that it is there in the form
that is attributed. This is all part of the process. 
Q: 
It 
may 
be 
worthwhile 
to 
distinguish 
between
‘knowledge’ in the past sense and ‘knowing’.
Bohm: Knowing requires being open and seeing what is
happening now.
Q: You used the example that Einstein was knowing things
with his body in a different way. Then knowing isn’t just a
series of images coming by in some programmed sequence.
It can be an extension of being present—which is a form of
knowing—not just a series of ideas floating by an observer.
Bohm: Yes. I think you could say that as you get a feeling
contact with the table, so Einstein got a feeling contact with
the scientific ideas with which he was working, which was
part of his thought.
Q: It provided a different kind of barometer for his theories.
Bohm: A richer sort of barometer, yes.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 109

So you have all this representation, which includes all of
that: the feeling contact, the visual sense, the sound, the
word, and everything else—all the different meanings.
A rainbow is a nice example. Suppose you see a rainbow.
It seems to be an object made up of coloured arcs. That’s
the way you experience it. But according to physics there is
no rainbow out there. And in fact, if you assumed that the
rainbow was an object and walked toward it, it would not
be found. Physics says that there is a bunch of raindrops
falling and there is light reflecting off the water and it
reaches your eye in a certain way. The light reaches
everybody’s eye in a rather similar way, therefore
everybody agrees there’s a rainbow. But this doesn’t mean
that what is there is a rainbow. What is actually there is
falling rain and light refracting—a process. 
Q: Isn’t that just as true for the table?
Bohm: The difference is that if you walk toward the table
you will touch it coherently. If you walk toward the
rainbow you will not. So the rainbow is not a coherent object.
Q: It’s a sheer image.
Bohm: It’s like the holographic image of the ship—it
doesn’t have the whole being that the ship has. Similarly,
the rainbow does not have being as a bow; it has being as a
process of falling rain and light refracting. The rainbow is a
representation which does not cohere with what it is
supposed to represent.
That example is very interesting because it shows the
way the thing works. The rainbow is a representation. The
representation was probably produced in people even
before words. You don’t have to have words to have
representation, as we’ve just gone into.
110 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: There seems to be a correspondence, however. If you
look at the table through a very powerful microscope, in a
sense you get closer and closer to the table just as you get
closer and closer to the rainbow.
Bohm: But you never get closer to the rainbow. It will move.
Q: There might be some use in pushing that analogy,
though, because a table is so real to me in my feeling. But
even if I go up and touch it or put a cup on it, all that I
finally have is some sort of sensations. And the ‘tableness’
of it is only in the stepping back and holding something in
my mind.
Bohm: Yes. The ‘tableness’ is built from your mind, out of
the whole set of reflexes all tied together. The same is true
of everything. Science has said that things come into the
nervous system, and it is in the brain that they are
somehow built into our sense of the reality of the world.
The point is whether this reality coheres in our experience.
If the reality that is so formed does not cohere, then we
have to change it.
The brain is forming a kind of representation of reality,
which is able to guide you properly if it is coherent. And
it’s clear that this sense of the reality of objects and things is
constructed. As I said earlier, psychologists such as Piaget
claim that very young children may not have the notion of
the reality of a permanent object—they may feel that when
it is not seen it just vanishes and that something else comes
up. For example, he cites the case of a child about two years
old who thought that the father who appeared at the dinner
table was different from the father in the office; they were
two people. Or else they may feel the unity of all objects. So
that’s part of the thing, whether it is one or many.
That’s another abstract concept which you have to get
straight in forming the representations. Your representation
puts certain things as one, certain things as many, certain
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 111

things as necessary, contingent, general, particular. It
organizes everything. And the meaning is very different
according to how it is represented. At first, that child was
seeing two fathers. Then he learned there was only one, and
therefore he saw only one. Perhaps he discovered the
incoherence in seeing two.
Thus, we have to say that representations can be correct
up to a point. Appearances can be correct up to a point, or
they may be illusory. That distinction is very important.
The fact that the brain constructs appearances is not the
whole story; but that some of them are correct up to a point
is crucial.
Q: Would you say then that the world we see is just a
description? 
Bohm: No. The description means the way we put it in
words; literally it means ‘writing it down’. The world we
see is far more than those words, but it is organized
through a representation in which those words have had a
big effect. The way we talk about things and the way we
think about things affects how we see them. Whether we
see two fathers or one is a crucial point. For instance, if you
have printed words which are a bit too far away to be seen
and somebody tells you what the words are, you actually
see them. There are many examples of that kind—how the
word or the thought affects what you see.
This is the point I want to make: thought is affecting what
you see. The representation enters into the perception.
Sometimes you know something is a representation—such
as when you draw a diagram or have a photograph. But in
many subtle ways the representation enters directly into the
perception, and you may miss the fact that it is coming
from thought. When you have the representation of
somebody as an enemy, that goes into the perception of that
person as the enemy, or as stupid, or as whatever.
112 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Is thought a mediation system, which allows us to be
aware of things that are not now or not present?
Bohm: Yes, but it is projected into what is now and present.
And that projection may be a good guide, it may be
accurate; it’s approximate, but it may be good enough. In
other words, to be useful in what you are doing it is
actually important to project that—it is important to see this
table as a table, and not to say this is just a representation.
When you are going to act toward it, you have to act
toward it as something that is present. A lot of it is
projected into what is present, but you act toward that too—
the only point being that if it is not coherent, you change it.
Therefore it’s crucial to see this: the representation affects
the perception. That is crucial. And it is a tremendous source
of illusion if we once lose track of the fact that this is
happening. 
Q: Does anything have multiple representations?
Bohm: Many things have, yes.
Q: Is there anything that doesn’t?
Bohm: I shouldn’t think so. You could represent things in
many many ways. Thought is unlimited.
Q: We often get locked onto a particular representation.
Bohm: We get locked on a particular one because it may
include reflexes that give rise to good chemical states of the
endorphins. Also there are other reasons, such as the lock of
absolute necessary. There are various factors which can lock
this thing so that you can’t let it change in the way that is
called for when there is incoherence. And that’s the way
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 113

illusion arises, and mistakes arise that you don’t correct,
and all the rest of that.
Q: Did you say thought is unlimited?
Bohm: There is no limit to how far you can extend thought,
saying: ‘Now we can grasp this. Tomorrow we could grasp
more. We could go on indefinitely.’ But each thought is
limited. Thought is limited in what it can grasp. Thought
does not grasp the whole.
Q: Then it’s quite crucial that we check the representation?
Bohm: Yes. What is missing is that we have to be able to
see that thought is actually participating in perception. One
of the assumptions thought has come to make is that certain
kinds of thought do not participate—they only tell you the
way things are, or perhaps they represent the way things are.
Now, the point is that thought actually does participate,
not only in the fact that we make the world according to thought
—our social world, and so on—but also because it
participates in the world that we see, either correctly or
incorrectly. Thought tells us that the father at the office is
the same as the father at the table. But thought does not
seem to know that by doing so it is participating—affecting
our perception. Not to see that participation is a crucial
mistake. Is it clear that this mistake can be very dangerous?
Q: My experience of my representation is my experience of
reality, isn’t it?
Bohm: The experience of reality includes the projection of
representations into what you see. But it is not entirely that,
because if your mind is working right you have to take into
account that the whole thing is incoherent. Then it loses its
hold and you begin to change. Is that clear?
114 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: So it is vital that we see the whole thing even beyond the
personal. Take the media, for example; they could make
you go to war.
Bohm: The media are full of representations which are
presented as perceptions. In fact, now they even have
docudramas; they’re doing it directly. They put something
in the form of a documentary which is only a drama.
Q: Could you give an example of a case where
representation affects experience and we can see that easily?
Bohm: There are a lot of examples. For instance, very often
cartoonists 
represent 
certain 
people 
as 
nasty 
and
unpleasant. Or the Nazis would represent the Jews in a
certain way, and then soon people were seeing them that way.
Q: But I meant more like from our tangible everyday
experience where we could see how it works.
Bohm: This is what we’re trying to get to. It is a very subtle
question. To see this thing actually happening is something
the human race doesn’t do.
However, 
there 
are 
a 
lot 
of 
examples 
of 
how
representation affects perception. I gave the one of where
you have an indistinct letter and somebody states what it is
and you then see it that way. If, on the other hand, the
figure is distinct, then you cannot easily see the effect of
representation. But in an ambiguous situation it becomes
clear that the way you are thinking is affecting the way you
see. There are hundreds of examples of that kind.
Q: And you’re suggesting that this is actually the general
case, although we may think it is an exception.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 115

Bohm: Yes. I’m saying that is the way perception works—it
is highly affected by thought and by representation and by
imagination, and so on. And in fact, that is quite inevitable.
But we do not seem to see this happening.
There are historians who say that in very early times
people had a more participatory type of thought. They
would think that they were participating in some of the
things they saw, like saying that they participated in the
totem of the tribe or in the whole of nature. And the
Eskimos apparently had a belief that there were many
many seals, but that each one was a manifestation of the
one seal—the spirit of the seal. That is, the one seal was
manifesting as the many. Therefore, they could pray to this
spirit of the seal to manifest so they could have something
to eat. Now, if you thought all seals were individuals, that
prayer would be ridiculous because you are asking this
individual seal just to come and be eaten. But to the spirit
of the seal it would be ‘but of course, I’ll just manifest for
the Eskimos and I’ll still be here’. I think that the American
Indians looked at the buffalo that way.
The earlier people felt that they were participating in
nature. And in some way they were more keenly aware of
the participation of their thought. However, in another way
they were perhaps overdoing it—in the sense that they
were supposing the reality of some of the things which
were being projected by the thought, in a way that may not
have been entirely right.
Then we developed instead a more objective kind of
thought which said; ‘we want to have a thought about
something where we don’t participate, where we just think
about it and know just what it is.’ That made possible
science and technology, and so forth. But that also went too
far, because we began to apply that objective thought
universally 
and 
said 
it 
applied 
inside, 
outside—to
everything. And then we say there is no participation
whatsoever by thought.
116 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Now, that is clearly wrong. I’ve pointed out that there is
a great deal of participation by thought, and how it creates
the world. And I’m saying also that thought clearly
participates in perception, and that that is the crucial form
of participation. Thought participates in everything; but our
ideal of objective thought is absolute non-participation—the
idea that thought is just simply telling you the way things
are and doing nothing whatsoever. In some areas that’s a
good approximation; but our thought has supposed that to
be the universal situation.
Thus, we could say that here is one of the questions
where thought is going wrong. And this could be said to be
very close to the fundamental flaw in the process—namely,
that thought is doing this thing and doesn’t realize that it’s
doing it. Is it clear what the question is?
Q: This may sound simplistic, but are you saying that
thought can only function by dividing; and once it’s
divided, it can’t be the whole?
Bohm: Thought cannot be the whole because it is just a
representation, an abstraction.
But also, there is a difference between dividing and
fragmenting. Thought may divide in the sense of marking
parts of a whole—such as distinguishing the various gears
of a watch. Or thought may fragment—such as smashing
the watch with a hammer. In the latter case, thought
separates things which are really one. You see, we ought to
make just a dotted line between thought and perception.
But thought has tacitly made a separation rather than
marking parts of a whole. Thought has made a solid line
and says thought is one side and perception is on the other.
Q: And that line has this physiological component, and so
the line is experienced as real.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 117

Bohm: Yes. The separation, the division, is experienced as real
—that’s the representation of thought. That becomes the
perception of the situation.
Q: Are you saying that thought, by setting boundaries, is
creating a separation all the time?
Bohm: It is creating the sense of separation, and then the
action flowing from that breaks things up. We’ll have to
discuss this some more. But this is really getting close the
crucial difficulty with thought—that it does not keep track
of what it is doing. That has been the difficulty all along.
Q: Thought is making a representation and presenting it as
a perception? 
Bohm: Yes.
Q: But that’s a deception.
Bohm: No, it’s not necessarily one, because it may be
necessary for practical purposes to see this table as a table.
If you are driving a car, you haven’t time to go through all
those thoughts. You must directly move towards what you
see, which includes a lot of thought. The meaning of what
you see is included in how you see it, so it is a necessary
feature of the whole system.
And yet, if thought knew it was doing this, then it would
be all right. The deception consists in the fact that thought
doesn’t know it is doing it.
Q: Then it isn’t that I am doing it, but thought is doing it.
Bohm: Yes, thought is doing it. But it doesn’t even know it
is happening. It says: ‘That’s perception, I’m thought. I’m
118 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

just telling you the way things are. I see the way things are
and I just tell you.’
Q: There’s a complete separation between me and what is happening.
Bohm: That’s right. A separation which is false, because the
way I think is affecting what I see.
Q: So that perception of the ‘me’ as separate is wrong?
Bohm: I don’t think that we’ve got to the ‘me’ yet. We are
just trying to say there is a mistake in thought, even before
we raise the question of ‘me’. Now, that mistake in thought
will allow this false notion of the ‘me’ to develop. 
I think we should have a break now.
Bohm: We were talking about how thought affects
perception and doesn’t know that it does so. And we said
that this could be a crucial mistake, because if we don’t see
how thought enters perception we may take that perception
as a fact unaffected by thought, and then base our
assumptions and actions and thinking on that so-called fact.
Thus we can get into a trap—such as we may assume that
people of a certain kind are no good, and then say ‘I can see
that they’re no good’.
We said that this question of thought entering perception
requires some attention, because it will not only do so
outwardly but also inwardly. And we will have to see the
serious consequences of that when we consider whether it
is possible to perceive ourselves and to disentangle the
confusion from our thoughts about ourselves.
Now, maybe you want to ask one or two more questions
and then we’ll go on.
Q: You talked earlier about how very deceptive thought can
be, and then you also talked about how unaware thought
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 119

can be. Somehow I get the feeling of a very coy and
conniving thought.
Bohm: In a way thought is very cunning. But it’s not really
very aware of what it is doing. The same cunning is also
what solves practical problems. We can think of thought as
a set of reflexes which has tremendous adaptability. It can,
for example, find all sorts of ways of making you feel
better. It feels around, it probes, it finds ways which may
look extremely ingenious. But that doesn’t mean that
thought has really a vicious spirit there trying to do you
wrong, or do you in or something.
Q: There is a kind of wishful thinking that supports the
weakness of the memory, the forgetfulness of certain
details. 
Bohm: Yes, part of the deception of thought may include
the fact that it makes you forget. Thought is able to make
you insensitive to all the reflexes which might make you
sleepy or not, or inattentive, or forgetful or whatever.
Thought can take command of those reflexes and operate
them. For instance, if the body has too much of the
chemical serotonin it could make you a bit dopey. So
thought might find a way to liberate serotonin by certain
thoughts. Thought can probe around. It’s one system, all of it.
That’s the crucial point: that it is all thought, and all those
movements are all one system. The system even enters
perception, and it affects perception. Thought could make
you feel sleepy, thought could make you feel very excited,
or thought could make the mind dart so that it won’t stay
with the point, saying ‘quick, something else is important’.
It can do all sorts of tricks to try to keep your mind off a
point that thought supposes might be disturbing.
120 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Do you think that thought is basically doing it to be
helpful? It’s not really doing it for any other reason?
Bohm: Yes, it’s doing what it is supposed to do—to try to
help. But it’s extremely confused about what it is doing. So
it often does harm.
Q: It doesn’t seem, though, that thought has the whole
system’s well-being as its aim or goal; it seems that it’s
much more a particular pleasure or sensation.
Bohm: But that’s the way thought conceives the key feature
of the whole system, getting that pleasure or pain.
Originally thought was set up to try to protect you and to
help you. And after a while it runs on its own. And it’s just
running. I don’t think you should think it is trying to do
anything, any more than your knee-jerk is trying to do
anything. 
Q: But we can see that, in many cases at least, thought is
trying 
to 
achieve 
a 
certain 
objective—pleasure 
or
satisfaction, whatever that means.
Bohm: That’s the way you interpret it, but thought may not
be doing that. Suppose the endorphins have suddenly been
removed from the pain nerves, and the brain is objecting
very strongly. Thought merely reacts, it responds with
reflexes aimed at doing whatever will reduce that—which is
what it does all the time anyway.
Q: It’s more of a mechanical view than we would like to admit.
Bohm: Yes. I’m trying to say that these reflexes are
relatively mechanical. And, though the brain as a whole is
not mechanical, it can get caught up into a system of
reflexes that looks like a machine.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 121

Q: Isn’t it that the brain demands security?
Bohm: That’s right. But faced with some sort of disturbance
the brain gets agitated, and the thought process comes in
with reflexes to try to diminish the agitation. There is
nothing special about it. Thought just goes on as if it were a
machine, though it is not a machine.
Q: After the fact, we call it these things. We say that it’s
trying to do something or that it’s mechanical. But that’s
only a description after the fact. Within the fact itself there
is merely what is going on.
Bohm: Yes, in effect it’s behaviour can be represented as
mechanical, but only up to a point. 
Q: Can you clarify for me what you understand by psychic
energy and thought, and the connection between both of
them.
Bohm: Thought will liberate through the reflexes all sorts of
energies. Thought is in command, as it were, of a whole
range of energies, which in turn affect thought. These
energies are not the 
most 
subtle energies of the
unconditioned, but there are a great range of energies there.
Q: Isn’t thought primarily dominated by conditioning, but
we do have a small percentage there where we have the
opportunity to see things differently? And the new
conditioning comes out of that, and then there is a change?
Bohm: That’s right. Thought works by conditioning. It has
to get conditioned. You need conditioning to learn a
language, to learn how to write, or to do all sorts of things.
When the conditioning gets too rigid, though, it won’t
change when it should. But there may be areas where it is
122 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

not that rigid and it could change, and then you can get
something new—a new set of reflexes.
Q: But there’s a window of opportunity occasionally where
we see something. That’s the reason we sometimes get an
insight to change.
Bohm: Yes. The window may arise in all sorts of fortuitous
ways, or perhaps non-fortuitous. What we are doing now
is, I hope, creating some kind of window. In other words,
perhaps the unconditioned energy is awakening, or
something, and therefore it can begin to look at this conditioning.
Q: When there’s the disappearance of the endorphins and
then the agitation of the brain to get that state back, what
are the other possibilities besides what thought does?
Bohm: If thought didn’t do anything, it might be that
another solution would come. The agitation might just
disappear. It may be that if you stay with the fact that there
are no endorphins for a little while, the system will soon
come to an equilibrium. There may be no real problem at all
except that thought says ‘quick, I must do something’.
Let me say a few more points here. We have this question
of thought affecting perception. This will be very crucial
tomorrow when we discuss the thought and the thinker or
the observer and the observed, or whatever you want to call
it, because the question arises: if thought affects what we
perceive, how are we going to separate the two?
We have with the body a very interesting situation called
proprioception, which means ‘self-perception’. If you move
any part of your body, you know that you have moved it—
the movement resulted from your intention. You know that
immediately, without time, without an observer, without
having to think. If you can’t tell that, then you’re in a very
bad way. There are people who have lost it and they can’t
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 123

move coherently, because you must be able to distinguish
between a movement that you have created and one that
occurred independently.
I’ve often cited the case of a woman who woke up in the
middle of the night hitting herself. What had happened was
that she’d had a stroke that damaged her sensory nerves,
which would tell her what she was doing. But the stroke
left the motor nerves so that she could still move her
muscles. Apparently she had touched herself, but since she
wasn’t being informed that it was her own touch she
assumed right away that it was an attack by somebody else.
Then the more she defended the worse the attack got. When
the 
light 
was 
turned 
on, 
the 
proprioception 
was
reestablished because she could then see with her eyes what
she was doing, so she stopped hitting herself. There was
also a case published of another woman who somehow lost
proprioception overnight, and couldn’t move her body
without watching every movement. She had to learn to
watch very skilfully and somehow to get along; apparently
that never changed.
Normally this quality of proprioception exists for the
body. And one of the things we need to see is the relation
between the intention to move and the movement—to see
immediately that relation, to be aware of it. We’re usually
not very aware of this intention to move, but we can be. If
somebody wants to make his movements more accurate or
skilled he will find his intention is not that well defined—
he doesn’t move the way he hopes. Somebody who wants
to play the piano, for instance, has to learn that relation
better so that his fingers will do what he wants them to do.
So a greater quality of proprioception occurs in that regard.
The essence of the movement may be in the intention to
move, which unfolds into the whole movement. For
example, we knew of a man who had a degenerative
disease and was unable to move at all. He could barely talk.
And yet he taught movement in a university. The question
is how he could do it. You could guess that, being very
124 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

intelligent and unable to move, he was somehow much
more aware of the intention than we are, because we focus
our attention on the result. Therefore, getting the intention
right may be very crucial to making the movement right.
Thus there is some relation between the intention to move
and the movement; and there is something in between that
you are vaguely aware of, which is proprioception.
There is one point I would like to bring up now which is
related to this. I’m going to say that thought is a movement—
every reflex is a movement really. It moves from one thing
to another. It may move the body or the chemistry or just
simply the image or something else. So when ‘A’ happens
‘B’ follows. It’s a movement.
All these reflexes are interconnected in one system, and
the suggestion is that they are not in fact all that different.
The intellectual part of thought is more subtle, but actually
all the reflexes are basically similar in structure. Hence, we
should think of thought as a part of the bodily movement,
at least explore that possibility, because our culture has led
us to believe that thought and bodily movement are really
two totally different spheres which are not basically
connected. But maybe they are not different. The evidence
is that thought is intimately connected with the whole system.
If we say that thought is a reflex like any other muscular reflex
—just a lot more subtle and more complex and changeable—
then we ought to be able to be proprioceptive with thought.
Thought should be able to perceive its own movement, be
aware of its own movement. In the process of thought there
should be awareness of that movement, of the intention to
think and of the result which that thinking produces. By
being more attentive, we can be aware of how thought
produces a result outside ourselves. And then maybe we
could also be attentive to the results it produces within
ourselves. Perhaps we could even be immediately aware of
how it affects perception. It has to be immediate, or else we
will never get it clear. If you took time to be aware of this,
you would be bringing in the reflexes again. So is such
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 125

proprioception possible? I’m raising that question. Is it clear
what the question means?
Q: Do ‘we’ have to be aware? Or could you say that there
may be an awareness; and then after that moment of
awareness some thought may be made about it?
Bohm: Can the movement of the body be aware of itself
proprioceptively? You could ask that question. The
movement of the body includes all that goes with it—the
awareness and everything. A movement without awareness
is quite different from a movement with. So could we also
say, ‘can the movement of thought be aware of itself?’.
Q: Can you distinguish that from self-consciousness?
Bohm: Yes, because when you move the body and are
aware of it you are not self-conscious. If you were it
wouldn’t work. You may even be very busy thinking about
something else, but you are aware if you have moved your
body. Whatever you are doing, you take directly into
account whether you have produced that movement, and
you act accordingly.
Suppose you push on something and it moves. You know
immediately that you moved it. That’s different from
thinking that it suddenly moved by itself. You are aware of
it, and you don’t have to be thinking about yourself. That
sort of awareness is also necessary for you to be able to
walk properly, or whatever.
This whole movement is somehow aware of the relation
between the intention and the result, because you say: ‘That
is a result of my intention to move and this other is not.
This came from somewhere else.’ But you don’t put that in
words or go through a complicated analysis or anything.
You are somehow directly aware, and then all the reflexes
can behave accordingly. Is that clear?
126 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Now, suppose thought could do this. I’ve given an
argument saying why it should be able to do it. If thought
is just an extension of all those body reflexes, maybe
thought could be directly aware of its movement, and then
could be aware of what it is doing. The basic trouble with
thought now is that it participates and is not aware of how
it is participating.
Q: May we go back to the physical? I didn’t understand
what was meant by ‘self-conscious’. I wouldn’t put the self
into it, but rather I would say that you actually have to be
with that movement or with that sensation at that moment.
Bohm: Yes, but you’re not aware of yourself thinking and
being separate from the movement. When you say ‘I am
thinking about myself’, you begin to get into that sort of thing.
If thought tried to look at itself in the usual way, by
separating itself from itself, then it couldn’t do it. But
suppose thought, without separating itself in any way,
would just be aware that it is moving. And various things
are happening, including things outside and things
happening inside—not only feelings and things like that,
but also perceptions are being affected, and so on. Could
we be aware—immediately see it—that this change of
perception came through thought and that change of
perception came because the object actually changed? This
is important.
I may perceive that you suddenly became angry at me.
That may happen because you actually became angry. But I
could also have suddenly thought of something which
made me see you as angry—that’s paranoia. Suppose, for
example, the boss is walking along with a nondescript look
on his face. I look at him and think: ‘He’s unhappy and
frowning. Maybe he is thinking he’s going to fire me.’ So I
see him as ready to fire me. That came from my perception
being affected by thought. On the other hand, maybe he is
actually ready to fire me. The distinction is very important.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 127

And you may even help to make it happen by seeing it
wrongly, because you will behave in a way which will
induce him to want to do it.
We are usually able to get some of those questions
straight about how thought affects perception, saying ‘OK,
that’s just my imagination’. But very often we don’t.
Paranoia is a case where proprioception has failed still
more, and people have a much harder time getting it
straight, if at all. The paranoid person can’t tell the
difference between what he has done and what has
happened independently. He sees threats everywhere,
which may be his own thoughts. He projects his own fears,
and so forth, into his perceptions all the time. People are
doing that anyway, but in paranoia it gets exaggerated
beyond what people usually do and such people become
unable to function.
Q: When something happens like a boss is walking down
the hall with a particular expression on his face, that may
be just a perceptual fact. But any interpretation on that has
to be questioned. 
Bohm: But the difficulty is that you don’t see it as an
interpretation, especially if you are paranoid. The thought
or the interpretation that you had, which is a representation
of a boss who is ready to fire you, becomes the perception of
the boss who is ready to fire you.
Q: Don’t we all do that?
Bohm: We all do it but to different degrees. Paranoia is
merely exaggeration of the usual behaviour. It goes too far.
Q: Is it like leprosy in thought? Yesterday you talked about
leprosy as if it was some problem with proprioception.
128 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: It is in a way. With leprosy, the nerves which will
tell the muscles what they are doing have been damaged
and they don’t feel the pain which you should feel when
you over-exert. And therefore you may pull the whole nose
out of joint. You may pull your fingers off. You may
destroy everything because you are not being informed
properly of the force you are using. And then when you see
the limbs coming off or the fingers coming off you say ‘my
God, the fingers are coming off by themselves’. But you’re
actually pulling them off without noticing.
Q: Doesn’t paranoia have qualities like that?
Bohm: It does. For example, if somebody treats a person as
an enemy or as a threat then it will become visible and that
person may become frightened and respond.
Q: Are all representations within the system? Could there
be a form of representation of another dimension? 
Bohm: The system produces representations. In so far as
they are based on the past, they are in the system.
Q: The way we function now, the brain is not proprioceptive?
Bohm: It is in many ways, but not in this way—not in thought.
Q: Are you suggesting that it may be possible to function in
a mode that acts as if there were proprioception?
Bohm: Or where there, in fact, would be proprioception.
I’m saying that from the argument I’ve given, I don’t see
why I should distinguish what goes on in the brain from
what goes on anywhere in the body, or what goes on in
thought from what goes on with the muscles, or with
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 129

anything. They are all basically similar, though different in
many ways.
Q: Does the lack of proprioception in thought as we now
know it mean that I cannot distinguish whether an image is
based on that which is going on or on what I think is going on?
Bohm: That’s right. We should be able to say: ‘I see what is
going on. I have formed inferences. I distinguish my
inferences from what I see. And I will check my inferences
against what I see later. But my seeing is not confused with
the inferences.’ That would be common sense, clear
thinking. But now that is blocked by the fact that some of
the things I ‘see’ have actually been projected by my
thought or my representations. And then when I start
thinking about them, I’m thinking about them wrongly.
They are conclusions. As they say in the court, they are
conclusions and not facts. But they look like facts. 
Q: And sometimes what we perceive is terrifying. But it
may be actually that the way we perceive is terrifying.
Bohm: Yes, we are projecting terrible things. When you are
dreaming you may project terrible things into the dream.
It’s the same sort of thing. What you perceive in a dream
may be entirely due to thought, but it is quite convincing as
a perception.
Q: What I meant was that if we had proprioception,
probably the first thing we would notice is that there is
something terrifying actually going on, which is the way we
see things. The way the thought is working is dangerous.
Bohm: Or perhaps if there were proprioception we
wouldn’t go on with this insane way of perceiving.
130 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: In order for it to occur, one would have to have no
censoring of whatever came up. And that’s very painful
and difficult.
Bohm: But what tells you that it is painful and difficult is
part of the thought process. The pain may come from the
same system which is causing all the rest of the trouble. The
thought process says ‘that’s going to be very painful and
difficult’. And therefore you will feel it, just as you feel the
reality of the table.
Q: Are you saying then, that the human species doesn’t
know what it does and doesn’t know how it perceives, and
that there might be another way of seeing?
Bohm: Yes. Therefore the first thing is that thought itself
must change in some way. I would like to give an image or
an analogy. I want to say that thought takes itself as very
big. But maybe it’s just a ripple on the stream. And the
stream is the stream of consciousness. So the stream of
consciousness has to be aware of itself. But that’s no great
thing because consciousness is simply allowed to be aware.
The question is: can the stream of consciousness be
proprioceptively aware of this ripple that it is producing,
just as it is aware of how it moves the body?
Q: That’s somehow addressing the difficulty I’ve been
having about understanding how thought could be aware
of itself. It seems to make perfect sense when you describe
it. But I have some notion that thought, being memory, can
only describe; it can’t be aware.
Bohm: But thought is also more.
Q: That’s what I mean. You use the phrase ‘the movement
of thought being aware of itself.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 131

Bohm: In a sense, memory is more than just memory,
because memory is a set of reflexes. It’s a movement. What
memory actually is, is movement. The word ‘memory’
usually represents something just stored up. But memory is
also a movement in the brain. And memory, which is
abstraction, is a representation of something which is itself
not abstract.
Q: If memory is a movement, then what you call
‘conditioning’ or the tape-recording of assumptions is also a
movement.
Bohm: Yes. But the tape is too mechanical an analogy; I
would rather not say ‘taped’, but ‘conditioned’. You can
think that each time you do something, it leaves a little bit
of change in the nerves so it builds up a pattern. It gets
more and more fixed. 
Q: When you say that thought is like the ripple on the
surface of the stream of consciousness, that makes it sound
as if in principle it should be very simple and easy to see
this ripple.
Bohm: It may be actually, but we don’t. Being in this mode
of consciousness we are now in, this ripple seems to be
everything. It is represented to be everything and therefore
perceived as everything.
Q: That might be one of the mistakes—that we think it’s
more difficult than it may in fact be.
Bohm: That may be so. We can’t count on what thought
tells us about how difficult it is. Thought doesn’t really
know. So it’s best to say that we don’t know how difficult it
is; and to say that whatever thought says about this, it
doesn’t really know.
132 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: This thing of proprioception functioning in the thought process
—the thought being aware of itself—can you approach that
in some different way?
Bohm: 
Well, 
thought 
is 
now 
conditioned 
to 
the
representation of itself in various ways: that it is different
from the body, that it doesn’t affect perception, that it’s just
telling you the way things are, and so on. And therefore,
that is the way you perceive how thought works. Whatever
thought represents can become how you perceive it. Now,
‘outside’ you have a check for your perceptions. If you
perceive this as a cup when it is something else, you will
soon find out by sensory experience that that is incoherent.
So perceptions which are mistaken show up as incoherence
and we correct them. But ‘inside’ it is much harder, because
you can’t get hold of it. We speak of thought as being
inside; it isn’t really, because it is also the whole world. 
Thought presents itself as separate from perception, as
just telling you the way things are. Thought has this picture
of how it works—that you see certain things and then
thought merely tells you more about them; that it draws
inferences, it does nothing and has no effect. Therefore
that’s the way you see thought. But thought is actually
doing more than that. It is affecting how you perceive
everything. Is that clear?
Q: You’re saying that the thought-body process is one
movement.
Bohm: Yes. And also the perception, the sense perception.
Q: There’s also awareness. Awareness must be upstream
from all of this.
Bohm: Fundamentally, yes. I’m suggesting that there is
available an awareness, a stream of consciousness, which is
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 133

more fundamental, which I imaged as being in the depth of
the ocean. But awareness, too, may be confused with the
operation of the system, because the system can make a
representation 
of 
awareness 
and 
then 
take 
the
representation to be that fundamental consciousness itself.
We say thought is a representation, it’s a form. A
representation is always a certain form. The rainbow is a
certain form. The letters are a certain form. The artist makes
a form. A representation is always a form; but that form
then becomes, apparently, a part of ‘what is’. Now,
everybody can see that a representation is hardly more than
a ripple; it doesn’t have much substance—anybody can see
that. But when it fuses with perception, then it seems to
have all the substance.
Q: The representation is an abstraction, it’s a symbol which
also has its physical components. 
Bohm: It has, but as a physical thing it is very, very tiny. I
mean, it may be only a few bits of ink on paper, or some
little electric current in the brain.
Q: It does not have a structure?
Bohm: It has a structure. The form has a structure, but it
has no independent substance. It has no inherent internal necessity.
Q: Could you represent it as the surface, with something
more subtle underneath?
Bohm: Yes. When you look at the surface of the ocean, all
sorts of forms will appear on those waves. They change this
way and that way and the other way. There’s very little to
hold them. There is very little in it. And then you have the depth.
Those forms, however, have a meaning in the mind. And
everything follows according to that meaning—it has to.
134 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

But an important part of the meaning is wrong, because one
part is missing: namely, it should mean that that is only an
outward form on the surface. But instead it means that that
form is the basic substance of ‘what is’.
Q: Does that imply that there are two kinds of perception—
one superficial and one of essence?
Bohm: I’m saying that there may be a deeper perception,
one which starts from these depths. But what we ordinarily
take to be perception—or at least what thought takes to be
perception, which we ordinarily call ‘perception’—is highly
affected 
by 
thought. 
Certainly, 
our 
ordinary 
sense
perception is generally of that nature, though it may
perhaps occasionally get out of it. 
At this moment we only have to worry about what
thought is taking as the source of its information. Now,
thought takes sense perception, among other things, as the
source of its information; and it says that sense perception
is unaffected by thought—that it is just telling you
something. And thought will then proceed from there. But
it may turn out that the perception has already been
affected by thought, and that thought is thus taking
something it has done as being a fact independent of thought.
Q: Which prevents the depth perception?
Bohm: Eventually it muddles the brain up so much that it
prevents almost everything. Based on that apparent fact a
lot of other things start to happen, and the brain muddles
up. From that going wrong, it spreads and becomes a
systemic fault. It spreads into everything.
Q: Would you say that there’s non-perception of the
interference 
of 
thought, 
there’s 
perception 
of 
the
interference of thought and there’s no thought interfering?
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 135

Bohm: Yes, those are possible states. Let’s suppose that
thought is able to be aware of its own effects. Then when it
is producing effects which make no sense it would simply
stop doing so. Thought is not maliciously trying to destroy
everything. It is apparently doing whatever it does
according to its own mechanism.
When you have proprioception of the body, you
wouldn’t make the sort of mistake that you would if you
didn’t have it—like that woman who got into attacking
herself. Similarly, when you don’t have proprioceptive
thought, you may start attacking yourself, you hurt
yourself. You say ‘I’m hurt’, under the impression that the
attack has come from the outside. 
Q: You’re talking not so much about a way of thinking but
a way of perception?
Bohm: Yes, it is some extension of perception. I’m saying
that perhaps such an extension of perception is possible.
Q: Would proprioception of thought take place not in what
we think of as thought, but actually in the physical, since
they are all the same thing?
Bohm: That’s actually the case. Since it is all physical it’s an
extension of the ordinary proprioception into something
more subtle, but still of the same general nature. That’s the
point I’m trying to make; that this distinction between
thought and the physical is one where we should just draw
a dotted line. But we have drawn a great big gulf between
them in our thought. And therefore we perceive them that way.
Q: I wonder if one of the reasons why people ask to have
this explained over and over again is that when you say
‘thought 
being 
aware 
of 
its 
own 
movement’, 
or,
‘proprioception’, the thinking makes an image of what that
136 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

would be. And rather than just listening to what you’re
saying about thought noticing its activity, thought starts
trying to make a description of what it would be like to be aware.
Bohm: Yes. And the difficulty with that description is that it
enters your perception. It would be all right to describe it if
you said ‘frankly this is a speculative attempt to imagine
what it might be, but it might not be that at all’. But instead
you just represent it in the imagination; and very quickly it
spreads over and becomes, apparently, some kind of reality
which misleads you. Now, that very process—the thing we
just described—is part of the fault in the system. It’s just
another form of the fault. 
Q: What if I’m not able to make much of a description, and
I say I can’t do this?
Bohm: But then that enters your perception as impossible
and therefore you perceive a block. If it’s impossible then it
is not even necessary to listen. I mean, you don’t have to
take it seriously at all. The rest follows.
Q: So we’re not going to get out of the situation where our
representations or thinking have an effect. But rather, we
are to be more aware of what’s happening in there.
Bohm: Yes. And also to describe it correctly when we do
see what is happening; because if we see what is happening
and describe it wrongly, we will be misinforming the
system about what it is doing, and the system will then get
more confused. All the information the system has about
itself affects what it does.
It’s important to grasp this. Grasping it intellectually, or
perhaps a little bit beyond, would be the first step, because
this will help clear away a lot of the confusion. But as long
as you are tacitly accepting all the other ideas about this
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 137

process you are going to see it that way, and you will never
get into it. Is it clear what I mean?
So it’s very important to draw correct inferences about
thought. These are not mere idle speculations; rather, we
have been observing and then drawing inferences, and then
trying to test them as far as we can or see whether we feel
they are reasonable. This is just a kind of extension of
common sense, when it is used properly. It’s the way you
observe something—you draw inferences from it; you then
look again and see whether your inferences are correct,
coherent, and so on.
This is the way we’re going—we are proceeding by
inference. But as we said before, this is not enough because
it still won’t get rid of the reflexes. However, it is a useful
step. Whether it is necessary I can’t say, but I think that to
be able to clear up some of this confusion, which has been
in the previous set of assumptions and ideas that the
system has about itself, will be an important step.
Q: Would it be possible for a person to describe the
proprioceptive process in thought as it actually functions?
Bohm: Perhaps a little later. Anything that you have seen
might be given a correct description. But if you haven’t yet
seen it, then it becomes fanciful and it starts entering the
other way—it affects your perception as if you had seen it.
Q: The question seems to be: how are we going to bring
forward that subtlety, so we can start dissipating this gross
abnormality of thought that doesn’t see itself working and
operating?
Bohm: When you use the word ‘how’, that can be taken to
mean ‘by what system will I do it?’, or ‘how will the system
do it?’.
138 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: What would you propose, then?
Bohm: We’re saying that for the time being you can just
consider the question. The attempt to regard this as solving
a problem is going to get in the way, isn’t it? That
problemsolving attitude is all right in a certain area where
the system works. But somehow we have to have another
approach in this area.
Q: If thought is from the past experiences and projected to
the future, would it be that if we’re in the present we can
see this thought process working? 
Bohm: That may well be. But then you have the question of
how we get into the present. Or, why aren’t we in the
present? Obviously we must be in the present. Where else
could we be? But why don’t we see this? We don’t live in
the past. Some people are said to live in the past, but that’s
only a figure of speech; you don’t address letters to them
into the past. The question is then: why are we not seeing
that we live in the present, if it is in fact true?
So you can see that this is the way the system is working.
And there are other features of this system which need
going into. It will require that we also go into the question
of time. The system also contains the whole system of time,
as well as the system of the self and the observer and the observed.
But I think we have begun to see enough of it to see that
there might be a way out—not to say there is, but there
might be. Now, this requires that we see thought as one
whole, with the entire chemical-physical system, and all that.
Q: Is proprioception something different from representing?
Bohm: Yes, clearly. When you have proprioception of the
arm you don’t represent the arm to yourself in any way.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 139

You are just simply directly aware—you’re not thinking,
representing the arm and how it is moving.
Q: But is anything perceiving anything else?
Bohm: No. I’m trying to say that we have part of our
language which says that if anything is perceived there
must be something else to perceive it. But that may not be
so, and that may be getting in the way. Why can’t we say
that the stream of consciousness can be aware of itself, or
that we don’t need a separate perceiver to perceive?
Q: Wouldn’t it be hard for this consciousness to be only
physical Newtonian matter? 
Bohm: We’re not saying it is just physical Newtonian
matter. I said before, I think, that matter may be unlimited
in its subtlety. In other words, part of the trouble with our
thought is that it says matter is very limited, that it is only
this or that or the other—which wouldn’t be able to do this
sort of thing at all. However, that would suggest that we
already know everything about matter. But I’m saying it is
crucial to say that we don’t know everything about matter.
Q: Then are you suggesting that matter can perceive?
Bohm: We haven’t come to that yet, but matter is capable of
something far more subtle than we might think. At the very
least it is going to respond to perception in new ways. For
example, a new perception might begin to change some of
the synapses, or these things that are rigidly stuck. And so
on. We’ll come to that later.
Q: You said earlier that the body obviously has
proprioception and thought seems to be lacking it; and
since the body and thought processes are only separated by
140 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

a dotted line, thought, at some level, would have to have
the movement of proprioception in its nature. However,
some shocks or noise or something else happening in
thought is drowning out sensitivity to this movement.
Bohm: Yes. Something is happening in thought which
rejects sensitivity or prevents it or resists it. It’s clear that if
you could see the activity of thought, you might discover
that most of the things we’re counting on actually are just
nothing; they are produced by thought—the self and the
society, and on and on.
Q: When we perceive with proprioception, are we
perceiving directly what is? 
Bohm: The movement, as it is, is somehow perceiving itself.
Q: When we perceive without proprioception we are
perceiving from memory?
Bohm: From the reflexes of memory, right.
Q: So there is a possibility of something more direct?
Bohm: Yes. Memory is not adequate for perceiving the
movement of thought. That seems clear, because memory
will never perceive the immediate, direct movement of
thought.
Q: I’ve seen a lot of my friends who are interested in this.
And it seems that they are more and more muddled and
theoretical and inhibited, and almost start to lose a certain
amount of common sense in dealing with life. They become
so caught up trying to be aware of themselves that it makes
me cautious. Am I going to start getting all muddled and
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 141

anxious and stop living because I’m so worried about being
aware of myself?
Bohm: I’m not suggesting that you do that.
The first point is if you just look at yourself without
understanding the questions we’ve been raising you will be
looking at something which you have invented by thought.
And you will get muddled, inevitably. I’m explaining why
you do get muddled when you just simply engage in introspection
—because whatever you see has been produced by thought,
and is presented as perception. Therefore, what you are
seeing is just a lot of forms and clouds and will-o’-the-
wisps, and so on.
Q: You don’t strike me as muddled at all. But I’m trying to
understand what it takes to do this. 
Bohm: Perhaps you have an assumption that whoever looks
at this is going to get muddled, which is an assumption of necessity.
Q: I’m trying to understand what it is that determines if
you get muddled or not.
Bohm: But the fact that you raised the question suggests to
me that there is some assumption underneath it.
Q: That does happen often.
Bohm: That’s the way we build these assumptions. When
something happens often, we say that it will happen
always, that it is necessary—it is always necessary. And we
get stuck. That’s the sort of thing we slip into. It may
happen very frequently, but that doesn’t mean always.
Once again, we have to say that we don’t know everything
about it and therefore we can’t say it happens always. Now,
that’s the first point.
142 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Then the second point is, as we’ve explained: if you don’t
look into these questions, such as proprioception and some
of the others, you are surely going to get muddled. I mean,
from the explanation I’ve given it becomes inevitable that
exactly the experience you describe is going to happen. So
that explains your experience.
The third point is: it’s not as if everything is going to be
all right if we don’t look into this. We are then going to
continue to have this muddle going on in the world, which
will lead ultimately to heaven knows what. We don’t even
know what it is going to do in the relatively near future,
because it could lead to some pretty disastrous things. It’s
not as if you could say: ‘Well, leave this alone and
everything is going to be all right. We’re going to have nice
common sense.’ Because common sense has broken down
in the face of this. It’s not that common sense is wrong, but
you cannot carry out common sense when all this is going on.
Therefore I would say that you have to look at it very
carefully and think very carefully. It’s true that there are all
the dangers you say. But there are also dangers in not doing
it. Then what will we do with that? It seems to me that
generally it would be reasonable to say all the several
alternatives are dangerous. But one of them is almost surely
going to fail—namely, what is going on now. And this
other may have some possibility of working.
I think that what I’ve said gives a coherent explanation of
the various phenomena which are actually happening.
That’s one of the things that it does. And all the times you
find that it isn’t working it explains why it isn’t working,
which mean we still have a challenge—we haven’t got to
the bottom, to the end of it.
Q: What did you mean by ‘we still have a challenge’?
Bohm: We have gone so far, explained all these things, but
we have not touched the reflexes sufficiently. We have had
some effect on them, probably. But these reflexes will still operate.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 143

Q: The explanation isn’t doing it.
Bohm: Yes. The explanation is useful, it is necessary, but
something more is needed.
Q: And you think it’s reasonable to assume that the
phenomena are there, and the explanation is correct as far
as we’ve gone?
Bohm: Let’s just say that as far as we can see up to now the
explanation is correct, that we have gone through this thing
by careful observation and inference and testing and it all
seems reasonable. Anybody who thought it wasn’t
reasonable had a chance to say so. And so far we can’t find
a hole in it. It does explain all these cases, all these different
difficulties that arise. It explains them. They are to be
expected within this thing, and we are not to be surprised
by them.
Q: Can we discuss the present a little more? Thought is
conditioned by the past and it projects what’s going to
happen in the future; so I’m missing what is happening in
the present because my mind is conditioned to what has
happened, or to what is going to happen. Whereas if I’m in
the present, I’m actually hearing everything that’s going on—
the people around me, or whatever happens—and at the
same time I’m listening to what you are saying and I’m also
listening to how my body feels. It’s one movement. There is
no separation; I’m one with you. And being in that state of
presence I can watch my thoughts.
Bohm: And what happens then?
Q: By watching my thoughts I release their hold on me. It’s
as though they are moving and I’m watching them, I’m not
144 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

caught up in them. By watching them I’m not them, so I can
question what they are telling me.
Bohm: But if you say ‘I’m watching’, then somebody could
ask: ‘Who’s watching? Is there a separation?’
Q: I don’t think we can say ‘I am watching’. There is just
watching, because ‘I’ and thought are together, not
separated. It’s a kind of deception to say that I am watching.
Bohm: Perhaps we’ll try to go into that further tomorrow.
But I think that to change this we need a kind of insight
that will change this physical situation, this physical-
chemical situation.
Q: Is there value in the objective of trying to describe such
an insight, rather than somehow challenging ourselves to
have it?
Bohm: When you have it you could say something about it.
The question is to say something that will actually
communicate what it is.
Q: And also, it seems we may sometimes be able to watch
our thoughts and talk about it. But when the emotions kick
in then we lose that ability; something else comes in.
Bohm: We have to have this thing so powerful and firm
that it works even when the emotions do come in. And the
ability to watch what is happening in thought may be
moving to give rise to perception.
We can say that there has to be a real change to make this
thing work. There has to be a change in this conditioning,
in this material base of the conditioning, so that it doesn’t
hold so strongly. And I think that that requires an insight.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON 145

The time is getting late now, so we might want to discuss
this tomorrow.
Q: Could you give us something to do as a little homework
for tonight?
Bohm: I think the best thing would be to do what we were
discussing this morning. That is, to try to use the words
which bring up the process—not only with anger or fear or
jealousy or even pleasure, but with whatever may be there.
Q: How about resistance? 
Bohm: If you have resistance, then the point is to try to find
the thought and use the word that is behind the resistance.
You find the words which are behind it. If you want to do
an exercise then that would be a good one to try.
Q: Would you recommend discussing it with somebody or
writing it down?
Bohm: You could write it down for yourself as a diary. Or
if you want you could discuss with somebody. Whatever
way you find convenient.
146 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

 
SUNDAY MORNING
Bohm: We’ve discussed a number of things and there are
still quite a few to go into.
First I thought I’d say a little more about proprioception. I
understand some people still feel it’s not clear. The basic
thing is that you are directly aware of your body, of how
your body is moving; whereas if you watch a tree moving,
for instance, you are aware that that’s quite independent of
you. Proprioception makes you aware of your whole body
as belonging to you, as part of you. You’re aware of what is
happening and how your intentions affect it, and so forth.
And we can always get better at proprioception. People
who are skilled, such as athletes or dancers, must have a
very good proprioception of exactly how they are moving.
They don’t have to stop to think. They may have an
intention in their thought as to what they want to do; but
while they are actually doing it they don’t stop to analyse
exactly how it’s going and compare that with what they intended.
That’s 
the 
kind 
of 
thing 
that 
is 
involved 
in
proprioception. But that awareness can break down. I read
about somebody who had something happen to him, and
then afterwards he felt that the right side of his body didn’t
belong to him—he was no longer aware of it as his own.
The point is that we are immediately aware of the
difference between a movement which originates by itself
and one which we have thought about, without actually
having to think ‘this is what I’m aware of’. I’m suggesting
that this proprioception should be extended into thought, so
147

that we are aware of thought as it participates. Thought’s
participation produces all sorts of things. And it affects
perception—what you think affects what you perceive
outside and how you feel inside.
Q: I wonder about that example you gave yesterday of the
woman who had lost all proprioception and had to use her
eyes to retrain herself. As we’re sitting here, all of us are
using proprioception or we wouldn’t be able to stay in our chairs.
Bohm: Yes, that’s a very good example. Suddenly she woke
up without proprioception and she couldn’t move her body
in any controllable or orderly way. She couldn’t sit up or do
anything. She had to watch everything to see what was
happening, and managed somehow to learn to get along
that way.
It’s very hard to explain, but as you’re sitting in the chair
you are aware of your body. You may not notice it, but
there is an awareness of your body touching the chair and
of the various little movements you have to make to correct
for the fact that you are starting to fall, and so on. This is all
part of proprioception. You’re not really thinking about it
or making decisions about it or making choices or anything
like that. Rather, it’s just working.
Now, we are asking whether proprioception could work
similarly with thought—where you would become directly
aware that your thought is affecting your perceptions. We
have discussed how thought affects perceptions. You see or
feel something produced by thought, but then the next
thought comes along and says ‘I’m only telling you the way
it is’. Thought makes that claim, while it is actually affecting
the way things are. That mistake is crucial. It’s the same as
not having proprioception in the body.
Q: I used to think that proprioception of thought is linear
and that I had to follow my train of thought, which is sort
148 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

of a contradiction. And so I realized that I had to be aware
of my thought through sensation.
Bohm: The thought gives rise to sensation, yes. Even the
impulse to think is a sensation. And then your thought
gives rise to further sensations and images.
Q: If while I’m talking to you I become so fascinated with
my talking that I lose the experience of the body, of
sensation, then that would be thought to be functioning
without what you’re calling proprioception. But if I come
back into my body and I talk to you, then there’s some
sense of these hands moving, the feel of this chair, the
quality of the voice. Then it’s a different process. Is that
what you’re suggesting?
Bohm: Yes, and all the different sensations which come
from what you are saying.
Q: Are we speaking of a unified field of awareness, which
includes thought but doesn’t exclude the physical?
Bohm: Yes. But I’m saying that thought is part of the
physical. Yesterday I made the point that thought is a more
subtle form of the physical. Perhaps we should discuss that
some more.
Thought is part of a material process. It goes on in the
brain, the nervous system, and really the whole body and
everything; it’s all one system. Thought can be conveyed by
material processes such as radio waves, television, writing—
all kinds of ways. In talking, sound goes out and conveys
thought. Within the body thought is conveyed by nervous
signals; there is a code of some sort, which we don’t know
too well.
We’re saying that thought is a material process; it has
reflexes that just go on by themselves. And if you have an
SUNDAY MORNING 149

insight or perception that this is true, then that will actually
affect you. An insight or a perception of truth may deeply
affect the material process, which includes all the reflexes.
But if we merely have an intellectual or inferential
knowledge of what is going on, then it doesn’t touch this
process deeply.
Q: When what you’re calling an insight takes place, in effect
a reorganization has taken place. And this isn’t something I
have or know about in my thinking, but simply that the
functioning is then somewhat different.
Bohm: Yes, there has been a change. Let’s suppose we use
synapses in the brain as a kind of representation, although
there is much more to it than that. You have all the nerves
which connect through synapses. And they can make a set
of synapses that produce a certain reflex which doesn’t
make sense, but just keeps going anyway. Just as thought
acts and participates, so every perception acts and
participates. Now by means of this perception of truth or
insight, that perception acts. And it acts directly in the
system and somehow makes a change so that the reflex
becomes inoperative. Perhaps it starts to dissolve away a
bit. You mustn’t dissolve all the synapse connections away
or else you wouldn’t be able to do anything. It has to be
done intelligently.
Have you ever seen something which seemed very
attractive to you, and suddenly you had a perception of
what it really was, and you said: ‘It doesn’t attract me
anymore at all. I’m dead to it.’ Do you see what I mean?
There was a chemical sense inside of desire, of wanting
something; and suddenly it stops. The chemistry is affected
by the perception.
We discussed yesterday that matter may be infinitely
subtle. Science doesn’t know all about it, and probably
never will. But matter is not just mechanical. Therefore, it
could respond to that perception in very deep and subtle
150 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

ways which may be beyond what science could even trace.
So there can be a change. That’s the notion: that the insight
or perception will affect the whole thing. It not only affects
the inferential understanding, but it also affects the
chemical level and everything.
Q: What if we see it all as a unified process?
Bohm: But we won’t even ‘see’ it, because when it works
it’s too fast for you to know what’s happened—you get it in
a flash. Later on you put it in words. Now, this question is
crucial: when an insight is put into words, what is it that
puts it into words? Is it thought or is it the insight? I want
to suggest that the insight itself will be an insight into the
words which express it properly. It’s almost as though the
words are coming out from a loudspeaker, rather than by
somebody trying to get them out.
Q: What are bodily gestures in the context of what we are discussing?
Bohm: That’s part of the expression, it’s not the result of
thought. Whatever is going on expresses itself through
words, through gestures and in various other ways. The
expression, whether verbal or not, is part of the perception
or the insight; it is the action of the insight. And the
expression is important, because the perception will not
only change some of the—call it synapses or whatever—but
it will also convey to thought the essential content of the
insight. So thought can then proceed on a different basis, in
a new direction. Therefore, it’s important that it be
expressed in words. But those words have to come from the
insight. If, on the other hand, the words are just from
memory, they may not be expressing it.
Q: Are you saying that when you have an insight into this
creative process, it’s in a mode that is not language—and
SUNDAY MORNING 151

that is a creative act? And it’s another creative act of the
brain to transform that into a language of words which we
can communicate?
Bohm: Yes. But I think that it’s all one act. The creative act
simultaneously alters some of the reflexes and also
produces the expression, in words or some other means,
which will enable thought to take it up and move in a
different way from there on.
Q: I wonder if a simple analogy would be the difference
between memorizing a bunch of multiplication tables and
understanding a formula. Once there is understanding of
the relationship, then the overhead of remembering all the
other data is gone and you can now relate to it.
Bohm: Yes. When you understand something, in some way
it touches at a deeper level and then it will come out in
words again.
The point is that we have the possibility of insight.
Suppose we ask ourselves: ‘Do we have it as an insight that
thought is a material process, or that thought always
participates in perception?’ If we have that insight then that
may remove some of the barriers to operating that way.
But our whole set of reflexes is against that. It says
‘thought is not a material process’. Our first reflex is:
‘Thought is far beyond matter, or separated from matter
somehow. It has some spiritual truth or significance.’ This
notion has been conditioned into us as a reflex.
Now, however, we’re saying thought is a material
process and thought participates—which means the notion
that thought is only telling you what things are is not really
a serious option. If that comes as an insight, or if you get
the insight that thought is not proprioceptive but requires
proprioception, then that is going to begin to touch the
synapses which hold those reflexes. The words will then
152 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

also produce a change in thought, and thought will begin to
stop getting in the way of seeing these things. 
Our 
conditioning 
contains 
various 
barriers 
to
proprioception, one of which is that thought implicitly says
proprioception is not necessary. And if thought were only
telling you the way things are, then proprioception would
not be necessary because there would be nothing to
perceive. Therefore, the notion that thought is only telling
you the way things are is not a serious option; it’s not a
serious thing to consider. Is that clear? When you have that
insight you are no longer taking seriously those things
which previously loomed all-important. You’re dead to
them, whereas previously they moved you very much and
had tremendous meaning. Now you say: ‘They have no
meaning. They’re just mechanical stuff.’
Q: Apparently there are degrees of proprioception. Is this
related to awareness as well as to non-awareness or
nonmindfulness? And are there other people besides
Krishnamurti who may have had a higher level of
proprioception or mindfulness of what is taking place?
Bohm: That may all be, but we’re liable to get into the
domain of speculations which are carried into the system.
We would put that into our system of thoughts and
reflexes, and it would become a kind of knowledge which
would get in the way. So there’s a danger in this kind of
imaginative speculation. The important point is actually to
see for yourself the proprioception of thought, to see it in action.
I would like to discuss the imagination so that we could
understand its role here, because it is very closely related to
this question. ‘Imagination’ means ‘making an image’,
‘seeing the image of something that is not there’; in other
words, fantasy, fancy, and so on. But really there is no
fundamental 
distinction 
between 
the 
processes 
of
imagination and perception. We’ve said that the entire
SUNDAY MORNING 153

consciousness is actually created by a process which is being
guided by information from the senses.
That process gives rise to our perception, and that
process is a kind of imagination. You could call that primary
imagination.
Also, we can start to imagine things which are not there,
things which are not indicated by perception. And that may
be creative imagination. We can imagine forms of things that
are unknown, which can then be brought into existence.
And we have another kind of imagination, which comes
from the past, from the reflexes—the reflexive imagination,
which could be called ‘fancy’ or ‘fantasy’. This again could
be useful, because we can imagine things and imagine
ourselves going in certain ways or doing certain things, and
solve problems that way. But it can be dangerous because
this fantasy may slip over into apparent perception; it can
participate in perception the way we said that thought does.
When you’re lost in fantasy, you seem to be almost
perceiving the thing imagined. And you are not only
apparently 
perceiving 
what 
you 
fantasize, 
you 
are
apparently experiencing and perceiving the self that is
doing it. In other words, it’s all built out of thought. You
can be an entirely different person in fantasy from what
you would be outside, such as is portrayed in the book, The
Secret Life of Walter Mitty.
Therefore, in fantasy you can create yourself and create a
world. But then fantasy may start to merge with your
perception of reality. Some people have suggested that
when the infant’s memory first starts to work it’s mostly
fantasy. According to the child psychologist Piaget, young
children do have a lot of fantasy in thought. They may
imagine that they are magically affecting things. And then
they have to learn to distinguish certain ‘fantasies’ which
are to be called ‘reality’, namely the ones that pass the tests
for reality: those which stand up, which everybody sees,
which resist being pushed, which are not affected by how
you think about them, and so forth.
154 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

So the reality which you perceive is affected by your
thought. Thought is working as a kind of imagination being
infused into your perception. It becomes part of what you
see. And that imagination is necessary. But if it gets held
too strongly and resists evidence of incoherence, then it
leads to all the problems we’re talking about.
That’s the general picture. You can see therefore that you
have to watch the imagination carefully. It can be creative
and it can be also very destructive, because the fantasy
realm can merge with reality and create a resistance to
seeing that it is fantasy. It will create reflexes that resist
seeing it, because you create such beautiful fantasies that
you don’t want to give them up. They feel very good, the
endorphins are produced and everything else. Hence, there
is a movement —a reflex —to hold them and to resist
thoughts which say that they are not right, or they are not
the way it is. Thus you get illusion and all that.
I think that this notion of fantasy will help you to
understand better how thought can enter into perception.
And even when you don’t think you are fantasizing it is
still entering perception, because perception is all basically
of the same nature as the process of imagination. If you
think of the fact that perception is created from the brain in
response to information, it follows inevitably that we can
easily produce perceptions which are not right; and we
have to correct them.
Q: What about the incoherence due to psychological
addiction, but which includes chemical addiction—such as
that of the alcoholic or the drug addict? This too can affect perception.
Bohm: Yes. But psychological addiction is always the most
difficult one. For example, experiments have been done
where animals were injected with some drug, maybe
morphine, which made them chemically addicted. There
were two groups—one was enabled to inject itself and the
other was injected. Then the drug was withheld from both
SUNDAY MORNING 155

groups. The group that was injected went through a
withdrawal process and was no longer addicted. The
animals that were able to press the button to inject
themselves got through the withdrawal process, but
whenever they saw the button they pressed it again, even
though it no longer gave them the drug. The point is that
the memory of that pleasure produced a reflex to press the
button. The button stirred up the whole system of memory.
Q: Are fantasy and imagination mostly based on memory
and past experiences?
Bohm: I said that there are several kinds of imagination.
There is the imagination based on memory, which is either
remembering the past or projecting the future. In addition,
there is a creative imagination which can project something
new which you can then bring into existence—for example,
a new idea to create something which was never there. In
fact, a great many things we see here were the result of that.
And I’m saying that perception is a process similar to
imagination. Now, this is the key thing. But we have no
control over it. It just happens. It’s going on and creates the
whole impression of a world. That world includes not only
what we sense—what we immediately perceive—but also
the effect of the past. Thought is affecting our perception.
Q: In fantasy is there never creativity?
Bohm: In general no, because it’s based on the past. I think
there is a real distinction between creative imagination and
fantasy. Fantasy may look very creative and feel very
creative, but it may not be. You can even fantasize that you
are being very creative. Anything can be fantasized; the
power of fantasy is beyond limit. And it has its place—for
instance, if you imagine arranging things in a room a
different way that’s fantasy but that may be useful.
156 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Is the perception of images in words, in itself, a physical
sensory type of perception? 
Bohm: It is part of the physical process, yes. It is very
similar to the process which occurs when you actually see
and hear, but it’s coming partly from memory.
Q: Then it’s an actual physical thing in the brain and the
body, and it kind of all comes together?
Bohm: Yes.
Q: I see that part of the problem is that we have repressed
words and images which are very quick. We’re used to
them and don’t see that they’re there. And when we think
we are experiencing pure perception we need to be aware
that the word and image are colouring that perception to
create pleasure. What is the insight that can break the
addiction to pleasure ?
Bohm: Let’s look at it first for a while. In fantasy you can
create pleasure, pain, fear, anything, because you are
producing from memory an experience similar to what
might be produced if it weren’t memory. If you are
sensitive you always can tell there is a difference, but the
fantasy may captivate you so far that you’re not sensitive to
the difference. In fact, you may not want to know the
difference, because it has created a reflex, saying: ‘This is so
nice I don’t want to know any more. I don’t want to know
about it. I don’t want evidence that it may not be so.’
Everybody is familiar with that experience.
But you can see that it’s basically coming from memory,
from thought. By words you can create fantasies. For
example, that’s what advertising is doing all the time. The
combination of words and images creates fantasy. The
purpose is to create the expectation or the sense of the
SUNDAY MORNING 157

pleasure you will get, or the advantages you will get out of
the product they are selling. It’s aimed to get you to
fantasize something about that product. A great deal of
work is required to produce those advertisements. They
think it out very thoroughly and the images have to be
carefully chosen and connected with the words. You can see
how this process is going on all around. The advertisers
didn’t invent it. They’re only taking advantage of
something that’s been going on for ages.
Now you ask ‘what about an insight or perception?’.
Well, we can’t make that to order. But I’m suggesting that
we can have an insight that thought and fantasy can
produce a sense of ‘reality’.
Q: I feel I have that insight. But because of the pleasure that
one gets from it—because there’s that connection in the
brain or whatever, that mechanism by which these fantasies
create pleasure or create pain—it seems as though one
somehow needs to break that connection.
Bohm: Yes, you need a further insight into why the mind is
escaping the consequences of the first insight. Although we
have an insight at the level of inference, these reflexes are
still working.
So one thing to do is just to get more familiar with it by
watching it, by using the words which produce the pleasure
in the same way that we’ve talked about using the words to
call up anger or fear, and follow it through. I think if you
stay with it and build up that pleasure from those words,
you will eventually get the sense that it is mechanical, that
it’s just something going on in the body. It hasn’t a great significance.
Q: I see it slightly differently. Let’s say I have this insight.
Somehow the reflex comes up, the synapse connection is
there, but it doesn’t have the hold. It’s like, ‘well, so it’s
going to do its thing, but I don’t believe in it in the same way’.
158 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: That weakens it. But you can, if you wish, sort of do
this exercise of really making the reflex work now that it
has been weakened. Until it had been weakened you
couldn’t do this. As long as you believed in the reflex, the
idea of doing this would have been impossible. You could
now say ‘I don’t believe in it anymore and therefore I can
try to make the reflex work’, and become very much more
clear that it is a reflex.
Q: And if one does what you’re suggesting would that
speed up the process of getting rid of the synapse?
Bohm: It might, yes. It might do something, and then at
some stage you would have an insight that the whole thing
has no meaning—it’s just simply a mechanical process.
Q: But at that point, the insight isn’t something which is
happening about the words anymore. Rather, it’s some
direct perception of the crossover between fantasizing and
perceiving, in the process of that happening.
Bohm: Yes, you get a direct sense of that; and that begins to
remove those reflexes which were telling you that it’s the
other way around. The thing which is confusing us is that
we still have a lot of reflexes telling us it’s not that way at all.
Q: I don’t know whether it’s a problem, but what about the
reflex of questioning all the reflexes?
Bohm: You have to question these reflexes because you’ve
had an insight that there is a vast number of reflexes and
there is no reason why they should be intelligent. That’s the insight.
Q: I think of the reflex as a button. When the button is
being pushed, can there be an insight into its action while
it’s happening, rather than thinking about it later?
SUNDAY MORNING 159

Bohm: Yes, or even before it happens, because you have
seen through this so thoroughly that you have no wish to
press the button.
Q: But the real proof of the insight, if we’re going to call it
that, is that the thing just doesn’t happen.
Bohm: Yes, but we have to test the insight, because we can
always fantasize that we’ve had it. We can test the insight
by seeing whether it stands up reasonably and logically,
whether we are actually able to do it, and so on. You have
to watch it all the time, because it’s very easy to have a
fantasy of an insight and say that you’ve had an insight.
Q: We have to be careful when using the word ‘insight’,
and be sensitive to what insight is. It’s not that I am making
the insight, but it’s that the insight happens.
Bohm: Or else to be sensitive to something that can be
mistaken for insight.
Q: Thought can deceive itself. It can fabricate the
impression of an insight, but that has nothing to do with insight.
Bohm: Yes, that’s the reflexive imagination. You can get
imagination which comes from the memory and which is a
reflex; so it’s not really relevant to this. But when you see
something new you could even say that the insight is
almost a kind of creative imagination, but one which
actually acts directly in the material process.
The nervous structure, synapses and so on are so
infinitely complex that the memory could never handle it
all. The memory could never know all that, you could never
know it all. But the insight is able to meet that as it actually
is, at the moment—this is the crucial thing—without time. If
it takes time it won’t meet it.
160 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: In a way I think you could almost say that no one could
ever ‘have’ an insight—that within a particular organism
something might occur, and after the fact someone might
say that that was an insight. But whether you imagined it or
something actually happened, it would never be anything
you had, but just that there might be a different
organization within the organism.
Bohm: Yes. That insight took place and there was a change
in the organism. The insight is probably from immense
depths of subtlety—perhaps even beyond the organism for
all we know. Wherever it comes from, the important point
is that it works directly at the physical chemical level of the
organism, along with everything else. So it really affects
you through and through.
Q: Is insight available to all of us? And does it take an
emotional opening for it to come in?
Bohm: We don’t know where it comes from. I’m suggesting
that it is available to all of us. But the reflex of thought is
continually resisting and defending against it, because the
insight may be seen as a threat to the structure which you
want to hold.
Q: Insight affects the conditioning; it may even be that not a
lot of it survives—that a lot of the conditioning dies, it
dissolves. 
Bohm: It’s a threat to the conditioning, yes. But the
conditioning is, in fact, not all that important. However, the
conditioning contains a reflex which informs you that the
conditioning is very important.
Now, I wonder if we shouldn’t go into the question of the self-
image. We’ve already sort of touched on it by thinking of
the imagination and fantasy giving a sense of a self that
SUNDAY MORNING 161

could be very different from your usual sense. And you
really feel it, you experience it. Or you can be watching
television or a play or a movie and getting lost in the
characters and feel that that character actually is you. In
fact, you’re experiencing the character through yourself,
because the television image is nothing but a lot of dots of
light on the screen. All the things you see in there are really yourself.
And that’s how you perceive everything. Clearly, there is
a kind of imagination involved in looking at the television
image. If you were to look at it carefully you would see
nothing but flashing lights. But you see people, trees,
characters; you see emotional conflicts and danger; you see
anger, fear, pleasure. But it’s all yourself. It’s all the
imagination being infused into the picture on the screen—
just as it gets infused into perception. So when you’re
looking at the television set, what you experience must
come from something like the imagination. Where else
could it come from?
It becomes more and more clear how thought enters into
perception. Thought, though, doesn’t know it’s doing it. In
fact, most of the time you don’t need to know. However,
when there is incoherence you do need to know. This is the
point: if there is a resistance to knowing it when you need
to know, if there are reflexes that resist knowing, then there
is trouble.
You can’t keep track of all that—every time you watch
the television set, thinking ‘well, this is really me, projecting
into the television screen’. It’s like the rainbow. I see a
rainbow out there; but according to physics, actually there
are drops of rain falling and light refracting off of them. The
same sort of thing happens when you’re looking at the
television. There are spots of light, and you see all sorts of
things happening; but it’s the same nature as the rainbow.
It’s closer to the actuality to say that there is a process going
on in the television set—a complex process with the light,
with your nerves, with everything. You can’t get hold of it
all. It’s a representation; that drama is representing
162 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

something in many, many levels. And what you see and
experience is that representation.
I’m trying to make it more clear how this thing is actually
a very common experience and not so hard. We are
infusing our imagination, our past, our knowledge into
what we see—not ‘we’ are doing it, but it’s doing it itself.
And that isn’t necessarily bad. It may be very necessary in
many contexts. However, when we fail to see that this is
happening then we are in danger, especially if there is
resistance to seeing it. And we are conditioned to resist
seeing that this is happening. That’s really where the self-
deception arises.
Now, it’s around the self-image that the problem is most
difficult. We’ve got a kind of self-image that is almost like a
television programme going on inside; its going on in the
nerves, and so forth. And this image has several parts. One
part seems to be ‘somebody’ inside at whom you are
looking. Another part seems to be ‘somebody’ who is
looking. We have different words for these. The word ‘I’
stands for the subject, the one who sees, who acts, who
does, who determines everything, who has will. ‘Will’ is the
same as ‘determine’ and ‘intention’. ‘I am determined’
means strong will. ‘I’ is the active agent: I will, I determine,
I see, I choose, I think. And also there is ‘me’ to whom it’s
all done. ‘Me’ is the object, everything happens to me. Then,
the basic concept, the ‘self’, is what unites those two. I and
me are two sides of myself. So there are me, myself and I.
That’s a concept of the self.
We’ve discussed this many times, that the word ‘I’ by
itself means almost the same as God. It’s the ultimate
source of everything. In the story of Moses who came to the
burning bush in the desert and asked the voice what was its
name, the voice said that His name was ‘I Am That I Am’. ‘I
Am’ was His first name and ‘I Am’ was His second name.
Later the voice said again that ‘I Am’ was his name; when
Moses asked ‘who shall I say sent me?’ the voice said ‘You
shall say that “I am” sent you’. Evidently ‘I Am’ was
SUNDAY MORNING 163

considered to be the name of God, which was very sacred,
not supposed to be repeated, and so on.
That’s a kind of perception—that the phrase ‘I am’ by
itself represents the pure subject, the pure source, the one,
the source of everything; and that ‘me’ represents the object.
But we identify or equate ‘I am’ with ‘me’, saying ‘I am this,
I am that, I am what I am, I am all the things attributed to
me’. However, there comes a problem in equating ‘I am’
with ‘me’, because ‘me’ is always limited; ‘little you’, they
say, ‘who are you to think you are great, the great “I Am”?’.
Whereas ‘I am’, without adding anything more, does not
have any implicit limitation.
The essential point is that the ‘me’ is always limited, but
we feel that ‘me’ is the same as ‘I am’, as ‘I’. Now, this
creates a conflict. People want to say: ‘I’m the greatest. I’m
the best. I’m the most wonderful.’ We have this great,
bright and shining image. And then the world comes along
and says ‘You’re nothing. You’re just fooling yourself.
You’re nobody.’ It deflates that image, which becomes a
shock and creates a great pain—the fantasy of pleasure can
equally turn into the fantasy of pain and fear and horror. In
a fantasy you can really get into all that.
But it’s very hard to keep the thought of ‘I’ and ‘me’ orderly
—to make sense of it, to make it coherent. People don’t
know how to resolve this contradiction between ‘I am’ and
‘me’. People say: ‘You should not treat me as an object. I
don’t like it. I’m insulted, hurt.’ And society says: ‘Who do
you think you are that you should be different from
everybody else and not be treated as an object? You think
that you shouldn’t be limited.’ Yet ‘me’, by definition, is an object.
The little child may feel that there is no limit, that he’s
everything. He forms that thought, that reflex, that fantasy.
Whether it reflects anything real or not we don’t know.
What is important is that it sets up a reflex, saying ‘that’s
me’. He would hardly form an identity without that. He
also depends on other people to tell him what he is and
who he is. However the great, bright and shining being he
164 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

sees from within is not always seen from without. Other
people don’t back that up. They may treat him as God
when he’s a very young child, but then a time suddenly
appears when they don’t.
So you have this tremendous conflict. You have what
Freud called the narcissistic image. There’s the Greek
legend of Narcissus, who saw a beautiful man in the water
and didn’t realize it was his own image. He fell in love with
it. But he could never get to that image, and he pined away
and died. The irony was he already had that for which he
was longing, he already was that for which he was longing.
However, he didn’t believe it or wouldn’t accept it. He said
‘that’s somebody else, whom I need’.
The point is: when we produce this self-image in fantasy
it then becomes the thing longed for. And we say ‘there it is
far away from me, and I’ve got to reach it’. But this is
another fantasy, another image. And it creates the sense ‘I
need to have that’.
The sense of necessity gives the greatest force and power
there is in human affairs. You can’t resolve that. And the
child never really learns—not in our current society, nor
probably in any society of which we know—to get free of
this image, to get free of being bound to this image.
Therefore, when the image is punctured it hurts. The
fantasy of this great, glorious, shining being is then turned
into a fantasy of somebody who is despised and looked
down upon and limited—who is nothing much, and all that
sort of thing—which creates pain. And that creates the need
to have other people tell me how great I am and it creates
the sense ‘I need to get proof of how great I am by what I
do or by what I own’, and that sort of thing.
This is very powerful. Human affairs are very powerfully
dominated by all that. And a megalomaniac would say ‘I
must govern the world in order to show what I am’, as did
Alexander the Great. It was reputed that neither he nor his
mother ever got along with his father. He identified with
his mother, and somehow they came to hate his father.
SUNDAY MORNING 165

Probably he felt a strong necessity to show his father how
great he was, so to do that he conquered the world. And
then when he had done that, he said that he was very sad
because he had no more worlds to conquer. In other words,
he had to keep on conquering the world, he never could
stop, because he had to feed that image all the time.
Q: But the philosopher Diogenes beat him down. He was
living in nature, enjoying the sunshine, and Alexander the
Great came and stood in front of him and cast a shadow.
The philosopher said to him: ‘Could you please get away?
You are blocking something you can’t give me—the
sunshine.’ The wisdom of the philosopher beat down his image.
Bohm: Well, I suppose Alexander probably always
suspected that it wasn’t quite true. I mean, he wasn’t
stupid; he was really very intelligent. But he was caught in
this image. And he had tremendous power because of it.
People would do anything for him because he had such
power. You can see how this whole thing works. Everybody
has this same image, which has been beaten down.
However, if the soldiers saw Alexander the Great with a
bright glorious shining image, they could identify with it;
they would feel, ‘I’m that way too’. So they would do
anything for him. Whatever he said for them to do, they
did. And therefore they became very powerful.
You can see the power of all this imagination and fantasy.
Throughout all the world that sort of thing has produced
effects like that. There was Hitler, and there have been all
sorts of other people. And we haven’t resolved this question.
The point is now that this self-image contains two parts.
At first that seems reasonable, because even physically
there is ‘I’ who is looking and ‘I’ at whom the looking is done
—‘I’ who is the subject and ‘I’ who am the object. I say:
‘Here is my body. I am looking at it.’ The body is the object
of the looking. But I am also the subject—‘I’ who am
looking. It seems that I am looking at myself—a reflexive
166 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

act. It makes sense, right? I wash myself, I shave myself, I
do all sorts of things like that.
And then when we form the image inside it seems that
there is ‘I’ who is the subject, looking at ‘me’ who is the
object. Down in the chest area somewhere perhaps is the
object, and up in the head is somebody looking. That can be
arranged by fantasy quite easily—we’ve discussed how
thought enters perception: once thought says that that’s the
way it is, then we perceive it that way.
But now if that ‘thing’ which is perceived in that way
were actually there, it would be extremely important and
precious, wouldn’t it? It would be this great, glorious
shining God—or at least it ought to be. It would be the
centre of existence and everything. For the little child it is.
And in fact, it never goes away for anybody. So that which
is inside here has tremendous importance and necessity. It’s
not merely the chemistry, but the chemistry is given
extremely high value by the importance and necessity
attached to the meaning. They go together, because there
are 
enormous 
chemical 
effects 
going 
on—
neurophysiological effects of such a great shining image,
which is perceived as reality, and also tremendous meaning
which holds it. Therefore, when all that doesn’t work
properly it really disorganizes the system.
Thus this self-image becomes central. And everything
becomes arranged to feed and sustain it in as good a way as
possible. We try to arrange thoughts that way. We try to get
people to support it. We try to produce situations, such as
acquiring wealth—people will make a lot of money to show
that they are really very great people. They make far more
money than they need for whatever they want to do. They
keep on making money. And if the mere making of money
isn’t enough, then they buy all sorts of things—far more
than they need—to show that they are great people.
Why do people do this? It’s accepted, it’s taken for
granted that they will do it. But we need to look into this.
Why? What’s behind it? You can see that there is a process
SUNDAY MORNING 167

going on here which involves the whole system. And
people will reinforce each other in all of it, because people
get their identity from one another—everybody says ‘you
are this, you are that, you are the other’. Or else you get
your identity by what you do, or by thinking of where you
came from, or what your ancestors were, and all that. So
you get a sense of identity built up out of thought, which
says ‘that’s terribly important’. You have to prove that
you’re there.
But this structure actually has no basis whatsoever except
thought, which is a very flimsy base. And since that
structure apparently is all-important, it would be very
important to prove that it is solidly grounded. Otherwise it
will be rather alarming to see this all-important structure
with no ground.
Q: I’ve asked myself who I am, and realized that I am
several images at once—each of my children has a different
image of me, as do my husband, friends and anyone else.
But I feel I’m not those images, I’m something else. Even
that ‘something else’ comes into question, as what I think I
am changes from one day to the next. I put a question
about my body, and asked whether I would be less of who I
think I am if I had one arm less, or whatever, than I now
have. So I decided I am not my body. There is something
else, but I can’t explain what it is.
Bohm: Well, that’s the problem: how are we going to find
what we are? You can’t exist without your body, but
usually people don’t take it all that seriously. Their identity
is what they can do or what they have or what their
relations are; that’s usually taken as more important. People
will allow their bodies to degenerate in favour of that.
Other people may regard their bodies as all-important. It
can vary. You can put your identity into almost anything—
into your country, or into your bank account or into your
achievements—into anything.
168 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

But the whole thing doesn’t seem to have any ground.
Now, if this self were what it’s apparently supposed to be,
then it would be very important to get a real solid ground
for it. And that’s why we feel the urge to search for this
identity. Yet people are not really that sure about their
identity. The question is: do we need an identity? Clearly in
some limited sense we do need to know who we are—we
have identity cards, we have memories and needs and
certain relationships, and all the rest. We keep that all
straight. But is that identity the supremely important thing
that it seems to be?
Q: Does the identity depend on the system you were
talking about?
Bohm: I’m saying that the system gives you the identity.
Without the system you would have no identity. The whole
system of thought spread over the world is what gives you
your identity, your place in the world and so forth. If there
were no system, how could you sustain that identity? The
identity could only exist socially and culturally. Although
we may try to identify ourselves with God, or something
like that, there again it’s the culture which gave you the
thought allowing you to do that. That’s what we have to
keep in mind.
There was an ancient view: ‘I don’t know what I am. What I
am is unknown, but constantly revealing itself.’ This is another
view of what you are. Let’s look at it for a moment. ‘I’ am
unknown. If there is something which is infinite—the
universe, or something beyond the universe—I am
somehow grounded in that. Maybe the whole physical
being, and probably even matter, is infinite in its subtlety.
And there may be something beyond. Therefore, whatever I
am, that must be the source of it. That is unknown—but it
reveals itself. We don’t need the notion of an identity, of an all-
important identity on to which we are going to hold,
because that gets in the way of the need to change our
SUNDAY MORNING 169

reflexes. Once we identify with something, our reflexes are
that way—it’s very important, ‘necessary’. And we will
want to preserve that identity even though it may involve
ideas that are false. 
Q: Are you saying that it’s very important for us to
preserve the particular kind of chemistry that we’re used to?
Bohm: That’s what it amounts to, implicitly—that identity
will give us a certain chemistry. And also we feel that we
want to preserve that. The whole body gets used to it. The
body itself can get used to a certain chemistry, and
demands that that chemistry be preserved. So thought will
try to do that. But in addition, thought has put it that there
is, more abstractly, an identity that has to be preserved—
which is absolutely necessary.
Q: I’ll just see if I can say it in my own words. The identity
lies in abstractions, which are images; and each one of those
images is a continuum, has a chemistry. And that chemistry
in some sense has a reality to it, and is all movement?
Bohm: Yes, it’s all movement. It includes chemistry and
possibly some material reality beyond chemistry—the
physics, the electricity, and beyond that.
Q: Say I find this out from someplace; and I, in my
abstractions, would like to change. But I don’t have any
notion that it’s not the images that have to change—it’s the
chemistry that has to change.
Bohm: The whole thing has to change. We may change the
images, but the chemistry doesn’t change that way. The
whole thing has to change: we need an insight into the whole.
Q: Could the fixedness of the chemistry be the cause of disease?
170 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: The fixedness of the chemistry and the fixedness of
the ideas around it are inseparable, because if your ideas
about the chemistry say that it is absolutely necessary to
maintain it, then that helps fix the chemistry. You can’t say
that the chemistry is fixed independently of the ideas that
the system as a whole is carrying about the chemistry.
Q: Is the need to label things and people and to put them
into little boxes part of this holding on to images?
Bohm: That’s part of the image—that we put people into
boxes, as you say. And they may actually have several
different boxes; there’s an expression about wearing several
different hats—such as when you’re at work you have one
hat and when you’re at home you have another one.
So the whole process is not coherent. When you begin to
look at it, you see that it doesn’t hold together. That’s the
incoherence of the image. And if you really see it—if you
really don’t believe it anymore—then you have to say that
making the image all-important is not a serious option.
It may be that it’s still going to operate, it still has a large
amount of chemistry that we haven’t got at, and so on. But
a very crucial step right here is the insight that this whole
process actually has no meaning. It has no ground. It’s truly
the most ephemeral sort of thing. There’s nothing more
ephemeral than thoughts; and yet thoughts can hold
themselves by saying ‘I must remain this way forever, with
absolute necessity’. The point is to have the notion of a
creative being, rather than of an identified being.
Q: As ephemeral as thought may be, is thought not in fact
in the brain cells themselves?
Bohm: It’s in the brain cells, but as an ephemeral movement
—it comes and goes, it mixes up with the chemistry and the
electrical currents, and all that. 
SUNDAY MORNING 171

Q: If the identity movement is strong it can be a block to
the creative energy.
Bohm: Yes, it certainly blocks it. The identity movement
may be the major block. We’ve been following the blocks all
along, and now this may be very close to the source of the
major block—the attempt to hold this identity, which is part
of the reflex system.
Q: I don’t think people have taken the danger of
identification seriously so far. At this moment, as you’re
making it clear, it seems that there is a real danger in
having an identity. The ephemeral movement of identity
can block the energy; it can be a strong addiction, because it
gets close to the power of necessity.
Bohm: Yes, it all ties up. We could look at that. The identity
has a certain limited significance. It’s not that we are going
to dispose of it, but it has no fundamental deep eternal significance.
There is eternal flow and movement that is creative. But
this creativity can get caught up in a certain process, which
appears to be mechanical. The process isn’t really
mechanical, because it can always change with new insight.
If it were a machine it could never change. I’m saying it
isn’t fully deeply a machine, but it can behave something
like a machine. So we can represent this process as
mechanical, but only up to a point.
We’ll leave it at that for now and take our break.
Bohm: We’ve been discussing this self-image—the self as
observer and the self as observed. They seem to be separate
because they have been imaged that way. The image
produces the perception of that separation.
Perhaps, if you want, we’ll talk about it for a little while.
We said that clearly the human being actually is there in
some sense—he is actual. The question is: does the human
172 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

being exist with a permanent identity? And, if there is one,
what would it be? We said that this notion of identity
doesn’t seem to be very coherent. The whole basis is very
ephemeral, insubstantial in thought.
Then there was the suggestion of another way of looking
at the human being. The ground of any person is really
unknown. It might be in the whole totality of whatever is—
of all matter, even beyond matter. We ourselves are matter
which has come together from all over the world. The
carbon in us has probably come from carbon dioxide, which
has been diffusing over the entire atmosphere. It may have
been somewhere on the other side of the world and it got
into plants and into animals, and so forth, and then got into
us. Likewise with the oxygen and water, and so on. So
materially our ground is really in the whole universe. Thus,
you could then follow it through scientifically and say that
it came from the earth, and that the earth was formed from
hot gas which came from stars, or whatever, and those
came from interplanetary dust—on and on, back to the Big
Bang and even beyond. Therefore, we could say all of that
has conspired to produce us—the material structures that
we are. Thus, we would have to say that in some sense this
matter is actual.
But our thoughts about it are not actual. They are
representations, they contain forms. The thought about the
table contains a form. But the table doesn’t actually end the
way we see it—at the atomic level it would sort of shade
out a bit. And in modern physics, one of the things they say
is that empty space is full of energy, a vast amount of
energy. Each wave in empty space has a certain minimum
energy, even when it’s empty, and if you add up all the
waves it would be infinite. But if you add up waves down
to a certain length called the Planck length (ten to the minus
thirty-three centimetres—a very short distance—beyond
which we might expect the present law of physics not to
hold) the total in a cubic centimetre would be more than the
energy of all the matter in the universe. The idea, then, is
SUNDAY MORNING 173

that space is mostly full, and that matter is a small ripple on
it. You can make a very strong case for that according to
modern physics.
Similarly, we could say that whatever is behind the mind—
the consciousness, or whatever you want to call it—is a vast
stream; and on the surface are ripples which are thought.
This seems to be an analogy. Even when we talk of things
being ‘here’, they are really small ripples on some vast
energy which is circulating. The only reason that this
energy doesn’t show up is because matter and light go right
through it without deflecting. What we experience is empty
space. But it may also be regarded as the fullness of space,
which is the ground of all existence. Matter is, then, a small
variation on this ground.
We now, however, begin to think of the forms in thought,
by which we try to represent matter. Those forms are much
more abstract than matter. We can elaborate those forms in
all sorts of ways—make very realistic looking pictures, and
so forth—but they are not the material things themselves.
Like maps, those forms may serve as guides and lead to
coherent action, if they are 
correct representations.
Otherwise they lead to incoherence and all the problems
that come from that.
That’s the general picture. The things which we actually
see are there in some sense; and we are going to discover in
our relation with them that we will be coherent if there is
correct thought. But the ground of the thing is much, much
deeper. At the very least it’s in the material structure, which
is far more solid than the thought about it. And then
beyond the material structure is another structure, which
may be even infinitely more solid than that, or far more
substantial than that.
Now, maybe mind is another ‘side’ of that same thing—
that which we call energy on one side is mind on the other
side. That is, energy is pervaded with a kind of intelligence,
out of which perhaps insight comes, or deeper perceptions
of truth. That’s the suggestion.
174 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Then what about ourselves? We say that our ground is in
all that. But we have all sorts of representations of ourselves
which are really rather superficial. And we try to identify
with them. But then once we do that, we have this quality
of thought which infuses it into perception. We apparently
perceive the thing we are representing—it seems to be
there. It’s like the rainbow; we see a rainbow, but what we
have is drops of rain and light—a process. Similarly, what
we ‘see’ is a self; but what we actually have is a whole lot
of thoughts going on in consciousness. Against the
backdrop of consciousness we are projecting a self, rather
than a rainbow. If you walk toward the rainbow you will
never get there. The image of the table is produced in the
same way, but if you walk toward the table you will get
there and touch it.
I’m suggesting that if you try to touch the self, it will be
the same difficulty as trying to touch the rainbow. We have
a representation of the self, which is really arising in a
process. We don’t know this process very well; but the
attempt to treat the self as an object is just not going to
mean anything. So instead, suppose we say that this self is
unknown. Its origin, its ground is unknown. And it is
constantly revealing itself, through each person or through
nature or through various other ways.
Q: The self is revealed?
Bohm: Whatever you mean by ‘yourself. The basic meaning
of the word ‘self’, according to the dictionary, is the
‘quintessence’—the essence of the essence. The fifth essence,
it was called. There were four essences in ancient times and
then they added a fifth one, which was the essence of the
whole thing. The idea is that the thing ‘itself’ means the
very essence of it. Thus what you mean by the ‘self is your
very essence. You say ‘I’ and ‘me’, and ‘myself—‘self’ being
the essence from which the ‘I’ and me’ have their ground.
SUNDAY MORNING 175

But that use of language will give rise to representations,
which we are liable to mistake for actuality.
That’s all I’m saying: whatever the self is, its essence is
unknown but constantly revealing itself.
One point is to clear up the thought that we are
something limited and known. I’m saying we cannot be that
which is limited and known. Nothing can be what is limited
and known; that can at best be an abstraction or a
representation. This actuality cannot be that.
Q: Would it help to look at this in terms of orientation
difference? In one sense, what we’re talking about is ‘I’ am
learned. All the memory, the sense of identification of self
at that level, is learned. A different orientation might be ‘I
am learning’.
Bohm: If you are learning, yes. However, if you’re learning
you can’t know—that you are learning implies the
unknown. We could say that the unknown is therefore
revealing itself in what you are learning. But there is always
the unknown. In other words, we are not going to exhaust
the unknown—we’ve said that even in physics there is this
picture of the almost infinite energy in empty space. So the
suggestion is that there is a vast unknown. It is revealing
itself. We are learning, if you like; and even if we’re not
learning it is revealing itself.
That’s the general notion. That’s the creative view of
being, rather than the idea of an identity of being.
Q: What is revealing itself?
Bohm: The unknown. The unknown ground of all that is. It
reveals itself in many ways. That is a creative view, a
creative notion of being. That’s what we are suggesting,
rather than a notion of identity—which is limited and
repetitive, and so on.
176 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

We don’t know. And if you once say ‘I am this forever’,
then it sort of blocks things. You could always ask ‘how do
you know that’s what you are?’. You may have been that
way, but there is no proof that whatever has been will
always be.
Q: If I hold up my hand I could say this is the unknown
revealing itself. If I look at your cup I can look at that as the
unknown revealing itself.
Bohm: Yes, anything. The unknown may reveal itself in a
similar way to what it was before. Many things just keep on
revealing themselves in a certain similar way, though
underneath it is eternal flux but producing a similar form
which we are representing in our thought. Now, our
thought is adequate for representing those forms, and it
may hint at what’s beneath, but it really cannot get hold of that.
Q: If I do something, such as make a painting, is that also
the unknown revealing itself?
Bohm: It can be, or it could be from your memory.
However, even the basic actuality of memory is the
unknown. We have to say that everything we know is a
form, which we sort of project onto the background of
consciousness —as we do with the rainbow. It can be
projected correctly or incorrectly; it’s not that every form is
as good as every other.
Many, many forms could be projected. We could have
different cultures and different views of life, and all, which
have different degrees of coherence. The important point is
that the overall view is in the culture, and we have to ask
how coherent it is. You can see that this thing is done not
only individually, but even more so collectively. By sharing
our thought and consciousness we are projecting forms into
SUNDAY MORNING 177

everything. We’ll discuss that this afternoon in connection
with dialogue.
Q: When you say culture is coherent or incoherent, are you
saying that the representation, the abstraction, will either be
coherent or incoherent? But the substance itself—the frame
and the canvas of the painting, as it were—is always
coherent. 
Bohm: Yes, the material structure is always coherent,
though it may not be what we think it is.
Q: Then incoherence can only lie in representations?
Bohm: In the forms of representations. And in the actions to
which those forms lead.
Q: Is there nothing that’s limited and known, except
through looking at it wrongly?
Bohm: Thought always provides limits which have relative
validity.
I’m suggesting that you have two possibilities. One is to
say that everything is limited, and knowledge could ‘get’ it
all. And the other is to say that knowledge cannot get it all.
People are trying to find out what the ultimate knowledge
is. Scientists thought they had it in the nineteenth century.
And then they said ‘no, it’s not so’. Today there is no sign
that we have the final theory yet, although people are
talking about the ‘theory of everything’, which they hope to
get. But you could say, first of all, that any knowledge
we’ve ever had has been limited. Now that doesn’t prove
anything, but it makes one question.
Suppose even that physicists had finally found the theory
of everything—the ultimate, final particles, which we’ll call
the ‘ultimons’. And then it would just go on century after
178 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

century. They would calculate in terms of the ultimons and
everything would work out. But there would still be no
proof that maybe in the next minute or next hour or day or
century they wouldn’t discover a limit to it all, and it
wouldn’t work.
In other words, there is no way to know that you’ve got it.
So it’s a poor strategy to assume it, because if you assume
that you have the ultimate then you won’t look for
anything else, and therefore it will tend to trap you. You
have no way of knowing that you have the ultimate. You
may say something like ‘God told me’, but then people
could say ‘how do you know that?’. You can’t ever get
absolute assurance that you have ultimate knowledge, no
matter how convinced you are of it. The best you can say is
‘as far as I can see, that’s the way it is’.
Q: Then the search for the ultimate in terms of knowledge
might be a mistake in itself.
Bohm: Yes, it may be a very serious mistake—part of the
flaw in the system we’re talking about. We have to be open.
You can see how important it is. If ultimate knowledge
were possible about the atom it would imply that it might
be possible about our identity, because we’re made of
atoms. Many scientists are working on that assumption—
saying that we will have it all, that artificial intelligence will
reproduce everything, and so forth. But I’m saying I think
that that is an incoherent procedure.
Q: How would you differentiate between the search for
ultimate knowledge and the search for something ultimate
beyond knowledge?
Bohm: You can’t search for it, because the very word
‘search’ implies trying to get hold of it. I think we have to
say only that, as far as thought is concerned, we need to
SUNDAY MORNING 179

leave 
open 
the 
possibility 
that 
something 
beyond
knowledge is possible, and indeed very plausible. First of
all, we’ve said that there is a great deal of evidence that
knowledge cannot be complete. And second, there has to be
something beyond; but we have no proof. Then we ask ‘is it
possible to somehow come in contact with that in some
other way?’. Maybe it would be possible and maybe not.
Q: Is the moving force the same for the search for ultimate
knowledge and the beyond? 
Bohm: I wouldn’t think so. I think the search for ultimate
knowledge would have to be a search for security. But we
have to say that what is beyond—which is the unknown—
cannot meaningfully be sought. If you would really see that,
it may be that it would give security. But at least the way
we picture it, the unknown doesn’t look very secure.
Q: The way we picture it from this viewpoint.
Bohm: Yes. Maybe when you are that, then it may be secure.
Q: Are you suggesting knowledge isn’t the barometer of
knowing?
Bohm: We know that already, because knowledge is always
subject to test for incoherence, which must get beyond
knowing. You cannot know all the tests for incoherence.
Q: Then there is some other sensitivity in knowing, other
than knowing being knowledge-based?
Bohm: Yes, knowing is a process based on the unknown.
180 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: I wonder if we could look at the relationship between
this ultimate self-image and the search for the ultimate
knowing, and how that relates to what we were talking
about before—the word creating the sensation, and so forth?
Bohm: If you assume, as the culture generally does, that
there is an ultimate knowledge, then that will be perceived
as something which is there as a possibility. Therefore your
intentions, your impulse, your motivation will be toward it,
because if there is such ultimate knowledge it would be the
right thing to try to get it. Now, if there isn’t, you will say:
‘That’s dead to me. I have no interest in that.’
Q: Universal ‘truths’ or ‘ideas’ seem to run across all
countries 
and 
cultures—for 
instance, 
the 
Ten
Commandments or the Golden Rule. Is that like a reflection,
or is that just a selfimage that’s projected by all people on
the planet?
Bohm: There may have been an insight that people have to
be related in a certain way in order for society to work and
for anything to have any meaning—an insight that you
can’t treat people totally immorally; that if you do so it will
all come back to you, it won’t work, it’s incoherent.
Q: Would that be a projected self-image?
Bohm: No, I think the original insight was beyond that, but
then thought takes hold of it and turns it into the system
and projects the self-image. In other words, everything can
be turned into this mill.
Q: Can we stay open-ended, without having expectations of
acquiring knowledge or results, and let things flow and just
‘let it be’?
SUNDAY MORNING 181

Bohm: Well, that’s a question we’re raising. The only
answer would be whether we do it or don’t. We can’t really
answer this from knowledge. If it is unknown and it can’t
be answered from knowledge, it seems to call for something
else, which we’ve been calling ‘perception of truth’ or
‘insight’. And we have been going into various kinds of
thoughts, looking at thoughts which are getting in the way
of this and which are part of our culture.
Perhaps we all are having some insight into this at some
level, that it has some effect. But it will require a lot of work
to get actually into all the chemistry which holds the old way.
That’s the point I would like to make. Now, if you don’t
want to call it ‘insight’ you could call it ‘perception of
truth’. And we could raise the question of what is truth.
Our culture has similarly produced a lot of confusion
around that, which makes it hard to get into it.
One theory of truth is that true ideas correspond to
reality, such as the true idea of the table would correspond
to the reality of the table. But we’ve just seen that this can’t
be because every idea is a representation—an abstraction
which leaves out most of the reality. It’s hard to know what
it corresponds to. For example, if a map is a correct map,
does it correspond to anything in the country? On the map
are lines and dots representing cities, roads, rivers and
boundaries. Those lines on the map are abstractions. They
are not actually lines anyway—if you look at them carefully
you can see they are little dots, printed dots of ink, all
strung near each other. And, similarly, the lines between
the countries don’t exist either. They’ve been imagined by
people. A fence or wall may eventually be put up, but it
was put up by people who thought there was a line there.
Thus there is a correspondence between one abstraction and
another, which guides you. But it’s a correspondence of
form, certain abstract forms, but not to reality—the reality
itself escapes you. Every one of those things which
corresponds in that way doesn’t stand by itself as reality.
182 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

There may be a correspondence of that kind, which is
part of a correct idea. And a correct idea will not only lead
to that kind of correspondence, but also to coherent action.
But I would like to say that truth is something more. An
idea may be correct or incorrect or somewhere in between;
but truth is something deeper. We should reserve the word
‘truth’ for something much deeper.
The root of the word ‘true’ in English means ‘straight’,
‘honest’ and ‘faithful’—like ‘a true line’. And in Latin, the
word verus is a root word which means ‘that which is’. So
you could say that a rough idea of the meaning of the word
‘truth’ would be ‘straight, honest and faithful to that which
is’. But there will be no truth unless the mind is straight,
honest and faithful; unless it doesn’t engage in self-
deception; unless the chemistry allows it. For truth to arise
there must be a certain situation in the brain.
Q: In the Greek language the word for truth is alethia, which
means ‘out of lethargy’, ‘out of sleep’.
Bohm: ‘Out of sleep’, yes. You have to be awake, alert for
truth. In other words, it requires what we may call a certain
‘state of mind’; really, a state of the material system as well.
What generally happens when the whole system is too
jangled is that it is filled with all sorts of chemical effects of
this incoherent thought, which interfere with perception
and put you to sleep, and so forth. You could say the brain
is filled with what I call ‘electrochemical smog’. And when
that is present we don’t have truth.
I think the idea that there is an abstract truth—
somewhere, somehow, sitting there waiting for us get hold
of it—is again the same as the idea of the ultimate
knowledge. Truth is something more vital. It has to be that
sort of movement which doesn’t deceive itself. And then it
has to fit, cohere with ‘that which is’. Truth is a perception,
and is simultaneously an action. The action of truth would
clear up the electrochemical smog. It clears up the smog, as
SUNDAY MORNING 183

it were, so that you see more clearly. And also the system
isn’t being poisoned, and whatnot. So that’s part of truth.
Truth is not merely information about ‘what is’. But rather
truth is a key factor in ‘what is’.
Q: How does truth relate to the unknown self revealing itself?
Bohm: The source of truth must be like the source of insight
—beyond what thought can grasp. And truth comes and
touches the physical chemical state of the brain, as well as
producing the words which communicate it to thought.
Truth is not just floating out there abstractly, but truth
actually is. That is to say, truth is a factor in actuality. Truth
meets ‘that which is’; it touches ‘that which is’ in a coherent
way when it touches what’s going on in the brain, and
clears up some of it. And then from there on, that
perception of truth gives rise to thought which can also act
in a more coherent way.
Q: You’re not separating the truth from ‘that which is’, are you?
Bohm: No, truth is a part of ‘that which is’. Truth is a
movement, or act, within ‘that which is’. It actually is.
Q: Can you say that truth is the action, and has its own actuality?
Bohm: Yes. Truth has its own actuality.
Q: Truth lived would be life without reflex then? Would we
be living without the reflex?
Bohm: Truth is not a reflex. It is a creative perception. We
need the reflex, but not to be dominated by the reflex.
Q: Can an insight show the truth of how the system works?
184 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: I’ll put it like this: the perception of truth, which
may be in a flash of insight, actually changes the system to
make it more coherent. And at the same time, it produces
the words, or whatever, which communicate a new
foundation for thought. 
Q: Could that imply that we need coherence to touch the truth?
Bohm: The brain has to quiet down. This incoherence is the
source of the electrochemical smog. Our civilization has
filled the air with chemical smog, and the lungs are not in
condition to breath properly sometimes. Similarly, the brain
is not in a condition to respond to truth.
Q: How does it respond to truth then?
Bohm: In this smog, it doesn’t; or it responds in a confused
way. And therefore it’s not truth.
Q: Is truth within the realm of description?
Bohm: No. We’re merely trying to give the words which
would sort of point there. But it’s an actuality. It cannot be
described, but it is an actuality which acts. The perception
of truth is an actual act which changes things; it’s not
merely that it is the truth about something which is different.
There is also the truth of the false. The truth of the false is
not only that it is false; but in the case of the
electrochemical smog, for instance, the truth of the false is
that it is a material process. Ultimately, underlying the false
is the truth.
Q: But the false lies only in abstraction.
Bohm: The false arises through inappropriate abstraction, of
a kind which leads to its own defence.
SUNDAY MORNING 185

Q: Absolute truth would not be affected by time. 
Bohm: The truth would not be time. It would not even
happen in time. Let’s say part of the action of truth is to act
on this smog, on the synapses, to remove the incoherence. If
it takes time it won’t be able to do that, because ‘that which
is’ is changing all the time. And the true perception of one
moment would not necessarily hold for the next.
Q: Then truth is revealed in the absence of thought. Might it
not be synonymous with beauty and joy?
Bohm: Yes, it might be more or less the same area.
Q: Along those lines, a great work of art, of whatever genre,
doesn’t just have a correct representation of that which it is
representing, but there seems to be something more. Is that truth?
Bohm: In some way, yes. Something like it. There was
something more—perception—which goes beyond merely
representing things. Though the representation may be
there, it’s more than that. Perhaps there was a perception of
truth when the artist was painting it, or doing it.
Q: And that would be part of the reason why a very
repressive kind of totalitarian system would try to restrict
and control art.
Bohm: They would not only control and restrict art, but
almost anything. They control and restrict science, for
example, to whatever areas they think appropriate. They
use art just as they use science.
I think perception of truth would only be possible with
freedom. So we need to bring in the question of freedom,
for which we don’t have time now. But truth and freedom
must be essentially one field. 
186 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Is truth similar to final knowledge?
Bohm: It wouldn’t be knowledge though. Truth acts from
moment to moment, is what I’m trying to say. Truth is the
action from moment to moment.
Q: Is it plain why Einstein held imagination to be so
superior 
to 
knowledge? 
He 
said 
something 
like
‘Imagination has been infinitely more of service to
humankind than is knowledge’.
Bohm: If it’s the creative imagination then that’s right,
because that leads to new perception and to new action.
Q: But since our culture represses that creative imagination
in both the arts and sciences we’re in a double bind here.
Bohm: Yes, that’s why we are going to discuss the culture.
I’ll just lay some foundation now; then the first part of the
afternoon we could discuss culture and dialogue, and go on
to the other questions of observer and observed, time and
so on.
We have brought up the question of the society and the
culture which is suppressing all these things, creating all
this smog. The trouble is not primarily originating in the
individual, nor is the individual able to handle it entirely by
himself. The individual change has tremendous importance;
but even if he did change, the change would still have
limited meaning. We would still have this whole culture
carrying on with the smog. Therefore, unless the whole
culture is changed it’s not going to have all that deep a
meaning. Fundamentally, the whole question of identity, self-
image, repression, assumptions and all that, is rising in the
culture, which is shared meaning. We share all that; it comes
in. We may reject some of it and accept some of it, but even
SUNDAY MORNING 187

to be able to do that is part of the culture. That’s all the
system. And the culture underlies the system.
I suggest that we’ll begin the afternoon, if we may, by
discussing the culture and how dialogue can be a way to
start to inquire into how the culture is operating in this field
that we’ve been talking about. It’s not enough to see all this
happening in ourselves because most of it happens between us.
Q: I had a thought a moment ago when you were talking
about truth and insight. There’s a thing in mathematics
called ‘factorial’, which calculates how many ways you can
combine things. If you have three objects, then there’s one
times two times three, which would be six combinations.
The factorial of ten is over three million. The brain has
about twenty billion neurons, and if you factorialized
twenty billion it would be a number for all intents and
purposes which would be infinite. If the brain is in that
state of silence where your conditioning and your thinking
are not operating, then might there be an infinity or non-
limited quality about the brain? Is it in that state that the
brain may be in communion or touched by the true nature
of truth and insight?
Bohm: If the brain really is not conditioned deeply and all
these combinations are free to move around, then it can
respond in an infinity of ways and move in relation to truth.
Shall we finish now?
188 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

 
SUNDAY AFTERNOON
Bohm: At the end of the morning session we were saying
that all this thought—this whole system—is even more
social and cultural than it is individual. And it is necessary
to go into that in order to see the whole of it, to see the
essential features of it. The way we are proposing to do that
is by dialogue. The word ‘dialogue’ has the root ‘dialogos’.
In Greek ‘dia’ means ‘through’ and ‘logos’ means ‘the
word’ or ‘the meaning’. We may picture meaning flowing
between people. ‘Dia’ doesn’t mean ‘two’ but ‘through’.
Therefore, many people can participate—it is between us or
among us.
One view of relationship would be to look at two people
as two points connected by a dotted line showing their
relationship as a secondary feature. Another view is a solid
line with a point at each end—which is to say that the
relationship is the main thing and the people are at the
ends, are the extremes of it. And in the dialogue we might
perhaps be that way.
Just as thought separates the self into the subject and
object, into the observer and the observed—which is all one process
—so thought separates people. But when people are really
in communication, in some sense a oneness arises between
them as much as inside the person.
Of course, ‘dialogue’ has not been commonly used in that
sense. For example, people talk about dialogues in the
United Nations; they say things like ‘we negotiate’.
However, negotiation is only the beginning. If people don’t
189

even know how to get started they may trade off various
points trying to find out at least how to proceed; but if you
merely trade off points and negotiate then that doesn’t get
very far.
The view of the dialogue which I am suggesting goes
very much further than that. I read many, many years ago
of an anthropologist who visited a North American Indian
tribe of hunter-gatherers. They would meet in a circle of
about thirty or forty people, and they would talk directly
with each other. Apparently there was no particular
authority, though it may be that the older people were
more listened to because they were supposed to be wiser.
They talked with no agenda, no purpose; they made no
decisions and they ended the circle for no apparent reason.
And after that they apparently understood each other well
enough so that they knew what to do. That was their way
of life; they met again and again, in sort of a sustained way.
It seemed to me at that time that this would be the right
way to live. But in modern civilization, or even in older
ones, we don’t appear to be able to do so. People seem to
require an authority or hierarchy, or else they make
determinate decisions. They don’t quite understand each
other when they are talking, so they never, really, can
maintain this sort of thing.
But it is becoming more and more urgent that people
should be able to talk together, because technology is
making it dangerous if we cannot. The point is: what does it
mean to be able to really communicate, for people to try to
talk together?
Suppose we put about four or five people together. That
is quite a different situation from having twenty or thirty
people together. Four or five people can get to know each
other and adjust; they can sort of avoid all the difficult
questions. In a way they may be reproducing a more family-
type situation; somebody may take on the authority or
leadership if they want to do something. But with thirty or
forty people, or even twenty, then a new thing comes in:
190 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

there are many different points of view, and you get
something more like a cultural situation of a society. 
In society we have a culture. I say a culture is basically a
shared meaning. Without that shared meaning society will
fall apart; it’s a kind of cement that holds society together.
If people want to get together to do anything things must
mean the same to them or they can’t do it. It would be at
cross purposes if everything had a different meaning for
different people.
However, in our society there are many subcultures in
which things mean something very different—ethnic
subcultures, religious and economic subcultures, educated
professions, people in different groups—thousands of
different divisions. And if people try to get together, from
those groups or even within one of those groups, they may
have somebody who runs the thing and then they can try to
do what they want. But if they were given a leaderless,
agendaless group they probably would feel very anxious
and not know what to do. Even if they went through that
anxiety, they would find sooner or later that they all had
different 
views 
and 
opinions—that 
they 
were 
not
communicating, and each one was doing things which were
irritating the others, making the others angry. Each one
would have a way of thinking which would make the
others feel very uncomfortable or exasperated. They start
blaming each other for all these things, as I’ve seen happen,
and the whole thing degenerates. They just fall apart; they
say ‘what’s the use?’.
In fact, that kind of difficulty arises whenever people try
to get together for a common purpose, whether in the
government or in business or wherever. You find that this
is the kind of thing that is going on. For instance, the
legislators really don’t get together in Congress to come to a
common meaning; they just trade off certain points in order
to pass bills. In contrast, I understand that when the
Constitution of the United States was written, the writers
spent a long time working together on it in the same place.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 191

They hammered it all out so that they would all agree on
the Constitution, which was a relatively unified document—
though it had certain problems in it which were not unified,
such as those which led to the Civil War, and so on. 
Now, that’s a kind of introduction to the concept of
dialogue. And for merely practical purposes we would
need dialogue. But in addition it has a much deeper
significance, which we will go into later.
If you went through this process, though, you would find
difficulties. First of all, some people become dominant.
They talk easily and run the show. Others keep quiet,
perhaps because they are afraid of making fools of
themselves; but they feel somewhat resentful of those who
are dominant, and that would also split the group. Some
people act out roles, and other people find this very
irritating. All sorts of things would be happening. These are
all problems which will arise when a group tries to get
together, but they are still on the surface.
Suppose we got through all that. Then come more
difficult things. People have different basic assumptions
about the important things in life—assumptions as to what
is really necessary, what is really true, the way people
ought to be, what our real purpose ought to be, and all that.
And as we’ve seen, these assumptions are in the form of
reflexes. People don’t quite know they have them. But when
the assumptions are challenged, suddenly a person may
jump up with an emotional charge. And then it goes back
and forth; the whole group can polarize between two such
assumptions.
We once tried to hold a dialogue in the early period in
Israel, and somebody said very quietly and innocently that
the trouble between Jews and Arabs is Zionism—the main
trouble is that Zionism keeps them apart. Then suddenly
somebody else rose up with his eyes popping out, and said
that without Zionism the State would fall to pieces. So there
were two different assumptions: one was that it was really
necessary to drop this idea of Zionism, and the other was
192 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

that without it Israel would be impossible. Both were
correct in a way, but there was no way to bring them together.
Such assumptions generate tremendous power. They’re
really assumptions of necessity. And what can happen in
such cases is that a lot of people are then drawn in who
weren’t before. In this instance the thing became very heated
—full of this electrochemical smog—and the people who
hadn’t at first been worried about it were all drawn in. But
a few were able to deflect it a bit, so it didn’t go too far. It
didn’t get resolved; a dialogue would have to be sustained
a long time to resolve a thing like that. However, it did
reach the point where the people could at least talk to each
other. The fellow didn’t walk out, and they were able to
listen to some extent to those two opposing assumptions or opinions.
This may seem a small point, but it’s really crucial. The
world is full of different assumptions of that kind—such as
the ones between capitalism and communism which, until
recently, divided the world. Each country has assumptions
of its sovereignty. And its neighbour has a contrary
assumption that it is right and it is sovereign, and so on.
These are assumptions all the way through: ‘who’s the
boss’, ‘I’m the one who runs it’. But somebody else wants to
run it: ‘I would be better able to do it.’ There are so many
assumptions, and they are very powerful. They are
assumptions of necessity. All the literature and the dramas
in the culture contain them; they are in there implicitly. The
Greek dramas were full of those assumptions of necessity,
which created the tragedies. The hero, who was really a
very fine person, very consistently stuck to his assumptions
of necessity and thus destroyed himself and everybody
around him.
And this is all collective. It’s not just an individual thing.
There are whole groups who stick together because of this.
We pick up these assumptions from the culture. ‘Culture’
has the same root as ‘cultivate’; we sort of cultivate it in
some way. The culture contains all these meanings of what
is necessary; we have all that.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 193

Now, with any group of people—including this one, if
we were to stick at it and meet, say, once a week for an
indefinite period; not forever, but indefinitely—in the
beginning you would be polite, you would find various
topics to talk on about which you could agree. As an
example, there was one group where there were some
liberal left-wingers on one side and conservatives on the
other. They found a lot of things to talk about which had
nothing to do with their politics. Then gradually they ran
out of those things, and somehow they began to have to
talk about the things on which they didn’t agree. And then
it wasn’t so easy.
Sooner or later, in this group or in any group, these types
of problems would arise. And if we can’t face them then we
can’t work together. But suppose you have to work
together. I’ll give a typical problem which some of us have
been thinking about recently. The directors or the executive
officers of companies need to work together in a group and
also with the rest of the company. But each person has a
different assumption, which is a kind of reflex, and he
doesn’t know he has it. Thus, people may be implicitly
following different policies and therefore going off in
different directions. Although they’re supposed to be
working together, they are really resisting each other.
The same is true in the government. Clearly the
government is full of people resisting one another. They’re
cancelling each other’s efforts and confusing the whole
thing. And in every organization you will find that. Even if
you set up a chief on top, the others have their own
opinions and they won’t necessarily follow the directives
from the top. They may seem to follow them, but there is a
resistance underneath. They are not following him, and he
can’t get his policies carried out.
So we need an effort to talk. What can we do with this?
I’m saying that there is a way—which means dialogue.
It’s really the same problem with the individual. We’ve
said that the individual has contrary intentions inside of
194 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

him, contrary reflexes. Suppose somebody is angry and he
wants not to be. He says; ‘Being angry is terrible. It’s going
to destroy what I’m doing, but I’m still angry.’ On one hand
he has the intention to remain angry and on the other hand
he has the intention to stop being angry. The two intentions
may be in the same person or in different people, but it
operates that way. And if you set up a group, it works
much the same.
When we talked about the individual we said that you
have to stay with this conflict, you don’t escape it. You stay
with it, you even bring it out. And you begin to get some
insight, you begin to see how thought is producing conflict.
As an individual you need to see that staying with this,
doing this, is more important than any particular issue you
are trying to resolve. In other words, if you can do this you
have gone to a deeper level beyond the issues that are
disturbing you.
The same is true in the group—we stay with this conflict
of intentions, reflexes, assumptions. Every assumption is
implicitly a reflex and a set of intentions. And just as
happens with the individual, so it moves out into the
group. Each person is affected by the other people’s
thoughts, so that the reflexes of one person become the
reflexes of the other. If one person is angry, the other is
angry. It all spreads.
Q: Do we have to find a broader common assumption of
necessity, a deeper one? When you say that about the
individual, I could see where I have a necessity or an
intention to understand the process. That necessity may be
stronger than the necessity of moving away from my anger.
Bohm: Yes, if you really see it. To see this, though, you
must see the meaning of what’s going on, the deeper
meaning. However, it’s not likely that you will see this on
the basis of the conditioning we have in society. But we
have to go into it, we have to see the deeper meaning of
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 195

this whole situation. What I want to emphasize here is that
the dialogue does not proceed from imposing a purpose or
an intention. If we just said ‘let’s all decide to do this’,
whatever we might choose to do would be an imposition—
it would really be more conflict.
Q: Would people have to come together already having that intention?
Bohm: No, maybe it can develop as we communicate. The
point is that we won’t start with a dialogue right away, as
we’re not starting right now. We start by talking about
dialogue. We are not pretending that we’re having a
dialogue. Rather, just as we’re talking about all these other
things, we start talking about dialogue. We are seeing the
meaning. Just as we saw the meaning of the whole thought
process and how it’s going wrong, we also see the meaning
of this situation collectively.
Let’s look at this question of meaning. The dictionary
gives three senses of the word ‘meaning’. One of them is
‘significance’; it’s like a ‘sign’ that points to something.
Another is ‘value’. And there is ‘purpose’ or ‘intention’.
These are connected, because if you say ‘something means a
lot to me’, you mean it has a high value. And if you say ‘I
mean to do it’, that is the same as to say ‘it’s my purpose,
my intention’. They’re related words, obviously. Something
with great significance will generate a sense of value. And
the value is the energy that infuses you; it makes you feel
it’s worth doing, or worthwhile.
Q: When you’re talking here you are consciously or
unconsciously creating a significance.
Bohm: That’s the point. I want to say that I’m
communicating a significance.
196 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: But if I were to get together with a group of people, I
might not be able to articulate that significance. It just may
not be available.
Bohm: I think that it would. I’m suggesting that we start by
communicating this significance and seeing where we can
go. If people who have no notion of this whole process of
thought and dialogue get together it’s possible that they
might find a way, but the chances are they would not.
Nevertheless, by a creative step they might somehow do it. 
Q: It seems, though, that there’s also another possibility. If
they are sufficiently open they may see a common necessity.
Bohm: That may be. But I’m saying that the typical people
in our society have reflexes which are against that openness.
Q: We may not have to create or project any significance.
We may have a common necessity that we can possibly
discover in this process.
Bohm: You can’t see necessity without the significance.
Necessity is a significance. The situation signifies necessity.
It signifies that it cannot be otherwise. So how do you know
that something is necessary?
Q: I would say through perception, awareness of it.
Bohm: But that’s a significance—you see the meaning of the
situation which implies that something is necessary. How
do you know what is necessary? Look at a situation: I
perceive ‘x’ is necessary. But that’s a certain significance.
Necessity and contingency are two significances.
Q: Doesn’t the perception give it the significance? Once you
have that perception, isn’t that the first thing that happens?
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 197

Bohm: Yes, it will. But if everybody were perceiving clearly
we wouldn’t have this problem.
Q: Obviously we’re not. But maybe there’s a possibility that
we could see this common meaning.
Bohm: At some point we may see a common meaning;
that’s what I’m trying to say. I’m just outlining the idea of
meaning now, and saying that at some point we may all see
a common meaning—which includes what is necessary,
what is valuable, what is worthwhile. And also I’m
outlining the purpose and what the intentions are which
could realize that. The value and the purpose flow out of
the perception of the meaning. Now, the purpose may be
changing, because as you see the meaning more deeply you
may have to shift the purpose. Is that clear?
I want to show that we have to start by seeing the
significance. 
Perhaps 
those 
early 
people 
saw 
the
significance easily. But now we have gone through
thousands of years of civilization with its smog and what
not, and it is very hard to see the meaning of this. Even if
we see it by intellect, by inference, it still is not working in
the reflexes. In other words, people who see that we need to
get together still can’t do it, because the reflex comes up—
such as Zionism and anti-Zionism.
Q: For me the word ‘necessity’ has the same meaning as ‘meaning’.
Bohm: It’s a kind of meaning, but there are very many
meanings besides necessity. For instance, there’s the general
and the particular, there’s necessity and contingency. And
there are a lot of other things like that. There are many
meanings, and necessity is a particular kind of meaning.
Q: Isn’t that fundamental to dialogue, though? Isn’t there a necessity?
198 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: That’s right, there is a necessity. If we all see the
necessity of dialogue we will just be doing it. But I’m
starting from a situation where that is not a common perception.
Q: Would you say that the necessity arises out of the
meaning, that if you don’t understand what it means you
can’t understand that it’s necessary?
Q: That’s what I’m questioning, because I think that the
necessity is there already. We have this necessity in the way
that the world is.
Bohm: But most people don’t see it.
Q: They don’t see it, they don’t see the meaning of that. But
isn’t it a fact?
Bohm: As you just said, they don’t see the meaning. The
meaning is what they don’t see. The meaning is necessary
to see the fact. You don’t see the fact clearly unless you see
a coherent meaning. What things mean to you will
determine the way you act. If something means an enemy,
or whatever, you act accordingly. That’s what we were
saying, that our thinking goes into the perception and gives
it a different meaning. So a great deal of thought has gone
into perception, giving it a different meaning. And the
meaning—which our thought gives it—is that no dialogue
is necessary, that we can all go on as individuals doing
whatever we like, that the highest form of civilization is
every individual doing something just for himself and not
consulting anybody else. And that’s what almost everybody
is saying. In fact, people like Ronald Reagan have said that
that’s the highest. And Margaret Thatcher prided herself on
that. And so on.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 199

Q: Suppose we say we have a given number of facts, such
as that various things are happening in the world. For one
person that statement means we should go hide in the hills
and collect ammunition. For another person it means we
should get together and talk. 
Bohm: And for another person it means forget about it all
and just take care of yourself.
Q: Therefore many different meanings could come out of that.
Bohm: Yes, because of all those different thoughts. It may
be that if we actually saw it clearly we would see together
that we really need dialogue. But there are vast numbers of
thoughts which have come in, and they enter into the
perception of the meaning. People are seeing the meaning
differently, which is why we can’t get together.
Q: How would you get people together in the first place?
For what reason would they get together if not for this purpose?
Bohm: People are together to a certain extent because they
want to do various things. And in addition they might get
together for this reason. But people are trying to get
together for countless reasons and not succeeding. For
example, there are the people who are interested in the
ecological crisis. They all have different meanings as to
what should be done, and they can fight each other and
cancel out each other’s efforts. They are trying to get
together; but not seeing the point of what’s going on—not
seeing how thought works—they are not able to.
Q: Are you suggesting that those people could get together
for a particular ecological reason?
200 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: But then they would discover that they cannot do
whatever they wanted to do unless they go into this deeper
question of meaning. At present there’s a danger that the
whole ecological movement will split up; in fact it has split
up a lot, the same as everything else has split up, because
everybody has a different meaning.
Q: Isn’t that one step removed from the fact then? We’ve
already given it a particular meaning, whatever the
meaning is: how we perceive reality, the world situation, or
whatever. Hasn’t that moved into a personal or subjective
direction away from the fact?
Bohm: It has moved, but the fact is that it has moved. We
must start with this fact. The higher order of fact is that
people are not looking at the true fact. That’s where we
have to start—from that fact.
Q: But as you’re saying, the circumstances are beginning to
compel us to do that in new ways.
Bohm: They’re making it necessary to do it, but whether we
will do it or not remains to be seen.
Q: Is it important or even necessary to have a reason for a
group of people to come together to attempt to have a dialogue?
Bohm: If thirty arbitrarily chosen people just got together
they probably wouldn’t have a dialogue. I’m trying to say
that we have to see the meaning of dialogue, the
significance and the value of dialogue, if we are going to
sustain the work needed to make it happen. It won’t
happen in just five minutes. You have to sustain the
dialogue week after week, because there are all these
resistances that are going to come up. So people will need
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 201

to have a firm perception of the meaning of dialogue, of the
meaning of the whole situation.
Q: But what is this meaning? I’ve been in many, many of
these groups. Every once in a while I ask ‘why are we
here?’. Nobody seems to know.
Bohm: I think people do have some vague sense of it,
which is not yet formulated; that’s one of the difficulties we
have to get through. We need a creative step so that we see
this firmly. If you have an insight into it, you could then
put it in words.
Now, you could ask: ‘Why don’t people see this clearly?
It seems a very present danger and yet it seems people can’t
see it.’ They don’t see it because of this thought process,
which is collective as well as individual. The thoughts, the
fantasies 
and 
the 
collective 
fantasies 
are 
entering
perception. Myths are collective fantasies, and every culture
has its myths. Many of them are entering perception as if
they were perceived realities. Everybody has a somewhat
different way in which this happens, and we don’t actually
see the fact. That is the fact: that we don’t see the fact. There
is a higher order of fact—which is that we are not seeing
the direct fact. As I said, that is the fact from which we
must start.
Q: If we were to begin to deconstruct our culture, wouldn’t
we also be able to deconstruct our individual conditioning
as we go along? Are they not one and the same?
Bohm: It’s the same field—the field of the system of
thought. The culture is held together by that system of
thought, which has the same flaw, whether it is collective or individual.
Q: Then how do we begin to deconstruct it?
202 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: I’m discussing that the dialogue will do it. We’re
sort of trying to get into it.
Suppose we say that we see the meaning of the situation
enough to see that it calls for something, it makes
something necessary. It makes dialogue necessary. And also
we see the value of dialogue, that it is very important. So
we’re beginning to generate some sort of purpose, at least
some immediate purpose of what shall we do. That purpose
may change again and again, because as we move along we
may want to do something else. What I want to say is that
we can’t start from the purpose. Rather, we have to start
from seeing the meaning. And the perception of the
meaning can get deeper and deeper as well.
Now why would we stick together—having all these
contrary assumptions and reflexes, and going through all
the unpleasantness and frustration? Why would we want to
stick together? If something is important, we know we will
do it. If we see this is important then we will stick together
and say ‘let’s sustain the dialogue and see if we find
creatively how to get through this’.
Q: If we see the necessity of it.
Bohm: That’s what the situation means to us, that it is a
necessity. To somebody else it may mean it’s no necessity at all
—‘I can just take care of myself’. I’m proposing that that’s
because of a certain way of thought. So can we have an
insight into the necessity, an insight which really removes
this smog? People try to get hold of this, but they get lost in
the smog.
Q: The necessity of what?
Bohm: 
Of 
really 
communicating, 
freely. 
But 
these
assumptions, 
for 
example, 
are 
stopping 
us 
from
communicating. They give this emotional charge; we
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 203

defend them against evidence that they are wrong, and so
on. We need to see the necessity of seeing all of that,
including the whole neurophysiological chemical process
involved which binds us. 
Q: Then an ordinary group might not have that necessity?
Bohm: They wouldn’t even know about this. How could
they see that necessity if they don’t know about this at all?
Q: Are you suggesting that it might work with an ordinary
group, or it couldn’t work with an ordinary group?
Bohm: It’s not likely. Possibly if they were very creative
and they stuck with it they might find it anyway. I mean,
we don’t want to put limits on human possibilities. But I’m
saying that it doesn’t look likely.
Q: More and more, scientists of group process are coming
to see and to show people that the biggest obstacle to a
group achieving whatever it was formed to do is that it has
to share meaning; that in order for a group to be able to do
whatever it’s going to do, it first needs to learn how to
share meaning together.
Bohm: Yes, and that means dialogue. That’s what I’m saying.
When we say we see the necessity of sharing meaning,
the first thing we discover is that we can’t do it. That’s the
same thing as with the individual—we see the necessity of
staying with anger but we can’t do it, we’re moving away.
So then what we have to watch is how we move away. And
if we are really serious about it we say: ‘I really see the
necessity, and I won’t just stop because I failed at that
point. I’ll stick with it and see if I can’t find why it’s not working.’
Q: One can sort of play with it.
204 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: You can play with this, but then you will get
frustration because very serious assumptions will come up
which are very, very, powerful. You have to say that you’ll
stick with it even though it gets difficult and unpleasant.
We can’t guarantee that this is going to work. But we
can’t guarantee that any other difficult thing you might
want to do is going to work either. If you ask for a
guarantee beforehand you might never do it.
Q: In a way we don’t even know what ‘working’ means.
We may think it’s supposed to work in a certain way, and it
may be working differently on a level we have no idea about.
Bohm: Yes, we don’t know too well what it means.
Now let me give what I call ‘a vision of dialogue’ to sort
of paint an idea of what it might mean. You don’t have to
accept it, but it may be a way to look at it. I’m not saying
that what we’re envisioning will work, not right away at
any rate. It may be that when you first try this it won’t
work. But still, it’s an important vision. Almost anything
worthwhile doesn’t work when you first try it.
Let’s suppose we can stick with this. And we face this
emotional charge—all this smog, all this irritation, all this
frustration—which can actually develop into hate if very
powerful assumptions are there. The smog between the
Zionist and the anti-Zionist could easily do that, and that’s
rather mild compared with what is really possible with
some 
assumptions. 
We 
could 
say 
that 
hate 
is 
a
neurophysiological chemical disturbance of a very powerful
kind, which is now endemic in the world. Wherever you
look, you see people hating each other. So suppose you
stick with this. You may get an insight, a shared insight,
that we’re all in the same position—everybody has an
assumption, everybody is sticking to his assumption,
everybody is disturbed neurochemically. The fundamental
level in people is the same; the superficial differences are
not so important.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 205

I am presenting this as an inference. But if you actually
get an insight, at that moment it might touch the whole
reflex structure with all the chemistry. It might be touched
at that moment.
It’s possible to see that there’s a kind of level of contact in
the group anyway. The thought process is an extension of
the body process, and all the body language is showing it,
and so on. People are really in a rather close contact—hate
is an extremely close bond. I remember somebody saying
that when people are really in close contact, talking about
something which is very important to them, their whole
bodies are involved—their hearts, their adrenalin, all the
neurochemicals, everything. They are in far closer contact
with each other than with some parts of their own bodies,
such as their toes. So, in some sense there is established in
that contact ‘one body’. And also, if we can all listen to each
other’s opinions, and suspend them without judging them,
and your opinion is on the same basis as anybody else’s,
then we all have ‘one mind’ because we have the same content
—all the opinions, all the assumptions. At that moment the
difference is secondary.
The point then is that you have in some sense one body,
one mind. It does not overwhelm the individual. If the
individual has another assumption he can have it, it’s
shared with the group and the group takes it up. There is
no conflict in the fact that the individual does not agree. It’s
not all that important whether you agree or not. There is no
pressure to agree or disagree.
Q: Are you saying that there’s contact, but the thoughts
which people have might be quite different—there doesn’t
need to be an agreement?
Bohm: We don’t have to agree that somebody is right, but
we have to listen to every thought and see its meaning.
Q: Then the connection is molecular, it’s not in thought. 
206 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: It’s sort of molecular. It’s hard to describe; I mean, it
is at another level. In early times they had it quite
frequently. And I think people want that very much.
In England, for example, the football crowds prefer not to
have seats in their football stands, but just to stand bunched
against each other. There are so many people, and when
something exciting happens they push against each other
and sometimes people get killed because of the crowd. They
can’t control it any more, and the pressure builds up to
something where people can’t breathe. There was a recent
incident where a lot of people were killed. And there have
been other incidents of that nature. So some people began
to suggest ‘why not put seats in all these football stands?’.
But many other people objected. They said: ‘We don’t want
seats. We want that contact.’ The reason they’re going to
those football games is not just to see the games; the game
is a socially acceptable reason for having this contact which
the society doesn’t allow anywhere else.
Q: If I can look beyond the assumptions—respect yours and
have my own—then can I see me in you?
Bohm: We can see that we all have these assumptions, and
we look at all the assumptions. I’m looking at your
assumptions and my assumptions. They’re all suspended.
I’m not deciding they are right or wrong. Or, if I think I
prefer mine, well, that’s OK. But still I’m looking at the
meaning of what you say. And therefore we are sharing a
common meaning. Then, if somebody else comes up with
another assumption we all listen to that; we share that
meaning. Now that would be the ‘vision of dialogue’.
The point is that we would establish on another level this
kind of bond, which is called impersonal fellowship. You
don’t have to know each other. In those football crowds
very few people know each other, but they still feel something
—that contact—which is missing in their ordinary personal
relations. And in war many people feel that there’s a kind
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 207

of comradeship which they miss in peacetime. It’s the same
sort of thing—that close connection, that fellowship, that
mutual participation.
I think people find this lacking in our society, which
glorifies the separate individual. The communists were
trying to establish something else, but they completely
failed in a very miserable way. Now a lot of them have
adopted the same values as we have. But people are not
entirely happy with that. They feel isolated. Even those who
succeed feel isolated, feel there’s another side they are missing.
Q: We’re presently talking about dialogue. Don’t we have
the task at hand, that when we go back home we want to
draw people together to dialogue?
Bohm: The suggestion is that we shouldn’t think of it as a
task. The whole point of dialogue is that we are not going
to have an agenda or purpose. We are going to see the
meaning and act accordingly.
Q: Isn’t there still the fact of thirty or forty people coining
together under one roof, as we’ve done here? Something
must make that happen.
Bohm: But we can’t ‘make’ it happen, not force it to happen
anyway. I’m trying to say that we can only look, as we did
with the individual. We can only perceive the situation. And
our insight may change the barriers to this.
Q: So obviously there’s no prescription; that would be a
contradiction to what we’re talking about. Yet there is
something unknown that must be done—which can or
cannot be done—for this to happen.
Bohm: Yes, something must happen, and we don’t know
whether it will or not. What I’m trying to present is the
208 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

meaning of dialogue—a ‘vision of dialogue’. By seeing the
meaning we will then begin to feel the value of it and begin
to establish purposes, which may help bring us towards it.
Q: The more the meaning, the more the action?
Bohm: From the meaning flows the sense of value. And
from that flows the purpose and the action.
Q: Are we talking about a shift in emphasis of priorities
and importance? Could we see the importance of
communication, and see that staying with the fact is more
important than our own assumptions? And do we try to
bring that idea into situations?
Bohm: If we once see the importance it will come. Therefore
we have to ask ‘if we’ve seen the importance, why aren’t
we doing it?’ The answer is always ‘there is further
chemistry and there are further reflexes which we haven’t
touched’.
Q: Then it’s something we could work on?
Bohm: Yes. By sustaining the dialogue we are beginning to
probe into all that deeper chemistry which was hidden.
And part of the whole process of these reflexes is to hide
themselves, so as to avoid disturbing the apple cart. I’m
suggesting that if we try to realize this ‘vision of dialogue’
we may find that we can’t do it. But every ‘vision’ has that
character at first.
So we have to sustain the dialogue in spite of frustration
and all the troubles. This energy of frustration and hate,
and the rest, would be dispelled and released as fellowship.
There is some close bond in that frustration, but now it
could become a different kind. When people are engaged in
the opposition of deep assumptions, there is a close bond
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 209

between them. If they’re indifferent to each other or if
they’re politely avoiding the issue, it isn’t there.
If you stay with this it creates a possibility of a certain
change. It’s very similar to what you have to do in the
individual problem—to stay with the difficult situation, not
escape it. If you find yourself escaping you need to watch
yourself escaping, and so on. It’s like the question of
sorrow, which Krishnamurti talked about a lot—that faced
with sorrow people seek a constant escape, a constant
movement away from awareness of it. The reflexes try to
relieve the situation by moving you away. And that means
you could never find out what it is, what’s going on; you
could never perceive that. But if you see yourself moving
away and stay with that, that staying with it builds up a
great deal of energy. The more you stay with it, the more
you get a sense that it’s all really some sort of physical
tension. Then you may get an insight that this whole thing
is just a part of the material process.
The social problem is also part of the material process,
but we give it a very different significance. For instance,
people don’t think that the problem between nations is part
of the material process; rather, it’s given a transcendental
significance. But, actually, it is just the material process
which has become muddled up—it’s in this smog situation.
In a moment of insight in the group we may see that we
share this material process, and that this material process
we share is more significant than all the particular thoughts
where we differ.
Q: Would you say that the sustaining of the dialogue within
oneself increases the possibility of the dialogue with others?
Bohm: Yes, because once you have an insight into this,
sustaining the dialogue in yourself will help the others. Or,
sustaining the dialogue with the others will help the
individual, and help also communication outside the group.
210 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

And the people who understand this could then try to
establish dialogue groups, and so on.
Usually for such a dialogue group there should be a
facilitator to help get it going and help point out what’s
going on, and so forth, who gradually becomes less and less
necessary. He might have the ‘vision of dialogue’, which he
could communicate. It’s important that the group see the
meaning of dialogue and have this sort of vision of it, to
keep going and to keep on developing that. The group may
talk about dialogue again from time to time, but it would
not be worthwhile to keep on asking ‘are we having a
dialogue?’. Although sometimes it is worthwhile.
I think now would be a good point to have a break.
Bohm: We’ve been discussing dialogue, to give the
meaning and to give a ‘vision of dialogue’. Tomorrow,
those who stay will try to begin something of a dialogue
throughout the day. But I think in the remaining time today
we’d like to discuss a few other points which we always
consider in these seminars.
One of the points is this question of separation. Once we
form the thought of separation—the image and the
imagination of separation—we perceive things and people
as separate. Then we make them separate, as when we
draw a line between countries and perceive two countries
and we then create two countries.
So we could say that though our bodies are individual,
nevertheless they are capable of a close connection on
another level through communication, which we’ve talked
about. The thought process is a fundamentally collective
system anyway. You would not have it in its present form
except through a culture and a society. A language could
only exist that way.
The individuality that we have—or that we think we have
—is to a large extent the product of our culture, which
creates the particular image of the individual. But all the
people in a certain culture have more or less the same
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 211

image of their individuality. It’s clear that thought
determines the question of what is connected or separate,
how you see it, and so on.
In our personal consciousness there is the impression that
there is an observer and an observed, there is a thinker who
produces thoughts separate from himself. And once
thought has formed the image of the self as ‘me’ and ‘I’,
then there is the view that it is ‘I’ who creates thought. In
other words, thought has explained its origin through the
image by attributing itself to that image, just as you could
attribute the sound of the telephone to the image in the
television set and feel it to be there. In a similar way, the
feeling could be created that somewhere in the head is the
source of thought.
Also, you have the division between the self and the
world. You say: ‘I end at my skin. Outside is the world.’
And you experience it that way. But that experience can be
very variable. There’s the example of a blind man with a
stick. If he holds the stick tightly he may feel that he ends at
the end of the stick; but if he loosens his hold, then he may
feel that he ends at his fingertips. Similarly, if a person
identifies himself as part of a country he may feel that he
ends at the boundary of his country, and if somebody
crosses the boundary he feels attacked. Or you may feel you
are one with the universe. Or vice versa, you have the
opposite sense—the thought which tries to go inward,
inward to the very essence, the core of the self, down to one
point, thinking that that point is ‘me’ and the rest is being
observed by me.
But it’s all an image. It changes around according to the
situation. That image may be more correct or less correct in
various situations. Where the connection is close it may be a
correct representation, and where it’s loose it is not. So it
would require seeing the coherence of that to see how it
works in each case.
We have this notion, then, that the agent, the thinker,
creates the thought. And a person may identify himself
212 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

with almost anything. Descartes said ‘I think, therefore I
am’, which meant his essential being was in the action of thinking
—he felt that the action defined his being. And many
people may feel that way from time to time.
Now, we’re suggesting that thought is a system
belonging to the whole culture and society, evolving over
history, and it creates the image of an individual who is
supposed to be the source of thought. It gives the sense of
an individual who is perceived and experienced, and so on.
This would be conducive to the next step, which is for
thought to claim that it only tells you the way things are
and then the individual inside decides what to do with the
information—he chooses. This is the picture which emerged
gradually: thought tells you the way things are and then
‘you’ choose how to act from that information.
Q: But does thought really tell you how things are? I think
thought distorts it. Only observation without the observer
can tell you how things really are, because the thinker can
manipulate thought and then he sees what he wants to see.
Bohm: I said only that in this picture or image, thought
claims to be telling you the way things are. That is not to
say that they are the way it tells you. To a certain extent it
gives valuable information, when it’s working right. But
thought says ‘this is the way things are, and you—the thinker
—must decide what to do’. And that’s all misinformation
according to what we’re saying.
Let’s say that you have an image of yourself as good and
something happens—perhaps your friend doesn’t back up
that image. You feel hurt. That image is removed and
you’re disturbed; and after that moment of disturbance
there arises the thought: ‘What happened? I’m hurt.’
Instead of the pleasure which was in the image, the reflex is pain.
What has happened is that the thought has now
separated itself in two and says: ‘There is “me” who is hurt.
And there is “I”, who am the observer, looking at the hurt.’
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 213

This will create a conflict because the minute you think that,
it’s implied that the one who is looking will try to stop the
hurt and will fight it. But we’re saying that that won’t
work, because there is actually nothing but a process of
thought which creates the image of ‘I’ and ‘me’. They are
both the same ground really—namely, thought. They are all
one. 
Q: It’s interesting that the ‘me’ has been hurt, but ‘I’ am
going to take revenge. It’s like two separate things.
Bohm: Usually what first happens is that the ‘me’ has been
hurt and ‘I’ must remove or get rid of the pain. ‘What can I
do?’ That’s the first reaction. So you start a train of thought:
‘Who did it? Who’s to blame?’ And you say: ‘OK, that one’s
to blame. I must take revenge.’ That would be one way out.
Or, ‘that person must apologize’. Or else another reaction
would be to say, ‘I should not be hurt’. But then there’s a
conflict, because the same thought process which makes
you be hurt is also fighting and saying you should not be hurt.
Thus, you have these two situations, these two
movements. It’s really all one, but there is that apparent
division which has been built up by this process of thought.
We have a representation of the self as capable of being the
observer and the observed. Just as we say ‘I can look at my
body’, so we say ‘I can look inside and see that it’s been
hurt’. That analogy is drawn, but it doesn’t work. The
process in which I look at my body has a certain meaning;
but the process in which there is an observer who steps
back to look at the hurt inside has no meaning, because it’s
just two images. It might as well be going on in a television
screen. It’s like the rainbow, which is really not there but
has a real process behind it—rain and light.
So there is a process behind all this, creating this sense of
an observer who is supposed to do something. That
observer apparently is perceived. And then thought comes
along, takes that as if it were a fact, and proceeds to try to
214 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

overcome the hurt. Whereas if that thought stopped, there
would be no problem. Children have a saying: ‘sticks and
stones can break my bones but words can never hurt me.’ It
may be true in a sense, but it doesn’t work. People still get
hurt by names because of the thought which creates the
image, which produces either pleasure or hurt.
Now, in so far as you have the image or fantasy which
gives pleasure, that same fantasy turns around to give pain
when the opposite information gets into it. You are very
vulnerable once you depend on fantasy or image to give
pleasure, because that creates the sense of ‘me’, and then
comes the division—when the pleasure doesn’t work and
the struggle and the fight and conflict, and so on. If that
division did not occur there would be no conflict.
Actually, no real division occurs, but as I’ve already said,
the appearance of division takes place in the image. If there
were no such appearance of division there would be no
occasion for conflict. There would be a perception that this
is thought. There would be proprioception of thought,
expressed in words as: ‘this is a train of thought which
produces pain.’ Then thought would just stop, because you
don’t want the pain.
But there are all sorts of assumptions, such as: ‘I am too
important to give up on this thought. I can’t allow myself to
give up the pain.’ Is that assumption clear? It’s a common
one. People who are hurt have an assumption: ‘I can’t allow
myself to give up that pain because then I would be sort of
negating myself, saying that I have no importance. That
cannot be allowed. It’s absolutely necessary to maintain my
importance.’
If we had an insight right away into all this—that the
observer is the observed, as Krishnamurti so often said—
then it would all evaporate. The point is that we have a
resistance to that insight. We have the fact that there is
confusion and incoherence. And we have the fact that we
do not have perception which sees what is going on. There
is this chemistry, this reflex, which keeps people going in
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 215

the same way. The chemistry is affected by the division,
and the division is sustained by the chemistry because the
body now demands relief. Being disturbed by the
chemistry, the body demands relief.
Suppose you hurt your arm. You would notice a
disturbance and say ‘I feel pain’. And then the thought
would come up and say ‘what’s the cause of the
disturbance?’. So you would sort of step back in your mind
and look, and say: ‘OK, I see that my arm has been hurt. I
must do something.’ That would make sense, because the
thought and the arm are not really that closely connected.
But when it comes to the psychological pain it doesn’t make sense.
Q: Would there first be a body image formed?
Bohm: The body image is always there in some sense. We
always sense our body.
Q: But you’re not talking about the physical image, you’re
talking of a different image?
Bohm: Yes. We form a self-image. It’s very vague, it doesn’t
have to be well defined. It’s just ‘me’. You may point to
yourself as being in the head or chest or solar plexus or
somewhere. You feel somewhere inside is a point or a small
region where ‘you’ are, which is the centre.
Q: Would that image be how we are defined by our
parents, by the teacher, by the culture?
Bohm: All of that creates the image and therefore all that
content is attributed to the image. Just as the ringing of the
bell is attributed to the telephone in the television image,
we experience all of this content as existing within the
image. The image, however, is perceived as real.
216 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: It appears that we exist in that image.
Bohm: All our properties and qualities are in that image.
We feel that they are there. If you’re hurt you will feel that
there really is something inside which has been hurt. People
say, ‘my heart has been broken’. And in fact they feel
something, because in the region of the chest or the solar
plexus there is clearly a great disturbance.
Q: So as we continue to grow up and go to school and
marry, and whatever, we’re adding to the image?
Bohm: Yes. Society is adding to it, saying that you are this
sort of person, you are that sort, you should be this, and so
on. And you are also adding, you’re doing your bit in it. It
all adds to build up the image. And that image then reacts;
it’s made up of a set of reflexes which act according to the
image. If the image is that ‘I am great’, then the action is
that ‘I would like to hear people say that’. Or else I would
say it to myself or try to do something to prove it.
Q: Then it’s always going to be a sense of incompleteness?
Bohm: It is always sensed as incomplete, yes, because it’s
only an image—it could never be complete.
Q: What about the cultural image? Doesn’t our culture have
its own self-image?
Bohm: It’s full of self-images and they are all contradicting
each other, just as our individual self-images contradict
each other.
Q: Then the individual image and the cultural image are
not really two distinct things?
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 217

Bohm: Our individual self-images mostly come from the
culture. The word ‘idiosyncrasy’ has the Greek root
meaning ‘private mixture’. There is a big mixture of images
floating around in the culture from which everybody picks
his own mixture. Each individual selects images for one
reason or another. He doesn’t do it consciously. He picks
up some of the images and repels some of the others; he
finds others revolting, and so on.
Q: Even our sexual images as a man, as a woman?
Bohm: Yes, it is all influenced heavily by the culture, very
strongly. It’s all there, and we form this image. We have the
image that ‘I do the thinking’, ‘I am the thinker’. But in fact
the culture has produced most of the thought. It sort of
passes through me, I add a bit to it, I do this or that to it.
The kind of thought we use, which is communicated,
originates basically in the whole society and the culture. We
have the sense of separation because our culture tells us
that each individual is separate, and therefore we perceive
it that way.
Q: It seems very hard not to feel that we are separate, since
we’re separate within our own skins and we can move
around. It’s just a very difficult concept to transcend.
Bohm: Yes, because the body actually has this relative
independence. But even then, as we said, it’s possible for a
group to become one body. And people really want that. In
the football crowds they are ready to risk life to have it. So
it is possible to have the body as individual or the body as a
group. But when it comes to the mind, we have become so
used to the notion that the mind is individual that we don’t
notice the plain evidence, all the evidence from which you
could infer that it is not.
218 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

There is, however, an element of individuality. In so far
as there is insight into, let’s say, the actual physical
neurochemical process we are talking about, that would
really be closest to individuality. We could say that
something of possibly cosmic origin operates directly in the
body when there is insight. And perhaps that is the closest
we would get to true individuality.
The word ‘individual’ literally means ‘undivided’. But
we’ve seen that the individual which society puts together
is highly divided and in conflict. So the question is not clear
about what is individual. There is a great deal of
incoherence there. And also, the failure to see that some of
these distinctions are merely ‘dotted lines’ leads to a wrong
meaning, it leads to endless confusion.
Now, that might raise the question of what kind of
freedom there is for the person. As long as we are in this
system, there is very little freedom. You can say ‘I do what I
want’, but what you want is the result of the system. We
are wanting things which are incoherent and creating
misery. And we’re not free to give that up.
Q: We think we are free when we do what we want,
especially when we’re young and we don’t realize that the
want itself prevents freedom.
Bohm: The want comes from the conditioning.
Q: Is what you’re talking about freedom of choice, not
choiceless freedom?
Bohm: Well, freedom at that level is not very significant.
The question is: could freedom have a deeper meaning? I
think this is connected with the question of necessity. We
may see necessity as external, that certain things are necessary
—necessity won’t be turned aside, and we have to turn
aside or it crushes us. But we have our own internal
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 219

necessity which may conflict with that, and then we have a
struggle. The external necessity may be too powerful and
you get crushed; or you may try to dominate and impose
your own necessity. That’s the sort of pattern we take. We
think that to be able to impose our own necessity is
freedom; but in fact I’m saying that’s still part of the same
system.
So we have to get clear on necessity and contingency.
Freedom would require some contingency, in the sense that
if things couldn’t be otherwise then there would be no
freedom. But freedom would also require some necessity,
because if there were no necessity our intentions would
have no meaning. We might intend to do something, but if
nothing holds with any necessity then anything may
happen, no matter what we intend. Therefore, in some way
both necessity and contingency are involved in freedom.
Q: I didn’t understand what you just said about necessity
and contingency.
Bohm: Necessity is what cannot be otherwise and
contingency is what can be. It’s because things can be
otherwise that you are possibly free to do various things.
But if things were totally contingent you would not have
any freedom, you wouldn’t be able to count on anything. I
couldn’t count on the necessity of this table to remain a
table. I could say ‘I want to put the cup on the table’, but
meanwhile the table might turn into a cloud of gas. So in
some way which is hard to express, freedom requires both
necessity and contingency.
Q: Then contingency is not the same thing as choice, is it?
Bohm: No, contingency really means ‘it can be otherwise’.
220 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Q: Whereas choice is something that’s produced in the mind
—an image or images of alternatives which the mind thinks
it has?
Bohm: Between possibilities you may choose, saying ‘I
prefer this to that’. 
Q: But does it have a base in reality? It’s just an image
produced by the mind.
Bohm: You may have several alternatives which are correct;
there may be several possible roads to go to a certain place.
Or suppose I come to a crossroads. One road will take me
here, one will take me there; if I choose this road I’ll go
here, and if I choose that road I will go there. Thus if I want
to go there, I should choose that road.
Q: It’s all a kind of fiction in a way, because that sort of
implies there’s something that chooses.
Bohm: That’s the language we use. I could put it that if my
intention is to go there, I must pick this road. Thought
could tell me that correctly. If I want to go there I must go
on that road, but if I want to go somewhere else I must go
on another road. Thought tells me that. Those are the alternatives.
Q: To get where you’re supposed to be going, though, you
can only take one turn. I mean, there’s action in reality and
there is choice in the realm of images. Aren’t they two
different things?
Bohm: Yes, but I’m saying that the presentation of
alternatives is a correct representation that thought could
give. But when you say that you choose this alternative, it’s
not clear what it means—who chooses, or what chooses, or
how it gets chosen. Even if that were free, it would seem
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 221

that it’s not a very significant kind of freedom. It does seem
that it is not free, however, because if your choice is
conditioned then you are not free.
I’m trying to say that freedom may be something deeper.
We might think of an artist, a creative artist, who is creating
a work of art. There are many possible contingencies—ways
of putting his materials here or there and with different
techniques. It’s open. That’s the field in which he can work.
And then from some perception—by some sense of internal
necessity, some creative perception of necessity—he must
begin to develop how this is to be done. Otherwise it won’t
hold together, it won’t have any value or any meaning. In
other words, freedom is the creative perception of a new
order of necessity.
Q: But oddly enough, that necessity isn’t anything I ‘have’.
It’s more like: ‘Oh, I’m sitting in this chair. How
interesting.’ I mean, it isn’t something I know, or move from.
Bohm: Well, really it’s creative. And that creation can also
enter into science and technology, and create all sorts of
things. In fact, everything that we’ve created came about
ultimately in that way. I’m saying that freedom is the
perception and creation of a new order of necessity.
In this way we would say that necessity is involved in
freedom. In other words, we don’t get free of necessity but
freedom is first. One of our pictures is that necessity is
getting in the way of our freedom, that if we’re stuck by
necessity we are not free. If we are bound by four walls
then we can’t get out. That’s one of the views we have—
that necessity is external.
Q: It seems to me that in a sense all one can ever be free to
do is be an innocent bystander. One really can’t do
anything other than that.
222 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: But still you are deeply involved in this creative act.
You don’t control the creative act. It’s coming from the
same source as insight.
Q: Saint Augustine said ‘Let go, and let God’. 
Bohm: That implies that people saw this unconditioned
source as God. People may give it various names at various
times.
Q: I’d still like to consider contingency and necessity in
general. Would this be an illustration that makes any sense?
I was listening to a chamber music concert of some very
new music. It sounded as if the composer had chosen
things with total contingency; but after listening for a while,
there began to be a certain inevitability so that after each
note the next note made sense. Even though I couldn’t
conceptualize the pattern, there seemed to be some
necessity coming through.
Bohm: If he was a genuine artist, there was a necessity
behind it. When somebody comes out with a new order of
necessity, other people may not see it right away and it
looks to them just like contingency. So they say ‘this is
rubbish’. In many cases it may be rubbish, but then
occasionally it isn’t.
Q: Can necessity be felt by an impulse, an impetus?
Bohm: It’s felt that way, but also that feeling could come
from the conditioning as well. Mozart himself said that he
saw the whole composition all at once. Somehow he saw
the whole necessity of it, and then he sort of unfolded it. If
that was the case, it was a kind of gigantic flash of insight
that created the whole thing. And you can’t say where it
comes from. The same as with any insight, having been
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 223

created it affects the brain and then the brain works it out—
how to play the music, the individual notes, and so on.
This suggests that there is a tremendous potential for
creativity; and that we could not only have the creation of
new orders of necessity in art or in science, but that maybe
we should look at culture, society and ourselves in the same
way—look at it as an art, a creative art. The dialogue is
potentially a creative art; namely, new orders of necessity
may arise if we sustain it.
I don’t know how easily it came to Mozart, but they say
that to Beethoven it was more of a struggle. He had to
sustain this work. And if we sustain a dialogue very
seriously, then it becomes possible that there will be
something 
creative 
and 
new—which 
would 
be 
the
microcosm, the germ, that could then communicate it. In
other words, that which appears to be just a lot of
meaningless contingency is the field in which some new
order of creative necessity might come. And out of that can
come a new culture, a new society.
That is the suggestion I want to make: that this notion of
artistic, scientific creativity should be extended into all these
areas, rather than fragmenting and saying ‘it is valid here,
but there we go the old way’.
Q: This suggests that necessity is nothing that I have, but
rather I place myself at the disposal of necessity. People
really can’t know what they’re supposed to do when they
come to a dialogue group, but in some sense they are ‘available’.
Bohm: That creative necessity arises in this movement
between them. And as with Mozart—in a way you could
say that he didn’t do this thing, it just happened to him.
Q: Would the meaning that is shared be the necessity?
224 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: It includes the necessity. To begin with, the meaning
is the necessity of dialogue. But when we get through all
these barriers which we’ve been talking about, then maybe
with the free flow of communication, with that sense of
oneness, another order of necessity could arise which was
altogether. Do you see what I’m driving at? It would be a
kind of artistic creation, but it would have the rigour of
scientific thought as well. 
Q: If the new society once took hold, would there ever be
no need for dialogue?
Bohm: The dialogue might become natural, in the sense of
those early people who just got together and talked.
Q: What I’m trying to ask is: if that pollution within the
system is ended, would the system then operate without a
need for dialogue?
Bohm: We wouldn’t need formal dialogue, but we would
still need to talk. Pollution is liable to arise. But if we are
very clear and sharp and rapid about it, it won’t get very far.
Q: How about individual dialogue? The more the
deconditioning comes about, is there less need for dialogue?
Bohm: We wouldn’t need dialogue as a way of repairing,
but rather communication would take place as a creative act
—like the art of communication. In other words, we
wouldn’t be getting together primarily for the sake of
overcoming or dealing with all the mess, rather it would
have another meaning.
Q: In the beginning of dialogue, isn’t there going to be a lot
of pollution?
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 225

Bohm: Yes. I’m saying we have to go through that, because
we’ve got it.
Q: You’re saying that when we’re starting dialogue, we
need to let the pollution come out. The aim doesn’t seem to
be to get rid of incoherence immediately—rather, to let it
emerge. 
Bohm: Yes, let it come out. We can’t get rid of it, any more
than Mozart could somehow force that perception to happen.
Q: Actually you don’t need to let it come out—it comes out
by itself.
Q: No, we usually stop it if it’s coming out.
Bohm: Even then, ‘we’ don’t stop it. It’s the reflexes which
stop it. But thought is always saying that thought didn’t do
it. It says ‘you did it’.
Q: Could we put it that, in the process of dialogue people
would start seeing the incongruence and the incoherence of
thought? They would realize that it’s a lot of defence and
protection of the image—a lot of pretending? As that drops,
people open themselves up for something different to come
through. And it can unfold to each person in different ways.
Bohm: The brain and the system open up to something
different. That difference can be something of creative
significance, even of cosmic significance—possibly contact
with something beyond just the culture and the society.
Q: But you’re required to move out of the incoherence.
226 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: Yes, because all that incoherence muddles up the
brain, it creates the smog. The brain is not able to work
right. It’s poisoned in some way.
The brain is a material system, but it is infinitely subtle
and can respond to the creative. If one brain such as
Mozart’s could do this, it suggests that it should be a
potential 
in 
general—not 
necessarily 
in 
music, 
but
somewhere, in some field. Mozart may have had some
unusual talent or structure which was good for music; but
that creative potential, which isn’t restricted to any
particular field, should be available to everybody within
whatever he can do. And it would be important for people
to see that. I think that the more civilization has developed,
the more it had tended to focus on all these other things—
saying that creativity is primarily for the sake of the
economy or to provide entertainment, or for some other
purpose like that.
So that is the suggestion: that there could arise a freedom
which is collective as well as individual. We are not free at
all, as long as we are stuck with all this stuff.
Q: And a culture which wants to dominate its citizens will,
of course, not encourage creativity, because they don’t want
people to be creative.
Bohm: The culture wants to defend itself. And we say all of
that really looms very large. But actually it’s a very small
thing. It is something very insubstantial—just very
ephemeral thoughts which are circulating all over the society.
Q: Think of how many cultures and empires have collapsed
in the history of the world. Maybe this is the time that the
cultures are collectively collapsing, and a new culture, a
new order is coming up. Maybe this is the microcosm of
what is happening.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 227

Bohm: It could be. We don’t know for sure. But the point is:
the new culture will arise first by our seeing the meaning of
this whole situation and seeing the value of it. And then the
particular purposes as to what we have to do will emerge
as we go along—one purpose after another, rather than
starting with a purpose which is fixed.
Q: I want to ask: isn’t there only one energy? It’s an illusion
that the energy of love is different from the energy of
violence. It’s the same energy, only in violence it is
polluted. This division creates violence. If we condemn
violence, or its opposite non-violence, that condemnation is
merely an idea. The thought creates the image and the
division. But if there is no division, then this energy in
violence is set free—it transforms.
Bohm: That’s true. We’re saying that the people in a
situation of hate and violence are in a situation connecting
them with a lot of energy. And this can transform into
another kind, which is friendship and fellowship and love.
But that requires that we take this seriously and really
sustain the work of communicating—of dialogue—if we are
going to be able to do it together.
And it’s essential to do this together because as an
individual it will have a limited meaning. Doing it together
means that we’re communicating, facing all these issues
and whatever happens—persisting and sustaining the work
even when it becomes difficult and unpleasant. The fact is
we are violent, we have all that. To imagine we don’t have
it will be meaningless. So we have to say that we have it.
And we have to stay with it. We perceive it. We need to
perceive the real meaning of it, which is that we are bound
together by this physical thing which we call ‘violence’.
Q: It seems that we see appearances differently and we see
ourselves as separate because our awareness is incoherent.
228 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

But once we go into this it becomes coherent and extremely
powerful.
Bohm: It is very powerful because it’s all working together
instead of being in different directions. It doesn’t cancel out
but it works together. I sometimes give the example of a
laser. Ordinary light waves are called ‘incoherent’; they go
in all directions and are not in phase with each other, so
they don’t build up. But the light coming from a laser is
coherent, because the waves all beam in the same direction
and build up great strength. Similarly, if even a few people
were to think together in a coherent way it would have
tremendous power in the culture and in the society.
Now, one of the questions that’s involved in all this is
time. All thought involves time, in a way which we don’t
see. We tend to think that everything exists in time, that
time is an independent reality. People represent time by
space. In a diagram they draw a line and call it ‘time’, and
say that here is a point in time, which is now, then another
point, then another point. Clearly, thought is then
representing time through space.
But we seem also to experience time psychologically.
Leibniz, the philosopher, has said that space is the order of
coexistence. All that co-exists is in a certain order which we
call ‘space’. And time is the order of successive existence—
the order of succession. The real basis of time is succession—
things succeeding each other in a certain order. Time is a
concept which is set up by thought to represent succession.
All sorts of concepts of time are possible. In the early
days people didn’t think much about time. They may have
had a vague notion of past and future—the vague notion of
tomorrow being any time, and the past not remembered
very well. There were no printed records. The past was
mostly mythological; and the future was probably equally
mythological, if they thought of it at all. They could
possibly have thought of seasons and things like that. The
seasons are the succession of process. Your body goes
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 229

through a succession of rhythms. And that succession is the
basis of the whole thing—that is a thing that’s actual.
Thought deals with that, puts it in order by means of the
concept of time. We may draw a line and call that ‘time’,
but as I have said earlier, that’s really representing time by
space. You say the clock tells time, but it doesn’t. What you
actually see is the position of the hands of the clock, not the
time. It means time; it’s been set up in such a way that it
should measure time. But we never actually see, perceive,
or experience ‘time’—it’s inferred. 
Nevertheless, we seem somehow to experience time in
our own psychological existence. But if you thought that
time was a basic reality then you would have a paradox.
The past is gone—it doesn’t exist. The future doesn’t exist either
—it’s not yet. And the present, if it were thought of as the
point dividing past and future, also could not exist, because
it would be dividing what doesn’t exist from what doesn’t
exist. That’s the paradox of this view. However, it is no
paradox if you just say that time is a representation. A
representation can be all kinds of things.
Science has developed all sorts of notions of time. There
is Newton’s idea of absolute time—a certain moment that’s
the same for the whole universe, and then another moment
succeeding it, and then another one. Einstein challenged
that, and said time is relative to speed, and so on.
You can change the ideas of time and of space, but they
are all representations. Each one may have a domain where
it’s correct; and beyond that it may not be right, may not
work coherently. But in our culture we have a tacit
assumption that everything exists in time.
Q: We make the mistake of using time in the psychological
field. Somebody may say that he needs many years to
become transformed. But that’s a very dangerous mistake,
because you never know when insight may happen. I don’t
think that time has a place in the psychological field.
230 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: Yes, but why is it that it seems to have a place?
Thought has assumed time and has represented time as the
essence of existence. We say, ‘time is of the essence’. But if
we say that time is of the essence, then time must be the
‘being’—what we are. And from that thought, which is a
commonly accepted notion, comes the perception that time
is the essence. Whether time really is the essence or not is
irrelevant, because once it’s commonly accepted we perceive
it that way. Then it becomes an absolute necessity. 
Q: Time is one of the measurables—what we call
‘substances’. We measure time, count on it, predict the
space between today and tomorrow. We make predictions
on it based on our experience between today and yesterday,
and count on the same rhythm. So it seems to have some
substance. And it’s quite useful, such as for measuring
distance or form or something like that. Therefore, it does
seem to be one of the essences of our existence.
Bohm: It may appear to be so. You were discussing
evidence in favour of its being the essence, but the point is
that it is nevertheless an abstraction. We can say that as an
abstraction or as a representation it may operate correctly in
a certain domain—it keeps track of succession.
Q: Are you saying that time and space are one?
Bohm: They may be one. The theory of relativity implies
their unity. Measurement of time and space keeps track of
the order of succession in a process. But you first have the
order of succession, and then you have the concept of time.
Now, however, it seems to have turned around—it seems
that you first have time, and in that time succession takes place.
Q: And you’re saying that if we lose track of the fact that
it’s a representation, it can become problematic?
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 231

Bohm: Yes, or confusing or incoherent. There is the same
problem as with all thought: the representation enters
perception and seems to be an actual fact. And the rest of
thinking then takes that as proof, and then proceeds to go
on from there. It starts to erect all sorts of things on a
wrong foundation.
I’m saying that before we can think of psychological time,
we need to see that the very notion of time itself is
misunderstood. Even in physics it is not adequately being
understood as an abstraction, as a representation. In a
certain area this will not be too important, because physical
processes are regular enough that they can be measured by
time. 
Therefore, 
even 
though 
you 
have 
this
misunderstanding you are not going to come to a serious
practical incoherence. For instance, if we have all timed our
watches together and we say that we are going to meet at a
certain time, then, if our watches work properly, we will be
in the same place. If they don’t work properly we will not.
So you can see that, physically, the concept of time
implies that there is a great order of nature in the whole
universe. From the most distant stars to here, every atom
vibrates at a certain rate which is the same as it is here.
There are all sorts of regularity that constitute a vast system
of order, which the concept of time is tapping into, as it
were. If that order were not there time would not be of
much use. If the rate of atoms were to become contingent
and sort of jump around, then you might as well give up
the notion of time. If there were nothing which would
follow that order, there wouldn’t be any use to think of it.
Q: You said that time is an abstraction, which arises out of
representation or out of thought. But also it seems that
thought presupposes time; thought seems to be a process in
time. In a way it’s circular.
Bohm: They go in a circle, yes. If we admit that thought is a
material process, and if we think of matter as moving in an
232 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

order in time, then that would suggest that thought will
also be moving in that time.
Q: In our discussion of thought, aren’t we assuming time to
some extent? 
Bohm: As we now have it, every thought assumes time.
Whether we discuss thought or anything else, we always
take time for granted. And we take for granted the notion
that everything exists in time. We don’t take for granted
that time is an abstraction and a representation, but we take
for granted that time is of the essence—reality—and that
everything is existing in time, including thought. There’s
some correctness to that, in the sense that its order of
succession can be put in terms of time.
Q: Time is an essential part of Newtonian physics, but what
about modern physics?
Bohm: It’s still playing a basic part, but it’s not so clear
what it means. When you get to relativity it becomes
dependent on the speed of the measuring instrument. And
in quantum mechanics it becomes indeterminate to some
extent. But the basic concept of time has not yet been altered
—it is still taken as the basic frame on which everything is put.
Q: In psychological thought, what is the error concerning time?
Bohm: What I said was, that in order for notions of time to
be really coherently relevant and applicable, we need to
have some suitable orders of succession to which they will
fit. If there were no orders of succession, which were all
synchronous and corresponding, then the notion of time
would be quite useless.
It’s not so obvious, even in physics—it took a long while
in physics just to get clocks that you could count on. But
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 233

psychologically the thing is far more complex. As you
know, in your psychological experience one moment can
seem a year, a long time can seem a short time, and so on;
it’s not quite so simple as with physics. The whole process
or movement is infinitely complex and very subtle.
Everything is changing every moment, and the possibility
of keeping track of it is nil.
You can imagine that between this moment now and the
next moment there is a stretch; then it is really space by
which you are representing time. When you say ‘ahead of
me is the future’, that a spatial analogy. You imagine the
future stretches ahead and the past is behind. But the past
is nowhere. The future is nowhere. Still, your experience is
that ‘back there’ is the past and ‘ahead of me’ is the future.
That’s a way of representing time, but it also seems to be a
way of experiencing it.
So we seem to be moving from the past toward the
future. I’ve said, though, that that experience isn’t making
sense because the future doesn’t exist. It isn’t spread out
before you. And the past is not there behind you. All you
have is the present. When it comes to the psychological fact,
the only fact you have is the present, the now.
Q: What about the physical fact?
Bohm: Even the physical fact must start from the present.
Physics can establish a fact of the order of succession. But
that order cannot be so nicely established psychologically.
You can hardly remember very much of what happened in
the past, and it has been proved that it’s mostly invented
anyway. And the future is an expectation which is seldom
realized. You can count on a physical fact, such as we can
meet at an agreed upon time if our watches are working
right. But you can’t count on any such thing with
psychological time. Therefore, we begin to see that it isn’t
so coherent.
234 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Relativity theory would say that the whole of time is one
big block, like space. But then you can’t quite understand
why you experience this moment now. One view is to say
that you are like a train going through time, but then
you’ve introduced another kind of time. You’ve slipped it
in again. So the best way to look at physics is to say that it
has made an abstract representation which allows you to
keep track of the order of succession. The order of
succession is really the fact.
The next question we have to raise is: when there is an
order of succession, is that order necessary or contingent?
In physics we are looking for what are called ‘laws of
nature’. We try to find necessary orders of succession, such
as the law of motion. We call these laws. The word ‘law’,
however, is an unfortunate word because it suggests a
legislator, and all that. But it could be called ‘a natural
regularity’ in the order of succession. In physics we
discover such regularity in the necessary order of
succession. If there were no necessity in this order, the
notion of time might as well be given up anyway.
When you say ‘I expect to arrive at success in changing
myself in the future’, you are counting on some order of
necessity in that succession—a series of steps in which you
will necessarily arrive at a better state. Actually it is all
contingent; that is the fact. I may intend to arrive there, but
I may arrive somewhere else altogether.
So what point does that order of time have? It’s entirely
imagined. You may say ‘I’m going to take a trip and go
through a series of cities between here and San Francisco,
and it will take a certain amount of time to go through
them. I’m going to go through this one first and then this
one and then this one.’ And if you have a good map, that is
what will actually happen. On the other hand, if you say
‘I’m going to go through a series of steps in self-
improvement’, it won’t happen.
Q: It’s deception, isn’t it?
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 235

Bohm: Yes, it’s a kind of deception.
Q: It’s sort of like trying to climb the rainbow.
Bohm: In fact, all these psychological steps are rainbows
that you’re chasing. Therefore, we say that it doesn’t look as
if this notion of time has nearly as much meaning
psychologically as physically. It has a little bit of meaning
psychologically because it takes time to speak, time to
think; the physiological process of thought takes time; we
have all sorts of body clocks, and thought is tied to that,
and so on. So it works up to a point. It’s not entirely
meaningless, but there’s not much meaning. You can’t say
that it’s of the essence.
Q: Earlier we said that the mental and the physical are not
really that different. But now we’re making a distinction of
time in the physical area and time in the psychological areas.
Bohm: Even in the physical we could say that wherever we
get to something so infinitely complex that we can’t find an
order of necessity, it becomes dubious. The people who
work in quantum mechanics are facing that. They are
saying that depending on your measurement it becomes
somewhat uncertain what the time is. So there is already in
physics a limit to the order of necessity, although it still
works up to a point. But in the psychological domain, the
attempt to use this order is causing a great deal of confusion.
Q: We’re suggesting that part of the psychological domain
is an illusion, and that’s why time doesn’t work there, why
time is really not of the essence. Time with self is of no use,
because the self is a rainbow. But is there another
psychological domain which would be more real, where
time still would not work?
236 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Bohm: There may be. We could say that if we start to
analyse the material process of the body, as scientists are
doing, time will certainly carry us a long way. When we
come to the mind, however, we see the problem I
mentioned: this big puzzle that the past seems to be behind
us and the future ahead. But that’s just the rainbow. Then
we say ‘OK, it doesn’t seem to be coherent to apply time to
this rainbow chasing’. So where are the past and the future
psychologically? Even physically we can’t really get hold of
them; although working with those concepts we can make
some sense of the succession.
What suggests itself is that psychologically—and perhaps
eventually for the deepest level physically—we can’t use
time as the essence. Rather, the moment now is the essence,
because all the past and the future that we ever will know
are in this moment. The past and the future are now—
namely, in so far as it has left any impression., whatever
has happened is now. And our expectations are now. Thus
we could say that now may be the starting point.
One picture you could make of an electron would be that
it sort of flashes into and out of existence so fast that when
picked up in the usual equipment it looks continuously
existent. It might have a certain regularity, so that it
appears to obey an order of necessity. But it might be that it
is basically creative; the creative act may create this order of necessity.
Q: Would that mean that any time we escape from the now
we are trying to change what is necessary?
Bohm: We are trying to push the order of necessity into the
time order. We’re trying to make a change in this order. But
we are in an area where that sort of abstraction, or that sort
of representation, cannot work. Even in physics we have to
admit that this was always a representation, that the actual
experience was always now.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 237

Q: Then any escaping from the now would be disorder,
incoherence and violence?
Bohm: What this escape amounts to is that all these reflexes—
which are the ‘past’—have affected our perception very
strongly so that we see differently. We don’t see the now as
anything more than a flash in this time.
Q: Is there a difference between necessity in the order of
succession and necessity in the moment?
Bohm: I would suggest that necessity in the moment is a
kind of creative necessity, as we talked about in relation to
art, where within the contingency there is a creative act. But
in matter the creation is recreation again and again—similar
but different; similar enough so that the form holds. In the
psychic domain, though, this similarity doesn’t hold except
in thought, because thought is based on memory, and
memory is just that thing which tries to hold this similarity.
Memory has a base in the material process, and the material
process is able to carry the similarity. It makes a record. Is it
clear what I mean?
Q: The past, the present, and the future are one motion. If
you look at a slow motion film of somebody taking a step,
you see a movement of past, present and future, but it’s one
movement.
Bohm: It is one movement. We talked about emptiness
containing energy. And it may be that the movement is
basically creative, in the sense that we talked about insight
or creativity being from this total source. It may be that
there is a source beyond this level of matter from which
creativity emerges, producing similarity and difference.
And in a certain mode of perception, picking up a certain
part of this process will create a sense of continuity.
238 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

We’ve said before that the past and the future are images
contained in thought. Thought ties those images together
with the present to give a sense of movement and
continuity. Using the example of a film—a cine-camera
records a series of somewhat different images. When played
back they give a sense of motion. This happens because the
brain does not distinguish images that are more than, say, a
tenth or so of a second apart; so when a lot of these images
are seen rapidly they are sensed as continuity. Similarly, a
lot of grains of flowing sand might look like water, continuous.
You can see that this sense of continuity arises from
thought, which puts it all together.
Q: You’re saying that in the psychological domain the
continuity is non-existent and only created by thought.
Continuity is inferred from the material realm, where
continuity does seem to exist because of the arising of similarities.
Bohm: That’s right. In the psychological domain, whatever
continuity exists is held by thought—and not very coherently.
Q: Then the difference between the psychological and the
physical domains is that the psychological has this infinite
complexity?
Bohm: It’s very subtle and complex. But maybe the depth
of the physical domain is equally subtle and complex.
That’s the suggestion. We’re drawing inferences and
making suggestions to consider.
Now, this ties with thought. We discussed the observer
and the observed being perceived as separate, with a space
between them. But we said that that is in the image. If it
were not an image, that separation would imply that there
would be time to act, that it would take time to cross the
space. And, having that space in time, the observer would
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 239

be independent enough so that he could think about the
observed a little while and then do something.
But if that separation is just simply an image, when in
fact the observer and the observed are all one thought
process, then whatever you call ‘the observer’ has already
been affected by the thing he wants to observe. Namely, if
he wants to observe anger he has already been affected by
anger in a distorted way. So he doesn’t have any time.
There is no space. There is no time. There is nothing but
thought, which has been affected by anger. And this
requires an insight, which would free the whole process.
Wherever there is a certain space and a certain
independence, it leaves the possibility of taking time. In the
physical sense that coheres, it can work coherently—the
further away something is the more time you have to deal
with it, the more time you have to think. But in the thought
process the thing is so entangled—involved and folded
together—that there isn’t that time, there isn’t that space.
Q: It’s as you said about Leibniz having the idea that space
is the co-existence. In a way, in the moment things co-exist.
And if you have an insight in the moment, would you then
have a new kind of co-existence where everything would
move together?
Bohm: Yes. it would co-exist in a coherent way, creatively;
that is the suggestion.
Now, all of this might also have to arise in the collective
context of a dialogue. We probably wouldn’t get into it
right away; but if we were able to pursue this, sustain this
dialogue properly, then people might get into that too—
experiencing time differently together, and so on.
I think all of that is possible, is open. But what we need
to do about time is to begin the same way as we deal with
anger. We have to begin to see how our experience of time
is affected by thought. To begin to get into it we find those
thoughts which are affecting our way of sensing time and
240 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

put them into words and observe carefully. We have to see
that time, which seems to be there of its own accord
without thought, would not be there without thought—not
psychological time. No time would be there, really, without
thought.
The point is to get an insight into this. I think that the
liberation from this process, from this incoherent kind of
thought, requires bringing in all these questions—all that
we’ve been talking about, including time. As long as we
accept time and take it for granted, we will be constantly
slipping back.
Q: Is time more primary than the self-image?
Bohm: It probably is. Time is a process based on our whole
notion of being able to order the world, which includes the
self. With anything you intend to do, you begin to project time
—you begin to bring this thing in. There’s a place where it
may make sense. But seeing that it generally does not,
getting that clear, is crucial to the whole thing.
Q: So time is a misrepresentation of successions?
Bohm: It may be in a certain area a correct representation.
But when it is extended too far it becomes a misrepresentation.
Q: Yesterday you put the question of what could reach the
substance, the structure. What can actually get to the
chemistry of it all?
Bohm: That would again be perception or insight. And
insight, we’ve already seen, is beyond time. We’ve seen that
insight cannot take time.
Q: Would it be correct to say that dialogue is the doorway
to insight?
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 241

Bohm: For insight together we need dialogue. Individually
a person can have insight; but we need it together, because
now the civilization has reached a stage where it cannot
proceed in the other way. In general we needed it anyhow,
but we now really need it.
Q: You said earlier that the self-image, the ‘I Am’, has a
sense of godlikeness. And time also brings in the notion of
godlikeness, because if there is time then you have control—
a way to order things. I wonder what’s behind this strong
impulse to want to be godlike?
Bohm: You can imagine that this image could somehow
arise in the child. And once the image arises it becomes a
reflex. It would be very hard to trace the source of all this,
but all of these elements come together and they form links
which support each other. Then it’s so exhilarating that the
body itself wants to hold it.
Q: Also, once you have an ‘I’, or the sense of oneself as
separate, you’re almost going to have to be godlike to get by.
Bohm: That may be true, too. But it ties together—if it were
not for this notion of psychological time there would be no
meaning to the self-image, because there would be no time
in which the self-image could do anything.
Q: Essentially what we’ve been talking about is that the
problem of man is thought, this self-image which is so
faulty. The ‘self’ is the complexity and depth of all this.
Thought is partaking of itself as the self.
Bohm: That’s right, thought is constantly trying to grasp
things and to bring order to them. And it would try to
grasp itself, because it sees the inferential evidence of itself.
And so it explains itself as coming from a source—a source
242 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

which is an image, which has time to act, which has
psychological time, and so on. If all of that were not there,
then these incoherent things in the process of thought
wouldn’t occur.
But that requires insight into this whole thing we’ve been
discussing. And that insight would open the door to
freedom, collectively as well as individually—to friendship
and fellowship and love.
I think that we should close now. We’ve covered a lot of
ground, and I hope that we will be able to proceed with this
throughout the year and meet again.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 243

 
INDEX
absolute necessity 71, 81, 102, 113,
169, 171, 230
absolute time 230
abstraction 94, 131, 133, 182, 185;
symbols 96;
time as 231, 237
achievements (of thought) 2
actuality 171, 177, 184, 185
addiction 43, 46, 155, 157
adrenalin flow 7, 9, 52, 72
advertisements 157
agitation (of brain) 121, 123
agreement 206
alcohol addiction 155
alethia 183
Alexander the Great 164
alphabetic symbols 97
ambition 72
analysis 13
anger 6, 84, 87, 91, 127, 240;
intention and 92, 194
animals:
drug addiction experiments 155;
pleasure-pain experiment 155
answers 35;
questions and 29
anxiety 35
appearances (construction of) 111,
228
arms trade (East-West relations) 11
art 186, 223
artificial intelligence 75, 179
assumptions 106, 131, 215;
in dialogue 191, 203, 208;
of necessity 80, 84, 142, 191, 195;
in thought system 22, 29, 93
atoms 104, 106, 179, 232
attention (and understanding) 67
awareness 197, 228;
of body 140, 147, 152;
of movement 125, 136;
in proprioception 17, 125, 131,
135, 139, 147, 152;
stream of consciousness 131,
132, 133, 139, 173
Beethoven, Ludwig van 224
belief systems 62
body 1, 6;
awareness of 140, 147, 152;
contact 206, 218;
image 216, 218;
language 83, 206;
state of 9, 19, 22, 39;
-thought process 133, 140, 206
boundaries 6, 117, 212;
establishment 4, 25
brain 48, 111, 135, 187, 226;
agitation 121, 123;
endorphins 45, 46, 50, 55, 62, 69,
104, 113, 121, 155;
fracturing behaviour 13;
intellectual centre 7;
pleasure-pain centres 48, 120;
proprioception 129, 140, 149;
synapse connections 55, 78, 140,
149, 157, 186;
waves 45
244

cancer, incoherence and 56
capitalism (assumptions) 193
‘carry-on’ effects (reflexes) 68
celestial bodies/matter 26, 29
chaos (world) 1, 14
chemical addiction 155
chemistry 215;
fixedness of 169;
and perception 149;
of self-image 169
child (self-image) 163
choice 219, 219
Christian model 13
Christianity 24
circle/circular table 104
civilization (growth of) 19
co-existence 229, 240
coherence 50, 64, 177;
criteria 60;
sustained 11;
universal 58;
see also incoherence
collective:
assumptions 22, 193;
dialogue 193, 202, 203, 227, 240;
fantasies 202
common meaning 197, 206
common sense 15, 137, 141, 142
communication 17, 92;
see also dialogue;
language
communism/communists 2, 193,
207
compassion 24
conclusions 129
conditioned reflex 52, 65, 77
conditioning 85, 122, 131, 145;
insight and 160, 187;
unconditioned 73
conflict 1, 2, 4, 213;
incoherence and 56, 58, 61, 215,
219
conflicting intentions 194
confusion 9, 32, 35, 61, 119, 137,
215, 219;
see also incoherence
Congress (USA) 190
consciousness 175, 177;
stream of 131, 132, 133, 139, 173
Constitution (USA) 190
construction of reality 111
contact 206, 218
contingency 69, 96, 219, 235, 238;
dialogue and 71, 197, 223
continuity 238
contradiction 56, 58, 61
correct idea 182
correction of incoherence 17
corruption (and innocence) 14
cosmic origin 218
cosmology 62
creative art 223, 225, 226
creative imagination 154, 155, 159,
186
creative perception (of necessity)
222, 238
creativity 75, 150, 171, 176, 238;
culture and 223, 227
crying 85
crystal spheres (perfection) 26
culture 22, 37, 48;
assumptions and 193, 203, 206;
creativity and 223, 227;
deconstruction 202;
dialogue and 186, 189, 193, 205,
206, 210, 223, 227;
identity and 169, 177, 180, 186;
individuality and 210, 212;
self-image and 216;
shared meaning 186, 189, 203,
206, 224
death 59
deception 101, 118, 159, 235
deconstruction (of culture) 202
defensive incoherence 56
defensive reflex 55
INDEX 245

depression (and negative thoughts)
46, 69
Descartes, René 212
description 111, 136
destruction 1, 5
dialogue 45;
culture and 186, 189, 193, 205,
206, 210, 223, 227;
and insight 187, 202, 205, 207, 240;
meaning of 189, 195, 203, 206,
210, 224, 228;
necessity and 71, 191, 197, 202,
223;
negotiated 71, 189;
perception and 197, 202, 207,
222, 228;
sustaining 201, 208, 224, 240;
vision of 205, 206, 210
disease analogy (incoherence) 56
disgust (expression of) 92
distinguish (distinction) 73
disturbance 62, 215
division function (thought) 116
DNA (incoherence) in 61
docudramas 114
dominant roles (in dialogue) 191
drug addiction 155
earth/earthly matter 26
East-West relations 11
ecological crisis 1, 1, 200
ecological pollution 21
economic crisis 1, 1
economic system 33
educational system 33, 35
Einstein, Albert 98, 109, 186, 230
‘electrochemical smog’ 183, 185,
193, 203, 205, 209, 226
electrons 104
elementary thought 52
emotion 6, 22, 40, 71, 145;
see also feelings
emotional centre 7, 41
endorphins 45, 46, 50, 55, 62, 69,
104, 113, 121, 155
energy 208, 227, 238;
liberation of 122;
waves 172, 176
envy (incoherence of) 63
ephemeral thoughts 171, 227
epicycles 26, 29
Eskimos 115
evolution theory 55
existence 230
experiences 24, 114, 144, 155, 233;
thought process and 138;
see also ‘felts’;
past
expressed thought 82, 85, 150
‘factorial’ 187
facts 129, 202, 233
false (truth of) 185
families (division within) 4
fantasy 152, 202, 213;
selfimage 161, 163 passim
fault (in thought process) 18, 22, 32,
43, 97, 116, 136, 202
fear, security and 48
feelings 36;
conditioned reflexes and 52, 77,
81;
feeling contact 108;
‘felts’ and 8, 13, 18, 19, 33;
good and bad 64, 75, 81, 84;
thought and 6;
uncomfortable 77;
unpleasant 32;
verbalized 98;
see also emotion
fellowship 206, 228, 242
‘felts’ 8, 13, 18, 19, 33
fictional thinking 4, 8
Fifth Discipline, The (Senge) 16
flattery 9
football crowds (contact) 206, 218
246 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

forms of representation 133, 172,
177, 182
fracturing behaviour 13
fragmentation 2, 19, 24, 25, 117
freedom 186, 219, 227, 242
Freud, Sigmund 164
friendship 228, 242
frustration 208
future 138, 144, 229, 233, 236
Galileo Galilei 29
general (and particular) 96
general insight 28
generalized process of thought 39
genetic structure 61
God 71, 72, 222
godlikeness 164, 166, 169, 242
gravity 27, 29
ground (of a person) 172
group:
contact 206, 218;
process (in dialogue) 203, 209,
224
guilt 7, 48
gut feelings 41
habit 14, 24, 93
happenings (and ‘what seems to
be’) 15
hatred 1, 208, 228
heavenly matter 26, 29
Hitler, Adolf 61, 165
‘homework’ for understanding 66
hurt 83, 86, 87, 213
hypnosis 85
‘I’ (of self-image) 162, 175, 212, 213,
242
‘I am’ (of self-image) 162
ideas (universal truths) 181
identity 167, 171, 176
ideographic language 97
‘idiosyncrasy’ 217
illusion 109, 111, 112, 113, 155
images 108, 129, 148, 152, 155;
affirming 46, 48;
choice and 219;
continuity of 238;
as language 91, 96, 97;
of separation 210;
symbols 96;
time and 238, 242;
see also self-image
imagination 115, 152, 157, 161, 165,
186;
memory and 155, 159;
separation 210
impersonal fellowship 206, 208
impetus (and necessity) 223
implicit thought 91, 93
impulse 8, 36, 55, 72, 223
incoherence 9, 12, 17, 19, 21, 75,
132, 215, 219;
of addiction 43, 155;
cancer/disease analogy 56;
dialogue and 225;
natural selection and 55;
reflex and 55, 65, 161;
self-image 161, 171, 173, 177,
180, 185;
signs 59;
simple 11;
sustained 11, 32, 51;
time factor 228, 232;
and uncertainty 34, 37
incomplete self-image 217
incomplete thought 96
inconsistency 56
individual:
assumptions 22, 193;
in dialogue 202, 203, 209, 225;
freedom 227;
intentions 21;
self-image 217
inferences 129, 133, 137, 157, 205, 242
information 5, 9, 15, 89, 94, 152,
155, 213;
source of 135
INDEX 247

innocence (and corruption) 14
‘inside’ 132
insight 24, 26, 144, 149;
and dialogue 187, 202, 205, 207,
240;
reflexes and 151, 157, 184, 203;
resistance to 215, 222, 230;
self-image 161, 181, 187, 241;
time factor 230, 238, 240;
truth and 181, 187
instinct, pain and 37, 38
intellectual centre (of brain) 7
‘intellectual map’ 67, 69
intelligence 23, 24
intention 9, 15, 92, 123, 219;
conflicting 194;
in dialogue 194, 198;
impulse and 72;
individual and collective 21;
movement and 123, 147;
to produce the situation 11
interference of thought 135
interpretation (of perception) 127
introspection 141
intuition 23
Kelvin, Lord 103
knee-jerk reflex 52, 54, 65, 66, 81
knowing 109, 180;
incompleteness 102
knowledge;
final truth and 186;
fragmentation 4, 5;
knowing and 109, 180;
limited 102 passim;
ultimate 178
known 175, 178
Krishnamurti 37, 152, 215
labelling (and image) 171
language 139;
body 83, 206;
expressed thought 82, 150;
image as 91, 96, 97;
symbols 96;
use of 89, 89
laser light waves 228
laws of nature 235
learning 33, 84, 93;
conditioned reflexes 52, 55, 66
leprosy (nerve damage in) 38, 128
limited matter 139
limits 175, 178
logical thought 54
love 24, 228, 242
magic 26
mass media 102, 114
material process 148, 151, 159, 209,
232, 236, 238
material structure 171, 178
matter 139, 172
‘me’ 15, 40, 118, 215;
of selfimage 162, 175, 212, 213,
216
meaning 219;
common 197, 206;
of dialogue 189, 195;
shared 186, 189, 203, 206, 224;
in tone of voice 82
media 102, 114
mediation system (thought as) 112
memory 18, 23, 76, 177, 238;
bringing out 89;
imagination and 155, 159;
reflex 52, 99, 119, 131, 141, 159;
repression of 82
message (in yelling) 81
mind 173, 218
misery 7, 63, 219
money (and wealth) 166
moon (falling) 27, 29, 32
movement:
awareness of 125, 131, 147;
intention and 123, 147;
reflexes 12, 124, 126;
self-image and 169;
thought as 124, 141
248 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 223,
224, 226
muddle 141, 226
multiple representations 113
myths 202
narcissistic image 164
national sovereignty 2, 71, 193
nationalism 1, 2, 9, 28
nations (fragmentation) 4, 6, 19
natural regularity 235
natural selection 55
natural state theory 28
nature:
laws of 235;
of matter 105;
participation in 115
necessity 69, 82, 87, 93, 219, 222;
absolute 71, 81, 102, 113, 169, 230;
assumption 80, 84, 142, 191, 195;
dialogue and 71, 191, 197, 202,
223;
selfimage and 164, 169;
symbol of 96, 102;
time factor 235, 236, 237
negative image 46, 48
negative thoughts 45, 45
negotiation 71, 189
nerve damage (in leprosy) 38, 128
nervous system 40, 41, 111, 128
neurochemical process 9, 218
neurophysiological process 45, 55,
56, 166, 203, 205
neutrons 104
Newton, Isaac 27, 31, 32, 230
Newtonian model 13, 139
non-participation 116
non-perception 135
non-self-serving thought 24
non-thought 99
non-verbal questioning 29
nostalgic feelings 9
notion (of system) 25
objectivity 20, 116
observer/observed 139, 186, 189,
212, 213, 213, 215, 239
oil industry (East-West relations) 11
openness 105, 107
opinions 105, 206
opportunity, window of 122
organized by thought 89
orientation difference 176
‘other state’ 50
‘outside’ the system 25, 132
ozone layer (role of thought) 5
pain 9, 33, 104, 157, 163;
and nerve damage 38, 128;
pleasure-pain centres 48, 120;
self-image and 163, 213, 216;
in solar plexus 40, 41, 216;
uncertainty and 37
painting (as unknown revealed) 177
paranoia 127
participation 5, 113, 126, 147, 149,
151
particular (and general) 96
past 138, 144, 229, 233, 236;
‘felts’ 8, 13, 18, 19, 33;
see also experiences
Pavlovian dogs 52
perception 23, 39, 238, 241;
depth 134;
dialogue 197, 202, 207, 222, 228;
imagination 152;
and participation 5, 113, 147, 149;
representation affects 112, 117;
of self see proprioception;
thought affected by 30, 31;
thought affects 5, 119, 123, 127,
132, 147;
of truth 149, 181
perfection 26
physical fact 233
physical Newtonian matter 139
physical time 236, 239
physics 103, 109, 232, 233
INDEX 249

Piaget, Jean 111, 154
pictures (as symbols) 97
Planck length 172
pleasure 7, 9, 40, 157, 163, 213;
endorphins 45, 46, 50, 55, 62, 69,
104, 113, 121, 155;
–pain centres 48, 120
policy-making (dialogue) 194
political system 33
pollution/polluted thought 1, 20,
225, 228
polygraph 41
positive image 46, 48
positive thinking 45, 45, 69
possessive thought 14, 17
power, self-image and 164
present 138, 144, 230, 233, 237
preverbal symbols 98
primary imagination 154
problem-solving 138
problems (source of) 1, 16, 99
professional groups
(fragmentation) 4
projected self-image 181
proprioception 18, 123, 135, 147, 215
protons 104
psychic energy 122
psychological addiction 155
psychological sense of thought 14
psychological time 231, 236, 239,
240, 242
psychology of well-being 46
psychosomatic process 43
quantum theory 103, 233, 236
quarks 104
questions 59;
and answers 29
rainbow (in physics) 109, 161, 175
reaction (and reflexes) 56
reality 71, 108, 114, 116, 169, 182,
201, 221, 229, 233;
construction 111;
fantasy and 154, 157
reflexes 113, 120, 143, 151, 157, 217;
accumulated (electrochemical
smog) 183, 185, 193, 203, 205,
209, 226;
conditioned 52, 65, 77;
dialogue and 186, 191, 195, 203,
208, 226;
imagination and 154, 159;
memory 52, 99, 119, 131, 141, 159;
self-image 161, 184;
thought as movement 12, 124,
126;
thought process 89, 101, 108
regularity 235, 237
relativity 103, 231, 233, 233
religion/religious differences 4, 6,
13, 24, 71
repetition 71
representation 128, 132, 139;
affects perception 112, 117;
form of 133, 172, 177, 182;
reflexes and 94, 99, 102, 108,
111, 113, 131;
self-image and 162, 172, 177,
182, 186;
time as 229, 237, 241
repression of memories 82
resistance 11, 34, 145, 155, 194;
to insight 215, 222, 223, 230;
necessity and 69, 71;
self-image and 161
science 4, 26, 32, 111, 223;
and technology 6, 20;
truth and 186, 186;
see also chemistry;
physics
‘searching reflex’ 52
Secret Life of Walter Mitty, The 154
security 48, 121;
need to know 32, 103, 180
self 236;
unknown (revealed) 175
250 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

self-consciousness 125
self-deception 7, 103, 162, 183
self-image 161, 212, 213, 216, 241, 242
self-perception 18, 123, 135, 147, 215
self-preservation 72
Senge, Peter 16
sensation/senses 148, 152, 180
sensitivity (in system) 33, 140, 159
separation 117, 126, 189, 210, 239
serotonin 120
sexual images 218
shared insight 205
shared meaning 186, 189, 203, 206,
224
significance 196, 201, 226
similarity 238, 239
simple coherence 11
sleep, truth and 183
society (in thought system) 19, 22
solar plexus, pain and 40, 41, 216
solidification 106, 108
sorrow 209
space 45;
empty/full 172, 176;
time and 229, 233, 239
speculation 136, 137, 152
state of the body 9, 19, 22, 39
state of mind 183
Stone Age coherence 75
stream analogy (pollution) 1
stream of consciousness 131, 132,
133, 139, 173
stress, incoherence and 56, 56, 58
stroke (case study) 123
structure (of system) 19, 23, 134
subcultures 190
‘substances’ 231
succession/successive existence
229, 231, 233, 233, 237, 241
sustained coherence 11, 32, 51
sustained incoherence 56
symbols 96, 99, 102
synapse connections (in brain) 55,
78, 140, 149, 157, 186
system:
of expressed thought 82;
and identity 169;
reflexive 94;
thought as 18, 22;
thought at core 89
systemic flaw 18, 22, 32, 43, 97, 136,
202
table (representation of) 94, 99, 106,
172, 175, 182
technology 1, 6, 20, 75
telephone (in television image) 108,
212
television image 108, 161, 212
terrible/terrifying perceptions 130
thinking 12, 100, 212, 213, 218;
fictional way of 4, 8;
pattern of 29;
problemcreation 16;
way of 16
thought:
achievement/role 119;
addiction 43, 46;
assumptions see assumptions;
awareness of 17, 131, 135, 141,
147;
-body process 133, 140, 206;
deception 101, 118;
difficulties 2;
effects 5, 16, 119, 123, 127, 132,
147;
expressed 82;
feelings/felts and 6, 8, 13;
imaginative 152;
incompleteness 102;
incoherence see incoherence;
insight see insight;
intellectual centre 7;
intuitive 23;
learning 33;
material process 148, 151, 159,
209, 232, 238;
as movement 124, 141;
INDEX 251

participatory 5, 113, 126, 147,
149, 151;
polluted 1, 20, 225, 228;
possessive 14, 17;
psychological sense 14;
source of problems 1, 99;
sources 17, 212;
as system 18, 22;
systemic flaw 18, 22, 32, 43, 97,
136, 202;
thinking and see main entry;
uncertainty 33, 37;
world problems and 1, 14
thought process 98, 121, 213;
and dialogue 196, 202, 206, 210;
incompleteness of thought 102;
intellectual map 67, 69;
past experience 138;
proprioception 123;
reflexive system 89, 101, 108;
systemic flaw 18, 22, 32, 43, 97,
116, 136, 202;
time factor 138, 239, 242
time:
physical 236, 239;
psychological 231, 236, 239, 242;
representation 229, 237, 241;
succession 229, 231, 233, 237, 241;
system 138
tone (of voice) 82, 84
truth 64, 173;
insight and 181, 187;
perception of 149, 181;
universal truths 181
ultimate knowledge 178
‘ultimons’ 178
uncertainty:
incoherence and 34;
incompleteness of thought 102;
and pain 37;
unpleasantness 32, 33
unconditioned (and conditioning)
73
understanding 66, 151
unity (in boundaries) 4
universal coherence 58
universal gravitation 27, 29
universal truths 181
unknown 180, 181;
revealed 175, 183
unpleasantness, uncertainty and 32
urge (of necessity) 72
verbal thoughts 98
views (and opinions) 105
violence 17, 25, 62, 65, 228
‘vision of dialogue’ 205, 206, 210
wars 1, 2, 4, 6
‘watching’ our thoughts 144
wealth (and money) 166
weapons 1
well-being 46, 120
‘what seems to be’/‘what is’ 15
whole 96, 117, 120, 125;
incoherence and 56
withdrawal process (drugs) 155
words:
bringing out memory 89;
communicated (in thought
process) 92;
expressed thoughts 82, 150;
and images 155;
insight and 150;
use of language 89, 89;
yelled message 82
world-self (separation) 212
world in chaos 1, 14
yelling (responses to) 75 passim
Zionism (assumptions) 191, 205
252 THOUGHT AS A SYSTEM

