
The undivided universe 
An ontological interpretation of quantum 
theory 
D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley 
London and New York 

First published 1993 
by Routledge 
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Routledge 
29 West 35th Stret, New York, NY 1001 
© 1993 D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
Typeset from authors' TeX disks 
in 10/12pt Computer Modem Roman 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
Mackays of Chatham PLC, Chatham, Kent 
Al rights reserved. No part of this bok may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without pennission in 
writing from the publishers. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this bok is available from the British Library. 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Bohm, David. 
The Undivided Universe: an ontological interpretation of quantum 
theory/by David Bohm and Basil Hiley. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Quantum theory. I. Hiley, B. J. (Basil J.) II. Title. 
QC174.12.B6326 
1991 
530.1'2-dc20 
91-21387 
CIP 
ISBN 0-415--06588-7 

Contents 
Preface 
xi 
1 
Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Why an ontological interpretation is called for 
l 
1.2 
Brief summary of contents of the book 
5 
1.3 
References 
11 
2 
Ontological versus epistemological interpretations of the 
quantum theory 
13 
2.1 
Classical ontology 
13 
2.2 
Quantum epistemology 
13 
2.3 
The quantum state 
17 
2.4 
von Neumann's approach to quantum theory 
19 
2.5 
Are Bohr's conclusions inevitable? 
24 
2.6 
References 
26 
3 
Causal interpretation of the one-body system 
28 
3.1 
The main points of the causal interpretation 
28 
3.2 
New concepts implied by the ontological interpretation 
31 
3.3 
Comparison with de Broglie's idea of a double solution 
38 
3.4 
On the role of probability in the quantum theory 
40 
3.5 
Stationary states 
42 
3.6 
Non-stationary states 
45 
3.7 
Are energy and momentum conserved in non-stationary 
states? 
47 
3.8 
The Aharonov-Bohm effect 
50 
3.9 
References 
54 
4 
The many-body system 
56 
4.1 
The ontological interpretation of the many-body system 
56 
4.2 
More on the notion of active information 
59 
4.3 
Further applications of many-body wave functions 
62 
4.3.l 
The chemical bond 
63 
4.3.2 
Superfluidity and superconductivity 
65 
4.4 
References 
71 
v 

vi 
5 
6 
7 
8 
The undivided universe 
Transition proceses considered as Independent of observation 
5.1 
The example of barrier penetration 
5.2 
Active and inactive information 
5.3 
Quantum transitions discussed independently of 
measurement 
5.4 
On the possibility of bifurcation points in more complex 
cases 
5.5 
The quantum process of 'capture' of particles (fusion-fission) 
5.6 
Sumary and conclusions 
5.7 
References 
Measurement as a special case of quantum proces 
6.1 
Brief treatment of the measurement process 
6.2 
Loss of information in the unoccupied wave packets 
6.3 
Quantum properties not generally attributable to the 
observed system alone 
6.4 
The meaning of the uncertainty principle 
6.5 
On proofs of the impossibility of hidden variables in the 
quantum theory 
6.6 
No measurement is a measurement 
6.7 
The Schrodinger cat paradox 
6.8 
Delayed choice experiments 
6.9 
The watchdog effect and Zeno's paradox 
6.10 
References 
Nonlocality 
7.1 
Introduction 
7.2 
Nonlocality in the conventional interpretations 
7.3 
Bell's inequalities 
7.4 
Extension of Bell's theorem to three particles 
7.5 
The EPR experiment according to the causal interpretation 
7.6 
Loss of nonlocality in the classical limit 
7.7 
Symmetry and antisymmetry as an EPR correlation 
7.8 
On objections to the concept of nonlocality 
7.9 
References 
The large scale world and the clasical limit of the quantum 
theory 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
Introduction 
In what way is classical physics contained as a limit of the 
quantum theory? 
IArge scale objects in the classical limit 
Illustration of the destruction of interference in tenns of 
streams of particles 
The extent of non-classical behaviour 
73 
74 
78 
83 
89 
92 
95 
95 
97 
98 
104 
106 
114 
116 
123 
125 
127 
131 
133 
134 
134 
134 
140 
146 
147 
151 
153 
157 
158 
160 
160 
161 
165 
172 
174 

9 
10 
II 
Contents 
vi 
8.6 
8.7 
The quantum world and its classical sub-world 
References 
The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation of quantum 
theory 
9.1 
Introduction 
9.2 
Chaotic behaviour of particles in many-body systems 
9.3 
Statistics of wave functions 
9.4 
The density matrix as determining all the physically 
significant results 
9.5 
The stochastic explanation of quantum probabilities 
9.6 
Detailed mathematical treatment of the stochastic model 
9.7 
Stochastic treatment of the many-body system 
9.8 
References 
The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
IO.I 
Introduction 
I0.2 
The Bohm, Schiller and Iiomno model 
I0.3 
The many-body Pauli equation 
I0.4 
The Pauli equation as the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac 
equation 
I0.5 
Extension to the many-body system 
I0.6 
The EPR experiment for two particles of spin one-half 
I0.7 
References 
The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
II.I 
Introduction 
11.2 
Reasons for starting with quantum field theories for bosonic 
fields 
Il.3 
An ontological interpretation of bosonic fields considered 
from the non-relativistic standpoint 
Il.4 
Analysis into normal modes and the ground state of the field 
11.5 
The excited state of the field 
Il.6 
Coherent states and the classical limit 
Il.7 
The concept of a photon 
Il.8 
Interference experiments 
Il.8.1 The treatment of interference 
Il.8.2 The two-slit interference pattl':m 
11.8.3 The Pfleegor-Mandel experiment 
11.9 
The EPR experiment 
II.IO 
Appendix: the destruction of interference by radiation 
II.II 
References 
176 
180 
181 
181 
182 
185 
191 
194 
196 
201 
203 
204 
204 
205 
208 
21 4  
222 
225 
228 
230 
230 
232 
238 
242 
247 
252 
255 
260 
260 
261 
262 
264 
267 
269 

vii 
The undivided universe 
12 On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
271 
12.1 
Introduction 
271 
12.2 
The one-particle Dirac equation 
272 
12.3 
The ontological interpretation of the Dirac equation for a 
many-body system 
274 
12.4 
Lorentz invariance of the many-body Dirac equation 
276 
12.5 
The multiple time formalism 
278 
12.6 
On the question of Lorentz invariance of the ontological 
interpretation of the Dirac equation 
279 
12.7 
On the Lorentz invariance of the ontological interpretation of 
boson.field theories 
286 
12.8 
On the meaning of non-Lorentz invariance of processes 
involving individual beables 
288 
12.9 
References 
295 
13 On the many-worlds interpretation 
296 
13.1 
Introduction 
296 
13.2 
Everett's approach to the many-world interpretation 
297 
13.3 
Comparison of Everett's approach to that of DeWitt 
302 
13.4 
Probabilities in the many-worlds interpretation 
305 
13.5 
On the preferred basis and the classical limit 
309 
13.6 
Comparison between our interpretation and that of the many-
worlds 
314 
13.7 
References 
316 
14 
Extension of ontological theories beyond the domain of quantum 
mechanics 
319 
14.1 
Introduction 
319 
14.2 
Our general world view, including our attitude to physical 
and mathematical aspects of basic concepts 
319 
14.3 
The Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber approach 
326 
14.4 
Stapp's suggestions for regarding quantum theory as 
describing an actual process 
329 
14.5 
The cosmological approach of Gell-Mann and Hartle 
331 
14.5.l Histories 
332 
14.5.2 Decohering histories 
334 
14.5.3 On the meaning of decoherence 
335 
14.5.4 The quasi-classical world 
337 
14.5.5 Measurement and observation 
339 
14.5.6 Comparison with our approach 
342 
14.6 
Extension of our approach beyond the domain of current 
quantum theory 
345 
14.7 
References 
348 

Contents 
ix 
15 Quantum theory and the implicate order 
350 
15.1 
Introduction 
350 
15 .2 
Relativity and quantum theory as indicators of a new order 
for physics 
351 
15.3 
Qualitative introduction to the implicate order 
353 
15.4 
Further illustrative example of the implicate order 
357 
15.5 
On the distinction between implicate and explicate orders 
361 
15.6 
More general notion of order 
362 
15.7 
The algebra of the implicate order 
363 
15.8 
A Hilbert space model of the trajectories in our interpretation 
of quantum mechanics 
367 
15.9 
An example of trajectories arising from wave structures 
368 
15.10 
Pre-space and the implicate order 
374 
15.11 
The super implicate order 
378 
15.12 
The implicate order of consciousness 
381 
15.13 
Further extension to an overall approach 
388 
15.14 
References 
390 
Index 
393 


Preface 
Over the last twenty years or so David Bohm and I have spent many hours 
discussing the main theme of this bok, namely, whether it is possible to provide 
an ontological interpretation of quantum mechanics, an issue that has ben 
fiercely debated since its inception. It was quite clear from the outset that it was 
not going to be possible to return to the concepts of classical physics and we found 
it necessary to make some radical new proposals concerning the nature of reality 
in order to provide a coherent ontology. The results of our deliberations form the 
content of this bok. 
Just as the final touches were being put to the manuscript, David died suddenly. 
The week before his death we had a series of meetings in which a few outstanding 
questions were resolved. Indeed in our last meeting David expressed general 
satisfaction with the final draft and was anxious to proceed quickly with 
publication. I have included the results of those discussions, but have resisted the 
temptation to 
make any 
significant alterations while preparing the final 
manuscript. 
I hope this bok will be a fitting testimony to this very radical and original 
thinker who rejected the view of conventional quantum mechanics, not for 
ideological reasons, but because it did not provide a coherent overall view of 
nature, a feature that David felt an essential ingredient of any physical theory. It 
was like Escher's 'The Waterfall", a fascinating picture in which region by region 
appeared to be carefully constructed and consistent, but when one stepped back 
to perceive the whole, a contradiction was there for al to see. Indeed the most 
radical view to emerge from our deliberations was the concept of wholeness, a 
notion in which a system formed a totality whose overall behaviour was richer 
than could be obtained from the sum of its parts. In the ontological theory that 
we present here, this wholeness is made manifest through the notion of 
nonlocality, a notion that is seemingly denied by relativity. Yet there is no 
observational disagreement with experiment. Nevertheless nonlocality does not 
fit comfortably within a space-time structure that is talien as a priori given and 
described by a diferential manifold. Thus in the final chapter we present some 
radically new ideas which talie us beyond the present paradigm. It was these ideas 

xii 
The undivided universe 
that David and I were anxious to develop further. Unfortunately his deep 
perceptions of these new possibilities will be sadly missed. 
Finally I should like to warmly thank all our colleagues for helpful discussions, 
particularly Chris Dewdney, Henry Folse, Sheldon Goldstein, Dipankar Home, 
Pan Kalolerou, Abner Shimony and Henry Stapp. I should also like to thank Nora 
Leonard for her exceptional patience and skilful preparation of the manuscript. 
B. J. Hiley 
January 1993 

Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1 
Why an ontological interpretation is called for 
The formalism of the quantum theory leads to results that agree with ex­
periment with great accuracy and covers an extremely wide range of phe­
nomena. 
As yet there are no experimental indications of any domain in 
which it might break down. Nevertheless, there still remain a number of 
basic questions concerning its fundamental significance which are obscure 
and confused. Thus for example one of the leading physicists of our time, 
M. Gell-Mann [1), has said "Quantum mechanics, that mysterious , confus­
ing discipline, which none of us really understands but which we know how 
to use". 
Just what the points are that are not clear will be specified in detail 
throughout this book, especially in chapters 6, 7, 8 and 14. We can however 
outline a few of them here in a preliminary way. 
1. Though the quantum theory treats statistical ensembles in a satis­
factory way, we are unable to describe individual quantum processes 
without bringing in unsatisfactory assumptions, such as the collapse 
of the wave function. 
2. There is by now the well-known nonlocality that has been brought 
out by Bell [2] in connection with the EPR experiment. 
3. There is the mysterious 'wave-particle duality' in the properties of 
matter that is demonstrated in a quantum interference experiment. 
4. Above all , there is the inability to give a clear notion of what the 
reality of a quantum system could be. 
All that is clear about the quantum theory is that it contains an algo­
rithm for computing the probabilites of experimental results. But it gives 

no physical account of individual quantum processes. Indeed, without the 
measuring instruments in which the predicted results appear, the equations 
of the quantum theory would be just pure mathematics that would have no 
physical meaning at all. And thus quantum theory merely gives us (gener­
ally statistical) knowledge of how our instruments will function. And from 
this we can make inferences that contribute to our knowledge, for example, 
of how to carry out various technical proceses. That is to say, it seems, 
as indeed Bohr (3) and Heisenberg (4) have implied, that quantum theory 
is concerned only with our knowledge of reality and especially of how to 
predict and control the behaviour of this reality, at least as far as this may 
be possible. Or to put it in more philosophical terms, it may be said that 
quantum theory is primarily directed towards epistemology which is the 
study that focuses on the question of how we obtain our knowledge (and 
posibly on what we can do with it). 
It follows from this that quantum mechanics can say little or nothing 
about reality itself. In philosophical terminology, it does not give what 
can be called an ontology for a quantum system. Ontology is concerned 
primarily with that which is and only secondarily with how we obtain our 
knowledge about this (in the sense, for example, that the process of obser­
vation would be treated as an interaction between the observed system and 
the observing apparatus regarded as existing together in a way that does 
not depend significantly on whether these are known or not). 
We have chosen as the subtitle of our book "An Ontological Interpreta­
tion of Quantum Theory" because it gives the clearest and most accurate 
description of what the book is about. The original papers in which the 
ideas were first proposed were entitled "An Interpretation in Terms of Hid­
den Variables" [5) and later they were referred to as a "Causal Interpreta­
tion" [6) . However, we now feel that these terms are too restrictive. First 
of all, our variables are not actually hidden. For example, we introduce 
the concept that the electron is a particle with well-defined position and 
momentum that is, however, profoundly affected by a wave that always 
accompanies it (see chapter 3). Far from being hidden, this particle is gen­
erally what is most directly manifested in an observation. The only point 
is that its properties cannot be observed with complete precision (within 
the limits set by the uncertainty principle) .  Nor is this sort of theory nec­
essarily causal. For, as shown in chapter 9, we can also have a stochastic 
version of our ontological interpretation. The question of determinism is 
therefore a secondary one, while the primary question is whether we can 
have an adequate conception of the reality of a quantum system, be this 
causal or be it stochastic or be it of any other nature. 
In chapter 14 section 14.2 we explain our general attitude to determin­
ism in more detail, but the main point that is relevant here is that we regard 

Introduction 
3 
all theories as approximations with limited domains of validity. Some the­
ories may be more nearly determinate, while others are less so. The way is 
open for the constant discovery of new theories, but ultimately these must 
be related coherently. However, there is no reason to suppose that physical 
theory is steadily approaching some final truth. It is always open (as has 
indeed generally been the case) that new theories will have a qualitatively 
different content within which the older theories may be seen to fit together, 
perhaps in some approximate way. Since there is no final theory, it cannot 
be said that the universe is either ultimately deterministic or ultimately in­
deterministic. Therefore we cannot from physical theories alone draw any 
conclusions, for example, about the ultimate limits of human freedom. 
It will be shown throughout this book that our interpretation gives a 
coherent treatment of the entire domain covered by the quantum theory. 
This means that it is able to lead to the same statistical results as do other 
generally accepted interpretations. In particular these include the Bohr 
interpretation and variations on this which we shall discuss in chapter 2 
(e.g. the interpretations of von Neumann and Wigner). For 'the sake of 
convenience we shall put these altogether and call them the conventional 
interpretation. 
Although our main objective in this book is to show that we can give an 
ontological explanation of the same domain that is covered by the conven­
tional interpretation , we do show in the last two chapters how it is posible 
in our approach to extend the theory in new ways implying new experimen­
tal consequences that go beyond the current quantum theory. Such new 
theories could be tested only if we could find some domain in which the 
quantum theory actually breaks down. In the last two chapters we sketch 
some new theories of this kind and indicate some areas in which one may 
expect the quantum theory to break down in a way that will allow for & 
test. 
Partly because it has not generally been realised that our interpretation 
has such new possibilities, the objection has been raised that it has no real 
content of its own and that it merely recasts the content of the conventional 
interpretation in a different language. Critics therefore ask: "If this is the 
case, why should we consider this interpretation at all?" 
We can answer this objection on several levels. Firstly we make the gen­
eral point that the above argument could be turned the other way round. 
Thus de Broglie proposed very early what is, in essence, the germ of our 
approach. But this met intense opposition from leading physicists of the 
day. This was especially manifest at the Solvay Congress of 1927 [7]. This 
opposition was continued later when in 1952 one of us [5] proposed an exten­
sion of the theory which answered all the objections and indeed encouraged 
de Broglie to take up his ideas again. (For a discussion of the history of 

4 
The 'mdivided univer"e 
this development and the sociological factors behind it, se Cushing (8] and 
also Pinch (9].) 
Let us suppose however that the Solvay Congress had gone the other 
way and that de Broglie's ideas had eventually been adopted and developed. 
What then would have happened, if 25 years later some physicists had come 
along and had proposed the current interpretation (which is at present 
the conventional one)? Clearly by then there would be a large number of 
physicists trained in the de Broglie interpretation and these would have 
found it difficult to change. They would naturally have asked: "What do 
we concretely gain if we do change, if after all the results are the same?" 
The proponents of the suggested 'new' approach would then probably have 
argued that there were nevertheless some subtle gains that it is difficult 
to weigh concretely. This is the kind of answer that we are giving now to 
this particular criticism of our own interpretation. To fail to consider such 
an answer seriously is equivalent to the evidently specious argument that 
the interpretation that "gets in there first" is the one that should always 
prevail. 
Let us then consider what we regard as the main advantages of our 
interpretation. Firstly, as we shall explain in more detail throughout the 
book but especially in chapters 13, 14 and 15, it provides an intuitive grasp 
of the whole process. This makes the theory much more intelligible than 
one that is restricted to mathematical equations and statistical rules for 
using these equations to determine the probable outcomes of experiments. 
Even though many physicists feel that making such calculations is basically 
what physics is all about, it is our view that the intuitive and imaginative 
side which makes the whole theory intelligible is as important in the long 
run as is the side of mathematical calculation. 
Secondly, as we shall see in chapter 8, our interpretation can be shown 
to contain a clasical limit within it which follows in a natural way from the 
theory itself without the need for any special assumptions. On the other 
hand, in the conventional interpretation, it is necessary to presuppose a 
clasical level before the quantum theory can have any meaning (see Bohm 
(10]). The correspondence principle then demonstrates the consistency of 
the quantum theory with this presupposition . But this does not change the 
fact that without presupposing a classical level there is no way even to talk 
about the measuring instruments that are essential in this interpretation to 
give the quantum theory a meaning. 
Because of the need to presuppose the classical level (and perhaps even­
tually an observer) , there is no way in the conventional interpretation to 
give a consistent account of quant u m  cosmology. For, as this interpretation 
now stands, it is always necessary to assume an observer (or his proxy in 
the form of an instrument) which is not contained in the theory itself. If 

Introduction 
5 
this theory is intended to apply cosmologically, it is evidently necessary 
that we should not, from the very outset, assume esential elements that 
are not capable of being included in the theory. Our interpretation does 
not suffer from this difficulty because the clasical level flows out of the 
theory itself and does not have to be presupposed from outside. 
Finally as we have already pointed out our approach has the potentiality 
for extension to new theories with new experimental consequences that go 
beyond the quantum theory. 
However, because our interpretation and the many others that have been 
proposed lead, at least for the present, to the same predictions for the ex­
perimental results, there is no way experimentally to decide between them. 
Arguments may be made in favour or against any of them on various bases, 
which include not only those that we have given here, but also questions 
of beauty, elegance, simplicity and economy of hypotheses. However, these 
latter are somewhat subjective and depend not only on the particular tastes 
of the individual, but also on socially adopted conventions, consensual opin­
ions and many other such factors which are ultimately imponderable and 
which can be argued many ways ( as we shall indeed point out in more detail 
especially in chapters 14 and 15). 
There does not seem to be any valid reason at this point to decide finally 
what would be the accepted interpretation. But is there a valid reason why 
we need to make such a decision at all? Would it not be better to keep 
all options open and to consider the meaning of each of the interpretations 
on its own merits, as well as in comparison with others? This implies that 
there should be a kind of dialogue between different interpretations rather 
than a struggle to establish the primacy of any one of them. {This point is 
discussed more fully in Bohm and Peat (1 1].) 
1.2 
Brief summary of contents of the book 
We complete this chapter by giving a brief summary of the contents of this 
book. 
The book may be divided roughly into four parts. The first part is con­
cerned with the basic formulation of our interpretation in terms of particles. 
We begin in chapter 2 by discussing something of the historical background 
of the conventional interpretation, going into the problems and paradoxes 
that it has raised. In chapter 3 we go on to propose our ontological inter­
pretation for the one-body system which however is restricted to a purely 
causal form at this stage (see Bohm and Hiley (12]). We are led to a num­
ber of new concepts, especially that of active information, which help to 
make the whole approach more intelligible, and we illustrate the approach 

6 
The tmdivided universe 
in terms of a number of key examples. 
In chapter 4 we extend this interpretation to the many-body system 
and we find that this leads to further new concepts. The moat important 
of these are nonlocality and objective wholeneu. That is to say, particles 
may be strongly connected even when they are far apart, and this arises 
in a way which implies that the whole cannot be reduced to an analysis in 
terms of its constituent parts. 
In chapter 5 we apply these ideas to study the proces of transition. 
Firstly in terms of the penetration of a barrier and secondly in terms of 
'jumps' of an atom from one quantum state to another. In both cases 
we se that these transitions can be treated objectively without reference 
to observation or measurement. Moreover the process of transition can in 
principle be followed in detail, at least conceptually, in a way that makes the 
process intelligible (whereas in the conventional interpretation , as shown in 
chapter 2, no such account is possible). This sort of insight into the process 
enables us to understand, for example, how quantum transitions can take 
place in a time that is very much shorter than the mean life time of the 
quantum state. 
In the next part of the book we discuss some of the more general im­
plications of our approach. Thus in chapter 6 we go into the theory of 
measurement. We treat this as an objective process in which the measur­
ing instrument and what is observed interact in a well-defined way. We 
show that after the interaction is over, the system enters into one of a set 
of 'channels', each of which corresponds to the possible results of the mea­
surement. The other channels are shown to become inoperative. There is 
never a 'collapse' of the wave function. And yet everything behaves as if 
the wave function had collapsed to one of the channels. 
The probability of a particular result of the interaction between the 
instrument and the observed object is shown to be exactly the same as 
that asumed in the conventional interpretation. But the key new feature 
here is that of the -u ndivided wholeness of the measuring instrument and 
the observed object, which is a special case of the wholeness to which we 
have alluded in connection with quantum processes in general. Because of 
this, it is no longer appropriate, in measurements to a quantum level of 
accuracy, to say that we are simply 'measuring' an intrinsic property of 
the observed system. Rather what actually happens is that the process of 
interaction reveals a property involving the whole context in an inseparable 
way. Indeed it may be said that the measuring apparatus and that which is 
observed participate irreducibly in each other, so that the ordinary classical 
and common sense idea of measurement is no longer relevant. 
The many paradoxes that have arisen out of the attempt to formulate 
a measurement theory in the conventional interpretation are shown not 

Introduction 
7 
to a.rise in our interpretation. These include the treatment of negative 
mea.surée.nts (i. e. results following from the non-firing of the detector), 
the SchrOdmger cat paradox [13). the delayed choice experiments [14] and 
the watchdog effect (Zeno's paradox)[15]. 
In chapter 7 we work out the implications of nonlocality in the frame­
work of our interpretation. We include a discussion of the Bell inequality 
[2] and the EPR experiment [16]. We then go on to discuss how nonlocality 
disappears in the clasical limit, except in the special case of the symmetry 
and antisymmetry of the wave function for which there is a. superselection 
rule, implying th at EPR correlations can be maintained indefinitely even 
at the large scale. This explains how the Pauli exclusion principle can be 
understood in our interpretation. Finally we discuss and answer objections 
to the concept of nonlocality. 
In chapter 8 we discuss how the clasical limit of the quantum theory 
emerges in the large scale level, without any break in the whole process 
either mathematically or conceptually. Thus, as we have already explained 
earlier, we do not need to presuppose the classical level as required in the 
conventional interpretation. 
In the next part of the book we extend our approach in several ways. 
Firstly in chapter 9, we discuss the role of statistics in our interpretation. 
We show that in typical situations the particles behave chaotically in a 
many-body system. From this we can infer that our originally asumed 
probability density, P = 11/i 12, will arise naturally from a.n arbitrary initial 
probability distribution. We then go on to treat quantum statistical me­
chanics in our framework and show how the density matrix can be derived 
as a simplified form that expresses what is essential about the statistical 
distribution of wave functions. 
Finally we discuss an alternative approach to this question which has 
been explored in the literature (17). i .e. a. stochastic explanation in which 
one assumes that the particle has a. random component to its velocity over 
and above that which it has in the causal interpretation. We show that 
in this theory, an arbitrary probability distribution age.in approaches ll/il2, 
but now this will happen even for single particle systems that would not, 
in the causal interpretation, give rise to chaotic motion. 
In chapter 10 we develop an ontological interpretation of the Pauli equa­
tion. We begin with a discussion of the history of this interpretation, show­
ing that the simple model of a spinning extended body will not work if we 
wish to generalise our theory to a relativistic context. Instead, we are led 
to begin with an ontological interpretation of the Dirac equation anJ to 
consider its non-relativistic limit. We show that in addition to its usual or­
bital motion, the particle then has an additional circulatory motion which 
accounts for its magnetic moment and its spin. We extend our treatment to 

8 
Tlae andivided univerae 
the many-body system and illustrate this in terms of the EPR experiment 
for two particles of spin one-half. 
In chapter 1 1  we go on to consider the ontological interpretation of b080n 
fields. We first give reasons showing the necessity for starting with quantum 
field theories rather than particle theories in extending our interpretation to 
b080nic systems. We then develop our ontological interpretation in detail, 
but from a non-relativistic point of view. The key new concept here is 
that the field variables play the role which the particle variables had in the 
particle theory, while there is a superwave function of these field variables, 
that replaces the wave function of the particle variables. 
We illustrate this approach with several relevant examples. We then 
go on to explain why the basically continuous field variables nevertheless 
deliver quantised amounts of energy to material systems such as atoms. We 
do this without the introduction of the concept of a photon as a 'bullet­
like' particle. Finally we show how our interpretation works in interference 
experiments of various kinds. 
In chapter 12 we discuss the question of the relativistic invariance of our 
approach. We begin by showing that the interpretation is relativistically in­
variant for the one-particle Dirac equation. However, for the many-particle 
Dirac equation, only the statistical predictions are relativistically invariant. 
Because of nonlocality, the treatment of the individual system requires a 
particular frame of reference (e.g. the one in which nonlocal connections 
would be propagated instantaneously). The same is shown to hold in our 
interpretation for bosonic fields [18] . 
We finally show, however, that it is possible to obtain a consistent ap­
proach by asuming a sub-relativistic level of stochastic movement of parti­
cles which contains the ordinary statistical results of the quantum theory as 
well as the behaviour of the world of large scale experience which is Lorentz 
covariant. Therefore we are able to explain the covariance of all the experi­
mental observations thus far available (at least for all practical purposes). 
We point out several situations in which this sort of theory could be tested 
experimentally and give different results from those of the current theory 
in any domain in which relativity (and possibly quantum theory) were to 
break down. 
We then come to the final part of the book which is concerned with 
various other ontological interpretations that have been proposed and with 
modifications of the quantum theory that are possible in terms of these 
interpretations. The first of these is the many-worlds interpretation which 
has recently aroused the interest of people working in cosmology We begin 
by pointing out that there is as yet no generally agreed version of this inter­
pretation and that there are two different bodies of opinion about it. One of 
these starts from Everett's approach [19] and the other from De Witt's (20]. 

Introduction 
9 
Though these are frequently regarded as the same, we show that there are 
important differences of principle between them. We discuss these differ­
ences in some detail and also the as yet not entirely successful efforts of 
other workers in the field to deal with the unresolved problems in these two 
approaches. Finally we make a comparison between our interpretation and 
the many-worlds point of view. 
The many-worlds interpretation was not explicitly aimed at going be­
yond the limits of the current quantum theory. In chapter 14 we discuss 
theories that introduce concepts that do go beyond the current quantum 
theory, at least in principle. The first of these is the theory of Ghirardi, 
Rimini and Weber [21] who propose nonlinear, nonlocal modifications of 
SchrOdinger's equation that would cause the wave function actually to col­
lapse. The modifications are so arranged that the collapse process is sig­
nificant only for large scale system<; containing many particles, while for 
systems containing only a few particles, the results are the same, for all prac­
tical purposes, as those of the current linear and local form of Schrodinger's 
equation . 
Even more striking changes are proposed by Stapp [22] and by Gell­
Mann and Hartle [23] , the latter of whom develop their ideas in considerable 
detail. They deal with the whole question cosmologically from the very 
outset by introducing mathematical concepts that enable them to describe 
actual histories of processes taking place in the cosmos, from the beginning 
of the universe to the end. 
We give a careful analysis of these approaches. Both of them aim to 
do what the many-worlds interpretation has not yet succeeded in doing 
adequately, i.e. to show that the quantum theory contains a 'classical world' j 
within it . While they have gone some way towards this goal, it becomesȂ 
clear that there are still unresolved problems standing in the way of its 
achievement. 
We also give a critical comparison between their approach and ours, 
pointing out that their histories actually involve a mathematical assump­
tion analogous to that involved in the notion of particles in our interpreta­
tion. Therefore it is not basically a question of the number of assumptions. 
Rather, we suggest that the main advantage claimed over ours, at least im­
plicitly, is that it expresses all concepts in terms of Hilbert space, whereas 
we introduce a notion of particles that goes outside this framework. 
Finally we discuss some proposals of our own going beyond the qu antum 
theory. Basically these are an extension of what we suggested in chapter 12. 
The idea is that there will be a stochastic sub-quantum and sub-relativistic 
level in which the current laws of physics will fail. This will probably first 
be encountered near the Planck length of 10-33 cm. However, over longer 
distances our stochastic interpretation of relativistic quantum theory will 

be recovered as a limiting case, but as we have suggested earlier, experi­
ments involving shorter times could reveal significant differences from the 
predictions of the current relativistic quantum theory. 
Up to this point we have, in a certain sense, been discussing in the 
traditional Cartesian framework even though many new concepts have been 
introduced within this framework. In chapter 15, the final chapter of the 
book, we introduce a radically new overall framework which we call the 
implicate or enfolded order. In this chapter we shall give a sketch of these 
ideas which are in any case only in early stages of development. 
We begin by showing that the failure of quantum theory and relativity 
to cohere conceptually already begins to point to the need for such a new 
order for physics as a whole. We then introduce the implicate order and 
explain it in terms of a number of examples which illustrate the enfoldment 
of a whole structure into each region of space, e.g. as happens in a hologram. 
We show that the notion of order based on such an enfoldment gives an 
accurate and intuitive grasp of the meaning of the propagator function 
of quantum mechanics and, more generally, of Hilbert space itself. 
We 
indicate how this notion is contained mathematically in an algebra which 
is essentially the algebra of quantum mechanics itself. 
These ideas are connected with our ontological interpretation by means 
of a model of a particle as a sequence of incoming and outgoing waves, 
with successive waves very close to each other. For longer times, this ap­
proximates our stochastic trajectories, while for shorter times it leads to a 
very new concept. What is to be emphasised here is that in this way our 
trajectory model can be incorporated into the framework of Hilbert space. 
When this is done, we see that it is part of a larger set of possible theories 
which include those of Stapp and Gell-Mann and Hartle. 
One of the main new ideas implied by this approach is that the geom­
etry and the dynamics have to be in the same framework, i.e. that of the 
implicate order. In this way we come to a deep unity between quantum 
theory and geometry in which each is seen to be inherently conformable 
to the other. We therefore do not begin with traditional Cartesian notions 
of order and then try to impose the dynamics of quantum theory on this 
order by using the algorithm of 'quantisation'. Rather quantum theory and 
geometry are united from the very outset and are seen to emerge together 
from what may be called pre-space. 
Finally we discuss certain analogies between the implicate order and 
consciousness and suggest an approach in which t he physical and the mental 
sides would be two aspects of a greater order in which they are inherently 
related. 

Introd•ction 
11 
1.3 
References 
l. M. Gell-Mann, 'Questions for the Future' , in The Nature of Matter, 
Wolfson Colifge Lectures 1980, ed. J .H. Mulvey, Clarendon Press 
Oxford, 1981. 
' 
2. J. S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, chap­
ter 2, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
3. N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Science Editions, 
New York, 1961. 
4. W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, Allen and Unwin, London , 
1963. 
5. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166-193 (1952). 
6. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 89, 458-466 (1953). 
7. L. de Broglie, Electrons et Photons, Rapport au Ve Conseil Physique 
Solvay, Gauthier-Villiars, Paris, 1930. 
8. J. T. Cushing, 'Causal Quantum Theory: Why a Nonstarter?', in The 
Wave-Particle Duality, ed. F. Selleri, Kluwer Academic , Amsterdam, 
to be published. 
9. T. J. Pinch, in The Social Production of Scientific Knowledge. Soci­
ology of the Sciences Vol. 1, ed. E. Mendelson, P. Weingart and R. 
Whitley, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1977, 171-215. 
10. D. Bohm, 
Quantum 
Theory, 
Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey, 1951. 
11. D. Bohm and F. D. Peat, Science, Order and Creativity, Bantam 
Books, Toronto, 1987. 
12. D. Bohm and B .  J .  Hiley, Phys. Reports 144, 323-348 (1987). 
13. E. Schrodinger, Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. 1 2 4 ,  323-338 (1980). 
14. J. A .  Wheeler, in Mathematical Foundalzon of Quantum Mechanics, 
ed. R. Marlow, Academic Press, New York, 1978, 9-48. 
15. B. Misra and E. C. G. Sudarshan , J. Math. Phys. 18, 756-783 (1977). 
16. A. Aspect , J. Dalibard and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1 1, 529-546 

12 
Tlae tmdivided universe 
17. D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, Phys. Reporls 172, 93-122 (1989). 
18. D. Bohm, B. J. Hiley and P. N. Kaloyerou, Phys. Reporla 144, 349-
375 (1987). 
19. H. Everett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454 -462 (1957). 
20. B. S. DeWitt and N. Graham, The Many-Worlds Interpretation of 
Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jer­
sey, 1973, 155-165. 
21. G. C. Ghiraidi, A .  Rimini and T. Weber, Phys. Rm 034, 470-491 
( 1986). 
22. H. P. Stapp, 'Einstein Time and Process Time', in Physics and the 
Ultimate Significance of Time, ed. D. R. Griffin, State University 
Press, New York, 1986, 264-270. 
23. M. Gell-Mann and J.B. Hartle, 'Quantum Mechanics in the Light of 
Quantum Cosmology', in Proc . 3rd fot. Sy mp. Found. of Quantum 
Mechanics, ed. S. Kobyashi, Physical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1989. 

Chapter 2 
Ontological versus epistemological 
interpretations of the quantum theory 
2.1 
Classical ontology 
In classical physics there was never a serious problem either about the ontol­
ogy, or about the epistemology. With regard to the ontology, one asumed 
the existence of particles and fields which were taken to be essentially in­
dependent of the human observer. The epistemology was then almost self­
evident because the observing apparatus was supposed to obey the same 
objective laws as the observed system, so that the measurement process 
could be understood as a special case of the general laws applying to the 
entire universe. 
2.2 
Quantum epistemology 
As we have already brought out in chapter 1, in quantum mechanics this 
simple approach to ontology and epistemology was found to be no ionger 
applicable. In the present chapter we shall go into this question in more 
detail especially in connection with the way this subject is treated in the 
conventional interpretation. 
Let us begin with the fact that quantum mechanics was introduced as 
an essentially statistical theory. 
Of course statistical theories in general 
are capable of being given a straightforward ontological interpretation, for 
example, in terms of an objective stochastic process. 
The epistemology 
could then be worked out along the same lines as for a deterministic the­
ory such as clasical mechanics. But Bohr and Heisenberg raised further 
questions about the validity of such an approach in the quantum theory. 
Their argument was based on two postulates: (a) the indivisibility of the 

a 
p 
Figure 2.1: Sketch of Heisenberg microscope 
quantum of action and (b) the unpredictability and uncontrollability of its 
consequences in each individual case. 
It follows from the above assumptions, as we shall show in more detail 
presently, that in the measurement of p and x, for example, there is a 
maximum possible accuracy given by the uncertainty principle įpįx > 
h. This is clearly a limitation on the possible accuracy and relevance of 
our knowledge of the observed system. However, this has been taken not 
as a purely epistemological limitation on our knowledge, but also as an 
ontological limitation on the possibility of defining the state of being of the 
observed system itself. 
To bring out what is meant here let us briefly review the Heisenberg 
microscope argument. A particle at some point P (see figure 2.1 ) scatters 
a quantum of energy hv which follows the path POQ to arrive at the focal 
point Q of the lens. From a knowledge of this point Q there is an ambiguity 
in our ability to attribute the location of the point P to within the resolving 
power of the lens įx = >./sin a where ). is the wave length and a is the 
aperture angle of the lens. This follows from the wave nature of the quan­
tum that links P to Q. But because the light has a particle nature as well, 
the quantum has a momentum hv/c and it produces a change of momen­
tum in the particle įp = hv sin (J / c where (J is the angle through which the 

Ontological versus epistemological interpretation• 
15 
quantum has been scattered by the particle. The indivisibility of the quan­
tum guarantees that its momentum cannot be reduced below this value 
while the assumed unpredictability and uncontrollability of the scatterin§ 
process within () Լ a guarantees that we cannot make an unambiguous 
attribution of momentum to the particle within the range 6.p = hvsino/c. 
And it is well known that from this we obtain Heisenberg's uncertainty 
relation 6.p6.x ?: h. 
Relationships of this kind implied, for Heisenberg and Bohr, that the 
basic properties of the particle, i.e. its position and momentum, are not 
merely uncertain to us, but rather that there is no way to give them a 
meaning beyond the limit set by Heisenberg's principle. They inferred from 
this that there is, as we have already pointed out, an inherent ambiguity 
in the state of being of the particle. And this in turn implied that, at 
the quantum level of accuracy, there is no way to say what the electron is 
and what it does, such concepts being applicable approximately only in the 
clasical (correspondence) limit. 
This evidently represented a totally new situation in physics and Bohr 
felt that what was called for was a correspondingly new way of describing 
an experiment in which the entire phenomenon was regarded as a single and 
unanalysable whole (1]. In order to bring out the full meaning of Bohr's 
very subtle thoughts on this point, let us contrast his view of the quantum 
phenomenon with the ordinary approach to the clasical phenomenon . To 
do this we may take the classical counterpart to the Heisenberg microscope 
as an example. The relevant phenomena can be described by first of all 
giving the overall experimental arrangement (the lens, the photographic 
plate, the scattering block and the incident light) . Secondly one has to 
specify the experimental result (the spot on the photographic plate) . But 
of course this result by itself would be of very little interest. The main point 
of the phenomenon is to give the meaning of the result. (In this case the 
location of the particle that scattered the light.) Evidently this is possible 
only if we know the behaviour of the light that links the experimental result 
to this meaning. Classically this behaviour is well defined since it follows 
from the wave nature of light. Since the light can be made arbitrarily weak 
and of arbitrarily short wave length, there is clearly no limit to the poss­
ible accuracy of the link between the experimental result and its meaning. 
That is to say the disturbance of the 'particle' and the ambiguity of its 
properties can be made negligible. This implies that the particle can then 
be considered to be essentially independent of the rest of the phenomenon 
in which its properties were determined. Therefore it is quite coherent to 
use the customary language which says that we have established a state of 
being of this independent particle as having been observed, and so that the 
measurement could then be left entirely out of the account in discussing 

the behaviour of the particle from this point on. 
In the corresponding quantum phenomenon there is an entirely differ­
ent state of affairs. For, as we have already pointed out, the quantum link 
connecting the experimental result with its meaning is indivisible, unpre­
dictable and uncontrollable. The meaning of such a result can, therefore, 
no longer be coherently described as referring unambiguously to the prop­
erties of a particle that exists independently of the rest of the phenomenon. 
Instead this meaning has to be regarded as an inseparable feature of the 
entire phenomenon itself. Or, to put it more succinctly, the form of the 
experimental conditions and the content (meaning) of the experimental re­
sults are a whole, not further analysable. It is this whole that, according 
to Bohr, constitutes the quantum phenomenon . 
It follows from this that given a different experimental arrangement 
(e.g. one needed to measure a complementary variable more accurately) 
we would have a different total phenomenon. The two phenomena are 
mutually exclusive in the sense that the conditions needed to determine 
one are incompatible with those needed to determ1ne the other (whereas 
clasically the two sets of conditions are, in principle, compatible) .  
Bohr emphasises that 1ncompatible phenomena of this kind actually 
complement each other in the sense that together they provide a complete 
though ambiguous description of the 'atomic object'. These complementary 
descriptions "cannot be combined into a single picture by means of ordi­
nary concepts, they represent equally essential aspects of any knowledge of 
the object in question that can be obtained in this domain" [2]. Clasically 
two such concepts can always be combined in a single unambiguous pic­
ture. This enables us to form a well-defined concept of an actual process 
independent of the means of observation (in which, for example, a parti­
cle actually moves from one state to another). But at the quantum level 
where the indivisibility of the quantum of action implies an ambiguity in 
the distinction between the observed object and observing apparatus, there 
is no way to talk consistently about such a process. It follows from Bohr's 
approach that very little can be said about quantum ontology• 
One has at most an unambiguous classical ontology and the quantum 
theory is reflected in this ontology by requiring basic concepts such as p 
and x to be ambiguous. One might perhaps suppose that there could be 
some unambiguous deeper quantum concepts of a new kind. But Bohr 
would say there is no way to relate these definitely to what we ordinarily 
regard as objective reality, i .e. the domain in which classical physics is a 
°Fobe [3) has made it clear that Bohr is not simply a positivist, but that the notion of 
M>me kind of independent physical reality underlies all his thinking. 

Ontological versu8 epistemological interpretations 
17 
good approximation. 
We can summarise Bohr's position as saying that all physical concepts 
must correspond to phenomenon, i.e. appearances. Each phenomenon is an 
abstraction. This is also true classically. But because the correspondence 
between the phenomenon and the independent reality which underlies it 
may, in principle, be unambiguous, and because all the phenomena are mu­
tually compatible, we may say that the independent reality can be reflected 
completely in the whole set of phenomena. This means in effect that we can 
know the independent reality itself. But quantum mechanically we cannot 
apply all relevant abstractions together in an unambiguous way and there­
fore whatever we say about independent reality is only implicit in this way 
of using concepts. 
What then is the meaning of the mathematics of the quantum theory 
(which is very well defined indeed)? Bohr describes this as the quantum 
algorithm which gives the probabilities of the possible results for each kind 
of experimental arrangement [4) . Clearly this means that the mathematics 
must not be regarded as reflecting an independent quantum reality that is 
well defined, but rather that it constitutes in essence only knowledge about 
the statistics of the quantum phenomena. 
All this, as we have already pointed out, is a consequence of the indivis­
ibility of the quantum of action which is very well verified experimentally. 
Bohr therefore does not regard his notion of complementary as based on 
philosophical assumptions. Rather it has for him an ontological significance 
in the sense that it says something about reality, i.e. that it is ambiguously 
related to the phenomena. He would probably say that attempts to define 
the ontology in more detail would be contradictory. 
2 . 3  
The quantum s tate 
Bohr's view seems to have had a very widespread influence, but his ideas 
do not appear to have been well understood by the majority of physicists. 
Rather the latter generally thought in terms of a different approach along 
lines initiated by Dirac, and von Neumann, in which the concept of a quan­
tum state played a key role (whereas with Bohr this concept was hardly 
even mentioned and was certainly not a fundamental part of his ideas). 
To understand what is meant by a quantum state we can begin with 
Dirac's notion that each physical quantity is represented by an Hermitean 
operator which is called an observable [5) . When this is measured by a 
suitable apparatus the system is left with a wave function corresponding 
to an eigenfunction of this observable. In general such a measurement will, 
in agreement with Heisenberg's principle, alter this wave function in an 

18 
Tl&e tmdivided universe 
uncontrollable and unpredictable way. But the probability of a certain 
result n is ICn 12 where Cn is the coefficient of the n1h eigenfunction in the 
expansion of the total wave function. 
Once we obtain such an eigenfunction we can measure the same observ­
able again and again, in principle, in a time so short that the wave function 
does not change significantly (except for a phase factor which is not rele­
vant) .  Each measurement will then reproduce the same result. In terms 
of the 'naive' ontology that pervades ordinary experience, this leads one to 
suppose that, between measurements of the same observable, the system 
continues to exist with the same wave function tPn (again, except for a phase 
factor) . Therefore one could say that during this time the system is in a 
certain state of being, i.e. it stands independently of its being observed. Of 
course, this state might change in longer times of its own accord and, in 
addition, it would also change if a different observable were measured. 
In contrast, Bohr would never allow the type of language that admitted 
the independent existence of any kind of quantum object which could be 
said to be in a certain state. That is to say, he would not regard it as 
meaningful to talk about, for example, a particle existing between quantum 
measurements even if the same results were obtained for a given observable 
in a sequence of such measurements. Rather, as we have seen, he considered 
the experimental arrangement and the content (meaning) of the result to 
be a single unanalysable whole. To talk of a state in abstraction from such 
an experimental arrangement would, for Bohr, make no sense. 
This general point can be clarified by considering what is in essence an 
intermediate approach adopted by Heisenberg.t He suggested that the wave 
function represented, not an actual reality, but rather a set of potentialities 
that could be realised according to the experimental conditions . A helpful 
analogy may be obtained by considering a seed, which is evidently not 
an actual plant, but which determines potentialities for realising various 
possible forms of the plant according to conditions of soil, rain , sunlight, 
wind, etc. Thus when the measurement of a given observable was repeated, 
this would correspond to a plant producing a seed, which growing under 
the same conditions, produced the same form of plant again (so that there 
was no continuously existent plant). Measurement of another observable 
would correspond to changing the experimental conditions, and this could 
produce a statistical range of possible plants of different forms. Returning 
to the quantum theory, it is clear th at in this approach the apparatus is 
regarded as actually helping to 'create ' the observed results. 
It must be empha5ised ,  however, that Bohr specifically rejected this 
I Tru• point of view was indeed proposed earlier by Bohm [6] . 

Ontological versus epistemological interpretations 
19 
suggestion which he probably felt gave too much independent reality to 
whatever is supposed to be represented by the wave function. (As we recall 
he regarded this as only part of a calculus for predicting the statistics of 
experimental results.) Thus he states "I warned especially against phrases, 
often found in the physical literature, such as 'disturbing of phenomena 
by observation' or 'creating physical attributes to atomic objects by mea­
surement'. Such phrases are . . .  apt to cause confusion , . . .  " (7). Bohr is 
evidently saying here essentially what we have said before, i.e. that for him 
it has no meaning to talk of a quantum object with its attributes apart 
from the unanalysable whole phenomenon in which it is actually observed. 
It is thus clear , as we have indeed already pointed out earlier, that 
Bohr's objection to the potentiality approach , as well as to taking the con­
cept of quantum state too literally, does not represent for him a purely 
philosophical question. Indeed in his discussion of the Einstein , Podolsky 
and Rosen experiment [EPR] ,  it was just this point that was crucial in his 
answer to the challenge presented by EPR. As we shall show in more detail 
in chapter 7, Bohr would say that the EPR paradox was based on an inad­
missible attribution of properties to a second particle solely on the basis of 
measurements that could be carried out on the first particle. 
2.4 
von Neumann's approach to quantum theory 
It is clear then that there is an important distinction between Bohr's ap­
proach and that of Heisenberg with his notion of potentiality, and perhaps 
an even greater difference from that of most physicists, who give a basic 
significance to the concept of quantum state. The notion of quantum state 
has indeed been most systematically and extensively developed by von Neu­
mann, who not only gave it a precise mathematical formulation , but who 
also attempted, in his own way, to come to grips with the philosophical 
issues to which this approach gave rise. 
It was a key part of this development to give a proof claiming to show 
that quantum mechanics had an intrinsic logical closure (in the sense, that 
no further concepts, e.g. involving 'hidden variables', could be introduced 
that would make posible a more detailed description of the state of the 
system than is afforded by the wave function) .  On this basis he concluded 
that the wave function yielded the most complete possible description of 
what we have been calling quantum reality, which is thus totally contained 
in the concept of a quantum state. 
In order to clarify the physical meaning of these notions he developed 
a more detailed theory of measurements. This theory still gave a basic 
significance to epistemology because the only meaning attributed to the 

20 
Tht undivided universe 
wave function was that it gave probabilities for the results of p08sible mear 
surements (i.e. it did not begin with the asumption of an independently 
existing universe that would have meaning apart from the proces in which 
its properties were measured) . Nevertheless this theory gave more signifi­
cance to ontology than Bohr did because it asumed the quantum system 
existed in a certain quantum state. 
This state could only be manifested in phenomena at a large scale (clas­
sical) level . Thus he was led to make a distinction between the quantum 
and the clasical levels. Between them, he said there was a 'cut' [8]. This 
is, of course, purely abstract because von Neumann admitted, along with 
physicists in general, that the quantum and classical levels had to exist in 
what was basically one world. However, for the sake of analysis one could 
talk about these two different levels and treat them as being in interaction. 
The effect of this interaction was to produce at the clasical level a certain 
observable experimental result. The probability of the n1h result was, of 
course, ICn 12 , where the original wave function was t/; = L Cn t/!n and t/!n 
is an eigenfunction of the operator being measured. But reciprocally, this 
interaction produced an effect on the quantum level; that is, the wave func­
tion changed from its original form t/; to t/!n ,  where n is the actual result 
of the measurement obtained at the classical leveL This change has been 
described as a 'collapse' of the wave function . Such a collapse would violate 
SchrOdinger's equation, which must hold for any quantum system. How­
ever, this does not seem to have disturbed von Neumann unduly, probably 
because one could think that in its interadion with the clasical level such 
a system need not satisfy the laws that apply when it is isolated. 
One difficulty with this theory is that the location of the cut between 
quantum and classical level is to a large extent arbitrary. For example, 
one may include the apparatus and the observed object as part of a single 
combined system, which is to be treated quantum mechanically. We then 
observe this combined system with the aid of yet another apparatus which 
is, however, treated as being in the classical level. The 'cut' has then been 
moved to some point between the first apparatus and the second. 
Von Neumann has given a mathematical treatment of this experiment 
which we shall sketch here. Let 0 be the operator that is to be measured 
Let On be its eigenvalues and t/!n ( x )  the corresponding eigenfunctions in the 
x-representation . The initial wave function is, as we have already stated , 
n 
The apparatus may have a large number of coordinates, but it will be 
sufficient to consider one of these, y ,  representing, for example, a pointer 
from whose points one can read the result of the measurement. Initially 

Ontological versus epistemological interpretations 
21 
the apparatus is in a fairly well-defined state represented by a wave packet 
4'0(11). The initial wave function of the combined system is then 
"Illa = ¢o(Y) L Cn t/in (x). 
(2.1) 
n 
We then assume an interaction between the observed system and the 
apparatus which lasts only for a time flt . For the purpose of explaining 
the principles involved, it will be sufficient to consider what is called an 
impulsive measurement, i.e. one in which the interaction is so strong that 
throughout the period in which it works, the changes in the observed sys­
tem and the observing apparatus that would occur independently of the 
interaction may be neglected. 
The interaction H amiltonian may be chosen as 
(2.2) 
where .X is a suitable constant. Since this is the same as the total Hamilto­
nian during this period, we can easily solve Schrodinger's equation, 
ih a"\11 
= in.XO a"\11 
at 
ay 
to obtain for the wave function after an interval flt , 
n 
If the interaction is chosen so that 
(2.3) 
(2.4) 
(2.5) 
where flOn is the change of On for successive values of n ,  then it follows 
that the wave packets multiplying different 1/in (z )  will not overlap. To each 
¢o(Y - .XOn flt) there will correspond a wave function Cn 1/in ( z ) .  
If we now observe this system with the aid of a second piece of apparatus, 
then in accordance with the postulates that have been described earlier, the 
latter will register the value of y .  But it will now have to be in one of the 
packets, while 1/in ( z ) will then represent the corresponding state of the 
original quantum system. In effect the total wave function has 'collapsed' 

22 
TAe Hdivided univerae 
from the original linear combination of products to a. particular product 
Ԝn(z)l/lo(y - AOnt) . The probability that this happens can be shown to 
be ICn l2 exactly as it was when we had only one measuring apparatus. 
In a. 'naive' view of this process, one could readily say that this collapse 
represented merely an improvement of our knowledge of the state of the 
system which resulted from its being measured by the second apparatus. 
Indeed in the application of classical probability in physics such 'collapses' 
a.re quite common. Thus before one has observed a. specified ensemble, the 
probability of a. certain result n may be Pn . When one observes the result 
s, the probability suddenly collapses from Pn to 8n, . 
But this interpretation is not valid here because in the clasical situ­
ation we have a. linear combination of probabilities of ea.ch of the results, 
whereas quantum mechanically we have a. linear combination of wave func­
tions, while the probability depends quadratically on these wave functions. 
Before the second measuring apparatus has functioned, we therefore can­
not say that the system is definitely in one of the n states with probability 
ICn 12 . For, a. whole range of subtle physical properties exist which depend 
on the linear combination of wave functions. Thus although the wave pack­
ets corresponding to different values of n do not overlap, they could, in 
principle, be ma.de to do so once a.gain by means of further interactions. 
For example, one could introduce a. suitable term in the Hamiltonian that 
brought such an overlap a.bout. Moreover one could have subtle observ­
ables corresponding to opera.tors that couple the combined states of both 
systems and the mean values of these would depend on the existence of 
linear combinations of the kind we have discussed above. (This point is 
discussed in some detail in Bohm [9] .) A II of this means that such linear 
combinations have an ontological significance and do not merely describe 
our knowledge of the probabilities of possible values of n which could be 
the result of this measurement. 
Actually a. similar problem was present even when we had only one 
piece of apparatus. But this is not generally felt to be disturbing because 
of the ta.cit assumption that the quantum of action that connects the ob­
served system and the observing apparatus could readily introduce signifi­
cant physical changes in a. microsystem such as an a.tom (along the general 
lines described in connection with the Heisenberg microscope experiment) . 
However, we a.re now led to the conclusion that observation could also in­
troduce significant changes of this kind in a macrosystem which includes 
the first piece of apparatus. Or, to put it differently, we may readily ac­
cept the notion that in an observation, the quantum state of a microsys­
tem undergoes a. real change when the wave function 'collapses' from a 
linear combination 11 
= L Cni.Vn(z) down to one of the eigenfunctions 
¢, (z). It is not clear however what it means to say that there is a sim-

Ontological versus epistemological interpretations 
23 
ilar real change in a macrosystem when the wave function collapses from 
ձ = L Cn f/!n(z)t/Jo(Y - AOn At) to a single state ,P, (z),P0(y - AO, At). 
This difficulty arises in essence because von Neumann introduced the 
basically ontological notion that the wave function represents a quantum 
state that somehow 'stands on its own ' (although , of course, in interaction 
with the classical level) . Bohr avoids this problem by never speaking of a 
quantum object that could stand on its own ,  but rather by speaking only of 
a phenomenon which is an unanalysable whole. The question of interaction 
between a quantum level and a classical level thus cannot arise. Therefore, 
in this sense, he is more consistent than von Neumann. 
At first sight one might be inclined to regard these questions as not very 
important , For after all the cut is only an abstraction and one can see that 
the statistical results do not depend on where it is placed, However, in so 
far as von Neumann effectively gave the quantum state a certain ontological 
significance, the net result was to produce a confused and unsatisfactory 
ontology. This ontology is such as to imply that the collapse of the wave 
function must also have an ontological significance (whereas for Bohr it 
merely represents a feature of the quantum algorithm which arises in the 
treatment of a new experiment), To show the extent of this difficulty, 
one could, for example, introduce a third apparatus that would measure 
a system that consisted of the observed object and the first two pieces of 
apparatus. For this situation the collapse would take place between the 
second and third piece of apparatus, One could go on with this sort of 
sequence indefinitely to include, for example , a computer recording of the 
results on a disc, In this case the collapse would take place when the disc 
was read, perhaps even a year or so later, (In which case the whole system 
would be in a certain quantum state represented by a linear combination 
of wave functions over this whole period of time.) And, as von Neumann 
himself pointed out , one could even include parts of the human brain within 
the total quantum system, so that the collapse could be brought about as 
a function of the brain. 
It is evident that this whole situation is unsatisfactory because the onto­
logical process of collapse is itself highly ambiguous, Perhaps Bohr's rather 
more limited ambiguity may seem preferable to von Neumann 's indefinitely 
proliferating ambiguity. 
Wigner has carried this argument further and has suggested that the 
above ambiguity of the collapse can be removed by assuming that this pro­
cess is definitely a consequence of the interaction of matter and mind [10]. 
Thus he is, in effect, placing the cut between these two and implying that 
mind is not limited by quantum theory, ( Pauli has also felt for different 
reasons that mind plays a key role in this context [1 l],) 
We can see several difficulties i n  the attempt t o  bring i n  the direct ac-

24 
The tmdivided universe 
tion of the mind to give an ontological interpretation of the current physical 
Jaws of the quantum theory. Thus in a laboratory, it is hard to believe that 
the human mind is actually significantly affecting the results of the func­
tioning of the instruments (which may, as we have already pointed out, be 
recorded on a computer that is not even examined for a long time). More­
over quantum theory is currently applied to cosmology, and it is difficult to 
believe that the evolution of the universe before the appearance of human 
beings depended fundamentally on the human mind (e.g. to make its wave 
function 'collapse' in an appropriate way) . Of course one could avoid this 
difficulty by assuming a universal mind. But if we know little about the 
human mind , we know a great deal less about the universal mind . Such an 
asumption replaces one mystery by an even greater one. 
One may ask why physicists have felt the need to bring in mind in their 
attempts to make sense of the quantum theory. Such a need is, indeed, 
implied in the work of those following along the lines of von Neumann. 
These want to say that the wave function has an ontological significance, i.e. 
as representing the quantum state, and at the same time to asume that it is 
a complete description of reality. However, as we have already pointed out, 
Bohr has claimed (apparently with greater consistency) that any ontology 
whatsoever is ruled out by the very nature of reality as revealed throughout 
the quantum theory. This would suggest that it would be better to adopt 
Bohr's point of view. 
2.5 
Are Bohr's conclusions inevitable? 
But does the fact that the quantum theory has been applied so success­
fully lead inevitably to Bohr's conclusion concerning the nature of reality? 
Clearly it does not. For as we have already explained, it involves certain 
asumptions about real physical processes. ln order to examine these as­
sumptions properly, let us repeat them. Firstly the quantum of action is 
taken to be indivisible and secondly it is assumed to be unpredictable and 
uncontrollable. From this, Bohr draws the conclusion that the state of 
being is inherently ambiguous at the quantum level of accuracy. 
It is essential to look more carefully at this conclusion which is based , in 
part, on a tacit identification of determinism with predictability an<l con­
trollability. This identification is clearly characteristic of positivist philo­
sophy. In this philosophy, science is not regarded as dealing with wh at 1 s ,  so 
that concepts cannot be regarded as reflecting reality. Rather they have to 
be defined empirically, i.e. in relation to their manifestation in observation 
and experience. In such a philosophy it follows that determinism can have 
no meaning beyond predictability and controllability. 

Ontological v e rsus epistemological interpretations 
25 
Since the quantum theory was first formulated, the relationship of de­
terminism to predictability and controllability has been clarified by the 
discovery that a very general clas of deterministic systems (i.e. those hav­
ing unstable and chaotic motions) are neither predictable nor controllable 
as has been discussed in some detail by Penrose (12). Thus the identificatioȁ 
of determinism with predictability and controllability has been invalidated. 
It follows that the mere uncontrollability and unpredictability of quantum 
phenomena does not necessarily imply that there can be no quantum world, 
which could in itself be determinate. 
What about the indivisibility and unanalysability of the quantum of 
action? It is true that in some sense, at least, the quantum of action is 
neither divisible nor analysable at the level of the phenomena. Consider, 
for example, an atom emitting a quantum of light. We have two distinct 
states. (a) The atom in an excited state and no quantum present, And (b) 
the atom in its ground state and a quantum present. 
The process of going from (a) to (b) is said to be a 'quantum jump' 
in the sense that there are no phenomena which correspond to any state 
in between. Of course, we may try to find such phenomena by observing 
the system in its process of transition. But as implied in Bohr's views, this 
would constitute an entirely different experimental arrangement that would 
be incompatible with the process of transition that we are considering. 
From this however it does not follow that there is no more complete 
description perhaps at a deeper more complex level in which this proces 
can be treated as continuous and analysable. One can indeed easily conceive 
of such a process in general terms. For example, the same kind of non­
linear equations that give rise to unstable and chaotic motions can also 
lead to what are called stable limit cycles in which the system stays near 
a certain state of motion. But more generally this stability may be limited 
so that the system can 'jump' from one such limit cycle to another, in a 
movement so fast and unstable that it could neither be predicted, controlled 
nor followed. Thus it would not appear in the phenomena. Indeed as we 
shall see in chapter 5, our interpretation of the quantum theory implies just 
such 'jumps' between what are in essence stable limit cycles. In this way one 
may explain processes that in the quantum theory are called "unpredictable, 
uncontrollable and indivisible quantum transitions between discrete orbits". 
But as we recall, Bohr's entire position depended crucially on his as­
sumptions of the nature of the quantum of action. Therefore from what we 
have said above it follows that there is no inherent necessity to adopt Bohr's 
position, and that there is nothing in Bohr's analysis that could rule out a 
quantum ontology. But of course, this latter would require the introduction 
of new concepts beyond that of the wave function and the quantum state . 
We would have to begin by simply assuming the new concepts and defining 

them through their participation in the laws of physics. 
In doing this we have to differ from Bohr who &t lea.st tacitly required 
that all ha.sic physical concepts be defined by referring them to specific 
phenomena. in which they a.re measured. In contra.st we derive the pOBible 
phenomena. a.s forms on the overall structure of concepts and their rela­
tionships. An example of this is given by Einstein's derivation of particles 
obeying the usual laws of motion, either as singularities, or a.s very strong 
static pulses in a. continuous non-linear field. The test of the theory is then 
to see whether the derived phenomena., not only explain the genera.I form 
of the observed phenomena., but also their detailed relationships. In such 
an approach, the epistemology follows naturally from the ontology (just as 
it does in classical physics) . 
At this point, however, we have to return to von Neumann who, as 
we have already pointed out, believed that the wave function contained 
the most complete possible description of reality, thus implying that there 
was no way to do what we have suggested above. Von Neumann based 
this belief on his theorem to which we have alluded earlier, that claimed 
to show that a. more detailed description would not be compatible with 
the laws of the quantum theory [13]. This proof was however questioned 
by Bohm [14] in 1952 and later by Bell [15] . A number of those who 
followed a.long von Neumann's lines, refined his arguments in several ways, 
but these refinements were also shown by Bell to make ta.cit asumptions 
a.bout ontological theories that a.re too limited. (All of this will be discussed 
in more detail in chapter 7.) 
We conclude that there are no sound reasons against seeking an onto­
logical interpretation of the quantum theory. This book presents in essence 
the first complete ontological interpretation that has been proposed. As 
indicated in the introduction, there have been several other ontological in­
terpretations since then. In chapter 14 we shall discuss these and compare 
and contrast them with the interpretation given in this book . 
2.6 
References 
l . N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Science Editions, 
New York, 1961 , 50-51 .  
2 .  Ibid. , p.26. 
3. H. J. Folse, The Philosophy of Niels Bohr, the Framework of Com­
plementarity, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985. 
4. N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human /\now/edge, Sfience Editions, 
New York, 1961 , 71 . 

Ontological versus epistemological interpretations 
27 
5. P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford, 1 947. 
6. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall , Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey, 195 1 .  Also available in Dover Publications, New York, 1989. 
7. N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Science Editions, 
New York, 1961 , 63-64. 
8. J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1955. 
9. D. Bohm, Quantum Theo ry, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey, 1951 , chapter 22 . 
10. E. Wigner, in The Sci e n tist Speculates, ed. I. J .  Good , Heinemann, 
London, 196 1 .  
1 1 .  K. V .  Laurikainen , Be yo n d th e Atom .  The Philosophical Th ought of 
Wolfgang P a uli, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1988. 
12. R. Penrose, 
Th e Empe ror 's Ne w Mind, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1989 . 
13. J .  von Neumann, Ma themat ical Foun dations of Quantum Mechanics, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1 955, 324. 
14. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166-193 ( 1 952). 
1 5 .  J.  S. Bell, R m  Mod. Phys. 3 8 ,  447-452 ( 1966) , and also in Speak­
able and Unspea kable in Qu a n t u m  M e ch a n ics, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1987. 

Chapter 3 
Causal interpretation of the one-body system 
In this chapter we develop the basic principles of our ontological interpre­
tation of the quantum theory in the context of a one-body system (while 
the many-body system will be treated in the next chapter). 
3.1 
The main points of the causal interpretation 
Let us begin by considering the standard WKB approximation for the clas­
sical limit in quantum mechanics. To do this we write the wave function 
in polar form 1/; = R exp(iS/h), We insert this form into Schrodinger's 
equation 
where V is the classical potentiaL This gives rise to two equations 
and 
as 
(\7 5)2 
n2 \72 R 
- +
-- + V - - - = 0 
ot 
2m 
2m R 
(3.1 )  
(3 ,2) 
(3,3) 
In order to obtain the WKB approximation, we note that in the classical 
limit in which there is a wave packet of width much greater than the wave 
length, >., the term -h2\72 R/2mR will be very small compared with the 
term (\7 5)2 /2m, We therefore neglect it and obtain 
(3.4) 

Causal interprdation of the one-body aystem 
29 
In the above we have written S = Sc to indicate that we are dealing with the 
classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation representing a particle with momentum 
(3 .5) 
which moves normal to the wave front Sc = const. It follows then that 
equation (3.2) can be regarded as a conservation equation for the probability 
in an ensemble of such particles, all moving normal to the same wave front 
with a probability density P = R2 . 
A)I of this may seem familiar but nevertheles there is something very 
noteworthy here. For though we have started with the quantum theory 
with all its ambiguities about the nature of a quantum system, we have 
somehow 'slipped over' into what is in essence the ordinary classical ontol­
ogy. It seems natural at this point to ask whether this kind of ontology 
could not be extended to the quantum domain . Thus we note the quantum 
equation (3.2) differs from the classical equation (3.4) only by the term 
-n2 /2m(\l2 R/ R) which evidently can be regarded as playing the role of 
an additional potential in what we may call the quantum Hamilton-Jacobi 
equation. To bring this out we shall define what we call the quantum 
potential: 
n,2 v2 R 
Q = - - -- . 
2m R 
The quantum Hamilton-Jacobi equation then becomes 
as + ('VS)2 
+ v + Q = o. 
8t 
2m 
(3.6) 
(3.7) 
The equation (3.3) still expresses the conservation of probability, but for 
an ensemble of particles which satisfies (3.7) rather than (3.4) . 
Let us now discuss this ontology in a more systematic way. Its key 
points are: 
l . The electron actually is a particle with a well-defined position x(t) 
which varies continuously and is causally determined. 
2. This particle is never separate from a new type of quantum field that 
fundamentally affects it. This field is given by R and S or alterna­
tively by 1/; = R exp(iS/n). 1/; then satisfies Schrodinger's equation 
(rather than, for example, Maxwell 's equation), so that it too changes 
continuously and is causally determined. 
3. The particle has an equation of motion 
dv 
m- = -\l( V) - \l(Q) . 
dt 
(3.8) 

30 
The undivided universe 
This means that the forces acting on it are not only the clMSical force, 
-'V'V, but also the quantum force, -'\!Q. 
4. The particle momentum is restricted to p =  '\!S. Since the quantum 
field .µ is single valued it follows (as can easily be shown) that 
f p dx = nh. 
(3.9) 
This resembles the old Bohr-Sommerfeld condition, but differs from 
the latter in which p = '\!Sc where Sc is the solution of the clasical 
Hamilton-Jacobi equation (3.4) rather than the quantum Hamilton­
Jacobi equation (3.7). 
5. In a statistical ensemble of particles, selected so that all have the 
same quantum field 1/;, the probability density is P = R2 . We shall 
discuss the significance of this in more detail in a later section, but 
we can now note that if P = R2 holds initially, then the conservation 
equation (3.3) guarantees that it will hold for all time. 
Given that the particle is always accompanied by its quantum field 1/;, 
we may say that the combined system of particle plus field is causally 
determined. (The statistics merely apply to an ensemble of causally deter­
mined trajectories.) For this reason the above proposals have been called 
the 'causal interpretation' in some of the earlier papers (though it must 
be emphasised that the basic ontological point of view given here can be 
extended, as we shall indeed do in chapter 9, to a more general stochastic 
context) . 
Finally it should be pointed out that unlike what happens with Max­
well's equations for example, the Schrodinger equation for the quantum field 
does not have sources, nor does it have any other way by which the field 
could be directly affected by the conditions of the particles. This of course 
constitutes an important difference between quantum fields and other fields 
that have thus far been used. As we shall see, however, the quantum theory 
can be understood completely in terms of the assumption that the quantum 
field has no sources or other forms of dependence on the particles. We 
shall in chapter 14, section 14.6, go into what it would mean to have such 
dependence and we shall see that this would imply that the quantum theory 
is an approximation with a limited domain of validity. In this way, as well 
as in other ways, we will see that our ontological interpretation permits a 
generalisation of the laws of physics going beyond the quantum theory, yet 
approaching the quantum theory as a suitable limit within which physics 
has thus far been contained. 

Cauaal interpretation of the one-bodr arate m 
31 
3.2 
New concepts implied by the ontological interpretation 
At first sight it may seem that to consider the electron, for example, as 
some kind of particle that is affected by the quantum field t/J is just a 
return to older classical ideas. Such a notion is however generally felt to 
have long since been proved to be inadequate in understanding quantum 
theory which possesses so many features that are very different from those 
of classical mechanics. However, closer inspection shows that we are not 
actually reducing quantum mechanics in this way to an explanation in terms 
of clasical ideas. For the quantum potential has a number of strikingly new 
features which do not cohere with what is generally accepted as the essential 
structure of clasical physics. 
In this connection it is important to note that the form of Newton's 
laws alone is not enough to determine that the general structure of clas­
sical physics shall hold. For example, a great deal of work has been done 
showing that to obtain determinism (which is surely an essential feature 
of clasical physics) we require further assumptions on the nature of the 
forces [1 ] .  For example, if infinite particle velocities or signal velocities are 
allowed, it has been demonstrated that determinism may fail. But no one 
has claimed to have given an exhaustive treatment of all the requirements 
even for determinism alone. Moreover it seems reasonable to suppose that 
other features of classical physics may also depend on further (largely tacit) 
asumptions about the nature of the forces. Indeed as we shall see, the new 
qualitative features of the quantum potential that we have mentioned above 
are just such as to imply the new properties of matter that are revealed by 
the quantum theory. 
The first of these new properties can be seen by noting that the quan­
tum potential is not changed when we multiply the field 1/! by an arbitrary 
constant. (This is because 1/! appears both in the numerator and the de­
nominator of Q.) This means that the effect of the quantum potential is 
independent of the strength (i.e. the intensity) of the quantum field but 
depends only on its form. By contrast, classicai waves, which act me­
chanically (i.e. to transfer energy and momentum, for example, to push a 
floating object), always produce effects that are more or less proportional 
to the strength of the wave. For example one may consider a water wave 
which causes a cork to bob. The further the cork is from the centre of the 
wave the less it will move. But with the quantum field, it is as if the cork 
could bob with full strength even far from the source of the wave. 
Such behaviour would seem strange from the point of view of classical 
physics. Yet it is fairly common at the level of ordinary txperience. For 
example we may consider a ship on automatic pilot being guided by radio 

32 
The undivided univer.9e 
waves. Here, too, the effect of the radio waves is independent of their 
intensity and depends only on their form. The essential point is that the 
ship is moving with its own energy, and that the form of the radio waves is 
taken up to direct the much greater energy of the ship. We may therefore 
propose that an electron too moves under its own energy, and that the form 
of the quantum wave directs the energy of the electron. 
This introduces several new features into the movement. First of all, it 
means that particles moving in empty space under the action of no clasical 
forces need not travel uniformly in straight lines. This is a radical departure 
from clasical Newtonian theory. Moreover, since the effect of the wave 
does not necessarily fall off with the distance, even remote features of the 
environment can profoundly affect the movement. 
As an example, let us consider the interference experiment. This in­
volves a system of two slits. A particle is incident on this system, along 
with its quantum wave. While the particle can only go through one slit or 
the other, the wave goes through both. On the outgoing side of the slit 
system, the waves interfere to produce a complex quantum potential which 
does not in general fall off with the distance from the slits (2) . This poten­
tial is shown in figure 3 . 1 .  Note the deep 'valleys' and broad 'plateaux'. In 
the regions where the quantum potential changes rapidly there is a strong 
force on the particle. The particle is thus deflected, even though no classical 
force is acting. 
We now consider a statistical ensemble of particles which may be ob­
tained, for example, by having electrons 'boiled out' of a hot filament in 
a random way. Each electron has its own quantum field , but with the 
aid of suitable collimators and velocity selectors, we choose only those elec­
trons with quantum fields corresponding approximately to waves with given 
direction and wave number that are incident on the slits in the manner de­
scribed above. While all the electrons now have essentially the same form 
of the quantum field and therefore of the quantum potential, they will all 
approach the slit system from different starting points. As will be shown in 
section 3.4 as well as in chapter 9 ,  for this case we may expect an essentially 
random distribution of such incident electrons. The resulting trajectories 
which are shown in figure 3.2 are then bunched into a series of dense and 
rare regions. These evidently constitute what are commonly called inter­
ference fringes. 
If, however, just one slit had been open , the quantum field , 1/.' . would 
only pass through this slit, so that beyond the slit system there would have 
been a different quantum field and therefore a different potential. This 
would produce a more nearly uniform distribution of particles arriving a t  
the screen , rather than a set of fringe-like regions. In this way we explain 
why the opening of a second slit can prevent particles from arriving at 

Ca usal interpretation of the one-bod11 a11atem 
33 
Figure 3. 1 :  Trajectories for two G aussian slit systems 

Figure 3 .2: Q u an t u m  potent ial for two G aussi an slits 

Causal interpretation of the one-bodr srstem 
35 
points to which they would not have come if only one slit had been open . 
In this explanation of the quantum propertie11 of the electron , the fact 
that the quantum potential depends only on the form and not on the am­
plitude of the quantum field is evidently of crucial significance. As we have 
already suggested ,  although at first sight such behaviour seems to be tϣ 
tally outside of our common experience , a little reflection shows that this 
is not so. Effects of this kind are indeed frequently encountered in ordi­
nary experience wherever we are dealing with information. Thus in the 
example of the ship guided by radio waves, one may say that these waves 
carry information about what is in the environment of the ship and that 
this information enters into the movements of the ship through its being 
taken up in the mechanism of the automatic pilot . 
Similarly we explain 
the interference properties by saying that the quantum field contains infor­
mation , for example about the slits, and that this information is taken up 
in the movements of the particle. In effect we have in this way introduced 
a concept that is new in the context of physics-a concept that we shall 
call active info rmation. The basic idea of active information is that a form 
having very little energy enters into and directs a much greater energy. The 
activity of the latter is in this way given a form similar to that of the smaller 
energy. 
It is important to distinguish our concept of active information from 
the more technical definition of information commonly adopted in physics 
in terms of, for example , Shannon 's ideas [3] implying that there is a quan­
titative measure of information that represents the way in which the state 
of a system is uncertain to us (e.g. that we can only specify probabilities 
of various states) . It is true that such concepts have been used to calculate 
objective properties of systems in thermodyn amics and even black holes 
etc .  (4) , but we wish to propose here a quite different notion of information 
that is not essentially related to our own knowledge or lack of it . Rather in 
the case that we are discussing , for example , it will be information that is 
relevant to determining the movement of the electron itself. We emphasise 
again that it is our thesis that this sort of usage of the word information 
is actually encountered in a wide range of areas of experience. 
What is 
cr ucial here is that we are calling attention to the literal meaning of the 
word , i.e. to in-form, which is actively to put form into something or to 
imbue something with form. 
As a simple example of what we mean , consider a radio wave whose 
form carries a sign al . 
The sound energy we hear in the radio does not 
come directly from the radio wave itself which is too weak to be detected 
by our senses. 
It comes from the power plug or batteries which provide 
an essentially u nformed energy that can be given form (i.e . in-formed) by 
the pattern carried by the radio wave . This process is evidently entirely 

36 
The tJndivided universe 
objective and ha.s nothing to do with our knowing the details of how this 
happens . 
The information in the rad io wave is potential/1 active every­
where, but it is actu ally active, only where and when it can give form to 
the electrical energy which , in this case, is in the radio. 
A more developed example of such a situation is given by considering 
the computer. 
The information content in a silicon chip can determine 
a whole range of potential activities which may be actu alised by giving 
form to the electrical energy coming from a power source. Which of these 
posibilities will be actu alised in a given case depends on a wider context 
and the responses of a computer operator . 
Although the above examples do indicate what we mean by the objective 
significance of active information , nevertheless they still depend on struc­
tures (like the radio set and the computer) which were originally designed 
and put together by human beings an d so may be felt to retain a trace of 
subjectivity. An example that does not involve structures set up by human 
beings is the function of the D N A  molecule .  The D N A  is said to constitute 
a code , th at is to say, a language .  The form of the DNA molecule is consid­
ered as information content for this code, while the ' meaning' is expressed 
in terms of various processes; e .g .  those involving RNA molecu les , which 
' read ' the D N A  code , an d carry out the protein-making activities that are 
implied by particular sections of the D N A  molecule. The comparison to 
our notion of objective and active information is very close . Thus, in the 
process of cell growth it is only the form of the DNA molecule that counts, 
while the energy is supplied by the rest of the cell (and in deed ultimately 
by the environ ment as a whole) . Moreover , at any mome nt, only a part of 
the D N A  molecule is being ' read ' and giving rise to activity. The rest is 
potentially active and may become act u ally active according to the total 
situation in which the cell finds itself. 
While we are bringing out above the objective aspects of information , 
we do not intend to deny its importan ce in su bjective human experience. 
However , we wish to point out th at even in this domain , the notion of active 
information still applies. A simple example is to be found in reading a map . 
In this activity we apprehend the information content of this map through 
our own mental energy. And by a whole set of virtu al or potential activities 
in the imagination , we can see the possible significance of this map . Thus 
the information is immediately active in arousing the imagination , but this 
activity is still evide ntly inward within the b rain and nervous system 
If 
we are actually travelling in the territory itse lf then , at any moment , some 
particular aspect may be further actu alised th rough our physical energies, 
acting in that territory ( according to a broader context, inc l uding w h at t h e 
human being knows and what he is perceiving at that mome nt) 
We therefore emphasise once again t h at even the i nformation held h y  

Causal interpretation of the one-bod11 s11stem 
37 
human beings is, in general, active rather than passive, not merely reflecting 
something outside itself but actually, or at least potentially, capable of 
participating in the thing to which it refers. Pasive information may in 
fact be regarded as a limiting case in which we abstract from the activity 
of information . This is essentially the kind of information that is currently 
used in information theory, e.g. as used by Shannon . The puzzle in this 
approach is that of how information that is merely pasive within us is 
able to determine actual objective processes outside of us. We suggest 
that passive information is rather like a map reflecting something of these 
processes which can guide us to organise them conveniently for our use, e.g. 
by means of algorithms that enable us to calculate entropy and other such 
properties. 
If the notion of active information applies both objectively and subjec­
tively, it may well be that all information is at least potentially active and 
that complete passivity is never more than an abstraction valid in certain 
limited circumstances. In this context our proposals to use the concept of 
active information at the quantum level does not seem to be unnatural. 
To show how these ideas work out in more detail, we can go once again 
into the example that we gave earlier of the electron in an interference 
experiment. We could say that this particle has the ability to do work. 
This ability is released by active information in the quantum field, which is 
measured by the quantum potential. As the particle reaches certain points 
in front of the slits, it is 'in-formed ' to accelerate or decelerate accordingly, 
sometimes quite violently. 
Although equation (3.8) may look like a classical law implying pushing 
or pulling by the quantum potential, this would not be understandable 
because a very weak field can produce the full effect which depends only 
on the form of the wave. We therefore emphasise that the quantum field is 
not pushing or pulling the particle mechanically, any more than the radio 
wave is pushing or pulling the ship that it guides. So the ability to do work 
does not originate in the quantum field, but must have some other origin 
(a suggestion which we shall discuss presently) .  
The fact that the particle is moving under its own energy, but being 
guided by the information in the quantum field , suggests that an electron or 
any other elementary particle has a complex and subtle inner structure (e.g. 
perhaps even comparable to that of a radio) . This notion goes against the 
whole tradition of modern physics which assumes that as we analyse matter 
into smaller and smaller parts its behaviour always grows more and more 
elementary. But our interpretation of the quantum theory indicates that 
nature is far more subtle and strange than previously thought. However, 
this sort of inner complexity is perhaps not as implausible as may appear at 
first sight. For example, a large crowd of people can be treated by simple 

statistical laws, whereas individually, their behaviour is immeneely more 
subtle and complex. Similarly, large masses of matter reduce approximately 
to a simple Newtonian behaviour, whereas the molecules and atoms out of 
which matter is built have a more complex inner structure. 
To make this suggestion yet more plausible, we note that between the 
shortest distances now measurable in physics (of the order of 10- ie cm) 
and the shortest distances in which current notions of space-time probably 
have meaning which is of the order of 10-33 cm, there is a vast range of 
scale in which an immense amount of yet undiscovered structure could be 
contained. Indeed, this range of scale is comparable to that which exists 
between our own size and that of the elementary particle. Moreover, since 
the vacuum is generally regarded as full (see Wheeler (5] and Hiley (6] 
for example) with an immense energy of fluctuation, revealed for example 
in the Casimir effect (7], it may be further suggested that ultimately the 
energy of this particle comes from this source. (Some of it may also come 
from the rest energy of the particle.) 
It should be added here that (as happens with the radio wave) the 
quantum information field may also have some energy. However, as has 
been made clear in the many analogies given here, this must be negligible in 
comparison to the energy of the particle which it guides. (Though perhaps 
these might be detectable in new kinds of experiments of the sort suggested 
in chapter 13, section 13.6 and chapter 14, section 14.6, which would go 
beyond the domain of current quantum theory.) 
A very important further implication of the notion of active information 
is that in a certain sense an entire experiment has to be regarded as a single 
undivided whole. This arises because the motion of the particles can be 
strongly affected by distant features of the environment such as the slits. On 
the other hand, in the corresponding clasical experiment the slit system can 
be ignored once the particle has passed through it. And as has been pointed 
out, a different slit system would produce a different quantum potential 
which would affect the motion of the particles in a different way. Therefore 
the motion of the particles cannot properly be discussed in abstraction from 
the total experimental arrangement. This is reminiscent of Bohr's notion of 
wholeness, but it differs in that the entire process is open to our 'conceptual 
gaze' and can therefore be analysed in thought, even if it cannot be divided 
in actuality without radically changing its nature. 
3.3 
Comparison with de Broglie's idea of a double solution 
The idea of a 'pilot wave' that guides the movement of the electron was first 
suggested by de Broglie (8] in 1927, but only in connection with the one-

Causal interpretation of the one-body system 
39 
body system. De Broglie presented this idea at the 1927 Solvay Congress 
where it was strongly criticised by Pauli [9). His most important criticism 
was that, in a two-body scattering process , the model could not be applied 
coherently. In consequence de Broglie abandoned his suggestion . The idea 
of a pilot wave was proposed again in 1952 by Bohm [10) in which an 
interpretation for the many-body system was given . This latter made it 
posible to answer Pauli's criticism and indeed opened the way to a coherent 
interpretation including a theory of measurement which was applicable over 
a wide range of quantum phenomena. As a result de Broglie [1 1) took up 
his original ideas again and continued to develop them in various ways. 
An important part of de Broglie's early approach was to try to explain 
the assumptions underlying the pilot wave interpretation in terms of what 
he called the theory of the 'double solution ' .  This was based on the as­
sumption of a non-linear field equation which , i11 the linear approximation , 
approached the ordinary Schrodinger equation . However, for large ampli­
tude , the non-linearity became important. He suggested that there would 
exist solutions which would correspond to a stable singularity or pulse when 
the amplitude was high and would gradually shade off into solutions of the 
linear Schrodinger equation at larger distances. The pulse would evidently 
correspond to a particle. He then gave arguments aimed at showing that 
in order to obtain continuity of the field , the movement of this pulse would 
have to be determined by the relation p = \7 S , where S is the phase of 
the linear part of wave at the location of the pulse. 
However, a closer analysis shows that this is actually only a necessary 
condition and not a sufficient one. Indeed we can see that it cannot be 
sufficient by considering the fact that energy and momentum conservation 
are necessary consequences of the kinds of equations discussed by de Broglie. 
The momentum in the singularity will be very large in comparison with that 
available in the extremely weak pilot wave . Therefore it will not be possible 
to obtain solutions of the field equations which would lead to the very great 
accelerations that are in general implied by the guidance relation (e.g. as 
seen in our discussion of the two slit ititerference experiment) .  Rather, we 
have seen that to obtain a powerful effect from a very weak field we need 
something like our concept of active information . For the phase, S, clearly 
depends only on the form of the field and not on the amplitude. In our 
approach, it is this form which 'in-forms' the energy of the self-movement of 
the particle. Therefore the key difference of our idea from that of de Broglie 
is that we do not attempt to explain the guidance relation in a simple 
mechanical way as an effect of non-linear propagation of fields. Instead 
we are appealing to the notion that a particle has a rich and complex 
inner structure which can respond to information and direct its self-motion 
accordingly. 

40 
Tlae undivided universe 
In addition it should be noted that the concept of the double eolution 
has never yet been extended to the many-body system, nor is there any 
idea available as to how this is to be done. On the other hand, as will be 
seen in later chapters, the notion of active information can quite naturally 
be extended to the many-body system. For these reasons as well as for 
those given earlier it seems that the general idea of something like active 
information is strongly indicated as needed for an ontological explanation 
of quantum theory. 
Returning to a consideration of the guidance relationship, we emphasise 
that this by itself is not enough to determine the behaviour of the particle. 
It is necesary also to have some equation that determines the changes of 
S. In our case this is, of course, the SchrOdinger equation. And as we have 
seen, it follows that the equation of motion is given by the modified form 
of Newton's law (3.8) which contains the quantum potential. 
If we start from the guidance relations, it is then implied that the quan­
tum potential, Q, will contribute to the acceleration in the way described 
above. However, we emphasise once again that the significance of this po­
tential is not that it represents the mechanical effects of attraction and 
repulsion of the particle by various features of its environment, e.g. the slit 
system. Rather its significance is that it represents a contribution to the ac­
celeration of the particle in its self-movement . But it must also be stressed 
that if the field satisfies an equation other than that of Schrodinger, then 
there will be a different formula for this contribution. (For example as we 
shall see in chapters 10 and 12, this actually happens in the case of the 
Pauli equation and the Dirac equation.) 
3.4 
On the role of probability in the quantum theory 
Thus far we have mainly been considering the individual particle. We shall 
now discuss in more detail how the concept of probability is used in the 
theory, in a suitable statistical ensemble. 
Let us first note that the function P = R2 has two interpretations, 
one through the quantum potential and the other through the probability 
density. It is our proposal that the more fundamental meaning of R (and 
therefore indirectly of P) is that it determines the quantum potential. In 
contradistinction to the usual interpretation its meaning as a probability is 
only secondary. Its significance in this respect is that it gives the probability 
for the particle to be at a certain position . Here we differ again from the 
usual epistemological interpretations which suppose it is the probability 
of finding a particle there in a suitable measurement. Indeed as will be 
brought out in more detail in chapter 6, the measurement process itself has 

Causal interpretation of the one-body system 
4 1 
to be interpreted as a particular application of the theory. This theory is 
formulated basically in terms of what Bell (12] has called 'beables' rather 
than of 'observables'. These beables are assumed to have a reality that is 
independent of being observed or known in any other way. The observables 
therefore do not have a fundamental significance in our theory but rather 
are treated as statistical functions of the beables that are involved in what 
is currently called a measurement. 
The above implies that ll/il2 has no necessary relationship to probability. 
That is to say, the two concepts are basically independent. It will be shown 
in chapter 9, however, that under typical chaotic conditions that prevail 
in most situations an arbitrary probability distribution , P, will approach 
and remain equal to ll/il2, the latter being an equilibrium distribution. The 
relationship between P and [l/i[2 is in this way seen to be contingent. We 
will indeed discuss, for example, a possibility that P f- liPl2 under certain 
new kinds of conditions which could in principle ultimately be investigated, 
even though P would be equal to 11/' [2 in all those situations that we have 
been thus far able to investigate. Moreover a stochastic model of the par­
ticle trajectories will also be given in chapter 9, which gives an additional 
possible explanation of why P approaches [ l/![2 . 
To illustrate these ideas let us consider a statistical ensemble of particles 
in which the experimental situation is so arranged that all the particles have 
the same wave function. In the usual interpretation , this situation is called 
a pure state. (We discuss the mixed state in chapter 9.) As an example, we 
may consider our previous discussion of the two slit experiment in which 
electrons boil out of a hot filament and are then suitably selected to have 
the same quantum field ii corresponding approximately to a plane wave 
with a definite wave vector k incident on the slits. This is the process that 
Dirac (13] calls the 'preparation ' of the measurement (and for Bohr (14] it 
is, of course, part of the experimental conditions). 
Suppose then that electrons enter the system one-by-one. Each one will 
have its own quantum field, but the forms of all these fields will be essen­
tially the same. However, the particles themselves will have a chaotically 
varying distribution of initial positions with a probability P = li+W-
It 
should be added that, as we shall show in chapter 9, there is no way to 
control or predict these conditions even though the motion is determinate 
in each individual case. 
In the experiment under discussion, our ensemble of particles with the 
same quantum field, 1/i, will pass through the slit system to be detected at 
the screen. Each individual result is determined by the initial conditions of 
the corresponding particle. As we have already pointed out, such a particle 
must pass through one slit or the other, but its motion is determined by 
active information coming from quantum fields that have passed through 

42 
Tlae •ndivided aniveNe 
both slits. Therefore particles can be kept away from certain points at 
which they could have arrived if only one of the slits had been open. As 
the results accumulate, one will then obtain the bunching of particles that 
produces the interference pattern in the way that has been described . 
To sum up then, the idea of probability that we have introduced here 
is clearly not essentially different from that used in clasical statistical en­
sembles. Thus in no sense is probability being regarded aa a fundamental 
concept. Rather the properties of the individual system are taken as pri­
mary, and probabilities are interpreted in terms of these. The main new 
quantum properties of matter follow not from the use of the probability 
theory, but rather from the qualitatively new features of the quantum po­
tential which , for example, imply a novel quantum wholeness such that 
tlle behaviour of a particle may depend crucially on distant features of the 
environment. 
3 . 5  
S tationary states 
We shall now go on to show how our interpretation can be applied to 
a number of specific examples which help to bring out the meaning of 
this interpretation . We shall begin by considering stationary states. In a 
stationary state the wave function oscillates harmonically with the time. It 
can be written as 
1/!(z , t) = iPo(z) exp(-iEt/h] .  
(3.10) 
The quantum Hamilton-J acobi equation (3.8) becomes 
E = (V' 5)2 /2m + V + Q. 
(3 . 1 1) 
Let us first consider an atom in an s-state. In this case the wave function 
1/!0(z) is real so that one can write S = 0. This implies that 
p = O 
and 
E = V + Q. 
(3 . 1 2) 
The above result means that in an s-state the electron is at rest. This 
may sem surprising, since classical physics leads us to expect a condition 
of dynamical equilibrium for a state of definite energy as an explanation 
of why the potential does not cause the particle to fall into the nucleus. 
However, equation (3 . 12) shows that in terms of our interpretation , the 
stability of this state arises from the fact that the quantum potential cancels 
out the space variation of the classical potential leaving a constant energy 
E that is independent of position . 
It must be remembered , however, that we are interpreting the quantum 
forces in terms of the new notion of active information that we have intro­
duced in the previous chapter. This information 'informs' the particle i n  

Cauaal Interpretation of the one-bodg agatem 
43 
its self-motion to contriȀute an accelԛration -'VQ/m which , in a stationary 
state, balances the classical acceleration -\JV /m. The particle is therefore 
able to remain in a fixed position and the reason it does not fall into the 
nucleus is that this is prevented by the outward acceleration due to the 
quantum potential. 
There is no state more closely bound to the nucleus than the lowest 
state. Indeed if we try to find one, we would discover that the repulsive 
effect of the quantum potential would be much stronger than the attractive 
effect of the classical potential. This explanation must be contrasted with 
the one usually given which attributes the stability of the lowest state to a 
kind of 'pressure ' due to the random motion that is said to be implied by 
the uncertainty principle [15]. 
More generally however, in a non-stationary state, the balance between 
-'il Q and -'il V will not hold . Moreover if this system is coupled to one 
with which it can exchange energy, then a transition is possible from one 
stationary state to another. We shall discuss this process in chapter 5 where 
it will be seen that the probability that the particle will arrive at the point 
z is lt/J( z ) 12 . In this way we understand how such a distribution of static 
particles can arise. 
Nevertheless one may ask how the stationary values of z are related to 
what is implied by the usual interpretation for this case, i.e. the probability 
of obtaining a certain momentum p in a measurement is ICP 12 where Cp is 
the Fourier coefficient of the wave function. It will be shown, in fact, in 
chapter 6 dealing with the theory of measurement according to our inter­
pretation, that if we measure the momentum of the particle in a stationary 
state, the resulting disturbance will change the quantum field and cause the 
particle to be accelerated by the quantum potential in a way that depends 
on its initial location . The probability of obtaining a net momentum p in 
this process will be shown to be just ICP 12. This means that for this case we 
have reproduced the results of the usual interpretation, but that we have 
given a different account of the meaning of these results. In chapter 6 we 
shall go into this question in more detail and show that our account of this 
process is consistent. 
Moreover if one is not aesthetically satisfied with this picture of a static 
electron in a stationary state, one can go to the stochastic model given in 
chapter 9. In this model the particle will have a random motion round an 
average p = 'VS, and the net probability density in this random motion 
comes out as P = 11f(z )l2 .  
In principle all stationary state wave functions can be taken as real, 
so that the above considerations apply. However, if the energy levels are 
degenerate, it is possible to form stationary states that are complex linear 
combinations of these real wave functions. As an example, let us consider 

44 
The undivided univerae 
the thre p-states. In their real forms, the basic wave functions are 
x f(r)/r 
y f(r)/r 
tP3 
z f( r)/r, 
(3.13) 
where r is the radial distance from the nucleus. From these we can form 
linear combinations having a definite angular momentum in any direction 
which may with sufficient generality be taken as that of z .  The three 
corresponding wave functions are then 
t/J+ 
( x + iy) f(r)/r 
t/Jo 
tP-
z f(r)/r 
( x - iy) f(r)/r, 
(3 . 14) 
which represent, respectively, angular momentum projections in the z direc­
tion of +h, 0 and -h. The phases of these wave functions are respectively 
S+ 
h</i 
So 
s_ 
0 
-h<P 
(3.15) 
where ¢ is the polar angle round the z-axis. The particle momenta for these 
phases are 
P+ 
h4i/ p 
Po 
P-
0 
-hJ/p 
(3.16) 
where p is the radius in cylindrical polar coordinates around the z-axis. 
Clearly the particle with z-component of angular momentum zero is at 
rest. But P+ and p_ correspond to motion in a circle around the z-axis at 
an arbitrary value of z ,  with angular momentum ±h. (See figure 3.3.) The 
velocity becomes infinite at p = 0, but as is well known the wave function 
vanishes on this line so that there is no probability that a particie will be 
there. 
The energy is 
E 
(V'S)2 /2m + V(r) + Q 

with 
so that 
Cauaal interpretation of the one-body aratem 
45 
z 
x 
Fig11re 3.3: Possible particle orbit for the P+ state 
as 
as 
- = - = 0  
az 
ap 
h2 
E = -;- + V(r) + Q. 
p-
(3. 1 7) 
in this case part of the energy h2 / p2 is kinetic, while the quantum potential 
balances V(r) + h2 / p2 only in the directions of z and p. 
We see then that by forming complex combinations of real stationary 
state wave functions, we obtain situations in which some of the energy is 
kinetic. In the case of a free particle, the two complex wave functions 
corresponding to an energy E = h 2 k 2 /2m are exp( ik · z) and exp( -ik · z) . 
These correspond respectively to particle momenta p = hk and p = - hk. 
This is an extreme case in which , as one can readily verify, the quantum 
potential is zero and this is why all the energy is kinetic. To understand 
our interpretation properly it is necessary therefore to keep in mind that 
a part of what is thought of in classical intuition as kinetic energy is now 
treated as an energy associated with the quantum potential. 
3 . 6  
Non-stationary states 
The general wave function is built out of a linear combination of station­
ary state wave functions and represents a situation in which the quantum 

46 
The undivided "niverse 
potential is changing with time. A typical case of such a situation is rep­
resented by a wave packet that moves with a certain mean velocity. Inside 
this wave packet we consider an ensemble of possible positions of the par­
ticle. As an example, let us take the special case of Gaussian wave packet, 
initially centred at z 0  = 0 and with mean momentum zero. 
¢0(x) ex: j exp[-k2(ǚx)2 + ik · z) dk . 
(3.18) 
Each wave oscillates with frequency w = hk2 /2m and so as a function of 
time, we have 
J [ 2 
Л 
. 
. hk2t] 
1/J(x, t) ex: 
exp -k (]x)- + 1k·z - i 2m 
dk . 
The evaluation of this integral yields 
lf>(x, t) 
ex: [ 
iht ]-! { 
-x2]x2 
} 
ǚx + --
exp 
2m]x 
4 [ ]x4 + h2t2 /4m2] 
(3 . 19) 
{ 
(iht/2m)x2 } 
x exp 
4]x" + h2t2 /m2 
. (3.20) 
The above represents a wave packet which remains centred at the origin 
but which spreads so that for large values of t ,  its width is 
ht 
]pt 
3 -- 3 -- 3 ]vt . 
m]x 
m 
This means that eventually the width of the packet corresponds to the 
spread of distances covered by the particles which is in turn determined 
by the spread of velocities which is equal to ]v . What the usual picture 
gives for this process is that there actually is an initial spread of velocities 
ǚv = ]p/m which is implied by the uncertainty principle ]p 3 h/ ԙz . 
But in the causal interpretation , the velocity is always well defined at each 
point . Its value is 
h 8¢ 
v = m ox 
where ¢ is the phase of the wave function. Since 
¢ 
= 
hx2t/2m 
4]x4 + h2t2/m2 
( 3 '2 1 ) 
we obtain 
h2 [ 
xt 
] 
v = m2 4]x4 + h2t2 /m2 . 

Causal interprttation of the one-6odr srstem 
47 
It is clear then that the particles are accelerated from zero velocity, and for 
large values of t the velocity is v = x /t . This acceleration is evidently a 
result of the quantum potential which is 
h2 "V2 R 
h2 [ 
Lix2 
2Lix2x2 
] 
Q = -
2m R = m 
4Ax4 + n2t2/m2 
-
(4Ax4 + h2t 2/m2)2 . (3·22) 
Evidently the quantum potential decreases as the wave packet spreads, 
falling eventually to zero. 
The picture is then that as the wave packet spreads, the particle gains 
kinetic energy, the amount depending upon where it was initially in the 
packet. This clearly denies the common idea to which we have already 
alluded that the spread of velocities was there from the start and given 
by the uncertainty principle. A similar situation was seen to arise in the 
case of stationary states with real wave functions, where likewise we had 
a zero velocity. The measurement process disturbed the system so that 
the energy represented by the quantum potential was turned into kinetic 
energy. However , the difference is that, in the case of the wave packet, we do 
not need an external disturbance such as that produced by a measurement 
process to initiate the acceleration of the particles. 
3. 7 
Are energy and momentum conserved in non-stationary 
states ? 
It is clear that in a non-stationary state, the amplitude of the wave function 
R, and therefore the quantum potential associated with it, will be a function 
of time. This evidently means that the energy of the particle, 8S/8t , will 
not be conserved in detail. It will however be conserved on the average as 
can be seen by considering 
J 
as 
j [(VS)2 
n2 v2RJ 
E =  
P(x)at dx = 
R2 
Ԛ + v - 2m R  dx. 
Putting 1jJ = Rexp(iS/n) in the above, we readily obtain 
E = j [
2ù 1/J• \721/J + lj!• Vlj!] dx. 
This is just the ordinary expression for the mean value of the Hamiltonian as 
given in the usual interpretation. And, as is well known, this is conserved 
as a consequence of Schrodinger's equation. Moreover this is enough to 
ensure that there will be conservation of energy in the classical limit where 
we neglect Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. 

Even in the usual interpretation, energy need not be conserved in detail 
when there is a wave packet. Rather the correct statement would be that 
energy is conserved only within the range defined by Heisenberg's principle, 
i.e. only within the mean width, fiE, of the wave packet. A similar situation 
can be found in what are called virtual states in the usual interpretation. 
These do not conserve the original energy, but in compensation they can 
last only for a time h/ fiE where fiE is the extent of non-conservation [16]. 
In our interpretation, however, the particle energy is definite but con­
stantly changing. Thus in the simple case of the Gaussian packet, we saw 
that the energy of the particle changes monotonically. More generally, how­
ever, the motion will be more complex and the particle may be expected to 
'jiggle' in an irregular way. But whatever the motion, the range of variation 
in the energy will generally be of the order of the mean width, fiE, of the 
packet. To see that this is so, let us write for the wave packet 
[-iE0t] '"°" 
[-iii Et] 
IV =  exp -h-
L.., CAEtliE+AE(x) exp 
h 
t:. E  
where Eo is the mean energy of the packet. Then 
as at 
It is clear that on the average the time dependent part of as 
I at will be of 
the order of fiE. 
Our picture is then that each individual particle moves with an energy 
close to the average E0, and with changes of energy of the order of fiE 
(which may in general give rise to a complicated pattern of motion) .  
A similar treatment can b e  given for momentum, and one will find that 
a wave packet, even for a free particle, undergoes corresponding changes 
of momentum as well. However, on the whole these remain more or less 
within the limits set by Heisenberg's principle .  
Where does this fluctuating energy and momentum come from? E vi­
dently it can be attributed to the quantum potential which is now a fu n c t ion 
of time. But as we have seen earlier the quantum potential is implied by the 
guidance condition, p = \JS, which, we recall, is to be interpreted a.s being 
brought about by the activity of the information in the quantum field The 
energy and momentum then come from the self-movement of the particle 
and, as we have suggested earlier, may ultimately originate in the vac u u m  
fluctuations. In such movement there is no intrinsic reason why en ergy and 

Causal interpretation of the one-body aystem 
49 
momentum should always be conserved . To be sure, this conservation holds 
for an isolated system in the classical limit, but it also holds there in our 
approach . Its failure to hold quantum mechanically is, as we have seen, of 
exactly the order as it is in the usual interpretation . In our approach one 
may however say that the electron viewed as a particle is never completely 
isolated because it is always affected by the quantum field and possibly by 
the vacuum fluctuations (so that the degree of isolation of any given system 
is, in general, relative and limited). The energy of the particle is, in fact, 
strictly conserved only in special cases, i .e. stationary states. 
We must emphasise again that the one-body case is at best a simplifica­
tion and an abstraction . For example, in the case of the slits, the particle 
may be strongly affected by the system through which it has gone, even 
when it is far away. If we treat the slits and the electron as a single com­
bined system (as we shall show in chapter 4, section 4 .2) it would then be 
possible to regard the resulting many-body wave function as expressing a 
direct nonlocal interaction between the electron and the slit (along lines to 
be discussed in more detail in the next chapter) . In this case the total mo­
mentum of the combined system would be conserved because the slit system 
would take up the momentum lost by the particle. (This would evidently 
also happen in the conventional interpretation (see Bohr [14]).) Since the 
slit system is so heavy, its response would be negligible in comparison with 
the statistical fluctuations of the momentum so that this transfer would not 
show up in experiment. 
Indeed whenever we abstract a system from a larger one, the wave 
function will reflect the overall system from which the abstraction has been 
taken . Therefore the goal of obtaining complete conservation for what we 
have wrongly been calling an isolated system will prove to be unattainable. 
For example, even if we take the slits and the electron as a combined system, 
the incident quantum field would reflect the collimating slits and velocity 
selectors which determined the beam incident on the slit system in question. 
And so, because the quantum potential can be large even when the quantum 
field is small, it follows that we will inevitably have non-conservation of both 
energy and momentum resulting from the fact that complete isolation of 
any quantum system is actually impossible. 
This behaviour is reminiscent of Bohr's argument mentioned in chap­
ter 2, namely that we cannot discuss the properties of a particular system 
apart from the context of the entire experimental arrangement with the 
aid of which these properties are observed. But of course, the difference is 
that we have given a conceptual analysis that explains why all this hap­
pens, whereas for Bohr nothing more can be said that can go beyond the 
description of the experimental phenomenon itself. 

A 
Beam 
Spliter 
Line of Flux 
Figure 3.4: Schematic AB effect 
3 . 8  
The Aharonov- Bohm effect 
Screen 
8 
A particularly interesting application of our interpretation is to the Aharon­
ov-Bohm (AB) effect [17] .  This effect demonstrates that a magnetic line 
of flux can produce observable modifications of an electron interference 
pattern, even though the electrons themselves never encounter a magnetic 
field . This is often felt to be mysterious because it is generally assumed 
that only the field B(x) is physically active and that the vector potential, 
A, from which the field is derived via B = (\7 x A), has itself no further 
physical significance beyond that of being a mathematical auxiliary in the 
description of the field . If no magnetic field acts on the electrons how then 
can the interference pattern be changed? 
We now give a brief description of the experiment. An electron beam 
from the source and collimating system, A ,  is incident on a beam splitter. 
The two resulting beams go round a line of flux and are recombined to 
meet again at a screen B, as shown in figure 3.4. When the flux is zero, a 
certain interference pattern is obtained . But for a finite value of the flux, 
this pattern is shifted . This shift was predicted from the quantum theory 
and it has been verified experimentally [18] . 
The ordinary quantum mechanical treatment begins with the Schro<ling­
er equation for the case where there is an electromagnetic vector potential , 

A. This is 
Causal interpretation of the one-bodr 111tem 
51 
ih 
tJt/; 
= -1- (-ih'V -:_A)2 t/; . 
8t 
2m 
c 
The above equation has a property called gauge invariance. That is, if 
we replace t/; by t/;' exp[ix(x)] and A by A'+ 'Vx(x) then we find that t/;' 
satisfies the same Schrodinger equation with A replaced by A'. It is evident 
that the magnetic field B = 'V x A' is not changed in this transformation. 
Thus the vector potential is not fully defined by the fields, but may be 
changed arbitrarily by a gauge transformation. It is for this reason that 
the vector potential is regarded as a mathematical auxiliary rather than 
a genuine physical concept. However, although A itself has no unique 
physical definition, we note that 
t A · dl = ls 'V x A · ds 
has a unique physical significance for it is not affected by the gauge trans­
formation A = A' + 'V X because 
f 'Vx · dl 
vanishes. With a line of flux of strength ct>, the vector potential is 
A= _±_¢; 
27rr 
where ǿ is the unit vector in the </>-direction. 
Since the magnetic field is zero outside the line of flux, it follows that A 
should be derivable from a potential in this region. However, this potential 
cannot be single valued or else the flux, ct>, inside the circuit would have to 
be zero. Let >. represent this potential. We have 
f 'V>. · dr =ct>. 
This implies that there must be a cut somewhere in this space which we 
are not allowed to cross so that in this restricted space, the potential >. is 
single valued. As long as we restrict ourselves in this way, we may write 
SchrOdinger 's equation as 
ih at/J = -1- (-ih'V - :.v>.)2 t/J. 
at 
2m 
c 
If we make the gauge transformation t/; = t/;' exp[ie>./c] we find that 1// 
satisfies the simple Schrodinger equation 
ih at/J' = -
1 [-ih'VJ2 t/J'. 
at 
2m 

We can therefore write for the actual solution 
, [ie>.(x)] 
t/J = I/!  exp 
--
. 
e 
This means that the flux line will afect the phase of the solution by a 
factor exp[ie>.(x)/c]. In general >.(x) will be different in the two bea1T1B and 
when the two beams come together, the relative phases will therefore have 
been altered by 
e f 
e 
-
V' >. .  dl = 
- <I> . 
e 
e 
In this way we predict a fringe shift, which we cannot explain as long 
as we believe that only the magnetic field can affect the electron. (The 
above treatment is an approximation but an exact treatment gives the 
same result [17].) 
However, in our interpretation there can be additional quantum forces. 
Indeed if we define the velocity as 
p 
e 
V'S e 
v =  - - -A =  -
-
-A 
m 
me 
m 
we can show from Schrodinger's equation that 
me 
dv 
dv 
e 
mdt = m dt + m(v · V')v = =v x (V' x A) - V'Q 
where Q is the quantum potential defined in the usual way as -(h2 /2m)­
V'2 R/ R. Evidently R is not altered by the gauge transformation which 
affects only the phase and so Q is gauge invariant. 
We see then that in general, in addition to the magnetic force, there is a 
quantum force which is prese nt even whe n the magnetic field is zero. This is 
basically how the AB effect is to be explained . It is clear that Q will be large 
only where R is changing rapidly. There will , of course, be a small quantum 
potential at the edge of the beam, but the particle deflections due to this 
correspond only to what is, in the usual interpretation , called diffraction of 
the beam at its edges. The main variation of R will occur where the two 
beams overlap to produce interference. Here the quantum potential will be 
large; indeed it is just what is responsible for the interference (as we have 
seen, for example, in the two slit e xperi ment) . The phase shift will then 
alter the quantum potential in a significant way and this will explain the 
origin in the shift in the interference pattern . 
This pattern has been calculated for a case in which the beam is split 
by a pair of slits with the line of magnetic fl u x  in the geometric shadow 
between them. The trajectories are shown in figure 3 . 5 .  One can see how 

Causal interprttation of the one-bodr aratem 
53 
Figure 3.5: Trajectories for the AB effect 

54 
The undivided universe 
Figure 3.6: Quantum potential for the AB effect 
the orbits are shifted so as to displace the net interference pattern . The 
corresponding quantum potential is shown in figure 3.6 and can be seen to 
be similarly shifted (compared with, for example, figure 3 . 1 ) .  
The above completes the explanation of the AB effect .  However , it 
should be noted that this explanation has an interesting further implication; 
i.e. that the vector potential actually ha5 a physical effect at the quantum 
level . The vector potential enters into Schri:idinger 's equation in such a way 
as to alter the wave function and this leads to the corresponding force in 
the acceleration of the particle. However , in the classical limit this effect 
becomes negligible and here it may be said that the vector potential is 
physically not effective. The mistake in the common way of talking about 
this is the tacit assumption that the classical idea about the vector potential 
also holds quantum mechanically. 
3. 9 
References 
1 .  J. Earman , A Pri m e r  o n  D e t e rm m 1sm, Rei del , Dordre c h t , 1 08 ti .  
2. C. Philippidis, C. Dewdney and B 
J .  Hiley, Nu o110 Cmi e n l o  5 2 B , 
15-28 ( 1979) . 

Causal interpretation of the one- body s11stem 
55 
3. C .  E. Shannon and W .  Weaver, Th e Mathematical Theory of Com­
munication, The University of Illinois Press, Chicago, Il linois, 1959. 
4. J. D. Bekenstein , Phys. Rev. D7, 2333-2346 (1973). 
5. J .  A .  Wheeler , 'Su perspace and Quantum Geometrodynamics ' ,  in 
Batte/le Re n co ntres, ed . C .  M .  DeWitt and J. A. Wheeler , Benj amin , 
New York ,  1968, 242-307. 
6. B .  J. Hiley, 'Vacuum or Holomovement ' ,  in The Philosophy of the 
Va cuum, ed . 
S .  Saunders and H .  Brown , Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 199 1 .  
7. H . B .  S .  Casimir , Proc. I<on. Ned. A kad. Wet. 51 , 793 ( 1948). 
8. L .  d e  Broglie, J. Physique, 6e sirie 8 ,  225 ( 1 927) .  
9. W .  Pauli, i n  Reports o n  the 1927 Solvay Congress, Gauthiers-Vi lliars 
et Cie , Par is ( 1928), 280. 
10. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166-193 ( 1952). 
11. L. d e  Broglie , Un e inte rpretatio n causale et n o n  linealre d e  la mican­
ique o n dulatoire: la thiorie de la double solution, Gauthiers-Villiars , 
Paris (1956) .  English translation : Elsevier , Amsterdam (1960). 
12. J .  S .  Bell , 'Speakable and Unspeakable' in 
Qu antum Mechanics, 
chapter 19, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge ,  1987. 
13. P. A .  M .  Dir ac ,  
Quantum Mechan ics, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1947. 
14. N .  Bohr, A tomic Physics a n d  Human Kn owledge, Science Editions, 
New York , 1961 , 50. 
15. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, chapter 5, sect ion 5, Prent ice- H all, Engle­
wood Cliffs, New Jersey, 195 1 .  
16. Ibid. , chapter 5 ,  section 1 1 .  
17. Y .  Aharonov and D. Bohm, Phys. Rm 115, 485-49 1 ( 1 959). 
1 8. M .  Peshkin and A. Tonomura, Th e A haron ov- Bohm Effect, Springer­
Verlag , Ber lin , 1989. 

Chapter 4 
The many-body system 
We shall now go on to consider the many-body system in which we shall see, 
in several striking ways, a further development of the difference between 
the classical and quantum ontologies, along with new concepts that are 
required for the latter. 
4.1 
The ontological interpretation of the many-body system 
Let us begin by considering the two-body system. The wave function 
¢(r1 , r2, t) satisfies the Schrodinger equation 
( 4. 1 )  
where \71 and \7 2 refer to particles 1 and 2 respectively. Writing ¢ = 
R exp(iS/h) and defining P = R2 = ¢• 1/; we obtain 
where 
and 
h2 (\72 + \72) R 
Q = 
_ _  
I 
2 
2m 
R 
(4.2) 
( 4.3) 
8P 
7fi + \71 · (P\71S/m) + \72 · (P\72S/m) = 0. 
(4.4) 
As in the case of the one-body system, equation ( 4.2) can be interpreted 
as the quantum Hamilton-J acobi equation with the momenta of the two 
particles being respectively 
and 
( 4 5) 

The manr-body ayatem 
57 
The above is evidently an extension of the guidance relationship for the two­
body system. It implies that the particles are guided in a correlated way. 
To õe the sigöificance of this correlation , one can consider the quantum po­
tentu':l, Q, which follows from the assumption that ÷ satisfies Schrodinger's 
equation . 
As can be seen from equation ( 4.3) ,  this potential contains R both in 
the denominator and the numerator, so that it does not necessarily fall 
off with the distance . We have already seen that for the one-body system 
this means that the particle can depend strongly on distant features of the 
environment . In the two-body system we can have a similar dependence 
on the environment, but in addition , the two particles can also be strongly 
coupled at long distances .  
Their interaction can therefore be described 
as nonlocal. 
This is the first of the new concepts implied by the causal 
interpretation that comes ou t in the many-body case. 
Going on to the N-body system, we would obtain in a similar way 
so that the behaviour of each particle may depend nonlocally on the con­
figuration of all the others , no matter how far away they may be . 
As in the one-body case ,  we may take P = R2 as the probability den­
sity, but this now is in the configuration space of all the particles. The 
SchrOdinger equation will imply the conservation of this probability (see 
equation (4.4) ). Therefore if P = R2 initially, this will hold for all time. 
And as explained for the one-body case , if P 1 R2 initially, typical chaotic 
movements will bring about P = R2 in the long run as an equilibrium 
distribution (as we will show in detail in chapter 9). 
For several centuries, there h as  been a strong feeling that nonlocal the­
ories are not acceptable in physics. 
It is well known , for example, that 
Newton felt very uneasy about action-at-a- distance (1] and that Einstein 
regarded it as 'spooky' [2]. 
One can understand this feeling, but if one 
reflects deeply and seriously on this subject one can see nothing basically 
irrational about such an idea. 
Rather it seems to be most reasonable to 
keep an open mind on the subject and therefore allow oneself to explore 
this possibility. If the price of avoiding nonlocality is to make an intuitive 
explanation impossible, one has to ask whether the cost is not too great. 
The only serious objection we can see to nonlocality is that, at first 
sight , it does not seem to be compatible with relativity, because nonlocal 
connections in general would allow a transmission of signals faster than 
the speed of light. In later chapters we extend the causal interpretation 
to a relativistic context and show that although nonlocality is still present, 
it does not introduce any inconsistencies into the theory, e .g. it does not 

58 
The undivided universe 
imply that we can use the quantum potential to transmit a signal faster 
than light. 
While nonlocality as described above is an important new feature of 
the quantum theory, there is yet another new feature that implies an even 
more radical departure from the classical ontology, to which little attention 
has generally been paid thus far . This is that the quantum potential, Q, 
depends on the 'quantum state' of the whole system in a way that cannot 
be defined simply as a pre-assigned interaction between all the particles. 
To illustrate what this means, we may consider the example of the 
hydrogen atom, whose wave function is a product of f( z ) , where z is the 
centre-of-mas coordinate, and g( r) where r is the relative coordinate 
Il = f(x)g(r ). 
The quantum potential will contain a term representing the interaction of 
electron and proton 
Q = _!i:_ V'2g(r) 
2µ g(r) 
where µ is the reduced mass of the electron. 
In the s-state, Q is a function only of r itself, while with a linear com­
bination of s- and p-wave functions it is easily shown to depend on the 
relative angles, 0 and ¢, as well. Evidently, it is impossible to find a single 
pre-assigned function of r ,  which would simultaneously represent the inter­
action of electron and proton in both s- and p-states. And, of course, the 
problem would be still more sharply expressed if we brought in all the other 
states (d, f, etc.). 
The relationship between parts of a system described above implies a 
new quality of wholeness of the entire system going beyond anything that 
can be specified solely in terms of the actual spatial relationships of all 
the particles. This is indeed the feature which makes the quantum theory 
go beyond mechanism of any kind . For it is the essence of mechanism 
to say that basic reality consists of the parts of a system which are in 
a preasigned interaction. The concept of the whole, then , has only a 
secondary significance, in the sense that it is only a way of looking at 
certain overall aspects of what is in reality the behaviour of the parts. In 
our interpretation of the quantum theory, we see that the interaction of 
parts is determined by something that cannot be described solely in terms 
of these parts and their preassigned interrelationships . Rather it depends 
on the many-body wave function (which , in the usual interpretation , is 
said to determine the quantum state of the system) This many-body wave 
function evolves according to Schrodinger's equation . Something with this 
kind of dynamical significance that refers directly to the whole system is 

The many-body 1y1tem 
59 
thus playing a key role in the theory. We emphasise that thia ia the moat 
fe.ndamenta/ly new aspect of the quantum theory. 
The above-described feature should , in principle , apply to the entire 
universe . At first sight this might suggest that we could never disentangle 
one part of the universe from the res t ,  so that there would be no way to 
do science as we know it or even to obt ain knowledge by the traditional 
methods of finding systems that can be regarded as at least approximately 
isolated from their surroundings . However, it is actually possible to obtain 
such approximate separation in spite of the quantum wholeness that we 
have described above. To see how this can come about, let us consider the 
special case in which the wave function 1Jl (r 1 , r2 , t) can be written as the 
product 
¢(r 1 , r2 , t) = ¢>A (r 1 , t)¢>B (r2 , t). 
The quantum potential then becomes the sum of two terms 
where 
and 
QB (r2 , t) = _!!..._ 'V RB (r2 , t)
. 
2m RB (r2 , t) 
In t his case the two systems evidently behave independently. In chap­
ter 8 we will show that there is a widespread tendency for such factorised 
wave functions to arise in typical situations that prevail in the present 
stage of the development of the universe , Moreover we shall also show that 
in t he classical limit where the quantum potential is negligible , nonlocal 
interactions will for this reason not be significant , 
We may say that while the basic law refers inseparably to the whole 
universe , this law is such as to imply that the universe tends to fall into a 
large number of relatively independent parts , each of which may, however, 
be constituted of further sub-units that are nonlocally connected , Therefore 
we can deal with these relatively independent parts in the traditional way 
as we do our experiments. 
4.2 
More on t he notion of active information 
We have seen t hat quantum theory implies a radically new behaviour of 
matter in several respects. It has been shown that all of this can be under­
stood in terms of our notion of active information applied , not on ly to the 

60 
The tmdivided tmiverse 
one-body system, but also to the many-body system. Of course in a purely 
logical sense, the theory could be said to be defined without this notion 
and could, of course, be thus expressed in a logically consistent way. But 
it is a key part of our intention in this book to help make the theory more 
intelligible in an intuitive sense, and not merely regard it as a system of 
equations from which could be derived algorithms permitting a calculation 
of interesting results. We feel that at least something like the notion of ac­
tive information would be needed in any attempt to do this; e.g. to account 
for quantum interference and the peculiar nonlocal properties of the many­
body system in an intuitively understandable way. Here we emphasise again 
what we have said in chapter 3, that the notion of active information cor­
responds to a tremendous range of common experience. We have generally 
devalued this sort of experience as far as physics is concerned and have 
asumed that physical laws should contain only mechanical concepts such 
as position, momentum, force, etc. When it is found that these do not 
apply coherently in a quantum context, then as explained in chapter 2, it 
is effectively assumed that all we can do is to use the quantum formalism 
as an algorithm to calculate the probabilities of experimental outcomes. 
But what we are pointing out here is that if we suitably extend the kind 
of concepts that we are willing to admit into physics (e.g. to include active 
information) then we can obtain a much better intuitive apprehension of 
the theory. This, in turn, may help guide our thinking in physics into new 
directions (some possibilities of which we shall discuss in chapters 14 and 
15) .  
Let us now consider the many-body system from this point of view. 
The wave function is defined in the configuration space of all the particles. 
Its effect on the particles is determined by the phase S and the quantum 
potential Q, both of which depend only on the form of the wave function 
and not on its amplitude. Along the lines discussed in chapter 3, we may 
therefore regard the wave function as containing active information. But 
this information is ordered in the configuration space rather than in the 
ordinary space of three dimensions. 
The fact that the wave function is in configuration space implies that 
we have to look more carefully into the meaning of active information in 
such a context. First of all we may consider its implications for all the 
motions of the particles. These now respond in a correlated way to what 
is, in effect, a common pool of information . This information guides the 
particles according to the condition Pi = 'Y'i 5(r 1 ,  . . .  , rN , t)/m which, of 
course, leads to a generally nonlocal quantum potential that we have al­
ready discussed. Different linear combinations of the wave fun<:tions will 
give rise to different pools of information, which in turn will give rise to 
corresponding differences in the behaviour of the system. 

The many-bod11 aratem 
61 
When the wave function is factorised into independent products, this 
will correspond to having independent pools of information. There is there­
fore an objective difference between systems which are wholes guided by a 
pool of common information and systems constituted of independent parts 
guided by separate pools of information. We may contrast this possibility of 
objective wholeness with what happens in classical mechanics, in which the 
notion of a whole is a subjective convenience for describing the behaviour 
of what are in reality a set of independently existent parts in interaction. 
The fact that the wave function is in configuration space clearly pre­
vents us from regarding the quantum field as one that carries energy and 
momentum that was simply transferred to the particles with which it in­
teracted (thus effectively pushing or pulling mechanically on the latter) . 
This is a further factor in addition to the form dependence of the activity 
of the field which leads us to consider the interpretation of this field as ac­
tive information. The multidimensional nature of this field need not then 
be so mysterious, since information can be organised into as many sets of 
dimension as may be needed. 
We may illustrate these notions by looking at the interference experi­
ment as a two-body system. To simplify the discussions, we assume that 
the slit system is rigid and can be described in terms of a single centre of 
mass coordinate, y. Clearly the mass, M ,  of the slit system is much greater 
than the mass, m, of the electron . In this case it is well known that the 
wave function can be approximated as 
\I = l/J(z - y)F(y). 
The quantum potential is 
_
_ h2 [v;R(z - y) 
\lE I F(y)I + 2\711 R(z - y) \711 IF(y)IJ 
. 
Q -
2 
mR(z - y) 
+ 
M I F(y)I 
M R(z - y) 
IF(y)I 
In the limit that M ::» m ,  the part of Q that acts on the electron reduces 
to 
h2 v;R(z - y) 
2m R(z - y) 
The above is essentially the same as that obtained in the one-body system, 
but the important difference is that it is a function oǾ ( z - y) · Therefore, as 
has indeed already been explained in chapter 3, section 3.7, the energy and 
momentum are not coming from the quantum field. Rather the electron and 
the slit system are 'in-formed' to respond in a correlated way by the pool of 
information that is common to both. The slit system is, of course, so heavy 
that its response can be neglected. But still from the conceptual point of 

62 
Tlie Hdivided universe 
view, we have to look at this process as a kind of interaction between the 
electron and the slit system rather than as an effect of the quantum field 
in space-time. The one-body treatment is therefore an abstraction which 
leaves out this essential feature. 
Finally we wish to point out that even the clasical potential can be 
looked at as representing the effects of active information . To do this we 
recall that, for example, in a two-body system each particle is guided by 
the total phase S(x 1 , x2 )  of the wave function. As we have seen earlier, 
this guidance condition combined with Schrodinger's equation implies the 
extended quantum Hamilton-Jacobi equation 
In the above equation, V and Q appear in essentially the same way. In 
fact both describe certain effects of the guidance condition and therefore 
of active information in the wave function . What is then the difference? 
The difference is that Q describes a part of the change with time of the 
active information that depends in a nonlocal way and in detail on the 
whole wave function (i.e. what is commonly called the quantum state) . On 
the other hand, V describes a part of the change of this information that 
is independent of all this and that is generally local in the way that it acts. 
This part is what manifests in the classical limit. 
Physics has already developed in such a way that the classical potential, 
V , can be regarded as an actual existent field distributed throughout three 
dimensional space. This field can be regarded as the source of the change 
of information with time brought about by V in the Hamilton-Jacobi equa­
tion. It obeys a wave equation implying the detailed conservation of energy 
and momentum. Therefore we can, if we wish, attribute the energy and 
momentum to the field and thus imagine it is flowing throughout space and 
into and out of the particle. But as we have seen, this picture could not be 
coherently applied to the quantum potential. Moreover as we shall see in 
chapter 1 1  when we consider our interpretation of the quantum field the­
ory, the picture of a continuously conserved flow of energy and momentum 
will not also apply except as a limiting case holding only in the clasical 
approximation. 
4.3 
Further applications of many-body wave functions 
We shall now give two further applications of the notions that have been 
described in this chapter which will make the physical meaning of our 
interpretation clearer. 

The man1-bod11 1111tem 
63 
,/. 9. 1 
The chemical bond 
We begin by considering the chemical bond . Clasically it is incomprehen­
sible why chemical bonds can form, and furthermore, why there are 80 
many specific kinds of such bonds. It is well known that the quantum 
theory has explained this in a generally satisfactory way. But this has 
been achieved at the expense of a loss of intuitive comprehension of what is 
involved physically in such a bond. In our interpretation we obtain a more 
intelligible way of understanding this. 
We shall illustrate these ideas in terms of the hydrogen molecule with its 
covalent bond. The molecule consists of two protons whose coordinates we 
label by z A and z B ,  and two electrons whose coordinates are represented 
by r 1  and r 2 .  The interaction between the particles are of the Coulomb 
type. This can be expressed as 
One of the usual procedures (due to Reitler and London) is to solve the 
Schrooinger equation for this case approximately, beginning with functions 
that are solutions when the nuclei are very far apart. We then have two 
separate hydrogen atoms, each in an s-state. Because the protons are so 
heavy we can, in the first approximation, regard them as fixed in specified 
positions. One approximate solution of the combined system is then 
( 4.6) 
This represents two separated hydrogen atoms A and B in their lowest s­
states in which the first electron is in atom A, while the second is in atom 
B .  Another solution is 
( 4.7) 
in which the first electron is in atom B, while the second is in atom A. 
These two states evidently have the same energy. And as is well known 
from standard perturbation theory, one has to start from a suitable linear 
combination of w 1 and w ll in order to obtain a series of approximations 
to the wave function when the particles come closer together. 
Because of the symmetry of Vi between r 1 and r 2  it follows, as can 
easily be shown, that the appropriate linear combinations are 
(4 .8) 

64 
Tlae .ndivided ftniverse 
ø 
I 
ǻ 
Ǽ 
w 
.E 
>. 
2 
3 
O> 
... 
Ԙ 
w 
Թ 
c 
CD 
ǽ 
Figure 4.1: Possible bonding energies of two hydrogen atoms 
From this we obtain: 
( 4.9) 
(noting that TjJ1 and 1/J11 are real because <Ii represents the lowest s-state) . 
The energy of these states comes out as a function of the separations T/ = 
l zA - zB I · They are shown in figure 4.1. 
Evidently the state corresponding to E +  gives rise to an attraction be­
tween the protons at medium distances, which turns into a repulsion at 
short distances. On the other hand, the state corresponding to E - leads 
everywhere to a repulsion. There is no way to understand this energy 
difference solely in terms of a pre-assigned interaction of the particles con­
stituting the molecule. For, since the wave function is real, the momenta 
of all the particles are zero and the energy is just the sum of the clasical 
interaction energy Vi and the quantum potential 
(4.10) 
To obtain the quantum potential we must first obtain an expression for 
R. From (4.9), (4.6) and (4.7) we see that 
R2 
= ÷ [<P2(r1 - ZA )¢i2(r2 - ZB ) + <P2(r 1  - ZB )¢i2(r2 - ZA ) 
+ 2¢i(r 1  - ZA )¢i(r2 - ZB)¢i(r2 - ZA )¢i(r 1 - ZB )] . 

The many-body ayatem 
65 
This shows the quantum potential will be a function of all the particle coor­
dinates implying a nonlocal interaction with the kind of quantum wholeness 
that we have described in the previous section. This latter means that even 
if all the particles are in the same positions and have the same velocity 
v = 0 for the two solutions, their energies will be different. This difference 
evidently has to be attributed to the quantum potential which is differ­
ent for the two cases. As we have already seen, for the case of w + ,  the 
molecule will be stable while for w _ it is not. The force that holds the 
molecule together and that determines the specificity of the chemical prop­
erties is thus a particular case of the nonlocality and wholeness which is, 
as we have pointed out earlier, the most essentially new feature implied by 
the quantum mechanics. 
In terms of the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, we have 
no intuitive notion of the difference between the states 11' + and w _
,
 nor 
indeed what it means to form a linear combination of states. Yet it is 
just this which is responsible for a vast range of chemical properties. In 
our interpretation these properties are understood through the notion that 
the wave function of a molecule constitutes a common pool of information 
that guides the activity of all its particles in related ways along the lines 
discussed at the end of the previous section. Different wave functions, 
constituting different pools of information, will then give rise to well-defined 
differences in the behaviour of the system. 
4. 3. 2 
Superfiu idity and supercon ductivity 
Superfluidity and superconductivity provide a very good illustration of how 
a common pool of information can give rise to strikingly new properties of 
a many-body system. 
It is well known that at low temperature many substances can go into 
a new state in which currents (either of atoms or electrons) can flow in­
definitely without viscosity or resistance. This state is stable only up to 
a certain temperature at which the property disappears. These super­
flow properties have been explained as a consequence of the many-body 
Schrooinger equation, but this explanation is very abstract and gives little 
intuitive understanding of how the phenomena in question come about. 
Our discussion is aimed at illustrating how the quantum potential makes 
superftow possible in its more common forms such as ordinary low tempera­
ture superconductivity and superftuidity in He4. It is not however intended 
to be a detailed treatment of all the complexities involved in the above nor 
will we consider the less common forms of superftow such as high temper­
ature and gapless superconductivity and superftow in He3 . 
We begin by discussing the case of superftuidity because this is easier 

66 
The undivided universe 
both conceptually and mathematically, but, as we shall se later, basically 
the same considerations apply to superconductivity as we have restricted 
this term above. What is essential here is that helium nuclei are bosons 
and that the electron pairs that are responsible for superconductivity are 
also effectively bosons. 
At first sight the problem of superflow in He4 seems to be almost impos­
sibly difficult because the helium nuclei repel each other with such strong 
forces that it would appear that no reasonable approximation could be 
made. However, it has been shown by D. Pines [3] that, as a consequence 
of the short range particle correlations, the system could be described as 
a collection of 'quasi-particles' with only weak soft-core repulsions between 
them. In the first approximation we can neglect these latter, so that a 
good starting point for the condensate wave function is one in which all the 
particles are moving at the same velocity t' = K /m. This wave function, 
which is evidently symmetric, is 
(4 . 1 1 )  
where ri represents the coordinate of the j1h particle and where we are 
asuming units in which h = 1 .  
However, the fact that all the particles are moving at the same speed is 
not sufficient by itself to account for the properties of superfluidity. What 
is required, in addition, is that this state be sta ble under external pertur­
bation. That is to say, under an external disturbance, a particle should not 
be able to drop out of the common velocity v = K /m, by giving up energy 
and going to a lower velocity v ' = (K - q0)/m. To account for this we 
follow along the lines of the explanation given by Landau [4] , Bogolubov [5] 
and Feynman [6]. 
A key point for such stability is that it should not be possible to change 
the momentum of a single particle in this system from K to K -q0 without 
affecting the others in such a way as to bring about a net increase in energy 
of the whole system. Basically this stability arises because of the symmetry 
of the wave function. Indeed it is easily seen that without this symmetry 
there can be no such stability. Thus consider, for example, what would 
happen if the wave function had no particular symmetry. We could then 
obtain an excited wave function by giving momentum to a single particle, 
say the ith , which would give rise to a wave function 
llfi = exp [-iq0 · ri] 110. 

The many-body ayatem 
67 
Or 
l)i = exp [iK · I>i] exp [i(K - %)ri] .  
j¢i 
(4. 12) 
Clearly this will be a possible solution of Schrodinger's equation and 80 
there is nothing to prevent this los of momentum by slowing down one of 
the particles independently of others. 
However, for bosons, the wave function has to be symmetric. The lowest 
state of excitation corresponding to a loss of momentum, q0 , will be 
It =  L exp [-iq0 · ri ] llf0 . 
(4.13) 
j 
If we neglect interactions, this too would permit the same kind of loss of 
momentum we described above. However, as shown by Bogolubov and by 
Feynman, when interactions are taken into account, the system is capable 
of supporting sound waves with frequency w = w(q). The term p(q0) = 
Lj exp [-q0 · r i J is well known to be the Fourier coefficient of the particle 
density. In such a case it is 
p( x) = I: 8 ( z - r j ) . 
(4. 14) 
Therefore the wave function (4. 13) represents the excitation of a sound 
wave (while the equation (4. 12), which is a wave function of no particular 
symmetry, represents no change of particle density and does not represent 
such a wave). p( q0) thus describes a collective deviation from equilibrium 
whose energy is E = w (q0) .  At low frequencies, w(q0) will satisfy the linear 
relationship 
w(q0) = qv, , 
where v, is the velocity of sound, while at higher frequencies it deviates 
from this relation. (As explained by Feynman (6) , these deviations are 
associated with rotons.) Stability will be achieved if the energy required to 
create a wave of excitation is greater than the kinetic energy given off by 
the particle for all q0. This requires that 
E - Eo 
(K - qo)2 
K2 
( ) 
.o__ _ __:_;К - - + w q 0 
2m 
2m 
K · qo 
qg 
( ) 
O 
- -- + - + w qo > 
. 
m 
2m 
(4. 15) 
The above will follow if w(q0 ) > K · q0/m or i f  v 
= K /m < w(qo )/qo, 
where v is the velocity of flow. This is, of course, just the well-known 
condition obtained by Landau (4) .  

68 
Tlat tmditlidtd univtrst 
It has to be pointed out that the Landau condition does not determine 
the actual maximum velocity in typical experimental situations such as flow 
in tubes. Indeed this is in general considerably less than that given by the 
Landau condition and is determined by further factors such as the existence 
of rotons and vortex structures of various kinds (Feynman [6]) . However, 
the Landau condition is evidently still satisfied in such cases. Moreover it 
is relevant to understanding the existence of superflow because if it is not 
satisfied, the particles can be scattered out of the common velocity thus 
making superflow impossible. Clearly no matter what the detailed structure 
of the vortices may be, the understanding of superflow depends basically 
on this sort of explanation of why the particles move stably together with 
a common velocity. 
To explain this stability intuitively, we shall have to show how the quan­
tum potential implied by the wave function ( 4. 13) actually constitutes ac­
tive information that keeps all the particles moving together in spite of 
perturbations that would otherwise scatter them. To do this we shall have 
to calculate how the wave function ( 4.13) changes when a perturbation is 
introduced. 
To simplify the problem we assume a small perturbing potential , V, 
which , of course, has to be a symmetric function of all the particles. We 
therefore write 
V = L V(rj ). 
j 
With the aid of perturbation theory, we find that 
where 
?w = L L 
V(q) exöõq - rj ]Wo 
j 
q tO 
q 
(4 . 16) 
( 4 . 1 7) 
In computing ?E9 it will be sufficient for the illustrative purposes of 
this discussion to restrict ourselves to values of q small enough so that the 
collective excitations will have the linear frequency relation w( q) = qv, , 
where v, is the velocity of sound. This gives us 
?E = E0 - E = -
qv, + - - --
. 
[ 
q2 
K . q] 
9 
2rn 
rn 
(4 . 1 8) 
Evidently as long as v, > K/m this denominator will never vanish and 
so there will be no real transitions, i .e. the perturbation involves only what 
a.re, in the usual interpretation, called virtual states. (When rotons are 
taken into account the limiting velocity of superflow will in general be less 

The manr-6od11 1r1tem 
69 
than v, but the above condition will still be satisfied.) Evidently we may 
reMonably Msume that V(q) becomes negligible for q/m > v, (this means 
that the potential is 'soft' which is implied by the fact that its high Fourier 
coefficients are small) . We then obtain 
šlt
= - :L::L: V(q) exp(-iq · r;] 
It 
. 
qv, [1 - (K · q)/mv,] O· 
I 
q 
(4.19) 
Once again for the purposes of illustration we may assume that K/m < v, . 
This gives 
'"' '"' V(q) 
. 
[ 
K · q] 
šIt = - L., L., -- exp [-1q · ri] 1 + --
Ito. 
. 
qv, 
mv, 
I 
q 
( 4.20) 
To further simplify the calculation we assume a V(r) that gives a Fourier 
coefficient V(q) = q exp(-q.X] . This implies that 
Writing 
V(r) 
ex ::2 [_x2 ô r2] 
1 
ex 
(.X2 + r2)3 ' 
A 
M· -
----
• - p2 + r[)2v, 
and 
B 
N - --Ժ-Ի 
• - (.X2 + r?)mvi 
(4.21) 
where A and B are suitable constants, we obtain 
( 4.22) 
The probability density is , in the first approximation, 
p = l1ta l2 [ 1 - 2 ó M;l 
(4.23) 
and the current density of the i1h particle in the direction q will be 
q · j; = l1tol2 { 
K¦
q 
- (ú:.)2q·\7; [(.xl)2]}· 
(4.24) 
The velocity in the direction q will be given by 
q · j; -
q · i; 
Ve = -p - l1tol2 (1 - 2 l:; M;] .  
(4.25) 

Figure 4.2: Stream lines around obstacle in liquid helium 
According to equation (4.23) , the distribution is altered in the neigh­
bourhood of the perturbation . If the perturbation is repulsive, the particles 
will on the whole be pushed away and vice versa if it is attractive. Accord­
ing to equation ( 4.24) the current will change in a corresponding way. This 
implies that for a repulsive potential, the particle will first move away from 
the perturbing obstacle. But because the perturbed wave function vanishes 
at infinity, the particle will eventually move back and will be left with its 
original velocity, thus implying there is no scattering ( as shown in figure 
4.2). 
In ordinary scattering processes, the energy conservation condition be­
tween initial and final states can be satisfied and we therefore get a real 
transition into a scattered wave. In the case of a superfluid however energy 
conservation cannot be satisfied so we get only virtual contributions to the 
wave function. If we evaluated the quantum potential, it would be seen 
that these latter contributions imply an additional force on the particle 
which accounts for why it is first accelerated away from the obstacle and 
then brought back to its original velocity. Since every particle will behave 
in essentially the same way, it follows that the liquid as a whole will flow 
around the obstacle and then reconstitute its flow in its original direction . 
This is basically our intuitive explanation of why the state of superflow 
is stable. This is evidently a purely quantum mechanical response of the 
whole system. It involves not only nonlocal interactions due to the quantum 
potential, but also the irreducible quantum wholeness implied by the fact 
that this interaction cannot be expressed in terms of a pre-assigned fu nc tion 
of the particle coordinates. 
All that we have said here also applies to superconductivity in which 
the charge carriers are electron pairs that act like bosons . The details can 
be found elsewhere [7], but the essential point is that ,  as with He4 , there is 

The man11-bodr aratem 
71 
a. 'gap' representing the energy needed to remove an electron pair from the 
common velocity. It will follow then that if there is an obstacle, the charge 
carrier will go round it and reform without scattering in the same way as 
happens for He 4 .  
I n  both cases the stability of the state of superflow can be understood 
further with the a.id of the notion of the active information that we have 
discussed earlier in section 4.2 of this chapter, where we pointed out that 
ea.ch particle is guided according to the relation v; = V;S(r1 , •
•
•
 rN). It 
may then be regarded as part of the common pool of information according 
to which ea.ch particle determines its velocity. One can say that in the state 
of superflow, this information brings a.bout a. coordinated movement of a.II 
the particles that can be thought of as resembling a. 'ballet dance' (in which 
a.II the dancers separate in a. systematic way to go round an obstacle and 
then reform their original pattern) . 
As the temperature goes up the property of superfluidity disappears. In 
terms of our approach, this is because the wave function breaks up into a. 
set of independent factors which can, as pointed out earlier, be thought of 
as representing independent pools of information. The electrons will then 
no longer be guided by a. common pool of information and will, therefore, 
scatter off obstacles rather than go round them and return to their original 
movement. In this way they begin to behave like an unorga.nised crowd of 
people who a.re acting independently and get in ea.ch other's way so that 
the property of superflow disappears. 
This means that the guidance condition and the quantum potential 
implied by it can, under certain conditions, have the novel quality of being 
able to organise the activity of an entire set of particles, in a. way that 
depends on a. pool of information common to the whole set. This behaviour 
is reminiscent of what is found in living beings which a.re similarly organised 
by a. common pool of information that is now thought to reside in the 
genes (and also society which is evidently organised by common pools of 
information of yet another kind). Thus a. considerable similarity is seen 
between the microlevel and other levels which we shall discuss in more 
detail in chapter 15. 
4.4 
References 
1. I. Newton, Principia Math ematica, ed. Mothe-Ca.jori, London, 1713. 
2. A. Einstein, in The Born-Einstein Letters, ed . I. Born, Macmillian, 
London, 197 1 ,  158. 
3. D. Pines, in Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David Bohm, 

72 
The undivided universe 
ed. B. J .  Hiley and F. D. Peat, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 
1987, 66-84. 
4. L. D. Landau, J. Phys. (USSR) 5, 71 (1941). 
5. N .  Bogolubov, J. Phys. (USSR) 1 1 ,  23 (1947). 
6. R. Feynman, Prog. Low Temp. Phys. 1 ,  17 (1955). 
7. J .  Bardeen, L. N. Cooper and J .  R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. 106 , 162 
(1957), and 108 , 1175 (1957). 

Chapter 5 
Transition processes considered as 
independent of observation 
In the usual interpretation it is an essential feature that transition pro­
cesses can only be discussed in a context in which they are observed in 
a measurement process. In an ontological approach such as ours, it is, of 
course, necessary to discuss transition processes taking place on their own, 
independently of their being observed . In this chapter we shall show how 
this can be done. 
We shall begin with the simple example of barrier penetration and then 
go on to consider transitions of electrons in atoms from one level to another. 
In developing our ideas we shall also show that in our interpretation , the 
quantum theory implies two general tendencies that oppose each other: 
1 .  A tendency for wave functions to spread and become less well defined 
in space when the system is isolated . 
2. A tendency for these functions to 'narrow down ' the range in which 
they have an appreciable effect when interaction with a background 
takes place. 
We shall call this latter tendency 'self-definition'. It is essential to take 
this into account if we are to understand how the universe can be in a fairly 
well-defined state at any given moment in spite of the tendency to become 
les well defined because of the general 'spreading' of wave functions. On 
this basis we are able to discuss the states of things without any need to 
refer to a measuring apparatus which, in the usual interpretation, would 
cause the wave function to 'collapse' t.o a more definite state. 

II 
Ill 
Figure 5. 1 :  Square potential barrier of height V 
5 . 1  
T h e  example o f  barrier penetration 
Let us consider a one-dimensional square barrier of height V and thickness 
a located between x = 0 and x = a , as shown in figure 5. 1 .  
We asume a particle of momentum p i n  region I incident from the 
left with energy E < V. In accordance with standard procedure , we also 
asume a reflected wave in region I with the same momentum. For region 
III we assume only an outgoing wave, which evidently will also have the 
momentum p. If we write the wave function in region III as 
iiln1 = A exp[ipx] , 
(5 .1) 
again setting h = 1, then the solution in region II will be the linear combi­
nation 
iI II = B exp[qx] + C exp[-qx] , 
where q = -J2m(V - E) . 
In region I the solution will be 
iil1 = D exp[ipx] + E exp[-ipx] . 
(5.2) 
(5.3) 
It is necessary then to provide for the continuity of the wave function and its 
derivative at x = 0 and x = a. This will determine the ratios of the coeffi­
cients and therefore the transmissivity and the reflectivity [1) . If the barrier 
is high and thick, the transmitted wave will be small and the reflected wave 
very nearly equal in intensity to the incident wave. 
We then form a wave packet by integrating t/! over a small range of 
p. This packet will be incident from x = 
- oo and will come up to the 
barrier where some of it will be transmitted , but (in general) most will be 
reflected. There will be a period during which the incident and the reflected 

Transition proasses considered as independent of obseMJation 
75 
wave packets overlap. If the transmissivity were zero ( as it would be for an 
infinite barrier) ,  the incident and reflected packets would form something 
very close to a standing wave which would have essentially a real wave 
function. The velocity would therefore be zero. But if the reflected wave is 
not quite as strong as the transmitted wave there will be a net (in general) 
small velocity in the region in which incident and reflected waves overlap, 
and as can indeed be verified from the formula 
v = _1_ ( t/!. 'Vt/! - t/!'Vt/!.) 
2mi 
Tj;• t/J 
· 
(5.4) 
When the incident wave packet disappears and only the reflected wave 
packet remains, the speed will once again be p/m, but of course in the 
negative direction. 
There is a complicated variation of velocity inside the barrier, but for 
the wave packet that has passed through, the speed will once again be p/m, 
but this time in the positive direction. 
The trajectories for the case of a Gaussian wave packet with E = V/2 
have been calculated for a range of initial positions of the particle within 
the wave packet [2] . Clearly their behaviour will depend on the quantum 
potential. This is shown as a function of x and t in figure 5 .2. As the packet 
comes up against the barrier we can see the quantum potential developing 
as a function of time in the region of overlap of the incident and reflected 
wave packets. We can also see how the quantum potential modifies the 
potential inside the barrier in a rather complicated way. In general the 
quantum potential will lower the barrier height, thus permitting particles 
to enter it. This of course removes the mystery as to how barrier penetration 
is possible. For such penetration depends on the total potential V + Q and 
not just the classical potential V alone. But it also depends on whether 
the net potential V + Q is greater than E for the whole period in which 
the particle is inside the barrier. It is clear from the figure that this will 
in turn depend crucially on the initial location of the particle, because the 
quantum potential remains low only for certain periods of time and indeed 
may have spikes in certain places that would tend to reflect back a particle 
positioned there. 
All of this can be brought out clearly by considering the trajectories 
shown in figure 5 .3. We can see that only the particles that happen to be 
at the front of the wave packet can even enter the barrier. But even most 
of these will be turned around before they are able to go through. There is 
however a critical trajectory, which divides the trajectories that go through 
from those that do not. This evidently resembles a bifurcation point of a 
kind which is typical of the non-linear equations describing unstable sys­
tems. Indeed it is clear that even though the equation for the wave function 

76 
The undivided universe 
Figure 5.2: Quantum potential for barrier (E = V /2) 

I 
i 
' 
0 
• 
Ԗ 
-
N 
8 
ԗ 
И 
ll 
Ը 
.. 
'1 
·.:: 
=i 
..Q 
-; 
·z 
= 
.£ 
0 
Q, 
° 
u.J 
.. 
';;! :I: 
.£ 
g ;:: 
ll 
·.:: 
0 
Й 
""' 
'1 
.fti' 
E!:< 
կ 
.., 
'1 
.. 
::I 
. !:!' 
հ 
x 

78 
The undivided universe 
is linear the quantum potential can be a highly non-linear function of the 
coordinates of the particle. Therefore we actually have here an example of 
such a bifurcation point. 
Of course we have here only a very simplified and abstracted system. 
In real systems with many particles and complicated potentials, there will 
be many such bifurcation points, implying something cl08e to chaotic mo­
tion (3]. But even in this simple system we can see the germ of the process 
by which quantum transitions can take place. The particle may go either 
one way or another, thus having an 'all or nothing' character. When we 
discuss the transitions in atoms, we will see this character coming out in a 
more complex context. 
5.2 
A ctive and inactive information 
All the basic concepts required to understand quantum transitions from a 
purely ontological point of view are already implicit in the simple example of 
barrier penetration given above. The essential point is that the wave packet 
has split into two distinct parts, which, in this case, will never meet again, 
as one goes to +oo and the other goes to -oo. The particle must enter one 
of these packets, because there is no probability of being in between where 
the wave function is zero. 
We may conveniently describe this process by thinking that the two 
wave packets correspond to two distinct channels. Which channel the par­
ticle will actually enter is determined by its initial position in the incident 
wave packet. Once the channels are formed they remain separate. The 
probability of being in a given channel is found by integrating lt/il2 over all 
the particle positions corresponding to that channel, and it is easy to show 
that this is just what would be obtained in the usual interpretation (e.g. in 
computing the probability of transition) .  
Since the channels do not overlap, the quantum potential in each can 
be calculated as if the other were not present. The same also holds for the 
guidance condition. Therefore in effect the system behaves as if it is in one 
of the channels only, with the appropriate probability that this is the case. 
We have, in this way, explained how a quantum transition takes place on 
its own , without the need to bring in a process of observation. 
But this raises an important question. Suppose, for example, that the 
particle is in the transmitted channel, corresponding to a wave function of 
very low intensity. Its physical properties are determined by this very weak 
quantum field, while the much stronger field corresponding to the reflected 
channel has no effect . Of course, as long as the channels do not overlap, w e  
can understand this, because the quantum field does not act mechanically, 

Transition processes considered as independent of obaeMJation 
79 
but rather, as we have already discussed, it acts as information that guides 
the particle in its self-movement and in such action t.he intensity of the field 
does not matter. 
Neverthele88 one may raise the question of what would happen if the 
channels were made to overlap again . For example, in two or three di­
mensions the experiment could be arranged to reflect both of the quantum 
fields into the same region of space. When this happened, the larger field 
would overwhelm the smaller one and the behaviour of the particle would 
be radically altered. In other words while the information in an 'empty' 
channel may not actually be active on the particle at a given moment, it 
may have the potentiality to become active later. Therefore one cannot say 
that the transmitted particle is in a state that is entirely independent of 
the reflected channel. 
This would, at first sight, seem to put in doubt our claim of having 
explained the transition process without the aid of an observation which 
would cause the wave function to 'collapse' irreversibly and finally, for ex­
ample, to the transmitted state. In this connection, however, it must at 
first be pointed out, that the possibility of interference of the two channels 
that we have described is an inevitable consequence of the quantum theory 
whether in our interpretation or in the usual one. As long as we restrict 
ourselves to the abstraction of a one-body system, this implication neither 
can nor should be avoided. 
It is our thesis that only when we take into account the interaction of 
this system with a background containing many particles that the transition 
becomes, in effect, irrevocable. The reason for this is that the information 
in the unoccupied channel will lose all its potentiality for becoming active so 
that it will remain permanently inactive after interaction with a sufficiently 
complex background. 
The simplest case in which this happens arises when the particle in 
question collides with another one and scattering takes place through a 
short range interaction . 
To discuss this process let us consider a three-dimensional system but 
asume a barrier of finite width that is uniform in the x- and y-directions 
with a plane wave ijJ = exp( ik0z) incident in the z-direction. The calcu­
lation of transmission coefficient will go through as in the one-dimensional 
case. 
But let us assume now that an atom with coordinates y is placed in 
the transmitted beam. To simplify the problem, we suppose that its wave 
packet has average velocity zero. This packet is given by 
4>o(Y) = L f(k) exp[ik · y] . 
(5.5) 

Let us further asume that the incident particle is represented by a wave 
packet bounded in all three directions but travelling only in the z-direction. 
Then the transmitted wave can be represented by the packet 
t/>o (z) = L g(k' - kG) exp(ik' · z], 
(5.6) 
where kG represents a vector in the direction of z and the packet is centred 
at k' = kG . Before the particles interact, the combined wave function will 
be 
/o = <Po(Y)tl>o(z ) . 
The particles will begin to scatter each other when their wave packets over­
lap. We postulate conservation of momentum and energy in this process. 
Because of the linearity of Schrodinger's equation, we can deal separately 
with each of the terms that make up the wave packet. Thus a term that 
was initially exp(ik' · z] exp(ik · y] will , because of conservation of momen­
tum, go over into exp(i(k' + K) · z] exp[i(k - K) · y]. The equation for 
conservation of energy then takes the form 
k'2 
k2 
(k' + K)2 (k - K)2 
-- + - = 
+ ---
2m' 
2m 
2m' 
2m 
(5 .7) 
and this introduces a relationship between K and the initial momenta. Be­
cause the wave packets in k and k' are fairly narrow, the above condition 
can be approximated by satisfying it for the values of k and k' correspond­
ing to maximum intensity, which are respectively k = 0 and k' = kG. Thus, 
to a good approximation, K can be obtained from the equation 
k') = K2 + (kG + K)2 
2m' 
2m 
2m' 
(5 .8) 
Therefore K is related only to kG and not to the precise values of k and 
k' .  This will simplify the subsequent discussion in an important way. 
We now return to the calculation of the wave function after interaction. 
This will be ( as a function of time) 
where 
A(K, t) 
B(K,t) 
/(z , y, t) = L h(K)A(K, t)B(K, t) 
K 
(5 .9) 
L g(k' - kG) exp[i(k' + K) . z] exp [ -i, (k' + K)2t] 
k' 
2m 
L f(k) exp[i(k - K) · y] exp [.=!_(k - K)2t] 
k 
21n 

Ttansition processes considertd as independent of observation 
81 
and h(K) represents the amplitude that finally results from the process 
of interaction (which will depend on the potential V(z , 11), of interaction 
between two particles). The sum over k must, of course, be restricted by 
the condition of conservation of energy. 
To show what the above means let us consider the factor B( K, t) which 
we rewrite as 
[ -i 
.2 ] '°' 
[ · ( 
k · Kt)] [ -ik2t] 
exp 2m (K · y + f\ t) t /(k) exp i k . y + -;-
exp 2;;-
. 
For t not too large, this can be written as 
exp Lò (K . y + J<2t)] «P ( y + t) . 
This corresponds to a wave packet moving with a velocity K /m. The 
term exp(-ik2t/2m], which we have neglected, describes the spread of the 
wave packet which may be taken to be small during the period of interest. 
A similar treatment could be given for A(K, t). This will also correspond 
to a wave packet, but moving with velocity -K /m'. 
What this all implies is that after interaction, the two particles are 
separating with a relative speed proportional to I< .  If the interaction is 
such that I< is considerably greater than the initial spread of momenta in 
the wave packets (dk and dk'), then after a suitable time, the distances 
moved by the particles 
dz = -Kt/m' 
and 
dy = Kt/m 
(5.10) 
will be greater than the widths fJz and fJy of the wave packets. When 
this happens the final wave function of the combined system D(z ,  y, t) will 
cease to overlap with the initial wave function Eo(z , y, t). Moreover for 
different values of K, the particles will go in different directions so that the 
contributions of these different values of K to the total wave function will 
also cease to overlap. 
This means that the original transmitted channel will now break into 
many parts. First there will be an unmodified transmitted channel in the 
regions far from the wave packet «Po(y) and a weaker one close to this 
wave packet . Secondly there will be modified channels in which both the 
scattering particle y and the transmitted particle z will be going in various 
directions. Since all these channels do not overlap, the quantum potential 
(and guidance condition) for the combined system will be determined only 
by the channel into which the particle actually enters. All the other channels 
will then correspond to inactive information . 

82 
The undivided universe 
Because there is such a process of the multiplication of non-overlapping 
channels corresponding to transmission of the particle, the poesibility of 
bringing about overlap of transmitted and reflected channels in the way 
described earlier has effectively been eliminated. For in order to have such 
overlap, it is necessary that this overlap takes place in the configuration 
space of all systems which have interacted. Therefore if we merely have an 
arrangement that brings reflected and transmitted waves into the same re­
gion of space, there will still be no effect on the quantum potential. To have 
such an effect we would also have to bring together all the scattered chan­
nels. If this is not done, the information in the reflected channel remains 
inactive, even though it corresponds to a much more intense quantum field 
than does the transmitted channel. 
Of course one could consider trying to bring back into the same region 
of space all the channels that resulted from the various scattering processes. 
Evidently this would be immensely difficult, almost certainly beyond our 
present technical capacity. Nevertheless it is still a logical possibility. But 
we can see that this possibility is not relevant here because all the parti­
cles concerned will keep on encountering further systems with which they 
interact , and these will bring about a further multiplication of channels. 
Ultimately this process will lead to chaotic motions which are charac­
teristic of thermodynamic equilibrium. As long as we accept the current 
explanations of the irreversibility of thermodynamic processes in terms of 
the notion of an approach to statistical equilibrium, for example through 
scattering, then we must also accept that the interactions that we have de­
scribed here will similarly be irreversible. Therefore the channels to which 
we have alluded earlier will be irrevocably distinct. The quantum potential 
and the guidance condition will be determined only by the channel actually 
occupied by the system. The remaining channels will then correspond to 
what we have been calling inactive information, i.e. information not only 
actually inactive, but also having no potential for becoming active. 
All this implies that the channels corresponding to actually or poten­
tially active information are constantly narrowing down as the system in 
question interacts with its surroundings. But it is implied by Schrodinger's 
equation that the wave function of a system is constantly spreading (e.g. 
as shown in detail in chapter 3 for Gaussian wave packet) . These two pro­
cesses evidently oppose each other as we have already indicated earlier, and 
the net result comes out of the balance between the tendency to spread and 
the tendency to narrow down to a more definite form. 
The narrowing down process produces a net effect that is essentially 
the same as that produced by the 'collapse' of the wave function in the 
usual interpretation. Yet there is no collapse here. At no stage do we need 
to violate our basic postulates in order to obtain the self-definition of the 

Transition processes considered as independent of obsert1ation 
83 
system. We shall discuss the full implications of this in more detail later, but 
for the present we shall emphasise only that this means that measurement 
does not have to play a fundamental role in our interpretation. Rather the 
universe is constantly defining itself and measurement is only a special case 
of this. 
5.3 
Quantum transitions discussed independently of 
measurement 
We now go on to discuss the process of transition of an electron in an 
atom. If such an atom is to jump from one stationary state to another, it 
is necessary that there be an additional system available that can take up 
the energy given off. This is usually the electromagnetic field within which, 
for example, a photon can be created. However, to avoid the complexities 
arising in our interpretation of the electromagnetic field (which we discuss 
in chapter 1 1 ) ,  we shall suppose that the energy is taken up in an Auger-like 
effect by an additional particle that was originally also in a bound state in 
the atom in question. 
To make possible a comparatively short mathematical treatment, we 
shall use here a simplified model of this process in which both particles are 
initially in bound states within a localised potential well. We shall suppose 
that they are in s-states and that all the transitions can be restricted to s­
states (i.e. there is negligible probability of going to states of higher angular 
momentum) . To further simplify the model we will suppose that initially 
the two particles do not interact and that at t = 0 a small perturbing 
potential V ( z - 11) is suddenly turned on (where z is the coordinate of the 
electron and 11 that of the particle which carries off the energy). We shall 
then apply the standard perturbation theory to calculate the changes of the 
wave function with time. The initial conditions will be determined by the 
requirement that the z-particle is in a stationary state with energy Et and 
with wave function 1/io(z) exp[-iEttJ (where we continue our notation in 
which h = 1 ) .  The 11-particle will be in a stationary state with energy Efj 
and with wave function 4io(11)exp[-iEfjt]. The net initial wave function 
will then be 
E = 1/io(z )4io(y) exp[- iEot] ,  
(5. 11) 
where E0 = E< + Efj . 
After t = O the Schrodinger equation for the combined system will be 
. aE 
z -
= 
at 
(5. 12) 

Since we can restrict ourselves to a-states, it will be convenient to introduce 
the function 
X = rArB li , 
where r A and r B are the radius vectors of the respective particles. In terms 
of x , Schrodinger's equation becomes 
8x [ 
1 
82 
1 
02 
] 
i- = ----- - ---- + V(rA - rB) x , 
&t 
2mA 8rǹ 
2mB 8rǸ 
(5.13) 
with the boundary condition that x = 0 at r A = 0 and r B = 0. The initial 
wave function is, of course, 
where xo = rAV>o(rA ) and .Ao = rBefio(rB) · 
For t > 0 we then write 
x = xo + Ax , 
Ax will contain the wave function components in which the z-particle has 
made a transition to XJ exp [-iE1tJ , while the y-particle has become free 
with absolute value of the momentum p. Since both particles were initially 
in a-states and since the z-particle is finally in an s-state, it follows that 
the final angular momentum of the y-particle is zero, so that it too is in 
an s-state. Recalling that x = 0 at r B = 0, the wave function of the latter 
will then be proportional to 
[ ip2 ] 
sin(prB ) exp ---t . 
2mB 
The typical contribution to the net wave function after transition will 
therefore be proportional to 
x1 (rA ) sin(prB) exp [-i ( E1 + 2ñB t)] . 
We then obtain 
Perturbation theory then yields 
_ 
V10,po 
(i 
[ . ( 
p2 )]) 
Cp - AE + (p2/2mB) 
- exp -1 E1 + 2mB t 
' 
(5. 14) 
(5. 15) 

Transition prousses considered as independent of ob1eMJation 
85 
where D.E ."". E1 - Eo which is the net increase of binding energy resulting 
from trans1t10n, and where the corresponding matrix element is 
V10,po = 1: 1: tf!j (z) sin(prB ) V(z - y)lf!o(z)¢0(y) dzdy. 
(5.16) 
We will be interested in finding the form of D..x for moderately long 
periods of time; i.e. for times long enough so that the factor 
1 - exp [-i (D.E + (p2 /2m8 )) t] 
D.E + (p2 /2mB) 
becomes a sharply peaked function with a maximum at that value of p 
for which the denominator vanishes. This function evidently has a width 
inversely proportional to the time t .  Let us denote the value for which 
this function is a maximum by p = Po . In evaluating D.x we can then 
replace p by p0 in all the terms in D.x that multiply this factor. Also, in 
evaluating this factor we may write p = p0 + D.p and neglect terms of the 
order of (D.p)2 (because we are considering t great enough so that the factor 
is large only for very small values of D.p) . We then obtain D.E + p2 /2m8 ծ 
p0D.p/mB = v0D.p where v0 is the speed of the outgoing particle. With 
these approximations we find that 
""' ( 1  - exp[ivoD.pt]) . 
D.x = x1 (rA ) V10,po Է 
v D.p 
sm(prB ) ·  
p 
0 
(5 . 17) 
For an unbounded system, this sum becomes an integral, which can be 
evaluated by means of contour integration . The wave intensity will be 
proportional to 
J
oo [ 
] [ ( 1 - exp[ivoD..pt])] 
exp[i(p0 + D..p)rB] - exp[-i(po + D..p)rB] 
v D. 
dD.p. 
-oo 
0 p 
The integral is finite everywhere including D.p = 0, even though the separate 
terms are singular there. We may therefore evaluate it by choosing, in the 
well-known way, a contour in the complex plane that goes around D.p = 0 
in an infinitesimal semi-circle which is chosen so that only outgoing waves 
will appear for t > 0. A typical term in the integral is proportional to 
J
oo exp[iD..prB] dD..p. 
-oo 
voD..p 
If we choose the contour in the upper half of the complex plane as shown 
in figure 5 .4, it can be seen that the integral vanishes. 

Figure 5.4: Contour to evaluate integral 
On the other hand, if we take a term like 
Joo exp[-ii:ipr B] di:i 
A 
p, 
_ 00  
Vou.p 
then by completing the contour in the lower half of the complex plane, we 
see that it does not vanish, but is equal to the residue at the singularity. By 
applying this method, we can see that all the terms containing the factor 
exp[i(p0+i:ip)r B] will vanish. The remaining two terms will be proportional 
to 
where S is the step function which goes to zero for negative values of its 
argument and is unity for positive values. This will imply a step-shaped 
wave that is spreading out at the speed v0. The total wave function (for 
large t) is then 
X = rArBexp[-Eot] [xo(rA).Ao(rB) + ViB:00x1(rA)exp[iporB]G(rB,t)] . 
(5. 18) 
In the above equation the term xo( r A ).Ao( r B) represents the initial wave 
function of the combined system, while the term 

Transition processes considered as independent of obaervation 
87 
represents the contribution of the perturbation to this wave function. 
We shall show presently that if the r B-particle enters the region cor­
responding to the perturbed wave function, the effect of the initial wave 
function on the particles becomes negligible so that the system can be said 
to have undergone a transition to the final state. The total probability of 
this transition can be found by integrating the square of the second term, 
divided by r1 over dr B .  It is clear that this will be proportional to t ( as it 
is in the conventional interpretations) .  However (as also holds in the con­
ventional interpretations) ,  this result will follow only for times much larger 
than 1/ flE. For as we recall, this approximation , which arises from sim­
plifying our various contour integrals, will not hold for times shorter than 
this. Indeed it is evident that at the very shortest times, the contribution 
of the perturbed wave function must be proportional to t itself, so that the 
probability of transition is proportional to t 2 .  
To see the meaning of the above equation i n  more detail , i t  is instructive 
to take the ratio of the perturbed contribution to the wave function to the 
unperturbed contribution. This is 
R - V10,p00X1 (r A ) exp[iporB]G(rB , t) 
-
vaxo(rA ).Xo(r B )  
· 
(5.19) 
Because the matrix element V10,p0o is, by hypothesis, small, this ratio will 
also generally be small. Where this is the case, the initial wave function 
will overwhelm the perturbation , which latter will then at most introduce 
a very small change in the overall wave function. In such a situation, the 
state of the particle would undergo negligible change. However, where the 
denominator in the above ratio is small , the situation can be quite different. 
Since .X0(r 8 ) represents a bound state, the ratio will indeed become as small 
as we please for values of r B appreciably greater than the mean spread of 
this wave function . For these values of r B ,  the initial wave function will 
be negligible compared with the perturbed wave function. This latter will 
now dominate and the motion of the particle will no longer be affected 
significantly by the initial wave function. The motion implied by this wave 
function will carry the particle further and further from the atom at the 
speed v0 .  The effective wave function of the system will then be propor­
tional to XJ (r A ) exp[ipor B]G(r B ,  t). This means that the outgoing particle 
is free, and that the bound electron now has a wave function XJ (rA ) ·  In 
other words, a transition has taken place from a state in which the electron 
was bound with the wave function xo(r A )  and the y-particle with .Xo(r B ) ,  
to one i n  which the electron is bound with the wave function XJ ( r A ) , while 
the 11-particle effectively has the free particle wave function exp[ip · r B] . 
It is evident then that this kind of transition can take place when the 
11-particle is initially located at values of r B large enough so that .Xa( r B ) is 

88 
The tmdivided universe 
negligible. Clearly such locations are highly improbable and this explains 
why only a few members of the ensemble will undergo transition. 
To see what happens to particles starting at small values of r 8 ,  let us 
compute the velocity from the guidance condition (which, as we have sen 
in chapter 3, implies the quantum potential). We find 
1 [ • ax 
ax· J 
/ . 
v =  --
X -- - x --
X
X · 
2imB 
arB 
arB 
( 5.20) 
For values of r B small enough so that the perturbed wave function has a 
much lower intensity than the unperturbed one this will be approximately 
proportional to Po/[mB>.Ԓ(rB)Ao(rB )] . It is clear that such particles start 
to move outward at a very low velocity, especially those initially at small 
radii. They will speed up as they go outward and will eventually enter the 
region in which the perturbed wave function is dominant. The effective 
physical state will then be one in which a transition has taken place along 
the lines that we have described. Ultimately all the particles in the ensem­
ble will be able to undergo transitions, in this way. However, in such an 
ensemble, the times of transition will be statistically distributed, and it is 
easy to show that this distribution is exactly what is predicted by the usual 
interpretation of the quantum theory. 
The above holds only in the approximation in which the perturbation 
theory is valid. In a more exact treatment, e.g. the Wigner-Weisskopf 
method [4] , the initial wave function is found to decay exponentially with 
some mean life-time r. It is clear that, depending on the initial conditions, 
some particles will be emitted in times much shorter than r. This means 
that the wave function does not give a complete description of the reality 
of the transition, because it has no terms in it to discuss the actual and 
often short time in which a particle approaching the edge of the atom is 
suddenly 'swept out' to become free in an interval of time that has no 
essential relationship to T. Clearly the additional concept of a particle is 
needed, alongside that of the wave function, to allow this process to be 
considered ontologically, i.e. as essentially independent of being measured 
or observed. 
A similar situation arises with radioactive decay brought about by bar­
rier penetration. For example, the mean-life of the uranium atom is 2 x 109 
years, but once a particle enters the barrier, it may go through in a time 
of the order of 10-22 secs. This speed of the actual process is also some­
thing that cannot be described solely in terms of the wave function and its 
asociated concept of mean-life time. 
Finally it should be noted that as in the example of barrier penetration 
discussed in section 5.1 there is still, in principle, the possibility of inter­
ference between the initial wave function and that representing particles 

Transition processes considert:d as independent of observation 
89 
that have undergone transition. (This is, of course, as valid in the usual 
interpretation as it is in our interpretation.) 
If the outgoing particle undergoes collisions, however, then it becomes 
steadily more difficult to obtain interference because more and more par­
ticles would have to be made to participate in just the right way. As in 
the case of barrier penetration, this would ultimately become imposible in 
practice. Simultaneously the domain of active information would narrow 
down so that the outgoing particle would be affected only by a relatively 
narrow wave packet, while the information in the remaining parts of the 
wave function would become inactive. 
5.4 
On the possibility of bifurcation points in more complex 
cases 
In the simple example of the Auger-like transition discussed in the previous 
section there are no bifurcation points such as were found in the example 
discussed in section 5 . 1 .  However, if we introduce a number of final states, 
bifurcation points can be obtained . 
To illustrate this , let us consider two possible final wave functions of 
the electron xi (r A )  and x2(r A ) · These will be assumed to have different 
energies so that the energies transferred to the y-particle will be corre­
spondingly different. We will assume that for the wave function x1 (rA ) ,  
the y-particle will have momentum p1 and velocity v 1 and for X2(r A ) these 
will be respectively p2 and v2 . The perturbed wave function will then be 
X 
rArB exp[- iEot] [ V1i o,p, o X1 (rA ) exp[ip1rB]G1 (rB , t) 
V1 
where 
and 
+ VJ,o,p,o x2(r A ) exp[ip2r B]C2 (r B , t )] 
V2 
(5.2 1 )  
G2(rB , t) = S(rB ) - S(rB - v2t). 
If the particle is in a region beyond that in which the initial wave function 
is appreciable then, as we have seen earlier, its motion can be treated solely 
in terms of the perturbed wave function. This latter describes what are 
effectively two wave packets in r B space which are multiplied respectively 
by x i (r A ) and x2 (r A )· As shown in figure 5.5, the first packet will have 

r8 - V2t 
iiiiiilif lii:'iiiiiiiiiilil-------+---
Figure 5.5: Overlap of wave packets 
reached r B = v 1 t , while the second will have reached r B = v2t . Assuming 
v1 > v2 , it follows that the second packet will be contained in the first, 
which latter has an advancing region of width tlrB = (v1 - v2)t , that 
does not overlap the first packet. If the particle is in this region , then 
the second wave packet (containing x2( r B ) as a factor) will not affect its 
motion. Therefore it can be treated as if the wave function had 'collapsed' 
to x1(rA ) exp(ip1 · rB] . However , if it is in the region of the second packet, 
there will still be interference between the two terms and we will not yet 
have a collapse to one term or the other. 
How is it possible to obtain a definite result? To answer this , we first 
note that this state of affairs is a consequence of our approximation in terms 
of perturbation theory in which the decay of the original wave function is 
not taken into account. Therefore an indefinite stream of outgoing waves 
is implied . 
However , when this decay is taken into account, e.g. by the Wigner­
Weisskopf approximation, it is found that the wave packets will have dura­
tions of the order of the mean life-time, T ,  of the original wave function . It is 
clear that when t is great enough, the separation of the packets, ( v1 - v2)t ,  
will be greater than their respective widths v1 T and v2r, and therefore 
the packets will separate. Where they have separated, the particle will 
be in one of these packets, in which case its motion can be treated with­
out reference to the other, as we have done in the examples already given 
here. The effective wave function will then be either x 1 (rA ) exp(ip1 r B] or 
x2(rA ) exp(ip2rB]. In other words we have shown that there are two mu­
tually exclusive channels into one of which the particle must enter. And 
as a simple calculation shows, the probabilities of either ch_annel will come 
out the same as those given by the usual interpretation. 

Transition processes considered as independent of obsenJation 
91 
Although the consideration of the finite lifetime shows that the outgo­
ing wave function will ultimately give rise to two separate channels (when 
t considerably exceeds the mean lifetime), it is necessary to point out here 
that this can happen in much shorter times if the outgoing particle can un­
dergo collisions with other atoms. As an example, suppose that the energy 
of the outgoing particle, E1 , corresponding to velocity v1 , is great enough 
to ionise an atom, while that of a particle of energy E2 and corresponding 
to velocity v2 is not. After the collision the part of the wave function cor­
responding to X 1  ( r A ) will then be multiplied by a factor g( z) describing 
the free state of the particle with coordinate z liberated from the atom 
in which it was originally held, while x2(r A ) is multiplied by g0 (z) corre­
sponding to the original bound stat.e of this particle . Clearly, in a relatively 
short time these wave functions cease to overlap, and subsequent collisions 
with them bring about a multiplication of channels in the way described 
in section 5.2. In principle this can happen in times of the order of that 
required for collisions (perhaps something like 10- 1 2 secs) . Therefore even 
if the period of decay is long, we will still generally obtain a separation of 
channels. However, if no collisions take place, the channels will not sepa­
rate and we will have interference between the two components of the wave 
function X1 ( rA ) exp[ip1 rB] and x2(rA ) exp[ip2rB]· This interference is in­
deed an example of the EPR correlation (which we shall discuss in detail 
in chapter 7) .  It is an unavoidable prediction of the quantum theory, both 
in the usual interpretation and in ours. 
Whether the channels are formed by separation of wave packets over 
times of the order of T or by collisions, it seems evident that there must 
be some limiting points or curves which divide the initial conditions of the 
particles that will enter one channel from those that will enter the other (as 
happened in the case of barrier penetration) .  Generally speaking however 
these will be in the overall configuration space and may be quite complex 
in form. The possible complexity will increase rapidly as we consider more 
and more stationary states, especially if we go to wave functions of higher 
angular momentum. In the latter case the stationary states will be char­
acterised , as we have seen in chapter 3, by a set of circular motions, in 
contrast to the s-state which is characterised by a set of points at which 
the particle is at rest. 
The general behaviour described above is similar to that obtained in the 
study of non-linear equations whose solution contain what are called stable 
limit cycles [3] . As we have pointed out earlier the equations for the particle 
motion in our interpretation are likewise clearly non-linear. It is implied 
by the discussion above that the solutions also have something like stable 
limit cycles except that a certain generalisation of this concept is needed 
here. Thus, as we have already indicated, for p-states,the stable limit cycles 

92 
The 1mdivided universe 
would be a set of circles. The difference from the usual kind of non-linear 
equation is that for each stable motion we have a whole set of posible limit 
cycles rather than just a single cycle. Each quantum state thus corresponds 
to a different set of limit cycles and a transition corresponds to an orbit 
going from one of these to another. 
In this discussion the s-states should be regarded as degenerate cases of 
limit cycles which reduce to single points in r A space and simultaneously 
to outgoing orbits in r B space. 
Finally it must be emphasised that our equations for the particle mo­
tions differ from the non-linear equations that have commonly been consid­
ered thus far, in that the forces, as determined by the quantum potential, 
are not preassigned functions either of external variables or of the parti­
cle coordinates. Rather, as was brought out in chapter 4, they depend on 
a quantum field of active information ordered in the configuration space 
which involves the whole system in a way that cannot be analysed solely in 
terms of relationships between the particles . It is this feature which makes 
it posible for such dramatically different limit cycles to emerge as a result 
of the evolution of the wave function even for simple systems. The fact 
that the activity of the quantum field does not necessarily fall off with the 
intensity of the wave is also crucial for this behaviour, since without it we 
could not have had some transitions taking place almost immediately even 
when the perturbed wave function was very weak . It is clear then that 
the new features of the quantum potential described above are principally 
what are behind the ability of our extension of Newton 's equations of mo­
tion to comprehend the new quantum properties of matter. This brings 
out in further detail the point that we made in chapter 3, section 3. 1 ,  i.e. 
that clasical physics does not follow from the form of Newton 's equations 
alone, but also requires certain restrictions on the forces that appear in 
these equations. When, as is the case of the quantum potential , we go 
beyond such restrictions, an entirely new kind of physical law is implied. 
5.5 
The quantum process of ' capture' of particles 
(fusion-fission) 
We now go on to extend the results of the previous section to the case of 
capture of an electron by an atom. This, combined with the discussion of 
ionisation that we have just given , will enable us to bring out how quantum 
mechanics implies the possibility of the formation of objective wholes as well 
as their dissolution into relatively independent parts and sub-wholes. As 
we saw in chapter 4 , this is one of the principal new properties of matter 
implied by quantum theory. 

Transition processes considered as independent of observation 
93 
We shall discuss this process as a kind of inverse of the one that was 
treated in the previous section. We consider an atom on which is incident 
a particle with a plane wave function exp( ikz) implying motion in the z­
direction only. In order to enable the atom to capture this particle 80 as 
to form a new combined system, it is necessary that there be something 
to carry away the energy that is given off. As happened in the case of 
ionisation , this will be done by an additional particle with coordinate y. 
Let us suppose there are further particles in the atom with coordinates 
designated by {i .  The initial state of the atom will then be represented 
by efio(tl, {; ) exp[-iEot] . The combined initial wave function for the entire 
system is therefore 
Wo = (z , y, {; , t) = 4'0 (11, {i) exp[ikz] exp [-i (Ea -:) t] . 
(5.22) 
Because of the interaction between these particles, this combined wave func­
tion will change. We shall asume that the main possibility for change is the 
introduction of a ground state, in which the z-particle has been captured, 
while the y-particle has been released. This wave function will thus be 
¢i1 (z , {i ) exp[-iE1tJ. The y-particle will then have a wave function whose 
typical component is exp[ip · y - ( ip2 /2m )t] . The net change of the overall 
wave function can then be written as 
.1,.1/J = L Cp (t) exp i (p · 11 - ð>) <P1 (z , {i ) exp[-iE1t] . 
p 
(5.23) 
We asume that this process can be treated by perturbation theory in a 
way similar to what was done with ionisation in the previous section. Of 
course the details will be considerably more complex because the outgoing 
wave cannot in this case be restricted to a spherically symmetric form. We 
shall however give only the general results here. The essential point is that 
after some time, the outgoing wave takes the form 
(5.24) 
where 88 is the azimuthal angle of the outgoing particle relative to the 
direction of the incident particle. If the initial conditions are such that 
the particle enters this outgoing wave, then there is no overlap with the 
incident wave function. The quantum potential acting on the particle will 
then be the same as if the incident wave function were not present and 
.1,.lfJ were the whole wave function. It is clear that in this case the incident 
particle will have been captured into a 'state' with wave function <P J ( z ,  {; , t) 

94 
The tmdivided universe 
corresponding to a stable limit cycle of the kind discussed in the previous 
section. At the same time the y-particle will be moving outward carrying 
away the excess energy. The probability of capture can be calculated by 
averaging with the probability density P = 1¢ 12 and this will give the same 
result as is obtained in the usual interpretation. 
Initially the combined system has a product wave function implying, 
as we have seen in chapter 4, that the two subsystems represented by z 
and (y, {;) respectively behave independently. If the initial conditions were 
such that the y-particle did not enter the outgoing wave, the effective wave 
function would have ended up as essentially unchanged so that the subsys­
tems would remain independent after collision. However, if the y-particle 
did enter the outgoing wave, then we will have formed a new whole with 
wave function ¢>1 (z , {; ) exp[-iE1t] along with the y-particle, which is now 
a new independent part. So what happened is that we began with one 
whole which included the {;-particle and the y-particle, and along with it 
was an independent particle represented by z . This whole broke up, but 
at the same time a new whole was formed with different constituents. This 
process could be described picturesquely by saying that the original whole 
had undergone 'fission ', while the product atom had undergone 'fusion' 
with the z- and {;-particles. Through the fission-fusion process we have 
been able to describe objective changes in the wholes that are present [5]. 
To come back to our description in terms of active information, we could 
also say that the original atom was characterised by a certain common pool 
of such information which broke up and reformed into a new pool that in­
cluded the z-particle instead of the y-particle. We emphasise once again 
that this process of forming and dissolving wholes is essentially quantum 
mechanical. For it is only through the existence of such pools of informa­
tion which are not expressible solely in terms of relationships of the actual 
particles that the notion of an objective whole can be given meaning. In 
contrast, as we have said earlier in classical physics there is no such ob­
jective significance to the whole, the latter can at best be regarded as a 
convenient way of thinking about what is considered to be in reality a set 
of parts. Quantum mechanics thus implies a new kind of process; i.e. the 
collection and dissolution of wholes. The language of ordinary quantum 
mechanics already tends to suggest this, in so far as it treats the quantum 
state as an unanalysable whole. However, as we have already suggested in 
earlier chapters, in our interpretation this wholeness becomes more intu­
itively intelligible because this interpretation highlights the new features of 
the quantum theory that bring it about. 

Tran.!ition proce.!ses considered as independent of obaervation 
95 
5.6 
Summary and conclusions 
The essential point of this chapter was to demonstrate with the aid of 
a number of typical examples that the transition process can be treated 
ontologically, i.e. as having no essential relationship to measurement or ob­
servation. We showed that in such a transition the wave function effectively 
splits so as to define a number of separate channels. The quantum potential 
was determined only by the channel that the particle actually enters. The 
channel entered by the particle depends on the initial conditions which are 
distributed statistically in an ensemble with P = lt +W . From this it follows 
that the probability of obtaining a certain result is the same as in the usual 
interpretation. 
In effect everything happens as if the wave function 'collapses' to the 
final result, while no collapse actually takes place. The channels not occu­
pied by the particles correspond to inactive information. We showed that 
if the particles make collisions with additional systems, there is a constant 
narrowing down of the domain in which the wave function can significantly 
affect the quantum potential at the location of the particles. From this it 
follows that the channel entered by the particles eventually becomes irre­
versibly fixed, so that it cannot be undone. 
An analysis of the behaviour of the particle orbits shows that there are 
bifurcation points dividing those orbits entering one channel from those 
entering another. Near these points, the motion is highly unstable and, 
indeed, chaotic in the sense of modern chaos theory. Stationary states then 
correspond to an extension of the concept of stable limit cycles which is 
found in the theory of non-linear differential equations. 
Finally we discuss the process of formation and dissolution of wholes 
(fission-fusion) . This brings out the possibility of an objective ontological 
wholeness and of a distinction bet.ween states of such wholeness and states 
in which the parts or sub-wholes behave independently. We understand this 
through the formation of common pools of information. This information 
brings about nonlocal interaction, but quantum wholeness implies even 
more than this. For it arises out of the quantum field which cannot be 
understood solely in terms of preassigned properties and interrelationships 
of the particles alone. Rather the whole is presupposed in the quantum 
wave function and it is the active information in this wave function that 
forms and dissolves wholes. 
5. 7 
References 
1 .  D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, chapter 1 1 ,  section 1 1 .5, Prentice-Hall, 

96 
The undivided universe 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1 95 1 .  
2. C. Dewdney and B .  J .  Hiley, Found. Phys. 12 , 27-48 ( 1 982) . 
3. P. Cvitanovic , Universality in Chaos, Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1984 . 
4. W. Reitler, The Quantum Theory of Radiation, Dover, New York 
1 984, 181. 
5. A .  Baracca, D. Bohm, B .  J. Hiley and A. E. G. Stuart, Nuovo Ciment 
28B , 453-466 { 1 975) .  

Chapter 6 
Measurement as a special case 
of quantum process 
As pointed out in chapter 2, in the conventional interpretation of the quan­
tum theory (which is basically epistemological in nature) measurement 
plays a key role in the sense that without it the mathematical equations 
would have no physical meaning. In our ontological interpretation, how­
ever, we have started with a treatment of the individual, actual process, e.g. 
a particle penetrating a barrier, undergoing transition between stationary 
states etc. Evidently it is necessary to deal with the measurement process 
in essentially the same way; i.e. as a special case of quantum processes in 
general. What is particularly significant in a measurement process is that 
from a large scale result that is observable in a piece of measuring appara­
tus, one can infer the state of the observed system, or at least the state in 
which it has been left after the measurement process is over. 
In this chapter we shall treat the measurement process in some detail 
and show how it is to be understood ontologically. We shall first discuss 
the general principles of this process. We shall show that the essential new 
feature of quantum measurement is that there is mutual and irreducible 
participation of the measuring instrument and the observed object in each 
other. As a result, any attempt to discuss this process as measuring 'a 
property of the observed object alone' will not be consistent with our inter­
pretation. Rather we say that the result of a measurement is a potentiality 
of the combined system and can be determined only in terms of the proper­
ties of the particles, along with the wave function of the combined system 
as a whole. On the basis of this notion, we shall go into several examples 
that help illustrate the principles involved and clarify some of the puzzles 
to which these examples give rise in the conventional treatment. 

98 
The undivided universe 
6.1 
Brief treatment of the measurement process 
In treating measurements ontologically we shall for the sake of convenience 
divide the overall process into two stages. In the first stage the measuring 
apparatus and the observed system interact in such a way that the wave 
function of the combined system breaks into a sum of non-overlapping pack­
ets, each corresponding to a possible distinct result of the measurement . In 
the second stage this distinction is magnified by some detecting device, so 
that it is directly observable at the large scale level. 
In the first of these stages, the wave function can be treated in the same 
way as was done in the discussion of von Neumann's approach given in 
chapter 2, section 2.4. As was done there, we let the initial wave function 
be represented by 
(6.1) 
n 
where ?/Jn ( z) are the possible eigenfunctions of the operator 0 that is being 
measured. We also let the initial wave function of the measuring apparatus 
be represented by ¢0(y) which corresponds to a suitable wave packet (de­
scribing, for example, the position of a pointer). The initial wave function 
of the combined system is then 
W;(z , y) = <Po(y) L Cn iPn (z) . 
(6.2) 
n 
As a result of the interactions, this wave function is modified and it becomes 
(6.3) 
n 
where the On are the eigenvalues of the operator 0. After the time Llt 
when the interaction is over, we obtain 
(6.4) 
n 
If the interaction is strong enough to satisfy equation (2.5) , then the <Pn = 
<Po(Y - .XOnL\t) will represent distinct and non-overlapping packets that 
correspond to the various possible results of the measurement. 
It is clear from (6.3) that during the period of interaction, the various 
components of the wave function will overlap and interfere. The amplitude 
of the wave function will then become a very complex and rapidly fluctu­
ating function of z and y and, of course, the time as well. The quantum 
potential will evidently be correspondingly complicated so that the mo­
tion of the particle becomes difficult to predict in much the same way as 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
99 
happened in the case of transitions between stationary states discussed in 
chapter 5. However, when the wave packets have definitely separated, the 
apparatus particle 11 must have entered one of them, say m, in which it 
remains indefinitely, since the probability of being between packets is zero. 
From then on, the action of the quantum potential (and, of course, the 
guidance condition) on the particles will be determined only by the packet 
tPm (z)4'm(11), because all the other packets (which do not overlap this one) 
will not contribute to it . So at least as far as the particles are concerned, we 
may ignore all the other packets and regard them as constituting inactive 
or physically ineffective information in the sense discussed in chapter 5. 
Here it must be emphasised that, as was shown for the transition processes 
for example, this will still happen even when there is some spatial over­
lap between t/im (z) and the remaining packets t/in (z) .  This is because of 
the multidimensional nature of the wave function of the combined system, 
which implies that the product, tPm (z )¢rn (11), and any other product, say 
t/i, (2)¢, (11) , will fail to overlap as long as o n e  of its factors fails to overlap, 
even though the other factor will still have some overlap. 
It is clear that measurement has in effect been treated as a particular 
case of quantum transition even though one of the systems concerned, i.e. 
the apparatus, is considered to be macroscopic. Indeed the combined sys­
tem makes a transition from an initial state ¢0(11) Ln Cn v'.in (z) to one of 
a set of final states, ¢m (11)1Jim (z). A simple calculation will show that the 
probability of this transition is just !Cn l2 (as it would be also in the con­
ventional interpretations). We may indeed use the language of chapter 5 
and say that each of the possibilities cfim (11)v'.im(z ) constitutes a kind of 
channel. During the period of interaction the quantum potential develops 
a structure of bifurcation points, such that apparatus particles initially on 
trajectories leading to one side of these points enter, for example, the m1h 
channel, while the others do not . Eventually each particle enters one of 
the channels to the exclusion of all the others and thereafter stays in this 
channel. When this has happened the 'observed particle' will behave from 
then on as if its wave function were just tPm ( z), even if v'.im ( z) and the rest 
of the ¢n (z) should still overlap. The fact that the apparatus particle must 
enter one of the possible channels and stay there is thus what is behind the 
possibility of a set of clearly distinct results of a quantum measurement. 
Nevertheless, as was brought out in chapter 5, the 'inactive' packets not 
containing the particles need not at this stage remain permanently inactive. 
Rather it is still possible, in principle, to bring the apparatus packet, say 
¢im(11) and cfin (11), together so they will interfere. In this case the quantum 
potential may now be affected by the previously inactive packets and s o  
the production of distinct and separate results of the measurement process 
is not yet irrevocable. 

100 
The undivided universe 
As shown in chapter 5, the irrevocability of such a process is established 
only when the apparatus particle interacts with a macroscopic system of 
particles. In the case of a measurement, this will be the detecting device 
which amplifies the results to a scale large enough to be directly observed. 
Such a detecting device will of course contain a very large number, N, 
of particles with coordinates Zi .  When this interacts with the apparatus 
particle, 11, its wave function A( z1 . . .  ZN ) will change. To each distinct 
state, n, of the apparatus variable, there will be a corresponding state 
Xn(11, z1 . . .  ZN) of the combined system of the apparatus and the detector. 
This wave function will then be 
n 
We have assumed that the effect of this interaction on the observed particle 
is negligible. In general however, some correlation of the 11 and the set {zi }  
is to b e  expected. But within the context under discussion this will have 
no appreciable effect on the meaning of the experimental results. For most 
purposes we can therefore simplify the treatment by writing 
where An ( z1 . . .  ZN ) represents the wave function of the detector correspond­
ing to ¢ܜ ( 11) for the apparatus variable. 
In the above we have allowed scope for the apparatus packet ¢n(11) to 
change to some other form ¢ܜ ( 11) as a result of interaction with the detector. 
In general, conditions can evidently be arranged so that this change will not 
produce any overlap between the ¢ܝ (11) corresponding to different values of 
n .  Even if it were possible, either naturally or by some special experimental 
arrangement for these to come to overlap, any given A< will not overlap with 
the other An in the configuration space of the detecting device. Therefore 
such overlap of the ¢ܝ will not alter the quantum potential acting on the 
z- and 11-particles. This is because the particles of the detecting device 
will now be in distinct channels in the overall configuration space of the 
detector. Moreover since these channels will be so complex and multiple 
in nature, it will not be possible to arrange them to overlap in the future, 
while the probability for this to happen spontaneously will be negligible. 
The channels corresponding to distinct possible results of a measurement 
are in this way established essentially irrevocably. 
The above treatment discusses measurement in terms of von Neumann 's 
analysis in which one introduces an interaction between measuring appa­
ratus and observed system that correlates the value of the observed result 
directly to the position of a suitable apparatus variable. However , there 

Measurement as a special case of quantum p roceaa 
101 
is a wide class of measurement in which the observed result ia, in the first 
instant, correlated to the momentum of such an apparatus variable. With 
the passage of time the resulting motion of the apparatus variable then 
leads to a separation of the apparatus packets corresponding to different 
values of the final state of the observed system. 
A typical example of this sort of measurement is the Stern-Gerlach 
experiment. Suppose we have a beam of atoms with coordinate y, each 
containing an electron with coordinate z .  Let the orbital angular momen­
tum of the atoms be h. Relative to any convenient z-axis there are three 
possible quantum fields t/J; (z) where j = 0, 1 ,  - 1  corresponding to the dif­
ferent values of the z-component of the angular momentum. The first 
stage of the measurement is achieved by letting the atoms pass through an 
inhomogeneous magnetic field in the z-direction. Before the atoms reach 
this field, the wave function of the combined system is 
(6.5) 
where ¢0 ( y) represents the initial packet corresponding to the location of 
the atom. 
While the atoms are passing through the magnetic field , the interaction 
Hamiltonian is going to be approximately 
( aB,) 
H1 = 
oz 
o L ,  
(6.6) 
where ( 8 B / 8 z )0 is the value of the gradient of the magnetic field at the 
centre of the beam and L, is the z-component of the angular momentum 
operator. Recalling that the interaction is impulsive so that all changes 
of the wave function due to the rest of the Hamiltonian can be neglected 
during the interaction, we obtain for the wave function immediately after 
passing through the inhomogeneous magnetic field , 
il 11 = L C; t/J; ( z )¢o(y)eij(8B/8Z)at!.t1J 
j 
(6.7) 
where tit is the time spent in this field. Thus the apparatus packet obtains 
a momentum proportional to the angular momentum of the atom. To 
make a measurement possible, the momentum transferred to the atom, 
(8B/8z)0 tit must evidently be much greater than the width bp of the 
packet. 
After this interaction takes place, the packets will begin to separate. 
With the approximations made here, the spread of the packet can be 

102 
The undivided universe 
neglected. We then obtain, after a suitable time t ,  
(6.8) 
where p0 = (8B/8z)0 ĵt. Clearly the three packets will eventually separate 
after which they may be detected, for example, at a screen. 
From here on the treatment goes through in essentially the same way 
as with the von Neumann type of measurement interaction. Thus, while 
the packets are separating but still overlap, there will be a complicated and 
rapidly varying quantum potential containing bifurcation points of more or 
les the same kind that has been discussed in earlier examples. According 
to the initial position of the z - and JI-particles, the system will enter one 
of these packets and, as explained earlier, this will determine a channel in 
which it remains from then on. The other two channels will then have no 
effect on the quantum potential (or on the guidance conditions) acting on 
the particle. They can therefore be ignored . However, as we have already 
pointed out in several contexts, it is still possible for the atomic quantum 
fields 4'i (ti) to be made to overlap , for example, with the aid of suitable 
magnetic fields. The corresponding channels are thus not yet irrevocably 
determined. 
The next stage is to allow the atoms to enter a detecting device. For 
example, this may be done by having each beam enter an ion chamber. As 
the atom goes through the chamber it will ionise molecules of the gas that 
are present there. Let the relevant coordinates of these molecules be de­
noted by z? . . .  zN (where zǷ represents the s molecule in the n1h chamber) . 
If an electron is liberated, it will be accelerated by the applied field of the 
ion chamber as shown in figure 6 . 1 .  This will initiate a cascade giving rise 
ultimately to a pulse containing so many electrons that it can be observed 
by ordinary means (e.g. a perceptible deflection of a galvanometer). 
To discuss the behaviour of the wave function Il of the total system, 
let xo = ITn >.a( z? . .
. z'J.,) represent the state in which all the counters are 
unfired and let x'j = >.'j(z? . . .  z'N) represent the state in which the n1h 
counter has fired and the others have not. The total wave function just 
before the particle enters a counter is 
where 
xo(z1 . . .  ZN) L Cj l/;j (z)efij (y) , 
j 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
103 
+ 
Figure 6 . 1 :  Discharging ion chamber 
After one of the counters has functioned this becomes 
It is clear that in order to obtain interference of the various states of the 
z-particle, it will be necessary that the quantum fields of the total system 
of z-particles in the fired state overlap those in the unfired state; even while 
the cascade is developing, it is evident that there will be no such overlap. 
And after all the cascade particles have reached the electrodes and flowed 
along the wire to a very different place, the possibility of establishing an 
overlap becomes even less likely than during the cascade. 
Along the lines that we have described above, we can see that it is in 
principle possible to follow the measurement process from the original atom, 
through the cascade, and to show how what was an essentially quantum 
mechanical process gradually turns into a directly observable pulse. We 
may here anticipate the results of chapter 8, where it is shown that large 
scale movements such as that of the pulse which reaches the electrodes 
of the ion chamber can be described by collective coordinates for which 
the WKB approximation is valid . This is what justifies us in saying a 

104 
The undivided universe 
quantum distinction of states of different angular moment is eventually 
made clasically manifest and therefore observable in the usual way which 
requires no further special analysis. 
At this stage we can say that everything has happened aa if the over­
all wave function had 'collapsed ' to one corresponding to the actual result 
obtained in the measurement. We emphasise, however, that in our treat­
ment there is no actual collapse; there is merely a process in which the 
information represented by the unoccupied packets effectively loses all po­
tential for activity. Or as we have put it in chapter 5, the range of potential 
activity of this information is spontaneously narrowed down in essentially 
the same way as happened with transition processes. It follows that in this 
regard measurement is indeed just a special case of a transition process in 
which the two systems interact and then come out in correlated states. It 
is this correlation that enables us, from the observed result, to attribute a 
corresponding property to the final state of the observed system. 
In the transition process that takes place in a measurement, it is clear 
that (as happens indeed in all transition processes) there is no need to place 
any 'cuts' or arbitrary breaks in the description of reality, such as that, for 
example, introduced by von Neumann between the quantum and clasical 
levels (see chapter 2). In fact we have given what is, in principle, a detailed 
account of the whole process of measurement which is not restricted to the 
phenomena alone as Bohr requires (while nevertheless retaining a wholeness 
similar to that of Bohr in certain ways which will be discussed in more detail 
later). 
6.2 
Loss of information in t he unoccupied wave packet s 
For those who are accustomed to the conventional interpretation of the 
quantum theory, the notion of empty wave packets arising naturally in 
transition processes and artificially in measurement processes may not seem 
to be acceptable, even though we have shown that they constitute inactive 
information that will never have any subsequent effect on the particles. 
This objection probably arises mainly because the conventional inter­
pretation asumes either tacitly or explicitly that the wave function corre­
sponds to the actual state of the fystem and as such constitutes the basic 
description of reality, at least in so far as this latter can be described in 
any way at all. Therefore it could be felt that the empty packets, which 
also satisfy Schrodinger's equation, constitute a vast mas of 'bits of re ality ' 
that are, as it were, 'floating around' interpenetrating that part of reality 
which corresponds to the occupied packets. 
In our interpretation, however, we do not assume that the basic reality is 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
105 
thus described primarily by the wave function. Rather, as we have stated in 
chapter 3, we begin with the asumption that there are particles following 
definite trajectories (and as we shall see in chapter 1 1  we can also incorpo­
rate ordinary fields such as the electromagnetic in this general approach). 
We then assume that the wave function, t/J ,  describes a qualitatively new 
kind of quantum field which determines the guidance conditions and the 
quantum potential acting on the particle. We are not denying the reality 
of this field , but we are saying that its significance is relatively subtle in 
the sense that it contains active information that 'guides' the particle in 
its self-movement under its own energy. The behaviour of the particles is 
profoundly affected by this field so that it has fundamentally new features 
relative to those of classical physics. The effects of the quantum field will, 
however, become manifest only at the classical level in the collective move­
ment of large numbers of particles. In the latter, the WKB approximation 
will generally hold and the quantum fields can be neglected. So ultimately 
all manifestations of the quantum fields are through the particles. 
We may make an analogy here to human relationships in society. The 
most immediate and concrete reality is the collection of individual human 
beings. In so far as these are related by pools of information, this latter will 
become manifest in the behaviour of the human beings. The behaviour both 
of the individual and of the society depend crucially on this information 
(rather as happens with the particles of physics). The information itself is 
held at some very subtle level which does not show directly and which has 
negligible energy compared with that involved in the physical movements 
of the people. To complete the analogy we might surmise that perhaps the 
information in the wave function is likewise contained at a more subtle level 
of negligible energy in a way that has not shown yet and that we have not 
thus far been able to study. 
In this analogy we can see that information is constantly losing its po­
tential for activity. For example, people may see that some of it is irrelevant 
or wrong, while a great deal may simply be forgotten. Even if the infor­
mation is preserved in books or on discs, most of these latter eventually 
become more and more difficult to access, for example, by being sent to 
depositories and ultimately by being shredded. Other information is sim­
ply lost by dispersal, for example, by the spread of sound waves and radio 
waves. In so far as this information can no longer affect human beings (or 
their proxies in the form of computers) it has lost its potential for activity. 
It is clear then that nothing is more common in ordinary experience 
than for information to lose its potential for activity. If we accept that the 
particle is what responds to information at the quantum mechanical level, 
it is clear that there is no serious problem with the empty wave packets. 
The essential point is that information is immensely more subtle and less 

106 
The tJndivided Bniverse 
substantial than the systems on which it acts. If we give up the idea that 
the wave function is what comes closest to describing that which may be 
called the substance of reality, then the los of potential for activity will be 
quite a natural and, indeed, even an expected feature. 
Another reason why many may have found it difficult to accept our 
ontological interpretation is that the wave function is all that is used in 
statistical calculations, which indeed makes no mention of the particles, 
except to say that the statistics yield the frequency with which they may 
be registered in specified experiments. Since particles seem to play no 
part in the calculations, and since the latter are what occupy the major 
part of the attention of physicists, it may be felt that the wave function 
(which corresponds to the quantum state) is in essence what the theory is 
all about. Therefore to have inactive parts of the wave function may seem 
unacceptable. 
However, if we think further about our analogy to the behaviour of 
human beings we may note, for example, that in the statistical behaviour of 
people moving on roads with signs that inform them, their behaviour could 
in certain cases be calculated from the information implied by the signs 
without the need for a detailed description of the movement and activity of 
the human being as a whole, e.g. including his muscles, his senses, his brain 
and nervous system etc. Similarly it need not be surprising to discover that 
the statistical behaviour of the particles of physics can be calculated from 
the information in the wave function without knowledge of the detailed 
constitution of the particles themselves. 
In both cases the fact that a quantity provides a complete basis for 
statistical calculations does not imply that it also provides a complete basis 
for an ontology. 
6.3 
Quantum properties not generally attributable to the 
observed system alone 
The very notion of a measurement implies, as has been explained ึartier, 
that we are using the macroscopic observable results of the operation of a 
measuring instrument to attribute some property to the object itself. How­
ever it can easily be seen that in what is called a quantum measurement, 
such an attribution is not in general possible. For during the interaction 
between object and measuring instrument, there is the linear combination 
(6.4) of wave functions. It follows that through this period, tJ.t ,  the two 
systems are 'guided' by a common pool of information implying a quantum 
potential that connects them in a nonlocal way. As pointed out m sec tion 
6.2, the orbits of both particles are then strongly correlated and yet highly 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
107 
unstable. Given that we always start with a statistical ensemble p = 1¢12 
which fluctuates at random from one experiment to the next, there will evi­
dently be no way to predict or control in each individual case which channel 
the particle will enter (even though this motion is determinate in itself). 
When the interaction is over, the channels will be separate and the infor­
mation in the unoccupied channel will, as we have already seen, become 
inactive, leaving only the occupied channel with its quantum potential. The 
wave function, and therefore the effective quantum potential, will then be 
profoundly altered (e.g. from a z-component of angular momentum zero to 
a z-component of h). The apparatus particles will also have been corre­
spondingly altered (e.g. one of the counters going from the unfired to fired 
state). It is clear then that we are not 'measuring' a state that has already 
been in existence. Rather the apparatus and the observed system have pa r­
ticipated in each other, and in this process they have deeply affected each 
other. After the interaction is over we are left ,  as already pointed out in 
the previous section, with a situation in which the states of the two are 
correlated, in accordance with the channel that the particles have actually 
entered. 
In certain ways the above behaviour is strongly reminiscent of Heisen­
berg's notion of quantum properties as potentialities belonging both to the 
observed system and the observing apparatus, rather than being just intrin­
sic properties of the observed system alone. Which potentiality is actualised 
depends on the observing apparatus as well as on the observed system. For 
example if the Stern-Gerlach apparatus is oriented in the z-direction, we 
actualise the potentiality of the atom to come into a state of well-defined 
angular momentum in this direction. On the other hand if the apparatus 
is oriented in the x-direction we actualise a different set of potentialities 
for the angular momentum now to be well defined in the x-direction. Evi­
dently the simultaneous actualisation of the two sets of potentialities is 
mathematically impossible and this corresponds to the physical impossi­
bility of simultaneously orienting the Stern-Gerlach apparatus in both of 
these directions. 
One can here make use of the analogy of the seed discussed in chapter 2 ,  
section 2.3. The different possible orientations of the apparatus correspond 
to different environments of the seed, which in turn lead to different forms 
of the plant. In the case of particles, we can see how changing the ori­
entation of the apparatus changes the quantum potential and how this in 
turn changes the possible states in which the system can be actualised . In 
this way we obtain an explanation of Bohr's principle of complementarity, 
which states that the experimental conditions needed for measuring a given 
physical quantity are incompatible with those needed to measure another 
one, when the operators corresponding to these quan tities do not commute. 

108 
The undivided universe 
Wha.t this a.II mea.ns is tha.t quantum properties cannot be sa.id to belong 
to the observed system a.lone a.nd, more generally, tha.t such properties ha.ve 
no meaning a.pa.rt from the tota.l context which is relevant in any pa.rticula.r 
situation . (In this case, this includes the overall experimental a.rra.ngement 
so tha.t we ca.n sa.y tha.t measurement is context dependent.) The a.hove 
is indeed a. consequence of the fact tha.t quantum processes a.re irreducibly 
pa.rticipa.tory in the wa.y we ha.ve explained here. 
Even in classical physics, measurement ma.y strongly disturb the ob­
served system a.nd introduce la.rge changes in its conditions. Moreover it is 
possible to ha.ve situations in which this disturbance is unpredictable a.nd 
uncontrollable, for example, if the interactions a.re such as to bring a.bout 
chaotically unstable motions. Since the initial conditions of the observing 
a.ppa.ra.tus can never be determined exactly we ma.y ha.ve a.n unpredictable 
a.nd uncontrollable disturbance of a. significant magnitude even in these 
clasical situations. Therefore we ca.n evidently ha.ve clasical conditions in 
which faithful measurements a.re not possible because there is no wa.y to 
correct for, or otherwise ta.ke into account, the effects of the disturbance 
a.rising in the measurement process. 
However, a.t the quantum level something much more radical is involved 
in this. For the interactions which now depend on the quantum potential 
ca.n introduce la.rge nonloca.l connections between a.II the constituents of the 
tota.l system which a.re not preassigned functions of the properties of this 
system. This is as if the basic la.w of interaction of a.II the pa.rts were chang­
ing in the process in which the observed system and observing a.ppa.ra.tus 
come into contact. The result is therefore, in effect, a. tra.nsforma.tion of 
the very na.ture of the system as a whole a.nd of a.II its constituents. In the 
quantum case, the pa.rticipa.tion therefore is of a. deeper a.nd more funda.­
menta.l na.ture tha.n it is classically. Indeed in classical physics no ma.tter 
how much the observed particle is disturbed funda.menta.lly, its basic la.ws of 
interaction rema.in the sa.me (being expressible, for example, as preassigned 
functions of a.II the particle va.ria.bles) . Therefore the basic properties of the 
particles may be regarded as intrinsic, no matter how strong the interaction 
ma.y be. But in the quantum theory such properties ca.n, as we ha.ve a.heady 
pointed out, ha.ve meaning only in the tot.a.I relevant context. 
The nearest classical a.na.logy to the a.hove situation arises in connection 
with the free energy of a. thermodynamic system 
F = E - TS. 
In the above, E is the intrinsic energy of the system, but the a.ctual energy 
available in an isothermal process is 6F = 6E-T6S, where 65 is the charge 
of entropy. But T6S is equa.l to the heat which flows into the bath in an 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
109 
isothermal process. The free energy is therefore not an intrinsic property of 
the system, but one that has meaning only in the context of a thermal bath 
with which the system interacts. The analogy to the quantum theory is 
clear, but it must be emphasised that the context dependence of properties 
in quantum mechanics is much more radical and far reaching than it is in 
thermodynamics. 
However , apart from the field of thermodynamics, the notion of prop­
erties that are not intrinsic but are inherently dependent on a total con­
text has actually been suggested to play a fundamental role in cosmology 
through the Mach principle. This states that basic properties of a parti­
cle, such as mass, depend on some form of collective feature of the general 
distribution of matter which includes indefinitely far off systems. And as 
we have seen, the quantum properties imply something similar, but far 
more widespread and pervasive, in the sense that measured properties are 
not intrinsic but are inseparably related to the apparatus. It follows then 
that the customary language that attributes the results of measurements, 
e.g. momentum and angular momentum, to the observed system alone can 
cause confusion, unless it is understood that these properties are actually 
dependent on the total relevant context. 
For example, the actual momentum of the particle is given by p = \7 S, 
but this evidently depends on the wave function. And as we have seen 
earlier, the latter may either correspond to a pool of information common 
to many particles or may depend on distant features of the environment 
such as a slit system. It is clear then that, as we shall bring out in more 
detail presently, the momentum of the n111 particle Pin = 85/ox;n is not 
an intrinsic property of that particle alone, but can only be understood 
in relationship to other particles and to all the relevant features of the 
environment. 
In this interpretation there is one property that is intrinsic and not 
inherently dependent in this way on the overall context. This is the particle 
position, z. It is evidently intrinsic because we have defined it in a way that 
is conceptually independent of the wave function. Moreover it is intrinsic 
also in the sense that it can be measured without being altered. This can be 
done, for example, by introducing an interaction between the particle and 
the observing apparatus in which the interaction Hamiltonian is a function 
that is proportional to the position, x ; , itself. In equation (2.3) , we may 
therefore write 
0 = z .  
Because z i s  a continuous variable , we can write the initial wave function 
as 
Il; =  j C(06(z - Oef>o(Y) d( .  
(6.9) 

1 10 
The undivided universe 
The final wa.ve function is 
11 J = J C(e)b(z - O<l>o (Y - A 1  z¾t) d{. 
(6.10) 
If by is the width of the packet </>o , this measurement will ma.ke possible 
a.n observable distinction between values of e differing by 6z = by I A I ¾t. 
Recalling tha.t this is a.n impulsive measurement, the change of z resulting 
from the original momentum possessed by the particle ca.n be neglected. 
Moreover the wa.ve equation during the interaction is 
al/; 
= A 1 Z  al/! 
at 
ay 
( 6· 1 1 )  
implying tha.t the only cha.nge is to shift ¢>0 (y) to ¢>0(y - A 1 z¾t) . I t  ma.y 
be asumed with sufficient generality tha.t ¢>0 is rea.I so tha.t this term will 
not introduce a.ny cha.nge in the momentum of the z-pa.rticle, p; = 85/ax; . 
It follows tha.t the position of the z-pa.rticle does not cha.nge in this mea­
surement. It is therefore possible to attribute this position va.ria.ble to the 
particle itself. 
However, while the position has not been changed in the measurement, 
the wa.ve function has in general been changed because the interaction with 
the measuring a.ppa.ra.tus ca.n bring a.bout a. new wa.ve function tha.t ca.n be 
much more localised in z-space tha.n the original one was. Since all other 
properties of the electron depend as much on the wave function as they 
do on the position of the particle, the measurement is still pa.rticipa.ting 
in an essential wa.y. Therefore even though the particle position has been 
determined 'faithfully', that is without changing it, this is not true of the 
other properties. With rega.rd to the latter we still cannot in genera.I talk of 
a measurement as something which simply establishes wha.t the sta.te of the 
observed system is. Therefore while the position of the particle considered 
as a.n a.bstra.ct concept is a.n intrinsic property, the other properties a.re, in 
genera.I, still context dependent. 
If we try to measure properties other than position, we find tha.t, as we 
ha.ve already pointed out , the result is affected by the process of interaction 
in a. wa.y tha.t depends, not only on the tota.I wa.ve function, but a.lso on the 
details of the initial conditions of both the particle and the a.ppa.ra.tus . To 
illustrate this we consider a. measurement of the momentum p. In equation 
(2.3) we introduce the opera.tor 0 = p. We then write the initial wave 
function as 
11; = J C(p)e;pz dp </>o(y) . 
(6. 12) 
The fina.I wa.ve function is 
Il J = J C(p)e;pz</>o(Y - A2pKt) dp. 
(6 . 13) 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
1 1 1  
This measurement will make possible a.n observable distinction between 
values of p differing by 6p = !;,,.y/ >.2!;,,.t. In effect this process turns the orig­
inal wave function into wave packets of width in momentum space 6p and 
in position space 6z = 1/ 6p = >.2 !;,.t/ /;,,.y. These wave packets do not in­
terfere because they correspond to non-overlapping 8tates of the apparatus 
variable. 
It is especially clear in this example how a measurement transforms the 
whole system in a radical way. To illustrate this in more detail, suppose 
we originally had a narrow wave packet in z-space of width 6z0 . After 
interacting with the momentum measuring device we would have a set 
of wave packets of width 6z = 1 /6p, where 6p is the accuracy of the 
momentum measurement. If 6p is very small it is clear that the effect of 
the measurement is to cause the original packet to spread a great deal in 
position space, in the same operation in which it narrows in momentum 
space. On the other hand if we had originally a broad packet in z-space 
and then measured z to a great accuracy, the effect would be, of course, to 
cause the packet to become very narrow in position space, while it spread 
out over momentum space. 
To bring out yet further how the actual particle momentum is generally 
changed in a momentum measurement, let us consider an initial state in 
which C(p) is chosen so that the overall wave function is real (i.e. C(p) = 
c• ( -p) ). The original particle momentum is p = VS = 0. After the 
measurement the particle will end up in one of the packets corresponding 
to the mean value of the momentum, Pm . The momentum has thus changed 
from zero to something close to Pm . 
In the ordinary quantum mechanical language of the conventional inter­
pretation, the momentum operator commutes with the Hamiltonian for the 
measurement process, so that one would have expected it to be a constant of 
the motion. How then is a change in this momentum possible? The answer 
is that, in our interpretation, the momentum operator is definitely related 
to the particle momentum only when the wave function is an eigenfunction, 
exp[ip · z] , of this operator. More generally, as has already been indicated 
in chapter 3, the actual particle momentum and the corresponding oper­
ator are not necessarily so closely connected. In such a measurement the 
interaction can be described by replacing 6.t by t in equation (6. 13). The 
wave function is then 
'i/!1 = j C(p) exp[ip · z]<Po(11 - >.2pt) dp. 
(6. 14) 
The coefficient of exp[ip · z] becomes C(p)</!0(11 - >.2pt), with C(p) 
= 
C- (-p) . 

1 12 
The un divided universe 
The reality condition is no longer satisfied because 
[C(p)¢0(11 - A2pt))" 
C° (p)¢0(11 - A2pt) 
i-
C( -p)¢0(11 + A2pt), 
(6.15) 
therefore p = V'S i s  n o  longer zero . A s  t ch anges , the phase will change 
and this implies that the particle is steadily changing momentum, at least 
until the wave packets cease to overlap , when its momentum will be some 
constant PJ (according to wh at packet the apparatus particle actually en­
ters) . If we were to work out the quantum potential , we would see that this 
would explain the change of momentum that takes place during the process 
of interaction . 
To bring this out in yet another way, let us consider the example of a 
one-dimensional particle in a box of length L. A particular initial wave 
function of the system may be 
. 
n 7rX 
( ) 
A sm L4>o y 
A [ [ . n7rx] 
[ . n7rx]] 
2i 
exp '£ - exp -i L 
¢0(y) . 
(6. 16) 
The initial momentum of the x-particle is evidently zero. 
The quantum 
potential is 
Q 
1 82 /8x2 sin(n7rX/ L) 
- 2m 
sin(n7rX/ L) 
= c:f 2ï · 
(6 .17) 
As pointed out in chapter 3, section 3.5, the quantum potential now contains 
all the energy which , in the conventional interpretation , is attributed to the 
kinetic energy of the particle. In the convention al interpretation , the latter 
is supposed to be moving back and forth with equal probability of being in 
either direction . Yet if this were actually the case ,  we would not understand 
why a particle with constant speed, p/m, could cross the regions where the 
probability is zero. Evidently we should not take this picture too literally, 
but it is better to think of it as a figu re of speech that people have become 
accustomed to use . 
On the other hand in our interpretation we have a 
consistent picture because the particle is at rest and there is no force on it 
because the quantum potential is constant . 
After interacting with the measuring app aratus , this wave fun ction splits 
into two non-overlapping parts , which may be written as 
= 
A 
. 
2i exp[1px]¢o(Y - A2pBt) 

Measurement as a special case of quantum process 
113 
A 
. 
+ 2i exp[-1px]¢o(Y + Ľ2p.1.t). 
(6. 18) 
But during the interaction there is a period throughout which these two 
parts overlap. In this period, the quantum potential will not be a constant 
and we see that the particle will be accelerated. Ultimately we end up 
with the particle in one of these packets with equal probabilities for both 
posibilities as in the conventional interpretation . 
However, there is a key difference in the language that we use to describe 
this process. In the conventional interpretation it is stated that we have 
measured the momentum without changing it, but in our interpretation ,  
the particle's momentum h as  been changed. This emphasises that, i n  a 
measurement process, we do not in general find an intrinsic property of 
the observed system that was already there . Rather we have an irreducible 
participation of each system in the other. Therefore the momentum is not, 
as we have already said, an intrinsic property. This will be true for all 
properties other than the position . 
We can bring out this character of the momentum further by considering 
the formulae for the mean values of p and of p2 . These are 
and 
p 
í j iP* (x) :x iP(x) dx 
j iµ• (x)iP(x) î! dx 
J 
a5 
P(x) ax dx 
p is obtained simply by averaging the momentum of the particle a5 /ax over 
the probability distribution P( x) . But to obtain p2 it is not enough tǶ coǵ­
sider the average of (a5/ax)2 . We have also to add a term (aR/ax) / R . 
This shows that the average value of an operator as computed quantum 
mechanically cannot in general be obtained by averaging the correspond­
ing physical property of the particle over the position distribution.. We 
understand this as a consequence of the fact that the momentum 1s not 

1 14 
The undivided universe 
an intrinsic property, but rather is inherently context dependent so that 
it involves the participation of the measuring apparatus and the quantum 
field as a whole. 
Quite generally all powers of the momentum operator higher than the 
first are to be understood in a similar way. (Corresponding results can be 
obtained for the angular momentum operator, h/i 8/8¢.) 
6.4 
The meaning of t he uncertainty principle 
Since our interpretation gives the same statistical distribution of experimen­
tal results as does the conventional one, it follows that the proofs usually 
given for the uncertainty principle will also be valid in our approach. The 
meaning of the uncertainty principle is, of course, that there is a limit to the 
precision with which properties can be attributed to the observed object on 
the basis of observed experimental results. Or as Bohr [1] has put it, there 
is an irreducible ambiguity in the meaning of these results as referring to 
intrinsic properties of the observed object . 
Because of this ambiguity, it becomes impossible to know from a mea­
surement exactly what the state of the particle is and, of course, this implies 
that we do not know exactly how it is going to behave after the measure­
ment. In general, the ambiguities of the actual particles' positions and 
momenta will be of the order of those present in the spread of the wave 
packets (as we have explained in more detail in chapter 3) . But in par­
ticular cases this may not be so. For example, in a stationary state, the 
ambiguity in the momentum of the particle p = \7 S was seen to be zero. 
So if p represents the actual momentum of a particle as it moves (or is at 
rest) in its trajectory, Heisenberg's principle can in certain cases be vio­
lated. In our interpretation, however, what Heisenberg's principle refers 
to is not the actual momentum of the particle itself, but the value of the 
momentum that can be attributed to the particle after what is commonly 
called a measurement of the momentum. And because measurements are 
actually participatory, these two can differ. Indeed it is misleading and 
even confusing to describe what happens as a measurement (rather as if 
in the observation of the mature plant, we were said to be 'measuring' the 
properties of the seed) .  Perhaps as Bell [2] has suggested, we should call the 
whole process an experiment or even a participatory experiment revealing 
the potentialities of the system in question . (Indeed this participatory fea­
ture has already been noted by Wheeler [3] in a different context in which, 
however, there is no way to explain how it comes about .) 
Another way of looking at the participatory nature of quantum experi­
ments in which something is said to be 'measured' can be seen by con-

Measurement as a special case of quantum proceu 
115 
sidering equations (6.2) and (6.3). These describe a proce88 in which the 
wave function is eventually transformed into a set of eigenfunctions of the 
operator that is being 'measured', and each eigenfunction is multiplied by a 
corresponding apparatus wave function which does not overlap the others. 
The function actually containing the particles (of both the apparatus and 
the observed system) then selects what will be the effective wave function 
realising one of the potentialities of the overall experimental arrangement, 
while the empty channels can be neglected. 
What we learn from the measurement is not only the value of the oper­
ator but also the final effective wave function of the observed system. From 
this we can locate the observed particle somewhere in the region in which 
the wave function of the particle is appreciable. The role of thื particle 
is crucial here and it makes it possible for the system to select one of the 
eigenfunctions which will be effective without the need for a collapse. 
If in the quantum domain experiments are thus mutually participatory 
transformations how do we understand the ordinary clasical experience 
in which we definitely obtain measured results that can be unambiguously 
attributed to the observed system without any question of mutual partici­
pation? The answer is, of course, that for measurements carried out in the 
clasical limit such participation is negligible, and the transformation of the 
wave function is unimportant because the quantum potential is negligible. 
We may bring out this point in more detail by considering a system 
with wave function t/i(z) whose Fourier coefficient is ¢(p). Let 6.z be the 
width of the wave packet in z-space and 6.p be its width in p-space. We 
can then show that in measurements of z and p carried out to respective 
accuracies 8z and 8p, the change of the wave function will be negligible 
when 8z խ 6.z and 8p ź 6.p. In this case the participatory character 
of the interaction will not be significant so that the net result is just to 
provide information (of limited accuracy) about the system. 
Along the lines leading to equation (6.3) we can say that in a measure­
ment of z ,  an initial wave function 
t/i; (z) = j t/i(08(z - 0 dE 
(6 . 19) 
goes over into 
(6 .20) 
with the accuracy of measurement given by bz = by/ ..\ 1 6.t where by is the 
width of the apparatus wave packet . If we choose bz լ 6.z , the change of 
¢0(y - ..\1 z6.t) over the region in which lfi(O is appreciable can be neglected 

1 16 
Tlae ttndivided universe 
and 80 we obtain to a good approximation 
(6.21) 
where z is the value of z at the centre of the particle's wave packet . This 
gives 
(6.22) 
If the value of y is observed as y0 ,  the value z can be inferred as 
z = y0/ A. 1'1. t . Thus by observing the value of y we are able to measure z 
to an accuracy 6z = 6y/ A.1 t;.t without making any significant changes in 
the observed system. 
A similar argument can be made for the measurement of momentum, 
showing that it is also possible to measure the latter without significant 
participation provided that 6p ź /!;.p. If we then consider the two results 
together, we obtain 
We conclude then that the ordinary idea of non-participatory measurement 
holds only when the measurements are much less accurate than the limits 
set by the uncertainty principle. But the conditions for this are the same 
as those for the classical limit. So it follows from our interpretation that 
in this limit we can ignore the participatory implications of the quantum 
theory in discussing the meaning of measurements. 
6.5 
On proofs of the impossibility of hidden variables in the 
quanhrm theory 
Historically the question of an ontological interpretation of the quantum 
theory was first put in the form of asking whether there could be 'hidden 
variables'. These, along with the wave functions, would determine the 
results of individual experiments and when treated as a statistical ensemble, 
they would also explain the probability distribution of the corresponding 
ensemble of experiments. (A detailed discussion of the work up to 1973 can 
be found in Belinfante [4) .) 
Rather early in the development of the theory, work along these lines was 
strongly discouraged by a theorem of von Neumann [5) claiming to show 
that no distribution of hidden variables could account for the statistical 
predictions of the quantum theory. We shall not reproduce his argument 
in detail here, but we shall merely focus on what we regard as the essential 
point at issue. 

Measurement as a special case of quantBm process 
1 17 
According to the uncertainty principle, the quantum theory implies that 
there is no state in which the values of non-commuting operators are well 
defined. We can ask however whether there are not some additional 'hid­
den' parameters that would select sub-ensembles in which such operators 
could be defined within limits that are narrower than the uncertainty prin­
ciple. An extreme case would be what von Neumann called a dispersionless 
ensemble in which these operators would all have definite values. 
Von Neumann [5] gave an argument aiming to prove that if there are 
such dispersionless ensembles then quantum mechanics must be 'objectively 
false'. A basic assumption underlying his proof is that if A and B are any 
two operators there is an operator A + B such that 
(A) +  (B) = (A + B) , 
(6.23) 
where (A) etc. denote the expectation values of the operator. This relation­
ship does in fact hold for the ensembles treated in the quantum theory. But 
von Neumann assumes that it also holds for sub-ensembles. In particular 
it would have to hold for a dispersion-free ensemble in which the values 
V(A), V(B) , . . .  of the quantities associated with the operators A ,  B, . . .  
were well defined and therefore equal to the corresponding eigenvalues of 
these operators. 
It is easy to see that this requirement cannot be satisfied. We shall 
discuss this question with the aid of an example given by Bell [6] , i.e. 
a particle of angular momentum with the eigenvalues of the components 
Lr , L11 , L, evidently restricted to n ,  0, - n .  We begin with the two operators 
A = Lr and B = Ly , then the angular momentum L' at an angle of 45° 
between these directions is 
L' = I(Lr + Ly ) -
(6.24) 
In the dispersion-free case this becomes 
V(L') = I [V(Lx) + V(Ly )] . 
But there is no way to satisfy this if V( L') = ±h and so one might conclude 
with von Neumann that there can be no dispersion-free state. 
Bell has given an answer to this. As is well known (and as von Neu­
mann agrees) there is really no meaning to combining the results of non­
commuting operators such as Lx , Ly and L'. For example to measure Lr we 
need a Stern-Gerlach magnet with a field in the x-direction, while Ly and 
L' would require fields in their corresponding directions. These measure­
ments are incompatible and mutually exclusive. Therefore we cannot arrive 

1 18 
The "ndivided universe 
at an inconsistency in this way. However, the interesting point i1 that in 
spite of this incompatibility, equation (6.23) is still true for quantum me­
chanical averages over the three separate series of measurements of Lr , L11 
and L' respectively. As we shall make clear later, the essential point is that 
von Neumann had in mind hidden parameters that belonged only to the 
observed system itself and were not affected by the apparatus. The three 
different pieces of apparatuses discussed above constitute three different 
and incompatible contexts. Therefore for an individual experiment there is 
no reason why Lr ,  L11 and L' should be related in the way that operators 
are related. However , as we have already remarked, equation (6.23) is still 
valid for averages over statistical ensembles of experiments even though it 
has nothing to do with individual experiments. 
The above criticism of von Neumann applies to non-commuting opera­
tors. But if the operators commute then it might seem that we can reason­
ably expect that even for individual cases the values of operators will have 
the same functional relationships as the operators themselves. There has 
been a continuing effort to improve on von Neumann's treatment by con­
sidering sets of commuting operators. Among the earlier discussions of this 
problem we may mention Gleason's work [7] on the basis of which J auch 
and Piron [8] thought that they had proved the impossibility of hidden vari­
ables. Bell [6] later showed that they had merely ruled out a limited class 
of such variables, i.e. those that are context independent. Bell did however 
point out that this proof did not apply to our interpretation because the 
latter implied context dependent hidden variables. 
This latter point does not seem to have been taken seriously by a number 
of workers in the field. Thus Kochen and Specker [9] gave another inde­
pendent proof which was similar in content to that of Jauch and Piron [8] , 
but which had the advantage of using operators that could be measured by 
known physical procedures. However, their proof was rather complicated 
and later Peres [10] gave a much simpler proof for the case of two particles 
of spin one-half. Meanwhile Greenberger, Horn , Shimony and Zeilinger [1 1] 
have also developed a simple proof along similar lines for the case of three 
or more particles of spin one-half. Mermin [1 2] summarised these in a very 
concise way. (For a helpful treatment of this phase of the work see Brown 
and Svetlichny [13] . )  All these authors use the example of commuting oper­
ators and are therefore basically similar in their fundamental assumptions 
We shall therefore carry out the further discussion in terms of Mermin 's 
presentation which is the simplest of these. 
Mermin begins with a set of commuting operators A ,  B ,  C, . . . . He then 
points out that if some fundamental relation 
J(A, B, C, . . .  ) = 0  
( 6 .25 ) 

Measurement as a special case of quantum proceaa 
1 19 
0'1r 
0'2r 
0'1r0'2r 
1 
0'211 
0'111 
0'1 110'211 
1 
0'1r0'211 
0'1y 0'2r 
0'1 z 0'2z 
1 
1 
1 
- 1  
Table 6. 1 :  Spin operators 
holds as an operator identity, then since the results of the simultaneous 
measurements of A, B ,  C, . . .  will be one of the sets of simultaneous eigen­
values a, b, c ,  . . .  of the operators in question, these results must also satisfy 
f(a , b, c, .
.
.
 ) = 0  
independently of the state of the system prior to measurement. 
He then assigns to the observables A, B ,  C, . . .  for an individual system, 
the values V(A) , V(B) , V(C) , . . . . These values are assumed simply to be 
revealed by measurement of the corresponding operator. Since any mea­
surement must give rise to an eigenvalue of the corresponding operator, 
the value assigned to that operator must be one of its eigenvalues. And 
since any commuting sub-set of the full set of operators can be measured 
simultaneously if the values are to agree with the predictions of quantum 
mechanics, they must be constrained by the relation 
f (V(A) , V( B) , V( C) , . . .  ) = 0. 
(6.26) 
We now go on to consider a system of two particles, each of spin-half, 
and the nine operators shown in table 6 . 1 .  
I t  is easy to see that the product of the three operators in each row is 
1 as is indicated in the table. The product of the operators in the first two 
columns is also 1, but the product of the operators in the third column is - 1 .  
Moreover it is also easily shown that the operators in each row commute, 
as do those in each column. Therefore the values of the operators must 
satisfy the same constraints as do the operators themselves. Thus we have 
V ( 0'1x0'2x) V ( 0'2x )  V( 0'1x ) 
V(0'111 0'211 ) V(0'111 )V(0'211 ) 
1 
V(0'1x0'2y )V(0'1y 0'2x )V(0'1 z 0'2z ) 
V ( 0'1r0'2y ) V( 0'2y ) V( O')x ) 
V(0'1y 0'2x ) V(o-1y ) V(0'2x ) 
1 
V(O't z 0'2z )V(0'1y 0'2y )V(0'1x0'2x ) 
- 1 .  
In the above set of equations each value appears twice, once as a member 
of a row and once as a member of a column. The values of all nine operators 

120 
Tiu. undivided univerae 
are ± 1 .  Therefore if we multiply all these equations together, the product 
of the left hand side is 1. On the other hand, the product of the right hand 
side is - 1 .  This contradiction implies that there is no consistent way to 
asign values to all the operators. 
This contradiction rules out the model of quantum theory that is pro­
posed by Mermin (and, of course, all the other authors who use essentially 
the same model). The basic assumption in this model is that the val­
ues V(A) , V( B) , V(C) , . . .  of the set of variables specifying the individual 
system are equal to the results R(A), R( B), R(C), . . .  of measurements of 
the corresponding operators. The above is equivalent to supposing that the 
beables are specified by V(A), V(B) ,  V(C), . . .  and that, as we have already 
said, the measurement simply reveals the values of these beables (as would 
happen in clasical physics). 
In our interpretation we do not assign values such as V(A) , V( B) , V( C), .  
to the operators. For these operators do not correspond to beables in 
our approach. Rather the beables are the overall wave function together 
with the coordinates of the particles, both of the observed system, x, and 
the of the observing apparatus, y. These beables determine the results 
R( A), R( B), R( C) , . . .  of each individual measurement operation. But these 
results are not present before the measurement operation has been com­
pleted. Rather they are then only the potentialities whose realisation de­
pends not only on x and y ,  but also on the overall wave function of the 
system and on the interaction Hamiltonian H1 between the apparatus and 
the observed object (the latter being determined in principle by the oper­
ator 0 that has to be measured) .  Therefore as we have already pointed 
out earlier, there is no pre-existing quantity that is actually revealed in this 
process. 
The above may be said to give the full meaning of the statement that the 
results R(A), R(B), R(C), . . .  are context dependent. On the other hand in 
the model used by Mermin , the results are assumed to be determined solely 
by the values V(A), V(B), V(C) , . . .  and are therefore context independent. 
Let us now return to a consideration of Mermin 's treatment. Since we 
do not assign values to operators, there is, of course, no unambiguous way 
to apply Mermin 's argument to our model. What we do instead is to show 
that the measurement of the operators given by Mermin do not lead to 
contradictory results. This is, of course, sufficient to demonstrate that our 
approach is consistent. 
Strictly speaking we ought to describe by means of some physical ar­
rangement how each of the operators above could give rise to the results 
R(A), R(B), R(C) , . . .  of the corresponding measurement process. With 
operators such as u 1 x  and u2y , this can be done fairly easily by asum­
ing that the particles are far apart and that the first particle undergoes a 

Measurement as a special case of quantum proceu 
121 
Stern-Gerlach process with the magnetic field in the x-direction, while the 
second particle undergoes a process with the field in the y-direction (see 
chapter 10) .  However, with product operators like u1.,u2< no one has yet 
suggested any physical process that could lead to results corresponding to 
their measurements (which would have to be of a nonlocal kind). Until such 
a procedure is suggested, we cannot demonstrate in detail how our approach 
leads to no contradiction with regard to operators of this kind. However, 
if we accept Mermin's asumption that such a measurement is somehow 
possible, then we can show that its results will not lead to a contradiction 
with those operators that may be measured . 
Let us first recall with the aid of equation ( 6.4) and the paragraphs that 
follow it, that any operator 0 which can be measured will lead to a linear 
supposition of wave functions corresponding to its different eigenvalues On . 
The active part of the wave function then effectively reduces to one of these 
eigenfunctions determined by the channel that is actually entered by the 
particles concerned. In this way we show that for a general operator 0, the 
result of measurement is one of its eigenvalues On , and that the observed 
system is left with the corresponding effective wave function t/Jn . 
We now apply these ideas to the operators in table 6 . 1 .  It will be 
sufficient for our purposes to consider the operators in the first column and 
in the last row. It will also be convenient to write 
CT).r = A 
CT1yCT2.r = B' 
CT2y = B 
CT1z CT2z = A' 
CT1x0"2y = C 
together with the identities 
C = AB =  A'B'. 
It is crucial to our argument to note that although A, B, C commute as 
do A' , B' and C, A and B do not commute with A' and B' . If we measure 
A, the result will be an eigenvalue an and the effective wave function will 
be the corresponding eigenfunction 1/!a" . Because A and B commute, if 
we then measure B the result will be a simultaneous eigenfunction of both 
operators, t/Janbn . It follows trivially that t/Ja n bn is an eigenfunction of C 
corresponding to eigenvalue an bn . So if we measure C, the result will be 
the product anbn . Therefore the operator identity C = AB implies the 
corresponding identity of the results R(C) = R(A)R(B). 
A similar argument can be made for the commuting set of operators 
A' , B' and C. However, it is important to keep in mind that A' and B' 
do not commute with A and B. Therefore a different and incompatible 
measuring apparatus is needed to measure A' and B' which excludes the 
apparatus necessary to measure A and B. 

122 
The undivided universe 
Let us recall here that the results depend as much on the wave function 
as on the apparatus variables y as it does on the variables of the obserำed 
system, x .  This implies that the results obtained for C when the apparatus 
used to 'measure' it can also be used to 'measure' A and B simultaneously, 
will not in general agree with the result obtained for C using an apparatus 
that would allow A' and B' to be 'measured' simultaneously instead. It is 
this point that enables us to avoid the contradiction produced by Mermin. 
This contradiction depends on assuming that the result of C, R( C), is the 
same in both cases. 
As we have already pointed out it may be said that a measurement of C 
is context dependent in the sense that the result obtained when A and B can 
be measured along with it has no necessary relationship to the result that 
would be obtained for C when A' and B' could be measured simultaneously. 
Because A' and B' do not commute with A and B, the corresponding pieces 
of measuring apparatus provide contexts that are mutually incompatible. 
It follows then that Mermin's argument makes assumptions that have no 
place in our interpretation, so that the contradiction to which it leads is 
not relevant to our approach. 
Kochen and Specker [9] have argued that the context dependence de­
scribed above does not invalidate the kind of proof of the impossibility of 
hidden variables that we describe here. This is because the results of the 
quantum mechanical observations should be determined by the hidden vari­
ables of the combined apparatus and observed system so that the net result 
for the combined system should be predictable in each case . Therefore the 
argument against hidden variables should still go through when applied to 
the combined system. Our answer to this is that when non-commuting 
operators are measured, different and incompatible pieces of apparatus are 
required. Therefore we have as many combined systems as there are rel­
evant sets of non-commuting operators (so that there is no single 'phase 
space' for the combined system) . This means that one of the basic assump­
tions underlying the proof of the impossibility of hidden variables is not 
satisfied in our approach. 
The context dependence of results of measurements is a further indica­
tion of how our interpretation does not imply a simple return to the basic 
principles of clasical physics. It also embodies, in a certain sense , Bohr's 
notion of the indivisibility of the combined system of observing apparatus 
and observed object. Indeed it may be said that our approach provides 
a kind of intuitive understanding of what Bohr [16] was saying. He de­
scribed a 'measurement' as a whole phenomenon not further analysable. 
The description of this phenomenon includes a specification o f  the experi­
mental conditions (which are equivalent to the context that we have been 
discussing), along with a statement of the results . From the resu lts and the 

Measuremwt as a special case of quantum process 
123 
conditions, one infers the 'values' of the 'measured' qualities, but 88 in our 
approach, it is not implied in Bohr's treatment that these values correspond 
to 'beables' that exist independently of the overall experimental context. 
6.6 
No measurement is a measurement 
In the conventional interpretation of the quantum theory one obtains a 
certain paradoxical quality for the case of what is called 'negative measure­
ment ', i.e. measurements which establish a given result by showing that the 
only possible alternative is not present. To illustrate this sort of paradox, 
suppose that by means of a Stern-Gerlach apparatus, we select a beam of 
atoms with a definite value, zero, for the z-component of the orbital angu­
lar momentum. We then do a further Stern-Gerlach experiment with the 
apparatus oriented in the x-direction. The beam splits into two parts cor­
responding to values of the x-component of +1i and - h . The wave function 
of the atom is then 
I 
W'(z , y) = V2 [4>o(Y - at)¢+ (z) + 4>o(Y + at)¢_ (z)] , 
(6.27) 
where, as shown in equation (6.4), 4>o represents the packet defining the 
coordinates of the atom as a whole, while z is the coordinate of the orbital 
electron, and a is a factor proportional to the strength of the interaction 
and to the time of its duration. 
Let us now suppose that a detector is placed in the beam corresponding 
to the - h  component of the angular momentum. In terms of the von 
Neumann interpretation of the quantum theory, we can say that if this 
detector fires, the wave function 'collapses' from its original form (6.27) to 
(6.28) 
And as pointed out earlier, in the conventional interpretation one can regard 
this 'collapse' as produced by the interaction with the apparatus. 
But suppose that in a certain individual case the detector does not fire. 
The wave function then 'collapses' to 
WJ, (Z , z) = 4>o(Y - at)¢+ (z) . 
(6.29) 
It sems difficult to accept that the failure of this apparatus to operate 
will produce a 'collapse' of the other beam which, in principle, could be 
very far away. Or as it has been put , it seems that "no measurement is a 
measurement" . 
Thus the paradox arises because a 'non-event' (i.e. the failure of tlte 
counter to fire) precipitates an event (i .e. the collapse of the wave function 

124 
Tht undividtd univtrst 
to a state in which the atom never even cont.acts the counter). It is clear 
that the asumption that the wave function actually collapses is the root 
of the difficulty. 
In the conventional interpretation this is a rather strange behaviour. 
However, what actually happens in this experiment can be explained fairly 
directly in terms of our interpretation. We begin by introducing the relevant 
coordinates of the detector, which may be represented by z 1 . . .  Z n .  We have 
to take into account, not only the wave function AJ ( Zi) representing the 
detector that has fired, but also the wave function Ao(zi) representing the 
detector that has not fired. Before interaction , the wave function for the 
whole system is 
1 
ll'o(z , y, z) = /2 [¢io(y - at)l/>+ (z) + ¢io(y + at)l/>- (z)] Ao(zi)· 
(6.30) 
After the interaction with the detector the wave function is 
11'1 (z, y, z) = ì [¢iu(y - at)l/>+ (z)A0(z;) + ¢iv(y + at)1f)_ (z)A1 (zi)] 
(6.31) 
where q,Ź represents the state of the particle as altered by the detector. 
It is clear from the above that we cannot leave out Ao( Zi) in equation 
(6.31) just because it describes a situation in which the apparatus has not 
functioned . Rather, it is evident that each part of the wave function con­
tains some component corresponding to the detector, whether the detector 
has acted or not . 
In the above wave function not only is there no overlap between ¢iw(y -
at) and ¢iŹ(y + at), but also between Ao(zi) and AJ (zi)· For example, 
if the detector is an ion chamber, then as we have brought out in sec­
tion 6. 1 ,  Ao( zi) corresponds to electrons attached to the atoms of the gas, 
whileA1 (zi ) corresponds to electrons that have cascaded and have been col­
lected on the electrode to give rise to a current in a wire leading away from 
the electrode. Clearly the wave function for the electrons in these two cases 
do not overlap. 
Taking the above into account, we can see that there are only two mutu­
ally exclusive possible configurations of the whole set of particleิ for which 
the total wave function is not zero. These are: 
1 .  The atom has angular momentum +h and the counter has not fired. 
2. The atom has angular momentum -h and the counter has fired . 
It follows then that if the counter has not fired, the atom must be in 
the channel corresponding to angular momentum +h, while if it has fired , 

Mtasurement as a special cast of quantum proctu 
125 
it must be in the channel corresponding to angular momentum -h. In 
this way a negative result implies that a measurement has nevertheless 
been made. What happens is that if the atom enters the channel that 
pases through the counter, the latter must fire, while if it enters the other 
channel, it does not. This is the sort of thing that would also happen in 
clasical physics. We emphasise again that we do not asume the collapse 
of the wave function. The particle enters one channel and is only affected 
by the active information of that channel. Thus there is no paradox in this 
conclusion. 
As in many other examples treated in this and other chapters, we avoid 
a paradox in our interpretation by giving up the assumption that the wave 
function is a complete description of reality (which is, incidently, what 
makes the further assumption of collapse necessary). By introducing the 
particle's position as essential for a more complete description, we turn 
what was a paradoxical situation in the conventional interpretation into 
one that is quite simple and straightforward. 
6 . 1  
The S chrodinger c a t  paradox 
Most of the further paradoxes of the conventional interpretations of the 
quantum theory arise from the above described assumption, made espe­
cially sharply by von Neumann, that the wave function provides the most 
complete description of reality that is possible. For when the wave function 
is constituted of a linear combination of components, the actual state of the 
system is ambiguous in the sense that there is no way to define it as being 
in one of the components or the other. The process by which the system 
'collapses' is then mysterious and often ultimately paradoxical. 
In a long article devoted to this whole subject, Schrodinger (14] criticised 
such assumptions with the aid of his now famous cat paradox. To formulate 
this paradox we begin by assuming a cat isolated in a box with a gun 
pointed at the cat. The firing mechanism for the gun is activated when an 
individual electron strikes it. We further suppose a source of the individual 
electrons which pass through a beam splitter. The effect of this splitter is 
to divide the wave function into two coherent parts 1/i1 (z) and iP2 (z) . The 
first part simply goes off harmlessly and is absorbed. The second part is 
aimed at the device that fires the gun. Classically one would expect from 
this arrangement that if a single electron enters the system, there would be 
equal probability after the experiment was over for the cat to be alive or 
dead. This statement could be made meaningfully even before anyone had 
looked into the box to see what had happened. 
Quantum mechanically, however, we must treat this situation in terms 

126 
The undivided 1miver!e 
of the wave function. Let z1 •
.
•
 ZN represent the particles constituting 
the cat and let ,PL(z 1  . . .  Z N) represent a living cat while 1/lv(z1 . . .  ZN ) 
represents a dead cat. Furthermore let 111 •
•
 • 11M represent the particles of 
the gun, the bullet, the powder and the firing device. Let 1/!u(111 . .  
· 11 M ) 
represent the unfired state of this system and 1PF(111 . .  
• 11M ) represent the 
fired state. 
Initially (just after the electron passes through the beam splitter) the 
wave function of the total system is 
After the entire process is finished, the wave function is 
'1 = 
1 
y121P1 (z)1/!u(y1 . . . Yu )1h(z 1 . . . ZN ) 
1 
+ y121P2(z)t/,F(y1 . . .  Yu )1/iv(z1 . . .  ZN ) . 
Since the two components of this wave function are coherent, it then follows 
in terms of the van Neumann interpretation, that the state of the total 
system cannot be one or the other. It therefore seems that the cat is in 
a state that is neither alive nor dead . This ambiguity could be removed 
only when someone looked into the box and saw whether the cat was dead 
or alive. The question immediately arises then of whether in the case that 
the cat was found to be dead, the observer had not actually participated 
in 'killing the cat'. 
Schrodinger regarded this whole situation as absurd. Firstly it did not 
make sense to him that observation was needed to answer the question of 
whether the cat was alive or dead. In addition, even before observation, one 
might well think that the cat should at least know more than this about 
its own state. Or if one does not wish to attribute consciousness to the 
cat, suppose instead that it had been a human being in the box. To avoid 
violence we could replace the gun by a device that would prick his skin . 
Would this person find himself in an ambiguous state in which his skin was 
neither clearly untouched nor clearly pricked by the device? 
In our approach this sort of paradox does not arise because we go beyond 
the asumption that the wave function provides the most complete possible 
description of reality. To define the actual state of being of the cat, we 
have to consider in addition the particles that constitute it. It is evident 
that when the cat is alive, many of these particles will be in quite different 
places and will move quite differently than they would if the cat were dead .  
Indeed one can easily see that i n  the configuration space of the particles 

Measurtment as a special case of quantum proceu 
127 
of the cat'. tǴere will be no overlap of Vi L(" 1 . . .  " N) and ,p D ( " 1 . . .  " N) . 
Therefore 1t 1s clear that at the end of the experiment the cat has to be 
either alive or dead. For the wave function corresponding to the live cat 
has no effect on the quantum potential acting on the dead cat or vice versa. 
Indeed this sort of nonoverlap is present also in the conventional in­
terpretations. However, in these latter, there is no way to remove the 
ambiguity in the state of being in a coherent wave function even when the 
components do not overlap. But in our interpretation the state of being 
also depends on the positions of the particles that constitute it and it is 
this which enables us to treat this situation non-paradoxically as in essence 
a simple case of pairs of alternative and mutually exclusive states. 
As a matter of fact it is not even necessary to go as far as the cat to 
resolve this paradox. Thus if we consider the system of firing device, plus 
gun, bullet and powder, it is clear that there is no overlap between the 
wave function t/Ju(y1 ·
·
· YM ) and t/JF("1 ·
·
· " M) (i.e. because after firing, 
the powder will become gas and the bullet will move so that their particles 
will be in very different positions) .  Therefore the particles cons ti tu ting 
this system will either be in the state corresponding to the firing or non­
firing of the gun. If the gun has aet.ually fired, the bullet will be speeding 
towards the cat ( and will not be in an ambiguous state in which it is neither 
moving towards the cat nor at rest) . The state of the dead cat will then 
follow only if the bullet is actually moving towards it. In other words, once 
the electron has in effect been 'detected', everything proceeds in essentially 
the same way as it does in classical physics. 
6 . 8  
Delayed choice experiment s 
Wheeler [3] has given a detailed description of several possible types of 
'delayed choice' experiments. These are designed to show that, according 
to the quantum theory, the choice to measure one or another of a pair of 
complementary variables at a given time can apparently affect the physical 
state of things for considerable periods of time before such a decision is 
made. 
Like Bohr, Wheeler puts a primary emphasis on the phenomenon , in 
which the experimental arrangement and the experimental result constitute 
an indivisible whole in the way discussed in chapter 2, section 2 . 1 .  From 
his analysis of the delayed choice type of experiment, he concludes that "no 
phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon" , so that 
the universe does not 'exist out there' indep endently of all acts 
of observation. It is in some strange sense a participatory uni­
verse. The present choice of the mode of observation .
. should 

128 
Tiu undivided univerae 
influence what we say about the past . . .  The past is undefined 
and undefinable without the observation. 
We can agree with Wheeler that no phenomenon is & phenomenon un­
til it is observed, because, by definition , a phenomenon is what appears. 
Therefore it evidently cannot be a phenomenon unless it is the content of 
an observation. The key point about an ontological interpretation such as 
ours is to ask the question as to whether there is an underlying reality that 
exists independently of observation, but that can appear to an observer 
when he 'looks' (in physics, with the aid of suitable instruments) .  We have 
proposed a model of such a reality in which we say, along with Wheeler, 
that the universe is essentially participatory in nature. However, unlike 
Wheeler, we have given an account of this participation , which we show 
throughout this book to be rational and orderly and in agreement with all 
the actual predictions of quantum theory. In doing this we assume, as we 
have been emphasising throughout this chapter, that the underlying reality 
is not just the wave function , but that it also has to include the particles. 
As we shall see in this section, when we take this into account there is 
no need to say that the past is affected by our observation in the present. 
Nor do we imply even that what we say about the past is thus affected . 
Therefore the need to introduce such ideas is based on the insistence that 
the wave function provides a complete di>scription of reality. Such insis­
tence has led, as we have seen , to many other strange paradoxical features, 
e.g. with negative measurements and with the Schrodinger cat paradox. It 
seems to us preferable to consider extending our notion of reality by includ­
ing the concept of particles, rather than to go on with an indefinite series of 
paradoxical consequences of sticking rigidly to the assumptions underlying 
the conventional interpretation of the quantum theory. 
To illustrate what is involved in the delayed choice experiment, we first 
describe one of the simplest arrangements suggested by Wheeler [3] (the 
generalisation to more complex cases is straightforward) .  Wheeler uses a 
photon interference experiment . To apply our interpretation [15] to this 
experiment would require a treatment of the electromagnetic field which 
we do indeed outline in chapter 1 1 .  However , to simplify the discussion , 
we shall consider instead the interference of particles such as electrons or 
neutrons. The experiment is shown in figure 6.2, respective beams being 
then reflected by mirrors at E and B. The beams meet at an additional 
beam splitter F and interference can be detected either in beam G or In 
beam H. Two particle detectors are mounted so that they can be moved 
easily and quickly either to C1 and C2 or to c; and C̀ . Then when the 
detectors are in the position C1 and C2 , the relative counting rates wilt 
be determined by the phase difference between the two routes reflecting 

Measurement as a special case of quantum procesa 
129 
-
C' 
* ---1-,._Ǉ--1-ǌǍǎǏǐǑǒ-1 
S 
A 
Figure 6.2: Schematic view of the delayed-choice experiment for photons 
passing through a half-silvered mirror at A .  Counters C1 and C2 can be 
moved into positions c; and c½ 
respectively from E and from B. But with the counters at c; and C½ . we 
can then tell which route a particle actually takes. But with the counters 
at C1 and C2 , there is no way to tell this because the result depends on the 
interference between the waves that have traversed these two paths. 
Suppose now that a single particle enters the system and furthermore 
suppose that it is represented by a wave packet that is not too broad. We 
can make the choice on which of these experiments to perform at sometime 
after the particle has entered the apparatus, but before it reaches the beam 
splitter F. 
In the conventional interpretation of the quantum theory, the wave func­
tion is, as we have already pointed out many times, assumed to provide a 
complete description of reality. Therefore we must say that the wave func­
tion collapses to the actual result of the measurement. Thus in the first 
kind of experiment, it will collapse to a state corresponding either to the 
firing of cԕ or of c½ ' and in the second experiment it will collapse to a state 
corresponding to the firing of C1 or of C2 . If the first experiment is done, 
then clearly the interference will be destroyed before the waves can arrive at 
the beam splitter F. But if the second experiment is done, interference will 
take place at the beam splitter F and then the wave function will collapse. 
Aside from the difficulties in the von Neumann concept of collapse as 

130 
Tlae 1"atlivided univerae 
discussed in chapter 2, ีction 2.4, there are M yet no further problems in 
the discussion of this experiment. Such problems arise only if we try, in 
addition, to give a detailed account of the process by which the previous 
state of afairs led up to these results. According to Bohr (16] (also as 
explained in chapter 2, section 2. 1 )  this is just what we should not try to 
do. 
However, Wheeler, apparently at least implicitly disagreeing with Bohr's 
position, did attempt to provide such an account. What he said was that 
if the counters are placed at Cܨ and q and if, say, only q fires, one can 
then say that the particle traversed the path AB. On the other hand, if 
the counters are at C1 and C2 and if only C1 fires, then, Wheeler says, 
that in some sense, the particle must have traversed both paths together. 
Therefore one would conclude that what can be said about the past depends 
upon the present choice of the mode of observation. 
It is clear however that in our interpretation there is no need for this 
strange attribution of past properties. For the reality is that, in all ca5es, 
the wave is split to traverse both paths while the particle traverses one or 
other in each individual case. But as has been brought out in a number 
of contexts, the interaction with the measuring apparatus implies mutual 
participation in which the final state need not directly reveal the earlier 
properties of the system. If the counter is placed at c; and fires, then, as 
explained earlier, the system is left with the corresponding wave function 
and the interference at F is destroyed. But if the counter is placed at C2 
and fires, then the system is left with the wave function corresponding to a 
particle moving from that point . But in getting there (whether it traverses 
the path ABF or AEF) it will have been affected by the quantum potential 
in the region of interference at F .  Therefore we are not surprised to discover 
that the frequency of detection of such particles reflects the difference of 
phase between the two beams. 
It should be recalled, however, that even the conventional interpretation 
of this experiment does not imply that what we say about the past is 
affected by our present choice of experiments. In fact the conventional 
interpretation would say that, in general, we cannot make unambiguous 
statements about the past on the basis of present observations. As we have 
seen our interpretation agrees with this in a certain way in that we cannot 
say from our observations at C1 which path the particle actually took . But 
we say that it actually took a definite path even though we cannot say what 
that path actually was. It is only if with Wheeler we tried to infer this past 
while holding to the conventional interpretation that we get into this sort 
of paradoxical way of talking about the past. 

Measurement as a spuial case of quantum process 
131 
6.9 
The watchdog effect and Zeno's paradox 
In the conventional interpretation, the quantum theory puts, as we have 
seen, the observing instrument into an essential role, in the sense that with­
out it the equations of quantum theory would have no physical meaning. At 
first sight one might then think that the more carefully we 'watched' a given 
process, the more that we would learn about how it takes place. Yet as has 
been shown [17, 18] ,  in the limit when the system is constantly watched, the 
process itself disappears and one is left with a constant state. While this 
is not actually a paradox, it does seem to suggest something unsatisfactory 
about the whole approach in the conventional interpretation. We shall see 
however that when this question is viewed ontologically, the whole effect 
can be seen to arise quite naturally in a way that is easily explained. 
To discuss this question, let us consider the simplified example of an 
atom of angular momentum h in a magnetic field B i[l the z-direction. The 
possible eigenvalues of energy of the atom in this field will be 
e B  
e B  
-- , 0,
- -- . 
2mc 
2mc 
Suppose that initially the wave function corresponds to an angular momen­
tum of zero. The transition to the state with angular momentum -h can 
be described more or less along the lines given in chapter 5, section 5.3. To 
do this we may assume, for example, that the atom in question contains a 
loosely bound electron which can, in an Auger-like effect, absorb the energy 
given off in a transition to the state of lower angular momentum - h. Again 
as shown in chapter 5, section 5.3, the probability of transition to such a 
state will then be proportional to the time t . 
Let us now suppose however that the angular momentum is measured 
by means of a very strong interaction which allows the measurement to take 
place in a time flt much less than 1/ !lE where AE is the energy given off 
in this transition. 
Without the measurement, the wave function of this atom would be 
given by (5. 18) but only for times much longer than 1/AE. For shorter 
times we may write 
where xo( r A )  represents a wave function corresponding to the zero angular 
momentum of the atom, while X - li  ( r A ) represents a wave function corre­
sponding to an angular momentum - Ii .  And Ao(r B .  t) represents the initial 
wave function of the Auger particle and-\_11 ( r a ,  t )  represents the change of 
the wave function of this particle as it begins to move out of the atom. As 

132 
The undivided universe 
pointed out in chapter 5, section 5.3, for sufficiently short times this wave 
function is proportional to the time. 
When the measuring apparatus interacts with the atom, we will get 
where ¢o(z) represents the initial wave packet of the apparatus (which will 
not change for a particle of angular momentum zero) while ¢0(z + a) rep­
resents the apparatus wave packet corresponding to an angular momentum 
-h. As explained earlier in this chapter, ¢0(z) and ¢0( z + o) do not overlap 
so that they determine separate channels into one of which the whole system 
must enter. If the interaction time with the apparatus is very short , then 
contribution of this term to the normalisation of the wave function will be 
proportional to t2 since the perturbed wave function itself is proportional 
to t .  
Suppose then we made a series of measurements each one i n  a time flt . 
In each of these measurements the probability of getting an angular mo­
mentum -h is proportional to (flt)2 and the probability that it is zero will 
be 1 - 1(flt)2 where / is a suitable constant. As flt decreases by a factor 
of 1/ N, the probability of transition in a given measurement will be pro­
portional to 1 / N2, and in N measurements it will be proportional to 1 / N .  
Therefore as N increases without limit, the net probability of transition 
goes to zero. Or in other words the effect of making repeated measure­
ments of the angular momentum at great speeds is to prevent transitions 
from taking place. 
In our interpretation this behaviour is perfectly comprehensible and in­
deed quite easy to explain. In order for a transition to take place, it is 
necessary that the perturbed wave function interfering with the original 
one shall produce a quantum potential that allows the Auger-like particle 
to escape. Otherwise it will simply remain stably in its original station­
ary state. However, if we measure the angular momentum very rapidly, 
then, as shown in equation (5. 18) , the perturbed wave function (which is 
proportional to t for times much less than l /ll E) will never become large, 
and furthermore it cannot make a significant contribution to the quantum 
potential. For this reason no transition can take place. 
The behaviour described above brings out once again the essentially 
participatory nature of quantum interactions. To make measurements in 
very short times requires very strong interactions, hence very intense par­
ticipation. The idea of measurement which implies that we are simply 
watching what is already there and not participating significantly, is seen 
to be particularly inappropriate in this example. 

Measurtment as a special case of quantum p rocess 
133 
6. 1 0  
References 
1 .  N. Boh r ,  Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Science Editions, 
New York , 196 1 ,  5 1 .  
2 .  J .  S .  Bel l ,  Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge , 1987. 
3. J. A. Wheeler , in Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 
ed . A. R. Marlow , Academic Press, New York ,  1978, 9-48. 
4. F. J. Belinfante , A Survey of Hidden Variables Theories, Pergamon 
Press , Oxfor d ,  1973. 
5. J .  von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 
chapter 4, Princeton University Press, Princeton , 1955. 
6. J. S. Bell , Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, chapter 
4, Cambridge U niversity Press , Cambridge ,  1987. 
7. A .  M. Gleason , J. Math. Mech. 6 ,  885-893 ( 1 957) . 
8. J . M .  Jauch and C .  Piron , Helv. Phys. Acta 36, 827 ( 1 963) .  
9 .  S. Kochen and E .  P. Specker, J. Math. Mech. 1 7 ,  59-87 ( 1 967) . 
10. A .  Peres , Phys. Lett. 1 5 1 A ,  107-108 ( 1 990) . 
1 1 .  D. M .  Greenberger , M .  A .  Horn , A .  Shimony and A .  Zeilinger, Am. 
J. Phys. 58, 1 13 1-1 143 ( 1990) . 
12. N .  D. Mermin , Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3373-3376 ( 1 990) . 
13. H .  R. Brown and G .  Svetlichny, Found. Phys. 20, 1379-1387 ( 1990). 
14. E. Schrodinger , Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. 124, 323-338 (1980) . 
15. D. Boh m, C .  Dewdney and B .  J .  Hiley, Nature 3 1 5 ,  294-297 ( 1985) .  
16. N .  Bohr , A tomic Physics a n d  Human Knowledge, Science Editions, 
New York , 1961 , 50. 
17. B .  Misra and E .  C .  G .  Sudarshan , ]. Math. Phys. 1 8 ,  756-783 ( 1977). 
18. W. M .  Itano, D .  J .  Heinzen , J .  J .  Bollinger and D. J .  Wineland , Phys. 
Rev. 4 1 A ,  2295-2300 ( 1990) . 

Chapter 7 
Nonlocality 
7 . 1  
Introduction 
We have seen earlier that nonlocality is a basically new feature of the quan­
tum theory, at least in our interpretation. In this chapter we shall go into 
this topic in more detail, especially with regard to the analysis of the ex­
periment of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (EPR) [l] . 
We shall first review briefly how this question is to be treated in terms 
of the various interpretations, and we shall show that all but one of them 
imply some form of nonlocality. However, it has generally been felt that 
the very concept of nonlocality is unacceptable in a scientific theory and so 
people have sought an explanation of this behaviour in terms of local hidden 
variables that would in principle determine the results of each measurement. 
This leads us then to give a brief discussion of Bell's inequality [2] (which 
has to be satisfied by any such explanation) ,  and also of the fact that Bell's 
inequality is not actually satisfied, either by the predictions of the quantum 
theory or by the experiments that have been done to test this point. 
We then go on to discuss how our own interpretation deals consistently 
with these questions by bringing in a nonlocal connection through the quan­
tum potential. We finally explain the fact that nonlocality is not commonly 
encountered at the large scale level by showing that it is generally difficult 
to maintain the wave functions that are needed for this except for certain 
systems at low temperatures (such as superconductors) and highly isolated 
systems that have to be produced in a rather artificial way. 
7 .2 
N onlocality in the conventional interpretations 
Nonlocality is usually discussed in terms of the EPR experiment . 
H ow­
ever, EPR emphasised not only the question of nonlocality, but also that 

N onlocality 
135 
of. whether. the quantum meԔhanics was what they called complete. By 
this they did not mean that 1t should cover everything that could ever be 
known, but rather that it had all the concepts necessary for its coherence 
as the basis of an ontology. The result of their analysis was that it was not 
complete in this sense. We shall give here a brief resume of their analysis 
as it would apply to a spin experiment involving a molecule of total spin 
zero, each of whose atoms have a spin of one-half [3] . 
Their discussion was based essentially on what they meant by an element 
of reality. In general terms this signified some feature of the world that 
is real, independently of its being observed or otherwise known by us. In 
particular they proposed a sufficient criterion for such an element of reality: 
if, without disturbing the system in any way, one can predict the values of 
a given quantity with certainty, i.e. with probability equal to unity, then 
that quantity corresponds to an element of reality. Clearly this fits in with 
our general intuitive notions of what is to be meant by an independently 
existent element of reality. 
We now consider an experiment in which the molecule is disintegrated 
so that the atoms are separated by a large distance. Suppose that the spin 
of atom A is now measured in the z-direction and that a given result is 
obtained. We can then predict that the spin of atom B is opposite. Of 
course, atom A will be disturbed when its spin is measured, so that we 
cannot conclude t.hat its spin was defined beforehand as an independently 
existent element of reality. But our predictions of the spin of atom B 
can now be made without disturbing atom B in any way at all. Because 
measurements of atom A do not disturb atom B in any way, it follows 
from the EPR criticism that the z-component of the spin of atom B must 
have been an element of reality even before atom A was measured and that 
indeed it was always an element of reality. 
But now we could have measured any other component of the spin of 
atom A instead, and by considering such a measurement it follows that 
every component of the spin of atom B has always been an element of 
reality. From this EPR concluded that. the quantum theory is conceptually 
incomplete. For one of its basic principles is that when two observables 
do not commute, they cannot be defined together. Therefore at most only 
one of these could be an element of reality at a given time. But if two or 
more are elements of reality, then this means that the mathematical form 
of the theory cannot reflect this in any way at all . To take this into account 
we would need new concepts not contained in t.he present theory. So EPR 
would argue that while the results of the quantum theory are statistically 
correct, this theory does not give an adequate account of the actual reality 
of the individual system. 
Although it is postulated that there is no interaction between the parti-

136 
The tmdivided universe 
des through forces of known kinds, one could evidently 88Ume that there 
was a new and as yet unknown kind of force that connected the two par­
ticles. Then when particle A was disturbed in its measurement, this dis­
turbance would communicate itself to particle B in such a way as to bring 
about a result opposite to that of A for its spin . 
If such an interaction was operating, then the criterion of EPR for an 
element of reality would clearly be irrelevant, since by hypothesis a distur­
bance of atom A can now bring about a disturbance of atom B. However, 
EPR did not sem to regard this sort of interaction as worthy of serious 
consideration. To see why, we note that there are two possibilities: 
1 .  The force is transmitted at some finite speed less than or equal to that 
of light. In this case the statistical predictions of the current quantum 
theory would, of course, have to fail for measurements of A and B 
that are space-like separated . But EPR assumed, as we have pointed 
out, that these statistical predictions are correct, and thus they did 
not even envisage such a failure of the current quantum theory. 
2. The interaction is transmitted instantaneously. In this case the in­
teraction would have to be nonlocal, i.e. to operate directly and im­
mediately between the two particles with a strong force even at very 
large distances. Evidently this would violate the special theory of 
relativity. 
However, Einstein felt there was an even more fundamental objection, 
because independently of relativistic considerations, he thought that all 
action had to be local, while he regarded nonlocal interactions as 'spooky' 
and thus in some way unacceptable [4) . Nevertheless he did believe that 
a suitable local explanation of this sort of experiment could eventually 
be obtained, perhaps on the basis of a new theory containing additional 
concepts that would represent new elements of reality. It is clear then that 
EPR did not make an explicit discussion of the question of nonlocality and 
focussed instead on that of completeness. 
Bohr [5), appreciating the penetrating criticism of EPR, took great care 
in formulating a response. Essentially this consisted in pointing out that 
his own approach of complementarity still applied , even when the particles 
were separated by large distances a!ld when the results of experiments are 
separated by large intervals of time. The main point was that the attempt 
to analyse the process in detail, and in doing so to attribute independent 
reality to the properties of the particle B, for example, was not permissible 
in the quantum mechanical context. This is because the form of the experi­
mental conditions and the content (meaning) of the experimental results 
are, in Bohr's view, a whole that is not further analysable. Therefore there 

Nonlocality 
137 
is no legitimate way to think about the properties of particle B apart from 
the experimental context in which they are measured. The context needed 
to think about the z-component of the spin of atom B is therefore not 
compatible with that needed to think about its x-component. This signifies 
that even though we can predict the properties of atom B from those of 
atom A without disturbing atom B, there is no experimental situation with 
regard to atom B in which both of the above predictions could have meaning 
together. 
The crucial point here is that Bohr is using a different notion of reality 
from that of EPR. For Bohr a concept represents reality only in so far as it is 
in unambiguous correspondence with the whole set of possible phenomena 
and these phenomena are necessarily such that they have to be described in 
terms of the concepts of classical physics. For Einstein, however, concepts 
are a 'free creation of the human mind ' and their correspondence with 
reality is at first assumed and then tested by the phenomena they predict. 
Therefore there is no problem in assuming the simultaneous reality of all 
the properties of particle B even though these cannot be simultaneously 
observed. Bohr regards this as a totally inadmissible way of using concepts 
in the context of quantum theory in which these have to be ambiguous and 
mutually exclusive, but nevertheless complementary. 
The above constitutes the essence of Bohr's answer to the emphasis of 
EPR on the question of completeness of the quantum theory. However, 
from this it also follows that it has no meaning, in his view, to talk about 
nonlocality. Indeed, according to Bohr nothing can be said about the de­
tailed behaviour of individual systems at the quantum level of accuracy. 
There is only the total unanalysable experimental phenomenon and no way 
to discuss in detail what this could mean ontologically. Therefore it also 
follows that there is no meaning to talking about locality either. All that 
we can do is to use the quantum algorithm to calculate the probabilities 
of the various experimental results. Nevertheless it still seems that some 
kind of nonlocality is, at least, implicit in Bohr's approach, because the 
phenomenon itself, which is spread out over space and time, is considered 
to be an unanalysable whole. 
Recall , however, that the most common approach to quantum theory is 
along the lines of von Neumann [6] rather than that of Bohr. To show how 
nonlocality is implied in this approach, let us consider the wave function 
for a system of two separated particles with total spin zero. This is 
1 
iit = V'J,f(r A )g(rB) [1/i+(A)l/i- (B) - 1/J_ (A)l/i+ (B)] ,  
(7.1) 
where f ( r A )  is the wave function of particle A and g( r B )  is the wave func­
tion of particle B and the expression in the square bracket represents the 

138 
Tlae ?Jndivided univerae 
spin part of the combined system. f ( r A ) may, for example, represent a 
situation where particle A is a long way to the left of the original centre of 
mass of the molecule, while g( r B ) represents a situation in which particle 
B is equally far to the right. We then asume that the spin of particle A 
is measured by means of an apparatus whose relevant coordinate is repre­
sented by 11· The theory of measurement that we have given in chapter 2 
can readily be extended to the case of spin. Before the interaction with the 
measuring apparatus, the total wave function is then 
1 
il; =  ../2/(r A )g(ra )¢0(11) [1/>+ (A)l/>- ( B) - 1/>- (A)l/>+ (B)) ,  
(7.2) 
where ¢>0(11) is a wave packet representing the initial state of the measuring 
apparatus. We then introduce an interaction Hamiltonian which depends 
upon the spin of particle A in such a way as to separate the wave functions 
of positive spin from those of negative spin. As shown in the discussion 
around equation (2.4) and using a similar notation we obtain for the final 
wave function 
il J 
1 
../2/(r A )g(ra ) [¢0(11 - >.t)tl>+ (A)l/>- (B)-
- ¢0(11 + >.t)l/>- (A)l/>+ (B)) . 
(7.3) 
As we have seen in this discussion, ¢0(11 - >.t) and ¢0(11 + >.t) will 
not overlap after the interaction is over. When an observation is made, the 
apparatus will be found in one or the other of these states as if the wave 
function had 'collapsed ' to the state in question. We will be left essentially 
with either 
or 
1 
ilj = ../2/(r A )g(ra )¢0(11 - >.t)l/>+ (A)l/>- ( B) 
(7.4) 
1 
i/lj = ../2f(rA )g(ra)¢0(11 + >.t)1{>_ (A)1/>+ (B) . 
(7.5) 
After particle A is measured, particle B is in a well-defined spin state 
even though there is no measuring apparatus that has interacted with this 
particle. A similar result would have been obtained if we had measured the 
component in any direction designated by 11. With regard to atom A, one 
can say that its interaction with the measuring apparatus was ' resp onsible ' 
for the 'collapse' on to the eigenfunction of its spin in the direction Tl . But 
if there is no connection between A and B how can the latter 'know '  that 
it too must 'collapse' into an opposite eigenfunction of the spin in the same 

Nonloca/ity 
139 
direction, even though this direction was chosen arbitrarily when someone 
decided to measure A when the atoms were far apart? Particularly, if this 
choice is made too rapidly to allow a signal to pass from A to B, it seems 
very reasonable to suggest that A and B are directly connected, though in a 
way that is perhaps not yet known. And so one sees the need for some form 
of quantum nonlocality when we analyse the EPR experiment in terms of 
the von Neumann approach. 
If there is a nonlocal connection between distant particles, what can 
we say about the possibility of using it to send signals from one of these 
particles to the other? Within the essentially statistical framework of the 
current quantum theory, this would require that there be something that 
we could do, for example, to particle A which would change the statistical 
result of measurements of the spin of particle B in one or more directions. 
We shall show that this is, in fact, impossible, from which it follows that 
EPR correlations cannot make possible the transmission of signals of any 
kind (including, for example, those that are faster than light). 
To show this we use a simplified form of a proof by Eberhard [7) . Let us 
suppose an external system with coordinate y is allowed to interact with 
the spin of particle A. The initial wave function for the combined system 
will be 
(7.6) 
where a represents the standard spin indices and tt>.+ (A) represents the 
wave function for particle A corresponding to a positive spin in any chosen 
direction, while 1{>':. (A) represents a negative spin in that direction. 
The most general possible result of this interaction will be represented by 
a unitary transformation on the sub-system consisting of y and A ,  because, 
by hypothesis, we are assuming our interaction does not directly disturb B. 
If it did then this would not constitute sending a signal from A to B, but 
would just be a direct disturbance of B by its interaction with y. 
To represent this unitary transformation , we assume that 4>o(Y) is the 
first term in an orthonormal set 4>n (y) . The most general unitary trans­
formation can be expressed as the matrix u0;:' where a and o:' represent 
respectively the initial and final spin indices. In this notation the initial 
wave function (7.6) can be written as 
Under the unitary transformation, this goes over into 

140 
Tlae wndivided universe 
Let us now consider spin averages for any spin u 8 for particle B. In the 
undisturbed state this average can be written as 
(7.9) 
This will be constituted of four terms, of which two may be called 'diagonal' 
and the other two called 'off diagonal'. A typical diagonal term will be 
Since ¢0 and Wf.(A) are normalised, this reduces to 
(7. 10) 
A typical off diagonal term will be 
But because ,Pԓ and 1/!':._1 are orthogonal this term is zero. We then get the 
familiar result 
(7 
. 1 1) 
(which is zero because the second term cancels the first). 
It is well known that a unitary transformation will not change the scalar 
products. It follows then that because this transformation acts only on 
particle A, the diagonal terms remain the same as before and that the off 
diagonal terms remain zero. Therefore the average of 17 B will be the same 
after transformation as before and we conclude then that nothing that we 
do to particle A will change the average spin properties of particle B. 
7.3 
Bell's inequalities 
We have seen that nonlocality is contained in all the interpretations of 
the quantum theory that we have disc ussed so far. 
As we have already 
pointed out in chapter 5, our own ontological interpretation also contains 
nonlocality as a basic feature. 
In considering the nonlocal implications of t h is ontological interpre­
tation , Bell [8] was led to ask whether nonlocality was necessary for all 
posible ontological explanations of quantu m  mechanics. 
He did this by 

Nonlocality 
14 1 
considering the EPR experiment in more detail , representing the states of 
elements of reality by a set of hidden variables A. These, together with the 
combined wave function of the observed system and the observing appara­
tus, will determine the results of each individual measurement process. In 
the case of the EPR experiment, we suppose the apparatus that measures 
the spin of particle A is characterised by an orientation parameter a, while 
the apparatus that measures the spin of particle B is characterised by the 
orientation parameter b (so that they need not, in general, be in opposite 
directions) . As shown in chapter 6, we may, in general, expect that each 
individual result of the spin of particle A will depend on hidden variables 
µa associated with the corresponding piece of measuring apparatus, while 
results for measuring particle B will depend on the hidden variables µb of 
the second piece of apparatus. In addition there will be some further hid­
den variables. There may be a set of such variables AA and AB belonging 
respectively to particle A and B by themselves, and a further set A which 
may be associated with the observed system as a whole, rather than just 
one of the particles. 
We then introduce a symbol to represent the result of measurement 
of the spin of particle A, with A = + 1 for a positive spin, and A = -1 
for negative spin, while B is the corresponding symbol for the result of a 
measurement on particle B .  It is clear from what has been said above that, 
in general , there may be a set of such variables 
(7.12) 
A and B also depend on the wave function of the combined system, but we 
suppress this for the sake of conciseness. 
At this point we have to ask how to take into account the context depen­
dence of the results of quantum mechanical observation that are discussed 
in chapter 6, section 6.5. It is important not to confuse the question of 
context dependence with that of nonlocality even though it is difficult to 
separate the two. To put the question of non locality for this experiment, we 
may asume that only a local context is allowed. In other words, the result 
of measuring particle A depends only on the context of particle A (i.e. the 
apparatus that measures its spin) and not on the context of particle B. 
The interaction between A and B will be local if the result A depends only 
on µa and AA and not on µb and AB (and vice versa for B). Therefore 
and 
(7. 13) 

142 
The tmdivided universe 
If the above is satisfied (i.e. if each result depends only on a local con­
text) then we may say that we have local hidden variables. 
In this connection, however, let us recall that, as indicated in section 
7.2, it would be quite possible to conceive of purely local explanations of 
the EPR experiment by means of forces that are transmitted at the speed 
of light or les, provided that the predictions of the quantum theory failed 
when measurements were made with space-like separation and held only 
when there was sufficient time for signals to be transmitted back and forth 
between A and B. One might explain such a behaviour by assuming an 
ambient field that connected both particles. By passing back and forth 
between A and B a number of times, this field would guarantee that B 
would 'know' which properties of A were being measured and would behave 
accordingly. This sort of explanation has always been open to consideration 
and in fact we have discussed its possibility in some detail in Bohm and 
Hiley [9) . But Bell's work is based on the assumption that there is no 
time for a signal that would allow the results of a measurement of one of 
the particles to depend on the context supplied by the other measuring 
apparatus. Equation (7. 13) then shows that local hidden variables will 
inevitably satisfy this requirement. 
To proceed with the derivation of Bell 's inequality we must now consider 
the distribution of hidden variables. Locality implies that the distributions 
over µa and µb are independent. It further implies that when we rotate 
the apparatus from one orientation to the other, its hidden variables will 
rotate with it and that such a rotation will not significantly alter the hidden 
variables, ,\A , ,\B, ,\, of the two particle system. 
This means that the hidden variables, µ0 , can be taken as having the 
same range independently of the orientation of the apparatus. We may 
therefore replace the symbol µa by µA , which denotes the fact that the same 
set of parameters can be used regardless of the orientation of the apparatus. 
Similarly we replace µb by µ8 . We therefore define three distributions 
PA(µA ) , PB(µB ) , and P(,\A , ,\B , ,\) . The function P of ,\A , ,\B and ,\ is 
able to express the statistical correlations that may be present between the 
two systems even though the measurement of one of the systems does not 
affect the other in any way. 
We can then define the averages of A and B over the hidden variables 
µA and µB respectively. This gives 
(7 . 14) 

Nonlocality 
143 
Since 
it follows that 
IB(b, )..B ,  )..) I :=:; 1 . 
(7.15) 
We then go on to consider the correlations of experimental results for A 
and B with various orientations a and b. These are what can be readily 
ԑeasured and they will provide the test for locality. A typical correlation 
IS 
To obtain the Bell inequality we begin by considering 
P(a, b) - P(a, c) = j p()..A , )..B , )..) 
x [A(a, )..A , ).)B(b, )..B , )..) - A(a, ).A , ).)B(c, )..B , )..)j d)..A d)..B d). 
= J p(). A , ).B , ).) [A(a, )..A , )..)B(b, )..B , )..) { 1 ± A(d, )..A , )..)B(c, )..B , )..)}j 
- A(a, ).A , )..)B(c, ).B , ).) { l ± A(d, )..A , )..)B(b, )..B , )..) }] d)..A d)..B d)... 
Taking the absolute value of both sides and noting that 
we obtain 
IA(a, )..A , )..)B(b, )..B , ).)I 
< 
IA(a, ).A , ).)B(c, )..B , ).)I 
< 
1 
IP(ab) - P(ac) I :'.S 2 ± (P(dc) + P(db)). 
From this it follows that 
IP(ab) - P(ac)I + IP( de) + P(db)I :'.S 2. 
(7.17) 
The above is Bell's inequality which must be satisfied for a local hidden 
variable theory to apply to our system of two particles with spin : These 
inequalities make possible a test for locality on the basis of measurements 
of four sets of correlations. 
" This symmetric form of the Bell inequality was first proposed by Clauser et al. [10] . 

a 
Figure 7. 1 :  Angular relation between the axes of various spin measurements 
The predictions of the quantum theory are that 
P(ab) = -a · b. 
(7.18) 
There is a range of angles for which (7. 18) does not satisfy the inequality 
(7. 1 7). For example consider the set of axes shown in figure 7. 1 .  Here, 
a 
= b - a /3 = c - d and / = d - c. Putting these in (7. 17) , we find 
IP( a) - P( a ,  /3) I + IP(/) + P(/3 + /) I  Զ 2. Now if a = 60, /3 = 60 and / = 0 
then the inequality on the left hand side is 5/2 which is certainly not less 
than 2 so that the inequality is violated. 
Bell's inequality has been tested in a large number of experiments and 
generally speaking the inequality has been found to be violated. These 
experiments do not use particles with spin but instead use correlations of 
polarised photons produced in atomic cascades. It can be easily shown that 
this case is mathematically equivalent to that of spin. The first experiment 
of this kind was performed by Freedman and Clauser [11]. The latest 
and perhaps the most thorough set of experiments, has been performed 
by Aspect et al. [12] .  In particular the latter were able to test whether 
the correlations were maintained even when the events of detection of the 
two photons were outside each other's light cones. Aspect et al. found the 
inequality was still violated. This implies that, independently of quantum 
mechanics, we have an experimental proof that if there are hidden variables 
they must be nonlocal. 
Aspect's experiments have been criticised by some physicists (13] . The 
main criticism is that Bell's inequalities could have been absolutely proved 
to have been violated only if the photon detector had an efficiency close 
to unity. With the actual rather low efficiencies of these detectors, there 

Nonlocality 
145 
seems to be room for asumptions concerning the hidden variables of the 
apparatus which could still preserve locality in spite of the experimental 
results. However, these asumptions seem rather arbitrary and artificial 
and , in fact, they give the impression of being contrived just to 'save the 
appearances'. The least we can say is that there is a strong prima facie 
case for nonlocality. 
As we have seen earlier, the whole notion of taking Bell's inequality 
as a test for locality is physically relevant only in a context in which we 
are dealing with measurements on A and B that are outside each other's 
light cones. Aspect's third experiment [12] is the one that provides strong 
evidence that this inequality is still violated in this context . For included 
in this experiment is a switching device that could randomly change the 
orientations of the detectors in a time too short for a light-like signal to 
pass between them. Of course one could suppose along the lines we have 
discussed earlier, that there was an ambient field that could pas signals not 
only between the particles A and B ,  but also between these and the random 
switching device. The particles A and B could then 'know' what the random 
switching device was going to do and they could adjust their behaviour 
accordingly. But this does not seem to be very plausible especially since 
the switching device could, in turn, depend on other random devices going 
on in an indefinitely proliferating chain. This could even include the human 
being who chose to set these devices up in a certain way. If, for example, 
measurements were made when A and B were separated by millions of miles, 
giving the experimenters the chance to change the apparatus in an arbitrary 
way, we would then assume that the ambient field would have to 'inform' 
the particles A and B of these changes so that they could adapt accordingly 
to produce the proper correlated behaviour. Of course it is possible that 
somewhere along this chain quantum mechanics would fail, but then it is 
the whole purpose of Bell's inequality to show that. any local hidden variable 
theory which allows for any kind of independent disturbance of a system 
from outside itself must imply the failure of quantum mechanics. 
In our treatment we have only discussed purely deterministic local hid­
den variable theories. There has been a great deal of work done on obtain­
ing inequalities of the Bell type for stochastic hidden variable theories (14] .  
Although the details of this work are more complex, the results are essen­
tially the same. We will discuss a theory of stochastic hidden variables in 
chapter 9. 

146 
The tmdivided univeNe 
1.4 
Extension of Bell's theorem to three particles 
Recently there has been developed a new proof of the impossibility of local 
hidden variables based on the consideration of three or more particles. In 
this proof it is directly shown that even the states of perfect correlation lead 
to a contradiction with quantum mechanics so that no statistical criteria 
are required and no inequalities are involved. 
We shall use here the very concise and simplified version of this proof 
presented by Mermin [16] who considers a system of three spatially sepa­
rated particles which we denote by 1 ,  2, and 3 respectively. The argument 
of Bell was based on choosing a particular state, the singlet state, of a 
combined system of two particles and showing that under the asumption 
of locality the correlations of these particles are not compatible with those 
predicted by the quantum theory. However, to obtain this result, Bell had 
to work out certain features of the statistical correlations of the two parti­
cles. There is no way from the correlations observed in individual instances 
to show a contradiction with locality. But when there are three or more par­
ticles then one finds that even the perfect correlations cannot be assigned 
consistent values under the assumption of locality. And so the impossibility 
of local hidden variables is demonstrated without the need for any further 
statistical measurements. 
Mermin begins by considering the three mutually commuting operators 
0"1r0"2y O"Jv , 0"1y 0"2r O"Jy and u1 y 0"2y O"Jr . He supposes that the wave function 
ct> is an eigenfunction of all three of these with eigenvalue 1 .  One can then 
immediately obtain a fourth operator, u1r 0"2r O"Jr , which is the negative of 
the product of all the above and therefore commutes with them. It clearly 
has the eigenvalue - 1 for the state cl> .  We can then write 
m1 r m2y m3y = 1 
m1 y m2y m3r = 1 
m 1 y m2r m3y = 1 
1n 1r tn2r m3r = - 1 
where the ms are the eigenvalues of the corresponding individual spin op­
erators. From these equations, we can obtain a set of perfect correlations. 
For example, if we measure u1 r and u2y then the value of O"Jy is completely 
determined and so on. 
If we multiply the four equations together, we obtain - 1  on the right 
hand side, but + 1 on the left hand side. Therefore there is a contradiction 
with our initial assumption that these values for any one particle are inde­
pendent of what is measured for the other particles. From this we see that 
the assumption of locality is directly violated. 
A weaker implicit assumption, namely, that of simple locality, is t h at t h e  
spin variables are at most locally context. dependent (in the sense th at t h e  

Nonlocality 
147 
apparatus that measures a particular spin variable is indivisibly linked to 
that spin). However, what follows from the above proof is that each particle 
is also indivisibly linked to a context determined by the pieces of apparatus 
that measures the other particles. Each value such as m 1 r  appears twice in 
the above equations, combined with different values for the other particles 
(in this case m211 m311 and m 2r m3r ) .  Therefore we are in essentially the 
same situation as that treated by Mermin for the case of two particles as 
discussed in chapter 6, section 6.4 . Although the three operators u1 r ,  u2 11 
and O'Jv all commute as do u 1 r , 
0'2r and O'Jr , nevertheless we cannot in 
general obtain the same value of m 1 r  when it is measured along with u1.r 
and 0'311 as when it is measured along with u2x and O'Jr .  A s  we have already 
pointed out the reason is that the operators other than u 1 r  in one set do 
not commute with those in the other. 
In the ontological interpretation this kind of context dependence would 
be evident because the measurements of non-commuting operators require 
different and mutually incompatible pieces of apparatus. Therefore there is 
no reason why u 1 r should have the same value no matter what other opera­
tors could be measured simultaneously by the chosen apparatus. Therefore 
there is no way in which the contradiction obtained in the proof could arise. 
7.5 
The EPR experiment according to the causal interpretation 
It will be instructive to show in detail how an EPR-type experiment is to 
be understood in our approach for the case of two particles (no essentially 
new principles are involved in the case of three or more particles) . Strictly 
speaking, to compare our results with the discussion that has been given 
here, we would need to use the causal interpretation for spin. Although we 
do develop this in chapters 10 and 12, we shall , for the sake of simplicity, 
consider here the case of a molecule of total angular momentum h .  This 
will give an EPR type correlation very similar to that obtained with spin. 
Although the Bell inequality cannot be directly applied to this case, an 
extension of Bell 's idea to systems of higher angular momentum has actu­
ally been carried out by Mermin (17] and yields similar but more complex 
results. 
Let us consider atom A whose centre of mass is represented by RA and 
whose internal electron coordinate is represented by r A , while correspond­
ing qualities for atom B are RB and r B . After the molecule has been 
disintegrated, the wave function of the whole system can be built out of 
wave functions of the separated atoms . We assume the centre of mass of 
these atoms have wave functions given by tPA(RA ) and tPB (RB ). We choose 
internal states with angular momentum h, which can be represented by 

148 
The wmdivided universe 
9.A (rA )tP;(rA ) and ga(ra )t/J;(ra ) where 
t/J1(r A) 
X,A + iy.A 
v12 r A 
t/Jo(r A ) 
Z.A 
= 
f'.A 
(7. 19) 
tP- 1 (r A ) 
X.A - iy.A 
h r  A 
The above evidently represent the three possible eigenvalues of the an­
gular momentum operator along the z-axis. The combined wave function 
is then 
It = 
N¢>.A (RA )¢>n (Rn )9.A(rA )9n (rn )  x 
1 
x v'3 [t/J1(rA h'1- 1 (rn ) - 1/Jo(r A)l/Jo(rn) + '+'1- 1 (rA )'+'11(rn)] 
(a) 
1 r A · rn 
-N¢>A (RA )¢>n (Rn)9A (r A )gn(r n) Ii) 
(b) 
v 3  r.A rn 
(7.20) 
where N is a normalisation constant. The above, being a scalar, corre­
sponds to total angular momentum zero. 
We asume for simplicity that all the ¢> and g are real so that both 
particles are at rest . As explained in chapter 4 this means that the quantum 
potential is balancing the total classical potentials that are responsible for 
the stability of the atoms. 
Suppose now we made a measurement of the angular momentum of 
particle A in any direction. Because of the isotropy of the wave function, we 
can always choose this as the z-direction . Using the theory of measurement 
described in chapters 2 and 6, we may assume an interaction Hamiltonian 
H1 = >.L,J J/oy, 
(7 .21) 
where y is the relevant coordinate of the measuring apparatus and where 
>. is a suitable constant chosen so large that the measurement will be im­
pulsive. The z-component of the angular momentum operator for particle 
A is 
L 
·( a 
a )  . a 
'" = - z  XA OYA - YA OXA 
= - z 8¢>A ' 
where ¢>A is the azimuthal angle of particle A .  
(7.22) 
If 41.A(Y) represents the initial wave packet of the apparatus, then the 
total initial wave function will be 

Non locality 
149 
During the interaction, the wave function, x, will be proportional to 
€ = L lfi; (rA )tf!-; (ra )GA (Y - jo:At) 
j 
(7 .23) 
where o: is a constant proportional to .\ .  To obtain a measurement, o:At 
must be large enough so that the GA (y - jo:At) do not overlap for differ­
ent j .  In this case there will be no interference between terms of different 
j, and the apparatus particle will enter one of the packets corresponding 
to a certain value of the angular momentum j'h . Thereafter it will re­
main in that packet and the quantum potential will be determined by the 
corresponding wave function lfi; 1 (r A )ifi-i' (r8 ) . As explained in chapter 6, 
this means that everything has proceeded as if the wave function of the 
system had 'collapsed' to lfi;' (rA)ili-; 1 (ra ). Not only will particle A have 
the angular momentum j'h but particle B will have the opposite angular 
momentum -j'h , so that the two angular momenta will be correlated and 
this will happen for an arbitrary orientation of the apparatus. Thereafter 
particle B will behave in every way as if its angular momentum had been 
measured and found equal to -j'h . 
As we shall show this correlation is evidently both context dependent 
and nonlocal. Indeed we will find that B is dependent on the apparatus 
that measures A which provides the nonlocal context for B . Of course, both 
A and B are context dependent in the sense that the angular momentum 
of each is a potentiality that is realised according to the orientation of the 
apparatus that measures A and the state of the 'hidden' particle variables 
YA belonging to this apparatus . 
The cause of the correlation between the particles is evidently the quan­
tum potential. It is interesting to follow in detail how this comes about 
during the period of interaction. However, to do this we shall use the guid­
ance conditions which, as we recall, imply the quantum potential. This 
potential can indeed be calculated from as/ at , but it is very complicated 
and it is more perspicuous to use the guidance conditions. 
We begin by expressing the relevant part of the wave function (7 .23) as 
the following 
€ 
sin 8 A sin Oa [G A (Y - o:At) exp[i(¢A - <Pa )] + 
+ GA ( y + 0: At) exp [- i ( ¢i A - ¢i B ) l] + 2 cos 8 A cos 8 B GA ( y) ' 
(7 .24) 
According to equation (7.22) , the z-component angular momentum of 
particle A is P.p,. = as/a¢iA and of particle B is p.p8 = as/a¢ia where S 

150 
Tlae undivided universe 
is the phase of the wave function. For Ρt = 0 the wave function is real, so 
that S = 0 and both particles have no angular momentum. More generally, 
the z-component angular momentum of particle A will be given by 
and a similar expresion holds for the z-component of the angular momen­
tum of particle B .  Assuming A (Y) is real, we then obtain 
{ sin fJ A sin fJ B ( • [ 
Re 
m 
€ A (Y - aΡt) exp[i(<PA - <f!B)] -
- ัA (y + aΡt) exp[-i(<f!A - <PB )J J) } · 
(7.25) 
Because the wave function depends only on the combination <PA - <PB 
it follows that 
as 
as 
P¢ .. 
= a<PA = - a<PB = -P¢B · 
Initially when Ρt = 0, it is clear that P¢ .. = P¢8 = 0. However, 
after a short time the contribution of A (Y - aΡt) and A (Y + aΡt )  no 
longer cancel and the values of P¢A and P¢8 will clearly then depend on 
y, which, as we have been assuming, has a random distribution with prob­
ability I A (y) 12• All other quantities being equal, the angular momentum 
variables for A and B will then separate depending on the value of y. But 
the net result also depends on ()A and () B ,  and on <PA - <PB . It is clear that 
the behaviour of particle B for example will depend on the initial values 
of fJ A and <PA , as well as on those of the apparatus. So we clearly have a 
nonlocal interaction. But it should be added that the net result for particle 
A will also depend on the initial properties of particle B .  In other words 
the result we get for an individual measurement of A already anticipates 
to some extent the way in which particle B starts out. That is to say the 
nonlocality is reciprocal. 
Because P¢;. = -p¢8 we can be sure that eventually when the apparatus 
packets have separated one of the particles will end up with a unit of angular 
moment and other with the opposite unit. The probability of each result 
can be obtained by integrating the square of the net wave function over all 
the relevant coordinates including those of the apparatus, and as is easily 
shown, this comes out the same as in the conventional interpretation . 
It is clear then that the assumption (7. 14 )  underlying Bell's inequ ality 
is violated. For if we measure B, the result will depend , not only on the 
variables of particle A, but also on those of the apparatus that measures 

Nonlocality 
151 
A .  From this it follows, as we have anticipated earlier, that this experi­
ment involves not simple nonlocality but rather a dependence on a nolocal 
context. 
Since the statistical results of our interpretation are the same as in the 
usual interpretation, we can see from the discussion in section 7.2 that 
the nonlocal quantum potential cannot be used to carry a signal, if this 
latter has to be detected statistically according to the rules of quantum 
theory. This means that there is no way to control the behaviour of atom 
B systematically by anything we might do to atom A .  
7.6 
Loss of nonlocality in the classical limit 
We have thus far gone extensively into quantum nonlocality and have seen 
that it can arise in a great many contexts. At first sight one might be 
concerned as to whether we will then be able to understand why nonlocality 
is not encountered in our common experience of the world. Basically the 
answer to this question is quite simple. For our ordinary experience, both 
in the domain of common sense and in that of classical physics, is restricted 
to situations in which the quantum potential is very small, so that, in this 
context at least, it does not produce significant EPR correlations. For, as 
we have seen, quantum nonlocality is entirely the product of the quantum 
potential. 
Nevertheless it may be instructive to see in more detail what are the 
conditions which favour nonlocality and what are those which do not. First 
of all it should be clear that EPR-type wave functions, which involve lin­
ear combinations of products of single particle wave functions, will be sta­
bilised by suitable classical interaction potentials V( r' - r) between the 
particles. For example, in helium, the electrostatic interaction between 
electrons brings about a big energy difference, !). £ ,  between wave functions 
that are symmetric linear combinations of the one particle electron wave 
functions and those that are antisymmetric linear combinations of these 
wave functions.  
I n the interaction of the system with others which involve energies less 
than ll.E, these linear combinations of wave functions will remain stable. 
At the atomic level, ll.E is quite large and this explains why the chemical 
combination into molecules holds together until they are disturbed by, for 
example, thermal fluctuations with temperatures such that kT is not too 
much less than !). £ .  With superconductors we also have the possibility 
of EPR-type wave functions. But since !).£ is small, these can only be 
maintained at low temperatures. 
The EPR experiment is concerned with situations in which there are 

152 
The undivided univer.!e 
correlations between free particles for which t>.E = 0. It may therefore be 
expected that such EPR correlations may be very difficult to maintain, for 
example, in the face of collisions and various kinds of external disturbances 
that could change the spins of atoms. Indeed if we regard measurement as 
a disturbance, we can see that it does indeed break the correlations and 
leaves us with product wave functions. 
More generally we might consider what happens in a collision in which 
the angular momentum can be altered. We shall discuss the case of a 
molecule of total angular momentum zero which disintegrates into two 
atoms, each of which has angular momentum h. While the atoms are 
flying apart the wave function is given by (7 .20a) . Suppose a collision 
takes place between particle A and another atom, C, whose centre of 
mass coordinates are Re and whose internal coordinates are re . To rep­
resent the full details of this process would require a complex notation 
that would not be very perspicuous. We shall here simply outline only 
the esential results. Let us suppose that atom C has the wave function 
.Pe (Rc )ge (re )1/;; (re ) so that the combined initial wave function for all 
three particles is .Pe (Rc )ge (rc )l/;; (r e ) ? , where า is given by equation 
(7 .20a) and where .Pe (Rc ) represents a wave packet. ,  In the collision pro­
cess, the z-component of the angular moment.um will be conserved, thus if 
i -+ i' and j -+ j' , then i + j = i' + j' . 
In the final wave function there will appear products such as 
.P'c ,  (Re )¢Ԑ , (RA )¢B (RB )ge (rc )gA ( r A )YB ( r B )ij;i' (re )1/!j' (r A)lj;_; ' (r B ) 
. 
} 
(7 .26) 
where .P'c , (Re ) represents a wave packet in which the centre of mas of 
particle C will be moving differently from what it does in its initial state, 
and similarly for ¢'A (RA )· Particles A and C will end up with energies 
,, 
that depend on their final and iflitial angular momenta. Therefore, if, 
for example, particle C interacts with a state of angular momentum h of 
particle A ,  its wave packet will move with a different speed from that of 
a particle that had interacted with an angular momentum of -h , or 0. 
Sooner or later these wave packets will therefore cease to overlap and the 
system will behave as if particle A had 'collapsed' into a definite angular 
momentum, while particle B had collapsed into an opposite state . The 
effective wave function would now be a product of the type (7.26) and 
the EPR correlations would have vanished. This shows that even if E P R  
correlations should happen to arise under natural conditions, they would 
eventually be destroyed. 

Nonlocality 
153 
7.7 
Symmetry and antisymmetry as an EPR correlation 
A very important type of EPR correlation occurs with symmetric or anti­
symmetric wave functions. However, this type of correlation has an im­
portant feature that is different from those examples that we have thus far 
discussed . 
To see what this difference is we first note that for equivalent particles, 
the Hamiltonian will be a symmetric function of all the particle variables. 
It follows then that if we have a solution of the wave equation, the inter­
change of two particles will generate another solution. We can then form 
linear combinations of solutions involving various permutations among the 
particles. Among these the symmetric and antisymmetric combinations 
are particularly interesting because all known particles are either bosons 
or fermions which have respectively symmetric and antisymmetric wave 
functions. 
What is particularly significant in the context of our discussion here is 
that there is what is called a superselection rule implying that transitions 
between symmetric and antisymmetric wave functions can never take place 
(which follows from the symmetry of the Hamiltonian). 
Therefore if one of the particles of such a system interacts with some­
thing else, for example, a measuring apparatus, it no longer follows that 
the unoccupied packet can have no further effect on the particles. Rather, 
there can be such an effect and this is indeed what is ultimately responsible 
for the Pauli exclusion principle . 
To illustrate this, let us consider a measurement of a single particle 
operator OA with eigenvalues a and eigenfunctions ¢0 (zA ). Because of 
the equivalence of particles, another particle B will have a correspond­
ing operator 08 with eigenvalues b and eigenfunctions ¢b (zB ) · The wave 
function for the combined system can be expressed in terms of the products 
¢0 (zA )¢b (zB ) · If, for example, the wave function is antisymmetric, we can 
write 
with Cab = -Cba . 
Let us suppose that we want to measure the operator 0 A . According 
to the theory of measurement that we have given in chapter 6, to do this 
we would need an interaction with the measuring apparatus 
where y is the relevant coordinate of the measuring apparatus and ,\ is a 
suitable constant. But for equivalent particles it is impossible to have such 

154 
The vndivided univerae 
an interaction a.s this would destroy the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. To 
obtain a symmetric Hamiltonian we write 
If </>o(SI) is the initial wave packet of the apparatus we will obtain , after 
interaction, 
Let us choose a certain pair of eigenvalues a1 and b1 . Their contribution to 
tP will be 
( </>o ( 11 - a I ) + ¢0 ( 11 - b I ) ) ( 1/! a 1 ( Z A ) 1/! b 1 ( Z B ) - 1/! b 1 ( z A ) tP a 1 ( z B ) ] . 
It is clear that the measurement has left the wave function antisymmetric. 
Suppose we find that 11 is close to a1 .  But from this information we 
cannot tell whether it is particle A or particle B that is left with the cor­
responding eigenfunction. It follows then that there is no way in such a 
measurement to distinguish between particle A and particie B .  
This implies that quantum mechanically equivalent particles are indis­
tinguishable whereas classically they might, in principle, be distinguishable 
by putting 'marks' on them. From this it has often been concluded that 
particles are not merely indistinguishable, but that they are identical. To 
do this is to go from an epistemological statement referring to our ability to 
distinguish things, to an ontological statement referring to what the parti­
cles are, i.e. one and the same. We recall from chapter 2 that in a positivist 
philosophy, epistemology and ontology are thus equated. But as we also 
stressed before, there is no real necessity to do this. Indeed in our ontolog­
ical interpretation of the quantum theory, we must say that although the 
particles are indistinguishable, they are still different , and that each one 
exists continuously and therefore has its own identity. 
In order to obtain the predicted results of the quantum theory, there 
is no need to asume such an identity, for these results all follow from 
the antisymmetry of the wave function alone. Indeed our interpretation 
gives the same results as those of the conventional ones, whether thP wave 
function is symmetric, antisymmetric or h as no particular symmPtry. These 
results follow when we average over the positions of all the particles with 
the probability density in configuration space 

Nonlocality 
155 
To illustrate what is meant by the identity of a particle when the wave 
function is antisymmetric, let us again consider two particles A and B, with 
two possible wave functions 
The antisymmetric wave function for the combined system is propor­
tional to 
The momenta of the particles are PA = fJS/ozA and PB = fJS/ozB . It 
is clear that PA = PB and that both particles are moving with the mean 
momentum ( k1 + k2)/2. The probability that the particles are at the same 
place is zero and this exemplifies the exclusion principle. The quantum 
potential is 
Q = __ 
l (k1 - k2)2 
2m 
2 
This is a constant and therefore it is consistent with the fact that the 
particles have no relative motion. (Recall that what is described as relative 
kinetic energy in the usual approach is here attributed to the quantum 
potential.) 
When the time-dependent Schrodinger equation is applied, one will find 
that these packets move and spread in a way described in chapter 4. We 
shall however suppose that this spread is negligible, so that the centres of 
the packets will move with velocities ki /m and k2/m respectively. Even­
tually the wave packets will separate and then the wave function will be 
proportional to [ i(ki + knt] 
11'1 = exp 
2m 
x { exp [i(k1 zA + k2zB )] exp [-% (zA - ѕ)] exp [-% (zB - і)] 
- exp [i(k2zA + k1 zB )] exp [-% (zA - ї)] exp [-% (zB - ј)] } . 
At this point the two terms in the above wave function will no longer 
overlap, therefore they constitute separate channels in configuration space, 

156 
The undivided universe 
into one of which the system as a whole must enter and remain thereafter. 
The unoccupied channel then has no effect on the quantum potential acting 
on the particles. Therefore the system is behaving as if it is in one of these 
channels alone, for example, the one in which the particle A has momentum 
k1 and particle B has momentum k2 . 
In this state, the quantum potential between the two particles is zero as 
it was in the original state. But evidently while the packets were separat­
ing, but still overlapping significantly, there had to be a quantum potential 
which accelerated particle A to momentum hk1 and decelerated particle B 
to momentum hk2. The antisymmetric wave function is therefore a partic­
ular case of the EPR-type wave function with its nonlocal interactions. 
It is clear that once the particles have entered a particular channel in 
configuration space in which they are distinctly separated in ordinary space, 
each particle continues to exist with its own identity and continues this 
identity in its movement. We could in principle measure the position of one 
of these particles again and again, thus verifying that it continued to exist 
just as we could if the wave function were not antisymmetric. Although 
we could not know whether the particle we observed corresponded to the 
original label A or B , we would nevertheless be sure that we had detected 
the same particle in successive measurements and that the other, far away 
particle, could never become confused with the one that we had measured. 
Up until now it would appear that the information in the unoccupied 
channel in configuration space had lost all potential for activity as it does 
for measurements in general in the way that we have explained in chapter 6. 
Suppose however that we brought the two particles back together by means 
of a suitable potential. This potential would also act on the unoccupied 
channel because of the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. So eventually the 
two channels would meet, and we would then lose the ability to keep track 
of the identity of each particle by further measurements, even though each 
particle would still retain its identity. The quantum potential would then 
be affected by the channel that had been unoccupied as well as by the one 
that had been occupied. And the particles would display the effects of the 
Pauli exclusion principle so that they would never be in the same place. 
As pointed out earlier, the reason why the information in the unoccu­
pied channel does not totally lose its potential for activity is because the 
antisymmetry of the wave function constitutes a superselection rule that is 
maintained in all interactions and therefore in all measurement processes 
as well. When there is no superselection rule, the unoccupied channel is 
treated sufficiently differently from the occupied one so that it would b e  
extremely improbable for them ever to interfere significantly again 
B u t  
with a superselection rule this will, as we have seen, take place. 
It follows that the Pauli exclusion principle and all other effects of the 

N onlocality 
15 7 
antisymmetry of the wave function are really manifestations of non locality. 
In fact, this nonlocality is so extreme that even particles that are very far 
apart must maintain unoccupied packets that allow the wave function to 
be antisymmetric and it is just this whole set of packets that may later 
come together in such a way as to guarantee that the particles will obey 
the Pauli exclusion principle whenever these packets meet again. 
7. 8 
On objections t o  the concept of nonlocality 
We have seen that some kind of non locality is common to all interpretations 
of the quantum theory which we have discussed thus far. Nevertheless there 
have been persistent and strong objections to the consideration of nonlocal 
theories of any kind, usually with the hope that a local interpretation will 
sooner or later be possible. 
In ancient times it does not seem that strong objections to nonlocality 
were very common. However, by the sixteenth century nonlocality did not 
seem to be an acceptable concept. For example, Newton referred to it as 
a 'philosophical absurdity' [18) . This sort of view continued to modern 
times. Thus, as we have already pointed out earlier, when Einstein noticed 
the possible nonlocal implications of the quantum theory, he referred to it 
as 'spooky' action at a distance [5) . The general mode of explanation that 
is currently acceptable in science is either action through contact or else 
action propagated continuously by fields. Indeed anything more than this 
is often regarded as incompatible with the very possibility of doing science. 
We cannot see any well-founded reason for such objections to the con­
cept of nonlocality. Rather they seem to be more or less of the nature of 
a prejudice which developed together with the growth of modern science. 
First of all, the concept of non locality is perfectly rational in the way that 
we have used it in our interpretation of the quantum theory. For it has 
led neither to internal logical contradiction nor to disagreement with any 
facts. Moreover there is nothing in what we have done that disagrees fun­
damentally with the current scientific approach . Some people might object 
that if everything is strongly and nonlocally connected, there is no way to 
do science, because we will not be able to isolate any system sufficiently 
to study it. But we have shown that in the context of the large scale level 
in which physical investigations are carried out, nonlocal effects are not 
significant. Therefore our interpretation allows for exactly the same degree 
of separability of systems that is required for the kind of scientific work 
that is actually being done. We then made nonlocal inferences about the 
finer and more subtle aspects of material processes, but these are based 
on ordinary rational scientific inferences. Indeed it is just by using the 

158 
Tiu undivided universe 
well-established methods of science that we have been led to make such 
inferences of nonlocality. 
Another objection to nonlocality is that it would violate special rela­
tivity. We shall discuss this question in more detail in chapter 12, where 
we shall show that our interpretation is, in fact, compatible with special 
relativity. For the present we merely note that, as has been shown in sec­
tion 7 .2, quantum nonlocality will not allow a signal to be transmitted 
faster than light by means of the statistical measurements that are basic 
to the current quantum theory in its conventional interpretation. Since 
our interpretation leads to the same results as do the conventional ones, it 
follows that through quantum nonlocalit.y there will be no way to exert in­
stant control over what happens at far away places, nor to transmit signals 
to such places. 
We have not yet found what we could regard as a valid logical or scien­
tific reason for dismissing nonlocality. We are therefore led to ask whether 
there could not be some other kind of reason. It may well be that one 
of the main reasons that people dislike the concept of nonlocality can be 
found in the history of science. For in the early period of the development 
of science there was a long struggle to get free from what may perhaps have 
been regarded as primitive superstitions and magical notions in which non­
locality clearly played a key part. Perhaps there has remained a deep fear 
that the mere consideration of nonlocality might reopen the flood gates for 
what are felt to be irrational thoughts that lurk barely beneath the surface 
of modern culture. But as we have argued, there is no inherent reason why 
this should happen. However, even if there were such a danger, this would 
not by itself constitute a valid argument against nonlocality. Indeed if one 
were to accept such arguments one might equally well say, for example, 
that nuclear energy should not even be considered for further investigation 
because it might lead not only to nuclear war, but also to radioactive con­
tamination and to destructive genetic mutations. While it is necessary to 
be aware of all these dangers, we still have to be able to enquire freely into 
all these avenues of research. 
7. 9 
References 
1. A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, Ph ys. 
Rev. 
4 7,  777-780 
(1935). 
2. J .  S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Qu antum Mech anics, Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1 987. 
3. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, chapter 22, section 15, Prentice- Hal l ,  

Nonlocality 
159 
Englewood Cliffs ,  N ew Jersey, 195 1 .  
4. A .  Einstein , i n  The Born-Einstein Letters, e d .  I. Born, Macmillan ,  
London , 197 1 , 158. 
5. N. Boh r ,  Phys. Rev. 48, 696-702 ( 1 935). 
6. J .  von Neuman n ,  The Mathematical Principles of Quantum Mechan­
ics, Princeton University Press ,  Princeton , 1955. 
7. P. H .  Eberhard , Nuovo Cimento 468 ,  392 ( 1978) . 
8. J .  S .  Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, 
chapter 1 ,  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge ,  1987. 
9. D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, Found. Phys. 11 , 529-546 ( 1 98 1 ) .  
1 0 .  J .  Clauser, M .  Hom , A .  Shimony an d R. Holt , Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 
880-884 ( 1 969) . 
1 1 .  S .  Freedman and J .  Clauser ,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 934-941 ( 1972). 
12. A .  Aspect , P .  Grangier and G .  Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 7 ,  460-466 
(198 1 ) ;  Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 91-94 ( 1 982) ; A. Aspect, J .  Dalibard 
and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44 , 1804-1807 ( 1 982) . 
13. T. W .  Marshal , E .  Santos and F .  Selleri , Phys. Lett. 98A , 5 ( 1 983). 
14. F .  Selleri a n d  G .  Tarozz i ,  La Rivista Nuo. Cim. 4, 1-53 ( 1 98 1 ) .  
1 5 .  D. M .  G reenberger , M . A .  Horne, A .  Shi mony and A .  Zeilinger, Am. 
J. Phys. 58, 1 131-1 143 ( 1990) . 
16. N . D. Mermin , Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3373-3376 ( 1 990) . 
1 7. N .  D. Mermin , Phys. Rev. D22, 356-36 1 ( 1980) . 
1 8. I. Newton , Principia Mathematica, ed. Mothe-Cajori, London , 1713. 

Chapter 8 
The large scale world and the clasical limit of 
the quantum theory 
8.1 
Introduction 
We have been discussing what may be called quantum reality as existing on 
its own without needing any observers, but capable nevertheless of contain­
ing observing instruments. We have suggested in several places that there 
is a continuous transition between this total quantum reality and the large 
scale world of ordinary experience. The question before us now is whether 
we can explain how this large scale world as a whole comes out of the basic 
quantum laws, or at any rate, those features of this large scale world that 
can be described in terms of classical physics. In other words, is classical 
physics contained in our interpretation of the quantum theory as a limiting 
case? 
In order to answer this question it is essential to show that quantum 
mechanics contains a classical level which is not presupposed as in the usual 
approach, but which follows as a possibility within the quantum theory it­
self. Here we must point out that this is by no means self-evident. It is 
of course clear that we will obtain classical behaviour whenever the quan­
tum potential is negligible. But as we shall see, quantum theory generally 
implies the possibility that even for very high quantum numbers, the quan­
tum potential may still be large. The behaviour at the large scale level 
is therefore in general not necessarily classical. However, we shall show 
that the general conditions in the universe are actually such as to imply 
an approximately classical behaviour for objects containing a sufficiently 
large number of particles (which means that there is a classical level that 
is esentially independent of measuring instruments). This is a distinct ad­
vantage of the ontological interpretation, for as we shall bring out later, 
all other interpretations presuppose a classical level (chapter 13) or else 

The large scale world and the classical limit 
161 
imply the assumption of some kind of change in the basic theory, which 
makes possible the classical level (Stapp [1], Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber 
[GRW] [2] and Gell-Mann and Hartle [3]) .  
The classical level is necessary not only because it is observed to ex­
ist, but also because within it, quantum mechanical processes can manifest 
themselves in phenomena which are essentially independent of further ob­
servation. As we shall see, it is this which makes it possible for people 
to establish and share knowledge of an objective nature in spite of the 
nonlocality of the fundamental laws. 
8 . 2  
In what way i s  classical physics contained a s  a limit of the 
quantum theory? 
It has commonly been assumed that the classical level arises where h -+ 0. 
But evidently, since h is fixed, it cannot go to zero. What we have to do is 
to derive the classical laws as approximations to the theory in which h is 
given its current value. But as we have already pointed out, it has to hold 
under certain conditions (which will be discussed throughout this chapter). 
With regard to this point, we repeat that it is clear that wherever the 
quantum potential can be neglected, the classical limit will hold as an 
approximation. For in this case the wave function plays no significant part 
in the determination of the motion of the particles, which then obey the 
simple Newtonian law 
dp = -\i'V. 
dt 
(8. 1) 
In so far as this law holds, the ontology effectively reduces to a set of 
particles (and of course ultimately, fields, as we shall see in chapter 1 1 ) 
obeying the laws of classical physics. 
Moreover, as stated in chapter 3, there is a well-known approximation, 
the WKB approximation, which gives rise to solutions describing classical 
trajectories. As we have already pointed out, this approximation becomes 
valid when the quantum potential is small compared with the kinetic en­
ergy. One can show [4] that this requirement will be satisfied whenever the 
potential varies smoothly enough so that the change in de Broglie wave­
length 6..X within a wavelength is small. One can also show that satisfaction 
of this condition will guarantee the smallness of the quantum potential. 
We emphasise again that this criterion was developed for the special 
case of a wave going in a definite direction. However, a linear combination 
of such solutions corresponding to waves going in opposite directions will 
still be a solution of Schrodinger's equation with the same energy. But such 
a linear combination will not in general have a negligible quantum potential 

162 
The undivided universe 
even though each of the functions that makes it up does have a negligible 
quantum potential . 
Suppose for example that we have a system that varies only in the 
z-direction and whose properties are uniform in the y- and z-directions. 
Suppose further that we have an electron moving in the z-direction which 
is bounded in a space whose edges are defined by a potential V(z) (which 
we assume to vary slowly enough so that we can apply the standard WKB 
techniques). One solution for the wave function is then 
where p(z) = J2m(E - V(z)) . 
Another solution is: 
1/J_ (z) = ë exp[-ê 1r p(z) dz] . 
v P(z) 
o 
(8.2) 
(8.3) 
Each of these, of course, has a negligible quantum potential except at z = a 
and at z = 0 (where these are the turning points of the particle at which 
p(z) = 0). To find the stationary states of the particle, we take a linear 
combination of the above two solutions (8.2) and (8.3) in which IA I = I B I ,  
while the phases of A and B are chosen so that the wave function fits a 
decaying exponential beyond z = a and z = 0. One finds that solutions 
are possible only for certain quantum numbers, n ,  representing the number 
of nodes of a wave function satisfying the Bohr-Sommerfield condition (see 
Bohm [4]) .  
The solution inside the box is then 
IAI 
. [ 11r 
] 
1/J(z) = JPW sm h 
0 p dz + ¢ 
(8.4) 
where ¢ is the appropriate phase factor which brings about the fit. 
With this linear combination we obtain a quantum potential which may 
be quite large. A simple calculation shows that this is 
Q = p2(z) . 
2m 
(8.5) 
Since the wave function is real , the particle is at rest inside the box and its 
kinetic energy has been transformed to the energy of the quantum potential 
(as explained in more detail in chapter 4) . 

The large scale world and the classical limit 
163 
To simplify the discussion we may consider the case in which the po­
tentials become infinitely high at x = 0 and at x == a. This is essentially a 
box of size a and the solutions are 
t/;(x) = A sin n1!'x . 
a 
(8 .6) 
It is clear for these solutions that the velocity of the particle is zero and 
that there are ( n - 1) nodes in the wave function at which the probability 
is zero. The picture according to our interpretation is that the particle 
is sitting at a particular position so that it is consistent to say that it 
never reaches a node. For small values of n this perhaps does not violate 
our intuition. But when n gets large we customarily expect that classical 
behaviour will result. Yet we can see that, no matter how large n is, we do 
not go to a classical limit. 
Einstein [5] objected to this result because he felt that when n becomes 
sufficiently large, we should always approach a classical behaviour in which 
the particle is moving back and forth with equal probability in both direc­
tions. Nevertheless independently of our interpretation we can see that this 
is impossible with the wave function (8.6) because it has nodes at which 
the probability density is zero. If the particles were moving back and forth 
at uniform velocity these nodes would not be possible. They might how­
ever be possible if the particles speeded up to infinite velocity where the 
wave function is zero, but this would violate classical intuition even more 
than would our assumption that the particles are at rest. Einstein's picture 
could only hold, therefore, if the quantum theory itself began to fail at 
sufficiently high quantum numbers (for example in the way that could be 
implied in later suggestions of Rosen [6] , as well as by those of Leggett [7] 
and Penrose [8] ) . 
As we have already indicated, however, we are exploring the hypothesis 
that quantum mechanics is universally valid, and it is therefore necessary 
to see whether this is coherent with our general experience at the classical 
level. Of course it is not part of the quantum theory to say that classical 
physics always holds at the large scale level (or at high quantum numbers). 
Indeed there are strong reasons to suppose that it should not hold always 
in this case. 
To bring this out, one could assume, for example, that the walls of the 
box did not correspond to an infinite potential, but rather to a finite, though 
large, barrier of limited thickness which could, therefore, be penetrated. In 
this case the system would be analogous to a Fabry-Perot interferometer. 
Therefore if electrons were incident on one side of the barrier, they could 
not only penetrate, but could also show transmission resonances for cer­
tain incident momenta (see Bohm (4]). These are characteristic quantum 

164 
Th e u n d1t11 ded u n iv e rs e  
A 
B 
Beam B 
Beam A 
Figure 8.1 : Deflection of two different portions of a plane wave by an 
inhomogeneous field centred at C 
mechanical effects. Indeed if these effects are not found even at arbitrarily 
large distances and for arbitrarily high quantum numbers , we will have to 
conclude that, as Einstein has implicitly assumed , quantum theory itself 
must fail here. However, it should be noted that Tonomura et al. (9) have 
demonstrated experimentally with electrons that the quantum theory holds 
for quite high quantum numbers . 
It is necessary nevertheless to explain why such non-classical behaviour 
at the large scale level is not more commonly encountered . At first sight 
one might suppose that this could be understood by considering the fact 
that our 'Fabry-Perot' interferometer would require extremely accurately 
machined parts and extremely accurately held positions . Clearly these 
will not be found in nature and will be very difficult to produce in the 
laboratory. However, this argument is not adequate. This is basically 
because the criticism raised by Einstein implies more generally that non­
cla.sical behaviour will be obtained whenever waves of appreciably different 
wave numbers cross. In the case of the particle in a box there are only two 
such waves going in opposite directions. But actually there is a wide variety 
of solutions in which many waves could cross. 
For example we may have a wave function spreading over a large area 
with a fairly well-defined momentum satisfying the WK B approximation so 
that the particle will be behaving clasically. Then by means of inhomogen­
eous forces occurring naturally, contributions from two different parts of the 
wave front may come to overlap, as shown in figure 8 . 1 .  

The large scale world and the classical limit 
165 
In the region , 0, of overlap , the orbits will become highly irregular and 
the particle will jiggle rapidly because the quantum potential is both large 
and rapidly varying. Indeed a particle originally passing through A may 
be deflected while it is in the region 0 in such a way that it leaves in 
the beam coming from B. This means that the non-clasical behaviour is 
not restricted to the region 0 where the quantum potential is large. Of 
course as we have shown in the previous chapter the statistical results of 
measurements will still come out consistently without violating the laws of 
the quantum theory. But the individual processes will have highly non­
classical implications. 
As we have remarked earlier however, such situations can readily arise 
in many ways. Indeed as we shall show, even if we consider systems as 
large as planets and stars, the wave function of the centre of mass may 
spread over large areas . As long as contributions coming from different 
parts of the wave front do not cross the behaviour of the objects concerned 
will be essentially classical. But an inhomogeneous gravitational field , for 
example , can bring about just such a crossing. And when this happens, the 
stellar or planetary trajectories would jiggle violently and be deflected in 
non-classical ways. 
If the positions of these objects were measured (e.g. by telescope) , such 
interference would be destroyed . However, it does not seem to be satisfac­
tory in an ontological theory to obtain classical behaviour of large scale and 
distant objects solely with the aid of measurements. 
8 . 3  
Large scale object s  i n  t he classical limit 
It is clear then that we need to go further to develop a theory of a clasical 
level that arises naturally in the universe. This should give an ontological 
explanation of not only planetary and stellar behaviour, but also that of 
large scale objects in general (including, of course, measuring instruments) .  
Large scale objects i n  general are described by collective coordinates. 
Moreover if the classical behaviour of stars or planets would depend on mea­
suring instruments it would still be necessary to show independently that 
the ontological interpretation of the quantum theory implies the possibility 
of having measuring instruments which will be stable and behave clasically 
without the need of further instruments to establish these properties. 
This question evidently has to be treated in a cosmological context. It 
is not necessary for our purposes to go all the way back to the big bang. 
Rather it will be convenient to begin with that phase of the universe that 
followed the inflationary period . By this time protons and electrons have 
been formed in states of high energy. But as the universe cooled down it 

166 
The undivided universe 
became posible for atoms and molec ules to form (the excess energy being 
given off as radiation which was disposed of by its spreading t h rough the 
empty space created by t he expansion of the universe) . From then on as 
the universe cooled fu rther, larger aggregates of matter were formed lead­
ing to galaxies containing stars, planets and ot her objects of t his n at u re . 
Later still the temperat u re d ropped so as to form solid matter t hat h ad  a 
st able atomic structure (e.g. crystals) . Whichever interpret ation of quan­
tum theory we use, this result will follow. For as the energy of aggregation 
is disposed of in the form of field quanta, we will fi n ally b e  left with the 
wave functions involving stable configu rations of fai rly low energy ( a  de­
tailed account of such processes will be fou n d  in Chew [10]) .  
Once we have st able solid structu res then we c an form arrangments of 
matter which constitute measu ring apparatuses and we have the possibility 
of leaving an irreversible macroscopic residue which can constitute a record 
held in this stable struct u re .  
In chapter 6 we did t his in terms of t h e  
discharge o f  an ion chamber. Another example would be a photographic 
plate which would respond to a single particle by irreversibly prod ucing a 
set of grains of silve r .  It is thus clear t h at t he existence of t he observing 
apparatus can be understood in terms of our ontological interpret ation . 
Moreover, wherever stable solid matter is formed , each atom is localised 
relative to the others within a fairly well-defined range of the order of t h e  
interatomic spacing. Because t h e  spread o f  the wave fun ction i s  s o  limited , 
there will not be significant interference of contributions from d iffe rent parts 
of the wave function (which was described earlier in connect ion wit h the 
galaxies , stars and planets) . Thus there will b e  no problem in showing the 
clasical behaviou r of various parts of the earth relative to each ot her, and 
of all the various macroscopic objects t h at are att ached to the eart h ( of 
course ,  including measu ring apparatus , laboratories etc . ) . 
Evident ly this sort of localisation of atoms relative to each ot her depends 
on the strong forces of mut u al interaction between t hem . Howeve r ,  when 
it comes to the centre of mass of the whole object t here are in general no 
such strong forces. There is then no reason why the wave funct ion of t h e  
cent re of mas should not spread o u t  over indefinitely large areas s o  that 
its various parts may come to cross in the manner described earlier with 
resulting non-classical behaviour .  
O ne of the basic questions t o  b e  add ressed i s  therefore that of finding out 
what determines the centre of mass wave fu nctions of the various objects 
in the universe which need not be strongly localised relative to each ot her. 
Consider , for example, the case of galaxies, st ars and planets discussed 
earlier- what determines the spreads of the wave functions of their centres 
of m&8? 
To answer this quest ion we have to go back to the proces in which t hese 

The large scale world and the classical limit 
167 
objects were formed from elementary particles. Ideally we would need to 
know the forms that these wave functions took when the particles were first 
created . At present there is no well-defined answer to this question , but we 
may explore a range of possible answers. 
Case A If for example the particles are created with localised wave func­
tions, the wave packets would spread so that we would be left with 
very nearly plane waves in each region of space . The quantum poten­
tial would be negligible except when parts of the waves were made to 
cross as discussed earlier . 
Case B The other extreme possibility is that particles are created as stand­
ing waves covering the whole of the closed universe (which would , 
for example, be spherical in the case of a universe described by a 
Robinson-Walker metric) . In this situation the quantum potential 
would be large everywhere and would remain large as the universe 
expanded . Even if there were inhomogeneities which broke the spher­
ical symmetry, there would still be a great deal of criss-crossing of 
waves having different wave numbers and directions, so that the quan­
tum potential would remain generally large. Therefore we would not 
have an approximately classical level at this stage of evolution of the 
universe. 
To see how a classical level may develop in both cases let us now con­
sider what happens as the particles aggregate to form large scale objects. 
The mean momentum of the centre of mass will be the sum of the mean 
momenta of all the particles that have come together. In the case of ap­
proximately plane waves resulting from the spread of the original individual 
wave packets (Case A) , we will obtain a well-defined momentum for the cen­
tre of mass while the possible positions will spread , in principle, over the 
whole universe. 
In the case of standing waves (Case B) , however, the momentum of the 
centre of mass will not be well defined , but will have a spread due to the 
spread of the momenta in the wave numbers of the original particles. If we 
make the reasonable assumption that the momenta of the different particles 
combine in random ways, the mean spread JokJ in the wave number k of 
the centre of mass will be Joki = VNloko l wherelokol is the average spread 
in the wave numbers of the individual particles. The quantum potential 
will be of the order of 
h2 
h2loko l2 
Q 
<;::, -2!1-1 lokl2 = -'-2-m_o_ 
where M = Nmo and mo is the mass of the original particles. No matter 
how large N becomes, Q will thus remain more or less the same value as it 

168 
Th e undivided universe 
would be for one atom. In a large system this is evidently negligible. The 
wave function will then be close to a plane wave (or more generally to a 
WKB approximate solution of the form t/J <X exp[iS/'1] in which there is no 
significant crossing of contributions from different parts of the wave front) . 
To make a quantitative estimate of the spread of momenta, let us con­
sider the extreme assumption that immediately after inflation the protons 
have a spread of wave vectors corresponding to a wave number moc/h. 
With this asumption even a small object weighing one gram would have 
a spread of velocities of a few centimetres per second while an object as 
large as the earth would have a spread of velocities of 10-9 times smaller. 
Clearly then (both for Case A and Case B) the overall wave function of the 
whole system will take the form 
'l' = f(X)¢;(x1 . . .  XN- 1 ) 
where f(X) represents the wave function of the centre of mass and 
¢(x1 . . .  XN - I ) represents the wave function of the internal state of the sys­
tem. Therefore in general large scale objects in free space will have wave 
functions spreading over large areas. However, these objects will neverthe­
les behave classically, except when contributions from different parts of 
the wave front are made to overlap by the action of inhomogeneous gravi­
tational fields. In this case the wave function becomes 
where t/JA (X) represents the beam coming from A and t/JB (X) that coming 
from B. This wave function gives a quantum potential that is not negligible 
and we have the possibility of a non-classical behaviour of objects as large 
as stars and planets. We must evidently find further arguments to eliminate 
this posibility. 
To prevent interference of contributions from different parts of the wave 
front, we must have some natural process analogous to the making of an 
irreversible record in the apparatus as a result of a measurement. Essen­
tially what is required is that the general environment be such as to allow 
the posibility of changes in it to take place which remain stable and which 
are different for different possible positions of the object in question . There 
are a number of ways that this might come about, but we will discuss just 
one of these. What we shall show here is that if there is a suitable radiation 
falling on these objects we can achieve our objective. 
To simplify the discussion we shall begin by considering a planet that is 
illuminated by light from a single star. If the planet is far from the star in 
question the light will be parallel. The planet will therefore cast a shadow 
which will be essentially a cylinder extending in the direction of the light. 

The large scale world and the classical limit 
169 
B 
Beam A  
s Al 
Figure 8.2: Shadows SA, , SB, etc. arising from possible positions of planet 
A, B etc .  when illuminated by light from a dist.ant star 
Because of diffraction , some light will enter the shadow . The diffraction 
angle will be of the order >./a, where >. is the wavelength of the light and a 
is the size of the object. Then as we move along the cylinder it will begin 
to fill with light and at a distance of a2 / >. , this shadow will more or less 
disappear. Therefore the volume of the shadow is of the order a4 / >. . With 
a typical planet, a ..., 1 09 ems and >. ..., 10- 5  ems, the volume is ..., 1 032 cm3 . 
Let us now consider two possible positions of the planet, A and B .  
Suppose there i s  a centre, C, of gravitation attraction which causes the two 
parts of the wave function respectively passing through A and B to overlap 
at 0 .  Without the starlight we would have interference at 0 with resulting 
non-classical behaviour of planets centre of mass (see figure 8.2). 
To see what happens in the starlight we must take the shadow into 
account . If the planet is at A it will have a shadow SA, but there will be no 
shadow in the path B .  Conversely if the particle is at B, it will have a shadow 
SB, ,  but now there will be no shadow in the path A. Let us consider the case 
when the planet is at A, then as it moves, its shadow moves with it from 
SA, to, say, SA, as shown in figure 8.2. There will be no shadow associated 
with the path B. In order to see the effect of these shadows on the quantum 
potential, we note that the total wave function must now include not only 
that of the wave function of the planet , 'lip = t,bp (x)¢p(x1 . . . XN - d ,  but 
also that of the electromagnetic field as modified by the shadows. We will 
now show that it is the presence of the wave function of the electromagnetic 
field that is responsible for the quantum potential acting on the planet to 

170 
Th t u n di1J1 ded universe 
remain small. 
We have not thus far in this book given the ontological interpretation 
of the electromagnetic field. A treatment of the field is however given in 
Bohm [1 1) , and a more detailed but simplified version 
_using a 
_scala
_r field is 
presented in chapter 1 1 .  We shall here discuss the basic principles m terms 
of the scalar field. Let AA be the wave function of the field  in the beam 
A. This wave function includes the effects of the shadow cast by the planet 
if it is actually in the beam A . Similarly let As be the corresponding wave 
function for the beam B. The total wave function corresponding to the two 
posibilities shown in the figure is 
IJr = [1f'A(X)AA1 () + 1/•s (X)As1 (ǳ)] ¢(x1 . . . X N _ i ) . 
The internal wave function of the planet is represented by ¢(x1 . . . X N _ i ) . 
We make the reasonable assumption here that the absorption of this light by 
the planet will not make a significant change in this wave function because 
the planet is so large and the intensity of starlight is so small. Evidently 
this wavefunction does not depend on whether the planet is at A or at B .  
With the arguments that are given i n  the appendix to chapter 1 1 , we 
can show that there can be negligible overlap between the overall wave 
functions corresponding to the two beams .  The condition for this will be 
seen to be essentially that each shadow contains a large number of quanta. 
When the beams cross there will then be no interference and we will have 
a classical behaviour. 
This condition is in fact satisfied with the light from a single star. To see 
this we note that the number of quanta in a cylinder of volume V is equal 
to V/c. With our value of V ¯ a4 / .X and with the estimated intensity from 
a typical star as 104 quanta per cm2 per second , we obtain a total number 
of quanta of the order 1025 . Clearly the condition for no interference is 
satisfied for planets and indeed for objects that are quite a bit smaller, 
even when the effects of the light from a single star are taken into account . 
We have thus far assumed that the star which is the source of the light is 
at a well-defined position and that there will be no possibility of interference 
with light coming from the star at another possible position . In effect we 
have been supposing that the wave function of the star is a small packet 
which spreads negligibly because its mass is so large. But according to 
our earlier argument , we cannot guarantee that such a wave function will 
have arisen by evolution from the early phases of the development of the 
universe. Therefore we must consider the possibility that even the star has 
an indefinitely extended wave function , which, however, according to our 
previous arguments must have a fairly weli-defined wave number. 
But we can see this will not change our conclusion. Thus according to 
figure 8.3, if the distance AA' < <  D, the change in angle of the light will be 

The large scale world and the classical limit 
171 
A 
A '  
A" 
Planet 
Figure 8 .3: Effect of a light source at a finite distance from planet 
negligible and everything will happen as before. If, however, AA" Ŵ D, then 
the direction of the light will be appreciably different . However, interference 
between contributions from different planetary positions is only possible 
if there is some inhomogeneous force which could bring contributions of 
the wave function of the star from A' and from A" together. But these 
distances are so large that we cannot see any reasons to suppose that this 
could happen to any significant extent . 
At this point it is interesting to ask what will happen with light sources 
that are closer than the stars and therefore correspondingly stronger, e.g. 
the sun .  Here the light will not be parallel, but will have a certain range 
of angles a. The range of the shadow is a/a but there is of course the 
penumbra that extends indefinitely with decreasing intensity. If we consider 
the shadow alone , the number of quanta in it will be the order of ( a3 / ac )I, 
where I is the intensity of the light. In the case of sun light, a Ŵ 0.01 
radians and the intensity of light will be Ŵ 1010 quanta per cm2 per second. 
For an object of the order of 1 cm in size, this will give rise to something 
like 1 010 quanta in the shadow . Clearly for objects of this size and down 
to about 10-3 ems, interference will be destroyed and the behaviour will 
be essentially classical . Moreover once interference has been destroyed , 
then the wave packet will not subsequently spread appreciably because the 
objects are so heavy. (These considerations could thus also be applied to 
small objects on the su rface of the earth that have become free of the solid 
structure of the earth . )  
We have thus far ignored the possible contribution of the penumbra to 
the destruction of interference and the resultant establishment of clasical 
behaviour. Indeed further investigation shows that light, for example , from 

1 72 
Th e u n dl l'ided u n 1 t1 e rs e  
different parts of the sun will have its wave function multiplied by that of 
the different atoms that have emitted it. The essentially parallel beams that 
have emanated from each region could then be treated independently and 
as a result could add to the destruction of interference even when they are in 
the penumbra. Evidently there could be many other kinds of radiation that 
could produce similar effects. All of this could decrease interference still 
further and could bring about classical behaviour for yet smaller objects. 
We conclude then that with reasonable assumptions about conditions 
prevailing throughout the universe, the quantum theory implies a classical 
level that is independent of measurements made by human beings . However, 
it would be important to do further work aimed at giving a more extensive 
discussion of these conditions. 
8.4 
Illustration of the destruc tion of interference in terms of 
streams of particles 
In order to give a simple explanation of how interference may be destroyed 
by a beam of light quanta, we shall here discuss a similar process in which 
an object is exposed to a stream of particles , e.g. neutrons or protons, 
from a distant source. (In the appendix to Chapter 11 we shall see that 
essentially the same kind of reasoning will apply to light quanta.) 
In this example we will evidently have then a very nearly parallel beam 
of particles incident on the object in question. We will assume that if a 
particle strikes the object it will be absorbed and that otherwise there is no 
interaction with the object. The incident wave function of the nth particle 
will then be a plane wave ,\n = exp[ikn xn] . The total wave function of the 
incident particles will be 
Aincident = II exp[ikn xnl ·  
n 
But actually the wave function of each particle will be modified be­
cause the object will leave a fairly well-defined shadow , limited only by the 
diffraction angle o 3 ,\/a. The location of this shadow will depend on the 
location 11 of the object . Specifically, the wave function of the nth particle 
will be ,\n 3 exp[ikn xn] except for the region of the shadow where it is 
zero. The wave function of the nth particle can then be written as 
where S(11) is a function that is unity everywhere except in a cylinder of 
base of the order of a ,  which latter is centred at 11 .  

The large scale world and the classical limit 
173 
Let us now consider the wave function of the object (which corresponds 
to the planet in our previous example as illustrated in figure 8.2) . Our 
question is whether contributions 1/JA(Y) and 1/Js (y) to this wave function 
from two different regions A and B can be made to overlap in some region 
0. The net wave function representing these two contributions together 
with that of the n1h incident particle will be 
(8.7) 
where >.nA is the wave function of the n1h particle as affected by the object 
at A and >.nB is that as affected by the object at B .  
I n  order to make a calculation possible, let u s  suppose that the wave 
functions >.nA and >.ns are li mited to some box of side L, where L is very 
large. Interference between the two contributions to W in equation 8.7 will 
be possible only for those values of Xn for which >.nA(xn ) and >-ns(xn )  
overlap , but will not b e  possible for those values of Xn for which one of 
these functions is zero. Since the wave functions >.nA ( Xn ) and >.nB ( Xn ) 
spread over very large areas , most of the values of Xn will produce overlap , 
but a fraction of the order of F = a3 /o:L3 of the possible values of Xn will 
not give rise to overlap . This function is essentially the ratio of the volume 
of the cylinder whose base is the object in question and whose height is 
the distance a/ o: 
= a2 / >.n within which diffraction will not produce an 
appreciable widening of the shadow. 
It is clear then that if we consider just one single particle there will 
only be a slight probability P0 
= F that interference will be destroyed, and 
a corresponding probability P = 1 - F that it is not destroyed . But if 
we consider N particles together, the probability that interference is not 
destroyed will be the product 
(since F is small). Evidently N F is just the number of particles in the 
shadow, so if this number is large enough interference will be destroyed. 
If the incident number of particles per cm2 per second is I and their 
mean velocity is V, then the total number of particles in the box will be 
L3 I /V. The probability PN will then be 
We can see that interference will be destroyed if I is large enough so 
that there is a large number of particles in the shadow. This criterion for 
negligible interference is basically the same as the one we give earlier for 
light quanta 

174 
The undivided universe 
8.5 
The extent of non-classical behaviour 
We have already seen that non-classical behaviour could occur for individ­
ual particles in many situations in which the quantum numbers are large. 
Even for larger objects containing many particles there may still be non­
clasical behaviour except under conditions in which quantum interference 
is destroyed , for example, by suitable radiation . In this section we shall go 
in more detail into the nature of this non-classical behaviour. 
Let us begin by considering the case of a microparticle moving in a box. 
This particle is constantly reflecting off the walls of the box .  Even if these 
walls are smooth and regular, the corresponding wave function will reflect 
back and forth many times so that a great many waves of large wave num­
ber going in different directions will criss-cross. If the walls are irregular, 
this breakup into smaller waves will be even stronger . Eventually we may 
expect a nearly isotropic distribution of waves whose velocity fl uctuates 
around a mean of zero. At this point there is little kinetic energy in the 
particle, and most of the energy will be in the quantum potential . Such 
a behaviour, which is evidently non-classical , can occur with quite large 
boxes . This behaviour in which the microparticle has a small fluctuating 
velocity is evidently an extension of Einstein 's example of a particle in a 
one-dimensional box. It could perhaps give an approximate description , for 
example, of an electron in a metal. 
In order to illustrate this behaviour in a simple case , let us consider a 
particle in a two-dimensional box of side L .  We shall simplify further by 
neglecting the molecular constitution of the walls. The wave function can 
then be built out of a set of eigenfunctions of the energy of the free particle. 
That is 
. m1T'x . n1T'y [ 
i 
7!'2 
] 
t/!mn = A sm ---y;- sm L exp - 2 M h  L2 (m2 + n2) t . 
Although we are neglecting the molecular constitution of the walls in deter­
mining the stationary states , we can still say that the walls produce a net 
wave function that is a complex linear combination of eigenstates in which 
all the t/!mn are involved. Let us write this as 
!./! = L Cmnt/!mn · 
mn 
We have already sen that for a single eigenfunction t/Jmn , the particle 
is at rest. But this need not be so for a general linear combination . Indeed 
the velocity of the particle is 
h !./!"Vt/! - t/!Vt/J" 
v = -- ----
2Mi 
1/;"t/! 

The large scale world and the classical limit 
175 
With t1;• t1; = p we can write for the component of the current 
pv., 
2:;Li [ ç exp [-2è h é: (m2 + n2 - m'2 - n'2) t] 
m'n' 
{ 
m7rx . n7ry 
• 
. m'rrx . n17ry 
x 
m cos -L
- sm y Cmn Cm'n' sm -L- sm -L-
1 • 
m17rX . n17ry . m7rx . n7ry }] 
- m cmn Cm'n' cos -L- sm -L- sm L sm L 
and similarly for Vy . 
It is clear that for the general Cmn this does not vanish . To understand 
why this is so we may first note that if we take different eigenvalues of the 
energy we will obtain a probability density that is a function of time. This 
evidently implies that there is a net current. But to obtain such a current, 
different eigenvalues of the energy will not be needed as long as these are 
degenerate. For example we can consider a system with spherical symmetry 
in which there are three eigenfunctions of the energy corresponding to a p­
state . If these are taken as real , they are proportional to x ,  y and z .  For each 
of these wave functions, the velocity is zero, but for the linear combination 
x + iy, the z-component of the angular momentum is h corresponding to a 
circulation of the particle around the centre. 
To return to the case of a particle in the box, we see from the above 
equation that the current (and therefore the velocity) is constituted of a 
large number of terms, each of which is small. As the particle moves, the 
sin and cosine terms will change rapidly, especially for large m and n .  The 
situation is in someway similar to that of the Lissajous figures because 
Vr and Vy will contain many terms of very high frequency which are in 
complex phase relations with each other. Although the wave numbers are in 
integral relationship here , these are so high that we are approaching the case 
in which the frequencies of the x- and y-motions are not commensurable. 
The velocity is thus built of many terms whose phases will have extremely 
complex relations with each other. 
Moreover for a real box ,  there would no longer be a simple integral 
relationship of the wave numbers of the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian . 
Any irregularity would destroy this , as would also a change to a more 
complex shape of the box. This would imply that the frequencies and wave 
numbers were irrationally related . As is well known, under these conditions 
in which a motion is constituted of many submotions with very complex 
phase relationships, the particle will follow an irregular trajectory which 
can eventually come arbitrarily close to any point in the box .  Indeed even 

1 76 
The undivided universe 
if we restricted ourselves to a linear combination of eigenfunctions of the 
same energy, this sort of result would st.ill follow . In this way we see that 
going only to the two-dimensional case, we obtain for eigenfunctions of the 
energy a quasi-chaotic movement. . As we shall show in the next chapter, 
this conclusion is strengthened when we go to more complex systems. 
Even if such objects are suspended in liquids or gases, the possibilities 
of interference will be limited because their mobilities are so low. It is clear 
that there will be an interesting area of study in the mesoscopic range, 
between the classical and quantum domains. It is perhaps significant that 
in this range the simplest forms of life are to be found. 
Of course if we try to use precise measurement to observe the behaviour 
of such objects, they will be put into well-defined positions and will behave 
essentially classically, provided th at they are heavy enough so that their 
wave packets do not spread significantly during the period of the exper­
iment. This means that the study of the mesoscopic region will require 
more subtle means than can be provided by exact measurements of the 
usual kind. 
8.6 
The quantum world and i t s  classical s ub-world 
We are now in a position to give at least the general outlines of an overall 
world view that is implied by our interpretation of the quantum theory. 
Our first experience is, of course, of a world that is revealed to us fairly 
directly by our senses in relation to our outward actions and inward reflec­
tions in thought. The immediate experience in this world is that which is 
described by what is called common sense, but later, as Bohr has pointed 
out, this is refined , where necessary, to the more exact description of clasi­
cal physics. Within the domain of such experience it may be said that this 
world is manifest. According to its Latin root, the word manifest would 
signify what can be held in the hand . More generally it is what can be held 
in the hand, the eye, and, of course, scientific instruments . Its basic char­
acteristic is that it contains certain relatively stable structures that make 
the holding posible. These structures must not only be relatively stable, 
but also essentially local. Everything in this world can be ultimately con­
stituted of such structures which are outside of each other in every sense 
and which interact only locally. 
Without such a world we would not be able to make sense of our obser­
vations of matter, nor to asign causes in any orderly way. Indeed it is for 
this reason that there is a natural reluctance to consider ideas such as non­
locality and indivisible wholeness, i.e. non-separability, into independently 
existent component parts. 

The large scale world and th e classical limit 
177 
When we come to the underlying quantum world , we find that it has a 
radically different nature. To be sure we still assume a particle, which at 
first sight would appear to be what is also done in classical physics . But 
we now say further that this particle is profoundly affected by the wave 
function , i .e. through the quantum potential and the guidance condition . 
The action of the quantum potential depends only on its form and not on 
its magnitude, so that its effect may be dominant even when the wave in­
tensity is small . This implies the possibility of a strong nonlocal connection 
of distant particles and a strong dependence of the particle on its general 
environmental context. The forces between particles depend on the wave 
function of the whole system, so that we have what we may call 'indivisible 
wholeness'. This means that for different wave functions we can have radi­
cally different connections between particles (not expressible, for example, 
in terms of a predetermined interaction potential) .  Thus there is a kind of 
objective wholeness, reminiscent of the organic wholeness of a living being 
in which the very nature of each part depends on the whole . 
All this behaviour is very different from what is to be expected classi­
cally. Indeed as we have already explained in chapter 3, classical physics 
depends not only on Newton 's laws of motion for the particles , but also on 
the nature of the potentials acting on them. The quantum potential implies 
so fundamental a difference in the behaviour of particles that we cannot re­
gard the latter in general as remotely classical under most circumstances . 
Because of nonlocality, quantum jiggling under quantum interference 
conditions and other quantum properties to which we have alluded , we 
may say that the quantum world is subtle. According to the dictionary 
this means "rarified , highly refined, delicate, elusive, indefinable" . Its root 
meaning is based on the Latin subtexlis which signifies ''finely woven" . 
Clearly the quantum world as we have described it cannot be held in the 
hand or in any other way. The very effort to hold it, e.g. in measurement, 
produces thoroughgoing unpredictable and uncontrollable changes in it. 
Each element participates irreducibly in all the others. The absence of 
mutual externality and separability of all the elements makes this world 
very elusive to the grasp of our instruments. It slips through the ordinary 
'nets' that we have devised to hold it. Nevertheless we are proposing that 
it is real and indeed that it constitutes a more basic reality than does the 
classical 'world'. Indeed as we have shown , this classical 'world ' comes out 
of the theory as relatively autonomous. This autonomy arises wherever 
the quantum potential can be neglected so that the clasical world can be 
treated on its own as if it were independently existent. But according to 
our interpretation it is actually an abstraction from the subtle quantum 
world which is being taken as the ultimate ground of existence. 
In the quantum 'world ' there is no way to obtain an objective public 

1 i8 
The undlt'ided unlt'erse 
display of results because everything in it is so irregularly mobile, subtle 
and mutually interdependent. But in the classical sub-world, events can 
happen that are negligibly affected by our measurements and observations. 
This sub-world includes not only particles, but also fields. We have not yet 
discussed the fields (though , as we have already pointed out, this will be 
done in some detail in chapter 1 1 ) .  Nevertheless we can say that the move­
ment of classically describable distribution of charge will produce classically 
describable movements of fields. 
This world of fields and particles is what conveys information to our 
senses in a well-defined way. Indeed we know of no other conditions in 
which this could happen . For example it is well known that the eye can be 
sensitive to a few quanta at a time, but the reception of a small number 
of quanta gives only the vaguest sense of optical stimulation. Meaningful 
perception requires a large number of quanta and therefore, along the lines 
we have already explained this will imply an essentially classical behaviour. 
Meaningful communication between people also requires classically describ­
able processes involving a large number of quanta. Thus it is not that we 
are assuming that the brain responds only to the states of particles and 
not to their wave functions. Rather we are simply calling attention to the 
observed fact that meaningful sense perception and communication has to 
go through the classical level in which the effects of this wave function can 
be consistently left out of account. 
But, of course, this does not mean that we cannot learn about the quan­
tum world . Instead, as we have shown, for example, through a process of 
amplification and recording in the stable structure of a measuring appa­
ratus , the overall quantum 'world' can manifiest itself in the more limited 
classical 'sub-world'. 
In demonstrating this possibility we have not had to assume any kind 
of 'cut' between these two 'worlds' such as that supposed by von Neumann. 
Rather there is only one overall quantum world which contains an approx­
imately clasical 'sub-world' that gradually emerges under conditions that 
have been described throughout this chapter. As we have said earlier we do 
not believe that this kind of result has been achieved by other interpreta­
tions without making assumptions that go beyond the scope of the current 
quantum theory. 
Moreover it is significant to note that it is just the most characteristic 
quantum properties such as non locality and undivided wholenes that bring 
about the clasical world with its locality and separability into distinct com­
ponents. Thus for example, in a measurement it is the nonlocal quantum 
potential produced in interaction with what may be a distant piece of appa­
ratus that separates the wave function of the 'observed system' into distinct 
channels that can be treated locally. Similarly, with planets, it is the wave 

The large scale world and th e classical limit 
179 
function of the incident radiation with its distant shadow that destroys in­
terference between contributions from different parts of the wave front and 
thus brings about a simple local behaviour. 
In a certain sense we could say that the overall quantum world mea­
sures and observes itself. For the clasical 'sub-world ' that contains the 
apparatus is inseparably contained within the subtle quantum world , es­
pecially through those nonlocal interactions that bring about the clasical 
behaviour. In no sense is the 'observing instrument ' really separate from 
what is observed . The relative autonomy of the clasical level that we have 
already discussed is then what makes it possible for the total quantum 
world to manifest and reveal itself within itself in a measurement. Thus in 
contrast to the classical notion of measurement we should regard a quantum 
measurement as a manifesting process. 
How do we understand what happens when the human being perceives 
the clasical world with its implications, that may simultaneously mani­
fest and reveal the quantum world7 The first step is through the senses, 
which as far as physiological sciences now know, can be explained classi­
cally. Sensory impulses are then carried into the brain, and even here a 
great many processes have been studied which likewise can be understood 
classically. Most neuroscientists seem to believe however that the brain 
can be completely treated in terms of classical concepts. At present this 
is evidently a speculative assumption . However, some neuroscientists, no­
tably Eccles (12] , have suggested that quantum processes may be important 
in understanding the more subtle activities of the brain . For example as 
has already been pointed out, we know that retinal cells respond to a few 
quanta at a time and that this response leads to a multiplication of their 
effects to a classical level of intensity. But the retina is just an extension of 
the brain. There could evidently be other parts of the brain in which such a 
sensitivity may exist, e.g. in certain kinds of synapses. If this were the case, 
then the brain would be a system that could , like a measuring apparatus, 
manifest and reveal aspects of the quantum world in the overall processes. 
Such quantum sensitivity would imply that in more subtle possibilities of 
behaviour of the brain, a classical analysis would break down. 
All this means that as the processes of perception unfolds into the brain , 
it may as it were connect to the subtle quantum domain which latter may 
in turn reconnect to the classical domain , as outgoing action is determined 
through amplification of quantum effects . 
Moreover it does not necessarily follow that quantum effects will only be 
of importance in the domain of very small energies. For as we have seen it 
is just through certain kinds of non locality that locality can emerge, e.g. in 
a measuring apparatus. Similar nonlocality may be required for the brain 
to have a local and essentially classical sub-domain of function . 

180 
The u ndivided unwerse 
Finally there is no reason to believe that quantum theory is an ultimate 
truth. Rather, like other theories, it probably has a limited domain of 
validity. Indeed various authors including ourselves have already suggest 
new theories containing quantum theory as an approximation within it and 
some of these will be discussed in chapter 15. Once again it may well be 
that a fuller understanding of the brain will require such more extensive 
theories going beyond the quantum mechanics. 
8. 7 
References 
1 .  H . P. Stapp , 'Einstein Time and Process Time ', in Physics and the Ul­
timate Significance of Time, ed . D.R. Griffin, State University Press, 
New York, 1 986, 264-270. 
2. G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini and T. Weber, Phys. Rev. D34, 470-49 1 
( 1986) . 
3. M .  Gell-Mann and J . B .  Hartle, 'Quantum Mechanics in the Light of 
Quantum Cosmology', in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Found. of Quantum 
Mechanics, ed . S. Kobyashi ,  Physical Society of Japan , Tokyo, 1989. 
4. D. Bohm, Qu antum Theory, Prentice-Hall , London, 195 1 ;  also avail­
able in Dover Publications, New York, 1989. 
5. A. Einstein, in Scientific Papers Presented to M. Born on his retire­
ment, Oliver and Boyd , London , 1953. 
6. N . Rosen , Found. Phys. 14, 579 ( 1984) . 
7. A. J .  Leggett ,  Prog. Theor. Phys. , supp. 69 , 80 ( 1 980) . 
8. R. Penrose, The Emperor's New Mmd : Concerning Computers, Minds 
and the Laws of Physics, Oxford University Press , Oxford , 1989. 
9. A. Tonomura, T. Matsuda, J .  Endo, H. Todokoro and T. Komoda, J. 
Electron Micros. 28, 1-1 1  (1979) .  
10. G .  F. Chew, Phys. Rev. 45A , 4312-43 18 ( 1992). 
1 1 .  D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166-193 ( 1 952) .  
1 2 .  J . C. Eccles, Proc. Roy. Soc. 227B , 4 1 1-428 (1986). 

Chapter 9 
The role of statistics in the ontological 
interpretation of the quantum theory 
9 . 1  
Introduction 
In our interpretation , the primary significance of the wave function is that it 
is a quantu m  field which determines information that is active on the parti­
cles in each individual system. However , we also say that the wave function 
determines the probability density in a statistical ensemble through the re­
lationship P = lllt 12 . But as already pointed out in chapter 3, section 3.4, 
this is regarded as a secondary significance of the wave function . In princi­
ple there is no reason why the probability could not be different from l11tl2, 
even though it is equal to l11tl2 in all cases that we have encountered so far. 
What we have to explain then is why P should tend to approach l11tl2 
in typical situations that are currently treated in physics (i.e. situations in 
which the quantum laws are valid) .  In this chapter we shall give such an 
explanation showing that one can understand how an arbitrary probabil­
ity density, P, may approach l11tl2 even on the basis of our deterministic 
theory because the latter leads to chaotic motions under a wide range of 
conditions. We shall then show how the overall statistical approach may 
be generalised to include, not only what are usually called pure states, but 
also what are usually called mixed states (which are at the basis of quan­
tum statistical mechanics) . Finally we shall extend this study and show 
how the approach of P to 11112 could further be justified on the basis of an 
underlying stochastic process in the movement of the particles. 

182 
The undivided universe 
9.2 
Chaotic behaviour of particles in many-body systems 
We have already seen in chapter 8, section 8.5 that even for a single particle 
in a two-dimensional box, we obtain a fairly complex and chaotic motion. 
With N particles in a three-dimensional box, this will evidently become 
still more chaotic. 
To illustrate what happens in such cases, let us consider a cubic box 
of side L. However, instead of supposing that the walls are impenetrable, 
we shall make the more realistic assumption that the particles can actually 
touch the walls where they could interact with its constituent atoms. We 
shall not, however, treat these interactions in detail, but we shall merely 
suppose that, as in chapter 8, section 8.4, they lead to a complex linear 
combination of stationary wave functions. To simplify calculations (which 
a.re intended to indicate what sort of thing may happen) ,  we also assume 
that the wave functions are periodic with period L. For a single parti­
cle the basic eigenfunctions are exp[ik · z] exp[- iwk t] where kr = 27rl/ L ,  
k Խ  = 27rm/ L and k ,  = 27rn/ L, and where wk = k2 /2m. 
For the N-particle system, the eigenfunctions of the energy are 
exp (i Ln kn · Zn] where Zn represents the position of the nth particle and 
kn is proportional to its momentum. The general wave function can then 
be written as 
ii' = 
L 
ck , , k, . kN exp [i L kn · Z n] exp [- i E wk t] . 
(9. 1 ) 
k 1 , k» .k N 
n 
For equivalent particles, the Cs will have to be restricted to anti-asymmetric 
functions. But here we need not specify what is the symmetry as this will 
be included in the values of C. 
The coefficients C can be very complex, for example interaction with 
the molecules constituting the walls may produce interfering combinations 
of wave packets which will involve a very wide range of possible values of 
k in the manner discussed in chapter 8, section 8.3. We may expect that 
after the system has been left by itself for a long time, there will indeed be 
such a linear combination. 
If we write p = 11/>12 and let v ,  be the velocity of the sth particle, we get 
1 
pv, = -2 -: [1/J•V,1/J - 1/J(V,1/J.)] . 
mi 
(9.2) 
This then gives 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
183 
pv, 
2æ L L  C{i:}C{l:'} (k. + k: ) 
{ l:} { l:'} 
X exp [-i ( å knXn - kX, xX)] exp [-i 1(wm -w)t] 
(9.3) 
where Cfi:} = Ci:, ,i:, i:N ' 
It is clear that the above is built out of a very large number of terms each 
of which oscillates with a phase that is in effect random relative to those 
of the others. The point in configuration space corresponding to z 1 . . .  Zn 
moves in a chaotic way through all the configuration space that is accessible 
to it. 
Intuitively we could expect that for statistical averages, this motion 
would be equivalent to some kind of probability distribution in the config­
uration space. What would this probability distribution be? 
To enquire into this, we first note that the function p = lf;• lf; satisfies a 
conservation equation in configuration space which is 
dp + '"' vn · Pl' n = 0 .  
dt L., 
(9.4) 
n 
Of course this does not mean that p itself is necessarily the probability. We 
may therefore write this probability density as P = pF. By definition , P 
satisfies the same conservation equation as p. We then obtain 
(9.5) 
This means that F is a constant of the motion. Suppose for example that 
we started with a distribution which was localised in an element of configur­
ation space n = ( z 1 , z 2 . . .  z N) . This element is chosen to be small 
relative to macroscopic dimensions, but large in relation to the wavelengths 
implied by a typical k vector. Because F is a constant of the motion , we can 
see what happens to the element n by following the various particle tra­
jectories on its boundaries. Consider for example two trajectories initially 
separated by bz .  These will correspond to large phase differences between 
most of the contributions to the velocity in equation (9.3) . Therefore the 
two trajectories will correspond to very different quasi-random paths that 
will in general lead them very far from each other. It follows that a simple 
element n will turn into a very complex, long drawn out and enmeshed 

184 
The undivided universe 
thread-like structure. Because any trajectory eventually comes near to any 
given point in configuration space, it also follows that in the sense of a 
coarse grained average , this thread-like structure will move in such a way 
as to more or less cover the whole of this space. Therefore in any process 
that does not depend on the complex and chaotic fine details of the motion, 
F may be taken as effectively a constant. In such a process we may say the 
probability is effectively p = liP 12 . 
There are a very wide range of conditions in which the sort of process 
described above may take place. These include metals, gases, plasmas etc ., 
so th at not only in the laboratory, but also in the stars and interstellar 
space, we may reasonably expect that quantum theory itself contains pro­
cesses that tend to produce distributions near P = liP 12 . Therefore it is not 
necessary to regard P = l t/> 12 as an assumption as is done in conventional 
interpretation . Although our interpretation has the additional assumption 
of particles, this is balanced by the fact that it does not require the usual 
assumptions on probability. So at least on the basis of a formal count of the 
number of assumptions, we cannot say that either interpretation is favoured 
over the other by the principle of Occam 's razor. 
It is instructive at this point to consider once again our example of elec­
trons emerging from a metal and going through a set of collimating slits and 
velocity selectors to enter a slit system in an interference experiment. To 
simplify the discussion, suppose we have cold emission of electrons brought 
about by a strong electric field near the surface of the metal. This combined 
with the wave function gives rise to a barrier of finite width which can be 
penetrated. The wave function (9 . 1) implies that electrons are constantly 
striking this barrier and a small part of the wave function penetrates as 
explained in chapter 5, section 5.1 . Some electrons will go through if their 
initial conditions are right. If an electron does go through , its wave function 
can then be regarded as simply the part that has penetrated , multiplied 
by the wave function of the metal containing the remaining electrons. It 
is therefore factorised so that the metal and the electrons behave indepen­
dently from this point on . 
Let us now consider an ensemble of cases in which electrons have left the 
metal in the way described above. There will be a distribution of electrons, 
each of which has its own wave function and its own initial position . Because 
the electrons are independent of each other and of the metal, we can follow 
the propagation of each of their wave functions according to Schrodinger's 
equation for a one-body system. This implies that they will move onward 
and pass through the collimator and velocity selector. When they have 
done this all the electrons will have wave functions of practically the same 
form. Because the distribution P = liPl2 is also propagated by Schrodinger's 
equation, it follows that our statistical ensemble of electrons will enter the 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpntation 
185 
slit system with the probability P = liPl2 where 1/i is the common wave 
function of all these electrons. In this way we understand how the ordinary 
probability distributions arise through the chaotic motions of the particles 
in their source and through the selection of a common wave function by the 
apparatus that prepares the experimental ensemble . 
9 . 3  
Statistics o f  wave functions 
In the previous section we have discussed a case in which electrons were 
selected so that they all have the same wave function . This corresponds 
to what has commonly been called a pure state. But this state is still 
a statistical distribution, since it refers to an ensemble of particles with 
different positions even though they have wave functions of the same form. 
But is it actually appropriate to call this ensemble a 'state' ? For this word 
generally connotes some property of an individual system rather than of a 
selected collection of systems. In the interests of clarity it would perhaps 
be better to call this collection of particles a pure ensemble rather than a 
pure state. 
Suppose however that we have a situation in which electrons are selected 
by a procedure that does not determine the wave function very precisely, 
e.g. the collimating slits are wide and the velocity selectors permit a large 
range of velocities to go through. In this case the wave function itself will in 
general be significantly different for each particle. In terms of our example 
of electrons coming out of a metal, we can see that the wave function 
in the metal contains effectively a random distribution of eigenfunctions 
of the total energy. Electrons will therefore emerge with some statistical 
distribution of wave functions, as well as of particle positions. This will 
correspond to what is commonly called a mixed state, although we shall, 
in accordance with our proposed terminology, call it a mixed ensemble. 
The distinction between pure and mixed ensembles clearly applies only 
in a statistical context. An individual system is described neither by a 
pure nor by a mixed ensemble. Rather it is characterised by specifying the 
wave function and the positions of all the particles in the system (as well as 
values of the relevant field variables) .  Thus, for example, the state of the 
universe has to be understood in this way because we are not assuming an 
ensemble of universes. 
Any quantum experiment always involves a statistical selection of sim­
ilar sub-systems within the universe. Such a selection will give rise ,  in the 
way just described, either to a pure or to a mixed ensemble. More generally 
under certain conditions a similar selection might even take place naturally 
so that, for example, a set of portions of an interstellar plasma might be 

186 
The undivided universe 
treated in terms of suitable mixed ensembles. 
Our basic concept is, however, that for each member of the ensemble the 
wave function has some definite form to which we can apply our interpre­
tation of the quantum theory in the usual way. Up until now we have been 
discussing in this book only the case of a pure ensemble for which averages 
are calculated by integrating the probability density P = ltiW over a.II the 
particle positions. However, in a mixed ensemble , the wave function is dis­
tributed over a range of possible forms . The statistical properties of such 
an ensemble will have to be calculated by averaging over the distribution 
of wave functions, in addition to averaging over the particle positions for 
each wave function . 
The general wave function may be represented by an expression in terms 
of an orthonormal basis which , for convenience, we shall take to be eigen­
functions of the energy. In the previous section we did this for free particles 
in a box and the wave function was given by equation (9. 1 ) .  More generally 
we may write 
11 = L CEa l/!Ea(x) 
Ea 
where E is the energy and a runs over all the states with the same energy. 
Any individual system must have a wave function described by a particular 
set of values of CE a . It will be useful also to write 
(9.6) 
so that 
11 = L REa exp[i¢Ea]l/!Ea(x) .  
(9.7) 
Ea 
If we have an ensemble of wave functions, there will have to be a corre­
sponding probability distribution of the REa and the ¢Ea · To describe 
this distribution we shall introduce the concept of wave function space. A 
point in wave function space is determined by all the CEa , or alternatively 
by all the REa and ¢Ea · Each individual system then corresponds to a 
point in wave function space. 
Let us now define the element of volume in wave function space. Writing 
CEa = UEa + ivEa , we obtain for this element 
dQ = TI duEadVEa · 
Ea 
dO = TI  dpEad¢Ea · 
Ea 
(9.8) 
(9.9) 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
187 
The mean number, dZ, of systems in this element is then 
dZ = P( . . . REa . . .  ; . . .  ¢Ea . . . ) <lr2 
(9.10) 
where P( . . .  REa . . . ; . . .  ¢Ea . . .  ) is the probability density of systems in 
wave function space. 
For a given wave function tf; , physical averages will evidently be deter­
mined by quantities such as 
0 = j tf;•Otf; dx = j L L c£101 cE,a,1/;'£10101/;E,a, dx .  
E1E, a,a, 
(9.11) 
If we have a statistical distribution of wave functions , we evidently have to 
average over this ensemble too. We then obtain 
(9.12) 
Let us define 
(9.13) 
and 
(9.14) 
We then obtain 
0 = tr(pO) . 
(9.15) 
From this it follows that p is the usual density matrix since all averages are 
obtained from it in the usual way. 
All that we have said holds both in our interpretation and in the con­
ventional interpretation. For thus far we have not used the assumption of a 
definite particle position . In both interpretations p has only an essentially 
statistical significance. We have to emphasise, however, that in our inter­
pretation the particle velocity in each individual case is determined by the 
actual wave function for this case which is 
11 = L CEat/JEa(z). 

188 
The undivided universe 
Writing 
P(:z) = L L  cf;0cE'o'1/>E0(z)ijJE'<> '(z) 
we obtain the following expression for the momentum p( z) at the point z 
where 
lj!Eo(z) = XEo exp [iAE o(z)] .  
Clearly the momentum for each case depends on all the coefficients CEa 
which determine the wave function for that. case. The probability density 
P( . . . RE a . . .  ; . . .  ¢Ea . . .  ) then evidently implies some corresponding dis­
tribution over the momenta p(z). If we carry out this average we will 
obtain the average momentum density 
PEaE'a' will therefore give only a statistical average of the momentum over 
the various wave function coefficients. 
Although the density matrix is sufficient to determine, not only the aver­
age of the momentum, but all relevant physical averages over the ensemble, 
it 
evidently 
does 
not 
determine 
the 
probability 
distribution 
P( . . .  RE a . . .  ; . . . ¢Ea . . .  ) itself. That is to say, physical averages are ex­
tremely insensitive to the detail of the distribution P. Indeed it is clear 
that to a given density matrix, a very wide range of such distributions is 
posible. Therefore within the framework of the statistical mechanics of 
quantum theory, the function P is highly ambiguous. Yet conceptually it 
is, in principle, determined for each ensemble. It is true that in doing any 
calculations, it is not necessary to say anything about P over and above 
what is said about the density matrix. Yet both in the conventional inter­
pretation and in our interpretation , conceptual clarity requires the notion 
of a probability distribution in wave function space. In our interpretation 
this is clearly needed because we have to suppose the wave function has 
a given form 1jJ = Reis before we can say what is the particle velocity, 
v = V S/m. We then consider a statistical distribution of such forms. In 
the usual interpretation the basic postulate also begins with the wave func­
tion and the density matrix is derived from this. The density matrix is not 
a fundamental concept in any of the interpretations of the quantum theory 
(though some, such as Prigogine [1] and Hawking [2] , have proposed new 
theories which are extensions of quantum mechanics in which the density 
matrix does play a fundamental role) .  
To illustrate the ambiguity of the statistical distributions underlying 
the density matrix, let us consider an atom of total angular momentum 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
189 
h. In the z-direction , for example, the three possible eigenfunctions of the 
angular momentum will be denoted by lj!j(z) with j = -1, 0, + l .  The 
general wave function may be written as 
(9.16) 
The probability distribution in wave function space can then be written 
as P( . . .  Rj . . .  ; . . . ¢ i . . .  ) . The density matrix is then 
p(:z, z') = J L P( . . .  R; . . . ; . . .  </!; . . . )Rj Rkei(¢,-¢»)1j!j (:z)ij!k(:z') Mt 
jk 
(9.17) 
If P does not depend on ¢; , this signifies random phases. In this case the 
density matrix reduces to 
p(:z, z') 
J L P(. ' .  R; ' '  .)Rji}Jj(:z)ij!j(:z') dO 
J 
L RJij!j(:z)ij!j(:z'). 
(9.18) 
This is evidently diagonal in the angular momentum quantum numbers 
j. If we further assume that the distribution is a symmetric function of 
. . .  Ri . .  . ,  all the R} will be the same and the density matrix will be 
(9.19) 
A very wide range of P( . . . Ri . . . ) can evidently lead to the above density 
matrix. This matrix has an isotropic significance because it takes the same 
form even if we choose our z-axis in some other direction . This means that 
the distribution of angular momenta obtained in a measurement will be 
independent of the orientation of the apparatus. But from this distribution 
we cannot even say that the original P( . . . Rj . . .  ) is necessarily isotropic , 
since, as we have seen , these results follow merely from the symmetry under 
interchange of any pair of variables Rj and R1c .  More generally it is evident 
that from the observable distribution of the results of measurements, we 
can say very little about the details of the distribution over the . . . Rj . . . . 
To further bring out the ambiguity of the P( . . . R1 . . .  ) , suppose that 
we had three ensembles in each of which the z-component of the angular 
momentum was well defined to be - 1 ,  0, + 1 ,  respectively. If these are mixed 
with equiprobability, this will give rise to the diagonal density matrix ( 9.19). 
But suppose the mixed ensemble was formed by having a sequen('.e in which 

190 
The undivided universe 
+ 1 is always followed by 0 and this by - 1 ,  which in turn is followed by 
+ 1 ,  and so on . The mixed ensemble would still imply isotropic averages, 
so that an experimenter would obtain the same statistical distribution no 
matter in which direction he measured the spin . Yet if he chose to measure 
only every third member of the ensemble, he would obtain a non-isotropic 
result corresponding to a spin in the z-direction of + 1, 0 or - 1 .  But the 
density matrix itself for the mixed ensemble does not show any sign of such 
a possibility. It is thus clear that many different physical situations may 
give rise to the same density matrix for the same overall ensemble. 
Even if the various sub-ensembles are chosen by a random process this 
may still hold . For example, one could use a random number generator 
to determine which of the above three sub-ensembles are chosen to be fed 
into the mixed ensemble. An experimenter who knew the order determined 
by the random number generator could then obtain a non-isotropic result 
for the measurements of the angular momentum. Of course in natural 
situations, we cannot know how such a random selection occurs and in 
such cases we will always obtain an isotropic result. But this does not 
change the fact that a given density matrix leaves open a vast range of 
physical states that could give rise to it. 
There may be yet further ambiguities in the physical state underlying 
the density matrix. Thus in many cases, our ensembles have come from 
larger systems, such as, for example, the electrons emerging from a metal. 
In principle there may still be correlations of one kind or another between 
the electrons of interest and those left in the metal. To be accurate, we 
should therefore base our considerations on the larger system containing 
both of these. Hence we should start with a probability distribution over 
the wave function coefficients of the combined system to form a corre­
sponding density matrix for this combined system. We may write this as 
p(z . . .  , 11 . . .  , z' . . .  , 11' . . .  ) where 11 represents the coordinates of electrons 
left in the metal. 
As long as we are concerned only with those electrons that have emerged 
from the metal, we can simplify the treatment by integrating over the co­
ordinates of the electrons that are left in the metal, while equating y with 
ti. This will give us a reduced density matrix p( z . . .  , z' . . .  ) from which 
the statistical properties of the electrons that have left the metal can be 
calculated. (This sort of density matrix has, for example, been used by 
Feynman [3] .) As we have already indicated, the original density matrix 
may contain correlations of all kinds, including, for example, EPR correla­
tions, but these no longer appear explicitly in the reduced density matrix, 
although their effects are indirectly taken into account. 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
191 
9.4 
The density matrix as determining al the physically 
significant results 
We emphasise then that the density matrix, in general, contains a conden­
sation of information in which most of the details of the individual system 
do not appear, but which contains just that information which is relevant 
statistically. In particular the density matrix determines, not only the 
statistics of all processes of measurement and of all proceses of transition 
in general , but also that of large scale manifestations of the microlevel, and 
ultimately all collective large scale averages, the latter being the basis of 
the description of the manifest world discussed in chapter 8. 
Firstly we see from equation (9. 15) that the density matrix determines 
the statistical results of all measurements. To show how it determines the 
statistics of transition processes, let us, for example, once again consider 
the case of cold emission from a metal through barrier penetration . This 
will, in general, give rise to a mixed ensemble described by a suitable den­
sity matrix in the manner that we have described earlier. (With the aid of 
further selection processes through collimating slits etc . ,  we can ,  of course, 
approach as close as we please to a pure ensemble.) Each individual mem­
ber of the mixed ensemble corresponds to a well-defined wave function , 1/J, 
with a further ensemble of particie positions P = 11/J 12 . For such a wave 
function, the probability of transition can be obtained by integrating the 
part of ll/J l2 corresponding to final state over the particle positions. We 
then have to integrate this over the distribution of wave functions. The 
final result will then be the same as that obtained by starting with the 
initial density matrix and integrating the trace of the final matrix over the 
ensemble corresponding to the final set of possible results of the transition 
process. 
Another important physical significance of the quantum theory is that 
it determines probabilities of large scale manifestations of microsystems. 
We have already given an example of this in chapter 6, where we discussed 
an ion chamber in which a single atom could initiate a cascade leading to a 
current of macroscopic magnitude. Such a process depends on an unstable 
situation created by the electric field which allowed the cascade to develop 
and eventually produce a large scale result. But this sort of process does 
not require an observing apparatus or any other set of conditions arranged 
by human beings. For example, in an interstellar plasma there could be 
a strong electric field in which individual electrons could initiate such cas­
cades. In all these cases, the probability of any given fluid distribution 
of the macroscopic currents would depend ultimately on the ensemble of 
particle positions in the atoms and the ensemble of wave functions of these 

192 
The trndl11lded unl11erse 
atoms. However, this dependence is such that the net statistical result 
could always be obtained from the density matrix in the usual way. 
Let us now come to the large scale averages of the collective variables 
themselves. As we have already pointed out, the variables will include the 
energy, momentum and angular momentum of the whole system and of its 
relevant sub-systems, as well as certain collective functions of the position 
(such as centre of mass and Fourier coefficients of the particle density which 
describe sound waves) .  Typically at the large scale level , systems will be 
close to stationary states. It will therefore be convenient to express wave 
functions in terms of eigenfunctions of the energy, 1/J Ea ( z) . 
We begin with a pure ensemble. The general wave function for such an 
ensemble is then 
The mean value of the energy is 
(9.20) 
But a typical large scale system has to be described by a mixed ensemble 
(e.g. because it is generally abstracted from a larger context in the way 
that we have already discussed) .  Let the probability distribution of wave 
functions in this mixed ensemble be P( . . . RE a . . .  ; . . .  ¢>Ea . . .  ) . The density 
matrix will then be 
PEaE'a' 
J P( . . .  REa · · · ; . . .  ¢>Ea · · ·) 
x REa RE'a'ei(¢Eo. - <E'o.' le-i(wEo. -wE'"'' )t dO. (9.2 1 )  
I n  general this density matrix is diagonal as a function of E ,  because the 
phases will be random. We may always choose a representation in which it 
is also diagonal in terms of a and a' . We therefore write 
We then obtain 
PEaE'a' = PEa6(E - E')6(a - a'). 
tr(pE) 
L EPEa ·  
E,a 
(9.22) 
(9 .23) 
To illustrate how such averages determine physical properties, let us 
consider a collection of particles in a box constituting a perfect gas, as­
suming periodic boundary conditions for convenience. The general wave 
function for such a system is given by equation (9. 1). 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpT'ftation 
193 
A typical eigenfunction of the energy is exp [i Ln kn · Zn] · The energy 
corresponding to this eigenfunction is 
E =  L 5_· 
2m 
• 
For a given particle , kx = 27rl/ L, ky = 27rm/ l and k, = 27rn/ L. 
We can apply the above to calculate the pressure in a box, which is 
With V = L3, we have 
= 
-8E oL = 
-ǲ (8E) v- 2/3 
P 
aL av 
3 
oL 
· 
(9.24) 
As the box expands , the energy decreases, and a simple calculation shows 
that 
p = äE 
,) 
(9.25) 
where E is determined from the density matrix as tr(pE). 
The above shows how typical macroscopic properties will follow from the 
density matrix. For the case of E we do not need to know the precise form of 
the density matrix to obtain the relationship between p and E that we have 
just calculated. But more generally to treat thermal properties, we need 
a more detailed knowledge of p. It is well known that for thermodynamic 
equilibrium, p is proportional to e- E/J:T _ If we write 
(9.26) 
where 1/; is the normalisation factor for p, we get 
1/J = -kT ln Z 
(9.27) 
where 
(9.28) 
In the well-known way we can obtain all the thermodynamic averages from 
the free energy 1/;. 
The problem of justifying that in a state of thermodynamical equilib­
rium, p ex e-E/kT , is essentially the same in our interpretation as it is in 
the conventional interpretation. Various treatments of this problem have 
already been given. (See, for example, Tolman [4].) However, in this book 

194 
Tiu tmdividrd universe 
it is not our main pu rpose to discuss qu antum statistical mechanics , but 
rather to focus on the fact that an ontological interpretation of the basic 
quantum theory is possible. What we have done in this section is to show 
the general lines along which one can incl ude quantum statistical mechanics 
within the framework of our approach . 
9.5 
The stochastic explanation of quantum probabilities 
We h ave thus far been explaining quantum probabilities in terms of chaotic 
motions that are implied by the quantum laws themselves, with pure en­
sembles representing chaotic motions of the particles and mixed ensembles 
bringing in also chaotic variations in the quantum fiel d .  Whenever we have 
statistical distributions of this kind , however , it is always possible that these 
chaotic motions do not originate in the level under investigation , but rather 
that they arise from some deeper level . For example, in Brownian motion , 
small bodies which may contain many molecules undergo ch aotic velocity 
fluctuations as a resul t  of impacts originating at a fi ner molecular level. 
If we abstract these chaotic motions and consider them apart from their 
posible causes we have what is called a stochastic process which is treated 
in terms of a well-defined mathematical theory (5] .  We can have two atti­
tude8 to such a stoch astic process . The first is that it is a result of deeper 
causes that do not appear at the level under discussion . The second is that 
there is some intrinsic randomness in the basic motions themselves . I n  so 
far as we apply the ord inary mathematical treatment , we need not commi t 
ourselves to either attitude . 
But of course , if we are thinking of possible 
models for the process then ou r attitude may make a differen ce, because 
the assumption of deeper causes implies that the stochastic treatment will 
break down at the finer level at which these causes are operating. (We shall 
discuss this posibility in chapter 14.) 
A stochastic expl anation of the quantum theory along these lines was 
first suggested by Bohm an d Vigier (6], who proposed a sub-quantum me­
chanical level which would bring about chaotic behaviour of the particles . 
Later a similar theory was proposed by Nelson (7] which ,  however ,  had cer­
tain import ant differences which we h ave discussed in detail in a subsequent 
paper ( Bohm and H iley [8]). 
The basic asu mption of Bohm and Vigier w as  that the velocity of an 
individ ual particle i is given by 
V S(x ·) 
V
j = 
1 
1 + ԏi(t), 
(9.29) 
m 
where {i (t) represents a chaotic contribution to the velocity of that particle 
which fluctuates in a way that may be represented as random but with zero 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
195 
average. This means that in the causal form of ontological interpretation 
that we have given thus far, we should regard (Vi S(xi )) /m as the average 
velocity of the particle i rather than as its actual velocity. It is through 
this average velocity that the quantum potential comes in. For as we have 
shown in chapter 3, if the average velocity 
V; S(x; ) 
m 
(9.30) 
and if ijJ = R exp[iS] then Schri:idinger's equation implies that 
dv; 
dt = -V; (V + Q) .  
(9.31 ) 
The stochastic process simply adds the random motion ; (t) so that 
dvi = -V · ( V  
Q) 
d; (t) . 
dt 
I 
+ 
+ 
dt 
(9.32) 
However, as we sh all see, in that branch of mathematics known as stochastic 
theory, it is not necessary to use explicitly the above expression for the 
acceleration and it will be sufficient to start with equation (9.29) from 
which equation (9.32) follows in the way described above. 
What stochastic theory typically does is to begin with a statistical en­
semble of particles which are assumed to have some probability distribution 
given by P(x, t). In such a theory, the notion of probability that is used 
is entirely classical and has r.othing whatsoever to do with the quantum 
mechanical subtleties involved in the uncertainty principle and in the 'col­
lapse' of the wave function in the conventional interpretations of quantum 
theory. 
What we want to do here is to begin by assuming that our prob­
abilities likewise have no intrinsic relation to the wave function and that 
they are simple 'classical-like' probabilities in the kind of ensemble that is 
treated so widely by standard stochastic theory. However, our aim in do­
ing this is to determine the properties of the random motions described 
by ; (t) so that an arbitrary initial ensemble with a probability distri­
bution P(z , t) will approach an ensemble with a probability distribution 
P(z ,  t) = p(z , t) = 11/>(z, t)l2 after a suitable interval of time. We then 
suppose that under typical conditions obtaining in quantum mechanical 
measurements, the interval of time will have been long enough so that the 
probability distribution will be given by 11/>(z, t) /2 . In this way we under­
stand the fact that while P(z , t) and l it>(z ,  t)l2 are basically independent 
concepts their numerical values will experimentally turn out to be equal 
in quantum mechanical experiments. 
In addition of course the chaotic 

196 
Tlae undivided universe 
proceses occurring at the quantum level independently of the stochastic 
process which we have already discussed in this chapter will then contribute 
further to bringing this result about. 
9.6 
Detailed mathematical treatment of the sto chastic model 
To make a detailed treatment of the stochastic proces, we shall assume 
that, whatever its origin may be, it can be represented as simple diffusion. 
To illustrate what this means we shall first consider a clasical context in 
which we treat the diffusion of Brownian motion particles in a gravitational 
field using the simple theory of Einstein. If P is the probability density of 
particles, then there is a diffusion current 
J( d) = -DVP, 
(9.33) 
where D is the diffusion coefficient. If this were all there was, the conser­
vation equation would be 
oP = -DV2 P 
at 
(9.34) 
and clearly this would lead to a uniform equilibrium distribution. However, 
as Einstein showed, in a gravitational field in the z-direction there is what 
he called an osmotic velocity 
The conservation equation then becomes 
oP 
[mg 
] 
at = -DV kT zP + VP . 
For the equilibrium distribution, oP/ot = 0 ,  so that 
VP mg 
-- = - z  + const. 
P 
kT 
or 
which is the well-known Boltzmann factor. 
p = Ae-mgz/kT 
(9.35) 
(9.36) 
(9.37) 
The picture implied by the Einstein model of diffusion is that the particle 
is drifting downward in the gravitational field and that the net upward 
diffusive movement balances this to produce equilibrium. 
It is worthwhile to provide a still more detailed picture of this process. 
To do this let us consider a simple one-dimensional model in which there is 
a unique free path A and a unique speed v .  We assume further that after 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
197 
collisions the velocities are randomly distributed in positive and negative 
directions while the speed is still v. 
Let us now consider two layers which are separated by ..\ .  The net 
diffusion current between these layers will be 
J(d) = - Ե [P _ p ] "" _ .!:'._ oP ,  
2 
1 
z - >.  -
2 OZ A .  
(9.38) 
Between collisions the average velocity gained from the gravitational field 
IS 
g ,\ 
Uo = - -- . 
2 v 
The above is evidently the osmotic velocity. The total current is 
J = 
_ f!_Ǳ p _ .!:'._ oP ,\ = _ ..\v [J_p + oP] . 
2 v 
2 oz 
2 
v2 
oz 
Writing v2 = kT/m and D = v..\/2 we have 
J = -D - P + -
[mg 
oP] 
kT 
o:: 
and this is just the equation that Einstein assumed . 
(9 .39) 
(9.40) 
It is important to emphasise that ,  at least in this case, the osmotic 
velocity is produced by a field of force. Without such a field there would 
be no reason for an osmotic velocity. 
For the stochastic interpretation of the quantum theory we would like to 
have a random diffusion process whose equilibrium state corresponds to a 
probability density P = liPl2 = p and to a mean current j = pv = p(V S/m) . 
Such a state is a consistent possibility if 1jJ 
= .J peiS/" satisfies Schrodinger 's 
equation because this implies the conservation equation 
In order to have P = liPl2 as an equilibrium density under such a random 
process, we will have to assume a suitable osmotic velocity. We do not have 
to suppose, however, that this osmotic velocity is necessarily produced by 
a force field , similar to that of the gravitational field in our example given 
above, but rather as we have already indicated , it may have quite different 
causes. (Thus as suggested by Nelson (9] , it could be some kind of back­
ground field that would produce a systematic drift as well as a random 
component of the motion .) At this stage it will be sufficient simply to pos­
tulate a field of osmotic velocities, u a( z ,  t ) ,  without committing ourselves 

198 
The undivided universe 
as to what is its origin. We therefore asume an osmotic velocity 
DVp 
uo = --
p 
and a diffusion current 
j(d) = -DV P. 
The total current will be 
P 
DVp 
j = -VS + -- - DV P. 
m 
p 
The conservation equation is then 
oP 
( VS 
Vp 
) 
- + V ·  P- + DP - - DVP = 0. 
&t 
m 
p 
In the above equations there is a systematic velocity 
VS 
Vp 
v, = - + D - . 
m 
p 
(9.41) 
(9.42) 
(9.43) 
(9.44) 
(9.45) 
This is made up of two parts, the mean velocity v = V S/m and the osmotic 
velocity u0 = DV p/ p, The mean velocity v may be thought to arise from 
de Broglie's guidance condition. As we have just explained , the osmotic 
velocity will arise from some other source such as a field , but the main 
point is that it is derivable from a potential D In p where p is a solution of 
the conservation equation 
(9.46) 
It follows from equation (9.44) that there is an equilibrium state with 
P = p in which the osmotic velocity is balanced by the diffusion current so 
that the mean velocity is v = VS/m , 
But now we must raise the crucial question as to whether this equi­
librium is stable. In other words, will an arbitrary distribution P always 
approach p? Writing P = F p we obtain the following equation 
{JF 
Pfit = DV · (pVF) = DVp , VF + DpV2 y 
(9.47) 
We shall show that F must eventually approach l everywhere by proving 
that the maxima of F must always decrease and the minima must always 

The role of statistics m the ontological interpretation 
199 
increase. Maxima and minima are characterised by VF = 0. At such 
points we have 
aF 
2 
pat = DpV F. 
(9.48) 
At a maximum, V2 F is negative and clearly F must be decreasing at this 
point . At a minimum, V2 F is positive and therefore F must be increasing. 
This can only cease when F = 1 everywhere. 
For times much longer than the relaxation time, r ,  of this process we 
will therefore quite generally encounter the usual quantum mechanical prob­
ability distribution . It is implied , of course, that at shorter times this need 
not be so and therefore the possibility of a test to distinguish this theory 
from the quantum theory is in principle opened up. We shall discuss the 
conditions under which such a test may be possible in chapter 14. 
The mean velocity is, of course, v = VS/m. As we have seen in connec­
tion with equation (9.31), this by itself does not determine the acceleration. 
In addition we need a differential equation for S. Then as we have seen in 
chapter 3 and also earlier in the present section , provided 1/; satisfies the 
SchrOdinger equation , S will satisfy the extended Hamilton-Jacobi equa­
tion (3.7) which contains the quantum potential . It is thus clear that in the 
present approach , the quantum potential is actually playing a secondary 
role and this is indeed why it does not have to be included explicitly in 
the stochastic approach (though it provides a very useful insight into the 
meaning of the process especially in the non-stochastic approach) .  But in 
all cases the fundamental dynamics depend first of all on the guidance con­
dition , and , in a stochastic theory, we bring in also the osmotic velocity and 
the effects of random diffusion. All these work together to keep a particle 
in a region in which P = 11/Jl2 is large and where its average velocity fluc­
tuates around VS/m. As explained earlier the quantum potential merely 
represents the mean self-acceleration of the particle under the influence of 
the de Broglie guidance conditions, and this will be valid only if i/; satisfies 
SchrOdinger's equation. If i/; had satisfied another wave equation, the mean 
accelerations would have been different. In fact we shall extend this theory 
in chapter 12 so that the wave function satisfies the Dirac equation , for 
which a very different mean acceleration is implied. 
To bring out the physical significance of the stochastic model, let us 
consider the two-slit interference experiment. A particle undergoing ran­
dom motion will go through one slit or the other, but it is affected by 
the Schrodinger field coming from both slits. In the interpretation that 
we gave earlier, this effect was expressed primarily through the quantum 
potential. In the stochastic interpretation it is primarily expressed through 
the osmotic velocity which reflects the contributions to the wave function 

200 
The undivided universe 
V, coming from both slits. Near the zeros of the wave function the osmotic 
velocity approaches infinity and is directed away from the zeros. Thus a 
particle diffusing randomly and approaching a zero is certain to be turned 
around before it can reach this zero. This explains why no particle ever 
reaches the points where the wave function is zero. And , as we have indeed 
already pointed out, the osmotic velocity is constantly pushing the particle 
to the regions of highest /¢/2 and this explains why most particles are found 
near the maxima of the wave function. 
Without asuming an osmotic velocity field of this kind , there would be 
no way of explaining such phenomena. As a result of random motions, for 
example, a partide just undergoing a random process on its own would have 
no way of 'knowing' that it should avoid the zeros of the wave function . 
To obtain a consistent overall picture we must consider the random 
background field . This is assumed , as we have already pointed out, to be 
the source of the random motions of the particle, but in addition it must 
determine a condition in space which gives rise to the osmotic velocity. 
Indeed, a single particle in random motion cannot contain any information 
capable of determining, for example, that every time it approaches the zero 
of a wave function it must turn around . This information could be contained 
only in the background field itself. Therefore, the stochastic model does 
not fulfil the expectations that would at first be raised by its name, that 
is to provide an explanation solely in terms of the random movements of 
a particle without reference to a quantum mechanical field (which may be 
taken as p  and S or as ¢ = ,/peiS/li ). 
I n  the interpretation that we have been giving throughout this book, 
this field has the property that its effect does not depend on its amplitude. 
As we have suggested in earlier chapters, this behaviour can be understood 
in terms of the concept of active information, i.e. that the movement comes 
from the particle itself, which is however 'informed ' or 'guided' by the field . 
In the stochastic interpretation there is a further effect of the quantum field 
through the osmotic velocity, which is also independent of its amplitude. 
We can therefore say that along with the mean velocity field , VS/m, the 
osmotic velocity field constitutes active information which determines the 
average movement of the particle. This latter is however modified by a 
completely random component due to the fluctuations of the background 
field . 
Clearly then, there are basic similarities between our original essentially 
causal interpretation and the stochastic interpretation. Nevertheless, there 
are also evidently important differences. One of the key differences can 
be seen by considering a stationary state with S = const. ,  e.g. an s-state. 
In the stochastic model the particle is executing a random motion which 
would bring about diffusion in space , but the osmotic velocity is constantly 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpďtation 
20 1 
drawing it back so that we obtain the usual spherical distribution as an 
average. But now the basic process is one of dynamic equilibrium. The 
average velocity, which is zero, is the same as the actual velocity in the 
causal interpretation. Such a view of the s-state as one of dynamic equi­
librium seems to fit in with our physical intuition better than one in which 
the particle is at rest. 
9 . 7  
Stochastic treatment o f  the many-body system 
The extension of this model to the many-particle system is straightforward. 
The wave function, t/>(x;r ), which is defined in a 3N-dimensional configura­
tion space, satisfies the many-body Schrodinger equation. We asume that 
the mean velocity of the nth particle is 
1 
a 
Ti;n = - -
8 . S(x;r ). 
m Xin 
(9 .49) 
In addition we assume an arbitrary probability density P(x;r ) and a random 
diffusion current of the nth particle 
. ( d) 
_ -D 8P 
J;n -
a 
. 
Xin 
(9.50) 
We then make the further key assumption that the osmotic velocity com­
ponent of the n1h particle is 
where p = /1/> /2 . 
u(o) = (D) 8p 
in 
p 8x;n 
(9.5 1 )  
From here on the theory will go through as in the one-particle case and 
it will follow that the limiting distribution will be P = /1/> /2 . 
Equation (9.50) describes a stochastic process in which the different 
particles undergo statistically independent random fluctuations. However, 
in equation (9.51) we have introduced an important connection between 
the osmotic velocities of different particles. For the general wave function 
that does not split into independent factors, the osmotic velocities of dif­
ferent particles will be related and this relationship may be quite strong 
even though the particles are distant from each other. For this model re­
quires an effectively instantaneous nonlocal connection which brings about 
the related osmotic velocities of distant particles (according to mvn = 
-Vn (V + Q)). 

202 
The 1mdivided universe 
It is clear then that the stochastic approach brings in yet another kind 
of nonlocality over and above that which is present in the causal interpre­
tation (in which, as we have seen in chapters 3 and 4, the acceleration is 
given by mvn = -V n( V + Q) , and Q is the generally nonlocal quantum 
potential) . However, by its very name, the stochastic approach seems to 
imply a theory in which quantum mechanics could be explained in terms of 
particles undergoing random processes and thus one could easily be led to 
expect that at least in this theory there would be no need for nonlocality. 
For example, Nelson (9] , who has worked intensively on this sort of inter­
pretation , has written "But the whole point (of the stochastic theory) was 
to construct a physically realistic picture of microprocesses, and a theory 
that violates locality is untenable" [10] .  From this it is clear that Nelson 
expected the stochastic theory to be local even though he finally came to 
the conclusion , in agreement with us, that it has to be nonlocal. 
To bring out the full meaning of this nonlocality it is useful to discuss 
the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment in terms of the stochastic inter­
pretation. To do this we first recall that, as shown in chapter 7, the essential 
feature of a measurement process is that the particles constituting the mea­
suring apparatus can be shown to enter a definite channel, and that after 
this they cannot leave the channel in question because the wave function 
is zero between the channels. From this point on the wave function of the 
whole system effectively reduces to a product of the wave function of the 
apparatus and of the observed system. It w as  demonstrated that thereafter, 
the remaining empty channels will not be effective. It follows that the net 
result is the same as if there had been a collapse of the wave function to a 
state corresponding to the result of the actual measurement. 
It is clear that a similar result will follow for the stochastic interpretation 
because here too there is no probability that a particle can enter the region 
between the channels in which the wave function is zero. 
Let us now consider the EPR experiment in the stochastic interpreta­
tion . We recall that in this experiment we have to deal with an initial 
state of a pair of particles in which the wave function is not factorisable. 
A measurement is then made determining the state of one of these parti­
cles, and it is inferred from the quantum mechanics that the other will go 
into a corresponding state even though the Hamiltonian contains no inter­
action terms that could account for this. In the causal interpretation the 
behaviour of the second particle was explained by the nonlocal features of 
the quantum potential which could provide for a direct interaction between 
the two diferent particles that does not necessarily fall off with their sep­
aration and that can be effective even when there are no interaction terms 
in the Hamiltonian. 
As we have sen in connection with equation (9.3 1 ) ,  in the stochastic 

The role of statistics in the ontological interpretation 
203 
interpretation all the above nonlocal effects of the quantum potential are 
still implied, but now we have seen that there is also a further nonlocal con­
nection through the osmotic velocities. And when the properties of the first 
particle are measured the osmotic velocities of both will be instantaneously 
affected in such a way as to help bring about the appropriate correlations 
of the results. 
It is clear that the stochastic interpretation and the causal interpretation 
treat the nonlocal EPR correlations in a basically similar way. The essential 
point is that in an independent disturbance of one of the particles, the fields 
acting on the other particle (osmotic velocities and quantum potential) 
respond instantaneously even when the particles are far apart. It is as if 
the two particles werP, in instantaneous two-way communication exchanging 
active information that enables each particle to 'know' what has happened 
to the other and to respond accordingly. 
Of course, in a non-relativistic theory it is consistent to asume such 
instantaneous connections. We shall, however, show later how these con­
siderations can be extended to take into account the fact that the theory 
of relativity has been found to be valid in a very broad context, 
9 . 8  
References 
l. I. Prigogine, Fro m B emg to Becoming: Ti m e  a n d  Co mplexity in th e 
Physical Sciences, Freeman, San Francisco, 1980. 
2. S. W. Hawking, Co m m u n .  Ma th. Ph ys. 8 7, 395-4 15 ( 1982). 
3. R. P. Feynman, Statistical Mechanics: A Set of Lectu res, chapter 2, 
Benjamin, London, 1972. 
4. R. C. Tolman, The Prin c iples of Statistical Mechanics, Dover, New 
York , 1979. 
5. E. Nelson, Dynamical Th eones of Brownian Motion, Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, 1972. 
6. D. Bohm and J-P. Vigier, Phys. Rev. 96, 208 ( 1954). 
7. E. Nelson, Phys. Rev. 150B , 1079 ( 1966) . 
8. D. Bohm and B. J .  Hiley, Ph ys. Reports 1 72 ,  93-122 ( 1 989) . 
9. E. Nelson, Quantum Fluctuations, Princeton University Press, Prince­
ton, 1985. 
10. Ibid. , p. 127. 

Chapter 10 
The ontological interpretation of the Pauli 
equation 
1 0 . 1  
Introduc tion 
We have thus far developed a systematic ontological interpretation of non­
relativistic Schrodinger theory for particles. In this and the next two chap­
ters of the book , we shall be concerned principally with extensions of the 
theory to include 
• the non-relativistic Pauli equation 
• field theories considered non-relativistically 
• relativistic treatment of both particle and field theories. 
We begin this chapter with a treatment of the non-relativistic Pauli 
equation . Firstly, we shall discuss some previous suggestions for an onto­
logical interpretation of this equation based on the idea that the particle is 
an extended rigid object which makes a 'spin' contribution to the total an­
gular momentum [1 ,2] . We then give reasons showing why this assumption 
does not give rise to a satisfactory theory. We are led instead to regard the 
Pauli equation as a non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation . When we 
do this we can se that, in addition to the straightforward contribution to 
the current implied by the previous models (cf. equation 5.4) , there is a fur­
ther circulating current in which the orbit precesses in a way that depends 
on the wave function. This makes a contribution to the total angular mo­
mentum which accounts for that which has usually been attributed to the 
particle's spin . This means that the spin angular momentum does not arise 
from an extended particle structure at all , but that rather it is a further 
and more subtle feature of the orbital motion of the particle. 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
205 
It is thus implied that the spin is a context-dependent property of the 
particle, rather than an intrinsic property. As such it is, as we shall see, 
readily related to a model originally proposed by Bell [3) . 
We develop our model and exhibit its consequences for a variety of 
typical situations. We then extend it to a many-body system to provide 
an explanation of the EPR experiment with two atoms of spin one-half 
constituting a molecule of total spin zero (thus extending the results of 
chapter 7 for particles of spin one). 
1 0 . 2  
The Bohm, Schiller and Tiomno model 
We now give a sketch of the original Bohm, Schiller and Tiomno model, 
[BST) , for spin [1). We shall give some reasons why we regard this model 
as ultimately inadequate, but it is nevertheless useful to consider it here as 
it will help make clear the model that we are actually going to adopt. 
We begin with the Pauli spinor 
i)Jj (x) = ( âã ) 
which satisfies the Pauli equation 
/Ni = 
-(Y' - ieA)2ipi + Vi)J + µ(u .  B)·1 . . 
at 
2m 
J 
'I'] ' 
( 1 0 . 1 )  
where <r are the Pauli spin matrices, A the vector potential and B the 
applied magnetic field. (We shall put h = c = 1 throughout this chapter.) 
To develop this interpretation, we start with the special case where 
A =  0 and B = 0. In this case the Pauli equation reduces to two uncoupled 
SchrOdinger equations. (It is readily seen that when B I- 0, the equations 
will generally be coupled .) Then setting i)J1 = Rj exp(iSj) we obtain 
and 
aSi + (Y'Sj)2 + V - _1_ Y'2Rj = O 
at 
2m 
2m Ri 
aRJ +Y' · (R2Y'Sj) = 0. 
at 
J m 
( 1 0.2) 
( 10.3) 
We can picture the meaning of the above therefore as two independent 
probability distributions, each of which is conserved and in which the ve­
locities of the particle are, in general, different. When B j. 0, neither of 

206 
The undivided universe 
these probability distributions is conserved by itself because the two wave 
functions are coupled . However, it is easily shown that their sum 
( 10 .4) 
is conserved. 
We may then define a mean velocity 
( 10.5) 
where P1 = 1¢1 12 and P2 = 1¢2 12 . The conservation equation is then 
{}P 
fit + \7 · (Pv) = 0. 
( 10.6) 
On this basis we can say that the first step in obtaining an ontological 
interpretation is to asume a particle following a definite trajectory with the 
guidance condition (10.5) (which is clearly a generalisation of the guidance 
condition for a particle without spin) .  The probability distribution of such 
particles will be asumed to be P = p. (By a generalisation of the argument 
used with Schrodinger's equation , it is clear that one can show that if there 
are chaotic processes in the motion of the particle, then , if P is not initially 
equal to p, it will approach p in the long run (see chapter 9).) 
Thus far we have not provided enough physical concepts to give a mean­
ing to the R; and S; , which constitute four quantities . The simplest phys­
ical idea would be to asume (as was indeed done in the original paper of 
BST [1]) that the particle is a spinning object whose orientation is specified 
by the three Euler angles (8 , ¢, x) .  It is well known that a two component 
spinor can be put into correspondence with these angles. Indeed we can 
write 
¢ = 
! ( cos ǰ exp [i(x + ¢)/2] ) 
P 
i sin ǯ exp [i(x - .P)/2] 
· 
( 10.7) 
Asuming that the object is spherical, we may propose that B and ¢i 
represent the orientation of the angular momentum vector , while x repre­
sents the angle of rotation of the object about this axis. If the angular 
momentum is one half, we can write the spin-vector as 
S = ! ipt uijJ
. 
2 
p 
( 10.8) 
This spin-vector is then easily shown to be in the direction determined by 
8 and l/J. It is clear that 
(10.9) 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
207 
The spinor is now fully interpreted. We are evidently regarding the Hamilton­
Jacobi phase, S, as being equal to the angle of rotation of the rigid body 
around an axis in the direction of the spin. 
We can obtain an interesting physical picture here. If we add to the 
energy of the particle the rest energy m0c2 , Schrodinger's equation (in this 
non-relativistic treatment) can be written as 
.81/Jj 
1 ( 
)2 
2 
' 8t  = - 2m V - eA tPi + Vt/Ji + moc t/Ji + µ(u · B)t/J; . 
( 10. 10) 
With B = 0 and V = 0, a particle with zero momentum will have the wave 
function 
•1• 
[ . t] ( cos 1 exp (i¢/2] ) 
o/ ex: exp -zm 
. 
. 
9 
[ • /2] 
. 
1 sm 2 exp -1¢ 
Thus the angular frequency is 
x = m 
( 1 0. 1 1 )  
which is the frequency corresponding to the Compton wavelength. When 
k is not zero, we get 
t/J ex: exp [-i (mc2 + 2
k
m
2 ) t] exp[ik · z] ( Ԏos 1 exp (i¢/.2] ) . ( 10. 12) 
z sm 1 exp (-1¢/2) 
This implies a motion in which, while z is increasing with time, the 
particle is simultaneously rotating around the axis determined by the spin 
direction. For example, in the case in which the spin is directed along the 
line of velocity, an element in the spherical structure of the particle executes 
a helical motion with the screw sense determined by the spin direction. (In 
general the motion is, of course, more complicated. ) 
There will be a generalisation of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation for S = 
X· To obtain this we first transform the velocity ( 10.5) with the aid of 
( 10.7) ,  and we find that 
1 
v = -(VS + cos BVq'i) - eA. 
2m 
(10.13) 
It can then be shown (see BST p.63) that S satisfies the equation 
85 
&t 
+ 
) 
(\75 + cos B\7¢ - eA)2 
1 \72p! 
cos 0( v . \7 ¢ + 
2 
- - --
m 
2m p! 
1 
® 
V + - [(\70)2 + sin2 0(\7¢)2] + µS · B = 0. 
2m 
( 10.14) 

208 
The undivided uniuerse 
In the above we have a generalisation of the quantum potential which 
is given by 
(10.15) 
In addition ,  the orbital motion depends on the angles 8 and ¢> which 
determine the spin-vector S .  This is a quantum mechanical spin-orbit 
coupling. Evidently it is also necessary that (} and ¢> depend on the orbital 
motion . What happens is that the spin-orbit coupling brings about a quan­
tum torque acting on the spin-vector (we shall not go into details here, but 
the relevant equations are given in BST p.64). 
We can illustrate the meaning of these equations in terms of a mea­
surement process in which we begin with a spin pointing in an arbitrary 
direction and measure it in the z-direction . As the wave packets corre­
sponding to positive and negative spins respectively begin to separate in 
the z-direction , it is found, first of all , that the quantum torque eventually 
lines the particle spin up with the corresponding wave packet into which 
the particle ultimately goes . Where the particle will go depends not only 
on its initial position , but also on the initial values of (} and ¢>. However, 
with the probability distribution that has been assumed , it is easily shown 
that the probability that the particle will end up in a given final packet, 
t/!1 (z) , is J liP1 (z) l2 dx. And this , of course, will be the same as one obtains 
in the usual interpretations. 
The relevant orbits have been worked out for two cases (see Dewdney 
et al. [4]). In both , one assumes the mass, m ,  of the particle is so great 
that we can neglect the spread of the wave packets. In Case 1 ,  the spin 
points initially in the x-direction . The trajectories are shown in figure 10 . 1 ,  
while the turning of the spin directions are shown i n  figure 10.2. For Case 2, 
similar results are given for a certain initial spin direction that yields a 75% 
probability for spin-up in the z-direction and a 25% probability for spin­
down. These trajectories are shown in figure 10.3, while the spin directions 
are shown in figure 10.4. 
10.3 
The many-body Pauli equation 
As shown in BST [1,2] ,  the model described here works consistently and 
provides an adequate ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation for 
a one-body system. However, this model gets into very serious difficulties 
when we try to extend it to a many-body system. To show what these 
difficultie8 are , let us begin by considering the general wave function for 
such a system, 11' = 11'; 1 
; N ( z 1 . . .  z N ) .  This has 2N complex components 
(or 2N+ 1  real components) . 


ro1 ;},mjy 'll!M. Pdl1!!:>ossv (1 ' z)o suoq11lU;}!Jo 10 Pld!.i :i·o1 ;}.ltli!J: 
• - 0 l x  
<;OO<;OO N 0 11i11 N 3 1 d 0  V13 H1 
1 
00 9 1  
0 0  .. L 
00 
ł I  
0 0  0 1  
00 8 
00 
9 
00 
• 
00 
ł 
00 0 
I 11 I I I I I I I I I I I 11 I I I I I I 1 I I I I I 1 11 ' ' \ 
< 
T 
Ol o -
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 1 1 \ ' ' 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I \ \ 1 \ ' ' 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 1 1 ' ' ' 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I \ 1 1 1 \ ' '  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I \ \ 1 \ ' ' - .i. " 0-
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I \ 1 1 1 \ ' '  -
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I \ I 1 1 \ '
,
 _ 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 1 1 1 \ , , , _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 1 1 1 \ ' ' , _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I 1 1 1 1 \ ' ' ' ' - ol-
o 1 0-
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I 1 1 1 \ \ , , , , _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I 1 1 1 1 \ \ , , , , , _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 \ \ ' '  ' ' ' - -
I I I I I I I I I I I I 1
1
1
 1 1 1 1 1 \ \ \ \ , , , , , ,  _ _ 
I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I 1 1 1 1 1 \ \ \ \ \ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' - - ol- <0 . o-
I I I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 \ \ \ \ \ \ \ ' '  ' '  ' ' ' ' - - -
, , , , , , , , ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' '  ' ' ' '  ' - - - -
' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' '  ' ' '  ' ' ' ' ' ' ' - - - - - - - -
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
, , ,
, ,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
, ,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - դ 00 0  
x 
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/ /
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/ _, _, _, _, _, _, _, _,  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
/ / / / /
/
/
/ "' "' "' "' - - - - - -
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
/
/ / / /
/ _, _, _,  _ _ _ _ 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 1
1
1
1
1
1
1 
I 
I 
I 
I
/
/ / / /
/ _, _, _ _ _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I 
I 
I / / / / / "' "' - - .i. <o 0 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I I 
I
/
/ / / / _,  _ _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1
1
I
1
1
1 1 
I
/
/ / / _, _ _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1
1
1 1 
I
/ / / / - -
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I 
I I
/
/ / "' _, _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I 
I I / _, / "' - .i. 0 1  0 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I I 
I
/ / _, _  
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I I
/ / _, _ 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I
/
/
./
/ -
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I
/
./
/ -
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I I / ,,. - .i. < 1  0 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I
/
/ / -
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
I
/
/ "' 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
/ "' 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1. I I I I I I .  I I I I I I I 
I 
I I ,, -
Ol O 


0 1 0 
, T I I ! f' ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ' ! ! ! ! ! ! f ! ! ! ! ! 
r I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
, r I I I ' ' ' ' r ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
I I I I I ! ! ! ! f f f f f f f f f f f f f ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
o 1 0  բ I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
,, I I T I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
' 
/ r r r 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ' ! ! 
, 
/ / r r r 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ! ! ! ! ! ! ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
0 1 0  ա I I I r r r I I ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
' I I I r r r I I I I ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
/ I I I r r r r I I I ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
,, , 
/ / r r r r r 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
,, ,  1 1 1
r
r
r
r
r
1
1
1
1
1
1
 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
0 00 Ÿ / ' ' I I I I r r r r r r I I I I ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
,, , , 1 1 1 1 1 1
r r r r r r 1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
 
,, ,
,
,
,
,
,
1 1 1 1 1
r r r r r r r r 1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
 
,, ,, ,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
r r r r r r r r r r r 
_, _, I ! I 
! 
! I I ! I 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! I I 
! 
! 
! I I 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! I 
x 
o oo գ / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / /  
/ / / / / / / / / / / / _ / _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
/ / / / / - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - \ - \ \ - \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 
_, _, _, _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \
\
\
\
\
\
\
I
 I I I I I I I I I 
_, ,, - - - - - - - - - - - - \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
-o oo Ÿ _, _, - - - - - - - - '- \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f 
,, _ _ _ _ _ _ _  , \ \ \ \ \ \
\
\
I
 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
 
,, _ _ _ _ _ _  , \ \ \ \ \ \
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
 
- - - - - - '- \ \ \ \ \
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
!
 ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
_ _ _ _ _ , \ \ \ \ \
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
- o 1 0  + - - - - - \ \ \ \ \ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
_ _ _ _ , \ \ \ \
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
!
 ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f 
- - - - \ \ \ \
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f 
_ _ _  , \ \ \ \
I
 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f 
- - - '- \ \ \
I I I I I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! f
f
 
-o 1 0  + - - - \ \ \ \ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f f 
- - - \ \ \ I  I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
 f 
_ _  , \ \ \
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f f 
- - ' \  \ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f f 
- - ' \.
,
I
 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! f f f 
-o 1 0 k 
-
, 
' 
\ \1 I I I I I I ' I I I I I I 11 I I I I I I I I I I I 11 I I I I I I ' I I I I I I 'I I I I I I 
o o o  
2 0 0  
• 0 0  
6 0 0  
e o o  
1 0  0 0  
1 2  0 0  
1 4  0 0  
1 6  0 0  
T 
x 1 0 -· 
TH ETA O R I E NTATION 0 2 5 0 7 5  
Figure 10.4: The field of orientations 8 (  z ,  t) asociated with figure 10.3 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
213 
The many-body Pauli equation i s  then (assuming B = 0) 
. 8'1 [ 1 
'"" 
2 
l 
i 7ft  = - 2m _ L., 
'V; + V(z1 . . .  ZN ) 
'1 . 
• - 1 , . . .  ,N 
( 10.16) 
From this we obtain the net probability density in the configuration space 
of all the particles 
( 1 0. 1 7) 
(See section 10.4 for a more detailed discussion of the many-body wave 
function.) 
Let us then define the current density in configuration space as 
(10. 18) 
It then follows from the Pauli equation that 
û + L('Vn · Jn) = 0. 
(10. 19) 
n 
The above expresses the conservation of probability in configuration space. 
In analogy with what was done in the many-body Schrooinger equation , 
this suggests that we define the particle velocity as 
(10.20) 
The above can be regarded as a generalisation of the guidance condition , 
while the conservation equation ( 10.19) implies that particles guided in 
this way will have a conserved probability density. But to complete the 
interpretation , we need to define the spin-vectors. In agreement with what 
was done with the velocities, the spin of the nth particle, Sn , has to be 
defined as 
Sn = 1/JǺ(j" ln'lPn 
p 
( 10.21) 
where (jn represents the spin matrix of the nth particle, and ln' represents 
the unit matrix on the spin indices of all the other particles. This will 
define at most 3N functions. We have also the definition of the velocities 
Vn , which will add up to give at most 6N functions (though not all of 
these may be independent) .  These are all the properties belonging to the 
individual particles alone that our spin model can allow for. However, 

214 
The undivided universe 
as we have already pointed out, the wave function contains, in general, 
2N+ 1  independent real parameters. Thus for the 2-body system there are 
8 independent parameters. But there are 6 spin vectors and 6 velocity 
components. Therefore it should be possible to give a physical meaning to 
all the parts of the wave function for this case (in which, of course, not all 
the physical quantities need be independent). Dewdney et al. (5] have, in 
fact, considered this case and have given some detailed results. 
It is clear however that as we increase N indefinitely, the number of 
physical properties of the individual particles will only increase as N ,  while 
the number of independent parameters of the wave function will increase 
as 2N+l . Therefore there is no way to give a physical meaning to all the 
parameters along these lines. One might consider properties belonging to 
sets of 2, 3 or 4 particles etc. ,  but it is difficult to see what this could mean 
physically. Such properties would be nonlocal and might be significant even 
when the particles are far apart. In any case, the simple model of a set of 
spinning particles would no longer apply. 
The above difficulty makes it doubtful that a consistent interpretation 
of the many-body Pauli equation can be obtained in terms of a model 
of spinning particles . But there is a further difficulty even with the one­
body Pauli equation , when we consider the fact that this must be the 
non-relativistic limit of a relativistic theory, i .e. the theory of the Dirac 
equation . The fact is that we cannot account properly for the value of the 
angular momentum for a model of this sort. Using the relation for the 
frequency of rotation of a particle that we obtained earlier, we can easily 
see that to have a spin one-half, we would need an electron of the size 
of the Compton wavelength. But we know that this cannot be allowed 
because of the experimental data on scattering. In fact this data implies 
that the electron cannot be larger than about 10- 16 cm. To obtain the 
angular momentum, h/2, a spinning particle of this size would have to 
have a peripheral velocity very much greater than that of light. Since we 
have to regard the Pauli equation as the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac 
equation, which is fully relativistic , we cannot allow such velocities. 
For these two reasons we conciude that this model of a spinning particle 
will not be an adequate one. 
10.4 
The Pauli equation as the non-relativistic limit of the 
Dirac equation 
We can obtain some further insight into what would be a proper model for 
the Pauli equation by considering in some detail how it comes out as the 
non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation. We begin with the Dirac spinor 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
215 
Ill = 111 a where a = 1 , 2 , 3, 4 .  The Dirac equation is 
all! 
( 
' 
) 
- = -a 
· 'V - ieA Ill - iVlll - im(3111 
at 
where a, (3 are the Dirac matrices. 
We choose a representation in which (3 is diagonal and write 
( 10.22) 
where 1/;1 and 1/;2 are two-component spinors corresponding respectively to 
(3 = + 1 and (3 = - 1 .  The Dirac equation becomes 
al/;1 = -(J' · ('V - ieA)l/;2 - i(V + m)l/;1 
(a) 
at 
al/;2 = -(J' · ( 'V  - ieA)i/;1 - i( V + m)l/;2 
(b) 
at 
where (J' are the Pauli matrices. 
( 10.23) 
For low velocities and positive energies, 1/;2 « 1/;1 . With 1/;2 ex exp[-iEt] 
we obtain 
(E - V + m)l/;2 = -i(J' · ('V - ieA)l/;1 .  
Putting equation ( 1 0.24) into (10.23a) we find 
. al/;1 
-(J' · ('V - ieA)(J' · ('V - ieA)l/;1 
( V  
) ·'· 
1 - = 
+ 
+ m 'l'I · 
at 
(E - V + m) 
This becomes 
. al/;1 
1 - = 
8t 
-('V - ieA)21/;1 + e ('V x A) · (J'l/;1 + (V + m)l/;1 . 
(E - V + m) 
Writing E = m + l!!.E and using 
we obtain 
1 
1 ( 
l!!.E - V) 
2m + l!!.E - V = 2m 
1 -
2m 
' 
JN1 
1 
. 
) 2 
e 
B 
( 
1 ` = - -('V - ieA 1/;1 + -
2 (J' ·  ¢1 + V + m)t/>i . 
ui 
2m 
m 
( 10.24) 
(10.25) 
(10 .26) 
( 1 0.27) 
( 10.28) 
This is clearly the Pauli equation with a constant rest mas term added . 

216 
The u ndivided un iverse 
To give an ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation considered 
as a non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation , we begin with the Dirac 
current 
which satisfies the conservation equation 
op 
..., 
. 
o 
(}t + v · ] =
. 
( 10.29) 
(10.30) 
As we have been doing in previous cases, we take advantage of the fact that 
when a conservation equation is satisfied , we can always assume a particle 
with a velocity satisfying our now generalised guidance condition 
J 
v = -
p 
( 1 0.3 1 )  
which h as  a probability distribution given by P = p. To do this i t  is, 
of course, necessary that p be positive definite. But P = 1¢12 is clearly 
positive definite. (Alternative definitions of the current density which do 
not, in general, lead to positive definite probabilities have been considered 
by de Broglie [6] . But evidently we cannot obtain a consistent ontological 
interpretation if we admit negative probability densities for the particles.) 
To simplify the subsequent discussion , we shall from now on restrict 
ourselves to a free particle. From equations (10.24) and ( 1 0.27) we then 
obtain 
(10.32) 
(also assuming energies low enough so the t!. E/m can be neglected) . We 
then obtain 
( 1 0.33) 
which reduces to the sum of two terms, j A + j B ,  where 
( 1 0.34) 
and 
(10.35) 
The velocity correspondingly reduces to the sum of two parts v = v A + v B 
where 
(10.36) 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
217 
J B  
VB = - . 
( 1 0 .37) 
p 
The first part of the current, iA , is the same as it was in the BST inter­
pretation of the Pauli equation ( and v A gives the same velocity as in this 
interpretation) . The second part, iB . satisfies the identity 'V · iB = 0 and 
this evidently corresponds to some kind of additional circulation. To see 
what this means consider the case in which 1/; is a spherical wave packet 
of radius a ,  centred at the origin and falling off rapidly at distances of the 
order r = a. The term 
VB =  -1- 'V X (1/JtC11/J) 
2m 
p 
( 1 0 .38) 
represents a velocity in the direction r x s (where s =  1/;tC11/;). This implies 
a circular movement around the direction of 'spin ' which has a maximum 
velocity near r = a . 
This additional velocity, v B ,  gives rise to a further contribution to the 
mean magnetic moment over and above that coming from the orbital mo­
tion. Indeed the average of the total magnetic moment, M ,  is 
- e l  . 
e l . 
e l 
. d 
M = '2 
r x }  dr = '2 
r x }  
A dr + 2 
r x J B 
T. 
The first term in the above is just 
We can write this as 
( 10.39) 
( 10.40) 
( 10.4 1 )  
The above is just the orbital momentum of the current. The secon d term 
IS 
( 1 0.42) 
We can readily transform this into 
( 10.43) 

218 
The u n di11ided universe 
This is the average magnetic moment due to the circu lating motion , which 
evidently comes out equal to the average obtained in the usual interpreta­
tion. 
We se then that, in the Dirac theory, the magnetic moment usually 
attributed to the 'spin' can actually be attributed to a circulating movement 
of a point particle, and not that of an extended spinning object. The 
total value is, however, independent of the size of the wave packet because, 
although the velocity of circulation goes down by a factor l/a for large 
wave packets, the moment of momentum contains a further factor r which 
compensates for this. 
This implies that the magnetic moment is not an intrinsic localised 
property of an extended particle structure at all . Rather it comes about as 
a result of the general motion of the particle through space as determined 
by the Dirac guidance condition ( 10.31 ) . This means that the magnetic 
moment, like so many quantum properties that we have discussed in earlier 
chapters, is a context dependent prope;ty of a point particle. This property 
depends on the quantum field, i.e. the Dirac spinor , 'If a , and therefore 
ultimately it has to be regarded as a potentiality that depends on the 
context of the overall environment in a way that we have discussed in 
chapter 4. 
In the usual approach , the magnetic moment is regarded as the product 
of spin and therefore it is implied that whatever movement produces the 
magnetic moment should also be responsible for what is generally called 
the spin angular momentum. 
It seems natural to suggest, therefore, that there is some relationship 
between the circulatory motion that we have described above and what 
has commonly been called the spin angular momentu m. In seeking this 
relationship , it is crucial to note that, for the Dirac particle, the velocity 
and the momentum are not in the same direction . Indeed the momentu m 
of the particle follows from equation (10.34) 
1 [1/JI(V'ij;i) - (V'1/JI)1/J1) 
mvA = -
2i 
p 
from which we can express the velocity as 
p 
v = - + va . 
m 
The orbital angular momentum is 
Lo = r x p. 
( 10.44) 
( 10.45) 

The ontological interprdatron of the Pauli equation 
219 
In an isolated system one expects the total angular momentum to be a 
constant . But if we compute Lo we obtain 
Lo 
r x p + r x p  
r x p + r x F  
r x p + T , 
( 10.46) 
where F is the applied force and T is the applied torque. Moreover even if 
T = 0 we will still not have conservation of the orbital angular momentum 
for the case of a Dirac particle. 
In the usual interpretation a similar question arises. Thus the orbital 
angular momentum operator L = r x p is not conserved even for a free 
particle because L = r x p = o: x p f.  0. This fact implies that there is an 
additional 'intrinsic ' angular momentum operator s and ,  as is well known , 
if we choose s = er /2 we obtain s = -o: x p so that J = L + er is conserved. 
Returning to our model we want to show that what has been usually 
called spin angular momentum can be attributed consistently to the cir­
culatory motion that comes out of the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac 
equation . What is usually called the mean spin angular momentum density 
is just 
s = t/J t '!._ t/J .  
2 
Let us now consider the quantity 
E = r x (\7 x s) , 
( 10 .47) 
( 1 0.48) 
which has the dimensions of an angular momentum density. Using three 
index tensors with indices i, j etc . ,  we can readily show that 
( 10.49) 
so that we obtain for what is usually called intrinsic angular momentum 
density 
( 10.50) 
We see then that Sj differs from tEj only by a perfect divergence. 
Therefore it is clear that their averages will be the same (because the inte­
gral of a divergence is zero), but in addition , tEi will also be conserved. 
To see that this is so we note that replacing Sj by t Ej merely adds a term 
to lj which is equal to 
1 a 
1 a 
i 
+ - - ( r; s ) - - - 6 ( r k s k } . 
2 8x; 
J 
2 8x; 
J 
( a) 
(10.50) 

220 
Th e u ndrnided un itierse 
If TJ is the tensor current density for the total angular momentum density 
Jj , the conservation equation for the latter can be written as 
81, 
8TJ -
ர+ ற- 0. 
ut 
ux; 
Adding ( 10.50a) to TJ leads to 
f)Jj + ar; + ǭǮ [1· OSj - 6irk OSk] = 0. 
8t 
OX; 
2 OXj 
• f)t 
) 
8t 
It is then clear that the total angular momentum will be conserved if the 
angular momentum density of circulatory motion as defined through tEj 
undergoes detailed conservation . Therefore t Ej is just as good a candidate 
for the 'intrinsic' angular momentum density as /Jj . 
If we accept t E1 as the intrinsic angular momentum density, we obtain 
for the total angular momentum 
( 10.51) 
In this way we are able to account for the intrinsic angular momentum as 
produced by the circulatory motion . Note however that this angular mo­
mentum is only half that which we might have expected at first sight from 
our expression for the magnetic moment ( 10.43) . The reason is basically 
that when v B is not in the direction of the momentum, there are intrinsic 
torques. These reduce the contribution of this motion to the total angular 
momentum below that which one might have expected from ou r general 
intuition (this latter, of course, does not include such cases in which the 
velocity and the momentum are not parallel) . 
It follows then, that like the magnetic moment, the spin is also a context 
dependent property of the particle rather than an intrinsic property. It 
might be better to call it a result of the context dependent circulatory 
motion of the trajectories which is over and above that which determines 
the usual orbital angular momentum. 
To sum up then , the interpretation that flows out of our discussion is 
that the electron must still be regarded as a simple point particle whose 
only intrinsic property is its position . The particle has a velocity which is 
determined by the guidance condition (10.29) . In the non-relativistic ap­
proximation, this includes that assumed in the BST model, along with an 
additional circulatory contribution 'il x ( 1/>i ul/>1 )/2mp. In this approxima­
tion the probability density is P = p = 111 i 12 .  
This model is very close to the one that was first proposed by Bell (3) 
who likewise asumed a point particle, but who asumed that the mean 

Th e o n t o log ical i n t e rp re t a t i o n  of t h e  Pauli equation 
22 1 
velocity is the same as that of the BST model, where 
t/Jt \lt/J - (\lt/Jt )t/J 
v 
-
±²³-
A -
2mip 
. 
The Bell model differs from the one that we have just developed , because 
it does not include the circulatory motion corresponding to the magnetic 
moment and the spin angular momentum. But since \l · j 8 
= 0, both 
models will give the same probability density. Therefore as long as we are 
only interested in probability densities, the circulating spin-current can be 
neglected , and we can use Bell's model instead . 
In the models that have just been described above, we restrict ourselves 
to determining the motion of a particle through suitable guidance condi­
tions , and we do not attempt to acrnunt in detail for the accelerations 
through something like a quantum potential or some form of spin-orbit 
interaction . To do this latter will give insight only if the acceleration can 
be given as some simple function of the relevant physical variables. For 
example , in the original causal interpretation , we find that the acceleration 
is determined by mi = -\l[V + Q] . The first of these terms represents 
the part of the acceleration that can be accounted for in terms of classical 
forces that are generally local and that produce an effect that is propor­
tional to the intensity of the field. The term -\JQ represents the quantum 
mechanical contribution that depends on the form of the field and not on 
the intensity, and that acts in a way that is generally nonlocal . 
In the BST model for the one-particle system there were additional 
quantum mechanical terms corresponding to explicit expressions for the 
spin-orbit coupling. But in the many-particle system, we could not find 
any acceptable physical interpretation for the vast number of terms that 
entered into the determination of the acceleration . In addition we found 
that we could not consistently attribute the spin angular momentum to an 
extended particle. We have therefore reached a point where the attempt to 
account for the acceleration in terms of various forces no longer provides 
any useful insight. Nevertheless the theory still works consistently as long 
as we have a suitable guidance condition. 
Given that there is no extended particle that is spinning and that what 
we call spin represents only some average property of the circulating orbital 
motion , how do we understand what we usually call a measurement of 
the spin , for example, in a Stern-Gerlach experiment? To discuss this, 
we may conveniently consider a neutral hydrogen atom with one orbital 
electron in an s-state. From equation ( 10. 28) we can see that the operator 
for the interaction energy of the electron 'spin ' with the magnetic field is 
(e/2m)u · B . (We neglect nuclear spin here.) If B is inhomogeneous, that is 
B = B( z) , it is readily shown (7) that this will cause the initial wave packet 

222 
The trndiv1ded universe 
to break into two parts that move in opposite directions along the axis 
determined by B(O) . For example, suppose the initial 'spin ' was in the x­
direction , so that the spin-current was circulating around the x-axis. After 
interaction with the inhomogeneous magnetic field in the z-direction, two 
packets begin to separate in this direction and eventually cease to overlap. 
Clearly the particle must end up in one of these packets. The results in 
each individual case depend , of course , on the precise initial conditions. 
The probability for each possible result will come out as one-half, given our 
asumptions about the probability distribution of the initial conditions. If 
the result corresponds to spin h/2, the current will circulate around the 
positive direction , while if the result is -h/2, the circulation is opposite. 
In this way we understand what happens in a so-called spin measurement 
as an essentially participatory process. In this process the net properties 
of the orbital motion are transformed through this participation in a way 
that depends on the precise initial conditions as well as on the 'environment' 
supplied by the measuring apparatus. The value that is attributed to the 
'spin ' as a result of a measurement process is thus a potentiality whose 
realisation depends on these conditions and on the general environment, 
including the measuring apparatus. 
10.5 
Extension to the many-body system 
We shall now extend this model to a system of many particles. In doing 
so we shall prove that the non-relativistic limit of the many-body Dirac 
equation implies that the current for each particle is just the one that we 
obtain for the many-body Pauli equation given in section 10.3, together 
with a circulating spin current for each particle. This latter is basically 
just an extension of the spin current obtained in the one-particle system. 
We begin by defining the Dirac wave function for a system of many 
particles. The treatment is very similar to that of the many-body Pauli 
equation. The total wave function can be written as 
( 10.52) 
where each index a; runs from 1 to 4. (We are not for the moment interested 
in the question of Lorentz invariance, which we shall discuss in a later 
chapter.) The Dirac equation for this system is then 
iá = L[O'.n · 'Vn + mnf3n + V(zn)]H. 
(10.53) 
n 
On represents the velocity operator for the n1h particle. Its matrix elements 
operate only on the spinor index an . Similarly for f3n. The O'.n have the 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
223 
anticommutation relations 
(a) 
( 10.54) 
and the commutation relations 
for n f. n' . 
(b) 
(10.54) 
That is to say, the a belonging to one particle commute with those belonging 
to the others. Similarly 
(c) 
( 10.54) 
and 
(d) 
( 10.54) 
Let us now adopt the representation in wh ich all the /3n are diagonal, so 
that the one-particle wave functions take the form 
where 1/J1 k and 1/J2k are two-component spinors whose indices have been 
suppressed and where < = 1 refers to the large component and < = 2 refers 
to the small component. The N-body wave function can then be written 
as 
W = W<, <N (z 1 . . . ZN , i). 
The Dirac equation will now have 2N explicit indices representing the large 
and small components for each particle respectively. The Dirac equation 
can then be written as 
( 10.55) 
( 10.56) 

224 
The undi111ded uni11erse 
We now write lj• ex exp[-iEt] and asume that all the particles have 
pos1t1ve energies. The Pauli wave function will then be approximately 
!f!1, 1 ft 1 w The total energy will be approximately E = Ln mn , in this 
non-relativistic approximation in which V is assumed to be small compared 
to Ln mn . 
For each particle, n ,  we can solve for W ,, 2ft. 'N in terms of W ,, .. 1ft <w 
Neglecting V for the reasons we have given , we find 
( 10.57) 
If we substitute this into (10.38) it is readily verified that we obtain the 
Pauli many-body equation . However, what we are especially interested in 
here is the current of the n1h particle which is 
Jn 
1!Jf o:n !/J 
L [w!, .. 1 ft  ,N un w,, . .  2ft · 'N 
(10.58) 
Let us now use ( 10.57) in ( 10.58) . We find that (asuming all the particles 
have the same mas) 
Jn 
2ài L [¢!, !ft <N <Tn (<Tn · \7n)!/J,, !ft <N 
This reduces to 
Jn 
2ßi E{[¢L 1ft ,N (\7n !/J,, l ft · 'N )  
' 
AB we have suggested before, we can simplify by assuming all the fn are 1 ,  
corresponding to p06itive energies for each particle. The remaining wave 
function is then just the Pauli many-body wave function W .  We then get 
( 10.6 1 )  

Th e o n t o logical i n t e rp re t a t i o n  of the Pauli equ ation 
225 
From this we conclude that the model ( 10.6 1 )  for the N-body system can 
be obtained by regarding each particle as having two parts to its velocity 
and 
( 1 /2mi) [l/it(V'n l/i) - (\i'01{it )l/i] 
liP 12 
( 1 /2m)V'n X (1/it <Tnl/i) 
liP 12 
( 10.62) 
( 10.63) 
Therefore our original picture which adds a circulating current to the ve­
locity of each particle still holds for the many-body system. 
We have of course been assuming the interactions are weak enough , 
so that all the particles will be within the non-relativistic limit . In this 
approximation the details of the interaction will not significantly change 
this picture . 
10.6 
The EPR experiment for two particles o f  spin one-half 
We shall now go on to discuss the EPR experiment for two particles of spin 
one-half. We shall find that we obtain a consistent interpretation that is 
in fact very similar to the one that. we gave for the case of two particles of 
spin-one forming a molecule of total spin-zero (chapter 7) . 
We begin by denoting the coordinates of our two particles by z 1 and 
z2 . For the sake of simplicity, we suppose that the two particles are not 
equivalent . We further assume that each particle is fairly well localised 
with respective wave packets /(zi ) and g(z2) , the centres of which are 
separated by a distance a that is much greater than the width of either of 
the packets. We also suppose that these packets represent s-states about 
their respective centres. 
The wave function for a system with total 'intrinsic' angular momentum 
zero will be 
where 
1/,J;j 
I 
II' = f(z1 )g(z2) L 1/i;1 
i,j=- 1 
0 
for i = j 
1 
J2 iP1 ,-1 
for i = 1 , j = - 1  
1 
- J2 l/i- 1 I 
for j = - 1 ,  J = l. 
( 10.64) 
( 10.65) 

226 
The undivided universe 
t/J;; expreses the fact that the wave function is antisymmetric in the 
spinor indices of the two particles. For the wave functions that we have as­
sumed , the particles will have no orbital angular momentum. The intrinsic 
angular momentum of the first particle is 
r1 x ('V1 x s1 )  
E1 =
---­
p 
and for the second particle it is 
(a) 
(b) 
( 1 0 .66) 
( 10.66) 
Clearly the values of E1 and .E2 are determined by s1 and s2 . We readily 
obtain 
and likewise 
s1 = Ǭ L [vLcr;kiik;] = o, 
ij k 
(a) 
( 10.67) 
(b) 
( 10.67) 
This means that in the initial state, there is no circulating current cor­
responding to intrinsic moments. We shall discuss the further significance 
of this in more detail presently. But we may note here that this result is 
very similar to that obtained for the orbital angular momenta of two atoms 
of spin-one combined to make a molecule of spin-zero where similarly we 
found that the particles were not moving. 
Let us now suppose that particle number 1 is subjected to a Stern­
Gerlach experiment so that its wave function divides into two parts, one 
moving upwards along the z-axis by a distance d, and the other moving 
downwards by this distance (we assume also that d is much greater than 
the width of the wave packets) . The wave function then becomes 
( 10.68) 
If particle number 1 enters the packet going upwards, particle number 1 
actually is set in circulatory motion in the positive direction around the 
z-axis, while particle number 2 is likewise set in motion in the opposite 
direction. And if particle number 1 enters the packet going downwards, the 
results for both particles will be opposite. 
It is clear then that we have explained the correlations in the results 
of the EPR experiment, not only for the case of the spin measured in 
the z-direction , but also in an arbitrary direction. This is because the 

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
The ontolo9ical interpretation of the Pauli equation 
227 
  
I 
l 
1 
1 2 
3 
4 
5 
t 
t 6 
STERN-GERLACH 1 ON   STERN-GERLACK 2 OFF 
Figure 10.5: Trajectories and correlated spin vector orientations for two 
particles initially in a singlet state after the impulsive measurement of the 
z1 -component of the spin of particle 1 only 

228 
The un dit1ided un ive rse 
wave function t/;;j is a scalar for rotations, so that the same analysis can 
be carried out for a Stern-Gerlach experiment performed in an arbitrary 
direction . 
At first sight it may seem very strange to say that the particles had ini­
tially no circulatory motion corresponding to intrinsic angular momentum. 
But ( as also happened for the case of two particles of spin-one) the intrinsic 
angular momentum of a given particle is seen to be very much a contextual 
potentiality, not only with regard to its direction , but also with regard to 
its absolute value. This is affected not only by the environment supplied 
by the measuring apparatus, but also by the presence of other particles 
and by the wave function of the combined system. Indeed a little reflection 
shows that the only possible way to have a completely isotropic state corre­
sponding to a molecule of total intrinsic angular momentum zero is to have 
zero intrinsic angular momentum for each particle. (The Pauli exclusion 
principle is , however, still maintained for equivalent particles because for 
these the total wave function is antisymmetric.) 
The way in which the intrinsic angular momentum develops for each 
particle can be followed in detail using the appropriate guidance condi­
tions. Dewdney et al. [5] have done this for the EPR experiment for the 
BST model. However, their results for s 1 and s 2  will still be relevant to 
our model. Although their velocities differ from ours in that they do not 
contain the circulatory motion , this difference does not alter the probabil­
ity distributions ( as we have pointed out in section 10.4) . These results 
are given in figure 10.5 in which it is clearly seen that .s 1 and .s 2  gradually 
increase from zero to their final values in each case. 
10. 7 
References 
l .  D. Bohm, R. Schiller and J .  Tiomno, Nuovo Cim. supp. 1 ,  48-66 
( 1955). 
2. D. Bohm and R. Schiller, Nuovo Cim. supp. 1, 67-91 ( 1 955) . 
3. J .  S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable 
m Quantum Mechanics, 
chapter 19, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
4. C. Dewdney, P.R. Holland and A. Kyprianidis , Phys. Lett. 1 19A , 
259-267 ( 1986). 
5. C. Dewdney, P.R. Holland and A .  Kyprianidis, J. Phys. A20, 47 17-
4732 ( 1987). 

The ontological interpretation of the Pauli equation 
229 
6. L. de Broglie, Une interpretation causale et non lineaire de la 
mlcanique ondulatoire: la thiorie de la double solution, Gauthiers­
Villiars, Paris ( 1 956) .  English translation, chapter 10, Elsevier, Am­
sterdam ( 1 960) . 
7. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, London, 1951. Also avail­
able in Dover Publications, New York, 1989. 

Chapter 1 1  
The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
1 1 . 1  
Introduction 
We are now ready to extend our ontological interpretation to the boson field 
which in this chapter we consider only from a non-relativistic stand-point. 
The question of relativistic invariance will be discussed in the next chapter. 
We shall begin by giving reasons why it is necessary in doing this to give 
up the notion of particle as fundamental and to regard our basic 'beables' 
as the field variables themselves. To understand what this means, we could 
approximate a continuous field by a very dense distribution of field points, 
xȔ , where n is the n1h point . The beables will then be the fields at the points 
in question (e.g. in the case of a scalar field ¢(xȔ)). These are represented 
by a point in the configuration space ¢( . . . xȔ . . .  ) of all the field be ables 
(which ,  in the limiting case of continuity, approaches a non-denumerably 
infinite number of dimensions) .  This is analogous to a system of infinitely 
many particles, but the coordinates xܧ of the particles now correspond to 
the values of the field ¢(xȔ) at the specified points at which the field has 
been asumed to exist . The trajectory of a whole set of particles in their 
configuration space is then replaced by the trajectory of the whole set of 
field beables in their configuration space. This means that the concept of 
particles does not correspond to a basic beable in our interpretation. 
How then do we understand the particle-like properties of the bosonic 
field, e.g. photons or bosons with mas? In this chapter we develop an on­
tological interpretation which shows systematically how this comes about. 
To do this we shall first analyse the field into normal modes and discuss 
their meaning for excited states of the field , including both Fock states and 
coherent states. We then discuss the absorption of a quantum of energy 
by an atom. In this process the field is initially distributed throughout a 
wide region of space. However, the equations for the field beables are not 
linear and local wave equations, such as for example, the d'Alembert and 
230 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
231 
Klein-Gordon equations. Rather they contain an extension of the quantum 
potential, which we call the super-quantum potential of the total field . This 
is both nonlinear and nonlocal . Because of this nonlinearity and non locality, 
energy is 'swept in' from the entire wave packet so that it concentrates 
on the atom as a single quantum of energy hv . When and whether this 
will happen depends on the detailed initial conditions of the total set of 
field beables. But statistically, the probability will be the same as in the 
usual interpretation . If there are several atoms, these initial conditions 
will determine which of them will absorb the full quantum of energy. In 
this way we are able to answer the criticism raised by Renninger [1] , who 
considered a spherical wave and asked how only one atom out of all the 
atoms on the wave surface comes to be excited . We thus show that while 
the field beables are distributed throughout space, they generally manifest 
themselves in a discrete particle-like way (e.g. as if the field were composed 
of photons or massive bosons) . 
This explains the wave-particle duality. For it is a wave-like distribu­
tion of field beables that determine the discrete particle-like manifestations. 
This is one of the major differences between our ontological model of par­
ticle beables and that of field beables. In the case of the latter there are no 
particle beables but only dynamic states of the whole set of field beables 
which suggest certain particle-like features in the overall behaviour. 
As an important illustrative example, we consider the photon-like be­
haviour in a gas arising when a quantum of energy is scattered by the atoms 
of this gas. Each scattering process gives rise to a subsequent quantum 
which then goes on to build up a cascade of ionised atoms that constitute 
what is usually called the 'track of the photon '. In our approach the scat­
tering process is described by the absorption of a full quantum of energy 
from the overall field in a way that we have already outlined , followed by 
re-radiation of a quantum of a lower energy. This is then absorbed and 
re-emitted by a succeeding atom and so on . The typical scattering angle 
in the Compton effect is of the order of >./ >.c where >. is the wavelength 
of the quantum and >.c is the Compton wavelength of the atom. For high 
energy quanta, this will be small. Therefore successive collisions will be dis­
tributed approximately along a straight line with small random variations. 
The whole process takes place in a definite time sequence as if a bullet-like 
object has struck the atoms in a series of collisions leaving ionised particles 
in its wake. Yet in our interpretation there is no such object. 
In this connection we emphasise that photons have never been observed 
directly but only through the manifestations in particulate matter that are 
attributed to them. Since our approach explains all these manifestations, 
we have no need of the further assumption of a bullet-like photon to account 
for what is actually observed. 

232 
The u n di111ded unwerse 
In the classical limit, the super-quantum potential becomes negligible 
in a way similar to that which we have already discussed for the quantum 
potential in chapter 8 .  The beables then obey simple linear equations, e.g. 
the d 'Alembert or Klein-Gordon equation . Their Fourier coefficients corre­
spond to simple harmonic oscillators which can ,  for example, be treated in 
terms of coherent states that have an essentially classical behaviour of the 
beables for high quantum numbers. 
The above makes it clear that in the clasical limit, a bosonic system 
does not produce significant particle-like manifestations . The nearest we 
can come to a particle in the classical limit is to make a wave packet in the 
field beables. In so far as the spread of this packet can be neglected , there 
is a localised pulse of energy which follows a particle-like path (see, for ex­
ample, Mandel (2] ) .  But in the classical limit ,  the restriction to transferring 
discrete quantities of energy to particulate matter plays no significant role. 
For the representation of the behaviour of the field as continuous provides 
a very good approximation to what actually happens. 
After thus bringing out the basic concept needed for our ontological 
interpretation of quantum field theory, we shall extend this interpretation 
to explain interference phenomena and the Pfteegor-Mandel (3) experiment 
involving the interference of two separated low-intensity lasers. Finally we 
treat the EPR experiment along with the Compton effect. 
1 1 . 2  
Reasons fo r  starting with quantum field theories for 
bosonic fields 
In developing an ontological interpretation of bosonic field theories, we have, 
a priori, to consider two possibilities. Firstly we could try to interpret such 
theories by asuming a set of bosonic particles that would be 'guided' by a 
quantum field based on a wave function of the whole system of particles. If 
we could do this, the quantum field theory would not require a treatment 
basically different from that which we have already given for the many­
body system. In the case of the electromagnetic field, for example, such 
particles would represent photons, while for meson fields of various kinds 
they would represent the corresponding massive bosons. 
But secondly, we could start as we have indeed already suggested in the 
introduction, 
by regarding the field quantities themselves 
as the 
basic beables. The wave functional of all these beables would then imply 
new quantum properties for the fields, and the particle-like manifestations 
would be explained along the lines discussed in the introduction, as dynamic 
properties of the whole set of field variables. 
In this section we shall sketch the principal reasons why the first ap-

The ontolo91cal interpretation of boson fields 
233 
proach cannot be carried out consistently. We will thus be left with the 
second approach as the only possibility. And this is, indeed , what will be 
the content of the remainder of the chapter. 
Various authors, de Broglie (4], Cufaro-Petroni et al. (5) , have proposed , 
for example, that we begin with the Klein-Gordon scalar equation regarded 
as the quantum wave equation for a single spin-zero particle. This is 
(We will again put h = 1 throughout this chapter.) 
From this it follows that there is a conserved charged current 
We could propose the guidance relation 
J 
v = -:a · 
) 
( 1 1 . 1 )  
( 1 1 .2) 
( 1 1 .3) 
But, as we have already pointed out in chapter 10, section 10.4, in order to 
be consistent this would require that j0 be positive definite. However, it is 
clear that j0 as given in ( 1 1 .2) is not, in general, positive definite. Thus if 
the energy is well defined and positive, j0 is positive while if it is negative, 
then j0 is also negative. It is therefore already clear that this approach 
cannot be made consistent. 
One might perhaps try to get around this difficulty by restricting ¢ 
to positive energies. But there is no way, in general, to maintain such 
a restriction , because in principle a potential can always cause transitions 
from one sign of energy to the other. Therefore we will always be faced with 
the possibility of a linear combination of positive and negative energies. For 
example, we can have 
¢ = <P+ (x)e-iEt + </J_ (x)e+iEt . 
( 1 1 .4) 
This gives 
jo = ¢i- (x)¢+ (x) - ¢Q (x)¢_ (x) + <Pi- (x)<P- (x)e2iEt + c.c. 
( 1 1 .5) 
This can move between positive and negative values. So that even if we 
began with positive values of j0 we could not guarantee that j0 would 
remain positive indefinitely. Moreover in going from positive to negative 
values jo must pass through zero. This will give rise to infinite velocities 

234 
The undivided universe 
which do not make sense physically and which would in addition violate 
the relativistic requirement that v :S c .  
Since we cannot make a consistent particle interpretation of the kind 
given above for the Klein-Gordon equation, it seems reasonable to conclude 
that we should adopt the alternative approach of regarding t;l>(x) as a field 
beable. The fact that j0 can be positive or negative is then understood 
through the notion that there can be positive and negative charges. This 
implies the possibility of pair production, so that the number of particles 
is not conserved. 
Evidently in this approach there is no way to regard ( 1 1 .3) as a guidance 
condition and the whole attempt to give a particle interpretation to this 
equation breaks down . 
It has been proposed however that there are other conserved quantities 
which would give positive definite densities, and that these would make it 
posible to go on with the particle interpretation nevertheless (Wesley [6] 
and Proser [7] ) .  What they suggest is that one take the energy density, Yo0, 
and flux of energy, Yoi , as a starting point. These satisfy the conservation 
equation 
()Too 
()T°i 
OXO + axi = Q .  
One would then define the particle velocity as 
' 
Yoi 
·
-
v 
- roo . 
Thus in the Klein-Gordon equation we have 
and 
ya; 
= ǫ [a¢>•a¢> 
_ ar/>ar/>· J . 
2 ax•at ax•at 
( 1 1 .6) 
( 1 1 .  7) 
( 1 1 .8) 
( 1 1 .9) 
Since 7'° is evidently positive definite, it is argued that a particle interpre­
tation of the Klein-Gordon equation can after all be maintained. 
A closer inspection shows, however, that such an interpretation would 
not be consistent with the theory of relativity (although in this chapter we 
are considering the field theory from a non-relativistic standpoint, it is still 
necessary that such a theory be applicable relativistically, or else we would 
contradict a large range of experimental facts). 
To show the inconsistency of such a definition of velocity, Jet us now con­
sider the ca.e of a free particle and a special solution of the wave equation, 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
235 
</> = exp[i(kx - wt)] . We obtain 
rio 
yOI 
and 7'°2 = T03 = 0. 
(m6 + k2) <f </>, 
wk1</>•</>, 
( 1 1 . 10) 
( 1 1 . 1 1 ) 
We can always choose a Lorentz frame in which k1 = 0 and Yo0 = m6</>•</> 
while 'J'°i = 0. This corresponds, of course, to a particle at rest . If we 
now transform to a new Lorentz frame so that the particle has velocity 
v = (v1 , 0, 0), we obtain 
yoo 
T'OO = -- . 
1 - vi 
( 1 1 . 12) 
If (T00 , yoi) is to represent particle density and current, it has to transform 
as a relativistic four vector , otherwise the integral of the probability will 
not be the same in every frame and the transformation between frames will 
not be unitary. This would require that the density in the new frame T100 
should be equal to T00 /லrather than to T00 /1 - v2 . We emphasise 
again that the difficulty arises basically because the charge current has to 
be a four vector and not a second rank tensor such as yµv . 
One can demonstrate even more striking inconsistencies in such an ap­
proach by considering the Maxwell field in free space. For this we have the 
energy density 
£2 + H2 
yoo = ___ _ 
811' 
The energy flux is given by the Poynting vector, so that 
Oi 
(E x H)i 
T 
= ---
411' 
( 1 1 . 13) 
( 1 1 . 14) 
Let us consider the special case in which E is parallel to H so that 
E x H = 0. Assume further E and H are in the direction x1 . This means 
that, under a Lorentz boost in the direction x1 , we will still have E' parallel 
to H' and E' x H' = 0. It follows that the Vflocity is zero in a whole range 
of Lorentz frames. Clearly it will not make sense to say that a particle is 
at rest for this whole range of Lorentz frames. 
Yet another approach has been proposed for interpreting the Klein­
Gordon equation through a particle model (see, for example, N ambu [8]) . 
This is based on the asumption of an invariant parameter r which repre­
sents the order of development of a system. The suggested wave equation 
IS 
/)</> 
= D</> 
OT 
( 1 1 . 15) 

236 
Th e undi11ided un i11erse 
where 0 is the d 'Alembertian. If we look for solution of the form 
we obtain 
f{ ¢i = Defi. 
( 1 1 . 16) 
Choosing K = m6, we see that this reduces to the Klein-Gordon equa­
tion. But there is a new feature because we can now obtain solutions with 
arbitrary values of /{ and the general solution is 
( 1 1 . 17) 
This theory obviously has room for a whole range of masses. Indeed if the 
mass is fixed, no probabiliti es will depend on r, because the wave function 
will be proportional to exp[iam2r] where a is a suitable constant. One 
can obtain a non-stationary state only by a linear combination of terms 
corresponding to different values of I< and therefore of different masses. 
In this theory, the probability density is defined as the scalar ¢i• ¢i which 
satisfies the conservation equation 
8(¢i• ¢i) + !l ·µ - 0 
Uµ) -
' 
OT 
( 1 1 . 18) 
where jµ is given in ( 1 1 . 1 ) .  Since ¢i• ¢i is positive-definite, we can consis­
tently define the guidance condition 
( 1 1 .19) 
Writing ¢i = Reis we obtain from ( 1 1 . 15) the generalised Hamilton-Jacobi 
equation 
where 
l DR 
Q = ---
2 R 
is the generalised quantum potential. 
( 1 1 .20) 
In order to bring out the meaning of these equations, we first note that 
¢• <P has to be taken as the probability density in space-time for an event 
at a point (x0 , xi). For example, in the usual interpretation it could be 
regarded as the probability in a measurement of finding a particle at the 
point zi and at the time x0 , for a certain value of the invariant parameter 
T. 
In an ontological interpretation , it would however be the probability 

Th e ontological interpre tation of boson fields 
237 
that, at this value of T ,  the particle actually is at this point in space-time. 
The velocity vµ would then be the rate of change of the coordinates of this 
space-time point with T .  
This theory evidently goes beyond the simple Klein-Gordon equation 
because its conceptual basis can only be understood in terms of a particle 
which may have a range of masses. For if the mass is fixed, the probability 
is, as we have seen , not dependent on r, so that there will be no way to 
discuss the statistics of the development of the system in the parameter r .  
For the present we do not know how to determine what should be the actual 
mass spectrum. To do this would evidently require some extension of the 
theory involving further new concepts . For example, the particle may have 
some internal parameters and the quantisation of these might determine a 
mass spectrum. If this approach were successful , this mass spectrum should 
be that of the particles that are actually to be found in nature. 
It is clear then that the parameter T introduces a new concept which 
goes together with the range of masses. The meaning of this concept is 
that we cease to regard x0 as determining the time order of development. 
Rather, x0 plays a role not very different from that of the space coordinates. 
Thus at a given value of T ,  the wave function will , in general , spread over 
a range of xi and x0 . There is no way in general even to be sure x0 will 
always increase monotonically with T ,  for (as we have seen also in the 
earlier suggestions regarding the Klein-Gordon equation) v0 can take on 
both positive and negative values. Interaction terms (which we have thus 
far neglected) can cause transitions between positive and negative values of 
v0 , so that an initial wave function representing a monotonic increase of x0 
with r can develop parts in which x0 goes on indefinitely decreasing with T 
(i .e. tracks parameterised by T can go backwards in x0) .  This is evidently 
a serious difficulty. 
However , further difficulties arise when one considers how one would 
treat the many-body system. If x'Jv represents the coordinate of the N1h 
particle, the wave function will be ¢i(xi, . . .  x'Jv ) . A natural generalisation 
of the wave equation would be 
( 1 1 .2 1 )  
Because ¢i spreads out over the coordinates xM of each particle, i t  follows 
that particles considered at a given value of T will not all have the same 
value of x0 . Indeed they will in general not even be all located on a simple 
space-like surface. Rather they will be distributed over a range of x0 (which 
is, of course, time as meant in the usual sense). It is not clear how this 
theory can be made to connect with the usual theory in which all the 

238 
The undivided universe 
particles are considered at the same time, or at least on a single space-like 
surface. 
Various authors (see for example Vigier (9]) have suggested that for the 
two-particle system, this ambiguity can be removed by considering the two 
particles at the same time in their centre of mas frame. But with many 
particles it is not clear which frame should be taken as the rest frame. 
Thus let us divide N particles into two parts with N1 and N2 particles 
respectively. In each part, all the particles could be taken at the same time 
in their overall centre of mass frame. But since the parts can be chosen 
arbitrarily, this leaves the whole question undefined . At the very least, 
this difficulty suggests that such an interpretation cannot be carried out 
unles the theory is supplemented by further conditions that determine the 
common time or space-like surface at which the particles are to be taken 
for a given T .  
There is yet, however, another conceptual difficulty. Because the wave 
functions ¢i spread out over a range of times for each particle, it follows that 
the quantum potential for the many-body system Q = -t Ln Dn R/ R will 
directly couple particles at different times. Nonlocality is thus extended 
from space to time .  In one sense this seems reasonable as a way of making 
the theory relativisitically invariant . Yet the concept of nonlocal action 
over time introduces new difficulties for understanding causality in its usual 
sense. And because , as we have seen , parts of the wave function 'travel 
backward in time' for a long way, this difficulty will not be restricted to 
short time intervals . 
To sum up then we would say that while this idea is an interesting one, 
we cannot use it confidently on the basis of an ontological interpretation 
until these difficulties and conceptual ambiguities are cleared up. 
1 1 . 3  
A n  ontological interpretation of bosonic fields considered 
from the non-relativistic standpoint 
In view of what has been said in the previous section , we feel that the only 
posibility for an ontological interpretation that is at present viable is to 
asume that the beables are the fields themselves . In this section we shall 
illustrate such an interpretation in terms of a real scalar field ¢;( x) with zero 
rest-mass along with its canonical momentum 7r(x). ( A  more condensed 
treatment of the electromagnetic field has been given in Bohm (10] .) As 
indicated in the introduction , we shall in this chapter restrict ourselves to 
a non-relativistic standpoint and in the next chapter we shall discuss how 
our ideas can be extended to a relativistic context. 
We begin with the idea of the configuration space of the total set of field 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
239 
beables. We recall that a good image of the meaning of this set can be ob­
tained by approximating a continuous field by the field variables over a set 
of discrete but fairly densely distributed points, ¢( xϩ ) ,  which will ultimately 
approach a continuous set. The whole set of beables is then . . .  , ¢(xள) ,  . . .  
To formulate the theory mathematically we introduce the well-known con­
cept of functional derivative of any function of the whole set of beables 
iv( . . .  ¢(xϩ ) . . .  ) . This is 
Ǫ = Jim { iv (  . . .  ¢(xழ) + 6¢ . . .  ) - iv ( . . .  ¢(xϩ) . . .  )} 
6¢( xϩ ) 
6¢- o 
6,P 
· 
If iv depends on the derivatives of ¢(xவ) ,  we may also have quantities like 
6iv / 6 ( d¢/ dxµ ) .  We shall not go into a detailed description here of this 
general notion of functional derivative (which can be found , for example, 
in Schiff (1 1] ) ,  but we shall use the ideas from now on . 
For a scalar field the classical Lagrangian density is 
( 1 1 .22) 
In a particle theory the momentum canonically conjugate to x is 8£/ax. 
In a field theory, basically the same concept is used in the sense that the 
momentum canonically conjugate to <P(xµ ) is 
µ -
6L 
a¢ 
7r(x ) - 6 UN/at) - at . 
( 1 1 .23) 
It is readily shown from an extension of the Euler-Lagrange equation 
that this classical field satisfies the wave equation 
( 1 1 .24) 
To quantise a particle theory we introduce the wave function 
1/J( . . .  x n . . .  ) . To quantise the field equation we introduce a correspond­
ing wave functional iv = iv ( . . .  ¢( xµ ) . . .  ) . Evidently this wave functional 
depends on the whole set of values of q\(xµ )  at every point in the universe. 
This then gives 1iv12 as the probability of a total given field distribution 
corresponding to a point in the configuration space of the overall field . In 
the standard quantum theory the clasical number 7r( xµ ) is replaced by an 
operator which can be symbolised as 
n ( µ) -
. 
6 
op X 
- -1 6</>(xµ ) · 
( 1 1 .25) 

240 
The undivided universe 
(This is analogous in the particle theory to Pop = -i(8/8xµ).) II0p (xµ) 
acts on the wave functional 11( . . .  , ef>(xµ) ,  . . .  ) .  
We emphasise again that there are basic similarities between quantum 
field theory and quantum particle theory (as well as differences, of course). 
The main similarity is that the field variables at each point play essentially 
the same role as the particle positions do in the particle theory. This can be 
made even clearer by considering the Fourier analysis of the field in a cubic 
box with periodic boundary conditions . The non-denumerable infinity of 
field variables is replaced by a denumerable infinity of Fourier coefficients 
<Pt with k., , k11 , k, restricted to integral multiples of 27r / L where L is the size 
of the box. The functional derivative then becomes an ordinary derivative 
and the similarity to particle quantum mechanics becomes very obvious. 
To obtain the ontological interpretation of field theory we do just what 
was done in the particle theory, that is, we assume the basic set of dynam­
ical variables . . .  , ef>(xµ) ,  . . .  which we take to represent the beables , have 
well-defined and continuously changing values. As pointed out in the in­
troduction , the trajectory of the beables corresponds to a single point in 
the configuration space of the total set of field variables. To determine this 
trajectory we begin with what we will call the super-Schrodinger equation 
which is 
where H is the Hamiltonian given by 
1 1 [ 
fJ2 
2] 
H = -
-
2 + (V'ef>(z , t)) 
2 All apace 
(6¢i(z , t)) 
( 1 1 .26) 
dV. 
( 1 1 .27) 
We then write 11 = R[ . . .  ¢>( z , t) . . .  ] exp{ iS[ . . .  ¢>( z , t) . . .  ]} , and obtain first 
of all 
as 
1 j [( 6s) 2 
] 
at + 2 
6¢> 
+ (V'¢>)2 dV + Q = O, 
( 1 1 .28) 
where Q is the super-quantum potential which we shall define presently. 
The above corresponds to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation of a particle system 
We also obtain 
as 
1 
( as ) 2 
Ft + 2m L axi 
+ V + Q = O. 
aP J 
!_ [p 6S] dV = O 
at + 
6¢> 
6¢> 
( 1 1 .29) 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
24 1  
where P = 111 12 is , as we have already explained , the probability of a given 
configuration of the total set of field variables. This clearly corresponds in 
particle theory to the conservation equation 
We can write 
8P 
8 ( 85) 
fit + L /)zi p /)z i 
= 0. 
I 
( 1 1 .30) 
This is an extension of the guidance condition for the particle case, which 
IS 
P = 'VS 
The super-quantum potential will be 
and this is comparable in the many-particle system to 
QMP = _
_ 
1 L 'V? R( . . Zj ,  . .  
' t) 
2m
. 
R( ... zj ,  . . .  , t) 
I 
( 1 1 .3 1 )  
( 1 1 .32) 
( 1 1 .33) 
From the extended Hamilton-Jacobi equation ( 1 1 .28) we obtain the 'field 
velocity' 
8¢> 
at 
85 
8¢> 
( 1 1 .34) 
Then equation ( 1 1 .29) clearly represents the conservation of probability. 
The remaining equation of motion is obtained from ( 1 1 .28) as 
( 1 1 .35) 
Putting ( 1 1 .23) into the above we obtain 
( 1 1 .36) 

242 
The tmdiv1ded u n iverse 
In line with the particle case given in chapter 7, the classical limit is ap­
proached whenever Q becomes negligible. In this case, equation { 1 1 .36) 
reduces to the ordinary wave equation. However , in the quantum domain 
there is an extra term -fJQ / 8¢. In general, this is a non-linear and non­
local function of ¢. As we shall see, it profoundly alters the meaning of 
the equation and leads to radically new implications. We emphasise again, 
however, that in the classical limit none of these will be significant . 
1 1 .4 
Analysis into normal modes and the ground state of the 
field 
In order to discuss the ground state and excited states of the field, it will be 
convenient to go to a representation in terms of normal modes. To simplify 
the problem we may, as we have already suggested, consider a cubic box of 
side L and assume periodic boundary conditions. We take L to be finite, 
but much larger than any dimension of physical interest, i .e. , in principle, 
as large as we please. The normal modes will then be trigonometric waves 
and an arbitrary field can be expressed as 
/2 
I 
¢(z ,  t) = y V Þ [ak(t) cos(k 
· z) + bk(t) sin(k · z)] , 
( 1 1 .37) 
where 
with 
k - 27Tnx .  
x -
L 
I 
k 
_ 27Tny . 
y -
L 
I 
k, 
= 27Tn, 
L 
and where nx , ny , n, are integers and V is the volume of the box. Because 
-k and k cover the same functions we should sum only over half the possi­
ble values of k, e.g. nx and ny cover all the integers positive, negative and 
zero, while n, is restricted to values greater than or equal to zero. When­
ever the sum is taken with the above restrictions we shall write it as above 
L:,/. 
We also introduce 7T{z, t), the momentum canonically conjugate to ¢(z ,  t), 
which satisfies the Poisson bracket relations 
{ ¢(z , t), 7T{z' , t) } = fJ{z - z'). 
( 1 1 .38) 
We Fourier analyse 71'( z, t) writing 
(2 
I 
""{z, t) = y V L [n1c(t) cos{k · z) + /3k(t) sin{k · z)] . 
k 
{ 1 1 .39) 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
243 
With the aid of ( 1 1 .38) we then obtain the Poisson bracket relations 
with all other Poisson brackets equal to zero. This means that a1; , a1; and 
bi: , (Ji: form a set of canonical variables. 
From ( 1 1 .27) we obtain the Hamiltonian 
( 1 1 .40) 
which in terms of Fourier analysis becomes 
( 1 1 .41) 
It is convenient to go to the complex representation of the normal modes. 
Writing 
we obtain 
and 
¢(z , t) = ;., L qk (t) exp(ik · z) 
v V k 
11'(z, t) = ;., L 11'k (t ) exp(ik 
· z) .  
v V k 
( 1 1 .42) 
( 1 1 .43) 
( 1 1 .44) 
From the above we see that the reality of ¢ implies that qk = q=k and 
that 11'k = 11'>k · 
We then obtain the Poisson bracket relations 
with all other Poisson brackets being zero. And the Hamiltonian becomes 
( 1 1 .45) 
We can easily verify that the classical equations of motion are 

244 
The undivided universe 
so that 
iik + k2qk = 0. 
We now go to the quantum theory. We represent the wave functional 
in terms of the qk and qk = q_k. We are restricting ourselves to half the 
values of k as before. We then write 
Il = Il( ... qk ... ;qk . . . ; t). 
Because the system reduces to a set of independent harmonic oscillators, 
the wave functional can be expressed as a linear combination of the product 
functions, 
( 1 1 .46) 
Each t/J ( qk, qk) satisfies an independent SchrOdinger equation representing 
a harmonic oscillator, 
( 1 1 .47) 
Writing t/J ( qk, qj,:) 
Jacobi equation 
Rk exp( iSk) we obtain the equivalent Hamilton-
( 1 1 .48) 
The above result is similar to that obtained in the causal interpretation 
of a particle undergoing harmonic oscillation . The ground state of equation 
( 1 1 .47) then represents the zero point energy. Its wave function is 
( 1 1 .49) 
The ground state of the whole set of oscillators is then 
( 1 1 .50) 
The quantum potential for this state is 
( 1 1 .51 )  

Writing 
we get 
The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
245 
as = - E 
at 
· 
E = L:' [ (Ý) ( 0¤ ) + kl 
k 
oqk 
oqk 
( 1 1 .52) 
Since the wave function is real , 85/oqk = 85/oqk = 0 and we obtain 
( 1 1 .53) 
This is, evidently, the usual expression for the zero point energy ( note 
that each k corresponds to two real oscillators a k and bk so that the usual 
factor ǩ is not present) .  
We shall now discuss the meaning of the wave function for the ground 
state, equation ( 1 1 .50) . Firstly, let us note that although the quantum po­
tential will, in general , be nonlocal, in the special case of the ground state it 
reduces to a local function . In fact, it cancels the term Lk' k2qkqk , which, 
in the space representation, corresponds to \l ¢• \l ¢. This is evidently a 
local function ( as we shall see later it is only in the excited states that 
nonlocality appears, although in the classical limit it disappears again) . 
Let us now consider the significance of the probability distribution. 
(Wheeler (12] has considered this problem for the electromagnetic field and 
has obtained results similar to those that will be given here. His analysis 
is, however, developed in less detail and, of course, does not consider the 
role of the quantum potential.) We begin by expressing the Qk in terms of 
¢(x), i.e. 
Qk = Jv. j exp[-ik · x]¢(x) dV. 
( 1 1 .54) 
(We have suppressed the coordinate t which will not be relevant in this 
context.) This yields 
where 
110 = exp [-j j ¢(x)¢(x')f(x' - x) d V dV'] , 
1 
I 
f(x' - x) = -2: k exp [ik · (x' - x)] . 
v 
k 
( 1 1 .55) 
To turn this sum into an integral, we introduce the density of k-vector 
which is V/(211')3 and we obtain 
f(x' - x) = (2:)3 j k exp [ik · (x' - x)] dk. 
( 1 1 .56) 

246 
The undivided universe 
This is not a properly defined function but we can evaluate it by taking 
a limit in which there is a cut-off in k-space. We can represent such a cut­
off by multiplying the integrand by a factor e-H and allowing A to become 
as small as we please. These integrations are then straightforward and the 
result is 
where r = lz' - z l .  
1 r2 - 3A2 
/{r) = 71'2 (P + r2)3 
The probability function is then 
P = !If 12 = I [-ff ¢(z)¢(z') r2 - 3A2 
d V d V'] 1 2 
o 
exp 
71'2 
(A2 + r2 )3 
( 1 1 .57) 
( 1 1 .58) 
This probability is largest when ¢{z) and ¢{z') have different signs. 
Therefore it is quite clear that for a given value of ¢( z) it is highly im­
probable that a neighbouring field ¢{z') will have the same sign within a 
distance of the order of A. (Recall that A is as small as we please.) This 
point can be brought out more clearly by going to spherical polar coordi­
nates where r = lz' - z I ·  The contribution to the probability coming from 
a field ¢( z )  which is on a shell of radius r will be 
I [-Jf ¢(z )¢(z + r )  r2 - 3A2 
2 d d"']l2 
exp 
71'2 
(r2 + A2 )2 r 
r 
H 
Clearly this probability can become very small for small A and small r, when 
¢( z) and ¢( z + r) have the same sign. It is therefore most probable that 
the field ¢{z ) is highly discontinuous, the sharpness of the discontinuity 
being dependent on the cut-off radius A .  Such a discontinuity implies that 
the most probable spatial form of the field will be chaotic , i.e. in the sense of 
modern chaos theory [13] .  However, this chaotic variation will be limited , 
because the variation of the Qk will be the order of 1 /../f as can be seen 
from equation { 1 1 .50) . 
Because 85 / Oqk = 11'k = Qk = 0, it follows that the field is static. This 
result is surprising as one generally thinks that the zero point fluctuations 
of the vacuum correspond to some kind of chaotic dynamical behaviour. We 
can, indeed, obtain such a dynamical behaviour by introducing the further 
8.8umption that the field is taking part in a random fluctuation in which 
the mean value of irk is zero. This would be along the lines suggested in 
our stochastic particle interpretation given in chapter 9. However, for the 
purp08e8 of the present treatment, we shall confine ourselves to the initial 
deterministic model , which we emphasise is completely self-consistent. 
The ground state energy which we ordinarily ascribe to the dynamic 
behaviour will now be attributed to the super-quantum potential. This 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
247 
is analogous to the particle case in a stationary state, with p = 0 and 
E = V + Q, or alternatively Q = E - V. In the classical case, we have 
T = E - V .  So Q is in some sense playing a role analogous to T. For 
example, in an excited state, the energy of the quantum potential enters 
into the quantum transitions in the same way that the kinetic energy would 
in the classical limit. And if, as we have suggested above, the energy of the 
quantum potential is accounted for by further random motions, then the 
analogy to our ordinary way of thinking will be very close. 
Whether we take the static or dynamic model, the ground state is not 
covariant because it defines a favoured frame in which either Qk = 0 or its 
mean value is zero. Will this be consistent with relativity? We will discuss 
this question in the next chapter. 
1 1 . 5  
The excited state of the field 
There is a considerable range of possible forms for the excited state of 
the field. One of these is the well-known set of Fock states in which the 
number of quanta and the energy are well defined. Another is the set of 
coherent states (14] ,  which are especially suited to the discussion of the 
time dependence of the field and its approach to the classical limit. We 
will discuss these in detail in the next section . For the case where the 
mean quantum number is low, both kinds of states lead to the same results 
for most purposes. However, as we shall see, for states with high quantum 
numbers there may be significant differences between the two types of state. 
Let us begin with a treatment of the Fock state. A typical wave function 
for the excitation of a normal mode qk with a definite k-vector is 
( 1 1 .59) 
The probability function is 
( 1 1 .60) 
What this means is that the actual field in the excited state will in general 
not look very different from that of the ground state. As a function of z 
we will have 
Pk = j j ¢i(z )¢i(z') exp[ik · (z' - z )] d V dV' / lllo i2 . 
( 1 1 .6 1 )  
The factor /110 /2 will still represent a generally chaotic variation. How­
ever, the integral in front implies a tendency for waves with vector k to 

248 
The undivided universe 
be emphasised relative to the original chaotic distribution. From the ac­
tual value of the field one could therefore not say for certain whether the 
state is excited or not because the same field configuration could exist in 
either state. Indeed, the degree of excitation is determined only with the 
aid of the super-quantum potential which involves the state of the whole 
as discussed in chapter 4 in the treatment of the many-body system. 
A wave functional having only a single normal mode excited is an ex­
treme abstraction. A more realistic representation of the state would in­
volve something like a wave packet. To represent such a packet we need a 
range of wave vectors, /1: . In this case the wave packet will take the form 
( 1 1 .62) 
In the above equation, the sum is over all k and we do not make the re­
striction that f _k = fk, because the wave functional is, in general, complex 
even though /(z) is real. Indeed considering that q_k = qk , we can also 
write 
11 = L1 [fkqk + f _kqi:] 110 
k 
( 1 1 .63) 
where the L:k' indicates summation over a suitable half of the total set of 
values of k as discussed before. For the applications made in this chapter 
we may asume that f 0 = 0, i.e. the space average of the field is zero. 
To obtain the time dependence of 11 , we note that the state q k 110 and 
qk Wo both have the same energy k, so that they oscillate as exp(-ikt) . In 
tnis case the wave function becomes 
11 (t) = L' [fkqke-ikt + f _kqke-ikt] 110 . 
k 
It is clear from the above that the qk terms correspond to running waves 
in the direction +z, while the qk terms correspond to running waves in the 
-z-direction. 
To simplify the discussion let us form a wave packet running only in the 
+z-direction. This will be sufficient to illustrate the general meaning of the 
super-quantum potential for these wave packets. We obtain 
where 
11(t) = J F(z , t)¢(z) dV110 
F(z , t) = ;,.,. L:' fk exp [-ik · z - ikt] .  
v V k 
( 1 1 .64) 
( 1 1 .65) 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
249 
To interpret this, it is convenient to write, in accordance with equation 
( 1 1 .37) , 
and define 
and 
fi 
I 
¢>(z , t) = V V L [ak (t) cos(k · z) + bk(t) sin(k · z)] , 
k 
with ¢> = if>c + ¢>, . We note that if>e and ¢>, are orthogonal . Similarly, we 
split F(z) into two parts Fe and F, with 
and 
F, = -rv L:' fk exp[ - ikt] sin(k · z ) .  
We further note that F, is orthogonal to il>e and Fe to ¢>, . Using these 
orthogonality relations we then obtain 
11(t) = J [Fe(z, t)¢>e (z) + F, (z , t)¢>, (z)] dV11a . 
( 1 1 .66) 
This wave function will be large in absolute magnitude for fields in 
which if>e = o:c Fe and ¢>, = o:, F, ,  where O:e and o:, are real and positive 
proportionality factors. This follows because the total integrand is then a 
non-negative function of both integrands. Fields that are not proportional 
in this way will tend to produce a smaller integral because of cancella­
tion, and this is especially true for the fields that are orthogonal to those 
described above. 
Introducing r( z) to represent the part of the field that is orthogonal to 
Fc(z , t) and F, (z, t) we can write 
i/>(z , t) = o:Je(z , t) + o, F, (z , t) + f(z, t) .  
( 1 1 .67) 
The most probable state will then be one in which o:e and o , are as 
large as possible (but let us recall that within the Gaussian function, w0 , 
will tend to limit the variation of the overall field). 

250 
The 1rndiv1ded universe 
It is therefore most likely that the field </J(z , t) will have the form of a 
wave packet corresponding to o:c Fc (z , t ) + o:, F, (z , t). The functions f(z , t) 
which are orthogonal to Fc(z , t) and F, (z , t) will then not affect the factor 
in front of llo. This means that their variation will be the same as it is in 
the ground state. Therefore the generally chaotic variation of the field as a 
whole will be modified by a statistical tendency to vary around an average 
which has the form of a wave packet as described above. 
We shall now show that inside this wave packet the super-quantum 
potential introduces nonlocal connections between fields at different points 
separated by a finite distance (unlike what happens in the ground state) . 
To obtain the quantum potential, we must first write down the absolute 
value of the wave function in the qk representation. Recalling that we are 
choosing f_k = 0 in equation ( 1 1 .63) , we write 
Then writing 
we have 
Il = L:' fkqk exp[-ikt] 11!0 . 
k 
g = L:' fkqk exp[-ikt] 
k 
R = ԍ = ../i?llo. 
The quantum potential is 
( 1 1 .68) 
Let us now evaluate the change of quantum potential, !:l.Q, from the ground 
state. This is 
l '"'1 f kfk 
l '"'' kfkqk exp[-ikt] 
!:l.Q = - - L,, 
-- + -L, 
+ c .c. 
4 k 
g• g 
2 k 
g 
( 1 1 .69) 
In a wave packet which has only a small range of wave vectors, the factor 
k on the right-hand side reduces to a fixed number ko, while the remaining 
factors reduce to unity. This term then gives the extra energy of the whole 
field above the ground state (recalling that only one quantum has been 
excited) .  More generally, this term varies with the time in a rather complex 
way, but it will be sufficient for our purposes to consider only those wave 
packets in which the spread of k makes a negligible contribution to this 
term. 

The ontological interpĝtation of boson fields 
25 1 
What will be of interest to us is the remaining term. When the qk are 
expressed in terms of <P( z) through equation ( 1 1 .54), the quantum potential 
then reduces to 
xQ = -¥L:' 
fkfk 
4 k J J F(z, t)<P(z) dV J J F• (z', t)<P(z') dV' 
( 1 1 .70) 
Clearly this term implies a nonlocal interaction between <P( z) at one 
point and the <P(z') at other points for which the integrand is appreciable. 
Writing Q = xQ + Qo , where Q0 is the quantum potential of the ground 
state given in equation ( 1 1 .55) we can write the field equation ( 1 1 .36) as 
( 1 1 .71) 
Using equation ( 1 1 .55) and expressing Q in terms of <P(z) by Fourier ana­
lysis we obtain 
f(z , t) 
x (f F(z, t)<fi(z) dV) 312 (f F• (z', t)<fi(z') dV') 112 + c.c. 
( 1 1 .72) 
Recall that in the ground state, the field is static because the effect of 
the quantum potential cancels out \72</J in the field equation. But now in 
the excited state there is a further term which causes the wave packet to 
move. As happens with the quantum potential itself, the field equation 
is nonlocal as well as nonlinear. This nonlocality represents instantaneous 
connection of the field at different points in space. However, it is signifi­
cant only over the extent of the wave packet. In the usual interpretation 
the spread of the wave packet corresponds to a region within which, accord­
ing to the uncertainty principle, nothing at all can be said as to what is 
happening. Therefore the causal interpretation attributes nonlocality only 
to those situations in which, in the usual interpretation, no well-defined 
properties at all can be attributed. 
It is important to note that a wave functional of the form 
it = q1i; exp[-ikt]ilfo does not correspond to the usual picture of an os­
cillation. This can be seen from equation ( 1 L72) because the term \72</J is 
absent. This result follows essentially because, as explained in a previous 

252 
The undivided universe 
chapter, stationary wave functions generally correspond to a static situa­
tion in contradiction to our intuitive expectations of a dynamic state of 
movement. 
11.6 
Coherent states and the classical limit 
In the previous section we discussed how Fock states are to be understood 
in terms of our ontological interpretation and we found that although our 
results are consistent, they do not correspond to our ordinary physical 
intuition as to what to expect under these conditions. In order to obtain 
wave functions giving results that are closer to such intuitive notions as 
well as to give a treatment that applies as we approach the clasical limit, 
we may use coherent oscillator wave functions (generally called coherent 
states in the usual interpretation [14]) . To illustrate what is meant by a 
coherent oscillator wave function, let us consider a particle with coordinate 
z undergoing harmonic oscillation . The Schrodinger equation is 
JN 
1 a2,p 
k 2 
i - = - - --
Г + -z 1/; .  
ot 
2m oz· 
2 
Introducing € = vmw x , where w = Ǩ , we obtain 
.a,p 
w [ a2 
2] 
i - = - - -- + e ,p 
8t 
2 
8€2 
. 
The ground state wave function is 
One can show by direct differentiation that a solution for Schrodinger's 
equation is obtained by writing 
( 1 1 .73) 
where ; is a complex number which we can write as I = l;le-i9 . We can 
rewrite the above as 
1/J 
oc 
exp [-t (€ - 1;1 cos( wt + 0))2] exp [il1I sin( wt + 0)€] 
>< exp [-il;l2 sin( wt + 0) cos( wt + 0) + tl;l2 sin2(wt + 9)] . 
( 1 1 .74) 
The latter exponential is a factor that can be absorbed into the normal­
ising coefficient. This solution, therefore, represents a Gaussian wave packet 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
253 
whose centre oscillates harmonically with amplitude 11'1 and initial phase 8. 
The mean momentum (in these units) at any time, t ,  is hi sin( wt + 8). 
Evidently the packet oscillates as a unit. Wave functions of this kind 
which are, of course, not stationary are what we have called coherent wave 
functions. They represent the nearest approximation to the classical be­
haviour of an oscillator. 
If at represents the creation operator for a quantum (so that ata = N 
is the number operator) then one can show [14] that 
(1 1 .75) 
The probability for the n°• state of exci.tation is 
This is a Poisson distribution and the most probable value of n is 
n = 1112. The root-mean-deviation is 8n ŷ .Jri or 8n/n ŷ l /  .Jri. For 
large values of 11' 1 .  although the number of quanta is indefinite, the frac­
tional deviation of this number from the mean approaches zero. This be­
haviour further shows the classical significance of coherent wave functions 
of high b I ,  because their energy becomes nearly determinate in the sense 
that the fractional deviation is small, while the absolute magnitude of the 
indeterminacy in energy becomes large enough so that one quantum more 
or less makes no significant difference. Therefore, in interactions with other 
systems, the oscillator with a coherent state of high mean energy behaves 
nearly like a classically well-defined object . 
To further show up the classical significance of such wave functions, we 
evaluate the quantum potential and compare it with the classical potential. 
The quantum potential (in these units) will be 
Q = -t (; - /1'/ cos( wt + 8)]2 + t ,  
( 1 1 .76) 
but because of the Gaussian probability function, the range of fluctuation of 
particle position and therefore of the quantum potential (which is essentially 
proportional to the argument of the Gaussian) will be of the order of 1 
(in these units) . Evidently, as the absolute value of bl becomes large, 
the total energy (which is kinetic + potential + quantum potential) will 
be correspondingly large and therefore much greater than the quantum 
potential. Since the quantum potential can be neglected , the dynamics will 
then be essentially that of clasical mechanics. 

254 
The undivided universe 
Of course, the coherent state represents clasical motion under condi­
tions in which, in the usual interpretation, we would say that x and p 
are defined as accurately as possible within the limits of the uncertainty 
principle. However, more general wave functions are clearly posible which 
approach the classical limit in the sense that the quantum potential can be 
neglected but which correspond to much greater uncertainty in x and p. 
It is evident that we can discuss coherent wave functions for the radia­
tion oscillators in a straightforward way. For low degrees of excitation the 
coherent wave function of an oscillator given by equation ( 1 1 .75) can be 
approximated as 
( 1 1 .77) 
This represents a time-dependent linear combination of the ground state 
and the first excited state. For most purposes, such as calculating prob­
ability of transitions, the results obtained from such a state are essentially 
the same as those obtained from the corresponding Fock state which is 
not time-dependent and in which the number of quanta is well defined . 
The only difference is that the mean field will oscillate harmonically in the 
coherent state while it does not do so in the Fock state. 
The most interesting case to consider is that of a wave packet in which 
the mean value of ¢i actually moves with the form of this packet even as we 
approach the limit of high quantum numbers. To obtain this we go back 
to equation ( 1 1 .73), writing for the wave function of an oscillator 
[ e 
. ] 
t/J CJ( exp - 2  + (1e-•wt . 
It will be convenient here to return to expressing the field ¢i in terms of 
a1: and b1: , the real and imaginary parts of Qi: . This field is 
efi(z , t) = Ü H, [a1: (t) cos(k · z) + b1:(t) sin(k · z)] . 
We want a packet in this field whose average behaviour is given by 
a1: = h i  cos[w1:t + 61:] 
and 
b1: = js1: I cos[w1:t + f1:] . 
The appropriate overall wave packet will have to be made up of a product 
of states 
[ 
(a2 + b2 )] 
Ii 
o: 
exp 
-Hk 
l: 2 
" 
exp h exp (i(61: + w1:t)) a1:] 
x exp [s1: exp (i(f1: + w1:t)) b1:] . 
( 1 1 .78) 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
255 
For large rk and S k  this will represent a very nearly well-defined state of 
movement as a wave packet (corresponding, for example, to the oscillations 
of an electromagnetic field in a resonant cavity). In this state the average 
field will have a packet form and there will be random Gaussian devia­
tions from this packet which become negligible when the mean amplitude 
is great enough . This means that, as pointed out in the introduction , the 
particle-like properties fade away and we are left with the field beables as 
an essentially complete description of the system. (Essentially because the 
super-quantum potential produces negligible effects.) 
1 1 .  7 
The concept of a photon 
Thus far in discussing wave packets we have not encountered any of the 
discrete quantised properties of the electromagnetic field . We shall now 
show how these come in by discussing the process of absorption of energy 
from the field by an atom which goes from the ground state to an ionised 
state. If the field is in an excited state with a single quantum of energy then 
it will interact with the atom. During this interaction, a very complex wave 
functional of the field together with the atom will develop. The resulting 
super-quantum potential can change dramatically to bring in bifurcation 
points. When the process is complete the whole system of field plus particle 
will then either remain in the initial state or will enter into a new state in 
which a quantum of energy has gone into the atom, while the field is left 
in the ground state. As we have already suggested in the introduction , the 
super-quantum potential ,  being nonlocal , sweeps up energy in this way from 
the whole wave packet and brings it to the atom. The discrete quantised 
manifestations of the field are thus explained in terms of a theory which 
nevertheless allows the fields to vary more or less continuously over a wide 
range of values. 
The treatment is very similar to that of the Auger-like effect which we 
discussed in a previous chapter. We begin with the initial wave functional 
of the field , which for mathematical simplicity we treat as a scalar field . 
This is given by equation ( 1 1 .62) , which represents a packet of Fock states 
with one quantum of excitation, 
The initial wave function of the electron in an atom is ¢0({ - {o) where {a 
represents the coordinates of the centre of the atom. The combined initial 

256 
The undivided universe 
wave functional is 
We asume an interaction Hamiltonian 
H1 = A J ¢(x)6(x - 0d3z = A¢(0 = A L qk exp[ik · {] . 
k 
( 1 1 .79) 
What this means is that the particle interacts locally, i .e. only at the central 
point of the atom. 
As happened in the Auger-like effect , the interaction Hamiltonian will 
introduce further terms into the overall wave function. The coefficient qk 
is the sum of a creation operator and an annihilation operator. In this 
case, only the annihilation operator will be significant and it will produce 
the ground state of the field. The quantum of energy will then go into 
the particle at {. We assume that this energy is considerably more than 
enough to ionise the atom. The final wave function of the electron can be 
written as tPJ = Ln Cn t/!n ((, t) where the tPn ((, t) represent packets going 
in various directions. Perturbation theory then enables us to compute Cn 
as function of the time. The final wave function for the whole system is 
Il = 11 1/!o(( -(o) + L ( an (t' , t) l/!n (C t - t') dt'IJI 
n Jo 
( 1 1 .80) 
where an (t' , t) can be calculated using ordinary time-dependent perturba­
tion theory along the lines explained in chapter 6. 
The coefficient O'.n ( t' , t) is proportional to Vno ,  which is the matrix 
element between the initial state 1/!o and one of the final states tPn of the 
electron . In more detail this is 
Vno = A J !/!Ԍ (() L fk exp [ik · (( + (o)] 1/!n (() dV' , 
k 
( 1 1 .8 1 )  
with e = ( - (o. (The term Lk fk exp [ik . ((' + (o)] has arisen by taking 
the matrix element of the field between its initial excited state and final 
ground state.) 
What equation ( 1 1 .80) means is that during a small time interval dt, a 
contribution to the wave function will be produced which will be described 
by the integrand. This contribution is multiplied by the ground state of 
the field . 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
257 
The packet functions t/Jn(/, t - t') correspond to particles that move in 
a direction represented by n and are set in motion at t = t' . These packets 
will all separate so that they cease to overlap both with each other and 
with the initial wave function Yo. 
Returning to the ontological interpretation as applied to the electron, we 
can say as shown in chapter 6 that the corresponding particle will eventually 
either enter one of the outgoing packets or it will remain in the initial 
state still bound to the atom. After it enters one of these channels, it will 
remain there indefinitely. Moreover, because the packets do not overlap 
with each other or with the initial wave functional, the quantum potential 
in each channel will be the same as if the other channels did not exist. In 
other words, as explained in chapter 6, all the effects of the collapse of a 
wave function will be present without any actual collapse having occurred . 
Furthermore, as also explained in chapter 6, when the electron goes on to 
interact with the thermal environment , the probability that these packets 
could ever come to interfere again will be negligible. 
The effective wave function of the combined system then reduces to 
( 1 1 .82) 
where n ! signifies the packet actually occupied by the particle. This repre­
sents a situation in which the particle now carries away a discrete quantum 
of energy, while the field is left in its ground state. 
As we have indeed already indicated, during the period of transition 
the quantum potential will be very complex and will contain many bifur­
cation points, implying a highly unstable movement of the whole system. 
According to the initial conditions of the particle and of the total field, the 
whole system will in some cases enter channels corresponding to a complete 
transition in which a whole quantum of energy has been absorbed by the 
particle, while in other cases no absorption will have taken place. These ini­
tial conditions are very complex because they include not only the particle 
position, but also the initial configuration of the entire set of field beables 
which are, as we recall, basically chaotic in their distribution . A very slight 
change in the initial field configuration could , in many cases, change the 
result from one outcome to something very different, for example from ab­
sorption of a quantum to non-absorption. However, when the probability 
of transition is worked out using the assumptions that the initial conditions 
have a distribution of field and particle variables corresponding to P = It/JI9 , 
then the usual probability of transition will be obtained. 
This probability is proportional to IVnol2 where Vno is the matrix ele­
ment given in equation ( 1 1 .81 ). It will be useful to transform this equation 

258 
The undivided universe 
by first introducing the function 
I<(( +  0o) = L fk exp (ik · (( + 00)] . 
k 
This is essentially the spatial form of the mean wave packet as deter­
mined by the Fourier coefficients fk, which appeared in the original wave 
functional of the field ( 1 1 .62). It is clear that the wave functional of the 
field determines a function K(O which is the nearest that one can come to 
what the clasical field would be in the corresponding classical situation. 
We may then expand exp(ik · (] = 1 + ik · ( because t/;0 is generally ap­
preciable only in regions considerably smaller than the typical wavelength 
in the packet. Then noting that t/Jo(f) and t/Jn(f, O) are orthogonal where 
1/.!n ((, O) is the value of t/Jn at t - t' = 0, we obtain 
Vno = A J t/J1(() L ik · (fk exp[ik · 0o]t/Jn((, O) dV' 
k 
A J t/J2(()(t/Jn((, 0) dV' · \1 I<(0o). 
( 1 1 .83) 
This means that the matrix element depends on the mean field J( through 
its gradient . The fact that it depends on the gradient has come about 
because we are working with a scalar theory. With a vector theory it would 
not depend on the gradient in this way. However, this difference is not 
of fundamental significance because it means only that the probability of 
transition depends on the gradient of the mean field function (so that, for 
example , the maxima will occur at points of steepest gradient rather than 
at points of greatest intensity of the wave) . 
When the ground state is spherically symmetric, the probability of tran­
sition , P, will also be spherically symmetric so that 
( 1 1 .84) 
We thus complete the demonstration that, although the field is essen­
tially continuous, the posibility of transfer of energies is discrete and quan­
tised according to the usual rules. Evidently, similar results will be obtained 
for emision, excitation , etc. 
By means of a calculation similar to that leading to equation ( 1 1 .72) 
it can be shown that the energy distributed throughout the wave packet 
is swept up through the nonlocal and nonlinear effects of the quantum 
potential. The fact that the amount of energy transferred is 'quantised ' can 
be understood by noting that in the long run the effective wave function 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
259 
has to talce the form of an excited state in which the energy differs by a 
definite and discrete amount from the ground state. 
Thus far we have considered an excited field incident on a single atom. 
What would happen if there were several such atoms in different positions 
that could be reached by the wave packet? (This is essentially the situation 
considered by Renninger [1) , but simplified by taking a plane wave as the 
limit of a spherical wave of infinite radius.) Is it possible then that we would 
still end up, as experimental fact requires, with a single quantum of energy 
transferred to only one of these atoms while the others remain unexcited? 
To treat this problem we would need to introduce not only the wave 
functional of the field , but also the wave functions ¢A (x 1 ) , ¢8 (x2 ) ,  ¢c (x3 )  
of the various particles . If we did this however, the perturbation theory 
could still be applied as in the one-particle case. The state in which a 
quantum had been absorbed would contain a linear combination of free 
states of the various particles. But this would correspond to having several 
possible channels of this kind . Our treatment would still go through and the 
particle would end up in one of these channels . The channel in which the 
quantum is absorbed is determined by the precise initial conditions of the 
particles and of the set of field beables as a whole (recalling that the whole 
process will, in general , be unstable and chaotic). However , the probability 
of each outcome will still be the same as in the usual interpretation . 
Finally, in section 1 1 .2, we showed that it is not possible to make an 
ontological interpretation of the field in which there would be a well-defined 
particle trajectory. How then is it possible to understand the observed fact 
that a 1-ray, for example, passing through a gas, not only leaves a trail of 
ionised particles looking like a track, but also shows an observable develop­
ment in time which suggests a bullet-like object, i.e. a photon, striking one 
atom after the other as it moves along? To understand this we must first 
recall that, as has already been pointed out in the introduction, this bullet­
like object is never itself observed . All that can ever be observed are the 
manifestations of the field in particulate matter (e.g. by ionising gas atoms 
or producing the photo-electric effect, etc.). So it cannot be concluded that 
experiments have proved the existence of 'particles' of light. 
The way is therefore open for a different explanation such as that which 
we are proposing here. This is that basically what is happening is that the 
electromagnetic field is undergoing inelastic scattering involving definite 
quanta of field energy in the way we have described earlier. We need not go 
into detail here, but we shall merely recall that this scattering is brought 
about, roughly speaking, by the absorption of a quantum of energy which 
is swept up into the atom and by the re-emission of a quantum of a slightly 
lower energy moving in a slightly different direction. If the initial energy 
of the quantum is large compared with that absorbed by the atom, then 

260 
The undivided universe 
a series of such inelastic scatterings will determine a distribution of ions 
resembling a jaggered track . 
In order to bring out the time development of this track one could , 
for example, have an initial wave packet that is narrow compared with 
the distance between the atoms. It would then follow that one scattering 
process after another would take place, as if there had been a bullet-like 
particle responsible for these events. However, even if the wave packet 
were broad , a similar result would follow. For, as shown in chapter 5, a 
transition proces can take place in a time much less than that required for 
the wave packet to pas a given point. When such a process takes place, e.g. 
the ionisation of an atom, the subsequent behaviour follows at a relatively 
well-defined time in a way that is independent of the width of the wave 
packet. 
We conclude that even though our ontological interpretation does not 
imply any boson particles such as photons, it can still explain all the experi­
mental behaviour that has been attributed to such 'particles' in the usual 
interpretation . 
11.8 
Interference experiment s 
11. 8. 1 
The treatment of interference 
We are now ready to discuss how interference is to be treated in the onto­
logical interpretation of the quantum theory. We shall do this by assuming 
that quanta of the field are detected by atoms that absorb discrete units of 
energy in the way described in the previous two sections . We shall see that 
in an interference experiment with two slits , for example, the probability 
of absorption will be proportional to what would be thought of clasically 
as the field intensity at the point where the atom is located . Of course, 
this probability will vary in just such a way as to explain the observed 
interference patterns. 
We shall then go on to discuss the Pfleegor-Mandel experiment (3] in 
which two independent laser sources are excited in such a way that there 
is only one quantum of energy in the whole system. (A more detailed 
discussion of this topic can be found in Paul [15] .} If the two lasers can 
interfere in a certain region of space, this gives rise to a paradox when 
we try to think of where the photon that is absorbed 'comes from'. In 
our treatment this situation presents no serious problem. The energy is 
distributed throughout the space between the sources, while in the process 
of absorption , it is swept into the single atom by the action of the nonlocal, 
nonlinear quantum potential .  

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
261 
Figure 1 1 .  l :  Two-sh t interference 
11. 8. 2 
The two-slit interference pattern 
Let us now return to a consideration of the interference in the two-slit 
experiment. To simplify the discussion we shall assume a resonant cavity 
with one of its normal modes excited to its first quantum state. Let us 
suppose that two small holes are made in the cavity close to each other, as 
shown in figure 1 1 . 1 .  We assume that this will make a negligible change 
to the normal modes inside the cavity. In the clasical description, waves 
will radiate out from the holes 1 and 2, and will interfere in the region A .  
We will treat this by representing the field inside the cavity by <l> c  and the 
field outside by ¢>0 . It will be convenient to treat <l>o as the sum ¢i 1 and ¢>2 
of the contributions from slits 1 and 2 respectively. The effective normal 
mode is then </> = <l>c + </>1 + ¢2 . Of course, this is an approximation that 
will be valid if the holes are small enough so that the overall wave function 
will not change appreciably during the course of an experiment. 
The probability of transition is not determined by </> alone but depends 
on K in the way given by ( 1 1 .84). As we have said earlier, K is the spatial 

262 
The undivided unit>erse 
form of the mean wave packet as determined by the Fourier coefficients f k • 
K(O = L fk exp[ik . eJ. 
k 
As with ¢, K can be written as a sum with three terms, K = Kc + K1 + 
K2 where Kc represents the value of K inside the cavity and K1 and K2 
represent the contributions from slits 1 and 2 as propagated from the cavity. 
If we place an atom at point A where the contributions of the two slits 
overlap, the probability of transition will then be 
( 1 1 .85) 
This shows the characteristic interference structure. Thus in a statistical 
ensemble of experiments performed with the same wave functional, the 
usual fringes will be obtained . As we have indicated in the previous section, 
the fact that they depend on the gradient of the field is due to the use of 
a scalar field ( which would follow also in the usual interpretation). With 
a vector field it is readily shown that probability is indeed proportional to 
the field intensity (16] .  
11. 8. 3 
The Pfieegor- Mandel experiment 
Let us now go on to the Pfteegor-Mandel experiment [3] . We shall treat this 
in terms of two resonant cavities Ci and C2 , each with a small hole in it. 
The beams coming out of the holes will cross at A as shown in figure 1 1 .2. 
Each cavity will have normal modes denoted respectively by the functions 
K1 and K2 . As in the interference experiment, we divide each of these into 
a part that is inside and a part that is outside the cavity, Ki = K11 + Ko1 
and K 2 = K 1, + Ko, . Suppose that one of these lasers is excited to t.he 
first excited Fock state while the other is left in the ground state. (It is 
easy to show that a similar result for this experiment would be obtained 
for coherent states as well .) According to equation ( 1 1 .59) the overall wave 
functional is then 
where Ito is the vacuum state and where f ik is the Fourier coefficient of 
Ki . But if the second laser is excited , then the overall wave function is 
W2 = L f2kqk llo . 
k 


264 
The undivided universe 
However , linear combin ations o f  such wave functionals are posi ble corre­
sponding to their being in phase or ou t of ph ase .  When t hey are in phase 
the wave fun ction al is 
II'+ = 7)f1k + f2k)qkllto 
k 
w h i le the 'out of pha.se' wave fu n ct ion al is 
II'_ = LU1k - f2k)qk ll'o. 
k 
( 1 1 .86) 
( 1 1 .87) 
With t hese two wave fu nctionals i t  is not possible to attribute the quantum 
of energy to either laser. 
To have two lasers with d efinite p h a.se rel ations of this kind i s ,  however, 
essentially the same as considering two wave packets with a d efinite phase 
relation as discussed i n  sec tion 1 1 .4 .  It follows from w h at we s ai d  t here 
t h at the energy will be d istributed between the two lasers in a way that 
varies statistically. Therefore the usual mode of talk ing about this, n amely, 
that the entire quantum of energy is either in one laser or the other, with 
equal probability, is not vali d . 
If we now suppose that an atom is placed at A to absorb a qu antum 
(see figure 1 1 .2) , the super-quantum potent ial would 'sweep u p '  the energy 
from bot h lasers to constitute a full qu antum .  
However, in a statistical 
ensemble of experi ments of this kind one would obtai n the usual interferen ce 
patt e rn . In t h is way the ontological interpretation provides a s imple means 
of understanding w h at otherwise seems a very paradoxical situation in this 
experiment . 
11.9 
The EPR experiment 
We now go on to apply our ontologic al interpretation to t he EPR situation . 
Because we are working in terms of a sc alar field , we c annot d isc uss the 
usual example in terms of polarisation or spin . Rather , we shall return to 
something more like the origin al EPR exp eri ment . This example h as  thus 
far been applied only to particles . In this case there was a wave fun ct ion 
6( z2 - z 1 - a) representing a situation in which w henever particle 1 is found 
at z 1 ,  particle 2 w ill be found at z2 = z1 + a. And , of cou rse , w henever 
the moment um of particle 1 was measured , that of particle 2 would be the 
opposite. This meant that it was possible to measure either the momentum 
or the position of particle 2 by making measurements on particle 1 only. 
In order to transpose this experiment into a field-theoretical context , we 
first replace 6{z2 - z1 - a) by a func tion S(z2 - z1 - a) which is sharply 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
265 
peaked but regular, and can be Fourier analysed as 
S = L.>k exp[ik ,  ( z 2 - z 1 - a)), 
k 
If the width of the function S is considerably less than a, then clearly the 
conditions of the experiment are not significantly altered but we can avoid 
the mathematical difficulties that arise from the 6-function. 
The experimental situation that we envisage is to have two normal 
modes of the field , each excited with opposite momentum, but in a corre­
lated way and with the distance between the respective regions of excitation 
of these normal modes approximately equal to a, The detection of the posi­
tion of these normal modes will be again by means of an atom that absorbs 
one of the quanta near the position of the atom fo (with the initial wave 
function of the electron that absorbs the quanta being t/Jo( ; - ;o)), What 
we have to do is to show what happens to the other normal mode when 
this process of position detection takes place on the first normal mode. 
The initial wave functional of the combined system of field and particle 
will then be 
or 
t/J = L 9k exp[-ik , a)]qkq_k Wot/Jo(; - ;o) 
k 
( 1 1 .88) 
( 1 L89) 
Let us now consider detection of the position of the normal modes in 
more detail. We can see from equation ( 1 1 .89) that there will be a statistical 
tendency that whenever the field ¢ is excited at z 1 , there is a corresponding 
excitation at z 2  = z 1  + a  (and this is, of course, just the experimental 
situation we wish to consider) , To treat the process of detection of position, 
we introduce the Hamiltonian for interaction between the field and the atom 
which we represent as 
H1 = ,\ L qk exp[ik , () , 
k 
This Hamiltonian will lead to the absorption of a quantum of energy 
associated with, say, qk , Because the two quanta of energy are oppositely 
correlated in momenta, this will leave the total field with only a single 
quantum associated with q_k = qk , and it will introduce a factor into the 
wave functional exp(-ik , 0 ,  

266 
The undivided universe 
However , as shown by equation ( 1 1 .80), this term will also bring about 
a transition of the particle wave function from t/Jo({ - {o ) to a final wave 
function which includes terms such as t/Jn ({, t) . Each t/Jn determines a sep­
arate channel, and eventually the electron enters one of them, t/Jn, , after 
which the other channels may be dropped from consideration . The final 
wave function of field plus particle will then be 
1) J = L 9k exp[-ik · ({ + a)]q_k Wot/Jn1 ({, t) . 
k 
( Recall q_k = qk when ¢> is real.) We are left with 
( 1 1 .90) 
( 1 1 .91) 
This result is the same as the one we would obtain using the usual quan­
tum theory, which effectively contains the assumption of the collapse of the 
wave function to the final state. However, in the ontological interpretation 
there has been no collapse, but an equivalent result has been brought about 
by the action of the super-quantum potential. The field now fluctuates in 
a region near z 
= { + a. The absorption of the quantum of energy by 
the atom at { has therefore given a more definite shape and form to the 
remaining field at z = { + a. This is, of course, a nonlinear and nonlocal 
effect of the super-quantum potential. 
To complete the discussion of the EPR situation , we now need an ex­
periment in which the momentum is determined rather than the position. 
One way of measuring momentum of a quantum is through the Compton 
effect .  For example, if the frequency of the quantum in one of the normal 
modes is 11 ,  we can measure this frequency by scattering the quantum from 
a very weakly bound electron . The quantum will be absorbed and a new 
quantum will be emitted with frequency 11
1 and with an angle, (), relative to 
the original wave vector . The electron absorbs the energy difference 11 - 11
1 
and scatters at an angle ¢> with momentum p. 
Using conservation of energy and momentum, we obtain by means of a 
well-known calculation 
p ( l  - p2 /4m2) 
II = 
. 
2 cos ¢> - p/m 
( 1 1 .92) 
By measuring p and ¢> for the recoil electron , we can therefore find 
the value of 11 .  And according to the reasoning behind the EPR effect we 
expect the second normal mode to have the same frequency but the opposite 
momentum. To make clear how this comes about, let us represent the initial 

The ontological interpretation of boson fields 
267 
state of the electron by t/Jo(€ - €0) .  This will be very poorly localised so 
that the range of momenta will be small . The limiting accuracy of the 
measurement will be determined by this range of momenta. To treat this 
problem in detail would involve time-dependent perturbation theory for the 
scattering process which includes the absorption of the original quantum 
and emission of the new quantum in another direction . However, for our 
purposes here we do not have to go into all the details. It is sufficient to 
take into account the fact that the initial wave function of the electron , 
t/Jo( € - €0 ) ,  goes into a linear combination of packet functions, t/Jn ( € ,  t) , 
representing the recoil electron . Each of these packets will constitute a 
channel and the electron will enter one of them so that thereafter the other 
channels can be neglected. We know from a more detailed mathematical 
treatment that these packets are very nearly plane waves with a range of 
wave numbers k corresponding roughly to the range in t/;0(€ - €0 ) . 
Let us denote the creation operator initially associated with the first 
normal mode, by qk , while the corresponding scattered quantum will be 
associated with qk' (which has a different direction from qk as well as a 
different energy) .  If the recoil electron determines that the quantum origi­
nally in the first normal mode had frequency 11 (and therefore momentum 
k = 11) , it follows that the final wave function will be effectively reduced to 
( 1 1 .93) 
This result shows that after the Compton effect has taken place, not only 
does the scattered quantum go into a definite state associated with qk' ,  but 
also that the quantum in the second normal mode goes into a definite state 
associated with Q- v ·  In other words the measurement of the properties of 
the recoil electron determines that the second normal mode transforms into 
a wave-like form correlated to the results of this measurement even though, 
according to the usual interpretation, there is no connection between the 
first normal mode and the second . But, of course, in our interpretation this 
is brought about by the super-quantum potential, and thus the explanation 
is basically similar to that given for the EPR situation with particles. 
1 1 .10 
Appendix: the destruction o f  interference by radiation 
In chapter 8, section 3, we explained how radiation falling on a large ob­
ject, such as a planet in space, can eliminate the possibility of interference 
between contributions of different parts of its wave front. In section 4 of 
chapter 8 we actually proved that this would happen when a distribution of 
particles falls on such an object, but we deferred the proof that this would 
happen for radiation until now. 

268 
The 1rndivided universe 
The situation we are discussing is shown in figure 8.2 (chapter 8) in 
which radiation is asumed to be falling on the planet. We consider two 
posible positions of the planet, A and B, and the shadows SA, and S81 
which would be cast from the respective positions. In section 4 of chapter 
8 we saw that particles would cast similar shadows and we proved that 
if there is a large enough number of such particles, the overlap between 
the total wave function for the planet at A and for the planet at B will 
become negligible so that interference in a region 0 (see figure 8. 1 )  will be 
destroyed. 
A very similar treatment can be given for radiation . Let us suppose 
there is a beam of radiation incident in the z-direction constituted of quanta 
having some range of k-vectors. A Fock wave function for a single quantum 
of definite wave vector k, can be written as 
( 1 1 .94) 
where yo is the ground state wave function for all the quanta as given in 
equation ( 1 1 .49) 
110 = II exp[-kqzq1:J. 
k 
( 1 1 .95) 
We are asuming that the planet completely absorbs the quantum if it falls 
on it, otherwise we suppose that nothing happens. We now write 
Qk , = j dx exp[ik, · x]¢(z) 
where ¢i(z )  is the field at z . The contribution to the net wave function 
when the planet is at A can be written as 
y1 = j dz exp(ik, · x] {¢i(z )SA (t1 - z )  + 1 - SA(Y - z )} lltoch(y) 
where SA is zero in the shadow of the planet and is unity otherwise, while 
zA(tl) is the planetary wave function for the region A. The above expresses 
the fact that the excited state of the field wave function will only occur 
outside the shadow of the planet while in the shadow we have only the 
ground state. 
The corresponding contribution when the planet is at B is 
it2 = j dz exp(ik, · .r] {¢i(z )SB(t1 - z) + 1 - SB(Y - z)} llto{B(tl) · 
We must now estimate the overlap between 11 1 and 112 . When we 
treated the case of particle bombardment in chapter 8, section 4 ,  this was 

Th e ontological interpretation of boson fields 
269 
simple as there was no overlap of the trajectories corresponding to the two 
cylindrical shadows SA1 and Se1 • With fields the situation is a bit more 
complicated because what we have to consider is not an overlap of positions, 
but rather of field variables between the excited state wave function and 
the ground state wave function. Because the Gaussian ground state has 
a finite spread of field variables, there is some overlap between this wave 
function and the first excited state wave function corresponding to the 
single quantum. Nevertheless this is evidently less than the overlap of the 
first excited state with itself. So there will be some decrease of overlap and 
will give rise to a fraction F of overlap which will be less that given by F 
in chapter 8, section 4 for the case of particles. 
So we may write 
3 
F' = fF = ԋ 
o:L3 
where f may be estimated to be of the order of one-half. From here on the 
proof can be carried through as in chapter 8, section 4. Therefore when we 
consider N quanta, we will find that the overlap is decreased by a factor 
exp[-N F] = exp[-N rn3 /o:L3] . 
We conclude that when there are sufficient quanta falling on the planet, 
the interference between planetary wave functions coming from different 
parts of the wave front can be neglected . 
1 1 . 1 1  
References 
1 .  M. Renninger, Zeit. Phys. 158, 417-421 (1960) . 
2. L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. 144, 1071-1077 ( 1966). 
3. R. L. Pfleegor and L .  Mandel, Phys. Rev. 
159, 1084 (1967) and 
J. Opt. Soc. A m .  58 , 946 ( 1968). 
4. L. de Broglie, Une interpretation causale et non liniaire de la 
mecanique ondulatoire: la thiorie de la double solution, Gauthiers­
Villiars, Paris (1956) . English translation : Elsevier, Amsterdam ( 1960). 
5. N. Cufaro-Petroni, C. Dewdney, P. Holland, T. Kiprianidis and J-P. 
Vigier, Phys. Rev. 32D , 1375-1383 (1985). 
6. J. P. Wesley, Found. Phys. 1 4 ,  155 (1984). 
7. R. D. Proser, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 1 5 ,  169 (1976). 
8. Y. Nambu, Prog. Theor. Phys. 5 ,  82-94 ( 1950) . 

270 
The undivided universe 
9. J-P. Vigier, ' Nonlocal Quantum Potential Interpretation of Relativis­
tic Action at a Distance in Many-body Problems', in Open Questions 
in Qu antum Physics, ed . G .  Tarozzi and A .  van der Merwe, Reidel, 
Dordrecht, 1985. 
10. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 180-193 ( 1 952) .  
1 1 .  L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mech anics, chapter 8, sec. 45, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1955. 
12. J .  A .  Wheeler, in Batte/le Rencontres, ed . C. M .  DeWitt and J .  A. 
Wheeler, Benjamin , New York, 1968, 255. 
13. Hao Ban-Lin, Chaos, World Publications, Singapore, 1984. 
14. J .  Glauber, Phys. Rev. 130 , 2529, and 1 31 , 2766 ( 1 963) . 
15. H .  Paul, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58 , 209-231 ( 1986). 
16. P. N. Kaloyerou , 'Investigations of the Quantum Potential in the Rel­
ativistic Domain ', Ph .D. Thesis, London , 1985. 

Chapter 12 
O n  the relativistic invariance 
of our ontological interpretation 
1 2 . 1  
Introduction 
In this chapter we shall examine the question of how far Lorentz invariance 
of our ontological interpretation can be maintained. 
We shall see that it is indeed possible to provide a Lorentz invariant 
interpretation of the one-body Dirac equation . For the many-body system 
we find that it is still possible to obtain a Lorentz invariant description of 
the manifest world of ordinary large scale experience which we introduced 
in chapter 7. In addition we show that all statistical predictions of the 
quantum theory are Lorentz invariant in our interpretation. This means 
that our approach is consistent with Lorentz invariance in all experiments 
that are thus far possible. 
When this question is pursued further however, it is found that we can­
not maintain a Lorentz invariant interpretation of the quantum nonlocal 
connection of distant systems. This is, of course, not surprising. Indeed 
we show that there has to be a unique frame in which these nonlocal con­
nections are instantaneous. A similar result is also shown to hold for field 
theories. These likewise give Lorentz invariant results in the manifest world 
of ordinary experience and for the statistical predictions of the quantum 
theory. But where individual quantum processes are concerned, our onto­
logical interpretation requires a unique frame of the kind we have described 
both for field theories and particle theories. 
We discuss the meaning of this preferred frame and show that the idea 
is not only perfectly consistent, but also fits in with an important tradition 
regarding the way in which new levels of reality (e.g. atoms) are introduced 
in physics to explain older levels (e.g. continuous matter) on a qualitatively 
new basis. 

272 
The undwlded unl11erse 
1 2 . 2  
The one-particle Dirac equation 
We shall begin with the one-particle Dirac equation and show that it is 
posible with this equation to obtain an ontological interpretation that is 
invariant in content to a Lorentz transformation . 
We have already given the essence of this interpretation in chapter 10, 
To recapitulate briefly, it follows from the Dirac equation that there is a 
conserved current density whose time component is positive definite, This 
IS 
with 
We define the velocity as 
We start with the identity 
This reduces to 
} 
·O 
J 
(tj;t t/;)2 
_ L(iPtaktj;) = (tj;l /3iP)2 + (iPt213.r5iP)2. 
k 
(12,l) 
(12.2) 
( 12 ,3) 
( 12 .5) 
The left-hand side of this equation is just p2 - L: i? and it is evident that 
the right-hand side is positive definite so that !vi < 1. 
If we denote the density p = j0 , we obtain for the conservation equation 
op 
- + V' ,  (pv) = 0. 
at 
(12.6) 
Therefore the velocity (12.3) may be taken as determining the guidance 
relation for a particle. If we assume a probability density, P = p, for any 
time, then equation (12.6) guarantees that it will hold for all time. 
AB we explained in chapter 10, it is not necessary to have a simple re­
lationship for the acceleration analogous to the one in the non-relativistic 
theory which expresses the latter as the sum of two terms, one correspond­
ing to the clasical potential and the other to the quantum potential . Even 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontolog1cal interprrtation 
273 
without such a relationship the path of the particle is completely deter­
mined by equation ( 12.3) and the whole theory will eventually go through 
by an extension of the approach given in chapter 10. 
It is evident that this theory is Lorentz invariant in content because 
the Dirac equation is covariant , and because from this it follows that the 
relationship (12.6) is also covariant. It is important , however, to ask what 
would happen if we assumed , as was done in chapter 9, that the probability 
density P was not initially equal to p, Could covariance still be maintained 
under these conditions? 
To discuss this question , we first note that in chapter 9 we have given 
two ways in which the probability distribution might approach p. Firstly, 
we might have a complex system consisting of many particles in interaction , 
e.g, electrons in a metaL We showed that in such a case, the probability P 
would eventually approach p ,  To be sure, the situation that brings about 
this approach is not covariant. For example, the electrons in the metal will 
determine a process that is uniquely related to the centre of mass frame 
of the metaL Yet once the distribution P = p has been brought about, 
the result will be covariant and will remain so. Thus electrons boiling out 
of the metal and accelerated to high velocities will still have a covariant 
distribution with P = p because this distribution was established before 
they boiled out. 
The second way of bringing about the distribution P = p is to assume 
an underlying stochastic process. No one has yet found a way to give a 
coherent description of a covariant stochastic process, although attempts 
have been made (Lehr and Park [1] , Fenech and Vigier [2]). The principal 
difficulty is that the probability of a given velocity would have to be uniform 
on a time-like hyperbola. This would mean not only that almost all the 
particles will be going very close to the speed of light , but also that there 
is no way to normalise the probability distribution (essentially because the 
Lorentz group is not compact). 
There is no need, however, to have such a Lorentz invariant stochastic 
process, Indeed, as long as we have a stochastic process that leads to P = p 
in any particular frame, this will be enough. For it follows that from then 
on we will have a theory that will have a Lorentz invariant content. Thus, 
for example, we could introduce equations for osmotic and diffusion velocity 
along the lines of equations (9.38) and (9.39) to give 
, +\7 ·  [P (v+D-)] -D\72P = 0  
( 12, 7) 
where v = ¢ t atf>/1¢12 and the osmotic velocity is evidently D(\7 p/ p), This 
equation would hold only in a certain frame and would evidently imply a 

274 
The undivided universe 
non-covariant process of approach to equilibrium. Nevertheless along the 
lines that we have described , it would lead to an equilibrium distribution 
that is Lorentz invariant. This would be enough to bring about a covariant 
ontological interpretation of the one-particle Dirac equation . (The osmotic 
velocity u0 = D(V' p/ p) may be infinite where p approaches zero and this 
would imply speeds greater than that of light. We shall however discuss 
this point in section 12.6 where we show that it leads to no inconsistencies.) 
1 2 . 3  
The ontological interpretation o f  t h e  Dirac equation fo r  a 
many- body sys tem 
In chapter 10 we have given the main features of the extension of the 
ontological interpretation for Dirac particles to a many-body system. We 
begin by summing up what was done there . Firstly we define the wave 
function for the many-body system to be W = Wi, in (z 1 . . .  Zn . . .  , i). 
Note that we are, at least for the moment, taking all the particles at the 
same time t. We introduce the operators, O'n, which operate only on the 
four indices, in , belonging to the nth particle (similarly for J1n ) .The Dirac 
equation for the N-body system is then 
i°: = -i {( O'n [vn - i)An(Zn,t)] + ( (,Bnm + (cl>n(Zn,t)])} w 
(12.8) 
where cl> and A represent the electromagnetic potentials. From this it is 
readily shown that 
(12.9) 
where in the above we sum over all the indices of all the particles. 
Defining the density p(z 1  . . . Zn . . . ) = 111 12 in the configuration space 
of all the particles and the guidance relation for the velocity of the n t h  
particle, tin , 
Vn = wt O'n w Ip, 
we obtain the conservation equation in configuration space 
op 
'" 
Oi + L., V n · Ptln = 0. 
( 12 . 10) 
(12. 1 1 ) 
If P = p initially, it follows that this will hold for all time. Along the lines 
that we have given in previous cases, we can see that the above provides a 
consistent ontological interpretation of the many-body Dirac equation . 
This consistency is evident in the particular frame that we have chosen 
for the representation of the beables of the system, which are Xn and ti n . 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
275 
The question then arises, however, as to whether this interpretation has 
a covariant content , i .e. one that has the same meaning in every Lorentz 
frame . Thus, for example, the many-body Dirac equation (12.8) considers 
all the particles at the same time and it is not immediately evident that one 
could make a Lorentz transformation in which all the particles would be 
considered at the same value of the transformed time t' = (t - vx)/ȴ . 
Nor is it evident that the Vn defined in equation ( 12. 10) would be obtainable 
from some four vector vȵ . And finally one can ask what is to be done with 
the negative energy states. 
Let us first consider the meaning of the negative energy states. This 
is usually treated in terms of fermionic creation and annihilation operators 
satisfying anticommutating relations, which , of course, describe particles 
that satisfy the exclusion principle. The most obvious anticommutating 
relations for the operators Il t ( x) and Il ( x) would be 
[11t(x), ll(x')l+ = o(x - x
') . 
If we Fourier analyse Il as 
,y, 
Գ [ 
ik z  
-ik z] 
"" = L., ak+ e 
+ ak_ e 
, 
this leads to the anticommutation relations 
[aL" ·ak+L 
[aL ,ak_L 
[aL, ak_ l +  
0 
( 12. 12) 
(12.13) 
(12. 14) 
while all the ak and the aL anticommute among themselves. 
The state of no particles would be one containing neither particles with 
positive nor negative energy. Therefore it would be possible in general for 
interactions to produce particles with negative as well as positive energies. 
To avoid this, standard treatments in field theory effectively interchange 
annihilation and creation operators. That is to say they write 
and 
where bk and bt are the creation and annihilation operators for the corre­
sponding antip!i.ticles with positive energy, so that we can write 
,y, 
Դ 
;k.z + bt e-ik z 
.., = L., ake 
k 
. 

276 
Ti t wndwtdtd t m l t' e rs e  
In this way we avoid having particles with negative energy. 
Although the approach described above is m08t convenient for field the­
ory, it must be emphasised that it is equivalent in all its results to the 
procedure adopted by Dirac , who originally worked with a purely particle 
point of view. What he proposed was that in the vacuum , all the negative 
energy states were filled . Because the particles satisfy the exclusion princi­
ple, the transition of particles to the negative energy states could therefore 
never occur. However, when a particle went to a positive energy state , it 
would leave a hole that acted like an antiparticle. So in effect a p08itive and 
negative pair would be created in such a process (more or les as happens 
in a semi-conductor where likewise a transition from one band to another 
creates a pair of positive and negative carriers) . 
In order that the exclusion principle be satisfied , it is necessary that 
the wave function for all the particles be antisymmetric. Once this condi­
tion is satisfied, then Dirac 's approach and the usual approach in terms of 
fermionic operators are essentially equivalent. (Indeed the two differ only 
by a unitary transformation in which the ak_ are replaced by b£ and the 
at 
by bk .) 
l:_ 
It is important to start with the Dirac approach if we wish to obtain 
an ontological interpretation of the Dirac equation , because fermionic fields 
cannot be given an ontological interpretation in terms of beables in the 
same way that it is posible with boson fields. For the fermionic field op­
erators have only two possible states and cannot be put in correspon dence 
with field beables that would change continuously. (On the other hand 
bosonic operators with their infinity of states can be represented in terms 
of continuous fields . ) All that we have to do then is to asume a posi­
tion Zn for each fermionic particle and to make the total wave function 
ՠ ; 1  
;. ( z 1 . . . Zn . . . , t) antisymmetric. Then , as we have already pointed 
out , provided that we asume the vacuum corresponds to having all the 
negative energy states 'filled' , we will be able to guarantee that there are 
no transitions to negative energy states. The interpretation we have given 
here will thus go through in a straightforward way. 
12.4 
Lorentz invariance of the many-body Dirac equation 
Let us now go on to consider the question of whether the many-body Dirac 
equation is Lorentz invariant in spite of the fa.ct that it uses a common time 
for all the particles. To show that it is Lorentz invariant we shall begin 
by making use of the fundamental relationship that we have indicated in 
section 12.3 between the field theoretic formulation for fermions and the 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
277 
particle formulation for the case that the total number of particles is well 
defined . We make use of the fact that the field formulation has been shown 
in standard treatments to be invariant not only to Lorentz transformations 
but also to any change of the space-like surface on which the initial values 
of the wave function are given . (For details see Schweber [3] .) From the 
equivalence of the field and particle formulations, it will be seen to follow 
that the Dirac many-body equation is also Lorentz invariant . 
Let us begin by assuming that the fermionic field contains N particles. 
The basic orthonormal set can be formed from linear combinations of wave 
functions 
( 12. 1 5) 
where t/.ii, (xi )  is the operator for the creation of a particle at the point x; , 
and 110 is the wave function representing the situation with no particle at 
any point. The general wave function can be written as a liner combination 
of this orthonormal set 
11 = J f L_ </J;, ;N (x, . . .  XN)iP!, (xi )t/i!, (x2) . . .  t/iJN (xN ) 1l o d x 1 . . dXN .  
( 1 2. 16) 
Since the operators tj;t (xj )  anticommute, it follows that the </; are anti­
symmetric functions of the Xj and the indices i1 . Indeed , as is well known, 
the </; are just the ordinary antisymmetric wave functions for the N-particle 
system. 
In terms of the field approach we can write the wave equation as 
. 811 
z at = H11 , 
( 12. 17) 
where the Hamiltonian is 
H = j d;i
x [t/ito: . (V - ieA(x))tj; - tj;o: · (V + ieA(x))t/it] . 
( 1 2.18) 
This Hamiltonian operates on the creation operators in equation ( 1 2. 16) . 
However, by integration by parts we can bring about an equivalent opera­
tion on the </;. It then follows that 
. a ,, 
( 
) 
1 0t 'l'j, iN X1 . . .  XN 
j , . )N n 
Since the operator formalism has been demonstrated to be covariant, 
it follows that the above form of the Dirac equation can be obtained in 

278 
The undivided universe 
any frame . As is well known , the transformation between frames in field 
theory is unitary. From this it follows that at least as far as probabilities 
a.re concerned , t he many-body Dirac equation is Lorentz invariant both in 
form and in conten t .  
1 2 . 5  
The multiple t ime formalism 
Although we have adequately prove d the invariance of t he Dirac many-body 
equation , it will b e  instructive to consider an alternative approach through 
the many-time formalism [4] because the lat ter can provide further insight 
into meaning of this i nvariance . 
Let us begin by considering the Dirac equ ation for N particles , each of 
mass m ,  which is 
( 12.20) 
where 
Hn = a · [Û
" - eA(zn , t)] + mfJn . 
( 12.2 1 )  
When the equation is i n  this form we c an only c alculate probabilities for 
obtaining certain results (e .g. the values of the Zn ) when me asurements 
are made at the same t ime t .  But suppose that we wis h ,  for example , to 
measure the positions of the particles z,, at different times Tn . The multiple 
time formalism provides a way of c alcu lating the probability of such results. 
To do this we begin by postulating the set of N wave equations 
. ox 
H 
i -
f) 
= 
nX · 
Tn 
( 12.22) 
These equ ations will all be integrable provided the H amiltonians H N 
and H N ' all commute . But this will follow provided that the various points 
(z1 T1 , z2r2 , etc .) are on a space-like surface , so that they are outside each 
other 's light cones . 
In this case one can start with X = x(z 1 , . . .  , Z N , t) 
with t = Ti = T2 = · · · = TN , an d integrate the equations (12.22) to obt ain 
X = X(Z1 , T1 ; z2 , T2 ;  . . .  ZN , TN )· 
B loch h as  proposed an interpretation for the meaning of x (see Went­
zel [4]). This is that lx l2 gives the net probability density for obtaining 
all these results together. It must b e  remembered however that Bloch is 
referring to the usual interpret ation an d not to our interpretation . 
To see what Bloch 's interpretation means, su ppose that we consider an 
ordered series of times T1 < T2 < 
· · · < TN . 
If, for example, we measure 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interprttation 
279 
x 1 at T1 then according to the theory given in chapter 2, which deals with 
the usual interpretation , the wave function after the measurement of the 
position of the first particle will 'collapse ' to 
where ¢(ʪ - ʪ1 r ) represents the wave function of the measuring apparatus 
whose wave packet centres at ; I r  which corresponds to obtaining the value 
z1 = Z t r (where Z t r  is the r1h possible result of the measurement) .  The 
important thing to notice here is that after this measurement , there will 
be no interference with parts of the wave function initially corresponding 
to values of Z t r different from the result actually obtained, Z t r · A similar 
description will hold for subsequent measurement of z2 , z3, etc. and there­
fore, as Bloch proposed, lxl2 will give the probability that if z1 = Z tr in 
the result of the first measurement, then z2 = z2, will be the result of the 
second measurement , and so on . 
The consistency of this formalism is further demonstrated by showing 
that propagation through a time flt is the same as that obtained by prop­
agating each of the individual equations ( 1 2.22) through flTn = flt . Thus 
we obtain for the total change of x 
and this is just what we would obtain from the single time formalism. 
Let us now consider Lorentz invariance of this formalism. Each of the 
equations ( 12. 22) is evidently Lorentz invariant . If we simply Lorentz trans­
form each of the equations from a wave function X in which all of the Tn 
are equated to a common time , t ,  we must then , in addition , consider each 
of the particles at a common time t' such that 
t' + vx;, 
Tn = 4 
as shown in figure 12. l .  It is evident from this that by suitable choices of Tn 
we can always have a wave function considered at a common transformed 
time t'. The Lorent.z invariance of the formalism is thus evident. 
12.6 
On the question of Lorentz invariance of the ontological 
interpretation of the Dirac equation 
Let us now raise the question as to what extent the ontological interpreta­
tion of the many-body Dirac equation is invariant in content to a Lorentz 

280 
The unditiided un iverse 
!' - constant 
x 
Figure 12. 1 :  Space-time frames 
transformation . To simplify the discussion , let us consider a two-body sys­
tem. In so far a.s the wave function of the combined system can be written 
as a product ijJ = 4>a(z1 , t i )¢b(z2 , t2 ) it is clear that the velocities ( 1 2 . 10) 
of the two particles will take the form 
and 
( 1 2 .23) 
The density in configuration space will be Pa(zi )pb(z2) , where 
and 
Pb(z2) = 4>l(z2)¢b(z2). 
The particles thus behave independently, and ,  from our previous discus­
sion of the one-particle case·, it follows that this system is Lorentz invariant. 
If there is a linear combination of wave functions, 
( 12.24) 
then , in general, the two systems will cease to be independent. However , for 
the special case in which 4>c(z1 , t)¢d(z2 , t) does not overlap 4>a(z1 , t)¢b(z2 , t), 
the interference terms will vanish and the net probability density in the 
configuration space of the two particles, lvJl2 , will divide into two distinct 

On the relat1v1st1c invariance of our ontological interprdation 
28 1 
channels of the general kind d iscussed in ch apters 5 and 6. In this case the 
particles will be in one of the ch annels , wh ile the potent ially active infor­
mation in the ot her channel will have no actual effect . It is clear then that 
once again the two parti cles will be independent . 
More generally, howeve r ,  there will be a nonlocal connection between 
the two parti cles , as c an be seen , for example , from the expression for the 
prob ab ility density i n  configu ration space 
IWl2 
IAl2l¢a(z1 , t) l2 1¢b(z2, t) l2 + IBl2l¢c(z1 ,  t)l2 1¢d(z2 ,  t)l2 
+ A• B¢!(z1 ,  t)¢! (z2 , t)¢c(z1 , t)¢d(Z2, t) + c . c . ,  
( 12 .25) 
and for the cu r rent density of the first particle in configurat ion space 
J 1 
IAl2¢t ,a (z1 ,  t)o:1¢a(z1 , t)l¢b(z2 ,  t)l2 
+ IBl2¢!(z1 ,  t)o:2¢c(Z1 , t) l¢d(Z2, t) l2 
+ A• B¢!(z1 , t)o:1¢c(z 1 ,  t)¢!(z2 , t)o:2¢d(z2,  t) + c . c . , 
(12.26) 
with a similar expression for the second p article . 
It is clear from the above that the velocities v1 = j 1 / p and v2 = j2/ p 
are n o  longer independent . 
Rather, the velocity of t he first particle , for 
example , will depend on the loc ation of the second particle, which may in 
general b e  far away. A n d  this, of cou rse , i mplies the non local con nection 
that we have mentioned above . When we go to the non- relativistic limit, 
this will lead , i n  t he way explained in chapter 10, to the Pauli equation , and 
eventually i n  the limit i n  wh ich the effects of 'spi n '  can be neglecte d ,  we 
obtain the S ch rod inger equ ation . In the latter c ase ,  a nonlocal con nec tion 
in the velocities of the particles implies a non local q u antum potential that 
accounts for the mutually rel ated accelerations that are entailed by the 
g u i d ance con d i tions . 
In the limit i n  wh i ch such non local con nections c an be neglected , it 
follows from what we have said earlier in this section that the theory will 
be Lorentz invarian t .  In this way we see that what we have i n  chapter 8 
cal le d  the manifest world , i . e .  the world of ord inary large scale clasically 
descr ibable expe rience, will be invariant . It is in this world that quantum 
properties will h ave to manifest themselves , whether th rough me asureme nts 
or through equivalent processes t h at occur n atu rally (e.g. as an ion going 
through a cloud of gas in a natural ly occurring electric field will produce 
large scale cascades of charged particles in essentially the same way 
as 
h appens in ion ch ambers constructed by human beings) . 
In order to agree with the experimental fac ts available , it is necessary to 
show that all statistical resu lts of measurement-manifestation processes are 

282 
The undivided universe 
Lorentz invariant. In doing this , it will be convenient first of all to point out 
how Lorentz invariance arises in the usual interpretation . What happens 
there is that the wave fun ction undergoes a unitary transformation , U, 
when we go from one Lorentz frame to another (where U depends on the 
Hamiltonian ) .  Therefore operators such as z- = Uznu- 1 do not in general 
commute with Zn (even though the Zn all commute with each other , as do 
the z- ) . In spite of this however , because the wave equations are the same 
in every frame , measurement theory will go through in a covariant way. 
It h as  been show n ,  however, that the ontological interpretation gives 
the same statistic al results for all measurement-manifestation processes as 
does the usu al interpretation . This means that our interpretation will have 
a covariant content for all statistical consequences of the measurement­
manifestation process . 
But the only quantum experiments that can be 
performed thus far are of this statistical nature . So, in this domain , our 
ontological interpretation is also Lorentz invariant in content . 
( In chap­
ter 14 we discuss the possibility of going beyond the present quantum me­
chanical statistical results. ) 
It is evident, however ,  that from the above discussion , it does not follow 
that the ontological interpretation for an individual system in terms of a 
particle with a well-defined trajectory is a Lorentz invariant concept. Indeed 
it would be extremely surprising to obtain a Lorentz invariant theory of 
particles that were connected non locally. To illustrate the typical difficulties 
involved in this notion , consider two separated particles , A and B ,  both at 
rest in the laboratory frame as shown in figure 12.2. 
I f  there is a nonlocal connection of the kind implied by our guidance 
conditions, then it follows that ,  for example , point a and point b instanta­
neously afect each other . But if the theory is covariant, there should be 
similar instantaneous connections in every Lorentz frame . Therefore a and 
b' as well as b' and a' will also be in such an immediate connection . It would 
then be possible for A acting at a to affect its own past a' by affecting b'. 
This would evidently imply a paradoxical situation (e.g. as in the case of a 
person who killed his own father before he was conceived and in doing so 
annihilated himself so that he was incapable of carrying out the asumed 
action) .  
O f  course , until w e  are able t o  carry out experiments on in dividual 
processes that are more accurate than the limits set by the uncertainty 
principle , it will not be possible to use quantum nonlocality for the purpose 
of sending signals. For as shown in chapter 7, in statistical measurements 
the EPR correlations between distant particles do not make it possible 
for signals to be sent from one particle to another . 
More generally any 
attempt to send a signal by influencing one of a pair of_ particles under 
EPR correlation will encounter the difficulties arising from the irreducibly 

)( 

284 
The undivided un111erse 
x, 
Figure 12.3: Trajectory intersection of hyperplane t' = constant 
participatory nature of all quantum processes. If for example we tried to 
'modulate' the overall wave function so that it could carry a signal in a 
way similar to what is done by a radio wave, we would find that the whole 
pattern of this wave would be so fragile that its order could change radically 
in a chaotic and complex way. As a result no signal could be carried. 
The non-invariance of the guidance relations for the case of nonlocal 
connection can be brought out more explicitly in terms of the multiple 
time formalism. We begin in the laboratory frame ( z ,  t) in which it is 
legitimate to asume that all processes can be described correctly. As shown 
in figure 12.3, we asume particles with coordinates z 1 , z2 and z 3  moving 
on definite trajectories that intersect the t' = const. hyperplane at a1 , a2 
and a3 . If we determine the velocity of each particle independently by the 
multiple time equations ( 12.22) , the results would indeed be relativistically 
invariant. 
But as we have seen in the previous section , this will give us the sta­
tistical behaviour of a system for which z 1  has been measured at T1 , 
z 2  
at a later time T2 , and so on. Although our results were obtained from 

On th e relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
285 
measurement theory in the usual interpretation, they will still follow in our 
interpretation . That is to say, after the measurement of z 1 is over and 
has yielded a certain result z 1 r ,  the subsequent behaviour of z 2 ,  z3 etc. 
will no longer be affected by the parts of the wave function correspond­
ing to z l• not equal to z I r (that is for positions which are not realised in 
the actual individual process of interaction with the measuring apparatus) . 
Therefore the wave function will not be the right one for calculating the 
guidance relations that actually operate on the particles when no measure­
ments are made. For in this latter case the wave packets corresponding to 
all possible values of z 1 r  can come to interfere with the passage of time. 
Because of nonlocal connections of z 1  with z 2 ,  z 3 , etc. this will introduce 
further terms in the guidance relations not contained in the multiple time 
formalism. Therefore the multiple time formalism cannot get us out of the 
difficulties implied by nonlocal connection . 
Indeed it is clear that the entire calculation of the particle velocity will 
be ambiguous until we specify the frame in which the nonlocal connections 
are instantaneous. The concept of a particle guided in a nonlocal way will, 
in general, not be Lorentz invariant. As we have already pointed out, one 
has therefore to assume some definite frame in which the connections are to 
be described as instantaneous, while in other frames they are described as 
working either backwards or forwards in time, although still on a space-like 
surface (as shown in figure 12.2). 
If it turns out that the laboratory frame is not the one in which the 
connections are instantaneous, then it might seem at first sight as if the 
present could affect the past. But because the effect is only on a space­
like surface, it follows that there will necessarily be a frame in which the 
nonlocal connections act only between points that are at the same time in 
this frame. Briefly, what this means is that there is always a unique frame 
in which the nonlocal connections operate instantaneously. In this frame 
there is no intrinsic logical difficulty about having nonlocal connections. 
The behaviour of these connections in other frames will then always be 
obtained by transforming these results from the special frame in which the 
connections are instantaneous. 
From the above it follows that even though the underlying theory re­
quires a preferred frame, all the statistical results of the quantum theory 
will still be covariant (as will, of course, the manifest world of large scale 
experience) .  The basic idea behind this is that every measurement process 
is determined by an operator. The covariance of the wave equation implies 
that to any operator 0, there is a corresponding operator, O', which is the 
Lorentz transformation of 0. In general, 0 and O' do not commute, but 
this need not concern us since we are interested here only in measurement 
processes that are occurring in a particular Lorentz frame. The theory 

286 
The undivided universe 
of measurement processes that we have given , along with the demonstra­
tion that the probability distribution P = p is covariant , then ensures that 
the statistical results of these measurement processes will have a Lorentz 
invariant content . 
Various authors have however tried to retain covariance of the underly­
ing theory by asuming nonlocal connections that are Lorentz invariant. For 
example , Droz-Vincent (5] , and Vigier (6) suggested that for a two-particle 
system, one would asume that the nonlocal connections were instanta­
neous in their centre of mas frame. Clearly this is a covariant notion . But 
the typical difficulty arises when we consider three or more particles. As 
we pointed out in chapter 1 1 ,  section 1 1 .2, where we discussed particle al­
ternatives to the bosonic field theories, the centre of mass frame of a pair 
of particles in a many-body system is ambiguous, because each particle 
may be considered in connection with any one of the remaining particles 
in defining such a frame . Even if we consider all the particles of the given 
system regarded as clasical , the concept is ambiguous because the latter 
may always interact with yet another system. Thus we do not feel that any 
overall theory of this kind can consistently define a covariant relationship 
of particles that are nonlocally connected. 
To sum up then , we have found that it is necessary to assume a basi­
cally non-Lorentz invariant theory for the individual particles. Nevertheless 
this theory becomes Lorentz invariant where nonlocal connections can be 
neglected . From this we conclude that the manifest level of ordinary large 
scale experience will be covariant in its behaviour. We have also shown 
that the statistical laws of the quantum theory are covariant . We empha­
sise again that there is Lorentz invariance in all of the domains of particle 
theory that have thus far been investigated experimentally, but these do 
not necessarily invalidate our assumptions concerning the underlying level 
in which the order of succession is unique. 
1 2 . 7  
On the Lorent z invariance of the ontological 
interpretation of boson field theories 
The question of Lorentz invariance in the ontological interpretation of boson 
field theories is not basically different from that in fermion many-particle 
theories. To bring out this essential similarity, we note that in the fermionic 
theory, the beables are particle positions governed by guidance conditions 
determined by the wave function (see equation 12.3) , while in boson the­
ories, the beables are the fields whose movement is governed by guidance 
conditions determined from the wave functional (see equation 1 1 .3). The 
similarity of the two theories can be made even more evident by using the 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interprttation 
287 
model discussed in chapter 1 1 ,  section 1 1 . 1 ,  in which field variables are 
considered only at a set of discrete, but rather densely distributed points in 
space-time. The field beables then correspond fairly closely to the particle 
beables. 
It is clear that as long as we stick to a certain Lorentz frame ,  this 
interpretation is coherent. But if we try to go from one Lorentz frame to 
another, we then encounter difficulties similar to those met in fermionic 
particle theories. For as we have already pointed out in chapter 1 1 ,  there 
will in general be nonlocal connections amongst the field beables. And as we 
have seen in this chapter, this means that a consistent description of these 
connections can be obtained only if we assume that there is a unique frame 
in which they are instantaneous. Also, if fermionic and bosonic systems are 
to interact, it is clearly necessary that this frame be the same for both of 
them. 
As was done with fermions, we can show that in the large scale limit 
of ordinary experience, bosonic fields can approach a simple clasical be­
haviour in which nonlocal connections become negligible. We have indeed 
already shown in chapter 1 1  that harmonic oscillators excited to high quan­
tum numbers can have wave functions (e.g. those corresponding to coherent 
states) in which the fractional fluctuation in the energy of excitation be­
comes very small, so that this energy can be regarded as very nearly well 
defined. Nevertheless, at the same time the total spread in the number of 
quanta becomes very large. And as Glauber (7] has shown , for such a wave 
function one can define an approximate meaning to the phase of an oscil­
lator. Therefore the oscillator can be regarded as moving very nearly in a 
clasical orbit. If we then put together all the equivalent oscillators corre­
sponding to the Fourier coefficients of the field , we obtain in the large scale 
limit of ordinary experience something that approximates to the behaviour 
of a clasical field. Because interactions that exchange a few quanta with 
the environment have no significant effect on the field as a whole, it follows 
that the latter can be regarded as independently existent. What this means 
is that one can ignore the basic quantum mechanical participation which is 
involved in a measurement, or more generally, in any manifestation in the 
large scale world of ordinary experience, whether this takes place naturally 
or is induced by human beings. (Chew and Stapp (8] have in fact given 
a more detailed treatment of this question for the case of massless fields, 
but they start from the point of view of the 5-matrix rather than the usual 
quantum mechanics.) 
As happens with fermions, this approximately independent part of the 
field in the manifest world will also have a negligible contribution from 
nonlocal quantum connections (essentially because the super-quantum po­
tential is negligible for such high quantum states) . However , it must be 

288 
The undivided universe 
recalled that this will generally hold only for masless bosons. However, 
with masive bosons the energies required for such a classical situation are 
so high that these do not play a significant role in the manifest world of 
ordinary experience . 
We can then go on to consider processes in which the quantum laws 
become important (e.g. scattering, ionisation , etc.) but as we have shown 
throughout this book , the statistical distribution of manifestations of these 
processes in the ordinary large scale world of experience will be the same in 
our interpretation as in the usual interpretations. Since the latter is Lorentz 
invariant, it follows that our approach will also lead to Lorentz invariant 
results for all statistical measurement-manifestation processes. 
As with fermions, it is only in the individual processes in which the 
quantum laws are important that the theory ceases to be covariant and 
requires the assumption of a unique Lorentz frame. (It is interesting that 
Chew and Stapp [8) also have such a frame which is implied by their concept 
of a unique universal time.) 
1 2 . 8  
On the meaning o f  non- Lorent z invariance o f  pro cesses 
involving individual beables 
As we have seen in the previous section , our ontological interpretation leads 
to Lorentz invariant results in the manifest world of ordinary experience and 
also in the statistical predictions of quantum theory. These two fields cover 
all the experimental knowledge that we have so far. It is only in connection 
with individual processes involving the beables that Lorentz invariance may 
break down . But as long as the quantum theory is valid, there is no way 
to demonstrate this non-Lorentz invariance experimentally. 
Nevertheless, it is understandable that there may be strong objections 
to giving up Lorentz invariance even at the level of individual processes 
involving the beables. For relativity theory (both special and general) has 
had a very wide range of successful applications. Moreover, the beauty 
and symmetry of its mathematical form have not only been attractive to 
physicists, but have led them to have great confidence in the ultimate truth 
of the theory. 
We have to be careful, however, not to assume that a theory has an 
absolute and unlimited validity just because it has agreed with a very wide 
range of experiments and because its form is aesthetically pleasing. From 
these reasons it does not follow that the theory of relativity is an absolute 
truth. In fact there is evidently no way to prove that any theory what-
80eVer is an absolute truth no matter how well verified it may be. Of 
course, as Popper [9] has pointed out, a good scientific theory should, at 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
289 
least in principle, be refutable and the theory of relativity clearly satisfies 
this requirement. But if we tacitly proceed in such a way as to take this 
theory as unchallengeable, we are, in effect, denying the applicability of 
Popper's requirement. However, such challenges may take many forms not 
only those involving experimental tests, but also those involving theoretical 
criticisms of the consistency of the theory in question with itself and with 
other generally accepted theories. We could then say that our ontological 
interpretation helps bring out a fundamental inconsistency between rela­
tivity and quantum theory, centred on the question of nonlocality. (Recall 
here that other interpretations of the quantum theory also imply non local­
ity, though not in such a clear way, as shown in chapter 7 and as we shall 
show in further detail in chapter 13.) 
What this suggests is that either we accept nonlocality, in which case 
relativity is not fully adequate in the quantum domain , or we reject non­
locality, in which case quantum theory is not fully adequate in the relativis­
tic domain. Of course, it is also possible that both theories may break down 
somewhere in the domain in which they meet .  We are therefore led to con­
sider the possibility that either relativity or the quantum theory, or both , 
may prove to be false when extended beyond certain domains. In chapter 
14 we shall discuss the possibility that it is the quantum theory that breaks 
down (though we shall not enquire specifically into whether the new theory 
would be compatible with relativity). In the present chapter we are inves­
tigating the possibility that it is special relativity that breaks down , while 
quantum mechanics remains valid. 
The most essential feature of special relativity is Lorentz invariance. 
We already know that Lorentz invariance must be limited at large dis­
tances where the effects of curvature are appreciable. We can also give 
an argument showing that Lorentz invariance should be limited at short 
distances (probably at the order of the Planck length) .  To do this let us 
consider a vector, vµ , of ordinary length and regard it as made up of many 
smaller vectors, c5vf , which are on a straight line such that 
Suppose that we make a Lorentz transformation. Strictly speaking this 
cannot be defined without giving the metric tensor 9µv · But at very short 
distances this tensor has large quantum fluctuations and does not reduce to 
its simple diagonal form. The Lorentz transformation , cµa , will then give 
us 

290 
The u ndivided universe 
It is clear that what was a simple line vector is transformed into a rather 
foggy distribution of constituent elements which are not well defined . So 
the whole idea of a simple Lorentz transformation of one line into another 
breaks down . The idea of Lorentz invariance only becomes relevant over 
intermediate distances for which the fluctuations of g µ11 will average out to 
something relatively small, implying that 9µ11 can be taken as effectively 
constant . 
All of this suggests that the Lorentz group may not be as fundamental 
as we have generally asumed. If it is not valid in the domain of very 
large distances and it is not valid in the domain of very small distances, 
it may also cease to be valid in yet other domains. The analysis given in 
this chapter suggests that even at intermediate distances it may cease to 
be valid for individual processes involving the beables wherever quantum 
nonlocality is important. 
We are thus led to asume something similar to a unique universal frame, 
or more accurately, to a universal order of succession . In certain ways 
such a theory would be reminiscent of the Lorentz-type ether theory within 
which there were large scale objects with structures undergoing processes 
that would change with velocity in such a way as to bring about Lorentz 
invariance in terms of frames defined through these structures. 
An explanation of this kind of theory is given in Bohm (10] . 
Here 
one appeals to the notion that matter is constituted of atoms consisting 
of negatively charged electrons and positively charged nuclei. The forces 
between atoms , responsible for binding them into molecules, and ultimately 
into macroscopic solid objects , are assumed to originate in the attractive 
forces between electrons and the nuclei, and the repulsive forces between 
electron and electrons as well as between nuclei and nuclei. Consider , for 
example, a crystal lattice. The places where the electrical forces come to 
a balance would then determine the distance, d, between the neighbouring 
atoms. Therefore, in the last analysis the size of such a crystal containing 
a specified number of atomic steps in any given direction is determined in 
this way. 
Lorentz asumed that the electrical forces were states of stress and strain 
in the ether. From Maxwell 's equations, assumed to hold in the reference 
frame in which the ether was at rest , it was possible to calculate the elec­
tromagnetic field surrounding the charge particle. For a particle at rest in 
the ether, it followed that this field was derivable from a potential , ¢>, which 
was a spherically symmetric function of the distance r from the charge, i.e. 
</> = q/r, where q is the charge of the particle. When a similar calculation 
was performed for a charge moving through the ether , it was found that 
the force field was no longer spherically symmetric. Rather, its symmetry 
became that of an ellipsoid of revolution , having unchanged diameters in 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
291 
the directions perpendicular to the velocity, but shortened in the direction 
of motion by the factor Jl - (v2/c2) . This shortening Ui evidently an 
effect of the movement of the electron through the ether. 
Because the electrical potential due to all the atoms in the crystal is 
just the sum of the potentials due to each particle out of which it is con­
stituted , it follows that the whole pattern of equipotentials is contracted in 
the direction of motion and left unaltered in the perpendicular directions, 
in just the same way as happens with a single electron. Now the equilib­
rium positions of the atoms are at points of minimum potential. It follows 
then that when the pattern of equipotentials is contracted in the direction 
of motion , there will be a corresponding contraction of the whole crystal in 
the same direction. A measuring rod made of such a crystal will therefore 
be shortened by the factor Jl - (v2/c2). But if the rod is perpendicular 
to the direction of motion its length will not be altered. 
In the reference given above, it is also shown that because the field 
intensity is increased by the contraction, it follows that the electromagnetic 
inertia of a charged particle is also increased. The net result is that any 
physical process involving the crystal (e.g. vibrations) is slowed down by the 
factor Jl - ( v2 / c2). Therefore if oscillatory processes are used to measure 
time , we obtain the well-known formula 
T -
To 
- Jl - (v2/c2) '  
where To is the period for a crystal at rest in the ether and T is the period 
for a crystal in motion through the ether. Finally it can be shown that 
two such processes equivalent to clocks will get out of phase when they are 
separated. 
When al three of these effects are put together, we obtain the Lorentz 
transformation between length and time as measured by a moving system 
and those measured by a system at rest in the ether. It follows from this 
sort of argument that Lorentz invariance is perfectly compatible with the 
assumption of an absolute frame such as that of the ether. Therefore there 
is no way from the experimental facts alone to prove there is no absolute 
frame determining a universal order of succession . 
However , for various reasons which were mainly either aesthetic or philo­
sophical , such a notion of a universal time order was rejected early in the 
twentieth century. For example, the ether theories available at the time as­
sumed very complex and implausible mechanisms to explain the behaviour 
of fields and physicists found these assumptions unattractive. In addition , 
the ether theory in the form presented by Lorentz was such that it was 
impossible to detect its presence by any experiments that could be con­
templated at that time. Therefore at the very least such theories were felt 

292 
The undi11ided universe 
not to be very relevant, while by many they were regarded as violating a 
philosophical principle that was widely accepted in the positivistic atmo­
sphere of the time, i.e. that all concepts contained in any theory ought to 
be observable. 
Nevertheless physics developed in such a way that some features of the 
ether theory were retained . Thus Einstein (1 1] in his general theory at­
tributed properties to empty space in the form of the gravitational tensor, 
9µv · Einstein therefore later came to say that his field theories were theo­
ries of a relativistic ether that did not involve detailed descriptions of any 
mechanisms. It w as essential for Einstein that such theories should be local 
and thus he was able to retain Lorentz invariance, at least in regions that 
were not too large (strictly speaking only in infinitesimal domains described 
by tangent spaces) .  But now we have additional reasons to limit Lorentz 
invariance implying that it does not hold even in the small. And nonlocal­
ity further suggests that even in intermediate domains, Lorentz invariance 
no longer holds for individual processes involving the beables , but is valid 
only in the manifest domain and in statistical applications of the quantum 
theory. 
The notion of having a domain in which all phenomen a become es­
sentially independent of the preferred frame is one that is actually quite 
familiar in other contexts . For example, consider a cubic crystal which 
evidently determines a preferred frame , yet large scale properties such as 
sound waves of long wavelength are isotropic and show essentially no trace 
of the frame . Similarly we may get Lorentz invariance for long waves even 
when there is a structure determin ing a preferred frame. 
We have used the ether theory to illustrate how it is possible to retain 
an absolute time order and yet retain Lorentz invariance. But the same 
result can be obtained in a much more general way without detailed and 
implausible assumptions about a material space-filling substratum of the 
kind to which Einstein objected . For example, one could suppose that in 
addition to the known types of field there was a new kind of field which 
would determine a space-like surface along which nonlocal effects would be 
propagated instantaneously. At present we can say very little about this 
field , but one could surmise that this space-like surface would be close to a 
hyperplane of constant time as determined in a certain Lorentz frame. A 
good candidate for such a frame could be obtained by considering at each 
point in space-time , the line connecting it to the presumed origin of the 
universe. This would determine a unique time order for the neighbourhood 
of that point around which one would expect isotropic properties in space. 
We may plausibly conjecture that this frame would be the one in which the 
3K background radiation in space has an isotropic distribution . 
This unique frame would not only make possible a coherent account of 

On the relativistic invariance of our ontological interpretation 
293 
nonlocal connections, but could also be significant in other ways. For ex­
ample in this frame there will evidently be no limit to the posible speed of 
the particles. Thus, in the stochastic form of the ontological interpretation 
of the Dirac equation it is possible, as we have seen in connection with 
equation ( 1 2.7) , to have random movements that are faster than light . In 
the unique frame that we have introduced , there evidently is no reason why 
such movements should not take place. (Recall however that a non-Lorentz 
invariant process of this kind can give a Lorentz invariant equilibrium dis­
tribution j = l/;tm}!,j0 = l/;tl/;.) 
This brings us to the second objection , i .e .  that the absolute frame is 
unobservable. Certainly if we restrict ourselves to the assumptions that 
have been made thus far , this would be a valid criticism. However, in 
terms of our ontological approach it is possible to alter these assumptions 
in such a way that the absolute frame would be observable, while negligible 
changes would be produced in the domain of experiments that have been 
possible thus far. 
A great many such assumptions are possible, but we shall limit our­
selves here to a simple illustration . Our ontological approach allows us , for 
example, to consider the possibility that the current quantum mechanics is 
an approximation to a deeper theory (as we shall explain in more detail in 
chapter 14) . Let us assume then that the long range connections of distant 
systems are not truly nonlocal, as is implied by the quantum theory, but 
that they are actually carried in the preferred frame at a speed that is finite, 
but very much greater than that of light. For measurements made at levels 
of accuracy thus far available, the results will be very close to those pre­
dicted by the present quantum theory. But if we can make measurements 
in periods shorter than those required for the transmission of quantum con­
nections between particles, the correlations predicted by quantum theory 
will vanish. In effect we would thus be explaining quantum nonlocality as 
an outcome of a deeper kind of non-Lorentz invariant locality. This however 
is relevant only in a domain beyond that in which current quantum theory 
is adequate. 
If we consider such modifications of the theory, it then becomes possi hie 
to contemplate an experimental test that would reveal the preferred frame. 
In essence this test would consist of doing an EPR experiment in which the 
relative time of detection of the two particles was extremely accurately de­
termined . In principle the Bell inequality would then no longer be violated 
for there would be no time for the disturbance of one particle to propa­
gate to the other before the measurement was made on it. And from this 
it follows that the latter particle would no longer go into a corresponding 
state of close correlation with the first one. Of course this will require a 
measurement of extremely high accuracy because the speed of transmission 

294 
The undivided universe 
of the quantum connection is asumed to be very much greater than that of 
light. It is clear that the accuracy required is far beyond that of the Aspect 
experiment (12] .  
In certain ways this test is  reminiscent of the Michelson-Morley experi­
ment, but it differs in the crucial respect that what is at issue here is not 
the measurement of the speed of light, but rather a measurement of the im­
mensely greater speed of propagation of our asumed quantum connection 
of distant particles. Nevertheless as in the Michelson-Morley experiment, 
we would have to take into account the speed of the earth relative to the 
preferred frame. Thus one would have to make measurements in differ­
ent directions and at different times. If one detected a change between 
these measurements. one would be able to demonstrate the existence of a 
preferred frame thus making the latter in principle observable. 
However, if such changes were found, this would indicate a failure of 
both quantum mechanics and relativity, which would be much more signif­
icant than the mere observation of the speed of the preferred frame. The 
meaning of such a result would be that we can eliminate quantum nonlocal­
ity provided that we asume a deeper level of reality in which the basic laws 
are neither those of quantum theory nor of relativity (which latter come 
out as suitable limiting cases and approximations) . 
Of cou rse, we cannot at present say any more about what these experi­
ments are that could falsify quantum mechanics and relativity. To say more 
we would have to develop our ideas in greater detail. We may give here 
the analogy of the atomic theory which was originally proposed in ancient 
Greece by Democritus about 2500 years ago. At that time there was very 
little to guide assumptions about the atoms (e.g. it was proposed that they 
were held together by 'hooks' and that there were atoms of all sorts, such as 
atoms of intelligence, etc.) . In any case it turns out that the experiments 
available at the time were much too crude to have given any significant 
information about atoms. It took 2000 years for ideas and experiments to 
develop far enough to permit some progress in this regard . Nevertheless 
the idea of atoms was relevant during all this time. What they indicated 
was that continuity at the large scale could be regarded as an appearance 
underlying which was the assumed discrete atomic reality. In any domain in 
which the notion of continuity was adequate atoms could not be observed . 
However, it was not asumed that atoms were intrinsically unobservable. 
Indeed the very notion of the atomic theory helped people to be alert to the 
fa.ct that there might be observable consequences on the large scale which 
could be explained through these atoms and some of which would not be 
compatible with the assumption of continuity. Such consequences would 
provide observable evidence of the atomic constitution of matter. 
Similarly with regard to the special frame implied by 'nonlocal' quantum 

On the relativistic invariance of our o ntological interpretation 
295 
connections and the deeper fields that would propagate these connections 
locally, we do not propose that these are intrinsically unobservable. We 
merely say that in the statistical and manifest domain in which the current 
quantum theory and relativity are valid , these new properties cannot be 
observed. Just as the observation of atoms became possible where conti­
nuity broke down, so the observation of the new properties would become 
possible where quantum theory and relativity break down. But of course it 
may take some time before we are able to pursue this matter experimentally 
(and hopefully fewer than 2000 years'). 
1 2 . 9  
References 
l . W. J .  Lehr and J .L. Park, J Math. Phys. 1 8 , 1235-1240 ( 1977) . 
2. C. Fenech and J-P. Vigier , C. R. A ca d. Sc. Paris 293, 249-252 ( 198 1) .  
3. S. S. Schweber, A n  Introdu ction t o  Relativistic Quantum Field The­
ory, Harper and Row, New York ,  196 1 .  
4. G .  Wentzel, Quantum Theory of Fields, Interscience, New York, 1949, 
138-152. 
5. P. Droz-Vincent, Phys. Re v. 19D , 702-706 ( 1979). 
6. J-P. Vigier, ' Nonlocal Quantum Potential Interpretations of Relativis­
tic Action at a Distance in Many-body Problems', in Open Questio ns 
in Quantum Physics, ed . G. Tarozzi and A. van der Merwe, Reidel, 
Dordrecht, 1985 . 
7. R. J .  Glauber, Phys. Rev. 130, 2529, and 1 3 1 ,  2766 ( 1 963) . 
8. G .  Chew and H .  P. Stapp , Found. Phys. 1 8 ,  809-83 1 ( 1 988) . 
9. K .  R. Popper, Th e Logic of Scientific Discovery, Hutchinson, London , 
1968. 
10. D.Bohm, The Special Theory of Relativity, Addison-Wesley, New York, 
1989. 
1 1 .  A. Einstein, in Scientific Papers Presented to M. Born on his retire­
ment, Oliver and Boyd, London , 1 953. 
12. A .  Aspect, J .  Dalibard and G .  Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1804-1807 
( 1982). 

Chapter 13 
O n  the many-worlds interpretation 
13.1 
Int roduction 
Over a period of time there have developed a number of other ontological 
interpretations of the quantum theory. In the next chapter we shall discuss 
some of these, but here we shall give a more detailed account of one of these 
which generally goes by the name of the many-worlds interpretation . We 
are giving this interpretation special attention because it has come to be 
fairly widely accepted , especially by those who work in general relativity 
and cosmology and who therefore feel a need to regard the universe as 
existing in itself whether observed or not . 
We must emphasise from the very outset , however, that there is no sin­
gle generally accepted version of the many-worlds interpretation. Indeed 
this interpretation has been constantly developing as a result of attempts 
to clarify its meaning and to remove what are perceived as its inadequacies. 
In this process a great many ideas have been explored which do not fully 
agree with each other, and it seems that , as yet , there is no final version 
of this interpretation that is accepted by all of its prot agonists. (For a 
comprehensive account of this development see Ben-Dov [1] . Further de­
tailed discussions will be found in Ballentine [2] , Bell [3] , Cooper and van 
Vechten [4] , d'Espagnat [5] , Primas [6] , Stapp [7] , Zeh [8] .) The key diffi­
culty stems from the fact that ,  as we shall see, the two main protagonists of 
this interpretation , Everett [9] and DeWitt [10] ,  differ significantly in their 
basic formulations, and from this difference further divisions arise from 
those who have adopted various approaches to deal with the difficulties 
that these two did not resolve. 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
297 
13.2 
Everet t ' s  approach to the many-worlds interpretation 
We shall begin with a discussion of Everett's approach to the many-worlds 
interpretation [9] , which emphasises the inclusion of observers as purely 
physical systems within the theory. It seems that in doing this Everett 
intends to deny dualistic notions in which mind , for example, might be 
regarded as a kind of spiritual reality beyond that of the material universe 
and separate from it. (This denial would also include Wigner's notion of a 
collapse of the wave function as produced by the interaction between matter 
and such a mind [1 1] .) 
Everett effectively assumes that the universe as a whole including all ob­
servers exists objectively and is described completely by a vector in Hilbert 
space. Within this universe he wants to attribute subjective states to the 
observers which are in perfect correspondence with some aspects of the ma­
terial universe and therefore of Hilbert space. (This sort of idea has been 
widely called psycho-physical parallelism. ) He feels that "it will suffice 
for his purposes that observers possess memories, i .e. parts of a relatively 
permanent nature whose states are in correspondence with the past expe­
riences of the observer" [12] .  What this means is that ,  as in a computer 
whose memories are contained in the state of a disc, some aspect of the 
physical state of the observer, presumably within his brain, serves as the 
basis of his memories. Deductions can then in principle be made about 
the subjective experience of the observer by examining the contents of the 
memory. 
Everett proposes that we can extend this model of an observer by con­
sidering him to behave like an automatic machine possessing sensory appa­
ratus coupled to registering devices capable of recording past sensory data 
as well as machine configurations. He further supposes that the present ac­
tions of the machine are determined , not only by its present sensory data, 
but by the content of its memory as well . Such a machine will be capable 
of performing a sequence of observations (measurements), and furthermore 
it will be able to determine its future behaviour on the basis of past results. 
Everett feels that for such a machine we are justified in using phrases such 
as "the machine has perceived A" or "the machine is aware of A" if the 
occurrence of A is recorded in its memory. 
We can further illustrate Everett's ideas in terms of the example of the 
measurement of the spin of a particle. In treating this question, Everett 
makes use of the von Neumann theory of measurement which is, of course, 
also what we have used in our own approach . If the initial wave function 
of the spin is 
tj! = at/!+(s) + ,Btj!_ (s) 
( 13. 1 )  

298 
The undivided universe 
and the initial wave function of the 'pointer' of the apparatus is a wave 
packet ¢>0(11), then after the measurement interaction is over, the combined 
system is left with the wave function 
tPJ = etc/i+ (t1)1/'J+ (s) + /J¢i_ (y)t/J- (s), 
(13.2) 
where ¢>+ (ti) and cP- (y) are wave packets corresponding respectively to pos­
itive and negative results of the spin measurement. The essential further 
step of Everett is to introduce wave functions x+ (M) and X- (M), where 
X+ and X- represent states of the brain (or computer) that correspond re­
spectively to memories of positive and negative results of this measurement. 
The overall wave function is then 
>. = ax+ (M)¢i+ (t1)1/'J+ (s) + /3x- (M)cP- (t1)1/'!- (s). 
( 13.3) 
In equation (13.2) we had a 'quantum state' in which the spin and the 
observing apparatus were entangled in the sense suggested by SchrOdinger. 
Similarly equation ( 13 .3) describes a state in which the memory within 
the observer has further been entangled in a similar way. Therefore in a 
fundamental sense the observer does not have a definite memory of what is 
the outcome of the measurement (unless either a or f3 is zero). 
In order to give the memory a definite state, we would have to have 
another observation in which thE content of this memory was observed. 
But this would introduce yet another memory of the second observer and 
the same difficulty would be repeated at one stage removed. It is clear 
therefore that if we add no further concepts to the quantum theory (e.g. 
such as well-defined particle positions as we have done and if we do not 
allow collapse) then there is no way in what Everett has said thus far, to 
describe the fact that a definite result is actually obtained in each case. 
In order to proceed further, some additional assumptions are evidently 
needed. Everett does not state these assumptions clearly and indeed puts 
them in such a tacit way that one can readily fail to notice them. However, 
his essential asumption is implicit in the statement given on page 68 of 
reference [12]. We shall give here a paraphrase of this statement which we 
feel brings out more directly what we think that Everett wants to say. 
In order to avoid the need for bringing about a definite result for the 
measurement by means of a collapse of the wave function in equation ( 13.3), 
Everett asumes that each part of this wave function corresponds to a def­
inite state of awareness of the content of the observer's memory. He says 
that in one sense, there is only one total awareness belonging to such an 
observer. Nevertheless he says that (for the case of spin measurement) this 
single total awareness simultaneously can be regarded as two-fold, and that 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
299 
each of the two partial awarenesses is not aware of the other (nor of course 
of the whole). 
It is evident that in a series of measurements, the number of partial 
awarenesses must multiply indefinitely. There are correspondingly many 
possible branches consisting of such sequences of partial awarenesses. He 
asumes that one of these branches represents the experience of a particular 
person . The other branches do not represent merely possible experiences 
that this person might have had ( as they would, for example, in a cor­
responding treatment in terms of our own interpretation). Rather they 
represent distinctly different sequences of experiments which are actually 
recorded in other awarenesses similar to, but different from, this particular 
one. We emphasise again that all these different sequences of awareness are 
not aware of each other, nor of the whole. 
Everett assumes that the whole universe including all observers exists 
objectively and is described, as we have already pointed out, completely and 
perfectly by a vector in H ilbert space. One may explain what this means 
loosely by saying that in some sense the universe is regarded as a multi­
dimensional reality. But what Everett is doing, is to make a theory that 
relates the universe to various points of view that are contained within it. 
What we experience of the universe is a single subsequence of these points 
of view. Or, as Squires [13] has put it , what we are dealing with is not a 
many-universe theory, but a theory of one universe with many viewpoints. 
Each point of view establishes a relationship between a state of awareness 
and the state of some other part of the universe containing the observing 
instrument and the observed object. 
The existence of this sort of relationship has been described by Everett 
as a relative state of the system corresponding to a particular state of 
the observer (or more accurately, to the state of his awareness) . Everett 
and those who follow him seem to regard this notion of relative state as a 
fundamentally new concept comparable perhaps to Einstein's regarding the 
meaning of a position coordinate as being relative to some material system 
which serves as a frame of reference. Thus in Everett 's language we can say 
that any part of the total vector in Hilbert space has a perceptible meaning 
only in relationship to 'frames' constituted of the memory of the observer. 
As there are many permissible coordinate frames in relativity so there are 
many observer 'frames ' in quantum theory. 
As an example of Everett 's interpretation , let us consider again equation 
(13.3). In this case the wave function of a partial awareness corresponding 
to a state of memory of spin +t will be multiplied by wave functions de­
scribing the state of the apparatus and of the spin itself also corresponding 
to spin +t. From there on this memory will develop further awarenesses 
which fit in with this state. It will however not be aware of the develop-

300 
The undivided universe 
ment of other components of the Hilbert space vector corresponding to the 
observing instrument and observed object. So on one branch the awareness 
is as if the spin had 'collapsed ' to -. 
Everett gives some arguments aiming to show the consistency of this 
approach . For example, if a second observer interacts with this system 
after the first observation, the overall wave function will become 
ax+ (M2 )x+( M1 )¢+ (y1 )¢+ (Y2)!/i+ ( s) 
+ /3x- (M2)x- (Mi )¢i_ (y1 )¢i_ (y2)tfi_ (s) 
where y 1 and y2 represent the coordinates of the first and second appara­
tuses respectively, while M1 and M2 represent the memories of the corre­
sponding observers. From Everett 's assumption, it follows that the mem­
ories of the two observers, the states of their apparatuses, and the value 
of the spin are completely correlated. Therefore if, for example, the first 
observer remembers spin +i, this means not only that the spin will act 
as if it were + i in all his subsequent experiences , but that the second ob­
server will also remember the spin was +  and experience it as such from 
then on. In th is way Everett explains how different observers can come to 
agree about the implications of their observations . Everett gives further 
arguments aiming to show in more detail how all the observed results of 
the quantum theory would follow from analyses of this nature. 
It is implicit in Everett's approach (and as we shall see, this is made 
explicit in De Witt's approach [10] ) that the main purpose of this interpre­
tation is to introduce the minimum number of concepts into the theory (for 
example, Everett would regard our notion of particle variables as further 
asumptions that are not needed) .  
I t  seems to be especially important for Everett t o  put all the concepts 
in his theory into correspondence with the basic mathematical structure 
of the quantum theory, i.e. in terms of Hilbert space. Thus he not only 
asumes that the physical universe can be described completely in terms 
of Hilbert space, but he seems to imply that the same is true for mind , 
which he regards as being in essence just awareness and memory as he has 
defined them. It must be emphasised however that this in itself is a highly 
speculative asumption with very little evidence behind it. Everyone agrees 
that we know very little about mind or conscious awarenes, but many 
would claim that it must include much more than just memory. Even if 
we accept the as yet unproven assumption that memory can be explained 
in the way that Everett does, it does not follow that this could be done 
for the whole of mind which includes attention, sensitivity to incoherence, 
all BOrts of subtle feeling and thoughts and creative imagination as well 
as much more. We will discuss this in more detail in chapter 15, where 
we , to, consider the posibility of including the observer in our overall 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
30 1 
view of the universe. However, we feel that the entire framework of the 
current quantum theory is too limited to do this properly and we propose 
extensions of the theory that might make a more coherent account of the 
observer possible. 
Perhaps we could put Everett's hypothesis about the mind into a more 
favourable light by regarding it as just a convenient simplifying asump­
tion that makes it possible for him to get on with the interpretation of the 
quantum theory. But even if we do this, we find that there is a further 
speculative hypothesis of a more physical nature. This is that it is pos­
sible to put some quality, such as awareness, into a precise and accurate 
correspondence with some part or component of the total vector in Hilbert 
space. Thus for example, returning to equation ( 13.3), it would be consis­
tent to say that the memory is well defined when either a = 0 or (J = 0. 
For in these cases, the memory would be determined by an eigenvector of 
what may be called a memory operator. Otherwise the memory has to be 
ambiguous, just as other properties , such as momentum and position, have 
to be ambiguous when the Hilbert space vector representing the state of the 
system is not an eigenvector of the corresponding operators. But Everett 
is further assuming that there is a property called awareness (which he re­
gards as essentially physical) that can be put into accurate correspondence 
with some part of the total Hilbert space vector, even when the latter is not 
an eigenvector of the memory. If a similar statement were made about an 
ordinary physical quantity, this would imply a violation of the uncertainty 
principle. Or to put it differently, Everett is assuming that the mind can be 
aware of its own state of memory without measuring the latter , therefore 
without disturbing the latter, and hence without introducing any ambigu­
ity. It is clear then that Everett has assumed a kind of property going far 
beyond what is allowed in the ordinary quantum mechanic&. In effect he 
has introduced a basically speculative theory of mind, along with an equally 
speculative theory as to how this can be related to a component of a total 
vector in Hilbert space. 
Everett's approach may well be interesting to pursue further, but it 
should not be presented as having a smaller number of hypotheses than 
other interpretations. Even if we do not object to the assumption of a large 
number of awarenesses undetectable to us or to each other, we must still 
notice that we are introducing large and unverifiable assumptions about 
mind and attributing new properties to Hilbert space which go beyond 
those which follow from ordinary quantum mechanics. 
If we accept Everett's approach in the above spirit, we can then go on 
to ask whether it is consistent in full detail and whether it deals adequately 
with all the problems raised in such an approach. We shall in the subsequent 
sections outline briefly what are the main questions involved and what are 

302 
The undivided universe 
the difficulties that arise in doing this. 
1 3 . 3  
Comparison of Everett's approach to that of DeWitt 
In this section we shall develop De Witt's approach to the many-worlds in­
terpretation and compare it with that of Everett .  In doing this we shall 
see that there are some very important differences between these two ap­
proaches. However , the fact that these differences exist appears not to be 
widely known or recognised , and indeed many authors including DeWitt 
himself esentially identify the two. The fact that both are commonly given 
the same name (though Everett did not use the term 'many-worlds ') helps 
further to draw attention away from the importance of these differences. 
DeWitt's motivation for his approach is clearly stated in his paper (10] .  
H e  felt dissatisfied with all the 'metaphysical ' assumptions contained i n  
previously available interpretations . He then proposed that we "forget all 
these" and begin afresh (14] .  In particular his intentions were stated 
as 
the following: 
1 .  To take the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics as it 
stands without adding anything to it. 
2. To deny the existence of a separate classical reality. 
3. To assert that the state vector never collapses. 
He then asserts that it is possible to achieve these intentions and that 
this was proved by Everett (9] with the encouragement of Wheeler [15] and 
that this has subsequently been elaborated by Graham (16]. As with Ev­
erett, DeWitt starts with the assumption that the mathematical concept 
of Hilbert space provides the whole of the basic conceptual structure un­
derlying quantum theory. He then says that only one additional postulate 
is needed to give meaning to the mathematics, namely, the postulate of 
complexity: "The world must be sufficiently complicated that it can be 
decomposed into systems and apparatuses" (14] . From this it follows that 
"the mathematical formalism of the quantum theory is capable of yield­
ing its own interpretation" (and all this without external metaphysics or 
mathematics). 
DeWitt evidently agrees with the implication of Everett's approach in 
a.ssuming that the universe is faithfully represented by a vector in Hilbert 
space. But of course, as he pointed out, this vector must be immensely more 
complex than the sort that appears in equation ( 13.3) . De Witt then asserts 
th&t the universe itself is splitting into a stupendous number of branches, 
all resulting from the measurement-like interactions between its myriads of 
components. Such interactions take place, not only in measurement, but 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
303 
also in natural processes of all kinds which likewise bring about a continual 
splitting of the universe. 
Here we encounter a serious difficulty. For DeWitt clearly attributes 
his theory to Everett in a number of places. Yet as we have seen there is 
no mention of splitting universes in Everett's work. Rather there is one 
universe with many awarenesses that are not aware of each other. To be 
sure Everett includes memory which is the content of these awarenesses as 
part of the total universe . Nevertheless he specifically requires that there 
be relatively permanent memories without which he could not formulate his 
notion of awareness. Of course, memory implies a very complex structure, 
but not every complex structure is a memory. So at the very least, De Witt 
should have said that Everett requires a kind of complexity that would 
provide the basis of memory, e.g. a brain or at least a super computer (as 
indeed we have seen from Everett 's comparison of awareness to the function 
of such a machine) .  But even this would not be enough; Everett also 
says that no very significant change takes place when an observer becomes 
aware of a certain result. It is not the universe that splits, but it is just 
awareness as a whole that divides into many parts that are not aware of each 
other . We repeat again what Squires [13] has said , i.e. it is not a theory of 
many universes, but a theory of many viewpoints of one universe .  Everett 's 
aim is thus not mainly to explain the universe, but rather to exr;lain our 
perceptions of the universe. 
Everett revealed his attitude to this question in commenting on some 
views on the quantum theory expressed by Einstein (17] .  In the von Neu­
mann interpretation, observation induces a 'collapse' of the wave function 
that may affect the whole universe. Einstein objected to that as implausible 
and unsatisfactory. At another time Einstein put this feeiing colourfully by 
saying that he could not believe that a mouse could bring about drastic 
changes in the universe by simply looking at it. In answer to this, Ev­
erett (18] says that from the standpoint of his theory, "it is not so much 
the system that is affected by an observation as it is the observer who 
becomes correlated to the system" . Further along he states that "obser­
vation . . .  simply correlates the observer to the system" . Furthermore he 
adds "Only the observer's state has changed, to become correlated . . .  with 
the system. The mouse does not affect the universe-only the mouse is 
affected" (19] . 
It is clear from the above that Everett did not contemplate the split­
ting of the universe. It follows then that there is a fundamental difference 
between the basic assumptions held by the two leading protagonists of the 
'many-worlds' approach. Indeed Everett's view should not even be called 
the many-worlds interpretation but rather, as Albert and Loewer [20] have 
suggested ,  the many-minds interpretation, a view which we discuss later. 

304 
The undivided universe 
The key difference between DeWitt's approach and that of Everett is 
that De Witt 's theory is purely objective, while Everett's theory depends 
crucially on the inclusion of the subjective experiences of the observer 
(which are however explained objectively as being in correspondence with 
parts of the total Hilbert space vector). For DeWitt, the universe actu­
ally splits as might happen to material objects. This asumption creates 
a number of problems. Firstly we can ask just when does it split. Thus 
for example, while the spin is interacting with the measuring apparatus 
as described in equation( 13.3) , the wave packets corresponding to the two 
posible results begin by overlapping. In principle some overlap may persist 
for a long way even though this may be small. What is it that determines 
when two overlapping wave packets, originally in one universe, suddenly 
become two non-overlapping wave packets in separate universes? Indeed 
unles the measuring apparatus is complex enough to make possible a dis­
tinct classical-like result, the universes should never split, as the two wave 
packets could again come to interfere in the way we have described in chap­
ters 6 and 7. B ut once the universe has split, it seems that such interferences 
would no longer be possible. In the usual approach to the quantum the­
ory ( as well as in our approach) it is always, in principle, possible for such 
interference to occur again. 
O ne usually appeals to some feature such as the complex and chaotic 
phase relations of the wave function to make such interference unlikely 
to have significant effects (for example see Bohm [21]) .  From DeWitt 's 
emphasis on ' complexity', one might suppose that he assumes that when 
the wave function reaches a certain degree of complication, the universe 
begins to split . But he does not define complexity (though some authors, 
notably Leggett [22] , are now exploring how such a definition may be made, 
but in a different context from that of the many-worlds interpretation). 
What would be required for an adequate formulation of De Witt's approach 
in this regard would be to come up with a good quantitative definition 
of complexity and to assume some further equations determining how the 
splitting of universes is related to this feature of complexity. But if he were 
to succeed in doing this, he would clearly have introduced new concepts as 
well as new equations , and could not hope to claim that the mathematics 
of the current quantum theory determines its own interpretation . 
Related to this difficulty is the fact that DeWitt wants to do without 
a separate clasical level and yet he does not suggest anything that could 
take its place. Nevertheless in describing what he means by an observing 
apparatus, he tacitly asumes all sorts of properties that are suggested 
by clasical physics, such as the posibility of distinct results which are 
stable and do not vanish in the quantum uncertainties of the Hilbert space. 
Perhaps he could also deal with this problem in terms of the notion of 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
305 
complexity if he could show that, with a sufficient degree of the latter, 
something like a classical wor Id would emerge in a certain limit as we have 
shown in terms of the quantum potential (see chapter 8). But in the absence 
of such a demonstration, we have to say that this key part of his basic 
intention has not been realised ( as has indeed been pointed out by Gell­
Mann and H artle [23]) . 
1 3 . 4  
Probabilities i n  t h e  many-worlds interpretation 
Whether we adopt the approach of Everett or that of DeWitt, we are still 
faced with the question of what is to be meant by probability in this general 
point of view. If we claim that the whole universe is completely described 
by a certain vector in Hilbert space, then this is unique and does not allow 
for a statistical theory (based for example on an ensemble of similar uni­
verses) . How then are we to relate the many-worlds approach to the usual 
probabilities of quantum mechanics? Everett and DeWitt adopt what is 
basically the same idea. 
They consider a long sequence of N measurements on similar systems 
initially in the same quantum state . Their aim is then to prove, without 
any extraneous assumptions about probability, that as N --+ oo the relative 
frequency of a given result will be equal to the usual quantum mechanical 
probability. 
For simplicity let us take the system to be a particle with spin . The 
relevant initial wave function is then 
1/Jo = al/J+ + !N- . 
( 1 3 .4) 
We now consider the whole set of systems as forming a single combined 
system whose initial wave function is 
Xo = 1/Jo ( l )l/Jo(2) . . . 1/Jo(N) , 
( 13.5) 
where the numeral indicates the particle in question. This can be written 
as 
Xo = (etl/J+ ( l ) + /'.1/J- ( l )) (etl/J+ (2) + /11/J- (2)) . . .  (al/J+ (N) + )11/J_ (N)) . 
( 1 3  .6) 
We now suppose that the spins of each of these particles is measured by 
a separate piece of apparatus whose relevant coordinate is Yn . If ¢o(Yn ) 
represents the initial wave function of the n1h apparatus, the total initial 
wave function is 
( 13.7) 

306 
The undivided un iverse 
It is clear that this wave function 1s a sum of 2N terms. A typical term 
would be 
S 
N-S 
T. ,  = ¢o(J11 )¢o(th) . . .  ¢o(J1N)n5/3N-s IT iP+ IT t/J_ ,  
{ 13.8) 
where D5 tli+ is a product of a certain number, S, of particle wave functions 
with spin +J and nN- S tP- represents the product for the N - S remaining 
particles with spin -Ǧ .  
After the measurement process is over, then, i n  accordance with the 
von Neumann theory that we have given in chapter 2, section 2.4, the term 
( 13 .8) becomes 
S 
N-S 
Ts1 = n5i3N-S IT <P+ (Yi )tP+ IT <P- (Yi )tP- , 
( 1 3 .9) 
where ¢+ (Yi )  represents the wave function of the pointer of the i1h appa­
ratus indicating spin +J and ¢_ (yd represents the wave function of the 
pointer of the apparatus indicating spin -Ǥ . Each of the above terms may 
be said to represent a branch of the total wave function, which latter is 
( 1 3.10) 
It is the object of the proofs given by Everett and DeWitt to show that, 
except for a set of measure zero, all branches will yield a fraction In 12 for 
spin +ǥ and l/312 for spin -J , as the number of branches becomes infinite. 
To do this Everett and DeWitt begin by assuming a measure associated 
with each vector in Hilbert space which is equal to the quantum mechanical 
probability that is usually associated with that branch of the wave function 
in standard quantum theory. For example, if the wave function is nt/!+ + 
!'11/!- , the measure of 1/i+ is lnl2 and that of tP- is l/312. But they do not 
begin by assuming this is a probability. Rather, they take it to be a purely 
abstract quantity which they have called 'measure'. They then show that 
in an infinite sequence of measurements the measure of branches in which 
the proportion of spin + differs from lnl2 and that of spin - from l/312 
is zero. 
As yet , however, nothing follows from this about actual relative frequen­
cies . To make a connection they have to introduce a further assumption. 
This is essentially that branches of measure zero never occur. From this it 
follows, of course , that in an infinite sequence , we will get the right relative 
frequencies. 
But this proof has been criticised by d'Espagnat [24] and others (see 
Deutsch [25] ) .  There is no intrinsic reason why branches of measure zero 

On the many-worlds interpntation 
307 
should never occur, if measure is nothing more than a purely abstract math­
ematical quantity. Moreover we would fail to obtain an additional result of 
standard probability theory which is necessary for its consistency: i .e. that 
sequences of small measure must occur correspondingly rarely. The treat­
ment of Everett and DeWitt would in any case appiy only to an infinite 
sequence, but the theory must apply to finite sequences that can be carried 
out in actual experiments. Indeed, current probability theory implies that 
finite sequences of small measure must occur sometimes if the distribution 
is random. In other words, we cannot guarantee that there will never be 
large fluctuations. The proof given by Everett and DeWitt contains no 
way of obtaining such a result (except perhaps by adding further arbitrary 
assumptions) .  It is only if we suppose that the mathematical measure cor­
responds to a relative frequency in a random ensemble that we can deal 
with these questions adequately. 
In any case a more careful analysis of this situation is made by Ballen­
tine (26] who shows that the relative frequencies do not actually approach 
lal2 and l,Bl2 for the case of spin ǣ. Rather the distribution Ballentine 
obtains is half and half. One can understand this by noting that the only 
way of bringing probability into this situation is to suppose equiprobability 
of the discrete alternatives, which will, of course, inevitably bring about 
a half-half distribution. It is clear then that the many-worlds interpreta­
tions of Everett and DeWitt have not succeeded in providing an adequate 
account of probability. 
To deal with this Deutsch [25] assumes further modifications of the the­
ory. Rather than supposing with DeWitt that the whole of existence is 
continually bifurcating into more and more universes , he postulates that 
there is always an infinite and essentially constant number of actual uni­
verses. For example in the case of spin that we have treated earlier in terms 
of equation ( 13 . 1 1 )  each of the whole set of universes initially has spin t 
and the corresponding apparatus is in its initial state. After the measure­
ment process, the universes are partitioned among the states indicated by 
( 13.13). 
The essential assumption of Deutsch is that there is a random distribu­
tion of these universes with probabilities corresponding to the usual quan­
tum mechanical probabilities for the associated results. In a measurement, 
we begin with an initial distribution of universes in which all of them had 
the same initial spin state given by 1/J = o.1/J+ + /31/J_ while all the appara­
tuses are in the same state. After the measurement is over this distribution 
is changed into one in which the probability that S particles in the sequence 
have wave function 1/J+ (while the remainder have wave function t/J_ ) is just 
iai25 1,Bl2(N-S) . This is, of course, just the usual quantum mechanical prob­
ability for such a sequence. And from this expresion it follows that as the 

308 
The undivided universe 
sequence approaches an infinite number, the relative frequency of spin + l 
will be lo-12 and spin -! will be 1 1312. 
2 
It is clear then that Deutsch succeeds in achieving the aim that Everett 
and DeWitt failed to achieve. However, there are a number of serious 
questions that Deutsch has not yet answered. The most obvious of these 
is that he has chosen a certain basis for the interpretation, in this case 
the one in which the spin in the z-direction is diagonal . Of course it is 
clear that this basis corresponds to the orientation of the apparatus. But 
recall that one of the basic aims of the many-world interpretations is to 
get everything out of the formalism without further assumptions. Deutsch 
has not shown why it is just these pieces of apparatus that will partition 
the universes in the way he has assumed. If he stops here he will be in a 
position similar to that of von Neumann who likewise distinguished between 
the apparatus and the rest of the universe without deducing this distinction 
from the formalism . Presumably the apparatus is distinct in that it behaves 
apparently classically as part of the large-scale world of common experience. 
Deutsch does call attention to this point, but like Everett and DeWitt he 
does not offer any proofs that such a 'classical ' basis must emerge from the 
formation itself. We shall discuss the question in more detail in the next 
section. 
A yet more serious question that we shall discuss here is concerned with 
the significance of the random ensemble of universes that Deutsch had to 
asume in order to give meaning to the concept of probability. In a given 
branch of the wave function , after the measurement process is over, the 
quantum state of the whole set of particles will be well defined. But once 
such a quantum state is given no further differences within it are possible, 
at least according to the usually accepted form of the quantum theory itself 
which aserts that the wave function gives all possible physical information 
about the system . How then do the many universes in the same quantum 
state differ? Deutsch does not make this clear. It is difficult to see how 
one could avoid the further postulate that there is an additional randomly 
distributed parameter or set of parameters not present in the ordinary 
quantum theory which would describe their differences. But to do this is 
to eliminate the key advantage claimed for the many-worlds interpretation , 
i.e. that it introduces no basically new physical concepts or equations or 
parameters. Indeed our own interpretation has been criticised just because 
it does introduce particle variables as new parameters. At the very least we 
could claim that these variables are relatively easy to understand, whereas 
with Deutsch 's random distribution of universes it is not clear how such 
parameters are to be understood. 
Deutsch 's approach has been applied thus far to the DeWitt interpreta­
tion in which it is supposed that a multiplicity of universes actually exists. 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
309 
Whether this approach can also be applied to the Everett interpretation is 
not clear. Let us recall that for Everett there is only one total universe with 
many points of view, each of which corresponds to a particular memory or 
awareness that is within its total universe. What seems to be called for 
is a random distribution of awarenesses over various quantum states with 
relative frequencies equal to the usual quantum mechanical probabilities for 
the associated results. To put this notion more precisely, let us represent 
the total wave function of the universe by 
( 1 3. 1 1 )  
where ¢; represents the i1h state of awareness and 1/J; represents the state of 
the rest of the universe that corresponds to it. The assumption analogous 
to that of Deutsch would be that IC; 12 represents the relative frequency 
of awarenesses of state i corresponding to the i1h component of the total 
Hilbert space vector Il . 
However, there appear to be difficulties with this suggestion . Consider, 
for example, a situation in which some fraction of the observers would be 
killed in a catastrophic event so that their memories would vanish . How 
would the statistics be formulated to take care of such a possibility? 
To sum up then , it does not seem that there is as yet an adequate treat­
ment of probability within the Everett interpretation , while even within 
the DeWitt interpretation, Deutsch 's further assumptions seem to be able 
to provide this only by foregoing the claim that no new basic principles are 
needed beyond those of the current quantum theory. 
1 3 . 5  
O n  t he preferred basis and t h e  classical limit 
One of the key remaining ambiguities in the basic formulation of the many­
worlds interpretation is around the question of how the clasical limit is to 
be treated . As we have seen, DeWitt's expressed intention was to avoid 
the assumption of a classical limit. Everett was less clear on this point, but 
the general tenor of his approach suggests a similar attitude. However, if 
we accept this then we are required either to show that something like a 
classical limit is contained implicitly in the many-worlds interpretation or 
else to show that such a limit is not needed . Yet nothing like this has been 
done so far in an adequate way. As we have pointed out ,  DeWitt appeals 
to an as yet vague notion of complexity and he seems to imply that this 
would take care of yielding the relatively well-defined and stable kinds of 
results that are usually comprehended in terms of a classical limit. On the 
other hand Everett explicitly denies that any such property of complexity 
is needed. Thus Everett (27] writes : 

3 1 0  
The undivided universe 
We impose no restrictions on the complexity and number of 
degrees of freedom of measuring apparatus or observers, and if 
any of these processes are present (such as heat reservoirs etc .) 
then these systems are to be simply included as part of the 
apparatus or observer. 
This lack of explanation of why the actual world of common experi­
ence corresponds to some kind of classical limit has indeed been noted 
by Deutsch [25) . As we have already pointed out in the previous section 
he acknowledges that there is some such favoured basis for interpretation .  
Nevertheless i t  is clear that the basis must b e  such as to somehow bring 
about the correct clasical limit . But Deutsch does not provide an an­
swer to the question of how this basis is related to the classical limit. We 
note that, in De Witt 's version of the many-worlds interpretation, it is also 
necessary to have this sort of preferred basis as has indeed been pointed 
out by many authors (Ballentine [2) , Bell [3) , Cooper and van Vechten [4) , 
d 'Espagnat [5) , and Primas [6) ) .  
To bring out what i s  required, we note that this basis determines the 
elements that correspond to the many-worlds into which a particular uni­
verse may further split. Some authors have suggested further mathematical 
asumptions that they hope might lead to determination of this basis. For 
example, Zeh [28) suggests that there is a unique analysis of the total wave 
function into relative states, called the Schmidt decomposition, and that 
this would deal with such questions. But without further concepts and 
asumptions one can easily see that such a treatment would still be am­
biguous. 
Thus consider an atom in some linear combination of p-states 
where 7);_ , 1);0 and 1/;+ represent wave functions in which the z-component 
of the angular momentum is respectively -h, 0 and h. Clearly De Witt 's 
splitting of universes cannot go so far as to imply that such an atom by 
itself would split into three copies with angular momentum well defined 
in the z-direction . Indeed if this were to happen, the theory would fail 
to agree with experiment in a domain that is well tested . We would not 
expect this sort of thing to happen even with medium-sized molecules. 
But as we approach the large-scale world of common experience the many­
worlds interpretation forces us to assume that at some point the universe 
does begin to split in this way. J ust where does this happen? As we have 
remarked earlier it is necesary in De Witt's approach to develop some new 
parameters such as complexity and new equations that will determine where 
the split will occur . But as we have seen, if we do this, the basic claim of 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
31 1 
the many-worlds interpretation that it does not introduce new asumptions 
and principles will again fail. 
A similar problem can be seen to arise in Everett's interpretation , but 
here it involves a certain ambiguity as to what is to be meant by awareness, 
memory or mind . Thus, for example, Everett's concept of relative state 
could be applied to a single hydrogen atom whose wave function may take 
the form 
Il = L C, 1,b, (z)</i, (y), 
where z is the coordinate of the nucleus and y that of the electron . If we 
were to apply Everett 's theory at this level, we would have to say that the 
electron is aware of the proton and that the proton is aware of the electron . 
It would then indeed follow that the overall awareness associated with the 
hydrogen atom as a whole would split into many correlated states of mu­
tual awareness of the electron and the proton , which states are, however, 
not aware of each other. This would imply that everything was aware of 
everything else and that human awareness (or indeed machine awareness) 
were only special cases of this .  
I t  i s  certainly not clear what such a theory could mean . If i t  were 
Everett's intention to propose this sort of theory, it would have been up 
to him to go into what he means by universal awareness of everything by 
everything. For such a notion is evidently far more radical than anything 
that arises in the commonly accepted views of the many-worlds interpre­
tation. In the absence of any discussion of this point by Everett or by 
those who follow him, we must assume that such a radical version of his 
interpretation was not his intention . 
But then this immediately raises the question of just what determines 
the conditions for awareness to exist. As we have seen , Everett expressly 
denies that the notion of complexity is basically relevant to his theory. 
Yet it seems evident because of his referring to computers and memories, 
that he has tacitly in mind some kind of complexity (as well as stability) 
as a basis for awareness. This means that he faces essentially the same 
difficulty as DeWitt. He will have to introduce some new asumptions as 
to what constitutes the conditions for awareness and new laws determining 
just when these conditions are satisfied. 
Recently these questions have been re-examined by Stapp [29] and by 
Albert and Loewer [20] in what is called the many-minds interpretation . 
The key step here is to assume that awareness or consciousness is not basi­
cally a physical property, but rather a property of mind which is supposed 
to be entirely different from matter. Thus the theory, unlike Everett 's, 
asumes a dualism between mind and matter along lines similar to that 
proposed much earlier by Descartes. The advantage of this approach is 

3 1 2  
Th e u n divided u n iverse 
that we do not need to assume that matter has properties given to it by 
awareness, i.e. that physical meaning can be given in the quantum theory 
to all branches of a linear su perposition of wave functions without con­
tradicting appearances. It thus makes possible a more consistent way of 
separating one domain (matter) that satisfies the superposition principle of 
quantum theory and another domain (mind) that does not. 
Such a dualist approach is in certain ways reminiscent of Wigner's sug­
gestions [1 1] ,  but it must be remembered that in the latter, mind and matter 
are supposed to interact in a two-way process. In the many-minds inter­
pretation however there is no such interaction . Rather mind is assumed to 
be capable of becoming conscious of certain aspects of the state of matter 
without influencing the latter in any way at all .  
The many-minds interpretation shares with Everett the assumption that 
physical reality corresponds to the total wave function of the universe . Like­
wise along with Everett , it assumes that on the large scale stable configura­
tions of matter exist which make possible not only measuring instruments, 
but also a reliable memory of what the results of measurement are. We re­
call in the Everett theory that the wave function describing relevant parts of 
the spin measuring apparatus and the memory is given by equation ( 13.3). 
>. = o:x+ ( M)¢+ (Y)tP+ (s) + f3x- (M)¢- (y)t/J- (s). 
The basic new asumption relative to Everett 's is that each person has 
a total mind that can split into many sub-minds that are not aware of each 
other . Each mind can be aware of a particular brain state corresponding 
to a memory of a particular experimental result that is stable and distinct 
from other memories corresponding to different possible results of the ex­
periment . Let these minds be represented by µ+ and µ_ . If the mind were 
in the domain of quantum mechanics, the wave function would then be in 
a linear superposition 
f = o:µ+ x+ (M)¢+(Y)tP+(s) + f3µ- x- (M)</>- (y)t/J- (s) . 
But here is where a break is made with the basic principles of quantum 
mechanics by assuming that µ+ and µ_ do not superpose. We further 
asume a random process in which the original mind m has split into two 
distinct new minds, µ+ and µ_ . The mind µ+ is aware of the physical 
situation whose wave function is x+ (M)¢+(Y)tP+(s) and mind µ_ is aware 
of the physical state corresponding to the wave function with the minus 
sign. Neither µ+ nor µ_ are aware of each other. 
In the further development of this process, there will be additional splits 
in the mind. 
For example, if some physical property corresponding to 
a wave function N is measured and remembered, there will then be a 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
313 
total of 2N minds aware of the N physical states , N ,  corresponding to 
measurements and memories of both the spin and the new property. 
In the random process in which the mind splits, we asume that the 
probability of a particular mind being associated with the N1h physical 
state and a particular spin variable '+' is proportional to loN 12 . As time 
goes on there will be a constant process of further splitting of the mind. 
All of this is very close to the treatment given by Everett and differs 
only in that we have further assumed a unique last stage , i.e. mind , in 
which the linear superposition fails (whereas Everett says nothing about 
this question ) .  By thus defining this unique last stage as a splitting of 
the mind and relating this split to the linear superposition of memories in 
the brain through random processes, the many-minds interpretation avoids 
difficulties of specifying the basis in which linear superposition breaks down. 
On the other hand, this advantage has been gained at the expense of not 
only bringing in duality of mind and matter, but also of having to assume 
special properties of mind which are difficult to understand, i.e. the ability 
to be aware of matter without any interaction and the ability to split in a 
random way into many minds, each of which is associated to a particular 
physical state. 
It should be pointed out here that the many-minds interpretation does 
not imply nonlocality. This comes about because reality is assumed to be 
in perfect correspondence with the total wave function of the universe and 
because the whole of this reality is covered completely by the perceptions 
of the many minds which have no effect on the wave function. Because 
Schrodinger 's equation contains only local interactions, its development is 
entirely local even though it has to be expressed in configuration space. 
Each mind becomes aware of only one facet of this multidimensional reality. 
The perceived classical world is then a result of the fact that each mind 
is only aware of a small part of the whole, the perceived classical world is 
in a sense an illusion . What is illusory is that this part is the whole. If it 
were seen to be merely a facet then there would be no illusion . 
To conclude, the many-minds interpretation does remove many of the 
difficulties with the interpretations of Everett and DeWitt , but requires 
making a theory of mind basically to account for the phenomena of physics. 
At present we have no foundations for such a theory. Indeed even to con­
sider the mere possibility of this sort of assumption, we have further to 
suppose that there are new kinds of laws uniquely relating real physical 
properties such as awareness, to parts or components of the total vector 
in Hilbert space. As we have pointed out in section 13.2 this is equivalent 
to assuming that the state of awareness is not limited by anything like the 
uncertainty principle-clearly a gigantic step beyond present day physics. 
Thus even if we succeed in developing such a theory, it is clear that we 

3 1 4  
The undivided universe 
will require new principles, new concepts and new equations. This means 
once again ,  that the claim of the many-worlds interpretation to avoid the 
addition of speculative new assumptions will fail . 
1 3 . 6  
Comparison between our interpretation and that o f  the 
many-worlds 
One of the first objections that tends to arise against the many-worlds inter­
pretation is that its assumption of an infinity of universes or minds , almost 
all of them being unobservable, violates the principle of Occam's razor, i.e. 
that we should not introduce a multiplicity of unnecessary assumptions. 
However, the proponents of this interpretation answer such objections by 
saying, e.g. with d'Espagnat [5] , that multiplication of worlds entitles one 
to economise on principles. Or as Primas [6] has said, "The Everett in­
terpretation is superior in logical economy." As we have already indicated, 
they would criticise our interpretation by saying that in addition to postu­
lating the reality of the wave function , it brings in the further concept of 
particles with their equations of motion . It is thus clear that they feel that 
the many-worlds interpretation is superior because it does not do this sort 
of thing. 
Leaving aside this question for the moment, it should be said that our 
interpretation accomplishes a number of things which cannot be done in 
the many-worlds view. Firstly, as we have seen in chapter 8, it gives a 
simple and coherent account of why the large scale world of common ex­
perience should be essentially classical . This is demonstrated by showing 
that the quantum theory implies a relatively autonomous domain in which 
the quantum potential can be neglected so that an approximately classical 
behaviour will result . 
The physical structures of observers are also manifest in this domain. As 
pointed out in chapter 8, it is a well-known fact that our sensory information 
comes from this level . From this it follows that we are directly aware of the 
particle aspect of the universe through the senses and that the more subtle 
wave function aspect is inferred by thought about our sensory experience in 
the domain that is manifest to the senses. We are therefore not basing our 
approach on the assumption that we are aware only of particles . Rather we 
are simply making use of the fact that at least in science as we know it thus 
far, all information comes ultimately through the manifest level (recalling 
that it comes not only through the particles, but also through the clasical 
limit of electromagnetic field be ables). 
The second advantage of our interpretation is that we do not have to 
asu me  the relation p = 1 ¥> 12 ab initio, but that we are able to arrive at this 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
315 
as an equilibrium distribution resulting from chaotic processes. 
Finally we cite what we regard as the main advantage, which is that it 
gives an intelligible and intuitively understandable account of how quantum 
processes take place. 
It is clear that the many-worlds interpretation cannot do any of these 
things. As we have seen earlier, it does not provide an adequate account of 
the large scale behaviour at the classical limit. Moreover it is compelled to 
asume the relation p = llfi l2 (e.g. as was done by Deutsch). And it gives 
no intuitively intelligible account of how quantum processes take place . 
With regard to the latter point , it defies the imagination to grasp intu­
itively how the universe could split, and even more as to how it could be 
doing so in a stupendous number of ways . It equally defies the imagination 
to grasp intuitively how awareness could split into many parts that are not 
aware of each other, and even more so how awareness could be, in effect, 
identified with some part of a vector in Hilbert space . 
Let us then consider once again the claim that the many-worlds inter­
pretation is the one that is most economic in concepts and principles. We 
have seen, however , that in order to introduce probability in a consistent 
way, Deutsch had to assume an infinity of universes in the same quantum 
state, and in effect to imply a random distribution of these universes over 
an undefined parameter whose nature is completely unspecified. As we 
have pointed out earlier, he has thus in essence replaced the new particle 
variables by a new parameter that would distinguish the various universes. 
So there is no advantage in the number of hypotheses. Moreover there is 
the disadvantage that his new parameters are far less clear in meaning than 
others. 
If we adopt DeWitt's approach, then , as we have seen, it is necessary 
to supplement this with some further principles involving perhaps an as 
yet unavailable definition of complexity and further equations determining 
just how this would determine the splitting of universes. On the other 
hand, if we adopt Everett 's approach or indeed that of the many-minds 
interpretation , we have to do something similar with regard to the splitting 
of awareness. In this connection a complete and consistent expression of 
these interpretations would, as we have seen, require new principles and 
asumptions of a speculative nature going beyond the current qu antum 
theory and beyond our present knowledge of awareness and its possible 
relationship to Hilbert space. 
In view of all these unresolved problems we have been led to ask why the 
many-worlds interpretation seems to be so attractive to some physicists. Of 
course we realise that the Hilbert space formulation of quantum mechanics 
has a great deal of symmetry and may therefore be felt to possess great 
beauty. Hence it is understandable that there may be great reluctance to 

3 1 6  
Th e undivided universe 
give it up or to go beyond it . On this basis one can see that the greatest 
advantage of the many-worlds interpretation for its proponents is that it 
provides an ontological formulation which relates all its basic concepts only 
to Hilbert space . In effect its says that everything can be put in some 
correspondence with Hilbert space. The first priority is thus to maintain 
the notion that all basic structures of concepts have to be expresed in 
terms of Hilbert space. As long as this can be done it is felt that all sorts 
of further asumptions are possible and that these do not count heavily as 
new principles. For example the assumption that the mind can be put in 
correspondence with a component of a vector in Hilbert space is considered 
to be of minor importance compared with maintaining the universal validity 
of the concept of Hilbert space itself. Similarly with regard to all the other 
asumptions that we have outlined here. 
We can however ask whether symmetry and beauty are always a sure 
sign that we have reached an ultimate truth that can never be altered 
through further enquiry. Indeed in our approach , which we shall explain 
in more detail in the next chapter , we argue that there is no reason to 
asume the ultimate truth of any particular feature of knowledge, however 
beautiful we may feel it to be. Moreover from our discussion of the many­
worlds interpretation , which shows that it has not yet fulfilled its claims 
to economy of principles, it does not seem to be justified to dismiss the 
asumption of new concepts in our interpretation (such as particle variables) 
that go beyon d what can be accommodated in terms of Hilbert space. 
As we have already remarked earlier we feel that the many-worlds in­
terpretation has interesting possibilities, but that its presentation would be 
greatly clarified it if were frankly admitted that some of its basic hypothe­
ses are of a highly speculative nature. Indeed the main motivation behind 
the many-worlds interpretation is, in our view , not really the minimisation 
of principles and hypotheses . But rather it is to retain Hilbert space as the 
ground for the basic conceptual structure so that everything in the theory 
can be formulated in terms of Hilbert space. It could be valuable to develop 
such a theory but it has to be said that before this is actually done in an 
adequate way, many as yet unresolved difficulties have to be dealt with. 
We shall go into this question further in the succeeding chapters . 
13. 7 
References 
1 .  Y. Ben-Dov, 'Versions de la Mecanique Quantique sans reduction d.e 
Ia Fonction d'Onde. Le Theorie d'Everett et l 'Onde Pilot ', These de 
Doctorat, Octobre 1987. 
2. L .  E. Ballentine, Found. Phys. 3 ,  229 ( 1973) . 

On the many-worlds interpretation 
317 
3. J. S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
4. L. N. Cooper and D. van Vechten, Am. J. Phys. 3 7 ,  219-227 ( 1 969) . 
5. B. d'Espagnat, Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 
chapter 20, Benjamin, Reading, Mass ., 1976. 
6. H .  Primas, Chemistry, Quantum Mechanics and Reductionism, Sec. 
3. 6, Lecture Notes in Chemistry, Springer, Berlin, 198 1 .  
7. H .  Stapp, Found. Phys. 1 0 ,  767 ( 1980) . 
8. H .  D .  Zeh , 'On the Irreversibility of Time and Observation in Quan­
tum Theory', in Proc. Int. School of Phys. 'Enrico Fermi ', Course 
49: 'Foun dations of Quantum Mechanics ', ed . B .  d'Espagnat, Aca­
demic Press, New York , 1971 , 263-273, and also Found. Phys. 3, 109 
( 1973) . 
9. H .  Everett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2 9 ,  454-462 (1957) . 
10. B. S. DeWitt and N .  Graham, The Many- Worlds Interpretation of 
Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jer­
sey, 1 973, 155-165. 
11. E. Wigner, 'Remarks on the Mind-body Question', in The Scie ntist 
Speculates, ed. I. J. Good, Heinemann, London, 196 1 ,  284-302. 
12. H .  Everett, 'The Theory of the Universal Wave Function ', in The 
Many- Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, ed. B. S. DeWitt 
and N. Graham, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 
1973, 64 . 
13. E. J .  Squires, Eur. J. Phys. 8 ,  171 ( 1 987) . 
14. B. S. DeWitt, 'Quantum Mechanics and Reality', in The Many- Worlds 
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, ed. B. S. DeWitt and N. Gra­
ham, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1973, 160. 
15. J. A. Wheeler, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 151-153 (1957) . 
16. N. Graham, 'The Measurement of Relative Frequency', in The Many­
Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, ed. B. S. DeWitt and 
N. Graham, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1973, 
229-253. 

3 1 8  
The undivided universe 
17. A. Einstein, 'Autobiographical Notes', in A lbert Einstein. Philosopher­
Scient1st, ed . P A .  Schilpp, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
1 969, 665. 
18. H. Everett, 'The Theory of the Universal Wave Function', in The 
Many- Worlds In terpretation of Quantum Mechanics, ed. B. S. DeWitt 
and N. Graham, Princeton University Press, Princeton , New Jersey, 
1973, 1 16. 
19. Jbid. , p . 1 17. 
20. D. Albert and B .  Loewer, Nous 2 3 ,  169 ( 1989) . 
2 1 .  D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, London ( 1951 ) .  Also avail­
able in Dover Publications, New York , 1989. 
22. A. J .  Leggett , Prog. Theor. Phys. Supp. 6 9 ,  80 ( 1 980) . 
23. M .  Gell-Mann and J . B .  Hartle, 'Quantum Mechanics in the Light of 
Quantum Cosmology', in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Found. of Quantum 
Mechanics, ed . S. Kobyashi, Physical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1989. 
24. B. d'Espagnat, Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 
chapter 23, Benjamin , Reading, Mass . ,  1 976. 
25. D. Deutsch , In t. J. Theor. Phys. 24, 1-4 1  ( 1 985) . 
26. L .  E. Ballentine, Found. Phys. 3 ,  229 ( 1973). 
27. H .  Everett , 'The Theory of the Universal Wave Function ', in The 
Many- Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, ed. B. S. DeWitt 
and N. Graham, Princeton lJ niversity Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 
1973, 1 00. 
28. H. D. Zeh , Found. Phys. 9 ,  803-818 (1979) . 
29. H .  P. Stapp, 'Quantum Measurement and the Mind-Brain Connec­
tion ', in Symposium on the Foundations of Modern Physics, ed. P. 
Lahti and P. Mittelstaedt, World Scientific , Singapore, 1990, 403 -
424. 

Chapter 14 
Extension of ontological theories beyond the 
domain of quantum mechanics 
14. 1 
Introduc tion 
Thus far our discussion has centred on various interpretations of the current 
quantum theory. But one of the implications of an ontological approach is 
that within its conceptual framework it is possible to contemplate certain 
modifications and extensions of the mathematical laws that go beyond the 
domain of the current quantum theory. In this chapter we shall discuss a 
number of suggestions along this line made by various authors and in the 
last section ( 14.6) we shall also include some of our own proposals for doing 
this. 
14.2 
Our general world view, including our attitude to physical 
and mathematical aspects of basic concepts 
Before going on to a detailed discussion of our proposals for the extension 
of quantum mechanics in new ways , we would like to give the outlines of our 
general world view. This will help make more clear what our motivation 
is in developing our theories . In addition it should help to clarify certain 
differences between our attitude towards basic physical and mathematical 
concepts and that which seems to be behind most of the other approaches. 
We shall begin by discussing the latter question first. Thus we have seen 
in the previous chapter, for example, that the basic attitude in the many­
worlds interpretation is to take the present general mathematical formula­
tion of quantum mechanics as the essential truth and to try to derive the 
physical interpretation as something that is implicit in the mathematics. 
Many speculative new assumptions have been made within this mathemati­
cal framework, but the first priority has been to retain this framework as the 
3 1 9  

320 
The undivided u n w e rs e  
ground for the general conceptual structure. Some of the proponents of the 
many-worlds interpretation , for example , Deutsch [l] as well as Gell-Mann 
and Hartle [2] , whose work will be discussed further on in this chapter, are 
even ready, at least in principle , to consider extending their theories be­
yond the current quantum mechanics . In addition the same may be said of 
Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber [3] , whose work we will also consider later in 
this chapter. However, even these authors are in essential agreement that 
what should not change is the requirement that the Hilbert space (and its 
natural extension to an infinity of dimensions) would be the basic structure 
in terms of which all other con cepts must be expressed . 
This attitude towards the mathematics has not always been dominant 
in physics. Indeed unti l the present century, the physical concepts were , for 
the most part , considered as primary, while mathematical equations were 
regarded as providing a more detailed and precise way of talking about these 
physical concepts. However, during the twentieth century with the advent 
of quantum theory (and to a lesser extent , relativity) the mathematics 
became much more highly developed and the physical interpretation much 
more abstract and indirect, as well as much less clear. As a result there was 
a constantly increasing focus on the mathematics, while the physical ideas 
were given less and less importance. Thus during the 1920s Sir J ames Jeans 
said that God must be a mathematician , implying by this that the universe 
was constructed on a mathematical plan and that its essence is best grasped 
in terms of the mathematics itself Later, Heisenberg went much further 
along these lines and said very explicitly that the essential truth was in the 
mathematics . This view has become the common one among most of the 
modern theoretical physicists who now regard the equations as providing 
their most immediate contact with nature (the experiments only confirming 
or refuting the correctness of this contact) .  So without an equation there 
is really nothing to talk about. On the other hand, in the past we began 
talking about our concept of physical reality and used the equations to talk 
about them. 
One of the reasons that our interpretation of the quantum theory may 
not have been so well understood is perhaps that it is not commonly realised 
that we have a rather different attitude to the mathematics. Our approach 
is not simply a return to the notion that the mathematics merely enables 
us to talk about the physical concepts more precisely. Rather we feel that 
these two kinds of concepts represent extremes and that it is necessary to 
be in a proces of thinking that moves between these extremes in such a 
way that they complement each other. 
We fully accept that progress can be made from the mathematical side 
alone ,  but we feel that to stick indefinitely to this approach is too lim­
ited .  For example, starting with Schrodinger's equation expressed in the 

Extension of ontological theories 
321 
Hamilton.-J acobi. forะ, we were led in chapter 3 to a new physical concept 
of a particle which 1s affected by a quantum field in a way that depends 
only on the form of the latter and not on its amplitude. With the aid of 
the concept of active information implied by this behaviour, we can first 
of all oǢtaǡn a c.oherent explanation of the quantum process which gives 
us new ms1ghts mto the quantum theory and enables us to understand it 
in a different way. But we do not regard these physical concepts as mere 
imaginative displays of the meaning of our equations. Instead, as we shall 
see in this chapter, we can then move to the other side of this process of 
thought and take our physical concepts as a guide for the development of 
new equations. In this way we are engaged in at least the beginning of a 
kind of thinking in which the clue for a creative new approach may come 
from either side and may flow indefinitely back and forth between the two 
sides. 
It should be clear from the above that we do not expect to come to the 
end of this process of discovery (for example, in a form that is currently 
called the ''Theory of Everything" ) .  Rather our view is that nature in its 
total reality is unlimited, not merely quantitatively, but also qualitatively 
in its depth and subtlety of laws and processes (see D. Bohm [4]). Our 
knowledge at any stage is an abstraction from this total reality and therefore 
cannot be expected to hold indefinitely when extended into new domains. 
In any case it is evident that there is no way to prove that any particular 
aspect of our knowledge is absolutely correct. Indeed no matter how long 
it may have demonstrated its validity, it is always possible that later it may 
be found to have limits. For example, Newtonian physics, which held sway 
for several centuries, was found to be limited and gave way to quantum 
theory and relativity. Yet just before this revolution took place at the end 
of the nineteenth century, Lord Kelvin, one of the leading physicists at the 
time, advised young people not to go into physics because it was finished 
and only subject to refinement in the next decimal places. Nevertheless he 
did point to two small clouds on the horizon, the negative results of the 
Michelson-Morley experiment and the problems of black body radiation. 
It must be admitted that he chose his clouds correctly, though he totally 
underestimated their importance. Nowadays physicists are similarly talking 
about an ultimate unified theory including the four forces and perhaps 
strings, supersymmetry etc . that would explain everything. However, it can 
hardly be said that the clouds in this picture are only two and restricted 
to being small. 
Our notion of the qualitative infinity of nature can usefully be brought 
out by considering the role of the atomic hypothesis of Democritus which 
we have already discussed in chapter 12, section 12.8. Not only did this 
hypothesis show the importance of speculative new concepts going far be-

322 
Th e undivided universe 
yond what could be demonstrated at the time of its proposal, but it also 
exhibited a further key feature that we would like to emphasise here. This 
is that deeper explanations often imply the limited validity of what were 
previously accepted as basic concepts, which later are then recovered only 
as approximations or limiti ng cases. 
This relationship of concepts is indeed typical of the whole of our experi­
ence. For example, as we go round a circular table, what we see immediately 
is an ever changing elliptical shape. But we have learned to regard this 
changing shape as a mere appearance, while the essence, i.e. the true being, 
is considered to be a rigid circular object. This latter is known first in 
thought, but later this thought is projected into our immediate experience 
so that the table even appears to be circular . 
But further investigation shows that this object is not solid and even­
tually discloses an atomic structure. The solid object now reverts in our 
thought to the category of an appearance, while the essence is the set of 
atoms out of which it is constituted . However, deeper studies then showed 
that even the atom is an appearan ce and that the essence is a nucleus sur­
rounded by moving planetary electrons . And later still even these particles 
were seen to be appearances, while the essence was a set of yet more funda­
mental particles such as quarks, gluons, preons, or else sets of excitations 
of strings, etc . But, in all of this development of our knowledge, it seems 
that whatever we have thought of as matter is turning more and more into 
empty space with an ever more tenuous structure of moving elements. This 
tendency is carried further by quantum field theory which treats particles 
as quantised states of a field that extends over the whole of space. 
What has been constant in this overall historical development is a pat­
tern in which at each stage, certain features are regarded as appearance, 
while others are regarded as of an essence which explains the appearance 
on a qualitatively different basis. But what is taken as essence at any stage, 
is seen to be appearance of a still more fundamental essence. Ultimately 
everything plays both the role of appearance and that of essence. If, as we 
are suggesting, this pattern never comes to an end, then ultimately all of 
our thought can be regarded as appearance, not to the senses, but to the 
mind . 
What science is aiming for is that these appearances be correct, i.e. 
that the actions flowing from them, such as experiments, be coherent with 
what the appearances would imply. Incorrect appearances are· thus either 
mistaken or illusory. The progress of science then implies the elimination 
of mistakes and illusions and the development of new sets of related ap­
pearances at various levels. Thus with the table to have the appearance of 
an elliptical object is correct only in a very limited sense. By bringing in 
the thought that the object is a rigid circle, we obtain a more nearly cor-

Extension of ontological theories 
323 
rect overall set of appearances. The thought of the atomic structure then 
makes the whole set still more nearly correct and so on . Thus what we are 
doing is constantly extending the appearances with the aid of thought. The 
ultimate reality is unlimited and unknown , but its succesive appearances 
serve as an ever more accurate guide to coherent action in relation to this 
reality. 
Another way of looking at the notion of appearances iB to note that 
appearances basically are what arise in our perception of the world .  As we 
have seen , the appearances in sense perception give rise to inferences about 
an essence that might be their origin , but this essence, which is seen in 
thought , turns out to be yet another appearance and therefore still part of 
our overall perception . No matter how far we go, we are therefore involved 
basically in perception . Our theories are not primarily forms of knowledge 
about the world but rather, they are forms of insight that arise in our 
attempts to obtain a perception of a deeper nature of reality as a whole. 
As such we do not expect their development ever to come to an end ,  any 
more than we would look forward to a final sense perception . This view of 
theory as perception can be found in Bohm [5] . 
At any stage in the development of perception as described above, there 
is always further room for new concepts which serve as ways of looking at 
reality. Such concepts may, in our approach, be either physical or mathe­
matical or both . Thus we do not suppose that physical concepts are merely 
something to be put in correspondence with the basic mathematical con­
cepts. Nor do we suppose that the mathematical concepts are necessarily 
subordinate to basic physical concepts. Rather both of these are appear­
ances and their relationships may provide a yet more comprehensive appear­
ance which guides our action towards the unlimited and unknown reality. 
The imaginative qualitative concept is therefore, in the long run , just as 
key a feature of this overall appearance as is the precise and abstract math­
ematical concept. The two together not only present a more comprehensive 
appearance than either one alone could do, but each can serve as a clue for 
further development in the other. 
In all this, scientific theory may even go so far as to throw some light 
on the observer, to whom all these appearances are supposed to be taking 
place. But as with everything else, even such theories are only further 
extensions of appearances, so to speak , which give the observer a mental 
mirror in which he or she is reflected. There will therefore be no final 
theory of the observer. The ultimate nature of awareness is unlimited and 
unknown , like that of the universe as a whole of which it is a part. In the 
next chapter, we will make further suggestions as to how the universe can 
include observers , which are along the lines described above. 
It may be readily seen that this general approach implies a certain kind 

324 
Th e undivided universe 
of limit to determinism. For in it, each theory is evidently an abstraction 
from a totality that is inherently unlimited , both qualitatively and quanti­
tatively. As such ,  it evidently cannot be entirely self-determined , because it 
always depen ds in various ways on what has been left out .  So the necessity 
of its self-determin ation is only relative and not absolute. 
Even here this self-determination may include unstable chaotic orders 
which approximate randomness. However, even the chaotic or stochastic 
character may be contingent and determined by conditions in domains not 
covered by the particular theory in question . For example, random vari­
ations in the trajectory of a Brownian particle may be partially or even 
totally determined by atomic motions at a deeper level. 
So ultimately our overall world view is neither absolutely deterministic 
nor absolutely indeterministic. Rather it implies that these two extremes 
are abstractions which constitute different views or aspects of the overall set 
of appearances . Which view is appropriate in a given case will depend both 
on t he unknown totality and on our particular mode of contact with it (e.g. 
the kinds of experiments we are able to do) . So as the situation changes, 
different views are constantly called for. But the unknown and unlimited 
essence is not restricted to any of these views. Rather it may be thought 
of as somewhere between them and ultimately beyond them, as indeed it 
is beyond what can be captured in thought , which is always limited to 
some abstraction from the totality. (For a more detailed discussion of this 
approach , see Bohm [5) .) 
The above is a special case of how even our basic concepts and cate­
gories of thought are ultimately appearances. If this is so, what then is the 
point of making an ontological interpretation of the quantum theory? To 
answer this ,  we first point out once again that every theory is not only a 
mere appearance, but that it is more, in the sense that its basic concepts 
must be said in some sense to reflect reality within its own domain. In 
other ontological theories suggested thus far in physics , it is either implied 
or asserted that such basic concepts correspond to independently existent 
realities, for example , not dependent on context or deeper levels of being. 
In our approach , however, the basic concept of a given theory may reflect a 
reality that is inherently dependent either on context or on deeper levels or 
on both. For example, the elliptical appearances of a circular object may 
be sen as realities by considering the light coming from the object to the 
eye and how the eye makes an elliptical image which is in some way carried 
back into the brain .  This we may consider to be an essential part of the 
reality corresponding to the elliptical appearance. Clearly this reality is 
not independently existent but depends on a context including the whole 
process that we h ave mentioned, as well as much more and particularly on 
the circular object which is taken to be the essential meaning of the ellipti-

Extension of ontological theories 
325 
cal appearances. But then the circular object is found to be dependent for 
its existence on a wide range of contextual parameters, e.g. temperature, 
and especially on the atomic constituents which are considered to be its 
essence. We find a similar behaviour as we go through a series of deeper 
essences and appearances. 
In particular as we come into the quantum domain , we find that it is 
necessary to state the relationship between essence and appearance explic­
itly by considering a totality which includes the measuring instruments as 
well as what is measured . In this case, the appearances show themselves 
in the instrument, while the essence is the whole quantum ontology of 
quantum fields and particles. The reason why the totality must explicitly 
include the appearances is that there is an irreducible participation of ob­
ject and observing apparatus in each other in the quantum domain, while 
in the domains treated by previous theories, the relation between essence 
and appearance can be neglected or else taken as only implicit. 
Because essence and appearance had thus to be considered as a totality, 
this created a serious problem for the extension of the traditional approach 
into the domain of the Ǡant um theory. When the quantum theory was first 
developed, people did not see how this question could be approached onto­
logically. Instead there was developed a basically epistemological approach 
of Bohr [6), Heisenberg and von Neumann in which the fundamental con­
cepts of the quantum theory were taken as representing only knowledge. 
The feeling that any other approach was impossible seems to have been 
grounded in the assumption that any ontological approach would have to 
have a final essence that was not dependent on anything else at all , so 
that it would never be necessary to consider essence and appearance as a 
totality, as we have done . 
To sum up, although each form of thought of the essence is an ap­
pearance, it also reflects a reality that is however always dependent for its 
existence as well as for its qualities and properties on broader contexts and 
deeper levels. This is one of the senses in which the theory is ontological, 
in spite of the fact that all thought gives appearances. In addition, our 
approach provides a reflection of reality that is in the form of a totality, 
including the measuring instruments along with everything else. This does 
not mean , of course, that it tells us everything about the universe or that 
it gives a final picture. Rather, as we shall bring out in more detail in the 
next chapter, one may here use the analogy of a hologram, in which any 
part of the record gives us information about the whole object rather than 
a part of it. This feature of our ontological approach is evidently especially 
important in cosmology and it is also important if it is ever our intention 
to understand the relation between the observer and the observed . 
In addition to all of this, our particular ontological interpretation has 

326 
The undivided un iverse 
the further advantage that it can be grasped more readily in an intuitive 
and imaginative way than is possible with a basically epistemological in­
terpretation such as, for example, that of Bohr. Besides, as we shall see in 
section 14.6 of this chapter, it makes possible certain kinds of extensions of 
the basic equations which would not be possible in a purely epistemological 
approach . Thus it opens the mind to exploration of new domains which 
would not be discernible without the ontological concepts. It is not that 
we want to dismiss the epistemological approach totally, but rather that 
we feel that both approaches have to be pursued and perhaps ultimately 
brought into relationship. 
Finally the view that our theories constitute appearances does not deny 
the independent reality of the universe as a whole. Rather it implies that 
even the appearances are part of this overall reality and make a contribution 
to it. What we emphasise is , however , that the content of the theory is not 
by itself the reality, nor can it be in perfect correspondence with the whole 
of this reality, which is infinite and unknown, but which contains even the 
processes that make theoretical knowledge possible. It is our view that this 
approach provides a more coherent understanding of the relationship of 
theory to the reality towards which it guides us, than do other approaches 
that are currently available . 
14.3 
The Ghirar di, Rimini a n d  Weber approach 
As we indicated in the introduction , a number of new ontological approaches 
in principle going beyond the current quantum theory have been suggested 
which have in common that they aim to preserve the notion that Hilbert 
space (with its natural extension to an infinity of dimensions) is the basis 
of the entire conceptual structure. One of the most interesting of these is 
the unified dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems of Ghirardi, 
Rimini and Weber (GRW) [3] . 
We give here a simplified treatment due to Bell [7] .  The wave function 
'!j;(r 1 , r2 , . . .  r n , t) is assumed to evolve according to Schrodinger's equation. 
However, there is a further process which reduces the spread of the wave 
function over each particle coordinate, r n , to something of the order of a 
new universal constant a . This is in a certain way similar to the process 
of collapse in the von Neumann interpretation, but the differences are that 
( 1) this is happening in general and not just in a measurement process, 
and (2) this process constitutes a well-defined extension of the quantum 
mechanical laws of the development of the wave function. 
A t  first sight it might seem that if a is chosen small enough to bring 
about the kind of localisation needed for a classical object, then this might 

Extension of ontological theories 
327 
contradict the quantum mechanical predictions of interference over fairly 
large distances. ( For a more detailed account of this point see Shimony [8] 
and Weinberg [9] .) However, it should be recalled that quantum mechanical 
interference properties over long distances have been extensively tested for 
the case of a single particle [10,1 1] and at most for a few particles [12] .  
We can avoid this difficulty by supposing that the rate of decay, A, 
depends on the number of particles , N ,  involved . Thus we can write A = 
N/r, where T is a characteristic time which is a new constant of nature. r 
can be chosen such that the rate of decay of the original wave function is 
negligible for a system of a few particles and quite rapid for systems with 
many particles, e.g. of the order of 1020 . 
To simplify the discussion, we assume a process in which the spread of 
the wave function is reduced to something of the order of a around a centre 
z which is distributed at random. For the n1" particle this process can be 
regarded as transforming the original wave function 1/J( r 1 ,  r2 , . . .  r n , t) into 
a new wave function 
( 1 4 . 1 )  
The factor f ( z) i s  normalised according to 
( 14 .2) 
GRW suggested that f(z) be a Gaussian, for example 
f ( z) = I< exp [-2:22 ] . 
(14.3) 
( 14 .4) 
The centre z is distributed at random with probability 1Rn (z ) l 2 . 
We are assuming that each particle is undergoing this process of nar­
rowing down the range of the wave function so that after a time T / N , the 
wave function will be reduced more or less to something having a range, 
a , for each particle. Interference will then be negligible beyond this range, 
but will be as predicted by quantum mechanics within this range , provided 
of course that we are considering times appreciably longer than T / N. It 
should be clear that the above assumptions will enable us to satisfy our re­
quirements that large scale systems (such as the observing apparatus) will 
be fairly localised , while systems of a few particles need not be localised. 

328 
The undivided universe 
It is possible now to show how the G RW approach allows a consistent 
treatment of the measurement process as a special case of the general pro­
cess in which the wave function of a system of many particles narrows down 
to a fairly well- defined region , As shown in chapter 2, section 2.4 ,  the wave 
'.unction . after the interaction between apparatus and the observed system, 
IS 
( 14,5) 
n 
where z represents the coordinates of the observed system (of which there 
are only a few) , while y1 , , , ,  y R represent all the internal co-ordinates of 
the apparatus , Y represents the centre of mass co-ordinate of the appa­
ratus which is directly observed at an essentially classical level ( e,g, the 
pointer position) ,  After the interaction is over the </>n do not overlap in 
the coordinate Y, but as pointed out in chapter 2, section 2.4, there is still 
potentiality for interference as long as we have a linear superposition of 
this kind , However, if we bring in the GRW process of narrowing down the 
wave function to something with a range of a and if the separation in the 
centre of mass coordinate , Y ,  of neighbouring wave packets is considerably 
greater than a, then this possibility of interference will be destroyed , 
To see how this happens we note that the </in and 1/Jn undergo indepen­
dent GRW processes and that the effect of this process on 1/Jn is negligible 
because there are only a few particles in the observed system, In general 
we may expect that the </>n to have had a fairly narrow range of YR even 
before the measurement took place and that this range will not change sig­
nificantly in the measurement process (which does not in general greatly 
affect the internal coordinates of the apparatus) , 
As we have pointed out earlier, it is only the spread of the centre of mass 
coordinate Y that is affected , The GRW process will cause the collapse of 
all but one of the </in to leave a single result </>m (y1 , , , Yr , Y) with a well­
defined 'pointer' reading Y ,  In this way we obtain a definite result, Clearly 
this process will not lead to paradoxes such as the Schrodinger cat paradox, 
If we consider an ensemble of experiments we will find that in some cases 
the wave function ( 14,5) will collapse to one packet and in other cases to 
another, so that we will be left with a random distribution of well-defined 
results, It is easily shown that the probability of the m1h result is ICm 12 , 
in agreement with the usual quantum mechanics, 
It is still necessary, however, to be sure that the GRW modification of 
the dynamics of microscopic constituents does not imply physically unac­
ceptable consequences for the dynamics of the whole system, G RW go into 
this question in some considerable detail, and show that no such unaccept­
able consequences will arise, In doing this, they are led to suggest values 

for the universal constants 
Extension of ontological theories 
329 
a 
10- 5 cm. 
T 
1016 sec 
Objects containing many particles will then be localised to within 10-5 
ems. A one-particle system will not be localised in less than someth ing of 
the order of 109 years. But a system of 1020 particles will be localised in 
10-4 secs . 
In comparison , our own approach introduces a random distribution of 
particle positions, C with a probability density equal to liP(Ol2 . Whether 
one regards the G RW approach as having a greater or lesser economy of 
assumptions depends primarily on whether or not we give first priority to 
retaining H ilbert space as the basic mode of expression of all concepts . 
However, we can add that thus far our approach is well defined and 
thoroughly worked out, whereas the assumptions of G RW have evidently a 
great deal of arbitrariness in them. Of course one might adopt the attitude 
that this arbitrariness may eventually be reduced by the development of 
further new ideas. But here one should note that it seems difficult to include 
the GRW approach in a relativistic context. For it has all the nonlocality 
of ordinary quantum theory and possibly some additional ones. Therefore 
it seems likely that further new developments of this approach may lead to 
the need to assume a deeper non-relativistic level , rather as we have had 
to do in our own interpretation as explained in chapter 12, section 12.8. 
Leggett (13] has yet another approach which is in considerable sympa­
thy with that of G RW. As we have already indicated in a previous chapter, 
he wants to introduce a new concept of complexity in the form of what 
he calls disconnectivity. In a macroscopic object it is to be expected that 
this disconnectivity is very large and he would anticipate that in such cases 
SchrOdinger 's equation should change significantly in such a way as to re­
move interference between macroscopically different states. However, he 
has not yet proposed a more definite form for such a theory because he 
wants to find some experimental evidence for a breakdown of qu antum 
mechanics in the macrodomain to guide his suggestions. 
14.4 
Stapp's suggestions for regarding quantum t heory as 
describing an actual process 
A rather different approach to an ontological theory of quantum mechanics 
has been suggested by Stapp (14]. (Stapp bases his approach on 5-matrix 
theory, but there seems to be no inherent necessity for doing so.) His aim is 
to develop a theory in which quantum mechanics would describe an actual 

330 
The undi11ided universe 
process taking place without any necessary reference to human observers. 
In doing this he is inspired by the ideas of Whitehead concerning nature as 
process. Whitehead [1 5] works in terms of the basic concept of an actual 
occassion , or as Stapp might call it, an actual event . In particular, that 
which is actual is represented , not by an infinitely thin space-like surface 
advancing through the space-time continuum, but rather by a sequence 
of actual processes, each of which refers to a bounded space-time region . 
In such a process a given event, n ,  is represented by a restriction on the 
set of classical fields allowed in the bounded space-time region Rn .  The 
basic concept is therefore neither becoming in three-dimensional space nor 
being in the four-dimensional world ,  but rather it is becoming in the four­
dimensional world .  
We have referred to regions of space-time Rn ,  but ultimately Stapp 
wants to derive even these from the quantum theory. He suggests this may 
be achieved in a manner mentioned in the previous chapter (section 13 .6) . 
He has shown [16] that the 'soft' photons emitted by matter have well­
defined 'classical' parts described by coherent states. As we have already 
said in a previous chapter (chapter 8), this shows that the quantum theory 
may contain a classical domain within it. Such a classical domain is what 
makes it possible to define the regions Rn in a physical way. 
It remains to define what is to be meant by an event within the process 
asumed by Stapp [14] .  He considers process to consist of a well-ordered 
sequence of actual events. Just prior to event n ,  there are several possibil­
ities of what may be actualised. Let these possibilities be labelled by the 
set en . Only one of these events will become actualised . Let it be called an . 
For each an , there is a corresponding region Rn .  Moreover for each possible 
event an , there is a projection operator Pn (an) which restricts the classi­
cal field inside the region Rn to some subset of the set of all conceivable 
clasical fields in Rn .  
Let S( en ) b e  the S-matrix subject to the condition that classical fields 
be limited to those allowed by the product of projection operators 
Let din be the initial density matrix and let d( en) be the density matrix 
transformed in the process of development described by the quantum the­
ory. This will give d(en) = S(en )d;nS+(en). Then the probability for the 
event en is asumed to be 
tr [d(en)] 
1: tr [d(eG)) . 
It is clear that Stapp's basic idea also defines everything within the 
framework of Hilbert space. A basic new assumption in his approach is 

Extension of ontological theories 
33 1 
that certain kinds of actual events, en , correspond to specifiable projection 
operators P(en ) and that statistical averages of any particular kind of se­
quence of such events will be determined in the way described above by 
averaging these operators with d;n , the initial density matrix of the uni­
verse. The assumption that events correspond to projection operators, even 
though these are not measured, is evidently something new, not contained 
in the current quantum theory. In contrast, in our interpretation we as­
sume, as we have already pointed out earlier, a particle position e with a 
probability density 11/1({)12 . As with the GRW approach, the decision as 
to which of these theories has a smaller number of hypotheses depends on 
whether or not we give a very high priority to taking Hilbert space as the 
basic concept. 
One of the principal difficulties with Stapp's proposal is that the concept 
of an event has not been very thoroughly developed . First of all Stapp has 
not provided a general criterion for the kinds of projection operators that 
could represent events, especially of how 'fine grained ' is the analysis that 
he will allow at this event level. (We shall discuss this question further in 
another context in the next section .) 
Next it seems that the 'classical' parts of quantum mechanics should be 
described in terms of the movement of fermionic particles as well as bosons. 
The classical context should also include large scale systems and perhaps 
even large molecules as well as a theory of soft gravitons which would be 
needed to establish the notion of metric as contributing to events. It is 
conceivable, as Stapp himself hopes, that further new ideas might meet 
at least some of these requirements.* Indeed in the next section we shall 
discuss certain proposals of Gell-Mann and Hartle which do start along 
these lines and go some way to developing a theory so as to deal with 
questions of this kind. 
14.5 
The cosmological approach of Gell- Mann and H artle 
Gell-Mann and Hartle [2] have independently suggested a theory along lines 
similar to that discussed in the previous section which aims to provide an 
interpretation that covers the whole cosmological context. 
These authors criticise traditional approaches in a way similar to that in 
which we do. In addition they especially emphasise the question of making 
an interpretation that is adequate for cosmology. In such a cosmological 
approach they say that there can be no fundamental division into observer 
•stapp [1 7] h M  made further suggestions along t hese lines in which t he event i• ultimately 
defined in consciousness . 

332 
The undivided universe 
and observed . Besides, there is no reason to assume a clasical world as 
fundamental or outside the basic quantum theory. 
They regard Everett [18] as the first one who suggested how to gener­
alise the conventional interpretation so as to apply quantum mechanics to 
cosmology. He did this by showing how an observer can be considered as 
part of the system and how the observer 's activities of measuring, record­
ing and calculating probabilities could be described in quantum mechanics 
along lines that we have d iscussed in the previous chapter. However, in 
agreement with what we have said there, they regard the Everett analysis 
as incomplete . Gell-Mann and Hartle feel that it does not adequately ex­
plain the existence of the classical world or the meaning of the 'branching' 
that replaces measurement in assigning probabilities. It was, they say, a 
theory of 'many worlds', but it did not explain sufficiently how they were 
defined or how they arose. 
In a short paper they briefly sketch their extension of the conventional 
formulation of quantum mechanics, which they claim meets these criti­
cisms [2] . They regard it primarily as "an attempt at extension , clari­
fication , and completion of the Everett interpretation" . They admit the 
research is far from complete, but they regard their paper as a sketch of 
how it may become so. 
We shall here give a summary of their general approach . 
14. 5. l  Histories 
The theory of Gell-Mann and Hartle [2] has to be understood , from the very 
outset, as dealing with nothing less than the entire history of the universe 
from the beginning to the end . However, to get on with the exposition, 
they allow themselves in this paper to ignore the first few moments and to 
start at a point at wh ich space, time and ordinary sorts of field variable are 
definable in their usual way. The initial quantum state of this universe is de­
scribed by some density matrix p . Mathematical elements describing more 
specific information are represented by operators 0( t) . They argue that it 
is sufficient to focus on projection operators P(t) representing properties 
that at the time t are either present or not . In this, their position is similar 
to that of Stapp [14) ,  discussed in the previous section , who also introduced 
projection operators, P(en ) ,  in a similar role. Like Stapp, Gell-Mann and 
Hartle consider time sequences of such projection operators, averaged over 
the initial density matrix of the universe. And like Stapp, they suggest 
a means of using these sequences to define a classical domain within the 
structure of Hilbert space. The main difference is that they develop their 
views more extensively and systematically, and show in more detail how 
such objectives might be realised . 

Extension of ontological theories 
333 
Stapp used projection operators corresponding to the quasi-classical co­
herent states of a field oscillator in order to represent possible sequences, 
of what he called actual events. Gell-Mann and Hartle use a different 
kind of projection operator for essentially the same purpose. What they 
do is to consider any one of the fields that are supposed to be basic in 
physics, e.g., as with Stapp, the electromagnetic . Their essential step is 
to obtain a classically adequate description of these fields represented by 
generalised coordinates Qi ( t) , not by using coherent states, but rather, by 
simply 'coarse-graining' the field variables defined, for example, at any point 
in space and time. Such coarse-graining only restricts their field values to a 
certain range, and says nothing about the further details within this range. 
To this end they introduce sets of projection operators [ P! (t) 2] which 
are unity in a given range of field variables, 6.¼ ,  and zero outside, where 
a denotes the range under consideration and k the particular set . These 
projection operators are expressed in terms of a 'square wave ' function of 
Qi(t) which is zero outside the range 6.¼ and unity inside. We denote 
this by B= (Qi). The corresponding matrix representation of the projection 
operator is then 
The whole set of projection operators is { Pt (t), P2k(t), . . . P!(t) } .  If the 
total set of ranges, a , covers all possible values of the field variables, they 
call this set exhaustive. An exhaustive set evidently need not be a complete 
set of operators, indeed it may involve few of them. 
They then go on to define sets of alternative histories. These consist of 
time sequences of exhaustive sets of alternative ranges, 
Such sequences provide coarse-grained descriptions of a set of possible his­
tories with coarse-graining of each actual event represented by 6.¼ and with 
the whole set given by 
A set of alternative histories is then obtained by allowing a1 . . .  ll'n to vary 
over all possible values. 
The extreme case of such a description is a completely fin e-grained his­
tory which is specified by giving a complete set of operators at all times. 
This sort of history is used in Feynman 's treatment of quantum mechanics 
in terms of a sum over histories, which begins by specifying the amplitude 
in terms of a particular basis of generalised coordinates. Gell-Mann and 

334 
The u ndivided universe 
Hartle suggest for this basis, the set of all fundamental field variables at all 
points of space. This amplitude is 
exp (iS [Qi(t)] / h) , 
where S is the action function wh ich is determined by the Hamilton ian H 
(or alternatively by the Lagrangian L). 
1 4 .  5 .  2 
Decohering h istories 
It is essential that completely fine-grained histories as defined in the previ­
ous section cannot consistently be assigned probabilities. The reason is that 
to do this would be incompatible with fundamental quantum mechanical 
properties such as two slit interference . It is the basic claim of Gell-Mann 
and Hartle that by suitably defin ing coarse-grained histories they can ob­
tain a consistent attribution of probabilities . 
The condition that two projection operators can represent two distinct 
posibilities for actual events is not only that they commute, but that 
their product P1 · P2 = 0. Thus we might require for alternat ive histories 
[P01] · [P0] = 0. But if we start from this requirement taken rigorously, we 
can never hope to achieve what Gell-Mann and Hartle set out to do be­
cause this set of operators is much too restricted . Their essential starting 
point is to note that all that is requ ired is to satisfy this condition for the 
actual intial state of the universe. Since by definition the universe cannot 
be in a state other than its actual one, we are not required to satisfy this 
condition for any other state . A sufficient condition for the decoherence 
of two alternative histories o:' and o: may then be obtained by integrating 
the projection operators [P01], [P0] with the density matrix of the universe. 
This will yield what we may call the decoherence functional D010: 
Do'o 
D ([Pa1], [Pa]) 
tr [P5, (tn) . . .  P),, (t i )pP), (ti )  . . .  P5 (tn)] . 
n 
I 
I 
n 
( 14.6) 
When the above is zero, the two sets of histories represented by o: ' and o: 
will then correspond to two possible alternatives. 
Gell-Man and Hartle argue however that even when D010 -:f 0, but is 
small , it is still possible, consistently, to regard o: and o: ' as alternative 
histories. But if we do this, then the probability rules will only be approx­
imately satisfied and the measure of the failure of the approximation will 
be indicated by the size of the off-diagonal elements. For example , in an 
arbitrary, but convenient way, we could define this measure more precisely 
as Tr [ID - Ddl2) where Dd is the diagonal part of D010 and the matrices 

Extension of ontological theories 
335 
should be thought of as on the space of very fine-grained histories. A set 
of coarse-grained histories can then be said to decohere to a certain degree 
of approximation when the off-diagonal elements of Da'a are sufficiently 
small, i.e. when Tr [ID - Ddl2] ':::'. 0. 
A further assumption is that under the above conditions the diagonal 
elements of Da'a are approximately equal to the probabilities P ([P0]) of 
the corresponding histories, or 
for each [Pa] in a set of approximate alternative histories. 
To sum up then, the smallness of the off-diagonal elements is assumed 
to be the condition for a consistent assignment of approximate probabilities 
while the diagonal elements are assumed to give their approximate values. 
14. 5. 3  O n  t h e  meaning of decoherence 
Gell-Mann and Hartle state that the (in general approximately) decoher­
ent histories are what we may discuss in giving a meaning to quantum 
mechanics. As they further say 
decoherence thus generalises and replaces the notion of 'mea­
surement' . . . .  Decoherence is a more precise, more objective, 
more observer independent idea . . . .  We may assign probabilities 
to various values of reasonable scale density fluctuations in the 
early universe, whether or not anything like a 'measurement' 
was carried out on them and certainly whether or not there was 
an 'observer' to do it. 
Measurements will then have to be seen as special cases of the universal 
process in which there is a 'measurement situtation ' such that certain ob­
jective and observer independent events in a given history are correlated to 
others in a different history, taking place in what we somewhat convention­
ally call a measuring apparatus. We shall return to this question later, but 
for the present we re-emphasise that measurements and observations play 
no fundamental role in the formulation of this theory. 
However , if this approach is to be carried out consistently, it is necessary 
to deal with a number of points that require clarification. To begin with , 
in principle, any set of projection operators might be thought of as suitable 
for defining decohering sets of alternative histories. ( Indeed if the subsets 
are exactly orthogonal, one can exhibit sets of histories that are exactly 
decoherent.) Which , among all these sets, are the ones that correspond to 
a sequence of actual events? It is important that we do not assume sets of 

336 
Th e undivided universe 
actual events that would imply a contradiction with the quantum theory 
in any domain in which it is known to apply. But if we can actually find 
a set of decoherent operators { P: ( t) } that define reasonable histories then 
it is clear that within the approximations that are being used , no statisti­
cal results of the theory will be contradicted by the asumption that the 
{ P: ( t)} represent alternative possibilities of sequences of actual events. For 
such a contradiction would arise only if there were significant 'interference 
properties '  between these sequences and these would imply coherence. 
This however raises the question of whether we can show that the theory 
actually implies sets of decoherent histories of the kind that we require . The 
decoherence functional depends, as has been seen , on the initial density 
matrix of the universe, p ,  but in addition it depends on the Hamiltonian 
H . For we have to follow the time-evolution of the operator P;(t) in the 
Heisenberg representation back to the time of the origin of the universe, 
using the formula 
P; (t) = e -iHt P:(o)eiHt , 
where P: (t) is the projection operator at the time t and P:(o) is the cor­
responding operator at the time t0. 
In effect the above procedure suggests a possible answer to the basic 
question that was raised in the many-worlds interpretation , i .e . what de­
termines the preferred basis for the various branches that are to be realised 
in the process of proliferation of the many universes? The new idea here 
is that it is the evolution of the universe from its initial conditions which 
should provide this determination , and that this would remove an impor­
tant ambiguity in the many-worlds approach . 
It is clear th at we cannot in the foreseeable future hope to carry out 
for the universe a calculation of all decohering sets of alternative histories. 
What Gell-Mann and Hartle do is to investigate specific illustrative exam­
ples of decoherence in more restrictive circumstances referring to the works 
of Joos and Zeh [19], Zurek [20] and Caldeira and Leggett [2 1] as well as 
Feynman and Vernon [22] . These authors investigate what is called dy­
namic decoherence, i .e .  that which is brought about through the dynamic 
evolution of the quantum state. All of them deal with simplified systems 
such as a single harmonic oscillator with coordinates x coupled to a large set 
of oscillators constituting an 'environment' .  The general result is that two 
histories corresponding to different trajectories, x( t) and x'( t) , will decohere 
in very short times for typical situations such as having the 'environmental' 
oscillators in an initial state of thermal equilibrium. 
Gell-Mann and Hartle feel that these illustrative examples made it very 
plausible that decoherence will be widespread in the universe for the familiar 
'classical' variables. For example this would explain why we do not see the 

Extension of ontological theories 
337 
track of a projectile spreading out into quantum superpositions in its orbit. 
14. 5. 4  
Th e quasi- classical world 
Ordinarily when we use coarse-graining, we are introducing something de­
pendent on a context related either to our sensory perceptions or to our 
instruments, communications or records, all of which are characterised by 
some kind of ignorance resulting in some incomplete specification of the 
system. Yet as Gell-Mann and Hartle say, we have the impression that 
the universe exhibits a finer grained , presumably objective and observer­
independent , set of decohering histories. These should make possible the 
definition of what they call a quasi-classical world governed approximately 
by classical laws. (This may be compared with our manifest world discussed 
in chapter 8.) 
Gell-Mann and Hartle feel that this quasi-classical world should follow 
from the initial conditions of the universe and the Hamiltonian, with the 
aid of the projection operators that we have been discussing in the previous 
sections. To show this, they would like to find a way to make the question 
of the existence of a quasi-classical domain into a calculable question in 
quantum cosmology. For this they need criteria to measure how close a set 
of h istories comes to constituting a quasi-classical domain . As they state 
in their article, they have not solved this problem to their satisfaction, but 
they discuss some ideas that they hope may contribute towards its solution . 
To explain what Gell-Mann and Hartle have done in this regard , we note 
that their idea of a quasi-classical history is closely related to that of a broad 
wave packet in ordinary quantum mechanics. As is well known , the centre of 
such a packet follows the laws of classical physics, while the packet spreads 
out very slowly, so that it resembles somewhat a classical particle moving 
through space, at least for some time. However, Gell-Mann and Hartle 
describe this process differently by means of a set of projection operators 
P!(t1 )P!(t2) . . .. For the simple case of a free particle, for example, it 
is easy to show that the product P!(t i )P: (t2) is large only when P!(t 2) 
represents a coarse-grained region whose centre is displaced relative to that 
corresponding to P!(ti )  by p(t2 - t1)/m (where p/m is the mean velocity 
of the wave packet as determined by the wave function of the system and 
ultimately by the density matrix of the universe) . It is clear then that 
products like Pǧ ( t 1 )P! (t2) . . . will be large only for histories in which the 
centres of the regions concerned are located more or less along the classical 
trajectories implied by the initial wave packet 
What has been gained by this procedure is that we have the possibility of 
obtaining a definite sequence of actual events (defined within the range Ll8 ) 
in spite of the spread of the wave packets. However, what we in fact get is a 

338 
The undivided universe 
whole set of possible sequences of actual events in which the probability will 
be large only for those sequences that are close to the classical trajectories. 
It is along these lines that Gell-Mann and Hartle would like to show 
that one can construct a whole quasi-clasical world corresponding to such 
histories. But there are certain problems that must be faced in order to do 
this. First of all , as we have already remarked , it is necessary not to make 
the history so fine-grained that the assumption of their existence would sig­
nificantly disagree with the predictions of the current quantum mechanics 
in the domain that the latter has found to be valid . This can be achieved 
by going to extremely coarse-grained projection operators , because, as is 
well known, such coarse graining will in general make off-diagonal elements 
of matrices such as Do'o small. On the other hand, we must not have a 
graining so coarse that it does not define the classical domain to any sig­
nificant extent. That is to say it must remain fine-grained enough to allow 
for a clasical description that would not be lost in total ambiguity. So we 
have to asume that the degree of coarse graining is somehow objectively 
determin ate at least within an order of magnitude as lying somewhere be­
tween the two extremes indicated above. This means, of course, that it is 
being assumed that quantum mechanics does break down when we reach 
this quasi-classical coarse-grained level. But we further assume that the 
point of breakdown is such that quantum mechanics holds for all practical 
purposes. 
Gell-Mann and Hartle are not satisfied with assuming that there is a 
simple universal coarse graining that is fixed , the same for all circumstances. 
We can see a reason for this, for example, by considering that systems 
at high temperature can be given a much more fine grained description 
than is possible for systems at low temperatures without introducing any 
practically observable deviations from the quantum laws. Gell-Mann and 
Hartle have therefore tried to find a universal function to express their 
criterion in such a way that it could adapt to all changing circumstances 
that could arise on various branches of the possible histories of the universe. 
To this end they considered various information theoretic measures of what 
they call the 'classicity' of a given domain, which they hope will ultimately 
yield the precise definition of a quasi-classical world as a whole. 
However , as we have already pointed out, they do not feel that, as yet, 
they have solved this problem to their satisfaction . But even if they could 
solve it, it would still require a basic new asumption in their approach going 
beyond current quantum theory. For no matter how subtle and variable 
their criterion for classicity may turn out to be, it will still have to have 
some kind of scale factor that determines the actual degree of objective 
coarse graining of the clasical world under any given set of circumstances. 
This world corresponds in some rough way to a similar asumption that has 

Extension of ontological thwnes 
339 
been made by GRW. For they too have to assume that quantum mechanics 
breaks down at some level, but in a way that is unimportant for all practical 
purposes. 
This sort of requirement is also characteristic of all forms of the many­
worlds interpretation as Deutsch [1] has indeed suggested .  For in assum­
ing a preferred basis in which the universe actually splits or in which the 
awareness of the observer similarly splits, they are inevitably implying a 
breakdown of the quantum theory, though this may be unimportant for all 
practical purposes. 
14- 5. 5 
Measurement and observation 
As we have pointed out earlier , Gell-Mann and Hartle regard measurement 
as a special case of a general process in the universe. When a correlation 
exists between the ranges of values of two operators of a quasi-classical 
world , there is what they call a 'measurement situation '. If the correlation 
has probability near unity, then the range of values of the one can be 
deduced from that of the other. All of this is, of course, objective and 
independent of the observer. 
The above however discusses only measurements in the quasi-classical 
world . What about measurements of essentially quantum mechanical op­
erators such as spin? Of course the spin states will not in general decohere 
by themselves. But in a measurement situation the different spin states are 
correlated with different classical histories. And these latter, of course, do 
decohere . The decoherence of the overall state will thus bring about the 
decoherence of the spin states that have been measured . This is very simi­
lar to what happens in our own interpretation , in which the non-overlap of 
the apparatus wave functions guarantees that there will be no interference 
between the spin states. In both cases the usual rules for probability will 
be recovered. 
In the theory of Gell-Mann and Hartle, the observer is discussed in much 
the same way as was done in the Everett interpretation, except that all is 
now treated in a cosmological context. The observer 's memory, awareness, 
etc. should, in principle, be included in the density matrix of the universe 
and it should also have some representation in terms of operators in the 
quasi-classical world. However, it is not enough to consider what happens 
at a given moment or period of history. It is necessary to consider how a 
set of observers might have evolved from the initial state of the universe. 
To discuss this question, Gell-Mann and Hartle refer to an observer as an 
"information gathering and utilising system (IGUS)" . They claim that such 
a system can in principle be treated in terms of quantum mechanics as these 
authors have formulated it. That is to say, in some form of approximation ,  

340 
The undivided universe 
no matter how crude . an IGUS is said to employ this form of quantum 
mechanics in a self-referential way. 
The possibility of this is based on the assumption that memory content ,  
and that to which i t  refers ,  are correlated b y  the laws of quantum theory as 
applied in this cosmological context. It is further assumed by the authors 
that these laws provide for the evolution of IGUSs in such a way that 
these latter can make predictions and draw further inferences about the 
probabilities of coarse-grained histories. It is argued that this capacity was 
maintained and developed because it was favourable to their survival. 
The reason why JG USs focus on decohering variables is that, at least 
within this theory, these are the o n ly variables for which predictions can 
be made. In addition t hey focus on the histories of a quasi-classical world , 
because these present enough regu larity over time to permit prediction by 
relatively rudimentary algorithms that are easily evolved . Gell-Mann and 
Hartle thus effectively extend Darwinism and propose a possible basis for 
it in the laws of quantum mechanics. 
If there are many significantly different quasi-classical worlds (as seems 
to be suggested in the many-universes point of view) one should better say 
that the IG US evolves to exploit a particular quasi-classical world or a set 
of such worlds. This implies, of course, that the IG US. including the human 
being, occupies no special place and plays no preferred role in the laws of 
physics .  (This approach is in some sense closely related to certain forms of 
the anthropic principle [23] .) 
Bringing in the evolution of the IGUS plays a key part in how the theory 
of Gell-Mann and Hartle deals with measurement situations. For example, 
they consider the mutually exclusive character of simultaneous position 
and momentum measurements. What this means in their point of view is 
that the history in which an observer, as part of the universe , sets up a 
measurement correlation to the momentum, p ,  and one in wh ich he does 
this for the position , q, are represented by two sets of decohering operators 
which are, however, mutually exclusive a ltern atives. (The decoherence is 
established by interacting with a thermal bath or with the 3° J( background 
radiation or with something similar .) Since these are mutually exclusive 
alternative possibilities for the universe as a whole, only one of them can 
be realised at a time in the development of the universe. Or more precisely, 
only one of them can arise on a particular branch of the evolution of the 
universe as a whole. They say however that "the choice of branch may 
ultimately be traceable to a quantum fluctuation that sets in motion a 
chain of events leading to one measurement situation or the other. (Some 
have even suggested that the human subjective impression of free will may 
be traceable to statistical or quantum fluctuations.)" 
To present these ideas more vividly, we may say that, according to this 

Extension of ontological theories 
34 1  
theory, the universe evolved first t o  give rise to matter, then to life, and 
ultimately to human beings along with their societies, sciences, measuring 
instruments etc. Eventually in this evolution there appeared a physicist 
who set up a momentum measuring device and established a correlation 
between the subsequent history of this process and the momentum of a 
quantum system at the time t. It seems inescapable that the physicist's 
impression that he freely choose to set this measuring instrument up would 
have had to be illusory at least in terms of this theory. For in this theory 
nothing whatsoever can happen unless it is part of the evolution of a suitable 
branch of the history of the universe as a whole. (Therefore we can see no 
reason why the authors have attributed this kind of conclusion to 'some' 
and have not stated what they themselves believe in this regard .) 
Similar considerations may be applied to the EPR-type of experiment. 
For example, at some part of the evolution of the universe, there may arise 
a molecule of spin zero, constituted of two atoms of spin h/2, along with a 
physicist who sets up an instrument designed to disintegrate the molecule 
and to measure suitable components of the spins of the two atoms. The fact, 
for example, that he has apparently 'chosen' to measure the z-component 
of one of them was somehow implicit from the very early phases of the 
universe . Once this 'choice' began to unfold from the primeval explosion, 
then there could never be any question of what would happen if the universe 
had developed in such a way as to bring about a measurement of some other 
component of the spin . 
Recall however that the paradoxical features of the EPR experiment 
arose because one assumed that before the measurement took place, it was 
always possible for the observer to 'choose' an arbitrary component of the 
spin (see chapter 2) . If this choice has no meaning then all the conclusions 
commonly drawn from the EPR experiment will not follow. For example, 
the same quantum fluctuation from which emerged the physicist 's choice 
to measure the z-component of the spin of one of the atoms, will also have 
given rise to the choice to measure a certain component of the spin of the 
second particle along with the correlation of the results of the two mea­
surements. Or as Bell has put it, there is a complete 'rapport' established 
at the very beginning of the universe between the net results and the total 
measurement situation including the physicists who set the experiment up 
and carry it out. Some people have called this sort of situation the denial 
of the counterfactual [24] . But what the theory of Gell-Mann and Hartle 
adds is an explanation showing why this denial follows necessarily from 
their model of the universe. 

342 
The u nd1111ded universe 
1{ 5. 6 
Co mpanson with our approach 
There are certain important similarities between our approach and that of 
Gell-Mann and Hartle, as well as, of course, important differences. One of 
the key similarities is that both approaches agree that the wave function (or 
the density matrix) is not a complete description of reality. Thus we bring 
in what we have called 'beables ', which are either precisely defined particle 
trajectories or precisely defined motions of the field variables. Gell-Mann 
and Hartle bring in their coarse-grained projection operators out of which 
they construct sets of alternative histories . Let us recall that most of the 
unsatisfactory features of the conventional interpretation (which requires 
the complete linearity of the wave equation ) arise from the assu mption that 
the wave function (or the density matrix) provides a complete description 
of reality. It is this assumption that (in the context of linearity) requires 
us to postulate the collapse of the wave function with all its attendant 
paradoxical features, that have been discussed throughout the book . (Of 
course, if the wave equation is non-linear, as in the approach of GRW, 
paradox is avoided and the 'collapse' is explained in another way. ) 
A second key similarity in the two approaches is that, in both of them, 
the clasical world is explained as part of the overall quantum world rather 
than simply assumed . Without such a possibility, we have to suppose that 
the universe is split into two qualitatively distinct parts even though we 
also tacitly assume that somehow the properties of the classical world are 
determined in principle from the quantum laws. To treat the classical level 
as flowing out of the qu antum laws is clearly necessary if we are to consider 
the un iverse as a single whole . For such a theory requires that the properties 
of matter at the classical level shall be implicit in the basic general laws 
which are actually quantum mechanical. In particular such an approach 
is evidently needed if we are to include the process of measurement itself 
within the theory in a coherent way. 
The main difference in the two points of view is that we bring in the 
concept of actual beables, e .g. particles and fields , while Gell-Mann and 
Hartle introduce their coarse-grained projection operators. A key point 
here is that although their projection operators are new concepts relative to 
the quantum theory in its current generally accepted form, they are never­
theless, as we have indicated earlier, still expressible as operators defined 
on a Hilbert space. On the other hand , our particle and field variables 
are not expressed as such operators in Hilbert space. Rather they are new 
concepts going outside this framework of Hilbert space altogether. 
In our approach once we have assumed particle and field beables, no fur­
ther fundamental assumptions are needed , nor as we have seen , are there 
serious problems involving the basic principles. Indeed even the probability 

Extension of ontolo9ica/ theories 
343 
assumption may be derived , as in chapter 9, either from the chaotic char­
acter of trajectories in the many-body system or from a stochastic process. 
The quasi-classical world (which in chapter 8 we have called the mani­
fest world) comes out simply and naturally as that domain in which the 
quantum potential can be neglected. There is no sharp break between the 
quantum world and the classical world, but only a continual increase in 
the 'classicity' of the behaviour , as we approach the domains in which the 
quantum potential becomes less and less important. 
On the other hand in the approach of Gell-Mann and Hartle, the simple 
assumption that sequences of projection operators correspond to actual 
histories is not enough . In addition , as we have seen , one has to assume 
an objective limit to the degree of fine grainedness of these operators. And 
besides, there is still the unresolved problem for finding a functional form 
for this limit that is suitable for all circumstances. 
A further conceptual unclarity of their approach is that the reality status 
of the wave function or the density matrix is , at best, highly ambiguous. It 
would seem from what they have written that everything that is actual and 
real is contained in the quasi-classical world. This seems strange because 
all the basic physical properties do in fact come out of the wave functions 
(or the density matrix). Should not this therefore be regarded as a key 
factor of reality (as indeed it is in our interpretation)? 
This ambiguity in the reality status of the wave function (or density 
matrix) is in a way a residue of the separation of the quantum world of 
the wave function and the classical world of the measuring instrument that 
was originally assumed by von Neumann (see chapter 2) . The basic role of 
the observing instrument is now replaced by a similar role of the coarse­
grained projection operators. Of course , the ambiguity in the cut between 
the measuring instrument and what is observed, has been removed because 
the latter has been given a universal significance (i.e. the universe contains 
a set of coarse-grained projection operators that in effect are constantly 
carrying out 'measurements' in a unique and objective way). Nevertheless 
there still remains the fundamental split between the two kinds of reality 
which many would feel to be undesirable. 
A further key point which we emphasise once again here, is that our 
approach has the advantage of being much more capable of being grasped 
intuitively and imaginatively than is that of Gell-Mann and Hartle. 
As we pointed out in chapter 1 3 ,  section 1 3 .2, the view shared by most 
of the protagonists of the many-worlds point of view is that they make no 
further serious assumptions. This view seems to be based on the extremely 
high priority that they give to retaining Hilbert space as the basic set of 
terms for the expression of all concepts. As a result, all the other assump­
tions that we have detailed in the previous chapter and in this section of the 

344 
The und1t11ded un iverse 
present chapter, do not seem to be very important . We acknowledge the 
posible value of basing a theory solely on Hilbert space concepts and al­
though we shall indeed explore such a theory in the next chapter, we still do 
not feel that Hilbert space has such advantages (e.g. beautiful symmetries) 
as to imply the necessity of giving this concept so overriding a value. It is in 
our view very important to keep the options open to allow the explanation 
of all approaches , as long as these have certain specific advantages such as 
those that have been outlined here in the exposition of our interpretation . 
In addition it should be kept in mind that such new approaches allow new 
forms of idea to be explored , some of which we shall discuss in the next 
sec ti on , as well as in the next chapter. 
Finally we would like to call attention to a more subtle difference be­
tween our approach and that of Gell-Mann and Hartle. In our interpreta­
tion , it is always, in principle , possible that there may be a modification 
coming from outside the total framework that we consider. For example, 
in the EPR experiment we supposed the observer could arbitrarily choose 
to reorientate the apparatus while the atoms were separating. Let us recall 
that it is this assumption which originally made the EPR experiment seem 
paradoxical and which ultimately led to the conclusion that there had to 
be a nonlocal connection between the atoms. In this case the modification 
might have been due to what has been called the 'free will' of the experi­
menter. But more generally, the central question here is not that of free 
will , but rather that of whether anything is possible that has a certain inde­
pendence of the quantum mechanical framework which we are discussing. 
The asumption of free will would imply such a case of independence. But , 
of course, there could be all kinds of new levels of law, not only in physics 
but also, perhaps wherever life, mind , society etc. are involved . In other 
words, as we have brought out in section 14.2, there is no valid reason for 
asuming that all existence can be reduced to the laws of the quantum 
theory. 
On the other hand, in the interpretation of Gell-Mann and Hartle it is, as 
we have seen , impossible for anything to happen that could not in principle 
be covered by some kind of extension of this theory based on the concept of 
Hilbert space plus the notion of the evolution of the universe that they have 
proposed .  From this it follows that everything that could happen would , 
in principle, be implicit from the earliest phases of the universe. It is this 
feature that leads to the conclusion that nothing independent of the whole 
scheme can come in to alter the course of cosmic evolution (which latter 
leads even to the determination of the orientation of a piece of apparatus 
as something that was implicit in the quantum fluctuations of the early 
universe) . As we have seen it is this feature that removes nonlocality, but 
the cost is a closure of our thinking, which , in our view, has no ground in fact 

Extension of ontological theories 
345 
and which may limit the development of our ideas in a counterproductive 
way. 
14.6 
Extension of our approach beyond the domain of current 
quantum theory 
Thus far we have discussed a number of suggestions for ontological interpre­
tations that go beyond the current quantum theory at least conceptually 
but nevertheless recover the latter as something that will be valid for all 
practical purposes .  In this section we shall discuss some suggestions of our 
own in which we show how our proposals can also be extended beyond 
the current quantum theory. However, these extensions are not just purely 
conceptual but we show how in principle they can lead in new domains to 
qualitatively new theories and correspondingly new experimental implica­
tions. 
The chief difficulty in carrying out this sort of extension of our approach 
is that there is such a wealth of possibilities and such a dearth of experi­
mental clues that might narrow them down. For example, in our basic 
equations for a trajectory of a particle, 
dp 
dt 
p 
- V(V + Q) 
VS, 
it would be possible to bring in arbitrary forces, F, to obtain 
dp 
= -V( V  + Q) + F 
dt 
as well as arbitrary additions, A ,  to the guidance relations to yield 
Any such changes could in principle fundamentally alter the consequences of 
the theory. Even though they might be chosen so that under conditions thus 
far investigated, the changes would be negligible for all practical purposes, 
the possibility would still be open that under new conditions these changes 
could no longer be neglected. 
Other changes of this sort that might be considered would be to make 
the Schrodinger wave equation nonlinear and to introduce terms that would 
relate the Schrodinger wave function to the particle positions. (Again in 
such a way that significantly new results would follow only in new domains 
not yet investigated. )  

346 
The u ndit•ided universe 
One way to make Schrodinger's equation dependent on the particle po­
sitions (so that there would be a two-way relationship between wave and 
particle) can be seen by considering equation ( 14. 1 ) .  In this equation , we 
can regard r n  as the actual position of the n1h particle. From the same 
arguments as apply to the GRW approach ,  it would follow that the overall 
wave function would tend to 'collapse' towards the actual particle positions, 
so that, in a large scale system, the empty wave packets of our interpreta­
tion would tend to disappear. 
Without some kind of experimental clue, we are at a loss in this sort of 
situation as to how to proceed. However, there have been a number of cases 
in the history of physics in which theoretical questions provided useful clues 
long before experimental physics was able to do so. A case in point is just 
the atomic theory of Democritus which we discussed earlier in chapter 2, 
section 2.8 as well as section 14.2 of this chapter. 
The idea of Democritus was inspired by a consideration of a philosoph­
ical paradox in the very notion of movement , which was shown by Zeno 
and other members of the Eleatic school . They demonstrated logical incon­
sistencies, not only in the idea of movement itself, but also in the idea of 
an empty space in which movement could take place . From their demon­
strations they concluded that only being is and that nonbeing is n ot, from 
which it followed that the concepts of becoming along with those of move­
ment and empty space had no meaning. 
Through contemplation of this paradox, Democritus was led to a reso­
lution . He proposed that being was discontinuous in the form of distinct 
and separated atoms, each of which was an indivisible and eternal being. 
Democritus thus retained , in a certain restricted way, the Eleatic concept 
of being. But he then postulated that there was an empty space in which 
these atomic beings could move in such a way that the collective aspec:t of 
their motion then explained the large scale properties of apparently contin­
uous matter with its continuous changes. On the other hand if we suppose 
that matter was truly continuous rather than only apparently so, then, as 
the Eleatics showed , there was no way in which its movement and trans­
formation could have meaning. 
One could , in principle, have seen at that time that the experimental 
detection of atoms depended basically on two related ways in which the 
laws of continuous matter could fail , firstly because atoms had a definite 
size and secondly because they had some non-zero free path between their 
successive collisions. These were , in fact, actually the ways in which the 
atomic theory was eventually verified experimentally. 
Our proposed ontological explanation of the quantum theory has, as 
we have seen, also led to a certain paradox. For it implies nonlocality 
and this would seem to contradict relativity which is regarded as a theory 

Extension of ontological theories 
347 
that is equally as fundamental as quantum theory. But as we have seen 
in chapter 12, section 12.7, it is possible to propose a deeper theory of 
the individual quantum process which is not relativistically invariant and 
which nevertheless leads to Lorentz invariant consequences for all statistical 
results, as well as for the large scale manifest world. In this theory there 
is a preferred coordinate frame in which the instantaneous transmission 
of impulses is in principle possible , so that there is no contradiction with 
nonlocality for individual quantum processes. In other words, we say that 
underlying the level in which relativity is valid there is a subrelativistic 
level in which it is not valid even though relativity is recovered in a suitable 
statistical approximation as well as in the large scale manifest world. 
In our discussion of this idea we have already suggested one way in which 
the theory might imply new experimental consequences. Thus, although 
there is no inherent limitation to the speed of transmission of impulses in 
this subrelativistic level, it is quite possible that quantum nonlocal con­
nections might be propagated , not at infinite speeds, but at speeds very 
much greater than that of light. In this case, as explained in chapter 12, 
we could expect observable deviations from the predictions of the current 
quantum theory (e.g. by means of a kind of extension of the Aspect-type 
experiment) . 
It would seem then that already in this case a subrelativistic level would 
simultaneously be one that goes beyond the current quantum theory. But 
the notion of a general subquantum mechanical level would have to go be­
yond the current quantum theory in a much more thoroughgoing way. To 
explore such a possibility it is useful to consider once again the stochastic 
form of our ontological approach . We recall that in this approach a particle 
follows a trajectory which is random, but which is modified by a suitable 
osmotic velocity along with the action of the quantum potential. At the 
level of Brownian motion of atoms, for example, similar random trajectories 
are regarded as approximations to actual trajectories in which this random­
ness does not prevail at indefinitely short distances. Rather there exists a 
characteristic length , the mean free path, below which simple causal laws 
begin to have a dominant effect . This free path reveals itself in many ex­
periments, e.g. those of diffusion , conductivity of heat, etc . Similarly we 
may propose that in our theory there is a minimum free·path below which 
the trajectory ceases to be random. As the atomic free path is the first sign 
of a 'sub continuous ' domain in which the laws of continuous matter would 
break down, so the free path in our trajectories would be the first sign of 
a subquantum domain in which the laws of quantum theory would break 
down . It is implied of course that this would begin to occur for wavelengths 
of the order of the 'free path'. 
The next sign of a breakdown of the quantum theory would be the 

348 
The undivided univeru 
discovery of some yet smaller dimension whose role might be analogous to 
the dimensions of an atom in the atomic explanation of continuous matter. 
We do not as yet know what this dimension is, but it seems reasonable 
to propose that it could be of the order of the Planck length, where, in 
any case, we can expect that our current ideas of space-time and quantum 
theory might well break down. The 'free path ' would then be some multiple 
of this length. 
At present further progress only seems to be p08sible through the use of 
the imagination to suggest new concepts that might permit a more precise 
formulation of these ideas. In this regard the situation is not very different 
from what it is in string theory, which is at present guided by speculative 
use of mathematical concepts, that also have little or no contact with ex­
periment . As we have pointed out in section 12.8 of chapter 12, it took over 
2000 years before the atomic theory of Democritus could achieve a more 
precise formulation. But we may reasonably hope that with the more rapid 
progress of science in the present era, it will take considerably less time. 
14. 7 
References 
1 .  D. Deutsch , Int. J. Theor. Phys. 24, 1-4 1  ( 1985) . 
2. M. Gell-Mann and J .  B. Hartle, 'Quantum Mechanics in the Light of 
Quantum Cosmology', in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Found. of Quantum 
Mechanics, ed. S. Kobyashi , Physical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1989. 
3. G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini and T. Weber, Phys. Rev. 034 , 470-49 1 
(1986). 
4. D. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, London , 1984. 
5. D. Bohm, The Special Theory of Relativity, Addison-Wesley, New 
York , 1989. 
6. N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human I<nowledge, Science Editions, 
New York, 1961 , 63-64. 
7. J .  S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1 987. 
8. A. Shimony, Phys. Rev. 20A , 394-396 ( 1979) .  
9 .  S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 , 485-488 ( 1989). 

ErttnJion of ontological tla eoriea 
349 
IO. C .  G. Shull, D. K .  Atwood , J. Arthur and M .  A. H orne, Plara. Ret1. 
Lett. 44, 765-768 ( 1 980) .  
1 1 .  J .  J .  Bolli nger e t  al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1 031-1034 ( 1989). 
12. V. Paraman an d a  and D. K .  B u t t ,  J. PhyJ. G13, 449-452 ( 1987). 
13. A. J .  Leggett ,  Prog. Th eo. Phys. Supp. 69, 80- 100 ( 1 980). 
14. H .  P .  Stapp , ' Einstein Time an d P rocess Time ' ,  in Ph yJ1cJ a n d  the 
Ultimate Significa n ce of Time, ed . D. R. G riffin, State University 
Press, New York ,  1986, 264-270 . 
15. A. N .  Whitehead , QED. Process and Reality, Princeton University 
Press , Princeton , New Jersey, 1985. 
16. H . P. Stapp , Ph ys. Rev. D28, 1 386 ( 1983) . 
17. H. P. Stap p ,  'Quant um Measurement and the Mind-Brain Con nec­
tion ' ,  in Symposium on the Foundations of Modern Physics, ed . P. 
Lahti an d P. Mittelstaedt , World Scientifi c ,  Singapore , 1990, 403-
424. 
18. H. Everet t ,  Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454-462 ( 1 957) .  
19. E .  Joos and H .  D. Zeh ,  Zeit. Phys. B 5 9 ,  223 ( 1985). 
20. W. Zurek, in Non-equilibrium Quantum Statistical Physics, ed . G . 
Moore an d M .  Scully, Plenum P ress , New York ,  1984. 
2 1 .  A. 0 .  Caldeira and A .  J .  Leggett ,  Physica 1 2 1 A ,  587 ( 1983) . 
22. R. P. Feynman and J .  R. Vernon , A nn. Phys. (N. Y.) 24, 1 1 8 ( 1 963) . 
23. J . D. B arrow an d F. J . Tippler, The A n thropic Cosmological Pnn c1 -
ple, Oxford University Press, Oxford , 1 986. 
24. B. d 'Esp agnat , Phys. Reports 1 1 0 ,  20 1 ( 1984) . 

Chapter 15 
Quantum theory and the implicate order 
1 5 . 1  
Introduction 
Throughout this book we have thus far been concerned mainly with showing 
that a consistent ontological interpretation of the quantum theory as it now 
stands is possible. In the previous chapter, however, we raised the question 
of going beyond the current quantum theory and in the last section we 
sketched certain more definite proposals for doing this. These proposals 
however still involve introducing the concept of a particle, in addition to 
that of the wave function . As we pointed out there, this implies that we 
go outside the notion of expressing all basic concepts in terms of Hilbert 
space. In the present chapter we shall begin by exploring a new way of 
understanding the quantum theory and going beyond it which does not go 
out of Hilbert space. Nevertheless it does not set aside the work that we 
have done thus far , but rather it also includes the description of the particle 
trajectory within the framework of Hilbert space. 
The basic idea is to introduce a new concept of order, which we call the 
implicate order or the enfolded order (1] .  This is to be contrasted with our 
current concepts of order which are based on the ideas of Descartes who 
introduced coordinate systems precisely for the purpose of describing and 
representing order in physical process. The Cartesian grid (extended to 
curvilinear coordinates) ,  which describes what is essentially a local order, 
has been the one constant feature of physics in all the fundamental changes 
that have happened over the past few centuries. In the quantum domain 
however this order shows its inadequacy, because physical properties cannot 
be attributed unambiguously to well-defined structures and processes in 
space-time while remaining within Hilbert space. Thus, for example, the 
uncertainty principle implies that it is not in general possible to give a 
definite space-time order to the motion of a particle in its trajectory. The 
fact that we nevertheless still use Cartesian coordinates, then, leads to 
350 

Quantum theorr anti the implicate onler 
351 
& certain difficulty in thinking clearly about the subject. A s  we pointed 
out in the previous ch apter, this is generally avoided by sticking to the 
mathematical equations and by saying that , in theoretical physics, these 
latter are basically what we are talking about, so that unclaritie. in physical 
concepts need not disturb us . 
What we are prop01ing here is that this disparity between physical con­
cepts (e .g . particle, wave, position ,  momentum) and the implications of 
the mathematical equations arises because the physical concepts are insep­
arably involved with the Cartesian notion of order, and this violate& the 
essential content of quantum mechanics. What we need is a notion of order 
for all our concepts, both physical and mathematical, which coheres with 
this content. In this chapter we shall explore how such coherence may be 
realised with the aid of the notion of the implicate order which will be 
developed here . 
In some ways this step is similar to that taken in the development of 
relativity, which likewise introduced new notions of order, e.g. with regard 
to simultaneity and also with regard to curvilinear coordinates. In relativ­
ity however strict continuity and locality are still maintained. But in the 
implicate order even these will have to be recovered as approximations and 
limiting cases. 
1 5 . 2  
Relativity a n d  quantum theory as indicators o f  a new 
order for physics 
It is generally agreed that neither special relativity nor general relativ­
ity have been united with quantum theory in a fully consistent way To 
be sure we do have relativistic quantum field theory and with the aid of 
renormalisation techniques, this gives a wide range of correct predictions. 
Nevertheless the fact remains that strictly speaking the present theory im­
plies various kinds of infinities and that the removal of these infinities by 
renormalisation algorithms is, logically considered, an arbitrary modifica­
tion of the original basic principles. No new principles have been suggested 
up to the present that would lead to fi nite results. It is also very clear that 
general relativity introduces still further problems of principle which have 
not yet been resolved 
An important light can be thrown on these difficulties by noting that 
the basic orders implied in relativity theory and in quantum theory are 
qualitatively in complete contradiction . Thus relativity requires strict con­
tinuity, strict causality and strict locality in the order of the movement of 
particles and fields. And as we have seen throughout this book , in essence 
quantum mechanics implies the opposite. 

352 
The undivided universe 
This kind of contradiction in basic concepts is reminiscent of the para­
doxes (e.g. Zeno's paradox) through which Democritus was led to the con­
cept of the atom as explained in the previous chapter. Would it not be 
posible that the present contradiction between the basic concepts of rela­
tivity and quantum theory could similarly lead to a qualitatively new idea 
that would open the way to resolve all these difficulties? 
As a clue to what this new idea might be, we could begin by asking, 
not what are the key differences between these concepts, but rather what 
they have in common. What they have in common is actually a quality of 
unbroken wholeness. 
To see what this means, let us first consider relativity. As is well known 
the concept of a permanently existent particle is not consistent with this 
theory. But rather it is the point event in space-time that is the basic 
concept. In principle all structures have to be understood as forms in a 
generalised field which is a function of all the space-time points. In this 
sort of theory a particle has to be treated either as a singularity in the field, 
or as a stable pulse of finite extent. The field from each centre decreases 
with the distance, but it never goes to zero. Therefore ultimately the fields 
of all the particles will merge to form a single structure that is an unbroken 
whole. 
The notion of unbroken wholeness is, however, still of limited applica­
bility in the theory of relativity, because the basic concept is that of a point 
event which is distinct and separate from all other point events. In quan­
tum theory however there is a much more thoroughgoing kind of unbroken 
wholeness. Thus even in the conventional interpretations, one talks of in­
divisible quantum processes that link different systems in an unanalysable 
way. In principle these links should extend to the whole universe, but for 
practical purposes their effects can be neglected on the large scale, so that in 
some suitable classical approximation we can use a simplified picture of the 
world as made up of separate parts in interaction. But in our interpretation 
there is also the fact that because the quantum potential represents active 
information, there is a nonlocal connection which can, in principle, make 
even distant objects into a single system which has an objective quality of 
unbroken wholeness. 
In such a single system, the idea of separate point events clearly has no 
place. Yet as we have pointed out there is a certain residue of this notion 
still implicitly present in the fact that ultimately all fields are defined in 
terms of space-time points. These points are put in order by means of a 
Cartesian grid (extended where necessary to curvilinear coordinates), and 
it is this order that makes it possible to define key concepts such as local 
interaction between fields and differential operators which play an essential 
role in expressing the movements of these fields. 

Quantum thtory and tht implicatt orrler 
353 
To sum up then, relativity and qu&ntum theory share the notion o( 
unbroken wholeness even though they achieve this in very different ways. 
As we have already explained in the previous section, we need a new notion 
of order that will encompass these different kinds of unbroken wholenes 
which could open the way for new physical content that includes relativit; 
and quantum theory but has the posibility of going beyond both. 
15.3 
Qualitative introduction to the implicate order 
Our notions of order in physics have generally been tacit rather than ex­
plicit and have been manifested in particular forms which have developed 
gradually over the centuries in a somewhat fortuitous way. These latter 
have, in turn, come out of intuitive forms and common experience. For 
example, there is the order of numbers (which is in correspondence to that 
of points on a line) , the order of successive positions in the motion of ob­
jects, various kinds of intensive order such as pressure, temperature, colour 
etc. Then there are more subtle orders such as the order of language, the 
order of logic, the order in music, the order of sensations and thought etc. 
Indeed the notion of order as a whole is not only vast , but it is also prob­
ably incapable of complete definition, if only because some kind of order is 
presupposed in everything we do, including, for example, the very act of 
defining order. How then can we proceed? The suggestion is that we can 
proceed as in fact has always been done, by beginning with our common in­
tuitive notions and general experience of order and by letting these develop 
so as to extend into new domains and fields of application. 
Our suggested next step is to explore how an order appropriate to whole­
ness can be found in our intuition and general experience. We begin by 
noting that the ordinary Cartesian order applying to separate points, finds 
one of its strongest supports in the function of a lens . What a lens does is 
to produce an approximate correspondence of points on an object to points 
on its image. The perception of this correspondence strongly brings our 
attention to the separate points. But as is well known , there is a new in­
strument used for making images called the hologram which does not do 
this. Rather each region of the hologram makes p06sible an image of the 
whole object. When we put all these regions together, we still obtain an 
image of the whole object, but one that is more sharply defined, as well as 
containing more points of view. 
The hologram does not look like the object at all, but gives rise to an 
image only when it is suitably illuminated. The hologram seems, on cursory 
inspection, to have no significant order in it , and yet there must somehow 
be in it an order that determines the order of points that will appear in 

354 
The undivided universe 
the image when it is illuminated. We may call this order implicit, but the 
basic root of the word implicit means 'enfolded'. So in some sense, the 
whole object is enfolded in each part of the hologram rather than being 
in point-to-point correspondence. We may therefore say that each part of 
the hologram contains an enfolded order essentially similar to that of the 
object and yet obviously different in form. 
As we develop this idea, we shall se that this notion of enfoldment 
is not merely a metaphor, but that it has to be taken fairly literally. To 
emphasise this point, we shall therefore say that the order in the hologram 
is implicate. The order in the object, as well as in the image, will then 
be unfolded and we shall call it explicate. The process, in this case wave 
movement, in which this order is conveyed from the object to the hologram 
will be called enfoldment or implication. The process in which the order 
in the hologram becomes manifest to the viewer in an image will be called 
unfoldment or explication. 
Enfoldment and unfoldment are actually encounted quite commonly in 
ordinary experience. For example, whenever one stands in a room, the 
order of the whole room is enfolded into each small region of space, and 
this includes the pupil of an eye which may happen to be there. This latter 
order is unfolded onto the retina and into the brain and nervous system, 
so as to give rise somehow to a conscious awareness of the order of the 
whole room. Similarly the order of the whole universe is enfolded into each 
region and may be picked up in various instruments, such as telescopes, 
from which they are ultimately unfolded to a conscious awareness of this 
order. The fact that light and other such processes are constantly enfolding 
and unfolding the whole is crucial for our ability to learn about any part of 
the universe of space and time, no matter where and when our observations 
may take place. 
These notions of enfoldment and unfoldment can be understood in terms 
of the Cartesian order as being only particular cases of movements of fields 
not having the kind of general necessity that we would attribute, for exam­
ple, to laws of nature. Rather what is significant for such laws of physics 
is considered to be the order of separate points. What we are proposing 
here is to turn this notion upside down and say that the implicate order 
will have the kind of general necessity that is suitable for expressing the 
basic laws of physics, while the explicate order will be important within 
this approach only as a particular case of the general order. 
How can we justify such a radical change in our point of view? First of 
all we note that basically all the laws of movement in quantum mechanics 
do correspond to enfoldment and unfoldment. In particular, the relation 
between the wave function at one time 1/J(z',  t') and its form at another 
time, 1/J(z , t), is determined by the propagator or the Green's function , 

Quantum theory anti the implicate onler 
35 
K(z - z', t - t') through the equation 
tf>(z , t) = j K(z - z' , t - t')!/!(z' , t') dz'. 
(15.1) 
The value of the wave function at z ,  t is the sum of contributions from the 
whole of z' at the earlier time t' weighted with the factor K(z - z', t - t'). 
And so we may say that the region near z enfolds contributions from all 
over space at other times. Vice-versa, it follows that each region near z' will 
unfold into the whole space z ,  with the weighting factor K(z - z' ,  t - t'). A 
simple picture of the movement is that waves from the whole space enfold 
into each region and that waves from each region unfold back into the whole 
space. 
Of course the Green's function has been derived ultimately from the 
Cartesian order by solving differential equations. But if we are questioning 
that this order holds fundamentally (especially at short distances), we may 
well adopt the point of view that the Green 's function is more basic than 
the differential equation (which latter will only be an approximation) .  In 
this case the order of enfoldment and unfoldment will be fundamental, while 
the Cartesian order will have a relatively limited kind of significance. 
The process of enfoldment and unfoldment was already well known im­
plicitly in the Huygens ' construction . Waves from each point unfold. But 
at the same time waves from many points are enfolding to give rise to a new 
wave front. So in the totality, the one process includes both enfoldment and 
unfoldment. It is only when we focus on a part that we are led to talk of 
these as distinct. 
The Huygens ' construction is actually the basis of the Feynman graphs 
which are widely used. To explain the connection, consider waves which 
start at a point P and arrive at a point Q (see figure 15. 1 ) .  In the first inter­
val of time, D.t, a possible path is from P to P' , and in the second interval 
from P' to P" and so on. Extending this construction, the path eventually 
arrives at Q. The Huygens' construction implies that the waves that arrive 
at Q from P are built up of contributions from every possible path . These 
paths are the starting point of the well-known Feynman diagrams. 
Originally Feynman [2] wanted to regard these paths as representing 
the actual trajectories of particles. But this would not be consistent, be­
cause contributions from various paths can interfere destructively as well 
as constructively. Rather, each path represents a contribution to the final 
field amplitude as implied by the Huygens' construction . And together the 
whole set of paths describes a process of enfoldment of waves towards Q, 
or alternatively the unfoldment of waves from P. 
Since all matter is now analysed in terms of quantum fields, and since 
the movements of all these fields are expressed in terms of propagators, it 

356 
The undivided universe 
Figure 15. 1 :  Huygens' construction and clasical paths 
is implied by current physics that the implicate order is universal . These 
fields, which are now being treated as the ground of all existence, have to 
be understood as being essentially in movement. This is because the field 
cannot be said to be an entity which would persist (as a particle for example 
does) in a certain form over a period of time. 
Thus, for example, consider a field variable 1/J(z, t) defined at the space­
time point z, t. This has at most a purely momentary existence and may 
be said to vanish at the very moment at which it would come into being. 
Something with persistent identity would require a unique relation between 
1/J(z, t) and the field at other times. If, for example, we try to relate 1/J(z, t) 
at 0 in figure 15.2 to 1/J(z, t + t5t) at A and thus define a persistent form 
of existence, we find that this leads to something quite arbitrary. For 
we could equally well have considered the same field point, 0, in another 
Lorentz frame ( z', t') and then related a 1/J( z', t') to 1/J( z', t' + 6t') at B .  
This would evidently have defined a different entity. With a particle, the 
path is unique and we do not have this sort of arbitrariness . What this 
means is that the field itself cannot be regarded as having an identity. Or 
to put it differently, we can never have the same field point twice. Nor is 
there a unique form within the field that persists. Therefore all properties 
that are attributed to the field have to be understood as relationships in 
its movement. 

0 
Qwantwm tluo,., nil tht am,licatt onltr 
367 
Figure 15.2: Non-uniqueness of fields in different Lorentz frames 
We may suppose that the universe, which includes the whole of exis­
tence, contains not only all the fields that are now known , but also an 
indefinitely large set of further fields that are unknown and indeed may 
never be known in their totality. Recalling that the essential qualities of 
fields exist only in their movement we propose to call this ground the holo­
movement. It follows that ultimately everything in the explicate order of 
common experience arises from the holomovement . Whatever persists with 
a constant form is sustained as the unfoldment of a recurrent and stable 
pattern which is constantly being renewed by enfoldment and dissolved by 
unfoldment. When the renewal ceases the form vanishes. 
The notion of a permanently extant entity with a given identity, whether 
this be a particle or anything else, is therefore at best an approximation 
holding only in suitable limiting cases. 
1 5 . 4  
Further illus t rative example o f  the implicate order 
We shall now give a further illustrative example involving a different form 
of the implicate order which helps us to focus our attention on geueral 
relationships that define such an order in more detail . This illustration is 
carried out with the aid of a device that we shall now describe. 

358 
Tlae trndivided univerae 
This device consists of two concentric glass cylinders; the outer cylinder 
is fixed, while the inner one is made to rotate slowly about its axis. In 
between the cylinders there is a viscous fluid , such as glycerine, and into 
this fluid is inserted a droplet of insoluble ink (3] . Let us now consider what 
happens to a small element of fluid as its inner radius moves faster than 
its outer radius. This element is slowly drawn out into a finer and finer 
thread. If there is ink in this element it will move with the fluid and will 
be drawn out together with it. What actually happens is that eventually 
the thread becomes so fine that the ink becomes invisible. However, if the 
inner cylinder is turned in the reverse direction, the parts of this thread 
will retrace their steps. (Because the viscosity is so high, diffusion can be 
neglected.) Eventually the whole thread comes together to reform the ink 
droplet and the latter suddenly emerges into view . If we continue to turn 
the cylinder in the same direction, it will be drawn out and become invisible 
once agam. 
When the ink droplet is drawn out, one is able to see no visible order in 
the fluid. Yet evidently there must be some order there since an arbitrary 
distribution of ink particles would not come back to a droplet. One can 
say that in some sense the ink droplet has been enfolded into the glycerine, 
from which it unfolds when the movement of the cylinder is reversed. 
Of course if one were to analyse the movements of the ink particles in 
full detail, one would always see them following trajectories and therefore 
one could say that fundamentally the movement is described in an expli­
cate order. Nevertheless within the context under discussion in which our 
perception does not follow the particles, we may say this device gives us an 
illustrative example of the implicate order. And from this we may be able 
to obtain some insight into how this order could be defined and developed. 
Our next step is then to consider the enfoldment of a series of ink 
droplets. Suppooe that the first ink droplet is enfolded by n turns and 
that the second droplet is then inserted at the same point to be enfolded 
an additional n turns. In this way we enfold a series of N droplets . In 
this series, the droplets will be enfolded n, 2n , 3n . . .  Nn times respectively. 
Suppose then that the motion of the cylinder is reversed. These droplets 
will unfold and re-enfold one after another. If the cylinder is turned rapidly 
(the viscosity being high enough to prevent diffusion) it will appear that 
there is a single persistent droplet at the point in question . Nevertheless 
the droplet is as it were being constantly recreated and dissolved from a 
distribution of ink that is in some sense spread out over a whole range of 
fluid. We thus obtain an example of how forms that persist in the explicate 
order can arise from the whole background and be sustained dynamically 
by a movement of enfoldment and unfoldment. 
If we suppose that these successive ink droplets are inserted at slightly 

Q1ant•m tl&eory and tl&e implicate order 
359 
different positions, then we will obtain what appears to be a moving ink 
droplet. The different rates of 'motion ' correspond to different enfolded 
distributions of ink in the whole fluid . In a sense the 'movement' of the 
ink droplet is 'guided ' by a general field of enfoldment belonging to the 
whole fluid. The attribution of this guidance to the particular place where 
the droplet emerges is not appropriate. Rather its behaviour is ba.sically 
global in origin. This dearly can be proposed as a model of a quantum 
'particle ' which might be asumed to underlie the sort of particles that we 
have postulated in our interpretation of the quantum theory. Of course, this 
model is rather crude and simple , but later on we shall propose a similar 
one that we can take more seriously. 
For the present, however, let us continue with this model . Suppose that 
we consider two particles initially at different positions , one represented by 
red ink and the other by blue ink . As we enfold these into the fluid, red 
ink particles and blue ink particles will eventually intermingle, so that in 
a given region we could not say that the ink droplets were really separate. 
Nevertheless when the cylinder was turned back , red and blue ink particles 
would begin to separate to form respectively red and blue droplets . It is 
dear that the ground of the particular behaviour of the visible droplets is 
global and that disturbances in this ground can lead to correlated changes 
in this behaviour. 
In our model the appearance in perception of what seems to be a pair of 
separate ink droplets can therefore be deceiving. Actually these apparently 
separate ink droplets are internally related to each other. On the other 
hand, as conceived in the explicate order , such droplets would only be 
externally related. This is one of the most important new features of the 
implicate order. What may be suggested is that this feature may give 
further insight into the meaning of quantum properties such as mutual 
participation and nonlocality. 
Another instructive illustration of the implicate order can be obtained 
by first considering the successive enfoldment of N droplets with the cylin­
der turning in a certain direction and successive droplets at a constant 
distance from each other. After these N droplets are enfolded the move­
ment of the cylinder is reversed to enfold additional S droplets at the same 
distance from each other as in the first set. After that we turn the cylinder 
in the original direction and then enfold an indefinite number of further 
droplets in a similar way. When the cylinder is turned backwards we will 
then find a droplet moving as before. But as shown in figure 15.3, at the 
point P there will suddenly appear a pair of particles 'moving' in opposite 
directions and one of these will proceed to meet the original particle at the 
point Q. They then appear to annihilate each other and nothing is left 
of them thereafter. However, the other member of the original 'pair' will 

360 
The undivided universe 
Figure 15.3: Enfoldment and pair creation 
pror,eecl onwards. 
It seems that we have here a simple model of pair production and an­
nihilation. But unlike the representation given in Feynman diagrams, we 
do not say that anything 'moves' backward in the time. Rather it is clear 
that what is significant here is the order in the degree of implication. 
To bring out what this means, let us define an implication parameter, T ,  
of a droplet, which is proportional to the number of times the cylinder has 
been turned since that droplet was inserted . This implication parameter 
takes negative values when the cylinder is turned in the opposite direction. 
What happens in this example is that the implication parameter has a part 
that increases, another part in which it decreases and a third part in which 
it increases again. The entire pattern is present at each instant in the whole 
fluid with varying degrees of implication. All that happens with the passage 
of time is a change in the implication parameter which may be positive or 
negative. 
What this suggests is that what is called the time coordinate in the 
Feynman's approach may actually be the degree of implication. In this 
interpretation , Feynman diagrams would not refer to actual processes but 
rather to structures in the implicate order. The meaning of time would 
have to be something different from T but nevertheless related to it. 

Quantum theory and the implicate order 
361 
15.5 
On the distinction between implicate and explicate orden 
We have thus far used the distinction between implicate and explicate orders 
rather looeely. We shall now discuss thi11 distinction in a more precise way. 
To begin with, we might consider a form whose elements were made of 
ink droplets of various colours. A simple form might be a line defined by 
droplets at its endpoints, or a triangle defined by droplets at its vertices. 
Alternatively we could represent this line by a smooth thread of ink and a 
point by a droplet, or various other representations could be adopted. 
What is characteristic of an explicate structure is that all its basic parts 
are separate and distinct and outside of each other, although they may be in 
well-defined relationships. For example, consider a two-dimensional square 
grid made up of points and the lines which connect them. The points are 
on the boundaries of the lines. Moreover each point has a definite set of 
four neighbours. It is clear that these requirements define the basic order 
of the grid which is clearly explicate in the sense defined above. 
However, it is not necessary that an explicate order be equivalent to a 
square lattice. Indeed in section 15.10 we give a more precise mathematical 
definition of an explicate order through what we call a contact matrix C;j 
which enables us to consider not only arbitrary lattices but also irregular 
structures such as dislocated crystals and glasses. 
Let us now return to our example of the grid. We may imagine that 
this grid is enfolded by a certain movement of the cylinder. Nevertheless 
when the cylinder is reversed all the parts will unfold in such a way that 
they come out all together again in the same explicate structure. This 
follows because all the parts have the same implication parameter. What 
this means is that this whole set of parts retains this potential for being 
explicate together even when it has been enfolded. Therefore within the 
implicate order, there can be structures that are essentially explicate, even 
though they are still enfolded. 
On the other hand there may be structures that are intrinsically impli­
cate in the sense that the whole cannot be unfolded together in one single 
explicate order. The case of the enfoldment of successive droplets is an 
example of this. For only one of the droplets can be unfolded at a time. 
The general case is one in which there is a succession of explicate struc­
tures enfolded to make up what is basically an intrinsically implicate order. 
However, this latter contains explicate suborders as aspects which are par­
ticular cases of the general notion of the implicate order . In this way we 
clarify our earlier statement that the implicate order is general and neces­
sary, while explicate orders are particular and contingent cases of this. 
What then is the relationship between the notion of explicate order and 

362 
The undivided universe 
that of the manifest world discussed in chapter 8, section 8.6? 
Clearly 
the manifest world of common sense experience refined where necessary 
with the aid of the concepts and laws of classical physics is basically in 
an explicate order . 
But the motion of particles at the quantum level is 
evidently also in an explicate order . 
However , as we have suggested in 
chapter 8, this latter order is not always at the manifest level because it is 
profoundly affected by the active information represented by the quantum 
potential. This latter operates in a subtle way and according to what has 
been said in this chapter , this operation is in an implicate order . Therefore 
the particle movement is not un derstood fully as self-determined in the 
explicate order in which it is described . Rather, this explicate order reveals 
the deeper implicate order underlying its behaviour. 
The movement of the beables becomes manifest only at the large scale 
level under conditions in which the quantum potential can be neglected .  In 
this case the movement is not only describable in an explicate way, but it 
can be approximated as self-determi ned in the same explicate order that we 
use to describe it. Therefore it is essentially independent of the implicate 
order and can be abstracted as existing on its own .  It is therefore capable 
of being 'grasped in the han d '  without fundamental alteration (whereas 
at the micro-level, the movement of particles is not) . Nevertheless, as we 
have seen in chapter 8 ,  the implicate order is still revealed in the manifest 
world in some of the more subtle relationships that arise in experiments at 
a quantum level of accuracy (e. g .  interference experiments ) .  
1 5 . 6  
More general notion o f  order 
At this point we need to develop a more general notion of what is to be 
meant by order ,  at least within the context under discussion . 
To illus­
trate the notion that we are suggesting , we begin with the straight line 
divided into equal segments .  What characterises the order of this line is 
that the differences of successive segments remain similar ( and indeed equal) 
throughout the whole line. The difference is j ust that each line is displaced 
by its own length relative to the one before . 
We may extend this suggestion to discuss the order of curves. For exam­
ple, if we approximate a circle by a polygon of many sides , we see that the 
differences of successive sides is that not only are they dis placed relative to 
each other , but that they have different angles . It is clear however that the 
successive differences are similar and that this is what makes the c urve a 
circle. If successive elements also turned into a third dimension , we would 
then get a helix resulting from the similar differences . 
And more gener­
ally, one could complicate this construction to produce curves of arbitrary 

Quantum theorr and the implicate order 
363 
complexity (see Bohm and Peat [4]). 
The next step is to consider the differences that are p08ible between 
such similarities. 
For example , we may arrange a set of lines in paral­
lel . 
Each of these has a set of similar differences, but then each line is 
determined by a different set of such similar differences. If the lines are 
equidistant, these differences in the similarities in turn constitute a higher 
order of similar differences. If we then consider an additional set of such 
lines perpendicular to the first , the entire arrangement would have a set of 
similarities that were different from those in the first set. 
If we go on to consider a series of such sets of lines , each having a small 
angle () relative to the preceding one , we obtain a set of similar differences (of 
the similarities in each set ) ,  and clearly this defi nes an order of orientations 
of all these successive arrangements. 
It is clear from all this that one can h ave an indefinitely extending 
hierarchy of similar d ifferences and different similarities of these differences, 
constitu ting what may be called an order of orders . If these orders have 
points of contact (e.g. as there are between perpendicular sets of lines in a 
grid) we may say they begin to form a structure. 
This treatment of order in terms o f  similar differences and different 
similarities appears to be broad enough not only to cover all the orders 
found thus far in physics, but it seems to be valid in much broader areas 
of experien ce. For example, an order of colours can be expressed as similar 
differences, as can an order of musical tones . The musical theme can clearly 
be seen in terms of similar differences and different similarities in patterns 
of notes , going on all the way up to the order that can be found in high ly 
organised compositions. Similar (but different ) orders can also be sen in 
thoughts, which often develop in patterns of similar differences and different 
similarities . 
1 5 .  7 
The algebra of the implicate order 
The implicate order finds a natural mathematical expression in terms of 
certain kinds of algebra. We shall first illustrate this i n  terms of the ink 
droplet model and then go on to extend our treatment to the algebras of 
quantum mechanics .  
If we start from any initial distribution of ink represented by some den­
sity function p0 (e .g. such as an ink droplet )  then after t he cylinder has 
been turned a certain number of t imes, we will obtai n  a distribution 
P1 
= Tpo, 
( 1 5 .2) 
where T is an operator that represents the transformation brought abou t 

364 
The undivided universe 
by this process . 
If we apply a similar t ransformation again , we obtain 
f>2 = T2 po and if we apply it n times, we obtain 
Pn = T"po. 
( 15.3) 
The above makes possible a simple mathematical description of the impli­
cate order because it embodies the feature that the differen ces of successive 
elements, i.e. the transformation T, remain similar . 
If we now consider the whole succession of droplets , we have to add up 
the contributions corresponding to the different values of n . We obtain 
n 
n 
( 15.4) 
But in principle we could have put in each droplet with a different density 
( a0) . This would have given us 
p = L anT"po. 
( 15.5) 
n 
In this way we obtain an algebra of transformations because each term in 
the algebra, T = I: a0T" , can be added to any other term and because 
clearly transformations can be multiplied . It is evident that by setting n = 0 
we obtain the unit element T0 , which simply represents no transformation 
at all .  
Let u s  now go o n  t o  discuss the quantu m theory. We have already seen 
that the basic notion in the quantum theory expressed through G reen 's 
functions can be understood as a form of the implicate order. Thus we may 
write for the transformation between two times 
1/J1 = Tl/Jo . 
( 15 .6) 
Here T will, in general , be complex . 
Successive transformations through 
n steps with similar differences can then be expressed as T" ,  so that we 
obtain 
( 15.7) 
Because of the linearity of the wave equation , we can , in general , add trans­
formations with su itable coefficients to obtain new solutions of the wave 
equation . Thus we could have 
( 15 .8) 
But the possibilities are much richer than this because we cou l d  bring in 
transformations that do not commute. For example , if TA and T8 are two 
such transformations we could have 
( 15 9) 

Quantum theory and the implicate onler 
365 
88 well 88 more complex combinations . It is clear that at least abstractly 
we can form an algebra in this way. 
Thus far we have given only the algebra of transformations, which in 
quantum mechanics is called the Heisenberg algebra (see Frescura and H i­
ley [5,6]) . This algebra can b e  completed by bringing i n  a projection oper­
ator P(z , z'). In this way, as we shall see , we can tie up with the ideas of 
Stapp [7] and Gell-Mann and H artle [8] . 
To simplify the discussion , let us consider an operator P1 (z0 ,  Azo) 
which at a given time t projects out everything but a cubic region of size 
Azo centred at the point zo . At any other time ,  th is operator has the form 
p1, = eiH(11-1) p1 e-iH(1'-1) , 
where eiH(i ' - i )  is the Green 's function between t' and t .  
Let u s  now give a more detailed expression for P1 . We write 
( 15. 10) 
( 1 5 . 1 1 )  
where t/iz0 (z) is a wave function that is constant in a region of size Azo , 
centred at z0 and zero outside. 
Clearly this wave function defines the 
projection operator that we want. We then obtain 
n ( 
A 
) 
_ 
-iH.(t'-t).1,• ( -') iH(11-1).,, 
( -) 
r-11 Zo , uz 
- e 
'+'Z a 
"" 
e 
'+'Z a "" . 
( 15 . 1 2) 
It is evident that the mere fact that we have an algebra is what enables 
us to express the properties of quantum interference. 
Such interference 
is not described by adding projection operators . 
Rather to do this cor­
responds to what is called forming a mixed state. 
Quantum interference 
is implied by a further property of the algebra, not present in algebras of 
the type that describe the ink drop model . 
This new property involves 
linear superposition over both indices of the projection operators , z' and 
z, separately. Operations carried out on each one of t hese correspond to 
what are called, in mathematical terms, ideals [6] . 
Operations from the 
left generate a left ideal , while those from the right generate a right ideal . 
Transformations of projection operators such as ( 1 5 . 10) involve both ideals 
together in a symmetric way. 
It is clear that the new projection operators at the time t' can be written 
as 
P,, (z0 , Az o) = ¢• (z' , t' - t)l/!(z , t' - t) 
( 15 13) 
so that what was initially a 'pure state ' remains so after tran sformation . 
This means that the l aw of motion does not involve the superposition of 
projection operators , but rather, the superposition on the left and right 

366 
The undivided universe 
ideals which imply contributions to the wave functions ,µ,, (z'),µ1.(z). Evi­
dently it is this feature that makes p08ible the properties of qu antum 
interference. For example , if the wave functions in ( 15. 1 1 )  correspond to 
wave packets of width A:r:0 ,  these will start to spread , at first slowly, and 
then more rapidly when t' - t is positive .  Sooner or later wave functions 
from packets that were originally in different regions will overlap and then 
we will have interference .  On the other h and when t' - t is negative , we 
can look at this situation as a packet which was originally spread out and 
which then converges to the region (:r:0 , A:r:o). In this case all the parts 
of the original packet ultimately come together and interfere to produce a 
wave function that is constant in the region (x0 , Ax0) and zero outside . 
If we recall the description relating the Green 's function to the implicate 
order in section 15 .3, we can see that the projection operators of Stapp and 
Gell-Mann and Hartle really develop according to the implicate order . An 
operator which corresponds to a well-defined region at the time t ,  corre­
sponds to an enfoldment of this region at all other times .  Their histories 
are therefore, in a sense , always present at any moment . But at any given 
time ,  t, only some are unfolded . It is evident that the effective assumption 
of these authors is that any event is actual only at the moment at which it 
is unfolded . Nevertheless it is always present whether unfolded or not .  
I n  our example we have thus far been thinking of the wave function of 
a single particle. B ut suppose that there are many particles . At the time 
t = 0 we should then write the projection operator of the n1h particle as 
( 1 5 . 14) 
Here 1ǫ and ln operate on all the particles other than n and where 1ǫ 
operates on the left ideal and ln operates on the right ideal. 
When the above is transformed by the G reen's function , not only will 
the wave packet spread out as in the one-particle case , but it will start to 
entangle with all the other particles . So we have an implicate order in the 
whole configuration space of the N particles . For times in t he distant past ,  
the whole universe i s  thus i n  some way correlated i n  its enfoldments . A s  
time passes , these correlations begin t o  disentangle and the wave fu nctions 
begin to converge on the region (xon , Axn ) belonging to the n1h particle 
while it becomes a constant as a function of the coordinates of the other 
particles . After th is the spreading and re-enfoldment process starts to take 
place again . 
An important point here is that if there is sufficient entanglement , then 
sooner or later , Pn , will begin to approach commu tation with P,.0 
I n  t h e  
models of Stapp and Gell-Mann and H artle, i t  will therefore b e  consistent 
to asume that projection operators at moderately different t imes will cor-

Quantum theory and the implicate order 
367 
respond to mutually compatible actu al  events . This will make it poesible 
to give the history a real content as objective and independent of observers. 
15.8 
A Hilbert space model of the trajectories in our 
interpretation of quantum mechanics 
We are now ready to extend the model of a particle in our interpretation 
so that it can be included within the framework of H ilbert space. We shall 
see that this model has certain similarities with the models of Stapp and 
Gell- M ann and Hartle, though there are important d ifferences that we shall 
bring out as we go along. 
We shall begin by returning to our ink d roplet model of a particle as 
given in section 15.4. We can now relate this to the extension of our ap­
proach beyond the domain of current quantum theory as suggested in chap­
ter 14, sect ion 14.6. We proposed there that the stochastic trajectories in 
our interpretat ion c an be thought of as arising from some random process 
with a certain free 'flight-time ' that is related to the Planck time .  So what 
we now suggest is to give up the idea that the particle has a continuous 
existence and to suppose instead that it is more l ike our ink droplet model , 
which is continually unfolding and re-enfolding. The time between these 
processes should be of the order of this mean free time. 
Successive 'droplets ' will have a random d istribution . 
However , there 
will be a systemat ic t rend in this d istribution , so that the differences bzn 
in succesive positions will imply a systematic average drift velocity, as well 
as an osmotic velocity. This will have to be such as to correspond to the 
velocities assumed in our stochastic model given in chapter 12. 
This model has certain feat ures that are qualitatively right ,  b u t  i t  does 
not readily fit in with quantum mech anical concepts. 
We therefore now 
propose a further new idea. Th is is to replace the converging and diverging 
droplets by converging and diverging quantum mechanical waves . I n  this 
way our concept of the particle is now included within the implicate order 
as a partic ular form in H ilbert space . 
To see what the similarities are between our mod el an d that of Stapp 
and Gell- M an n  and H artle, let us recall that 
as shown in the previous 
section 15.7, the projection operators of Gell- M ann an d H artle [8] are also 
part icular cases of the implicate order. The key difference is t h is .  Their 
projection operators correspond to waves that converge on extended regions 
and then diverge . 
On the ot her hand , ou rs converge to a point and then 
diverge . 
To see how the two approaches are relate d ,  we can consider a 
projection operator P( z0 , 9z) and let the range of 9z approach zero. It 
i s  clear that both se t s  o f  operators are contained within this fr amework 

368 
The Hdivided universe 
Gell-Mann and Hartle propose actual histories which consist of a s e­
quence of projection operators P( z0 , z ) , in which z is large enough 
to describe an essentially cl8.8ical-type development of actual events. Our 
proposal is to consider a sequence of actual events forming a 'trajectory' 
which is essentially quantum mechanical. So in some sense we have quan­
tum mechanical histories and they have classical histories. The advantages 
of our approach have been discussed earlier throughout this book, but here 
we recall two of them. First there is no sharp distinction of classical and 
quantum levels. The cl8.8ical level arises naturally without further 8.8ump­
tions in a gradual way as the quantum potential becomes negligible. On 
the other hand, in the approach of Gell-Mann and Hartle, we have simply 
to 8.8ume such a distinction of classical and quantum levels without hav­
ing, as yet, a clear criterion for what are the limits of the cl8.8ical level. 
Secondly our approach gives a simple and fairly clear account of quantum 
processes as well as providing an intuitive understanding of all the transfor­
mations of the theory in terms of the implicate order. On the other hand, 
in their approach , the individual quantum process cannot be described and 
therefore there is no intuitive understanding of what it means. 
The dependence of the points to which the various succesive waves 
converge on some sort of systematic drift velocity and osmotic velocity 
provides an explanation of the 'inertia' of the particle. It is this dependence 
which also guarantees that a particle will not enter a region of zero wave 
function and will not leave its channel once it enters. In this way definite 
results can be preserved at the manifest level which includes the observable 
outcomes of measurements. 
The notion of a particle with permanent identity has now been replaced 
by that of a particle with no permanent identity. Rather its basic 'elements' 
are constantly forming and dissolving in succession. Over times much longer 
than that between successive wave formations, the whole process approxi­
mates a trajectory (which may however be engaged in a stochastic process ) .  
For shorter times the notion of a trajectory dissolves away and some en­
tirely new concepts will be needed which we shall discuss. (Further on , we 
shall give an example of these in terms of incoming and outgoing waves ) 
1 5 . 9  
A n  example o f  t rajectories arising from wave s truc tures 
In order to illustrate the ideas developed in the previous section we shall 
now give a specific example of trajectories arising from wave structures. To 
simplify the discussion, we consider a particle always moving at t h e  speed 
of light but with stochastic variations in direction so that we have a kind of 
zigzag path in space-time whose mean velocity will evidently be les t h an 

Qu antum theory antl the implicate order 
36Q 
c .  When we go over to the wave model, the end points of each line of the 
zigzag will be the points towards which our waves converge and from which 
they then diverge. It seems natural to assume that these waves also move 
at the speed of light so that to each point P of convergence and divergence 
there is an incoming and outgoing light cone. The trajectories in question 
will then correspond to a suitable sequence of such light cones. 
This sort of structure of trajectories can be clarified with the a.id of the 
theory of the higher spherical geometry of Lie and Klein (see Klein [9]). 
To relate the light cones to this geometry, we first consider any convenient 
hyperplane, say t = 0. Each light cone intersects this hyperplane in a 
sphere. Those light cones whose vertices have t < 0 will be defined to 
produce spheres of positive radius r = t .  The light cones whose vertices 
have t > 0 will also produce spheres but these will be asigned negative 
radii. So there is a 1 : 1 correspondence between light cones and their 
intersections with any hyperplane t = const. 
What Lie and Klein proposed was an interesting way of parameteris­
ing these spheres. To obtain their parameterisation , let us first write the 
equation of a sphere 
( x - a) 2 + ( y - b) 2 + ( z - c) 2 = r2 , 
( 15.15) 
where the coordinates of the centre are (a, b, c) and the radius is r .  Equation 
( 15.15) reduces to 
x2 + y2 + z 2 - 2(ax + by + c z) = r2 - a2 - b2 - c2. 
( 15.16) 
We now regard this sphere as parameterised by the five quantities a = 
x 1 ,  b = x2 , c = x3 , r = -x4 and (. But these parameters are related by 
We introduce homogeneous coordinates by writing 
X6 - X5 
(
=
--
x6 + X5 
and 
X; 
X ; = 
, 
x6 + x5 
The condition ( 15. 17) reduces to 
2 
x2 
x2 
x2 
v 2 
x2 - 0 
X6 -
5 -
4 + 
I + 'В 2 + 
3 -
· 
( 15.17) 
( 15 . 18) 
The six parameters we have introduced in addition to equation ( 15 . 18) now 
parameterise the sphere. 

370 
Tlae undivided universe 
Figure 15.4: Light cones on one light ray yx 
The advantage of this parameterisation is that the conformal invari­
ance of the description is now evident. For equation ( 15. 18) implies the 
invariance to six dimensional pseudo-orthogonal transformations which are 
easily seen to be isomorphic to the conformal group. By distinguishing a 
light cone at infinity, we can reduce this to the Poincare group and this may 
be for example done by defining this light cone through the relationship 
(15.19) 
One can readily show that the condition for two spheres to come into con­
tact, i.e. to touch each other at single point and have a common tangent 
plane, is 
( 15.20) 
where X and Y refer respectively to the spheres in question. One can 
also see that if two spheres are in contact, then the vertices of their cor­
responding light cones are connected by a null ray (see figure 15.4) .  We 
now proceed to show how the trajectories are described in terms of these 
spheres. First of all consider a sphere of radius r corresponding to a light 
cone whose vertex is in the future at t = r. Now consider a sphere of radius 
r' < r corresponding to a light cone with vertex at t = r' . Suppose the 

Qvantum tlaeorr arul Uae im'liԲ1e oNer 
371 
p 
Figure 15.5: Light ray as point of contact , P, of spheres 
two spheres are to be in contact as shown in figure 15.5. Between them 
lie other spheres with the same point of contact P and with intermediate 
radii. All of these correspond to light cones with a null ray in common . 
But further spheres of larger radii lie beyond the outer sphere going to a 
sphere of infinite radius which represents a plane wave. Beyond this lie 
spheres of negative radii corresponding to the light cones whose vertices 
have negative values of t (see figure 15.6) . As the radius approaches zero 
from either positive or negative direction , we approach the point P .  So a 
point is a sphere of zero radius. 
Let us now consider our trajectory starting from a sphere of zero radius 
representing a light cone with vertex at t = 0. The first step in our trajec­
tory (see figure 15.7) is represented by the point of contact P and a sphere 
of radius r. The corresponding null ray is in the direction of the radius 
of the sphere at the point P. The next null ray will be represented by a 
larger sphere contacting the first sphere at the point Q. The next null ray 
will correspond to a still larger sphere contacting the second sphere at yet 
another point R. This procedure is to be continued indefinitely so that we 
obtain a complete description of the zigzag trajectory. 
The key point here is that we have described our trajectory entirely 
in terms of wave forms at any given time. It is easy to show that this 
description is conformally invariant. For every transformation that must 
turn spheres into spheres (and if we restrict ourselves to satisfying ( 15 19) ,  
we will have only Poincare invariance). But now we c an  see the meaning 

Figure 15.6: Illustration of spheres with positive and negative radii 
of these transformations without explicit reference to time. For example 
in a time displacement, flt ,  the radius of each sphere changes by flt . In a 
Lorentz transformation , however, the radii and centres change together so 
that initially concentric spheres cease to be concentric. 
From what we have been saying, it follows that our trajectory is now 
described in an implicate order. As this order unfolds in time, the radii 
of the spheres corresponding to incoming waves decrease while those cor­
responding to outgoing waves increase. The entire trajectory is now shown 
as a kind of enfolded geometric structure whose meaning can be seen all at 
once as a 'chain' of successively contacting spheres. The law of development 
is implicit in this structure. 
This way of looking at the subject is close to what is implied by Feyn­
man's approach as well as to the Huygens principle. Feynman (2) describes 
his trajectories as a sequence of points in time. We describe them as se­
quences of spheres all enfolded at a given time. The Lagrangian is thus, in 
our approach, a property of the implicate order which holds at any given 
moment. And as seen in section 15.8, backward tracks in time are replaced 
by tracks in which the implication parameter is decreasing. In our model, 
the implication parameter is just the radius of the sphere. Thus in fig­
ure 15.6, we could have the radii of spheres decrease for a while and then 

a 
Figure 15. 7: Trajectory in terms of spheres 

374 
The undivided univer.!e 
increase again . As explained in the previous section , this corresponds to 
pair production . But now there is no need to have the mysterious notion 
of backward motion in time .  
The above i s  a very simple model o f  the particle i n  terms o f  the implicate 
order. Much more complex models can evidently be developed using, for 
example , spinors and twistors, but to do this would take us too far outside 
the scope of this book . 
1 5 . 1 0  
Pre-space and the implicate order 
In the previous two sections we have proposed how the notion of a con­
tinuous trajectory can be replaced by that of a succession of waves, each 
converging to a point , and how this succession can be seen as a structure 
in the implicate order. However, the equivalence of this model to a particle 
is limited. Because for times shorter than that between successive waves, 
the idea of a particle is no longer relevant. 
It seems natural to suppose that ,  as we have suggested earlier , the crit­
ical time in this regard is the Planck time. For such intervals the ordinary 
notions of space-time and the structure of matter will in any case probably 
break down because of quantum fluctuations of the metrical fiel d .  Indeed 
the notion of measurability of space-time in the usual way could hardly 
be expected to be applicable un der such con ditions. Rather we may antici­
pate that the implicate order would become the dominant and fundamental 
concept here. 
We have thus far seen throughout this book how it is possible , not only 
for the manifest level of ordinary experience , but also the quantum level 
underlying it , to emerge from a still deeper implicate level in which the 
clasical Cartesian notions of form, order and structure have more or less 
dissolved. Indeed it was implicit in the previous two sections that such 
ideas, underlying our classical notions of space-time and measure , would 
have to arise as limiting cases of this deeper implicate order. In many ways 
this suggestion is close to one that has been under consideration recently 
by physicists, i.e. that of 'pre-space ' (10] .  The differen ce is that we want to 
go much further than has generally been contemplated in the discussion of 
pre-space and to propose more definite lines along which we could actually 
enquire into developing an overall mathematical formulation of these ideas. 
We have space in this book only for a brief sketch of our proposals. 
A number of preliminary papers on this subject have already been pub­
lished (1 1 ,12] and further work is proceeding . 
The principal current difficulty in the attempt to make theoretical phys­
ics coherent is the notion of a mathematical point in space-time without 

extension or duration . This has been very useful as an abstraction , but we 
feel that there is a great deal of evidence (some of which we have diacused in 
this book) that this notion has reached its limits of validity and 119efulneas. 
The idea of beginning with an extended region has indeed ben long in the 
air and has been explored by many people [13] .  Indeed both Stapp [7] and 
Gell-Mann and Hartle (8] have at least implicitly begun with this notion by 
considering projection operators that cover regions. 
As a point of departure let us therefore begin by considering integrals of 
fields over regions. These may be the ordinary fields, like the electromag­
netic field , or they may be quantum fields represented by the wave function . 
To simplify the discussion we restrict ourselves to a set of scalar fields <fi. 
Let ¢1' denote any particular total configuration of the field . Different val­
ues of the index p then denote different total configurations. We further 
consider a set of regions R.; and we define the integral of ¢1' over such a 
region as 
ef = [ ¢J' .  
JR, 
(15.21 ) 
The above types of integral have been extensively studied in algebraic topol­
ogy [14] and they are called p-sets. These p-sets may include integrals of 
vectors, tensors etc . over regions of various dimensionalities. One of the 
main concepts of the theory is th at these p-sets can be put together to 
describe the composition of regions into larger regions and that this can be 
comprehended within an appropriate algebra. In this algebra, boundary re­
lationships can be expressed as a discrete structure of matrix elements and 
the entire content of typical physic al equations (such as Laplace's equation , 
Maxwell's equations, etc . )  can be replaced by purely algebraic relation­
ships among the p-sets . All of this has been done classically, but we are 
now exploring how this can be extended to a quantum context . 
The crucial point that is relevant for our purposes is that these algebraic 
relationships are invariant under two closely related transformations, 
( 15.22) 
and 
( 15.23) 
or the two together give 
( 15.24) 
The similarity of the above to the transformations of quantum t heory is 
evident . Thus (15.22) describes a transformation in which the field in one 
region is 'exploded ' into the whole space (or else 'imploded' from the w hole 
space into any one region ) .  It therefore corresponds to a wave , w hich now 

376 
The undivided universe 
comes in , not to a point ,  but to a region . It is therefore simply an extension 
of the implicate order to a theory in which we do not need to assume 
dimensionless points. 
The equations ( 15.23) however describe a transformation in which the 
regions rather than the fields are 'exploded ' or 'imploded ' .  
There is a 
complete symmetry between the implic ate order as applied to fields and 
the implicate order applied to regions . This symmetry is similar to that 
between points and planes in projective geometry or to that of any element 
and its dual in ordinary geometry. 
It is different in that it is far more 
general and comprehensive in its possibilities . 
This symmetry gives another intuitive image of the quantum mechanical 
symmetry in Hilbert space and of the symmetry of the bra and the ket of 
Dirac . 
As the invariant is a scalar product of a bra and a ket , so here 
the invariant p-set is the scalar prod uct of a field and a region . 
Indeed 
from this symmetry it becomes clear that there is ultimately no distinction 
between the fields and space-time itself. E ach is a dual description of the 
other . Physical quantities will then be invariants which c an be interpreted 
as relations between fields or between regions. 
In general these relationsh ips will be nonlocal . Locality must be a spe­
cial case. How then can we define locality? To do this, we must have an 
explicate order, i.e. one in which the elements are outside of each other and 
yet cover the whole space. A simple illustrative example of this would be 
a set of square elements in contact in such a way as to make up a squ are 
grid . To express their local contact, we can define a contact matrix C;j 
which is zero when the elements ij are not in contact and unity when they 
are. In this example, correspond ing to each specific region R; ,  C;j would 
have a certain four elements that were not zero, and these elements would 
define the neighbours of the region R; ,  Each value of j would also define a 
direction from which could be built a line ordered according to the index j 
(with similar differences between successive elements) .  
But the whole theory must b e  invariant to an explosive transformation , 
i .e .  an enfoldment into the implicate order , When this is done, the elements 
C;i will no longer have the simple structure of zeros and ones described 
above , but will be very complex. 
Yet they are in some sense implicitly 
describing the same order. Moreover if we simultaneously transform the 
field <f>P in a dual way then the quantity ef remains invariant, i.e. 
ef = r <f>P = 1 ¢/. 
JR , 
R11 
( 1 5.25) 
The above is a kind of generalisation of the invariance that arises in general 
relativity. 

Quantum theory and the Implicate order 
377 
Given a set of contact matrices , C11 , we can ask whether or not it 
could be transformed completely into an explicate order. Of COUl"Be thia 
need not be a simple square lattice. Nevertheles11 more generally after the 
transformation each index i must be non-zero for a relatively small number 
of indices j .  It is not even necessary however that the pattern be the 118111e 
for all indices i. Changes in the pattern may for example correspond to 
dislocations in the lattice. 
Structures of the above general kind will be called 'locally connected '. 
If there exist a transformation that reduces a given matrix, Ci; , to a locally 
connected matrix, C:j , we shall say C;j is in essence locally connected even 
though it appears to be non-local in the particular representation that we 
have chosen. 
An interesting question arises if there is no matrix c:i which is locally 
connected .  A similar question arises in general relativity when the metric 
tensor cannot be made diagonal over the whole space. In this case we have 
a new property called curvature. If C;j cannot be transformed into a locally 
connected matrix, this means that we have a 'space' which may be 'locally 
explicate' but which gradually enfolds as we move along the locally ordered 
lines. To picture this we can say that ' wherever you are' you may represent 
this as an 'ordinary local space' but that there will be a horizon in which 
this space 'dissolves ' into an implicate order. S uch a 'universe ' would not 
have a definite boundary, but would simply fade into something that does 
not manifest to us beyond its horizon . 
Nor would it have a beginning or 
an end . But rather it would similarly fade in the distant past and in the 
distant future. 
Yet , to anyone that was beyond our horizon , everything 
would be as definite (or indefinite) as it is to us . That is to say, there is a 
kin d of relativity of the implicate order. Some new mathematical concept 
corresponding to curvature would have to be developed to express more 
precisely the distinction between an irreducibly implicate order and on e 
that could be transformed as a whole into an explicate order. 
Another interesting example of an irreducibly implicate order is one that 
could not be put in explicate form locally, but that could be approximately 
explicate on the larger scale . That is to say, the Cij matrices could not be 
reduced to some canonical form implying only local contact . This would 
mean , in general , that the non-zero elements of the contact matrix would 
spread out over whatever parameters with which we try to label the regions 
constituting our space . 
This would of course imply a general nonlocal 
contact between elements and would mean that the ordinary ideas of space 
as constituted of localisable elements wou ld no longer hold . So processes 
that were associated with what we now call the Planck length would have 
to be desc ribed in what is an essentially qu antum mechanical k i nd of space 
in which Cartesian notions of order would not even arise . Never t heless the 

378 
Tht undivided univeNt 
C;; matrices might have such properties that large sets of elements could be 
grouped together and that a transformation could be found in which these 
groups would have a simple cont act matrix of a local nature that would give 
rise to an explicate order . In such a theory an ordinary geometrisable space 
could emerge in the 'large', while it had no meaning in the 'smal l ' .  Indeed 
these very words 'large ' and 'small '  would be somewhat misleading, since 
measure could prevail only in relation to the elements that are grouped 
together to give rise to a local contact matrix implying an explicate order . 
We have been discussing how explicate orders, or approximations to 
such orders , could emerge from a ground that was irreducibly implicate as 
a whole . This is an example of how an explicate order arises as a partic­
ular case of the implicate order . We have here distinguished this case by 
requiring certain properties of the contact matrix . A similar procedure has 
already been explored in ordinary geometry through the Klein Erlanger 
programme [15) .  Thus if we begin with projective geometry as our most 
general concept we can obtain affine geometry as a particular case by distin­
guishing a plane at infinity. To obtain ordinary metric geometry, we merely 
have to distinguish a certain quadric on this plane and call this the circle 
at infinity. But from our starting point , even proj ective geometry is very 
special. Our first step is to obtain a simple explicate order without which 
the idea of geometry itself would have very little significance . We do this 
by distinguishing a particular implicate order as the explicate order. But 
this is possible on ly if the contact matrix ha.<. a suitable form. From here on 
we could try to go further in defining the equivalent to points, lines, planes 
etc .  in terms of p-sets , and thus we would distinguish a particular case of 
the explicate order , i.e. one that is geometrisable as a whole . From here we 
could go on to projective ,  affine an d metric geometries by further distinc­
tions. If this were done then the whole of geometry would be invariant to 
enfoldment transformations in the implicate order . We could then say that 
the order of space ( and ultimately of time )  ft owed out of a deeper implicate 
order of pre-space . 
Moreover this pre-space would have a structure that 
was inherently conformable to the laws of the quantum theory. We would 
thus be free of the present incoherence of trying to force quantum laws into 
a framework of a Cartesian order that is really only suitable for classical 
mechanics . 
1 5 . 1 1  
The super implicate order 
Thus far we have been considering t he implicate order mainly in relation 
to particle theories, but further interesting insights can J:>e obtained by 
extending the notion of implicate order to quantum field theories . 

Quantum tluorr and the implicate o"'er 
379 
The cl&88ical field, which generally obeys a linear equation, hu already 
been understood in terms of the implicate order, e.g. u in the example of 
the hologram. But when this field is quantised, a further kind of implicate 
order is introduced. We shall call this the super implicate order. The super 
implicate order is related to the implicate order as the implicate order, 
in particle theories, is related to the particles. Consider, for example, a 
particle which classically executes simple harmonic motion. Its equation of 
motion is linear 
.. 
2 
mx =
- a-
x .  
When this theory is quantised by bringing in a wave function it>( x) 
R( x) exp(iS( x)] the equation of motion becomes 
where 
1 Y'2 R 
Q = - 2m !l ·  
As we have seen i n  earlier chapters , this not only makes the equation non­
linear, but also introduces a force that depends on the whole quantum field 
and that reflects the activity of information ( so that if we have several 
harmonic oscillators, we also obtain nonlocality) .  
Similarly consider a classical linear field equation 
As pointed out in chapter 1 1 , when the theory is quantised, we bring in a 
wave functional 
t/J = t/J( . . .  ¢i(xµ ) . . .  ) = R exp [iS] 
and the field equation becomes 
where Q is given by ( 1 1 .32) . The wave equation now becomes nonlinear as 
well as nonlocal, as happened in the particle theory. 
The connection between wave and particle theories can be made yet 
more evident by considering the normal modes of the field theory. If 9t is 
such a normal mode corresponding to wave number k, then classically 1t 
satisfies the harmonic oscillator equation 

380 
The undivided universe 
All the harmonic oscillators are independent. On quantisation, the wave 
functional can be written as 
tj; = tj;( . . .  q,, . . .  ; q; . . .  t) = R exp (iS] . 
If we develop the field equations along the lines given in chapter 1 1, we 
obtain 
where 
.. 
k2 
a Q( 
• 
) 
q,, + q,, = -
-
a 
. . .  q,, . . .  ; q,, . . .  t 
q,, 
Q = _ ǟ L' _.!_ 82 R . 
2 ,, R 8q'j, 
Each of the oscillators now obeys a nonlinear equation and it is in general 
coupled to all the others. 
As in the particle theory, the implicate order manifests in the activity 
of the particle through the quantum potential. It is clear then that in field 
theory there is a super implicate order that manifests in the field beables. 
The effect of the implicate order on the particle is to make its behaviour 
more wave-like than it would be in classical physics. However, as we have 
seen in chapter 1 1 ,  section 1 1 .7, the effect of the super implicate order on 
the field beables is to oppose the classical tendency for waves to spread and 
to cause the wave field to be 'swept in ' towards atoms, for example. The 
beables may now be regarded as the first implicate order. The super impli­
cate order thus tends to organise the first implicate order into something 
more particle-like than it would be in classical physics. 
At this point a little reflection shows that the whole idea of implicate 
order could be extended in a natural way. For if there are two levels of 
implicate order, why should there not be more? Thus if we regard the 
super implicate order as the second level, then we might consider a third 
level which was related to the second as the second is to the first. That 
is to say, the third implicate order would organise the second which would 
thereby become nonlinear. (For example there might be a tendency for the 
whole quantum state to collapse into something more definite.) 
Evidently we could go on indefinitely to higher levels of implicate order. 
Since each is related to the one below, as the one below is related to the 
one still further below, we have a sequence of similar differences. In other 
words we have an order of implicate orders. 
Thus far we have considered only a one-way connection of implicate 
orders in which the higher affects the lower but not the other way round. 
However, we could quite readily extend the idea to allow lower orders to 
affect the higher ones. At present we have very little to guide us as to how 
to do this , but we have indeed already considered a possibility of this kind 

Quantum theory and the implicate orrler 
381 
in chapter .1 4 ,  section 14.6. We prop08ed there to change SchrOdinger's 
wave equation so as to depend on the particle p08itions in a way that is 
similar to what is done in the approach of Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber (16] 
with regard to the position towards which the wave function is made to 
collapse. As a result of this change the wave function in our theory will 
tend to remain loosely asociated with the particles and the empty channels 
would disappear so there would be a twcrway relationship between wave 
function and particle. A similar tendency could be asumed such that all 
levels of implicate order would tend to be loosely associated with th08e 
below. Thus the order of implicate orders would be based on sequences of 
two-way relationships. 
To develop such an order of implicate orders would require that we first 
obtain some notion of the third implicate order. At present there is very 
little to guide any speculations about this. It is however an interesting 
posibility that may be kept in mind for further exploration. The main 
suggestion that we have, at present, is that a third implicate order would 
require a superwave functional. This would imply that the wave functional 
is spread over a range of possibilities. But the notion of a density matrix 
can be thought of as implying the same sort of thing, i.e. a statistical spread 
over wave functions or over wave functionals. If the density matrix were 
thus connected to the superwave functional, this would mean, for example, 
that a state of thermal equilibrium spreading over a range of energies is 
actually a reflection of some new property that flows out of the superwave 
functional. 
Another possible area in which the super implicate order may be relevant 
is in consciousness as will be brought out in the next section of this chapter. 
1 5. 1 2  
The implicate order and consciousness 
Several physicists have already suggested that quantum mechanics and con­
sciousnes are closely related and that the understanding of the quantum 
formalism requires that ultimately we bring in consciousness in some role 
or other (e.g. Wigner (17] , Everett [18) and Squires (19) ) .  Throughout this 
book it has been our position that the quantum theory itself can be un­
derstood without bringing in consciousness and that as far as research in 
physics is concerned, at least in the present general period, this is probably 
the best approach. However, the intuition that consciousness and quantum 
theory are in some sense related seems to be a good one, and for this reason 
we feel that it is appropriate to include in this book a discussion of what 
this relationship might be. 
Our proposal in this regard is that the basic relationship of quantum 

theory and consciousness is that they have the implicate order in common. 
(For an extensive discussion of this approach se Bohm (20) .) The essential 
features of the implicate order are, as we have sen, that the whole universe 
is in some way enfolded in everything and that each thing is enfolded in the 
whole. However , under typical conditions of ordinary experience, there is a 
great deal of relative independence of things, so that they may be abstracted 
as separately existent, outside of each other, and only externally related. 
However, more fundamentally the enfoldment relationship is active and 
essential to what each thing is, so that it is internally related to the whole 
and therefore to everything else. Nevertheless, the explicate order, which 
dominates ordinary 'common sense' experience as well as classical physics, 
appears to stand by itself. But actually this is only an approximation and 
it cannot be properly understood apart from its ground in the primary 
reality of the implicate order, i.e. the holomovement. All things found in 
the explicate order emerge from the holomovement and ultimately fall back 
into it. They endure only for some time, and while they last, their existence 
is sustained in a constant process of unfoldment and re-enfoldment, which 
gives rise to their relatively stable and independent forms in the explicate 
order. 
It takes only a little reflection to see that a similar sort of description will 
apply even more directly and obviously to consciousness, with its constant 
flow of evanescent thoughts, feelings, desires, urges and impulses. All of 
these flow into and out of each other and, in a certain sense, enfold each 
other (as, for example, we may say that one thought is implicit in another, 
noting that this word literally means enfolded) . 
A very clear illustrative example of this enfoldment can be seen by 
considering what takes place when one is listening to music. At a given 
moment, a certain note is being played , but a number of the previous notes 
are still 'reverberating' in consciousness. Close attention will show that it 
is the simultaneous presence and activity of all these related reverberations 
that is responsible for the direct and immediately felt sense of movement, 
flow and continuity, as well as for the apprehension of the general meaning 
of the music. To hear a set of notes so far apart in time that there is no 
consciousness of such reverberation will destroy altogether the sense of a 
whole unbroken living movement that gives meaning and force to what is 
being heard. 
The sense of order in the above experience is very similar to what is 
implied in our model of a particle as a sequence of successive incoming and 
outgoing waves. Thus in section 15.9, we saw how a particle trajectory 
could be expressed at a given moment in terms of an order of spherical 
waves that are present at that moment. Here the outgoing waves would 
correspond to 'reverberations' , while the incoming waves would correspond 

to anticipaǞions ǝwhǜch are also evidently present u we li1ten to the mueic) .  
The essential pomt 1 s  that the whole movement is contained in thil way at 
any given moment. 
Of course not all of it is conscious at any given moment and a great 
deal may be unconscious. B ut even that which is unconscious and vaguely 
anticipatory may contain a whole movement. The most striking example 
of this is Mozart saying that the whole composition came to him almost in 
a flash and that from there on he wu simply able to play it or to write it. 
Thus the whole was unfolded rather as the sequence of spheres is unfolded 
in our model . 
Further similar examples can be obtained from visual experiences (e.g. 
as a series of similar frames in a movie sensed simultaneously can give 
rise to a feeling of movement) .  What all this suggests is that our m08t 
primary experience in consciousness actually is of an implicate order. And 
our perception of the explicate order is constituted mostly by a series of 
abstractions from this. To go into all this here would take us too far afield , 
but an account of it can be found elsewhere ( Bohm (2 1]). To sum up then , 
in consciousnes , as in quantum theory, the explicate order emerges from 
the implicate order as a relatively stable and self-determined domain and 
ultimately flows back into the implicate order . 
The implicate order is not only the ground of perception, but also of the 
actual process of thought . For thought is based on information contained in 
the memory. We do not know a great deal of how memory works at present , 
but it does not seem that it operates through a one to one correspondence 
between , for example , an object and an image stored somewhere in the 
brain . Rather what is relevant for thought is the storage of many abstracted 
items of information , for example , about shape , colour ,  the uses of the 
object , the various things with which it is associated , etc. 
Indeed in our 
customary use of language we say that a certain content is re-collected , 
thus suggesting that this content is collected together from the whole of 
memory. The fact that it does seem to come from the whole can be seen 
with the aid of an elementary example . 
Thus English nouns ending in 
'-ation ' generally come from verbs ending in '-ate ' .  Thus 'rotation ' comes 
from 'rotate' .  But this rule does not always hold . For example 'inclination ' 
does not come from 'inclinate '. The crucial point here is that we c an tell 
immediately that 'inclinate ' is not an accepted word , whereas 'rotate' is. 
This strongly suggests that somehow our 're-collection ' is directly from a 
whole rather than the result of an algorithm for searching the memory in 
detail. 
All of this is clearly compatible with the notion that the basic order 
of the mind is implicate and that the explicate arises as a partic ular case 
of this implicate order in much the way that we have suggested in this 

384 
The undivided universe 
chapter for the quantum theory and for pre-space. So the various items of 
information that have been stored up may be regarded as somehow enfolded 
in the brain and indeed probably in the rest of the nervous system as well 
as in the muscles and organs. 
It is clear moreover that this information is basically active rather than 
pasive. We may easily verify this in our subjective experience . Suppose, for 
example , that on a dark night one encounters some shadows . If the memory 
contains information that there may be asailants in the neighbourhood 
this can give rise immediately to a sense of danger, with a whole range of 
possibilities (fight , flight , etc . ) .  This is not what could be called purely 
a mental process , but includes an involuntary and essentially unconscious 
process of hormones, heartbeat and neuro-chemicals of various kinds, as well 
as physical tensions and movements. However, if we look again and we see 
that it is only a shadow that confronts us, this thought has a calming effect 
and all this activity ceases. Such a response to information is extremely 
common (e.g. information that ' X '  is a friend or enemy, good or bad etc . ) .  
More generally i n  consciousness, information i s  seen to be active i n  all these 
ways physically, chemically, electrically etc. 
This sort of activity is evidently similar to that which was described in 
connection with quantum processes involving particles such as electrons , for 
which the information in the wave function was also active in the movement 
of the particle. At first sight, however, there may st ill seem to be a signifi­
cant difference between these two cases. Thus , in our subjective experience, 
action can , in some cases at least , be mediated by reflection in conscious 
thought . On the other hand, in the case of the electron , the action of in­
formation is immediate. But actually, even if this happens, the difference 
is not as great as it might appear to be. For such reflection follows on the 
suspension of physical action . This gives rise to a train of thought. How­
ever, both a suspension of physical action and the resulting train of thought 
follow immediately from a further kind of active information implying the 
need to do this. 
It seems clear from all this that at least in the context of the processes of 
thought , there is a kind of active information that is operating which is in 
key ways rather similar to that which operates in the action of the quantum 
potent ial. To clarify what this means in the present context, it is convenient 
to introduce the notion that consciousness shows or man ifests on two sides 
which may be called the physical and the mental. Active information can 
serve as a kind of link or 'bridge' between these two sides .  These latter are 
however inseparable, in the sense, for example, that information contained 
in thought , which we feel to be on the mental side , is at the same time a 
related neurophysiological , chemical and physical activity (which is clearly 
what is meant by the 'material ' side of thought ) .  

Quantum theorr and the implicate onltr 
385 
We have however up to thia point considered only a small part of the 
significance of thought . Thus , our thoughts may contain a whole range of 
information content of different kinds. This may in turn be surveyed by a 
higher level of mental activity, as if it were a material object at which one 
were 'looking ' .  Out of this may emerge a yet more subtle level of infor­
mation , whose meaning is an activity that is able to org&niae the original 
set of information into a greater whole . But even more subtle information 
of this kind can , in turn , be surveyed by a yet more subtle level of men­
tal activity, and at least in principle this can go on indefinitely. Each of 
these levels may then be seen from both sides . From the mental side , it is 
a potentially active information content . But from the material side , it is 
an actual activity that operates to organise the les subtle levels , and the 
latter serve as the 'material ' on which such operation takes place. 
The proposal is then that a similar relationship holds at indefinitely 
great levels of subtlety. It is being suggested that this posibility of going 
beyond any specifiable level of subtlety is the esential feature on which the 
posibility of intelligence is based . 
It is interesting in this context to consider again the meaning of the 
word 'subtle ' .  As stated in chapter 8, section 8.6, this is "rarefied , highly 
refined , delicate, elusive , indefinable" ; its Latin root is sub-texere, which 
means "fi nely woven" . This suggest a metaphor for thought as a series of 
more and more closely woven nets. Each can 'catch ' a certain content of 
a corresponding 'fineness ' .  The finer nets cannot only show up the details 
of form and structure of what is 'caught ' in the coarser nets ; they can also 
hold within them a further content that is implied in the latter . We have 
thus been led to an extension of the notion of implicate order , in which we 
have a series of inter-related levels. In these , the more subtle-i .e . 'the more 
finely woven ' levels including thought, feeling and physical reactions-both 
unfold and enfold those that are less subtle ( i .e. 'more coarsely woven ') . In 
this series , the mental side corresponds, of course , to what is more subtle 
and the physical side to what is less subtle . And each mental side in turn 
becomes a physical side as we move in the direction of greater subtlety. 
Let us now return to a consideration of the quantum theory. We have 
already seen that there is a basic similarity between the quantum behaviour 
of a system of electrons for example and the behaviour of mind . But if we 
wish to relate mental processes with quantum theory, this similarity will 
have to be extended . The simplest way of doing this is to use the idea of a 
series of implicate orders for matter in a way that has already been disc ussed 
in the previous section . So we are supposing that , like mental processes , 
physical processes are also capable of extension to indefinitely great levels 
of subtlety in a series of implicate orders with two-way relationships. 
One may then ask what is the relationship between the physic al and the 

mental proceses? The answer that we propose here is that there are not 
two processes. Rather, it is being suggested that both are essentially the 
same. This means that that which we experience as mind, in its movement 
through various levels of subtlety, will, in a natural way ultimately move the 
body by reaching the level of the quantum potential and of the 'dance' of 
the particles. There is no unbridgeable gap or barrier between any of these 
levels. Rather, at each stage some kind of information is the bridge. This 
implies that the quantum potential acting on atomic particles, for example, 
represents only one stage in the proces. 
The content of our own consciousness is then some part of this over­
all process. It is thus implied that in some sense a rudimentary mind-like 
quality is present even at the level of particle physics, and that as we go to 
subtler levels, this mind-like quality becomes stronger and more developed. 
Each kind and level of mind may have a relative autonomy and stability. 
One may then describe the essential mode of relationship of all of these as 
participation, recalling that this word has two basic meanings, to 'partake 
of' and to 'take part in'. Through enfoldment, each relatively autonomous 
level of mind partakes of the whole to one degree or another. Through this 
it partakes of all the others in its 'gathering' of information. And through 
the activity of this information, it similarly takes part in the whole and 
in every part. It is in this sort of activity that the content of the more 
subtle and implicate levels is unfolded (e.g. as the movement of the particle 
unfolds the meaning of the information that is implicit in the quantum field 
and as the movement of the body unfolds what is implicit in subtler levels 
of thought, feeling, etc.). 
For the human being, all of this implies a thoroughgoing wholeness, 
in which mental and physical sides participate very closely in each other. 
Likewise, intellect, emotion, and the whole state of the body are in a similar 
flux of fundamental participation. Thus, there is no real division between 
mind and matter, psyche and soma. The common term psychosomatic is in 
this way sen to be misleading, as it suggests the Cartesian notion of two 
distinct substances in some kind of interaction. 
Extending this view, we see that each human being similarly participates 
in an inseparable way in society and in the planet as a whole. What may be 
suggested further is that such participation goes on to a greater collective 
mind, and perhaps ultimately to some yet more comprehensive mind in 
principle capable of going indefinitely beyond even the human species as a 
whole. 
Finally, we may ask how we can understand this theory if the subtle 
levels are carried to infinity. Does the goal of comprehension constantly 
recede as we try to do this? We suggest that the appearance of such a 
recession is in essence just a feature of our language, which tends to give 

Quantum theory and the implicate order 
387 
-----StN 
____ _ 
Figure 15.8: Magnetic poles as abstractions from an overall magnetic field 
too much emphasis to the analytic side of our thought processes. 
To explain what is meant here, one may consider the analogy of the 
poles of a magnet, which are likewise a feature of linguistic and intellec­
tual analysis, and have no independent existence outside such analysis. As 
shown in figure 15.8, at every part of a magnet there is a potential pair of 
north and south poles that overlap each other. But these magnetic poles are 
actually abstractions, introduced for convenience of thinking about what is 
going on , while the whole process is a deeper reality-an unbroken magnetic 
field that is present over all space. 
Similarly, we may for the sake of thinking about the subject, abstract 
any given level of subtlety out of the unbroken whole of reality and focus 
our attention on it. At each such level, there will be a 'mental pole' and a 
'physical pole'. Thus as we have already implied, even an electron has at 
least a rudimentary mental pole, represented mathematically by the quan­
tum potential. Vice versa, as we have seen , even subtle mental processes 
have a physical pole. But the deeper reality is something beyond either 
mind or matter, both of which are only aspects that serve as terms for 
analysis:These can contribute to our understanding of what is happening 
" See Marshall [22) for an acconnt of an idea having important simi lari ties with what has 
been proposed here . H e ,  too, uses the notion of a general quantum reality as a basis for 
the bodily and mental realms , considered as inseparable sides or aspects. But he propoees 
to explain this from the quantum theory as i t  now stands in its usual interpretation. 
However, we have here used the ontological interpretation of the quantum theory with 
its addi tional concepts of particle trajectories and active information, and have asumed 
that ultimately the relationship of mental and material sides can be nnderstood only by 

388 
The undivided universe 
but are in no sense separate substances in interaction . Nor are we reducing 
one pole to a mere function or aspect of the other (e.g. as is done in materi­
alsim and in idealism) . The key point is, however, that before the advent of 
the quantum theory, our knowledge of matter as gained from the study of 
physics would have led us to deny that it could have a mental p ole, which 
would enable it to participate with mind in the relationship that has been 
described here . We can now say that this knowledge of matter (as well as 
of mind) has changed in such a way as to support the approach that has 
been described here. To pursue this approach further might perhaps enable 
us to extend our knowledge of both poles into new domains . 
15. 1 3  
Further extension t o  a n  overall approach 
What we have done here opens up the possibility of an overall approach that 
encompasses all aspects of objective nature and of our subjective experience 
(e .g. as an observer and a thinker) . 
To develop such an approach , we 
first note that not only inanimate nature, but also living nature , is to be 
understood in terms of the implicate order . Consider a tree , for example, 
which grows from a seed . Actually the seed makes a negligible contribution 
to the material substance of the plant and to the energy needed to make it 
grow . The substance comes from the air, water and soil ,  while the energy 
comes from the sun . In the absence of a seed , all these move in an implicate 
order of a relatively low level of subtlety (based, for example, on the order 
of the constituent particles) . 
This brings about the constant re-creation 
of inanimate matter in various forms . 
However, through the information 
contained in the DNA molecule ,  the overall process is subtly altered so 
that it produces a living tree instead . All the streams of matter and energy 
which had hitherto developed in an unorganised way, now begin to bring 
substance and energy to the plant , which grows and eventually decays to 
fall back into inanimate matter. 
At no stage is there a break in this process. For example one would not 
wish to say that an 'inanimate' molecule of carbon dioxide enters the tree 
and suddenly becomes 'alive ' ,  or that the oxygen molecule suddenly 'dies ' 
when it leaves the tree. 
Rather, life is eternally enfolded in matter and 
more deeply in the underlying ground of a generalised holomovement as is 
mind and consciousness. Under suitable con ditions, all of these u nfold and 
extending t he scheme beyond the domain in which the current quantum theory is valid. 
For other recent attempts to consider the mind-matter relation in the light of the 
quantum theory, see Penrose (23] and Lockwood (24] . For a discussion of the notions of 
active information and implicate order by a number of authors , see Pylkkiinen [ 2 5] . 

Quantum theory and the implicate order 
389 
evolve to become manifest in ever higher stages of organisation. 
The notion of a separate organism is clearly an abstraction, as is also its 
boundary. Underlying all this is unbroken wholenes even though our civil­
isation has developed in such a way as to strongly emphasise the separation 
into parts. 
In this whole process, it is clear that the observer along with his thoughts 
is contained in an inseparable way. For example, the general theories of 
physics (including the very one we are proposing here) are an extension of 
this proces. What such a theory produces is a kind of reflection of reality 
as a whole, As explained in chapter 14, section 14. 1 ,  this provides another 
aspect or appearance of the whole. We may usefully regard this appearance 
as a kind of mirror through which reality is perceived. Clasical physics 
provided a mirror that reflected only the objective structure of the human 
being who was the observer. There is no room in this scheme for his mental 
process which is thus regarded as separate or as a mere 'epiphenomenon' 
of the objective processes. As we have seen throughout this book, however, 
quantum physics interpreted ontologically and extended in a natural way 
makes possible a reflection even of the subtle mental aspects of the observer. 
Thus, through this mirror the observer sees 'himself' both physically and 
mentally in the larger setting of the universe as a whole, There is no need, 
therefore, to regard the observer as basically separate from what he sees, 
nor to reduce him to an epiphenomenon of the objective process. Indeed 
the notion of separateness is an abstraction and an approximation valid for 
only certain limited purposes. More broadly one could say that through the 
human being, the universe is making a mirror to observe itself Or vice versa 
the universe could be regarded as continuous with the body of the human 
being. After all, this latter, like the plant, gets all its substance and energy 
from the universe and eventually falls back into it Evidently the human 
being could not exist without this context (which has very misleadingly 
been called an environment) .  
Although the implicate order is a theory of the whole, it is i n  no sense 
a 'theory of everything', Or to put it differently we do not expect any 
'mirror' to provide a complete and perfect reflection of reality as a whole, 
Every mirror abstracts only some features of the world and reflects them 
only to a limited degree of accuracy as well as from a limited perspective. 
We emphasise again that physical theories share in this sort of limit as 
much as all other forms of knowledge, For our thought is always a limited 
abstraction from the indefinitely great subtlety of the implicate order as a 
whole, We can always extend it, but then it will always still be limited, 
And beyond these limits, there is always indefinitely more that h as  not 
been grasped in thought, 
At the very least, the above is what would be implied by our proposal 

390 
The undivided universe 
of an order of ever increasing orders of subtle ty in the implicate order . 
But probably the whole scheme of the implicate order will be found to be 
limited too, and will eventually have to be contained in some yet more 
comprehensive idea. More generally, we are not aserting finality for any 
of the ideas that we propose here. All proposals are points of departure 
for exploration. Eventually some of them may be developed so far that we 
may take them as working hypotheses. But in principle we will be ready to 
modify them or even to drop them whenever we find evidence for doing this. 
This applies even to the very idea that we are discussing at this moment . 
We suggest that the approach outlined above is more coherent than one in 
which we either tacitly or explicitly take specified features of our ideas as 
finally fixed and absolutely true .  
I n  particular we would say here that certain features o f  theories that 
have attempted to cover both mind and matter ,  for example, those proposed 
by Everett [18) and by Gell-Mann and Hartle [8] , do imply that mind is a 
rather limited sort of system (that could be completely covered for example 
by the notion of an 'information gathering and utilising system' (IGUS) ) .  
N o  doubt mind is capable of doing this sort of thing. But a little observation 
shows that it is much richer in its capabilities. In particular, if a human 
being is nothing more than such a system he is effectively reduced to a kind 
of machine . How then would we understand creativity? Perhaps we could 
say it is an illusion brought about by our not having complete knowledge 
of how the machine works . 
But we can ask how can it be known that 
this is all that we are? 
Thus, in the time of Newton, people compared 
everything including living beings to a clockwork and at later times the 
brain and nervous system were compared to a telephone exchange . 
It is 
now being compared to a super computer . 
In each age people use the 
latest technological developments as models for the mind. Very probably 
in another century or so the whole notion of computers will be seen as rather 
limited and perhaps even as outmoded as nineteenth-century machines are 
now thought to be. 
Doubtless we will then have a still more intricate 
machine with which one could compare the mind if one chose to do so. 
This whole approach seems to be affected with irreducible contingency. 
There is really no necessity for it at all .  We are therefore free, if we so 
choose, to explore the broader approach to mind and matter, and therefore 
to the whole of reality, that we have been discussing here and throughout 
the rest of the book. 
1 5 . 1 4  
References 
1 .  D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge and Kegan 

Paul , London , 1980 . 
Quantum theory and the implicate order 
39 1 
2. R. F .  Feynman , QED. The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, 
Princeton U niversity P ress ,  Princeton , New J ersey, 1985. 
3 .  J .  P. Heller, A m .  J. Phys. 28, 348-353 ( 1 960) . 
4 .  D .  Bohm and F .  D. Peat , Science, Order an4 Creativity, chapter 3, 
Bantam Books , Toronto, 1987. 
5 .  F .  A. M. Frescura and B. J .  Hiley, Found. Phys. 10, 705-722 ( 1 980) . 
6 .  F .  A . M .  Frescura and B .  J .  Hiley, Rev. Brosileiro de Fisica Vol. 
Especial , 49-86 ( 1984) . 
7 .  H .  P. Stapp , ' Einstein Time and Process Time ' ,  in Physics and the 
Ultimate Significance of Time, ed . D .  R. G riffin , State University 
Press, New York, 1 986 , 264-270 . 
8 .  M .  Gell-Mann and J .  B .  Hartle, 'Quantum Mechanics in the Light of 
Quantum Cosmology ' ,  in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Found. of Quantum 
Mechanics, ed . S. Kobyashi ,  Physic al Society of J apan , Tokyo, 1989. 
9 .  F .  Klein , Elementary Mathematics from an A dvanced Standpoint: 
Geometry, Dover , New York ,  1939. 
10. C. W .  Misner , K. S. Thorne and J .  A. Wheeler, Gravitation, W. H. 
Freeman , San Francisco, 1973 . 
1 1 .  D. Bohm, B .  J .  Hiley and A .  E .  G .  Stuart, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 3, 
1 71-183 ( 1 970) . 
1 2 .  D. Bohm and B .  J .  Hiley, Rev. Brasileira de Fisica Vol. Especial, 
1-26 ( 1 984) . 
13. K .  Menger , The Rice Institute Pamphlet 27, 80- 107 ( 1 940) . 
1 4 .  W. V. D .  Hodge , The Theory and Applications of Harmonic Integrals, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge , 1952. 
15. F .  Kle in , Bull. N. Y. Math. Soc. 1 1 ,  215-249 ( 1893 ) .  
1 6 .  G .  C .  Ghirardi, A. Rimini and T .  Weber, Phys. Rev. D34 , 470-49 1 
( 1986) . 
17. E .  P. Wigner, ' Remarks on the Mind-body Qu:ǙǚiǛn', in Symmetries 

392 
The undivided universe 
18. H. Everett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454-462 ( 1 957). 
19. E .  Squires, The Conscious Mind in the Physical World, Adam Hilger, 
Bristol, 1990. 
20. D. Bohm, Phil. Psych. 3 ,  271 ( 1990). 
2 1 .  D. Bohm, The Special Theory of Relativity, Addison-Wesley, New 
York, 1989. 
22. I. N. Marshall, 'Consciousness and Bose-Einstein Condensates', New 
Ideas in Psychology 1, 73-83 ( 1989). 
23. R. Penrose , The Emperor 's New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds 
and the Laws of Physics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, I 989. 
24. M .  Lockwood, Mind, Bmin and the Quantum, Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford, 1989. 
25. P. Pylkkanen , The Search of Meaning, Thorsons, Wellingborough, 
1989. 

Author index 
Albert, D. 303, 3 1 1 , 347 
Aspect, A. 144, 145, 294 
Ballentine, L.E. 269 , 307, 3 10 
Belinfante, F.J. 1 16 
Bell, J.S. l ,  7, 26 , 4 1 ,  1 1 4, 1 1 7, 1 1 8, 122, 
134, 140, 145, 146, 205 , 220, 296, 
3 10 ,  326 
Ben-Dov, Y. 296 
Bloch, F. 278 
Bogolubov, N. 66 
Bohm, D. 4, 5 ,  18, 22, 26, 39, 142, 16 1 ,  
1 6 3 ,  1 70, 1 94, 205, 238, 290, 304, 
3 2 1 , 323, 324, 363, 382 
Bohr, N. 2, 1 3 ,  15, 1 9 ,  24, 38, 41, 49, 
104, 1 1 4, 1 22, 1 23, 127, 130, 1 36, 
137, 325 
Brown, H.R. 1 1 8 
Caldeira, A.O. 336 
Chew, G.F. 166, 287, 288 
Chusing, J.T. 4 
Clauser, J. 143, 144 
Cooper, L.N. 296 , 3 10 
Cufaro-Petroni, N. 233 
de Broglie, L. 3, 4, 38, 39, 1 98, 2 16, 233 
d'Espagnat, B. 296, 306, 3 1 0, 3 14 
DeuŁch, D. 306, 307, 3 10, 3 1 5 , 320, 339 
Dewdney, C. 288 
DeWitt, B.S. 8, 296, 300, 302, 3 1 5  
Dirac, P.A.M. 7, 1 7 ,  4 1  
Droz-Vincent, P. 286 
Eberhard, P.H. 139 
Eccles, J.C. 179 
Einstein, A. 19, 26, 57, 1 36, 137, 138 
163, 164, 1 74, 196, 292, 303 
Everett, H. 8, 296, 297, 302, 309, 332, 
38 1 ,  390 
Fenech, C. 273 
Feynman, R.P. 66, 67, 68, 190, 336, 355, 
372 
Folse, H.J. 16 
Freedman, S. 1 44 
Frescura, F.A.M. 365 
Gell-Mann, M. 1, 9, 10, 1 6 1 ,  320, 33 1 ,  
365 , 367 , 375, 390 
Ghiradi, G.C. 9, 1 6 1 ,  320, 326, 3 8 1  
Glauber, J. 287 
Gleason, A.M. 1 1 8 
Graham, N. 302 
Greenberger, D.M. 1 1 8 
Hartle, J.B. 9, 10, 1 6 1 ,  320, 3 3 1 ,  365, 
367, 378, 390 
Hawking, S.W. 188 
Heisenberg, W. 2, 13, 1 5 ,  18, 20, 320, 
325 
Hiley, B.J. 38, 142, 194, 365 
Hom, M. 1 1 8 
Jauch, J.M. 1 1 8 
Jeans, J. 320 
Joos, E. 336 
Klein, F. 369 
Kochen, S. 1 1 8, 1 22 
Landau, L.D, 66, 67 
Leggett, A.J. 163, 304, 329, 336 
Lehr, W.J. 273 
Lie, S. 369 
Lockwood, M. 388 
Loewer, B. 303 , 3 1 1  
Mandel, L. 232 
Marshall, 1.N. 387 
Mermin, N.D. 1 1 8, 1 20, 1 2 1 ,  122, 146, 
1 47 
Narnbu, Y. 235 

394 
The undivided universe 
Nelson, E. 194, 197, 202 
Newton, I. 157 
Parle, J.L. 273 
Paul, H. 260 
Pauli, W. 7, 23, 39 
Peat, F.D. 363 
Penrose, R. 163, 388 
Peres, A. 1 18 
Pfieegor, R.L. 232 
Pinch, T.J. 4 
Pines, D. 66 
Piron, C. 1 18 
Podolsky, B. 19, 134 
Popper, K.R. 288 
Prigogine, I. 188 
Primas, H. 296, 3 10, 314 
Pr0$er, R.D. 234 
Pylkkanen, P. 388 
Renninger, M. 23 1 ,  259 
Rimini, A. 9, 161, 320, 326, 38 1 
Rosen, N. 19, 134, 163 
Schrodinger, E. 7, 125 
Schweber, S.S. 277 
Shiller, R. 205 
Shimony, E.P. 1 18, 327 
Sr ŀcker, E.P. 18, 122 
Squires, E.J. 299, 303, 36 1 
Stapp, H.P. 9, 10, 161, 287, 288, 296, 
3 1 1, 329, 330, 33 1 , 332, 365, 367, 
375 
Svetlichny, G. 1 18 
Tiomno, J. 205 
Tolman, R.C. 193 
Tonomura, A. 164 
van Vechten, D. 296, 310 
Vernon, J.R. 336 
Vigier, J.P. 194, 238, 273, 286 
von Neumann, J. 3, 17, 19, 23, 98, 102, 
104, 1 16, 1 17, 1 18, 125, 137, 139, 
325 
Weber, T. 9, 161, 320, 326, 38 1 
Weinberg, S. 327 
Weisskopf, V. 88, 90 
Wentzel, G. 278 
Wesley, J.P. 234 
Wheeler, J.A. 38, 1 14, 127, 1 28, 130 
Whitehead, A.N. 330 
Wigner, E. 3, 88, 90, 297, 3 1 2, 38 1 
Zeh, H.D. 296, 3 10, 336 
Zeilinger, A. 1 18 
Zurek, W. 336 

Subject index 
action-at-a-distance 57, 1 5 7 ;  'spooky' 
1 36 
actual event 320, 337 
Aharonov-Bohm effect 50 
angular momentum measurement 148, 
190 
anti-symetric wave function 153 
Auger-like effect 83, 1 3 1  
awareness 30 1 ,  303, 3 1 1 , 3 1 5 ,  339 
barier penetration 74, 79 
beables, in Dirac theory 276; in field 
theory 230, 239, 259, 287, 342, 380; 
in particle theories 4 1 ,  1 20, 342 
Bell inequalities 1 34, 140, 142, 147, 1 5 0, 
293 
bifurcation 75, 89 
boson fields 8 ,  230 
bullet-like photon see photon, bullet-like 
properties 
brain 36, 1 79, 3 8 1  
cat paradox, SchrOdinger 7, 125, 1 28, 
328 
Cartesian order 10, 350, 353, 374, 377, 
386 
Casimer effect 38 
causal interpretation 2, 28, 30, 46, 202 
causality 29 
chanel 6, 78, 8 1 , 102, 107, 1 2 1 , 1 24, 
1 5 5 ,  202, 257 
characteristic length 34 7 
chemical bond 63 
clasical limit 4, 7, 13, 20, 3 1 , 47, 62, 
1 5 1 ,  160, 1 74, 242, 308 ; of fields 287 
clasicity 338 
coarse graining 337, 342 
coherent state 252 
collapse 6, 20, 22, 73, 79, 82, 95, 104, 
1 1 5 ,  123, 125, 1 38, 149, 297, 380 
collapse of wave function of universe 303 
complementarity 16, 107. 1 36 
complexity 304, 309 
conformal group 370 
consciousness 10, 1 26, 3 1 2, 3 8 1 ,  388 
contact matrix 36 1 ,  376 
context dependence 108, 1 14, 1 18 ,  120, 
122, 147 
correspondence principle 4 
cosmology 165, 338 
cut, von Neumann's 20, 1 78 
decay of the wave function 327 
decohering histories see histories, 
decohering 
delayed choice 127 
density matrix 188, 190, 343 
determinism 24, 324 
DNA 36, 388 
Dirac equation 7, 40, 199, 2 1 4, 272 
Dirac vacuum 276 
dispersion-free 1 1 7 
double solution 39 
Eleatics 346 
energy swept out of field 264 
energy-momentum conservation 39, 47, 
70 
enfoldment 354, 359, 376, 386 
entropy 108 
epistomology 2, 13, 19, 26, 97, 154 
EPR 1, 7, 19, 9 1 ,  134, 1 4 1 ,  1 5 1 , 1 90, 
202, 225, 282, 34 1 
EPR for fields 264 
explicate order 350, 354, 36 1 ,  382 
'exploding' transformation 375 
Fabry-Perot interferometer 163 
faithful measurement 1 10 
faster-than-light ¡ignals 57, 1 39, 282 
Feynman diagrams 360 
field: ground state 242; first excited state 
247 

396 
The undivided universe 
fine-grained histories see histories. 
fine-grained 
fission-fusion 92 
form 3 1 ,  39, 325 
gauge transformation 5 1  
Gaussian wave packet 46, 75, 252 
general relativity 35 1 
Green's function 354, 364 
GRW theory 326, 346, 38 1 
guidance condition 39, 8 1 ,  149, 1 98, 2 18, 
22 1 , 234, 282 
Hamilton-Jacobi theory 29, 56, 62, 199, 
24 1 , 3 1 5  
Heisenberg algebra 365 
Heisenberg microscope 14, 22 
hidden variables 2, 19, 1 1 7, 122, 1 42, 
145 
Hilbert space 9, 297, 3 1 3, 320, 329, 342, 
350, 367 
histories 332, 365 ; decohering 334; 
fine-grained 333 
hologram 353 
holomovement 357, 382 
Huygens construction 355, 372 
hyperspherical geometry 369 
ideal 365 
implicate order 10, 350, 354, 36 1 ,  378, 
382 
implication parameter 360 
indistinguishable particles 154 
indivisibility of the quantum of action 14, 
16 
information 38, 42, 48, 61, 7 1 , 94, 105, 
200, 388; active 5 ,  36, 4 1 ,  49, 62, 68, 
7 1 ,  78, 94, 379, 384; inactive 79, 99; 
passive 37 
information gathering and utilising system 
(IGUS) 339, 390 
ink-droplet model 358, 363 
interference: two-slit experiment 32, 42, 
49, 6 1 ,  199; two-slit using lasers 26 1 
intrinsic property 1 14 
ireversibility 82 
Klein Erlanger programe 378 
Klein-Gordon equation 233; and proper 
time 235 
localisation of atoms 166 
locality in explicate order 377 
Lorentz ether 290 
Lorentz invariance 27 1 ,  282, 288, 346; in 
Dirac theory 276, 279; and 
nonlocality 286 
Mach's principle 109 
magnetic moment of electron 2 1 8  
manifest world 1 76, 1 9 1 ,  288, 3 1 4, 362, 
368 
many-body system 8, 40, 56, 1 82, 20 l ,  
208, 222 
many-body Dirac 274 
many-minds interpretation 3 1 3  
many-worlds interpretation 8 ,  296, 336 
meaning 36 
measurement problem 18, 20, 47, 97, 
109, 1 1 4, 1 20, 1 3 1 ,  1 38, 297, 328, 
334, 342 
measurement at space-like separation 144 
memory 300, 303, 3 1 1 , 339 
metric tensor 289, 292 
mixed state 1 8 1 ,  185 
momentum measurement 1 10, 266 
multi-time formalism 278 
negative measurement 1 23 
non-linearity 39, 78, 9 1 ,  95, 25 1 
nonlocality l ,  6, 49, 57, 60, 70, 106, 1 34, 
145, 1 5 1 ,  157, 1 79, 20 l ,  292, 346, 
379; in field theory 250, 25 5 ;  and 
special relativity 1 36, 1 58; in time 238 
non-stationary states 45, 47 
observables 4 1  
ontological interpretation 3 1 , 40, 47, 1 28, 
140, 166, 325, 346; of Dirac electron 
279; of fields 259 
ontology, 2, 1 3, 16, 18, 23, 1 37, 1 54, 
324; of boson field 232 
organic wholeness 1 7 7  
osmotic velocity 1 97, 199, 20 1 ,  347 
participation 26, 107, 1 1 4, 222, 284, 386 
Pauli equation 7, 40, 204, 2 14 
Pauli exclusion principle 1 5 3, 1 56 
perception 323 
Pfleegor-Mandel experiment 262 
photon: concept of 255; bullet-like 
properties 23 1 ,  259 

Planck length 9, 289, 377 
Planck time 367, 374 
Poincae group 370 
position measurement 109, 1 15 
potentiality 1 8, 36, 79, 97, 107, 1 1 5 ,  2 1 8  
preferred basis in many-worlds 
interpretation 309 
preferred frame 292 
pre-space 374, 378 
probability 40 ; in ontological 
interpretation 1 8 1 ,  184 
projection operators 330, 365 
P-sets 375 
P-state of atom 44, 58, 9 1  
pure state 4 1 ,  1 8 1 ,  365 
quantum algebra 363 
quantum algorithm 17, 23 
quantum cosmology 4, 338 
quantum j ump 25 
quantum potential 29, 37, 40, 48, 5 2, 57, 
65, 75, 8 1 ,  92, 95, 98, 102, 108, 1 1 2, 
1 49, 16 1 ,  199, 22 1 ,  379 
quasi-classical world 338 
rapport 34 1 
relation between the physical and the 
mental 385 
relative state 299 
rotons 67 
Solvay Congress 3, 39 
spin measurement 1 19, 1 35, 1 38, 1 4 1 ,  
299 
splitting of universe 3 10 
Subject index 
397 
spreading wave function 73 
stationary states 42, 49, 97 
statistics 1 8 1 ,  194 
statistical mechanics 7, 1 9 1  
Stem-Gerlach experiment 10 1, 107, 1 17, 
1 2 1 ,  22 1 
S-state of atom 42, 58, 92, 200 
stochastic theory 7, 30, 43, 145, 194, 
196, 202; of Dirac electron 293; and 
Lorentz invariance 273 
sub-quantum level 9 
subtle world 177 
superfluidity and superconductivity 65, 
1 34 
super-implicate order 378, 380 
super-quantum potential 240, 246 
"Theory of Everything" 3 2 1 ,  389 
trajectory 32, 75, 77, 105, 175, 209, 227, 
347, 368, 373; arising from waves 369 
transitions, atomic 95 
unanalysable whole 23, 94, 1 37, 1 76 
unbroken wholeness 352 
uncertainty principle 1 5 ,  43, 46, 1 14, 
1 16, 194, 25 1 , 3 1 3, 350 
universal time 288 
vacuum fluctuations 49 
varifyability 288 
vector potential 50, 54 
watchdog effect 1 3 1  
wholeness 6 ,  1 5 ,  38, 42, 58, 65, 95, 1 22 
WKB approximation 28, 105, 1 6 1 ,  164 
Zeno paradox 1 3 1 ,  352 

