
Wholeness and the
Implicate Order
‘One of the most important books of our times.’
Resurgence
‘I ﬁnd his concept of wholeness extraordinarily appeal-
ing, as an explanation of the riddles of modern physics,
and as a prescription for human living.’
John P. Wiley Jr, Smithsonian
‘Wholeness and the Implicate Order conveys a sense
of work in progress, which aims at a distantly glimpsed
ideal of the uniﬁcation of all aspects of the world. . . .
The feeling of struggle in Bohm’s book is its most
appealing feature.’
Abner Shimony, Nature


David
Bohm
Wholeness and the
Implicate Order
London and New York

First published 1980
by Routledge & Kegan Paul
First published in Routledge Classics 2002
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 1980 David Bohm
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 0–415–28978–5 (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–28979–3 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor and Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-99515-5 Master e-book ISBN

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
ix
Introduction
x
Fragmentation and wholeness
1
1
Appendix: Résumé of discussion on Western and
Eastern forms of insight into wholeness
25
The rheomode – an experiment with
2
language and thought
34
1 Introduction
34
2 An inquiry into our language
36
3 The form of the rheomode
41
4 Truth and fact in the rheomode
53
5 The rheomode and its implications for our
overall world view
59
Reality and knowledge considered as process
61
3
1 Introduction
61

2 Thought and intelligence
63
3 The thing and the thought
68
4 Thought and non-thought
71
5 The ﬁeld of knowledge, considered as process
79
Hidden variables in the quantum theory
83
4
1 Main features of the quantum theory
84
2 Limitations on determinism implied by the
quantum theory
85
3 On the interpretation of indeterminism in the
quantum theory
86
4 Arguments in favour of the interpretation of
quantum-mechanical indeterminism as
irreducible lawlessness
88
5 Bohr’s resolution of the paradox of Einstein,
Rosen and Podolsky – the indivisibility of all
material processes
93
6 Preliminary interpretation of quantum theory
in terms of hidden variables
97
7 Criticisms of our preliminary interpretation of
quantum theory in terms of hidden variables
102
8 Steps toward a more detailed theory of
hidden variables
108
9 Treatment of quantum ﬂuctuations
110
10 Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle
113
11 The indivisibility of quantum processes
117
12 Explanation of quantization of action
122
13 Discussion of experiments to probe
sub-quantum level
133
14 Conclusion
139
contents
vi

Quantum theory as an indication of a new
5
order in physics
141
Part A: The development of new orders as
shown through the history of physics
141
1 Introduction
141
2 What is order?
146
3 Measure
149
4 Structure as a development from order
and measure
151
5 Order, measure and structure in
classical physics
153
6 The theory of relativity
155
7 Quantum theory
162
Quantum theory as an indication of a new
6
order in physics
177
Part B: Implicate and explicate order in
physical law
177
1 Introduction
177
2 Undivided wholeness – the lens and
the hologram
182
3 Implicate and explicate order
186
4 The holomovement and its aspects
190
5 Law in the holomovement
197
Appendix: implicate and explicate order in
physical law
199
The enfolding-unfolding universe and
7
consciousness
218
1 Introduction
218
2 Résumé, contrasting mechanistic order in
physics with implicate order
219
3 The implicate order and the general
structure of matter
227
contents
vii

4 Quantum theory as an indication of a
multidimensional implicate order
236
5 Cosmology and the implicate order
240
6 The implicate order, life and the force
of overall necessity
245
7 Consciousness and the implicate order
248
8 Matter, consciousness and their common
ground
262
Notes
273
Index
281
contents
viii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author and publisher would like to thank the following
for permission to reproduce copyright material: The Van Leer
Jerusalem Foundation (chapters 1 and 2, from Fragmentation and
Wholeness, 1976); the editors of The Academy (chapter 3, from
The Academy, vol. 19, no. 1, February 1975); Academic Press
Ltd (chapter 4, from Quantum Theory Radiation and High Energy
Physics, part 3, edited D. R. Bates, 1962); Plenum Publishing
Corporation (chapters 5 and 6, from Foundations of Physics, vol. 1,
no. 4, 1971, pp. 359–81 and vol. 3, no. 2, 1973, pp. 139–68).

INTRODUCTION
This book is a collection of essays (see Acknowledgments)
representing the development of my thinking over the past
twenty years. A brief introduction will perhaps be useful in
order to indicate what are the principal questions that are to be
discussed, and how they are connected.
I would say that in my scientiﬁc and philosophical work, my
main concern has been with understanding the nature of reality
in general and of consciousness in particular as a coherent
whole, which is never static or complete, but which is in an
unending process of movement and unfoldment. Thus, when I
look back, I see that even as a child I was fascinated by the puzzle,
indeed the mystery, of what is the nature of movement. When-
ever one thinks of anything, it seems to be apprehended either as
static, or as a series of static images. Yet, in the actual experience
of movement, one senses an unbroken, undivided process of ﬂow,
to which the series of static images in thought is related as a
series of ‘still’ photographs might be related to the actuality of a
speeding car. This question was, of course, already raised in

essence philosophically more than 2,000 years ago in Zeno’s
paradoxes; but as yet, it cannot be said to have a satisfactory
resolution.
Then there is the further question of what is the relationship
of thinking to reality. As careful attention shows, thought itself is
in an actual process of movement. That is to say, one can feel a
sense of ﬂow in the ‘stream of consciousness’ not dissimilar to
the sense of ﬂow in the movement of matter in general. May not
thought itself thus be a part of reality as a whole? But then, what
could it mean for one part of reality to ‘know’ another, and to
what extent would this be possible? Does the content of thought
merely give us abstract and simpliﬁed ‘snapshots’ of reality, or
can it go further, somehow to grasp the very essence of the living
movement that we sense in actual experience?
It is clear that in reﬂecting on and pondering the nature of
movement, both in thought and in the object of thought, one
comes inevitably to the question of wholeness or totality. The
notion that the one who thinks (the Ego) is at least in principle
completely separate from and independent of the reality that he
thinks about is of course ﬁrmly embedded in our entire tradi-
tion. (This notion is clearly almost universally accepted in the
West, but in the East there is a general tendency to deny it ver-
bally and philosophically while at the same time such an
approach pervades most of life and daily practice as much as it
does in the West.) General experience of the sort described
above, along with a great deal of modern scientiﬁc knowledge
concerning the nature and function of the brain as the seat of
thought, suggest very strongly that such a division cannot be
maintained consistently. But this confronts us with a very dif-
ﬁcult challenge: How are we to think coherently of a single,
unbroken, ﬂowing actuality of existence as a whole, containing
both thought (consciousness) and external reality as we
experience it?
Clearly, this brings us to consider our overall world view, which
introduction
xi

includes our general notions concerning the nature of reality,
along with those concerning the total order of the universe, i.e.,
cosmology. To meet the challenge before us our notions of cos-
mology and of the general nature of reality must have room in
them to permit a consistent account of consciousness. Vice versa,
our notions of consciousness must have room in them to under-
stand what it means for its content to be ‘reality as a whole’. The
two sets of notions together should then be such as to allow for
an understanding of how reality and consciousness are related.
These questions are, of course, enormous and could in any
case probably never be resolved ultimately and completely.
Nevertheless, it has always seemed important to me that there be
a continuing investigation of proposals aimed at meeting the
challenge that has been pointed out here. Of course, the prevail-
ing tendency in modern science has been against such an enter-
prise, being directed instead mainly toward relatively detailed
and concrete theoretical predictions, which show at least some
promise of eventual pragmatic application. Some explanation of
why I want to go so strongly against the prevailing general
current seems therefore to be called for.
Aside from what I feel to be the intrinsic interest of questions
that are so fundamental and deep, I would, in this connection,
call attention to the general problem of fragmentation of human
consciousness, which is discussed in chapter 1. It is proposed
there that the widespread and pervasive distinctions between
people (race, nation, family, profession, etc., etc.), which are
now preventing mankind from working together for the com-
mon good, and indeed, even for survival, have one of the key
factors of their origin in a kind of thought that treats things as
inherently divided, disconnected, and ‘broken up’ into yet
smaller constituent parts. Each part is considered to be essentially
independent and self-existent.
When man thinks of himself in this way, he will inevitably
tend to defend the needs of his own ‘Ego’ against those of the
introduction
xii

others; or, if he identiﬁes with a group of people of the same
kind, he will defend this group in a similar way. He cannot
seriously think of mankind as the basic reality, whose claims
come ﬁrst. Even if he does try to consider the needs of mankind
he tends to regard humanity as separate from nature, and so on.
What I am proposing here is that man’s general way of thinking
of the totality, i.e. his general world view, is crucial for overall
order of the human mind itself. If he thinks of the totality as
constituted of independent fragments, then that is how his mind
will tend to operate, but if he can include everything coherently
and harmoniously in an overall whole that is undivided,
unbroken, and without a border (for every border is a division
or break) then his mind will tend to move in a similar way, and
from this will ﬂow an orderly action within the whole.
Of course, as I have already indicated, our general world view
is not the only factor that is important in this context. Attention
must, indeed, be given to many other factors, such as emotions,
physical activities, human relationships, social organizations, etc.,
but perhaps because we have at present no coherent world view,
there is a widespread tendency to ignore the psychological and
social importance of such questions almost altogether. My sug-
gestion is that a proper world view, appropriate for its time, is
generally one of the basic factors that is essential for harmony in
the individual and in society as a whole.
In chapter 1 it is shown that science itself is demanding a new,
non-fragmentary world view, in the sense that the present
approach of analysis of the world into independently existent
parts does not work very well in modern physics. It is shown that
both in relativity theory and quantum theory, notions implying
the undivided wholeness of the universe would provide a much
more orderly way of considering the general nature of reality.
In chapter 2 we go into the role of language in bringing about
fragmentation of thought. It is pointed out that the subject-verb-
object structure of modern languages implies that all action
introduction
xiii

arises in a separate subject, and acts either on a separate object,
or else reﬂexively on itself. This pervasive structure leads in the
whole of life to a function that divides the totality of existence
into separate entities, which are considered to be essentially
ﬁxed and static in their nature. We then inquire whether it is
possible to experiment with new language forms in which the
basic role will be given to the verb rather than to the noun. Such
forms will have as their content a series of actions that ﬂow and
merge into each other, without sharp separations or breaks.
Thus, both in form and in content, the language will be in
harmony with the unbroken ﬂowing movement of existence as a
whole.
What is proposed here is not a new language as such but,
rather, a new mode of using the existing language – the rheomode
(ﬂowing mode). We develop such a mode as a form of
experimentation with language, which is intended mainly to
give insight into the fragmentary function of the common lan-
guage rather than to provide a new way of speaking that can be
used for practical communications.
In chapter 3 the same questions are considered within a dif-
ferent context. It begins with a discussion of how reality can be
considered as in essence a set of forms in an underlying uni-
versal movement or process, and then asks how our knowledge
can be considered in the same manner. Thus, the way could be
opened for a world view in which consciousness and reality
would not be fragmented from each other. This question is dis-
cussed at length and we arrive at the notion that our general
world view is itself an overall movement of thought, which has
to be viable in the sense that the totality of activities that ﬂow out
of it are generally in harmony, both in themselves and with
regard to the whole of existence. Such harmony is seen to be
possible only if the world view itself takes part in an unending
process of development, evolution, and unfoldment, which ﬁts
as part of the universal process that is the ground of all existence.
introduction
xiv

The next three chapters are rather more technical and math-
ematical. However, large parts of them should be comprehen-
sible to the non-technical reader, as the technical parts are
not entirely necessary for comprehension, although they add
signiﬁcant content for those who can follow them.
Chapter 4 deals with hidden variables in the quantum theory.
The quantum theory is, at present, the most basic way available
in physics for understanding the fundamental and universal laws
relating to matter and its movement. As such, it must clearly be
given serious consideration in any attempt to develop an overall
world viewing.
The quantum theory, as it is now constituted, presents us with
a very great challenge, if we are at all interested in such a ven-
ture, for in this theory there is no consistent notion at all of what
the reality may be that underlies the universal constitution and
structure of matter. Thus, if we try to use the prevailing world
view based on the notion of particles, we discover that the ‘par-
ticles’ (such as electrons) can also manifest as waves, that they
can move discontinuously, that there are no laws at all that apply
in detail to the actual movements of individual particles and that
only statistical predictions can be made about large aggregates of
such particles. If on the other hand we apply the world view in
which the universe is regarded as a continuous ﬁeld, we ﬁnd that
this ﬁeld must also be discontinuous, as well as particle-like, and
that it is as undermined in its actual behaviour as is required in
the particle view of relation as a whole.
It seems clear, then, that we are faced with deep and radical
fragmentation, as well as thoroughgoing confusion, if we try to
think of what could be the reality that is treated by our physical
laws. At present physicists tend to avoid this issue by adopting
the attitude that our overall views concerning the nature of re-
ality are of little or no importance. All that counts in physical
theory is supposed to be the development of mathematical equa-
tions that permit us to predict and control the behaviour of large
introduction
xv

statistical aggregates of particles. Such a goal is not regarded as
merely for its pragmatic and technical utility: rather, it has
become a presupposition of most work in modern physics that
prediction and control of this kind is all that human knowledge
is about.
This sort of presupposition is indeed in accord with the gen-
eral spirit of our age, but it is my main proposal in this book that
we cannot thus simply dispense with an overall world view. If we
try to do so, we will ﬁnd that we are left with whatever (gener-
ally inadequate) world views may happen to be at hand. Indeed,
one ﬁnds that physicists are not actually able just to engage in
calculations aimed at prediction and control: they do ﬁnd it
necessary to use images based on some kind of general notions
concerning the nature of reality, such as ‘the particles that are
the building blocks of the universe’; but these images are now
highly confused (e.g. these particles move discontinuously and
are also waves). In short, we are here confronted with an
example of how deep and strong is the need for some kind of
notion of reality in our thinking, even if it be fragmentary and
muddled.
My suggestion is that at each stage the proper order of oper-
ation of the mind requires an overall grasp of what is generally
known not only in formal, logical, mathematical terms, but also
intuitively, in images, feelings, poetic usage of language, etc.
(Perhaps we could say that this is what is involved in harmony
between the ‘left brain’ and the ‘right brain’.) This kind of over-
all way of thinking is not only a fertile source of new theoretical
ideas: it is needed for the human mind to function in a generally
harmonious way, which could in turn help to make possible an
orderly and stable society. As indicated in the earlier chapters,
however, this requires a continual ﬂow and development of our
general notions of reality.
Chapter 4 is then concerned with making a beginning in the pro-
cess of developing a coherent view of what kind of reality might
introduction
xvi

be the basis of the correct mathematical predictions achieved in
the quantum theory. Such attempts have generally been received
among the community of physicists in a somewhat confused
way, for it is widely felt that if there is to be any general world
view it should be taken as the ‘received’ and ‘ﬁnal’ notion con-
cerning the nature of reality. But my attitude has, from the
beginning, been that our notions concerning cosmology and the
general nature of reality are in a continuous process of develop-
ment, and that one may have to start with ideas that are merely
some sort of improvement over what has thus far been available,
and to go on from there to ideas that are better. Chapter 4 pres-
ents the real and severe problems that confront any attempt to
provide a consistent notion of ‘quantum-mechanical reality’,
and indicates a certain preliminary approach to a solution of
these problems in terms of hidden variables.
In chapter 5 a diﬀerent approach to the same problems is
explored. This is an inquiry into our basic notions of order.
Order in its totality is evidently ultimately undeﬁnable, in the
sense that it pervades everything that we are and do (language,
thought, feeling, sensation, physical action, the arts, practical
activity, etc.). However, in physics the basic order has for centur-
ies been that of the Cartesian rectilinear grid (extended slightly
in the theory of relativity to the curvilinear grid). Physics has
had an enormous development during this time, with the
appearance of many radically new features, but the basic order
has remained essentially unchanged.
The Cartesian order is suitable for analysis of the world into
separately existent parts (e.g. particles or ﬁeld elements). In this
chapter, however, we look into the nature of order with greater
generality and depth, and discover that both in relativity and in
quantum theory the Cartesian order is leading to serious contra-
dictions and confusion. This is because both theories imply that
the actual state of aﬀairs is unbroken wholeness of the universe,
rather than analysis into independent parts. Nevertheless, the
introduction xvii

two theories diﬀer radically in their detailed notions of order.
Thus, in relativity, movement is continuous, causally determin-
ate and well deﬁned, while in quantum mechanics it is dis-
continuous, not causally determinate and not well deﬁned. Each
theory is committed to its own notions of essentially static and
fragmentary modes of existence (relativity to that of separate
events, connectable by signals, and quantum mechanics to a
well-deﬁned quantum state). One thus sees that a new kind of
theory is needed which drops these basic commitments and at
most recovers some essential features of the older theories as
abstract forms derived from a deeper reality in which what
prevails is unbroken wholeness.
In chapter 6 we go further to begin a more concrete develop-
ment of a new notion of order, that may be appropriate to a
universe of unbroken wholeness. This is the implicate or enfolded
order. In the enfolded order, space and time are no longer the
dominant factors determining the relationships of dependence
or independence of diﬀerent elements. Rather, an entirely diﬀer-
ent sort of basic connection of elements is possible, from which
our ordinary notions of space and time, along with those of
separately existent material particles, are abstracted as forms
derived from the deeper order. These ordinary notions in fact
appear in what is called the explicate or unfolded order, which is a
special and distinguished form contained within the general
totality of all the implicate orders.
In chapter 6 the implicate order is introduced in a general
way, and discussed mathematically in an appendix. The seventh
and last chapter, however, is a more developed (though non-
technical) presentation of the implicate order, along with its
relationship to consciousness. This leads to an indication of
some lines along which it may be possible to meet the urgent
challenge to develop a cosmology and set of general notions
concerning the nature of reality that are proper to our time.
Finally, it is hoped that the presentation of the material in
introduction
xviii

these essays may help to convey to the reader how the subject
itself has actually unfolded, so that the form of the book is, as it
were, an example of what may be meant by the content.
introduction
xix


1
FRAGMENTATION AND
WHOLENESS
The title of this chapter is ‘Fragmentation and wholeness’. It is
especially important to consider this question today, for frag-
mentation is now very widespread, not only throughout society,
but also in each individual; and this is leading to a kind of
general confusion of the mind, which creates an endless series
of problems and interferes with our clarity of perception so
seriously as to prevent us from being able to solve most of
them.
Thus art, science, technology, and human work in general, are
divided up into specialities, each considered to be separate in
essence from the others. Becoming dissatisﬁed with this state of
aﬀairs, men have set up further interdisciplinary subjects, which
were intended to unite these specialities, but these new subjects
have ultimately served mainly to add further separate fragments.
Then, society as a whole has developed in such a way that it is
broken up into separate nations and diﬀerent religious, political,
economic, racial groups, etc. Man’s natural environment has

correspondingly been seen as an aggregate of separately existent
parts, to be exploited by diﬀerent groups of people. Similarly,
each individual human being has been fragmented into a large
number of separate and conﬂicting compartments, according to
his diﬀerent desires, aims, ambitions, loyalties, psychological
characteristics, etc., to such an extent that it is generally accepted
that some degree of neurosis is inevitable, while many indi-
viduals going beyond the ‘normal’ limits of fragmentation are
classiﬁed as paranoid, schizoid, psychotic, etc.
The notion that all these fragments are separately existent is
evidently an illusion, and this illusion cannot do other than lead
to endless conﬂict and confusion. Indeed, the attempt to live
according to the notion that the fragments are really separate is,
in essence, what has led to the growing series of extremely
urgent crises that is confronting us today. Thus, as is now well
known, this way of life has brought about pollution, destruction
of the balance of nature, over-population, world-wide economic
and political disorder, and the creation of an overall environment
that is neither physically nor mentally healthy for most of the
people who have to live in it. Individually there has developed a
widespread feeling of helplessness and despair, in the face of
what seems to be an overwhelming mass of disparate social
forces, going beyond the control and even the comprehension of
the human beings who are caught up in it.
Indeed, to some extent, it has always been both necessary and
proper for man, in his thinking, to divide things up, and to
separate them, so as to reduce his problems to manageable pro-
portions; for evidently, if in our practical technical work we
tried to deal with the whole of reality all at once, we would be
swamped. So, in certain ways, the creation of special subjects of
study and the division of labour was an important step forward.
Even earlier, man’s ﬁrst realization that he was not identical with
nature was also a crucial step, because it made possible a kind of
autonomy in his thinking, which allowed him to go beyond the
wholeness and the implicate order
2

immediately given limits of nature, ﬁrst in his imagination and
ultimately in his practical work.
Nevertheless, this sort of ability of man to separate himself
from his environment and to divide and apportion things ulti-
mately led to a wide range of negative and destructive results,
because man lost awareness of what he was doing and thus
extended the process of division beyond the limits within which
it works properly. In essence, the process of division is a way of
thinking about things that is convenient and useful mainly in the
domain of practical, technical and functional activities (e.g., to
divide up an area of land into diﬀerent ﬁelds where various
crops are to be grown). However, when this mode of thought is
applied more broadly to man’s notion of himself and the whole
world in which he lives (i.e. to his self-world view), then man
ceases to regard the resulting divisions as merely useful or con-
venient and begins to see and experience himself and his world
as actually constituted of separately existent fragments. Being
guided by a fragmentary self-world view, man then acts in such a
way as to try to break himself and the world up, so that all seems
to correspond to his way of thinking. Man thus obtains an appar-
ent proof of the correctness of his fragmentary self-world view
though, of course, he overlooks the fact that it is he himself,
acting according to his mode of thought, who has brought
about the fragmentation that now seems to have an autonomous
existence, independent of his will and of his desire.
Men have been aware from time immemorial of this state of
apparently autonomously existent fragmentation and have often
projected myths of a yet earlier ‘golden age’, before the split
between man and nature and between man and man had yet
taken place. Indeed, man has always been seeking wholeness –
mental, physical, social, individual.
It is instructive to consider that the word ‘health’ in English is
based on an Anglo-Saxon word ‘hale’ meaning ‘whole’: that is,
to be healthy is to be whole, which is, I think, roughly the
fragmentation and wholeness
3

equivalent of the Hebrew ‘shalem’. Likewise, the English ‘holy’
is based on the same root as ‘whole’. All of this indicates that
man has sensed always that wholeness or integrity is an absolute
necessity to make life worth living. Yet, over the ages, he has
generally lived in fragmentation.
Surely, the question of why all this has come about requires
careful attention and serious consideration.
In this chapter, attention will be focused on the subtle but
crucial role of our general forms of thinking in sustaining frag-
mentation and in defeating our deepest urges toward wholeness
or integrity. In order to give the discussion a concrete content
we shall to some extent talk in terms of current scientiﬁc
research, which is a ﬁeld that is relatively familiar to me
(though, of course, the overall signiﬁcance of the questions
under discussion will also be kept in mind).
What will be emphasized, ﬁrst of all in scientiﬁc research and
later in a more general context, is that fragmentation is continu-
ally being brought about by the almost universal habit of taking
the content of our thought for ‘a description of the world as it
is’. Or we could say that, in this habit, our thought is regarded as
in direct correspondence with objective reality. Since our
thought is pervaded with diﬀerences and distinctions, it follows
that such a habit leads us to look on these as real divisions, so
that the world is then seen and experienced as actually broken
up into fragments.
The relationship between thought and reality that this
thought is about is in fact far more complex than that of a mere
correspondence. Thus, in scientiﬁc research, a great deal of our
thinking is in terms of theories. The word ‘theory’ derives from
the Greek ‘theoria’, which has the same root as ‘theatre’, in a
word meaning ‘to view’ or ‘to make a spectacle’. Thus, it might
be said that a theory is primarily a form of insight, i.e. a way of
looking at the world, and not a form of knowledge of how the
world is.
wholeness and the implicate order
4

In ancient times, for example, men had the theory that celes-
tial matter was fundamentally diﬀerent from earthly matter and
that it was natural for earthly objects to fall while it was natural
for celestial objects, such as the moon, to remain up in the sky.
With the coming of the modern era, however, scientists began to
develop the viewpoint that there was no essential diﬀerence
between earthly matter and celestial matter. This implied, of
course, that heavenly objects, such as the moon, ought to fall,
but for a long time men did not notice this implication. In a
sudden ﬂash of insight Newton then saw that as the apple falls so
does the moon, and so indeed do all objects. Thus, he was led to
the theory of universal gravitation, in which all objects were
seen as falling toward various centres (e.g. the earth, the sun, the
planets, etc.). This constituted a new way of looking at the heavens,
in which the movements of the planets were no longer seen
through the ancient notion of an essential diﬀerence between
heavenly and earthly matter. Rather, one considered these
movements in terms of rates of fall of all matter, heavenly and
earthly, toward various centres, and when something was seen
not to be accounted for in this way, one looked for and often
discovered new and as yet unseen planets toward which celestial
objects were falling (thus demonstrating the relevance of this
way of looking).
The Newtonian form of insight worked very well for several
centuries but ultimately (like the ancient Greek insights that
came before) it led to unclear results when extended into new
domains. In these new domains, new forms of insight were
developed (the theory of relativity and the quantum theory).
These gave a radically diﬀerent picture of the world from that of
Newton (though the latter was, of course, found to be still valid
in a limited domain). If we supposed that theories gave true
knowledge, corresponding to ‘reality as it is’, then we would
have to conclude that Newtonian theory was true until
around 1900, after which it suddenly became false, while
fragmentation and wholeness
5

relativity and quantum theory suddenly became the truth. Such
an absurd conclusion does not arise, however, if we say that all
theories are insights, which are neither true nor false but, rather,
clear in certain domains, and unclear when extended beyond
these domains. This means, however, that we do not equate
theories with hypotheses. As the Greek root of the word
indicates, a hypothesis is a supposition, that is, an idea that is
‘put under’ our reasoning, as a provisional base, which is to be
tested experimentally for its truth or falsity. As is now well
known, however, there can be no conclusive experimental proof of
the truth or falsity of a general hypothesis which aims to cover the
whole of reality. Rather, one ﬁnds (e.g., as in the case of the
Ptolemaic epicycles or of the failure of Newtonian concepts just
before the advent of relativity and quantum theory) that older
theories become more and more unclear when one tries to use
them to obtain insight into new domains. Careful attention to
how this happens is then generally the main clue toward new
theories that constitute further new forms of insight.
So, instead of supposing that older theories are falsiﬁed at a
certain point in time, we merely say that man is continually
developing new forms of insight, which are clear up to a point
and then tend to become unclear. In this activity, there is evi-
dently no reason to suppose that there is or will be a ﬁnal form
of insight (corresponding to absolute truth) or even a steady
series of approximations to this. Rather, in the nature of the case,
one may expect the unending development of new forms of in-
sight (which will, however, assimilate certain key features of the
older forms as simpliﬁcations, in the way that relativity theory
does with Newtonian theory). As pointed out earlier, how-
ever, this means that our theories are to be regarded primarily as
ways of looking at the world as a whole (i.e. world views) rather
than as ‘absolutely true knowledge of how things are’ (or as a
steady approach toward the latter).
When we look at the world through our theoretical insights,
wholeness and the implicate order
6

the factual knowledge that we obtain will evidently be shaped
and formed by our theories. For example, in ancient times the
fact about the motions of the planets was described in terms of
the Ptolemaic idea of epicycles (circles superimposed on
circles). In Newton’s time, this fact was described in terms of
precisely determined planetary orbits, analysed through rates
of fall toward various centres. Later came the fact as seen
relativistically according to Einstein’s concepts of space and
time. Still later, a very diﬀerent sort of fact was speciﬁed in terms
of the quantum theory (which gives in general only a statistical
fact). In biology, the fact is now described in terms of the theory
of evolution, but in earlier times it was expressed in terms of
ﬁxed species of living beings.
More generally, then, given perception and action, our theor-
etical insights provide the main source of organization of our
factual knowledge. Indeed, our overall experience is shaped in
this way. As seems to have been ﬁrst pointed out by Kant, all
experience is organized according to the categories of our
thought, i.e., on our ways of thinking about space, time, matter,
substance, causality, contingency, necessity, universality, par-
ticularity, etc. It can be said that these categories are general
forms of insight or ways of looking at everything, so that in a
certain sense, they are a kind of theory (but, of course, this level
of theory must have developed very early in man’s evolution).
Clarity of perception and thought evidently requires that we
be generally aware of how our experience is shaped by the
insight (clear or confused) provided by the theories that are
implicit or explicit in our general ways of thinking. To this end,
it is useful to emphasize that experience and knowledge are one
process, rather than to think that our knowledge is about some
sort of separate experience. We can refer to this one process as
experience-knowledge (the hyphen indicating that these are two
inseparable aspects of one whole movement).
Now, if we are not aware that our theories are ever-changing
fragmentation and wholeness
7

forms of insight, giving shape and form to experience in gen-
eral, our vision will be limited. One could put it like this: experi-
ence with nature is very much like experience with human
beings. If one approaches another man with a ﬁxed ‘theory’
about him as an ‘enemy’ against whom one must defend oneself,
he will respond similarly, and thus one’s ‘theory’ will apparently
be conﬁrmed by experience. Similarly, nature will respond in
accordance with the theory with which it is approached. Thus,
in ancient times, men thought plagues were inevitable, and this
thought helped make them behave in such a way as to propagate
the conditions responsible for their spread. With modern scien-
tiﬁc forms of insights man’s behaviour is such that he ceases the
insanitary modes of life responsible for spreading plagues and
thus they are no longer inevitable.
What prevents theoretical insights from going beyond exist-
ing limitations and changing to meet new facts is just the belief
that theories give true knowledge of reality (which implies, of
course, that they need never change). Although our modern way
of thinking has, of course, changed a great deal relative to the
ancient one, the two have had one key feature in common: i.e.
they are both generally ‘blinkered’ by the notion that theories
give true knowledge about ‘reality as it is’. Thus, both are led to
confuse the forms and shapes induced in our perceptions by
theoretical insight with a reality independent of our thought and
our way of looking. This confusion is of crucial signiﬁcance,
since it leads us to approach nature, society, and the individual
in terms of more or less ﬁxed and limited forms of thought, and
thus, apparently, to keep on conﬁrming the limitations of these
forms of thought in experience.
This sort of unending conﬁrmation of limitations in our
modes of thinking is particularly signiﬁcant with regard to
fragmentation, for as pointed out earlier, every form of theor-
etical insight introduces its own essential diﬀerences and distinc-
tions (e.g., in ancient times an essential distinction was between
wholeness and the implicate order
8

heavenly and earthly matter, while in Newtonian theory it was
essential to distinguish the centres toward which all matter was
falling). If we regard these diﬀerences and distinctions as ways of
looking, as guides to perception, this does not imply that they
denote separately existent substances or entities.
On the other hand, if we regard our theories as ‘direct
descriptions of reality as it is’, then we will inevitably treat these
diﬀerences and distinctions as divisions, implying separate exist-
ence of the various elementary terms appearing in the theory.
We will thus be led to the illusion that the world is actually
constituted of separate fragments and, as has already been indi-
cated, this will cause us to act in such a way that we do in fact
produce the very fragmentation implied in our attitude to the
theory.
It is important to give some emphasis to this point. For
example, some might say: ‘Fragmentation of cities, religions,
political systems, conﬂict in the form of wars, general violence,
fratricide, etc., are the reality. Wholeness is only an ideal, toward
which we should perhaps strive.’ But this is not what is being
said here. Rather, what should be said is that wholeness is what is
real, and that fragmentation is the response of this whole to
man’s action, guided by illusory perception, which is shaped by
fragmentary thought. In other words, it is just because reality is
whole that man, with his fragmentary approach, will inevitably
be answered with a correspondingly fragmentary response. So
what is needed is for man to give attention to his habit of frag-
mentary thought, to be aware of it, and thus bring it to an end.
Man’s approach to reality may then be whole, and so the
response will be whole.
For this to happen, however, it is crucial that man be aware of
the activity of his thought as such; i.e. as a form of insight, a way
of looking, rather than as a ‘true copy of reality as it is’.
It is clear that we may have any number of diﬀerent kinds of
insights. What is called for is not an integration of thought, or a
fragmentation and wholeness
9

kind of imposed unity, for any such imposed point of view
would itself be merely another fragment. Rather, all our diﬀerent
ways of thinking are to be considered as diﬀerent ways of look-
ing at the one reality, each with some domain in which it is clear
and adequate. One may indeed compare a theory to a particular
view of some object. Each view gives only an appearance of the
object in some aspect. The whole object is not perceived in any
one view but, rather, it is grasped only implicitly as that single
reality which is shown in all these views. When we deeply
understand that our theories also work in this way, then we will
not fall into the habit of seeing reality and acting toward it as if it
were constituted of separately existent fragments corresponding
to how it appears in our thought and in our imagination when
we take our theories to be ‘direct descriptions of reality as it is’.
Beyond a general awareness of the role of theories as indicated
above, what is needed is to give special attention to those theor-
ies that contribute to the expression of our overall self-world
views. For, to a considerable extent, it is in these world views that
our general notions of the nature of reality and of the relation-
ship between our thought and reality are implicity or explicitly
formed. In this respect, the general theories of physics play an
important part, because they are regarded as dealing with the
universal nature of the matter out of which all is constituted, and
the space and time in terms of which all material movement is
described.
Consider, for example, the atomic theory, which was ﬁrst
proposed by Democritus more than 2,000 years ago. In essence,
this theory leads us to look at the world as constituted of atoms,
moving in the void. The ever-changing forms and characteristics
of large-scale objects are now seen as the results of changing
arrangements of the moving atoms. Evidently, this view was, in
certain ways, an important mode of realization of wholeness, for
it enabled men to understand the enormous variety of the whole
world in terms of the movements of one single set of basic
wholeness and the implicate order
10

constituents, through a single void that permeates the whole of
existence. Nevertheless, as the atomic theory developed, it ulti-
mately became a major support for a fragmentary approach to
reality. For it ceased to be regarded as an insight, a way of look-
ing, and men regarded instead as an absolute truth the notion
that the whole of reality is actually constituted of nothing but
‘atomic building blocks’, all working together more or less
mechanically.
Of course, to take any physical theory as an absolute truth
must tend to ﬁx the general forms of thought in physics and thus
to contribute to fragmentation. Beyond this, however, the par-
ticular content of the atomic theory was such as to be especially
conducive to fragmentation, for it was implicit in this content
that the entire world of nature, along with the human being,
including his brain, his nervous system, his mind, etc., could in
principle be understood completely in terms of structures and
functions of aggregates of separately existent atoms. The fact that
in man’s experiments and general experience this atomic view
was conﬁrmed was, of course, then taken as proof of the
correctness and indeed the universal truth of this notion. Thus
almost the whole weight of science was put behind the
fragmentary approach to reality.
It is important to point out, however, that (as usually happens
in such cases) the experimental conﬁrmation of the atomic
point of view is limited. Indeed, in the domains covered by
quantum theory and relativity, the notion of atomism leads to
confused questions, which indicate the need for new forms of
insight, as diﬀerent from atomism as the latter is from theories
that came before it.
Thus, the quantum theory shows that the attempt to describe
and follow an atomic particle in precise detail has little meaning.
(Further detail on this point is given in chapter 5.) The notion of
an atomic path has only a limited domain of applicability. In a
more detailed description the atom is, in many ways, seen to
fragmentation and wholeness
11

behave as much like a wave as a particle. It can perhaps best be
regarded as a poorly deﬁned cloud, dependent for its particular
form on the whole environment, including the observing
instrument. Thus, one can no longer maintain the division
between the observer and observed (which is implicit in the
atomistic view that regards each of these as separate aggregates
of atoms). Rather, both observer and observed are merging
and interpenetrating aspects of one whole reality, which is
indivisible and unanalysable.
Relativity leads us to a way of looking at the world that is
similar to the above in certain key respects (see chapter 5 for
more detail on this point). From the fact that in Einstein’s point
of view no signal faster than light is possible, it follows that the
concept of a rigid body breaks down. But this concept is crucial
in the classical atomic theory, for in this theory the ultimate
constituents of the universe have to be small indivisible objects,
and this is possible only if each part of such an object is bound
rigidly to all other parts. What is needed in a relativistic theory is
to give up altogether the notion that the world is constituted of
basic objects or ‘building blocks’. Rather, one has to view the
world in terms of universal ﬂux of events and processes. Thus, as
indicated by A and B in ﬁgure 1.1, instead of thinking of a
particle, one is to think of a ‘world tube’.
This world tube represents an inﬁnitely complex process of a
structure in movement and development which is centred in a
region indicated by the boundaries of the tube. However, even
outside the tube, each ‘particle’ has a ﬁeld that extends through
space and merges with the ﬁelds of other particles.
A more vivid image of the sort of thing that is meant is
aﬀorded by considering wave forms as vortex structures in a
ﬂowing stream. As shown in ﬁgure 1.2, two vortices correspond
to stable patterns of ﬂow of the ﬂuid, centred more or less at A
and B. Evidently, the two vortices are to be considered as
abstractions, made to stand out in our perception by our way of
wholeness and the implicate order
12

thinking. Actually, of course, the two abstracted ﬂow patterns
merge and unite, in one whole movement of the ﬂowing stream.
There is no sharp division between them, nor are they to be
regarded as separately or independently existent entities.
Relativity theory calls for this sort of way of looking at the
atomic particles, which constitute all matter, including of course
human beings, with their brains, nervous systems, and the
observing instruments that they have built and that they use in
their laboratories. So, approaching the question in diﬀerent
ways, relativity and quantum theory agree, in that they both
imply the need to look on the world as an undivided whole, in which
all parts of the universe, including the observer and his
instruments, merge and unite in one totality. In this totality, the
Figure 1.1
Figure 1.2
fragmentation and wholeness
13

atomistic form of insight is a simpliﬁcation and an abstraction,
valid only in some limited context.
The new form of insight can perhaps best be called Undivided
Wholeness in Flowing Movement. This view implies that ﬂow is, in
some sense, prior to that of the ‘things’ that can be seen to form
and dissolve in this ﬂow. One can perhaps illustrate what is
meant here by considering the ‘stream of consciousness’. This
ﬂux of awareness is not precisely deﬁnable, and yet it is evidently
prior to the deﬁnable forms of thoughts and ideas which can be
seen to form and dissolve in the ﬂux, like ripples, waves and
vortices in a ﬂowing stream. As happens with such patterns of
movement in a stream some thoughts recur and persist in a more
or less stable way, while others are evanescent.
The proposal for a new general form of insight is that all
matter is of this nature: That is, there is a universal ﬂux that
cannot be deﬁned explicitly but which can be known only
implicitly, as indicated by the explicitly deﬁnable forms and
shapes, some stable and some unstable, that can be abstracted
from the universal ﬂux. In this ﬂow, mind and matter are not
separate substances. Rather, they are diﬀerent aspects of one
whole and unbroken movement. In this way, we are able to look
on all aspects of existence as not divided from each other, and
thus we can bring to an end the fragmentation implicit in the
current attitude toward the atomic point of view, which leads us
to divide everything from everything in a thoroughgoing way.
Nevertheless, we can comprehend that aspect of atomism which
still provides a correct and valid form of insight; i.e. that in spite
of the undivided wholeness in ﬂowing movement, the various
patterns that can be abstracted from it have a certain relative
autonomy and stability, which is indeed provided for by the
universal law of the ﬂowing movement. Now, however, we have
the limits of this autonomy and stability sharply in mind.
Thus we can, in speciﬁed contexts, adopt other various forms
of insight that enable us to simplify certain things and to treat
wholeness and the implicate order
14

them momentarily and for certain limited purposes as if they
were autonomous and stable, as well as perhaps separately exist-
ent. Yet we do not have to fall into the trap of looking at our-
selves and at the whole world in this way. Thus our thought
need no longer lead to the illusion that reality actually is of
fragmentary nature, and to the corresponding fragmentary
actions that arise out of perception clouded by such illusion.
The point of view discussed above is similar, in certain key
ways, to that held by some of the Ancient Greeks. This similarity
can be brought out by considering Aristotle’s notion of
causality. Aristotle distinguished four kinds of causes:
Material
Efﬁcient
Formal
Final
A good example in terms of which this distinction can be
understood is obtained by considering something living, such as
a tree or an animal. The material cause is then just the matter in
which all the other causes operate and out of which the thing is
constituted. Thus, in the case of a plant, the material cause is the
soil, air, water and sunlight, constituting the substance of the
plant. The eﬃcient cause is some action, external to the thing
under discussion, which allows the whole process to get under
way. In the case of a tree, for example, the planting of the seed
could be taken as the eﬃcient cause.
It is of crucial signiﬁcance in this context to understand what
was meant by formal cause. Unfortunately, in its modern conno-
tation, the word ‘formal’ tends to refer to an outward form that
is not very signiﬁcant (e.g. as in ‘formal dress’ or ‘a mere formal-
ity’). However, in the Ancient Greek philosophy, the word form
meant, in the ﬁrst instance, an inner forming activity which is the
cause of the growth of things, and of the development and
fragmentation and wholeness
15

diﬀerentiation of their various essential forms. For example, in
the case of an oak tree, what is indicated by the term ‘formal
cause’ is the whole inner movement of sap, cell growth, articula-
tion of branches, leaves, etc., which is characteristic of that kind
of tree and diﬀerent from that taking place in other kinds of
trees. In more modern language, it would be better to describe
this as formative cause, to emphasize that what is involved is not
a mere form imposed from without, but rather an ordered and
structured inner movement that is essential to what things are.
Any such formative cause must evidently have an end or
product which is at least implicit. Thus, it is not possible to refer
to the inner movement from the acorn giving rise to an oak tree,
without simultaneously referring to the oak tree that is going to
result from this movement. So formative cause always implies
ﬁnal cause.
Of course, we also know ﬁnal cause as design, consciously held
in mind through thought (this notion being extended to God,
who was regarded as having created the universe according to
some grand design). Design is, however, only a special case of
ﬁnal cause. For example, men often aim toward certain ends in
their thoughts but what actually emerges from their actions is
generally something diﬀerent from what was in their design,
something that was, however, implicit in what they were doing,
though not consciously perceived by those who took part.
In the ancient view, the notion of formative cause was con-
sidered to be of essentially the same nature for the mind as it was
for life and for the cosmos as a whole. Indeed, Aristotle con-
sidered the universe as a single organism in which each part
grows and develops in its relationship to the whole and in which
it has its proper place and function. With regard to the mind, we
can understand this sort of notion in more modern terms by
turning our attention to the ﬂowing movement of awareness. As
indicated earlier, one can, in the ﬁrst instance, discern various
thought patterns in this ﬂow. These follow on each other
wholeness and the implicate order
16

relatively mechanically, through association determined by habit
and conditioning. Evidently, such associative changes are
external to the inner structure of the thoughts in question, so
that these changes act like a series of eﬃcient causes. However, to
see the reason for something is not a mechanical activity of this
nature: Rather, one is aware of each aspect as assimilated within a
single whole, all of whose parts are inwardly related (as are, for
example, the organs of the body). Here, one has to emphasize
that the act of reason is essentially a kind of perception through
the mind, similar in certain ways to artistic perception, and not
merely the associative repetition of reasons that are already
known. Thus, one may be puzzled by a wide range of factors,
things that do not ﬁt together, until suddenly there is a ﬂash of
understanding, and therefore one sees how all these factors are
related as aspects of one totality (e.g. consider Newton’s insight
into universal gravitation). Such acts of perception cannot prop-
erly be given a detailed analysis or description. Rather, they are
to be considered as aspects of the forming activity of the mind. A
particular structure of concepts is then the product of this activity,
and these products are what are linked by the series of eﬃcient
causes that operate in ordinary associative thinking – and as
pointed out earlier, in this view, one regards the forming activity
as primary in nature as it is in the mind, so that the product
forms in nature are also what are linked by eﬃcient causes.
Evidently, the notion of formative cause is relevant to the view
of undivided wholeness in ﬂowing movement, which has been
seen to be implied in modern developments in physics, notably
relativity theory and quantum theory. Thus, as has been pointed
out, each relatively autonomous and stable structure (e.g., an
atomic particle) is to be understood not as something independ-
ently and permanently existent but rather as a product that has
been formed in the whole ﬂowing movement and that will
ultimately dissolve back into this movement. How it forms and
maintains itself, then, depends on its place and function in the
fragmentation and wholeness
17

whole. So, we see that certain developments in modern physics
imply a sort of insight into nature that is in respect to the notions
of formative and ﬁnal cause, essentially similar to ways of
looking that were common in earlier times.
Nevertheless, in most of the work that is being done in phy-
sics today the notions of formative and ﬁnal cause are not
regarded as having primary signiﬁcance. Rather, law is still gen-
erally conceived as a self-determined system of eﬃcient causes,
operating in an ultimate set of material constituents of the uni-
verse (e.g. elementary particles subject to forces of interaction
between them). These constituents are not regarded as formed
in an overall process, and thus they are not considered to be
anything like organs adapted to their place and function in the
whole (i.e. to the ends which they would serve in this whole).
Rather, they tend to be conceived as separately existent
mechanical elements of a ﬁxed nature.
The prevailing trend in modern physics is thus much against
any sort of view giving primacy to formative activity in
undivided wholeness of ﬂowing movement. Indeed, those
aspects of relativity theory and quantum theory which do sug-
gest the need for such a view tend to be de-emphasized and in
fact hardly noticed by most physicists, because they are regarded
largely as features of the mathematical calculus and not as indica-
tions of the real nature of things. When it comes to the informal
language and mode of thought in physics, which infuses the
imagination and provokes the sense of what is real and substan-
tial, most physicists still speak and think, with an utter convic-
tion of truth, in terms of the traditional atomistic notion that the
universe is constituted of elementary particles which are ‘basic
building blocks’ out of which everything is made. In other sci-
ences, such as biology, the strength of this conviction is even
greater, because among workers in these ﬁelds there is little
awareness of the revolutionary character of development in
modern physics. For example, modern molecular biologists
wholeness and the implicate order
18

generally believe that the whole of life and mind can ultimately
be understood in more or less mechanical terms, through some
kind of extension of the work that has been done on the struc-
ture and function of DNA molecules. A similar trend has already
begun to dominate in psychology. Thus we arrive at the very
odd result that in the study of life and mind, which are just the
ﬁelds in which formative cause acting in undivided and
unbroken ﬂowing movement is most evident to experience and
observation, there is now the strongest belief in the fragmentary
atomistic approach to reality.
Of course, the prevailing tendency in science to think and
perceive in terms of a fragmentary self-world view is part of a
larger movement that has been developing over the ages and that
pervades almost the whole of our society today: but, in turn,
such a way of thinking and looking in scientiﬁc research tends
very strongly to re-enforce the general fragmentary approach
because it gives men a picture of the whole world as constituted
of nothing but an aggregate of separately existent ‘atomic build-
ing blocks’, and provides experimental evidence from which is
drawn the conclusion that this view is necessary and inevitable.
In this way, people are led to feel that fragmentation is nothing
but an expression of ‘the way everything really is’ and that any-
thing else is impossible. So there is very little disposition to look
for evidence to the contrary. Indeed, as has already been pointed
out, even when such evidence does arise, as in modern
physics, the general tendency is to minimize its signiﬁcance or
even to ignore it altogether. One might in fact go so far as to say
that in the present state of society, and in the present general
mode of teaching science, which is a manifestation of this state
of society, a kind of prejudice in favour of a fragmentary self-
world view is fostered and transmitted (to some extent explicitly
and consciously but mainly in an implicit and unconscious
manner).
As has been indicated, however, men who are guided by such
fragmentation and wholeness
19

a fragmentary self-world view cannot, in the long run, do other
than to try in their actions to break themselves and the world
into pieces, corresponding to their general mode of thinking.
Since, in the ﬁrst instance, fragmentation is an attempt to extend
the analysis of the world into separate parts beyond the domain
in which to do this is appropriate, it is in eﬀect an attempt to
divide what is really indivisible. In the next step such an attempt
will lead us also to try to unite what is not really unitable. This
can be seen especially clearly in terms of groupings of people in
society (political, economic, religious, etc.). The very act of
forming such a group tends to create a sense of division and
separation of the members from the rest of the world but,
because the members are really connected with the whole, this
cannot work. Each member has in fact a somewhat diﬀerent
connection, and sooner or later this shows itself as a diﬀerence
between him and other members of the group. Whenever men
divide themselves from the whole of society and attempt to
unite by identiﬁcation within a group, it is clear that the group
must eventually develop internal strife, which leads to a break-
down of its unity. Likewise when men try to separate some
aspect of nature in their practical, technical work, a similar state
of contradiction and disunity will develop. The same sort of
thing will happen to the individual when he tries to separate
himself from society. True unity in the individual and between
man and nature, as well as between man and man, can arise only
in a form of action that does not attempt to fragment the whole
of reality.
Our fragmentary way of thinking, looking, and acting, evi-
dently has implications in every aspect of human life. That is to
say, by a rather interesting sort of irony, fragmentation seems to
be the one thing in our way of life which is universal, which
works through the whole without boundary or limit. This
comes about because the roots of fragmentation are very deep
and pervasive. As pointed out, we try to divide what is one and
wholeness and the implicate order
20

indivisible, and this implies that in the next step we will try to
identify what is diﬀerent.
So fragmentation is in essence a confusion around the ques-
tion of diﬀerence and sameness (or one-ness), but the clear
perception of these categories is necessary in every phase of life.
To be confused about what is diﬀerent and what is not, is to be confused about
everything. Thus, it is not an accident that our fragmentary form of
thought is leading to such a widespread range of crises, social,
political, economic, ecological, psychological, etc., in the indi-
vidual and in society as a whole. Such a mode of thought implies
unending development of chaotic and meaningless conﬂict, in
which the energies of all tend to be lost by movements that are
antagonistic or else at cross-purposes.
Evidently, it is important and indeed extremely urgent to clear
up this deep and pervasive kind of confusion that penetrates the
whole of our lives. What is the use of attempts at social, political,
economic or other action if the mind is caught up in a confused
movement in which it is generally diﬀerentiating what is not
diﬀerent and identifying what is not identical? Such action will
be at best ineﬀective and at worst really destructive.
Nor will it be useful to try to impose some ﬁxed kind of
integrating or unifying ‘holistic’ principle on our self-world
view, for, as indicated earlier, any form of ﬁxed self-world view
implies that we are no longer treating our theories as insights or
ways of looking but, rather, as ‘absolutely true knowledge of
things as they really are’. So, whether we like it or not, the
distinctions that are inevitably present in every theory, even
an ‘holistic’ one, will be falsely treated as divisions, implying
separate existence of the terms that are distinguished (so that,
correspondingly, what is not distinguished in this way will
be falsely treated as absolutely identical).
We have thus to be alert to give careful attention and serious
consideration to the fact that our theories are not ‘descriptions
of reality as it is’ but, rather, ever-changing forms of insight,
fragmentation and wholeness
21

which can point to or indicate a reality that is implicit and not
describable or speciﬁable in its totality. This need for being thus
watchful holds even for what is being said here in this chapter, in
the sense that this is not to be regarded as ‘absolutely true know-
ledge of the nature of fragmentations and wholeness’. Rather, it
too is a theory that gives insight into this question. It is up to the
reader to see for himself whether the insight is clear or unclear
and what are the limits of its validity.
What, then, can be done to end the prevailing state of frag-
mentation? At ﬁrst sight this may seem to be a reasonable ques-
tion but a closer examination leads one to ask whether it is in
fact a reasonable question, for one can see that this question has
presuppositions that are not clear.
Generally speaking, if one asks how one can solve some tech-
nical problem, for example, it is presupposed that while we
begin not knowing the answer, our minds are nevertheless clear
enough to discover an answer, or at least to recognize someone
else’s discovery of an answer. But if our whole way of thinking is
penetrated by fragmentation, this implies that we are not capable
of this, for fragmentary perception is in essence a largely
unconscious habit of confusion around the question of what is
diﬀerent and what is not. So, in the very act in which we try to
discover what to do about fragmentation, we will go on with
this habit and thus we will tend to introduce yet further forms of
fragmentation.
This does not necessarily mean, of course, that there is no way
out at all, but it does mean that we have to give pause so that we
do not go with our habitual fragmentary ways of thinking as we
seek solutions that are ready to hand. The question of fragmenta-
tion and wholeness is a subtle and diﬃcult one, more subtle and
diﬃcult than those which lead to fundamentally new discoveries
in science. To ask how to end fragmentation and to expect an
answer in a few minutes makes even less sense than to ask how to
develop a theory as new as Einstein’s was when he was working
wholeness and the implicate order
22

on it, and to expect to be told what to do in terms of some
programme, expressed in terms of formulae or recipes.
One of the most diﬃcult and subtle points about this question
is just to clarify what is to be meant by the relationship between
the content of thought and the process of thinking which pro-
duces this content. A major source of fragmentation is indeed
the generally accepted presupposition that the process of
thought is suﬃciently separate from and independent of its con-
tent, to allow us generally to carry out clear, orderly, rational
thinking, which can properly judge this content as correct or
incorrect, rational or irrational, fragmentary or whole, etc. Actu-
ally, as has been seen, the fragmentation involved in a self-world
view is not only in the content of thought, but in the general
activity of the person who is ‘doing the thinking’, and thus, it is
as much in the process of thinking as it is in the content. Indeed,
content and process are not two separately existent things, but,
rather, they are two aspects of views of one whole movement.
Thus fragmentary content and fragmentary process have to come
to an end together.
What we have to deal with here is a one-ness of the thinking
process and its content, similar in key ways to the one-ness of
observer and observed; that has been discussed in connection
with relativity theory and quantum theory. Questions of this
nature cannot be met properly while we are caught up, con-
sciously or unconsciously, in a mode of thought which attempts
to analyse itself in terms of a presumed separation between the
process of thinking and the content of thought that is its prod-
uct. By accepting such a presumption we are led, in the next
step, to seek some fantasy of action through eﬃcient causes that
would end the fragmentation in the content while leaving the
fragmentation in the actual process of thinking untouched. What
is needed, however, is somehow to grasp the overall formative cause
of fragmentation, in which content and actual process are seen
together, in their wholeness.
fragmentation and wholeness
23

One might here consider the image of a turbulent mass of
vortices in a stream. The structure and distribution of vortices,
which constitute a sort of content of the description of the
movement, are not separate from the formative activity of the
ﬂowing stream, which creates, maintains, and ultimately dis-
solves the totality of vortex structures. So to try to eliminate the
vortices without changing the formative activity of the stream
would evidently be absurd. Once our perception is guided by the
proper insight into the signiﬁcance of the whole movement, we
will evidently not be disposed to try such a futile approach.
Rather, we will look at the whole situation, and be attentive and
alert to learn about it, and thus to discover what is really an
appropriate sort of action, relevant to this whole, for bringing
the turbulent structure of vortices to an end. Similarly, when we
really grasp the truth of the one-ness of the thinking process that
we are actually carrying out, and the content of thought that is
the product of this process, then such insight will enable us to
observe, to look, to learn about the whole movement of thought
and thus to discover an action relevant to this whole, that will
end the ‘turbulence’ of movement which is the essence of
fragmentation in every phase of life.
Of course, such learning and discovery will require a great
deal of careful attention and hard work. We are ready to give
such attention and work in a wide range of ﬁelds, scientiﬁc,
economic, social, political, etc. As yet, however, little or none of
this has gone into the creation of insight into the process of
thought, on the clarity of which the value of all else depends.
What is primarily needed is a growing realization of the
extremely great danger of going on with a fragmentary process
of thought. Such a realization would give the inquiry into how
thought actually operates that sense of urgency and energy
required to meet the true magnitude of the diﬃculties with
which fragmentation is now confronting us.
wholeness and the implicate order
24

APPENDIX: RÉSUMÉ OF DISCUSSION ON
WESTERN AND EASTERN FORMS OF INSIGHT
INTO WHOLENESS
In the very early phases of the development of civilization, man’s
views were essentially of wholeness rather than of fragmenta-
tion. In the East (especially in India) such views still survive, in
the sense that philosophy and religion emphasize wholeness and
imply the futility of analysis of the world into parts. Why, then,
do we not drop our fragmentary Western approach and adopt
these Eastern notions which include not only a self-world view
that denies division and fragmentation but also techniques of
meditation that lead the whole process of mental operation non-
verbally to the sort of quiet state of orderly and smooth ﬂow
needed to end fragmentation both in the actual process of
thought and in its content?
To answer such a question, it is useful to begin by going into
the diﬀerence between Western and Eastern notions of measure.
Now, in the West the notion of measure has, from very early
times, played a key role in determining the general self-world
view and the way of life implicit in such a view. Thus among the
Ancient Greeks, from whom we derive a large part of our fun-
damental notions (by way of the Romans), to keep everything in
its right measure was regarded as one of the essentials of a good
life (e.g. Greek tragedies generally portrayed man’s suﬀering as a
consequence of his going beyond the proper measure of things).
In this regard, measure was not looked on in its modern sense as
being primarily some sort of comparison of an object with an
external standard or unit. Rather, this latter procedure was
regarded as a kind of outward display or appearance of a deeper
‘inner measure’, which played an essential role in everything.
When something went beyond its proper measure, this meant
not merely that it was not conforming to some external standard
of what was right but, much more, that it was inwardly out of
fragmentation and wholeness
25

harmony, so that it was bound to lose its integrity and break up
into fragments. One can obtain some insight into this way of
thinking by considering the earlier meanings of certain words.
Thus, the Latin ‘mederi’ meaning ‘to cure’ (the root of the mod-
ern ‘medicine’) is based on a root meaning ‘to measure’. This
reﬂects the view that physical health is to be regarded as the
outcome of a state of right inward measure in all parts and
processes of the body. Similarly, the word ‘moderation’, which
describes one of the prime ancient notions of virtue, is based on
the same root, and this shows that such virtue was regarded as
the outcome of a right inner measure underlying man’s social
actions and behaviour. Again, the word ‘meditation’, which is
based on the same root, implies a kind of weighing, pondering,
or measuring of the whole process of thought, which could
bring the inner activities of the mind to a state of harmonious
measure. So, physically, socially and mentally, awareness of the
inner measure of things was seen as the essential key to a
healthy, happy, harmonious life.
It is clear that measure is to be expressed in more detail
through proportion or ratio; and ‘ratio’ is the Latin word from
which our modern ‘reason’ is derived. In the ancient view, rea-
son is seen as insight into a totality of ratio or proportion,
regarded as relevant inwardly to the very nature of things (and
not only outwardly as a form of comparison with a standard or
unit). Of course, this ratio is not necessarily merely a numerical
proportion (though it does, of course, include such proportion).
Rather, it is in general a qualitative sort of universal proportion
or relationship. Thus, when Newton perceived the insight of
universal gravitation, what he saw could be put in this way: ‘As
the apple falls, so does the moon, and so indeed does every-
thing.’ To exhibit the form of the ratio yet more explicitly, one
can write:
A : B :: C : D :: E : F
wholeness and the implicate order
26

where A and B represent successive positions of the apple at
successive moments of time, C and D those of the moon, and
E and F those of any other object.
Whenever we ﬁnd a theoretical reason for something, we are
exemplifying this notion of ratio, in the sense of implying that as
the various aspects are related in our idea, so they are related in
the thing that the idea is about. The essential reason or ratio of a
thing is then the totality of inner proportions in its structure,
and in the process in which it forms, maintains itself, and
ultimately dissolves. In this view, to understand such ratio is to
understand the ‘innermost being’ of that thing.
It is thus implied that measure is a form of insight into the
essence of everything, and that man’s perception, following on
ways indicated by such insight, will be clear and will thus bring
about generally orderly action and harmonious living. In this
connection, it is useful to call to mind Ancient Greek notions of
measure in music and in the visual arts. These notions
emphasized that a grasp of measure was a key to the understand-
ing of harmony in music (e.g., measure as rhythm, right propor-
tion in intensity of sound, right proportion in tonality, etc.).
Likewise, in the visual arts, right measure was seen as essential to
overall harmony and beauty (e.g., consider the ‘Golden Mean’).
All of this indicates how far the notion of measure went beyond
that of comparison with an external standard, to point to a uni-
versal sort of inner ratio or proportion, perceived both through
the senses and through the mind.
Of course, as time went on, this notion of measure gradually
began to change, to lose its subtlety and to become relatively
gross and mechanical. Probably this was because man’s notion
of measure became more and more routinized and habitual,
both with regard to its outward display in measurements relative
to an external unit and to its inner signiﬁcance as universal ratio
relevant to physical health, social order, and mental harmony.
Men began to learn such notions of measure mechanically, by
fragmentation and wholeness
27

conforming to the teachings of their elders or their masters, and
not creatively through an inner feeling and understanding of the
deeper meaning of the ratio or proportion which they were
learning. So measure gradually came to be taught as a sort of rule
that was to be imposed from outside on the human being, who
in turn imposed the corresponding measure physically, socially
and mentally, in every context in which he was working. As a
result, the prevailing notions of measure were no longer seen as
forms of insight. Rather, they appeared to be ‘absolute truths
about reality as it is’, which men seemed always to have known,
and whose origin was often explained mythologically as binding
injunctions of the Gods, which it would be both dangerous and
wicked to question. Thought about measure thus tended to fall
mainly into the domain of unconscious habit and, as a result, the
forms induced in perception by this thought were now seen as
directly observed objective realities, which were essentially
independent of how they were thought about.
Even by the time of the Ancient Greeks, this process had gone
a long way and, as men realized this, they began to question the
notion of measure. Thus Protagoras said: ‘Man is the measure of
all things’, thus emphasizing that measure is not a reality
external to man, existing independently of him. But many who
were in the habit of looking at everything externally also applied
this way of looking to what Protagoras said. Thus, they con-
cluded that measure was something arbitrary, and subject to the
capricious choice or taste of each individual. In this way they of
course overlooked the fact that measure is a form of insight that
has to ﬁt the overall reality in which man lives, as demonstrated
by the clarity of perception and harmony of action to which it
leads. Such insight can arise properly only when a man works
with seriousness and honesty, putting truth and factuality ﬁrst,
rather than his own whims or desires.
The general rigidiﬁcation and objectiﬁcation of the notion of
measure continued to develop until, in modern times, the very
wholeness and the implicate order
28

word ‘measure’ has come to denote mainly a process of com-
parison of something with an external standard. While the
original meaning still survives in some contexts (e.g., art and
mathematics) it is generally felt as having only a secondary sort
of signiﬁcance.
Now, in the East the notion of measure has not played nearly
so fundamental a role. Rather, in the prevailing philosophy in the
Orient, the immeasurable (i.e. that which cannot be named,
described, or understood through any form of reason) is
regarded as the primary reality. Thus, in Sanskrit (which has an
origin common to the Indo-European language group) there is a
word ‘matra’ meaning ‘measure’, in the musical sense, which is
evidently close to the Greek ‘metron’. But then there is another
word ‘maya’ obtained from the same root, which means ‘illu-
sion’. This is an extraordinarily signiﬁcant point. Whereas to
Western society, as it derives from the Greeks, measure, with all
that this word implies, is the very essence of reality, or at least
the key to this essence, in the East measure has now come to be
regarded commonly as being in some way false and deceitful. In
this view the entire structure and order of forms, proportions,
and ‘ratios’ that present themselves to ordinary perception and
reason are regarded as a sort of veil, covering the true reality,
which cannot be perceived by the senses and of which nothing
can be said or thought.
It is clear that the diﬀerent ways the two societies have
developed ﬁt in with their diﬀerent attitudes to measure. Thus,
in the West, society has mainly emphasized the development of
science and technology (dependent on measure) while in the
East, the main emphasis has gone to religion and philosophy
(which are directed ultimately toward the immeasurable).
If one considers this question carefully, one can see that in a
certain sense the East was right to see the immeasurable as the
primary reality. For, as has already been indicated, measure is an
insight created by man. A reality that is beyond man and prior to
fragmentation and wholeness
29

him cannot depend on such insight. Indeed, the attempt to sup-
pose that measure exists prior to man and independently of him
leads, as has been seen, to the ‘objectiﬁcation’ of man’s insight,
so that it becomes rigidiﬁed and unable to change, eventually
bringing about fragmentation and general confusion in the way
described in this chapter.
One may speculate that perhaps in ancient times, the men
who were wise enough to see that the immeasurable is the pri-
mary reality were also wise enough to see that measure is insight
into a secondary and dependent but nonetheless necessary
aspect of reality. Thus they may have agreed with the Greeks that
insight into measure is capable of helping to bring about order
and harmony in our lives, while at the same time, seeing perhaps
more deeply, that it cannot be what is most fundamental in this
regard.
What they may further have said is that when measure is
identiﬁed with the very essence of reality, this is illusion. But
then, when men learned this by conforming to the teachings of
tradition, the meaning became largely habitual and mechanical.
In the way indicated earlier, the subtlety was lost and men began
to say simply: ‘measure is illusion’. Thus, both in the East and in
the West, true insight may have been turned into something false
and misleading by the procedure of learning mechanically
through conformity to existent teachings, rather than through a
creative and original grasp of the insights implicit in such
teachings.
It is of course impossible to go back to a state of wholeness
that may have been present before the split between East and
West developed (if only because we know little, if anything,
about this state). Rather, what is needed is to learn afresh, to
observe, and to discover for ourselves the meaning of wholeness.
Of course, we have to be cognisant of the teachings of the past,
both Western and Eastern, but to imitate these teachings or to try
to conform to them would have little value. For, as has been
wholeness and the implicate order
30

pointed out in this chapter, to develop new insight into fragmen-
tation and wholeness requires a creative work even more dif-
ﬁcult than that needed to make fundamental new discoveries in
science, or great and original works of art. It might in this con-
text be said that one who is similar to Einstein in creativity is not
the one who imitates Einstein’s ideas, nor even the one who
applies these ideas in new ways, rather, it is the one who learns
from Einstein and then goes on to do something original, which
is able to assimilate what is valid in Einstein’s work and yet goes
beyond this work in qualitatively new ways. So what we have to
do with regard to the great wisdom from the whole of the past,
both in the East and in the West, is to assimilate it and to go on to
new and original perception relevant to our present condition of
life.
In doing this, it is important that we be clear on the role of
techniques, such as those used in various forms of meditation. In
a way, techniques of meditation can be looked on as measures
(actions ordered by knowledge and reason) which are taken by
man to try to reach the immeasurable, i.e., a state of mind in
which he ceases to sense a separation between himself and
the whole of reality. But clearly, there is a contradiction in
such a notion, for the immeasurable is, if anything, just that
which cannot be brought within limits determined by man’s
knowledge and reason.
To be sure, in certain speciﬁable contexts, technical measures,
understood in a right spirit, can lead us to do things from which
we can derive insight if we are observant. Such possibilities,
however, are limited. Thus, it would be a contradiction in terms
to think of formulating techniques for making fundamental new
discoveries in science or original and creative works of art, for
the very essence of such action is a certain freedom from
dependence on others, who would be needed as guides. How
can this freedom be transmitted in an activity in which conform-
ity to someone else’s knowledge is the main source of energy?
fragmentation and wholeness
31

And if techniques cannot teach originality and creativity in art
and science, how much less is it possible for them to enable us to
‘discover the immeasurable’?
Actually, there are no direct and positive things that man can
do to get in touch with the immeasurable, for this must be
immensely beyond anything that man can grasp with his mind
or accomplish with his hands or his instruments. What man can
do is to give his full attention and creative energies to bring
clarity and order into the totality of the ﬁeld of measure. This
involves, of course, not only the outward display of measure in
terms of external units but also inward measure, as health of the
body, moderation in action, and meditation, which gives insight
into the measure of thought. This latter is particularly important
because, as has been seen, the illusion that the self and the world
are broken into fragments originates in the kind of thought that
goes beyond its proper measure and confuses its own product
with the same independent reality. To end this illusion requires
insight, not only into the world as a whole, but also into how
the instrument of thought is working. Such insight implies an
original and creative act of perception into all aspects of life,
mental and physical, both through the senses and through the
mind, and this is perhaps the true meaning of meditation.
As has been seen, fragmentation originates in essence in the
ﬁxing of the insights forming our overall self-world view, which
follows on our generally mechanical, routinized and habitual
modes of thought about these matters. Because the primary re-
ality goes beyond anything that can be contained in such ﬁxed
forms of measure, these insights must eventually cease to be
adequate, and will thus give rise to various forms of unclarity or
confusion. However, when the whole ﬁeld of measure is open to
original and creative insight, without any ﬁxed limits or barriers,
then our overall world views will cease to be rigid, and the
whole ﬁeld of measure will come into harmony, as fragmenta-
tion within it comes to an end. But original and creative insight
wholeness and the implicate order
32

within the whole ﬁeld of measure is the action of the immeasur-
able. For when such insight occurs, the source cannot be within
ideas already contained in the ﬁeld of measure but rather has to
be in the immeasurable, which contains the essential formative
cause of all that happens in the ﬁeld of measure. The measurable
and the immeasurable are then in harmony and indeed one sees
that they are but diﬀerent ways of considering the one and
undivided whole.
When such harmony prevails, man can then not only have
insight into the meaning of wholeness but, what is much more
signiﬁcant, he can realize the truth of this insight in every phase
and aspect of his life.
As Krishnamurti1 has brought out with great force and clarity,
this requires that man gives his full creative energies to the
inquiry into the whole ﬁeld of measure. To do this may perhaps
be extremely diﬃcult and arduous, but since everything turns on
this, it is surely worthy of the serious attention and utmost
consideration of each of us.
fragmentation and wholeness
33

2
THE RHEOMODE – AN
EXPERIMENT WITH LANGUAGE
AND THOUGHT
1 INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapter it has been pointed out that our thought
is fragmented, mainly by our taking it for an image or model of
‘what the world is’. The divisions in thought are thus given
disproportionate importance, as if they were a widespread and
pervasive structure of independently existent actual breaks in
‘what is’, rather than merely convenient features of description
and analysis. Such thought was shown to bring about a thor-
oughgoing confusion that tends to permeate every phase of life,
and that ultimately makes impossible the solution of individual
and social problems. We saw the urgent need to end this confu-
sion, through giving careful attention to the one-ness of the
content of thought and the actual process of thinking which
produces this content.
In this chapter the main emphasis will be to inquire into the

role of language structure in helping to bring about this sort of
fragmentation in thought. Though language is only one of the
important factors involved in this tendency, it is clearly of
key importance in thought, in communication, and in the
organization of human society in general.
Of course, it is possible merely to observe language as it is,
and has been, in various diﬀering social groups and periods of
history, but what we wish to do in this chapter is to experiment
with changes in the structure of the common language. In this
experimentation our aim is not to produce a well-deﬁned alter-
native to present language structures. Rather, it is to see what
happens to the language function as we change it, and thus
perhaps to make possible a certain insight into how language
contributes to the general fragmentation. Indeed, one of the best
ways of learning how one is conditioned by a habit (such as the
common usage of language is, to a large extent) is to give careful
and sustained attention to one’s overall reaction when one
‘makes the test’ of seeing what takes place when one is doing
something signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the automatic and accus-
tomed function. So, the main point of the work discussed in this
chapter is to take a step in what might be an unending
experimentation with language (and with thought). That is, we
are suggesting that such experimentation is to be considered as a
normal activity of the individual and of society (as it has in fact
come to be considered over the past few centuries with regard to
experimentation with nature and with man himself). Thus, lan-
guage (along with the thought involved in it) will be seen as a
particular ﬁeld of function among all the rest, so that it ceases to
be, in eﬀect, the one ﬁeld that is exempted from experimental
inquiry.
the rheomode
35

2 AN INQUIRY INTO OUR LANGUAGE
In scientiﬁc inquiries a crucial step is to ask the right question.
Indeed, each question contains presuppositions, largely implicit.
If these presuppositions are wrong or confused, then the ques-
tion itself is wrong, in the sense that to try to answer it has no
meaning. One has thus to inquire into the appropriateness of the question.
In fact, truly original discoveries in science and in other ﬁelds
have generally involved such inquiry into old questions, leading
to a perception of their inappropriateness, and in this way allow-
ing for the putting forth of new questions. To do this is often
very diﬃcult, as these presuppositions tend to be hidden very
deep in the structure of our thought. (For example, Einstein saw
that questions having to do with space and time and the particle
nature of matter, as commonly accepted in the physics of his day,
involved confused presuppositions that had to be dropped,
and thus he was able to come to ask new questions leading to
radically diﬀerent notions on the subject.)
What, then, will be our question, as we engage in this inquiry
into our language (and thought)? We begin with the fact of
general fragmentation. We can ask in a preliminary way whether
there are any features of the commonly used language which
tend to sustain and propagate this fragmentation, as well as,
perhaps, to reﬂect it. A cursory examination shows that a very
important feature of this kind is the subject-verb-object struc-
ture of sentences, which is common to the grammar and syntax
of modern languages. This structure implies that all action arises
in a separate entity, the subject, and that, in cases described by a
transitive verb, this action crosses over the space between them
to another separate entity, the object. (If the verb is intransitive,
as in ‘he moves’, the subject is still considered to be a separate
entity but the activity is considered to be either a property of the
subject or a reﬂexive action of the subject, e.g., in the sense that
‘he moves’ may be taken to mean ‘he moves himself’.)
wholeness and the implicate order
36

This is a pervasive structure, leading in the whole of life to a
function of thought tending to divide things into separate
entities, such entities being conceived of as essentially ﬁxed and
static in their nature. When this view is carried to its limit, one
arrives at the prevailing scientiﬁc world view, in which every-
thing is regarded as ultimately constituted out of a set of basic
particles of ﬁxed nature.
The subject-verb-object structure of language, along with its
world view, tends to impose itself very strongly in our speech,
even in those cases in which some attention would reveal its
evident inappropriateness. For example, consider the sentence ‘It
is raining.’ Where is the ‘It’ that would, according to the sen-
tence, be ‘the rainer that is doing the raining’? Clearly, it is more
accurate to say: ‘Rain is going on.’ Similarly, we customarily say,
‘One elementary particle acts on another’, but, as indicated in
the previous chapter, each particle is only an abstraction of a
relatively invariant form of movement in the whole ﬁeld of the
universe. So it would be more appropriate to say, ‘Elementary
particles are on-going movements that are mutually dependent
because ultimately they merge and interpenetrate.’ However, the
same sort of description holds also on the larger-scale level.
Thus, instead of saying, ‘An observer looks at an object’, we can
more appropriately say, ‘Observation is going on, in an
undivided movement involving those abstractions customarily
called “the human being” and “the object he is looking at”.’
These considerations on the overall implications of sentence
structures suggest another question. Is it not possible for the
syntax and grammatical form of language to be changed so as to
give a basic role to the verb rather than to the noun? This would
help to end the sort of fragmentation indicated above, for the
verb describes actions and movements, which ﬂow into each
other and merge, without sharp separations or breaks. Moreover,
since movements are in general always themselves changing,
they have in them no permanent pattern of ﬁxed form with
the rheomode
37

which separately existent things could be identiﬁed. Such an
approach to language evidently ﬁts in with the overall world
view discussed in the previous chapter, in which movement is,
in eﬀect, taken as a primary notion, while apparently static and
separately existent things are seen as relatively invariant states of
continuing movement (e.g., recall the example of the vortex).
Now, in some ancient languages – for example, Hebrew – the
verb was in fact taken as primary, in the sense described above.
Thus, the root of almost all words in Hebrew was a certain verbal
form, while adverbs, adjectives and nouns were obtained by
modifying the verbal form with preﬁxes, suﬃxes, and in other
ways. However, in modern Hebrew the actual usage is similar to
that of English, in that the noun is in fact given a primary role in
its meaning even though in the formal grammar all is still built
from the verb as a root.
We have to try here, of course, to work with a structure in
which the verb has a primary function, and to take this require-
ment seriously. That is to say, there is no point in using the verb
in a formally primary role and to think in terms in which a set of
separate and identiﬁable objects is taken to be what is basic. To
say one thing and do another in this way is a form of confusion
that would evidently simply add to the general fragmentation
rather than help bring it to an end.
Suddenly to invent a whole new language implying a radically
diﬀerent structure of thought is, however, clearly not practicable.
What can be done is provisionally and experimentally to intro-
duce a new mode of language. Thus, we already have, for example,
diﬀerent moods of the verb, such as the indicative, the sub-
junctive, the imperative, and we develop skill in the use of lan-
guage so that each of these moods functions, when it is required,
without the need for conscious choice. Similarly, we will now
consider a mode in which movement is to be taken as primary in
our thinking and in which this notion will be incorporated into
the language structure by allowing the verb rather than the noun
wholeness and the implicate order
38

to play a primary role. As one develops such a mode and works
with it for a while, one may obtain the necessary skill in using it,
so that it will also come to function whenever it is required,
without the need for conscious choice.
For the sake of convenience we shall give this mode a name,
i.e. the rheomode (‘rheo’ is from a Greek verb, meaning ‘to ﬂow’).
At least in the ﬁrst instance the rheomode will be an experiment
in the use of language, concerned mainly with trying to ﬁnd out
whether it is possible to create a new structure that is not so
prone toward fragmentation as is the present one. Evidently,
then, our inquiry will have to begin by emphasizing the role of
language in shaping our overall world views as well as in
expressing them more precisely in the form of general philo-
sophical ideas. For as suggested in the previous chapter these
world views and their general expressions (which contain tacit
conclusions about everything, including nature, society, our-
selves, our language, etc.) are now playing a key role in helping
to originate and sustain fragmentation in every aspect of life. So
we will start by using the rheomode mainly in an experimental
way. As already pointed out, to do this implies giving a kind of
careful attention to how thought and language actually work,
which goes beyond a mere consideration of their content.
At least in the present inquiry the rheomode will be con-
cerned mainly with questions having to do with the broad and
deep implications of our overall world views which now tend to
be raised largely in the study of philosophy, psychology, art,
science and mathematics, but especially in the study of thought
and language themselves. Of course, this sort of question can
also be discussed in terms of our present language structure.
While this structure is indeed dominated by the divisive form of
subject-verb-object, it nevertheless contains a rich and complex
variety of other forms, which are used largely tacitly and by
implication (especially in poetry but more generally in all
artistic modes of expression). However, the dominant form of
the rheomode
39

subject-verb-object tends continually to lead to fragmentation;
and it is evident that the attempt to avoid this fragmentation by
skilful use of other features of the language can work only in a
limited way, for, by force of habit, we tend sooner or later,
especially in broad questions concerning our overall world
views, to fall unwittingly into the fragmentary mode of func-
tioning implied by the basic structure. The reason for this is not
only that the subject-verb-object form of the language is con-
tinually implying an inappropriate division between things but,
even more, that the ordinary mode of language tends very
strongly to take its own function for granted, and thus it leads us
to concentrate almost exclusively on the content under discus-
sion, so that little or no attention is left for the actual symbolic
function of the language itself. As pointed out earlier, however, it
is here that the primary tendency toward fragmentation orig-
inates. For because the ordinary mode of thought and language
does not properly call attention to its own function, this latter
seems to arise in a reality independent of thought and language,
so that the divisions implied in the language structure are then
projected, as if they were fragments, corresponding to actual
breaks in ‘what is’.
Such fragmentary perception may, however, give rise to the
illusory impression that adequate attention is indeed already
being given to the function of thought and language, and thus
may lead to the false conclusion that there is in reality no serious
diﬃculty of the sort described above. One may suppose, for
example, that as the function of the world of nature is studied in
physics, and that of society is studied in sociology, and that of
the mind in psychology, so the function of language is given
attention in linguistics. But of course such a notion would be
appropriate only if all these ﬁelds were actually clearly separated
and either constant or slowly changing in their natures, so that
the results obtained in each ﬁeld of specialization would be
relevant in all situations and on all occasions in which they
wholeness and the implicate order
40

might be applied. What we have been emphasizing, however, is
that on questions of such broad and deep scope, this sort of
separation is not appropriate and that in any case the crucial
point is to give attention to the very language (and thought) that
is being used, from moment to moment, in the inquiry into the
function of language itself, as well as in any other form of
inquiry in which one may engage. So it will not be adequate to
isolate language as a particular ﬁeld of inquiry and to regard it as
a relatively static thing which changes only slowly (or not at all)
as one goes into it.
It is clear, then, that in developing the rheomode, we will have
to be especially aware of the need for language properly to call
attention to its own function at the very moment in which this is
taking place. In this way, we may not only be able to think more
coherently about broad questions concerning our general world
views, but we may also understand better how the ordinary
mode of language functions, so that we may be able to use even
this ordinary mode more coherently.
3 THE FORM OF THE RHEOMODE
We now go on to inquire in more detail into what may be a
suitable form of expression for the rheomode.
As a ﬁrst step in this inquiry, we may ask whether the rich and
complex informal structure of the commonly used language
does not contain, even if perhaps only in a rudimentary or ger-
minal form, some feature that can satisfy the need, indicated
above, to call attention to the real function of thought and lan-
guage. If one looks into this question, one can see that there are
such features. Indeed, in modern times, the most striking
example is the use (and over-use) of the word ‘relevant’ (which
may perhaps be understood as a kind of ‘groping’ for the
attention-calling function that people almost unconsciously feel
to be important).
the rheomode
41

The word ‘relevant’ derives from a verb ‘to relevate’, which
has dropped out of common usage, whose meaning is ‘to lift’
(as in ‘elevate’). In essence, ‘to relevate’ means ‘to lift into atten-
tion’, so that the content thus lifted stands out ‘in relief’. When a
content lifted into attention is coherent or ﬁtting with the con-
text of interest, i.e. when it has some bearing on the context of
some relationship to it, then one says that this content is relevant;
and, of course, when it does not ﬁt in this way, it is said to be
irrelevant.
As an example, we can take the writings of Lewis Carroll,
which are full of humour arising from the use of the irrelevant.
Thus, in Through the Looking Glass, there is a conversation between
the Mad Hatter and the March Hare, containing the sentence:
‘This watch doesn’t run, even though I used the best butter.’
Such a sentence lifts into attention the irrelevant notion that the
grade of butter has bearing on the running of watches – a notion
that evidently does not ﬁt the context of the actual structure of
watches.
In making a statement about relevance, one is treating thought
and language as realities, on the same level as the context in
which they refer. In eﬀect, one is, at the very moment in which
the statement is made, looking or giving attention both to this
context and to the overall function of thought and language, to
see whether or not they ﬁt each other. Thus, to see the relevance
or irrelevance of a statement is primarily an act of perception of
a very high order similar to that involved in seeing its truth or
falsity. In one sense the question of relevance comes before that
of truth, because to ask whether a statement is true or false
presupposes that it is relevant (so that to try to assert the truth or
falsity of an irrelevant statement is a form of confusion), but in a
deeper sense the seeing of relevance or irrelevance is evidently
an aspect of the perception of truth in its overall meaning.
Clearly, the act of apprehending relevance or irrelevance can-
not be reduced to a technique or a method, determined by some
wholeness and the implicate order
42

set of rules. Rather, this is an art, both in the sense of requiring
creative perception and in the sense that this perception has to
develop further in a kind of skill (as in the work of the artisan).
Thus it is not right, for example, to regard the division
between relevance and irrelevance as a form of accumulated
knowledge of properties belonging to statements (e.g., by saying
that certain statements ‘possess’ relevance while others do not).
Rather, in each case, the statement of relevance or irrelevance is
communicating a perception taking place at the moment of
expression, and is the individual context indicated in that
moment. As the context in question changes, a statement that
was initially relevant may thus cease to be so, or vice versa.
Moreover, one cannot even say that a given statement is either
relevant or irrelevant, and that this covers all the possibilities.
Thus, in many cases, the total context may be such that one
cannot clearly perceive whether the statement has bearing or
not. This means that one has to learn more, and that the issue is,
as it were, in a state of ﬂux. So when relevance or irrelevance is
communicated, one has to understand that this is not a hard and
fast division between opposing categories but, rather, an expres-
sion of an ever-changing perception, in which it is possible, for
the moment, to see a ﬁt or non-ﬁt between the content lifted
into attention and the context to which it refers.
At present, the question of ﬁtting or non-ﬁtting is discussed
through a language structure in which nouns are taken as basic
(e.g., by saying ‘this notion is relevant’). Such a structure does
indeed formally imply a hard and fast division between rele-
vance and irrelevance. So the form of the language is continually
introducing a tendency toward fragmentation, even in those
very features whose function is to call attention to the wholeness
of language and the context in which it is being used.
As already stated we are, of course, often able to overcome this
tendency toward fragmentation by using language in a freer,
more informal, and ‘poetic’ way, that properly communicates
the rheomode
43

the truly ﬂuid nature of the diﬀerence between relevance and
irrelevance. Is it not possible, however, to do this more coher-
ently and eﬀectively by discussing the issue of relevance in terms
of the rheomode, in which as suggested earlier, hard and fast
divisions do not arise formally, because the verb, rather than the
noun, is given a primary role?
To answer this question, we ﬁrst note that the verb ‘to rel-
evate’, from which the adjective ‘relevant’ is derived, ultimately
comes from the root ‘to levate’ (whose meaning is, of course, ‘to
lift’). As a step in developing the rheomode, we then propose
that the verb ‘to levate’ shall mean, ‘The spontaneous and
unrestricted act of lifting into attention any content whatsoever,
which includes the lifting into attention of the question of
whether this content ﬁts a broader context or not, as well as that
of lifting into attention the very function of calling attention which
is initiated by the verb itself.’ This implies an unrestricted
breadth and depth of meaning, that is not ﬁxed within static
limits.
We then introduce the verb ‘to re-levate’. This means: ‘To lift a
certain content into attention again, for a particular context, as
indicated by thought and language.’ Here, it has to be
emphasized that ‘re’ signiﬁes ‘again’, i.e. on another occasion. It
evidently implies time and similarity (as well as diﬀerence, since
each occasion is not only similar but also diﬀerent).
As pointed out earlier, it then requires an act of perception to
see, in each case, whether the content thus ‘lifted again’ ﬁts the
observed context or not. In those cases in which this act of
perception reveals a ﬁt, we say: ‘to re-levate is re-levant’ (note
that the use of the hyphen is essential here, and that the word
should be pronounced with a break, as indicated by the
hyphen). Of course, in those cases in which perception reveals
non-ﬁtting, we say ‘to re-levate is irre-levant’.
We see, then, that adjectives have been built from the verb as a
root form. Nouns also can be constructed in this way, and they
wholeness and the implicate order
44

will signify not separate objects but, rather, continuing states of
activity of the particular form indicated by the verbs. Thus, the
noun ‘re-levation’ means ‘a continuing state of lifting a given
content into attention’.
To go on with re-levation when to do so is irre-levant will,
however, be called ‘irre-levation’. In essence, irre-levation
implies that there is not proper attention. When some content is
irre-levant, it should normally sooner or later be dropped. If this
does not happen, then one is, in some sense, not watchful or
alert. Thus, irre-levation implies the need to give attention to the
fact that there is not proper attention. Attention to such failure of
attention is of course the very act that ends irre-levation.
Finally, we shall introduce the noun form ‘levation’, which
signiﬁes a sort of generalized and unrestricted totality of acts of
lifting into attention (note that this diﬀers from the ‘to levate’,
which signiﬁes a single spontaneous and unrestricted act of
lifting into attention).
Clearly, the above way of using a structure of language form
built from a root verb enables us to discuss what is commonly
meant by ‘relevance’ in a way that is free of fragmentation, for
we are no longer being led, by the form of the language, to
consider something called relevance as if it were a separate and
ﬁxed quality. Even more important, we are not establishing a
division between what the verb ‘to levate’ means and the actual
function that takes place when we use this verb. That is to say, ‘to
levate’ is not only to attend to the thought of lifting an
unrestricted content into attention but it is also to engage in the
very act of lifting such an unrestricted content into attention.
The thought is thus not a mere abstraction, with no concrete
perception to which it can refer. Rather, something is actually
going on which ﬁts the meaning of the word, and one can, at the
very moment of using the word, perceive the ﬁt between this
meaning and what is going on. So the content of thought and
its actual function are seen and felt as one, and thus one
the rheomode
45

understands what it can mean for fragmentation to cease, at its
very origin.
Evidently, it is possible to generalize this way of building up
language forms so that any verb may be taken as the root form.
We shall then say that the rheomode is in essence characterized
by this way of using a verb.
As an example, let us consider the Latin verb ‘videre’, mean-
ing ‘to see’, which is used in English in such forms as ‘video’.
We then introduce the root verbal form ‘to vidate’. This does not
mean merely ‘to see’ in the visual sense, but we shall take it to
refer to every aspect of perception including even the act of
understanding, which is the apprehension of a totality, that
includes sense perception, intellect, feeling, etc. (e.g., in the
common language ‘to understand’ and ‘to see’ may be used
interchangeably). So the verb ‘to vidate’ will call attention to a
spontaneous and unrestricted act of perception of any sort what-
soever, including perception of whether what is seen ﬁts or does
not ﬁt ‘what is’, as well as perception even of the very attention-
calling function of the word itself. Thus, as happens with ‘to
levate’, there is no division between the content (meaning) of
this word and the total function to which it gives rise.
We then consider the verb ‘to re-vidate’, which means to
perceive a given content again, as indicated by a word or thought.
If this content is seen to ﬁt the indicated context, then we say: ‘to
re-vidate is re-vidant’. If it is seen not to ﬁt, then of course we
say: ‘to re-vidate is irre-vidant’ (which means, in ordinary usage,
that this was a mistaken or illusory perception).
‘Re-vidation’ is then a continuing state of perceiving a certain
content, while ‘irre-vidation’ is a continuing state of being
caught in illusion or delusion, with regard to a certain content.
Evidently (as with irre-levation) irre-vidation implies a failure of
attention, and to attend to this failure of attention is to end
irre-vidation.
Finally, the noun ‘vidation’ means an unrestricted and gener-
wholeness and the implicate order
46

alized totality of acts of perception. Clearly, vidation is not to be
sharply distinguished from levation. In an act of vidation, it is
necessary to levate a content into attention, and in an act of
levation, it is necessary to vidate this content. So the two move-
ments of levation and vidation merge and interpenetrate. Each of
these words merely emphasizes (i.e., re-levates) a certain aspect
of movement in general. It will become evident that this will be
true of all verbal roots in the rheomode. They all imply each
other, and pass into each other. Thus, the rheomode will reveal a
certain wholeness, that is not characteristic of the ordinary use
of language (though it is there potentially, in the sense that if we
start with movement as primary, then we have likewise to say
that all movements shade into each other, to merge and
interpenetrate).
Let us now go on to consider the verb ‘to divide’. We shall
take this to be a combination of the verb ‘videre’ and the preﬁx
‘di’, meaning ‘separate’. So, ‘to divide’ is to be considered1 as
meaning ‘to see as separate’.
We thus introduce the verb2 ‘to di-vidate’. This word calls
attention to the spontaneous act of seeing things as separate, in
any form whatsoever, including the act of seeing whether or not
the perception ﬁts ‘what is’, and even that of seeing how the
attention-calling function of this word has a form of inherent
division in it. With regard to this last point, we note that merely
to consider the word ‘di-vidate’ makes it clear that this is
diﬀerent from the word ‘vidate’ from which it has been derived.
So, to di-vidate implies not only a content (or meaning) of div-
ision but also that the very use of this word produces a function
for which the notion of division is seen to provide a description
that ﬁts.
We now consider the verb ‘to re-dividate’, which means
through thought and language to perceive a given content again
in terms of a particular kind of separation or division. If to do
this is seen to ﬁt the indicated context, then we say that ‘to
the rheomode
47

re-dividate is re-dividant’. If it is seen not to ﬁt, we say that to
‘re-dividate is irre-dividant’.
Re-dividation is then a continuing state of seeing a certain
content in the form of separation or division. Irre-dividation is a
continuing state of seeing separation where, in the ordinary
language, we would say that separation is irrelevant.
Irre-dividation is clearly essentially the same as fragmentation.
So it becomes evident that fragmentation cannot possibly be a
good thing, for it means not merely to see things as separate but
to persist in doing this in a context in which this way of seeing
does not ﬁt. To go on indeﬁnitely with irre-dividation is possible
only through a failure of attention. Thus irre-dividation comes
to an end in the very act of giving attention to this failure of
attention.
Finally, of course, the noun ‘dividation’ means an unrestricted
and generalized totality of acts of seeing things as separate. As
has been indicated earlier, di-vidation implies a division in the
attention-calling function of the word, in the sense that di-
vidation is seen to be diﬀerent from vidation. Nevertheless, this
diﬀerence holds only in some limited context and is not to be
taken as a fragmentation, or actual break, between the mean-
ings and functions of the two words. Rather, their very forms
indicate that dividation is a kind of vidation, indeed a special
case of the latter. So ultimately, wholeness is primary, in the
sense that these meanings and functions pass into each other to
merge and interpenetrate. Division is thus seen to be a con-
venient means of giving a more articulated and detailed
description to this whole, rather than a fragmentation of
‘what is’.
The movement from division to one-ness of perception is
through the action of ordering. (A more detailed discussion of this
is given in chapter 5.) For example, a ruler may be divided into
inches, but this set of divisions is introduced into our thinking
only as a convenient means of expressing a simple sequential order, by
wholeness and the implicate order
48

which we can communicate and understand something that has
bearing on some whole object, which is measured with the aid
of such a ruler.
This simple notion of a sequential order, expressed in terms of
regular divisions in a line on a scale, helps to direct us in our
constructional work, our travels and movements on the surface
of the Earth and in space, and in a wide range of general practical
and scientiﬁc activities. But, of course, more complex orders are
possible, and these have to be expressed in terms of more subtle
divisions and categories of thought, which are signiﬁcant for
more subtle forms of movement. Thus, there is the movement of
growth, development and evolution of living beings, the move-
ment of a symphony, the movement that is the essence of life
itself, etc. These evidently have to be described in diﬀerent ways
that cannot generally be reduced to a description in terms of
simple sequential orders.
Beyond all these orders is that of the movement of attention.
This movement has to have an order that ﬁts the order in that
which is to be observed, or else we will miss seeing what is to be
seen. For example, if we try to listen to a symphony while our
attention is directed mainly to a sequential time order as indi-
cated by a clock, we will fail to listen to the subtle orders that
constitute the essential meaning of the music. Evidently, our
ability to perceive and understand is limited by the freedom
with which the ordering of attention can change, so as to ﬁt the
order that is to be observed.
It is clear, then, that in the understanding of the true meaning
of the divisions of thought and language established for our
convenience the notion of order plays a key role. To discuss this
notion in the rheomode let us then introduce the verbal root
form ‘to ordinate’. This word calls attention to a spontaneous
and unrestricted act of ordering of any sort whatsoever, includ-
ing the ordering involved in seeing whether any particular order
ﬁts or does not ﬁt some observed context, and even the ordering
the rheomode
49

which arises in the attention-calling function itself. So ‘to
ordinate’ does not primarily mean ‘to think about an order’ but,
rather, to engage in the very act of ordering attention, while
attention is given also to one’s thoughts about order. Once again,
we see the wholeness of the meaning of a word and its overall
function, which is an essential aspect of the rheomode.
‘To re-ordinate’ is then to call attention again to a given order,
by means of language and thought. If this order is seen to ﬁt that
which is to be observed in the context under discussion, we say
that ‘to re-ordinate is re-ordinant’. If it is seen not to ﬁt, we
say that ‘to re-ordinate is irre-ordinant’ (e.g., as in the application
of a linear grid to a complex maze of alleyways).
The noun ‘re-ordination’ then describes a continuing state of
calling attention to a certain order. A persistent state of re-
ordination in an irre-ordinant context will then be called ‘irre-
ordination’. As happens with all other verbs, irre-ordination is
possible only through a failure of attention, and comes to an end
when attention is given to this failure of attention.
Finally, the noun ‘ordination’ means, of course, an
unrestricted and generalized totality of acts of ordering. Evi-
dently, ordination implies levation, vidation and di-vidation,
and ultimately, all these latter imply ordination. Thus, to see
whether a given content is re-levant, attention has to be suitably
ordered to perceive this content; a suitable set of divisions or
categories will have to be set up in thought, etc., etc.
Enough has been said of the rheomode at least to indicate in
general how it works. At this point it may, however, be useful to
display the overall structure of the rheomode by listing the
words that have thus far been used:
Levate, re-levate, re-levant, irre-levant, levation, re-levation, irre-
levation.
Vidate, re-vidate, re-vidant, irre-vidant, vidation, re-vidation,
irre-vidation.
wholeness and the implicate order
50

Di-vidate, re-dividate, re-dividant, irre-dividant, di-vidation,
re-dividation, irre-dividation.
Ordinate, re-ordinate, re-ordinant, irre-ordinant, ordination,
re-ordination, irre-ordination.
It should be noted that the rheomode involves, in the ﬁrst
instance, a new grammatical construction, in which verbs are
used in a new way. However, what is further novel in it is that the
syntax extends not only to the arrangement of words that may be
regarded as already given, but also to a systematic set of rules for
the formation of new words.
Of course, such word formation has always gone on in most
languages (e.g. ‘relevant’ is built from the root ‘levate’ with the
preﬁx ‘re’ and the suﬃx ‘ate’ replaced by ‘ant’), but this kind of
construction has tended to arise mainly in a fortuitous way,
probably as a result of the need to express various useful rela-
tionships. In any case, once the words have been put together the
prevailing tendency has been to lose sight of the fact that this has
happened and to regard each word as an ‘elementary unit’, so
that the origin of such words in a construction is, in eﬀect,
treated as having no bearing on its meaning. In the rheomode,
however, the word construction is not fortuitous, but plays a
primary role in making possible a whole new mode of language,
while the activity of word construction is continually being
brought to our notice because the meanings depend in an
essential way on the forms of such constructions.
It is perhaps useful here to make a kind of comparison with
what has happened in the development of science. As seen in
chapter 1 the prevailing scientiﬁc world view has generally been
to suppose that, at bottom, everything is to be described in terms
of the results of combinations of certain ‘particle’ units, con-
sidered to be basic. This attitude is evidently in accord with the
prevailing tendency in the ordinary mode of language to treat
words as ‘elementary units’ which, one supposes, can be
the rheomode
51

combined to express anything whatsoever that is capable of
being said.
New words can, of course, be brought in to enrich discourse
in the ordinary mode of language (just as new basic particles can
be introduced in physics) but, in the rheomode, one has begun
to go further and to treat the construction of words as not essen-
tially diﬀerent from the construction of phrases, sentences, para-
graphs, etc. Thus, the ‘atomistic’ attitude to words has been
dropped and instead our point of view is rather similar to that of
ﬁeld theory in physics, in which ‘particles’ are only convenient
abstractions from the whole movement. Similarly, we may say
that language is an undivided ﬁeld of movement, involving
sound, meaning, attention-calling, emotional and muscular
reﬂexes, etc. It is somewhat arbitrary to give the present exces-
sive signiﬁcance to the breaks between words. Actually, the rela-
tionships between parts of a word may, in general, be of much
the same sort as those between diﬀerent words. So the word
ceases to be taken as an ‘indivisible atom of meaning’ and
instead it is seen as no more than a convenient marker in the
whole movement of language, neither more nor less funda-
mental than the clause, the sentence, the paragraph, the system
of paragraphs, etc. (This means that giving attention in this way
to the components of words is not primarily an attitude of analy-
sis but, rather, an approach that allows for the unrestricted ﬂow
of meaning.)
Some insight into the meaning of this change of attitude to
words is given by considering language as a particular form of
order. This is to say, language not only calls attention to order. It
is an order of sounds, words, structures of words, nuances of
phrase and gesture, etc. Evidently, the meaning of a communica-
tion through language depends, in an essential way, on the order
that language is. This order is more like that of a symphony in
which each aspect and movement has to be understood in the
light of its relationship to the whole, rather than like the simple
wholeness and the implicate order
52

sequential order of a clock or a ruler; and since (as has been
pointed out here) the order of sounds within a word is an
inseparable aspect of the whole meaning, we can develop
rules of grammar and syntax that use this order in a systematic
way to enrich and enhance the possibilities of the language for
communication and for thinking.
4 TRUTH AND FACT IN THE RHEOMODE
In the ordinary mode of language, truth is taken as a noun,
which thus stands for something that can be grasped once and
for all or which can at least be approached, step by step. Or else,
the possibility of being either true or false may be taken as a
property of statements. However, as indicated earlier, truth and
falsity have actually, like relevance and irrelevance, to be seen
from moment to moment, in an act of perception of a very high
order. Thus, the truth or falsity in content of a statement is appre-
hended by observing whether or not this content ﬁts a broader
context which is indicated either in the statement itself or by
some action or gesture (such as pointing) that goes together
with the statement. Moreover, when we come to statements
about world views, which have to do with ‘the totality of all
that is’, there is no clearly deﬁnable context to which they can
refer and so we have to emphasize truth in function, i.e. the possi-
bility of free movement and change in our general notions of
reality as a whole, so as to allow for a continual ﬁtting to new
experience, going beyond the limits of ﬁtting of older notions
of this kind. (See chapters 3 and 7 for a further discussion of
this.)
It is clear, then, that the ordinary mode of language is very
unsuitable for discussing questions of truth and falsity, because
it tends to treat each truth as a separate fragment that is essen-
tially ﬁxed and static in its nature. It will thus be interesting to
experiment with the use of the rheomode, to see in what way
the rheomode
53

this can allow us to discuss the question of truth more ﬁttingly
and coherently.
We shall begin by considering the Latin ‘verus’, meaning
‘true’. So we shall introduce the root verbal form ‘to verrate’.
(The double ‘r’ is brought in here to avoid a certain confusion of
a kind that will be evident as we proceed.) This word calls
attention, in the manner discussed in the previous section, to a
spontaneous and unrestricted act of seeing truth in any form
whatsoever, including the act of seeing whether this perception
ﬁts or does not ﬁt that which is perceived actually to happen in
the apprehension of truth, as well as seeing the truth in the
attention-calling function of the word itself. So, ‘to verrate’ is to
be in the act of perceiving truth, as well as to be attending to
what truth means.
To re-verrate, then, is to call attention again, by means of
thought and language, to a particular truth in a given context. If
this is seen to ﬁt what is to be observed in this context, we say
that to re-verrate is re-verrant, and if it is seen not to ﬁt, we say that to
re-verrate is irre-verrant (i.e. a particular truth ceases to be valid when
repeated and extended into a context that is beyond its proper
limits).
We see, then, that the question of truth is no longer being
discussed in terms of separate and essentially static fragments.
Rather, our attention is called to the general act of verration, and to
its continuation in a particular context as re-verration and irre-
verration. (Irre-verration, i.e. the persistent holding to a truth
beyond its proper limits, has evidently been one of the major
sources of illusion and delusion throughout the whole of history
and in every phase of life.) Verration is to be seen as a ﬂowing
movement, which merges and interpenetrates with levation,
vidation, di-vidation, ordination, and indeed with all the
other movements that will be indicated in the subsequent
development of the rheomode.
Now, when we discuss truth in the ordinary mode, we are
wholeness and the implicate order
54

inevitably brought to consider what is to be meant by the fact.
Thus, in some sense, to say: ‘This is a fact’ implies that the
content of the statement in question is true. However, the root
meaning of the word ‘fact’ is ‘that which has been made’ (e.g.,
as in ‘manufacture’). This meaning does have bearing here
because, as is evident, in some sense we actually do ‘make’ the
fact: for this fact depends not only on the context that is being
observed and on our immediate perception, it also depends on
how our perceptions are shaped by our thoughts, as well as on
what we do, to test our conclusions, and to apply them in
practical activities.
Let us now go on to experiment with the use of the rheo-
mode, to see where this leads when we consider what is meant
by ‘the fact’. We thus introduce the root verb ‘to factate’, mean-
ing a spontaneous and unrestricted attention to consciously
directed human activity in making or doing any sort of thing what-
soever3 (and this, of course, includes the ‘making’ or ‘doing’ of
the attention-calling function of the word itself). To re-factate
is, then, through thought and language, to call attention again to
such an activity of ‘making’ or ‘doing’ in a particular context. If
this activity is seen to ﬁt within the context (i.e. if what we are
doing ‘works’) then we say ‘to re-factate is re-factant’ and if it is
seen not to ﬁt, we say ‘to re-factate is irre-factant’.
Clearly, a great deal of what is ordinarily meant by the truth or
falsity of a statement is contained in the implication of the words
‘re-factant’ and ‘irre-factant’. Thus it is evident that when true
notions are applied in practice, they will generally lead to our
doing something that ‘works’, while false notions will lead to
activities that ‘do not work’.
Of course, we have to be careful here not to identify truth as
nothing more than ‘that which works’ since, as has been seen,
truth is a whole movement, going far beyond the limited
domain of our consciously directed functional activities. So,
although the statement ‘re-verration is re-factant’ is correct as far
the rheomode
55

as it goes, it is important to keep in mind that this calls attention
only to a certain aspect of what is to be meant by truth. Indeed, it
does not even cover all that is meant by fact. Far more is involved
in establishing the fact than merely to observe that our know-
ledge is re-factant, i.e. that it has generally led us successfully to
achieve the goals that were originally projected in thought. In
addition, the fact has to be tested continually, through further
observation and experience. The primary aim of such testing is
not the production of some desired result or end but, rather, it is
to see whether the fact will ‘stand up’, even when the context to
which it refers is observed again and again, either in essentially
the same way as before, or in new ways that may have bearing on
this context. In science, such testing is carried out through
experiments, which not only have to be reproducible but which
also have to ﬁt in with ‘cross-checks’ provided by other experi-
ments that are signiﬁcant in the context of interest. More gener-
ally, experience as a whole is always providing a similar sort of
test, provided that we are alert and observant to see what it
actually indicates.
When we say ‘this is a fact’ we then imply a certain ability of
the fact to ‘stand up to’ a wide range of diﬀerent kinds of testing.
Thus, the fact is established, i.e. it is shown to be stable, in the sense
that it is not liable to collapse, or to be nulliﬁed at any moment,
in a subsequent observation of the general sort that has already
been carried out. Of course, this stability is only relative, because
the fact is always being tested again and again, both in ways that
are familiar and in new ways that are continually being explored.
So it may be reﬁned, modiﬁed, and even radically changed,
through further observation, experiment and experience. But in
order to be a ‘real fact’, it evidently has, in this way, to remain
constantly valid, at least in certain contexts or over a certain period
of time.
To lay the ground for discussing this aspect of the fact in the
rheomode, we ﬁrst note that the word ‘constant’ is derived from
wholeness and the implicate order
56

a now obsolete verb ‘to constate’, which means ‘to establish’, ‘to
ascertain’, or ‘to conﬁrm’. This meaning is made even more
evident by considering the Latin root ‘constare’ (‘stare’ meaning
‘to stand’ and ‘con’ meaning ‘together’). Thus, we can say that
in the activity of testing, we ‘constate’ the fact; so that is estab-
lished and ‘stands together ﬁrmly’, as a coherent body, which is
able in a certain relative sense, to ‘stand up’ to being put to the
test. Thus, within certain limits, the fact remains con-stant.
Actually, the very closely related word ‘constater’ is used in
modern French, in much the sense that has been indicated
above. In a certain way, it covers what is meant here better than
‘constate’ because it is derived from the Latin ‘constat’ which is
the past participle of ‘constare’, and thus its root meaning would
be ‘to have stood together’. This ﬁts together quite well with
‘fact’ or ‘that which has been made’.
To consider these questions in the rheomode, we then intro-
duce the root verb ‘to con-statate’. This means ‘to give spon-
taneous and unrestricted attention to how any sort of action or
movement whatsoever is established in a relatively constant form
that stands together relatively stably, including the action of
establishing a body of fact that stands together in this way, and
even the action of this very word in helping to establish the fact
about the function of language itself’.
To re-constatate is then by means of word and thought, to call
attention again to a particular action or movement of this kind in
a given context. If this latter is seen to ﬁt within the context in
question, we say: ‘to re-constatate is re-constatant’, and if it is
seen not to ﬁt, we say: ‘to re-constatate is irre-constatant’ (e.g.
the fact as it had previously been established is not found
factually to ‘stand up’ to further observation and experience).
The noun form ‘re-constation’ then signiﬁes a particular kind
of continuing state of action or movement in a given context that
‘stands together’ in a relatively constant way, whether this be
our own action in establishing a fact, or any other kind of
the rheomode
57

movement that can be described as established or stable in form.
It may thus, in the ﬁrst instance, refer to the possibility of con-
ﬁrming again and again, in a series of acts of observation or
experimentation, that ‘the fact still stands’; or it may refer to a
certain continuing state of movement (or of aﬀairs) which ‘still
stands’ in an overall reality including and going beyond our acts
of observation and experimentation. Finally it may refer to the
verbal activity of making a statement (i.e. state-ment) by which
what one person re-constatates can be communicated, to be re-
constatated by other people. That is to say, a re-constatation is, in
ordinary use of language, ‘an established fact’ or ‘the actual state
of movement or of aﬀairs that the fact is about’ or ‘the verbal
statement of the fact’. So we do not make a sharp distinction
between the act of perception and experimentation, the action
of that which we perceive and of which we experiment, and the
activity of communicating verbally about what we have
observed and done. All of these are regarded as sides or aspects
of an unbroken and undivided whole movement, which are
closely related, both in function and in content (and thus we do
not fall into a fragmentary division between our ‘inward’ mental
activities and their ‘outward’ function).
Evidently, this use of the rheomode ﬁts very well with the
world view in which apparently static things are likewise seen as
abstractions of relatively invariant aspects from an unbroken and
undivided whole movement. However, it goes further in imply-
ing that the fact about such things is itself abstracted as just that
relatively constant aspect of the whole movement appearing in
perception and experienced in action, which ‘stands together’ in
a continuing state, and which is thus suitable for communication
in the form of a statement.
wholeness and the implicate order
58

5 THE RHEOMODE AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
FOR OUR OVERALL WORLD VIEW
In seeing (as pointed out in the previous section) that the rheo-
mode does not allow us to discuss the observed fact in terms of
separately existent things of an essentially static nature, we are
led to note that the use of the rheomode has implications for our
general world view. Indeed, as has already been brought out to
some extent, every language form carries a kind of dominant or
prevailing world view, which tends to function in our thinking
and in our perception whenever it is used, so that to give a clear
expression of a world view contrary to the one implied in the
primary structure of a language is usually very diﬃcult. It is
therefore necessary in the study of any general language form to
give serious and sustained attention to its world view, both in
content and in function.
As indicated earlier, one of the major defects of the ordin-
ary mode of using language is just its general implication that
it is not restricting the world view in any way at all, and that
in any case questions of world view have to do only with
‘one’s own particular philosophy’, rather than with the con-
tent and function of our language, or with the way in which
we tend to experience the overall reality in which we live. By
thus making us believe that our world view is only a relatively
unimportant matter, perhaps involving mainly one’s personal
taste or choice, the ordinary mode of language leads us to fail
to give attention to the actual function of the divisive world
view that pervades this mode, so that the automatic and
habitual operation of our thought and language is then able to
project these divisions (in the manner discussed earlier) as if
they were actual fragmentary breaks in the nature of ‘what
is’. It is thus essential to be aware of the world view implied
in each form of language, and to be watchful and alert, to
be ready to see when this world view ceases to ﬁt actual
the rheomode
59

observation and experience, as these are extended beyond
certain limits.
It has become evident in this chapter that the world view
implied in the rheomode is in essence that described in the ﬁrst
chapter, which is expressed by saying that all is an unbroken and
undivided whole movement, and that each ‘thing’ is abstracted
only as a relatively invariant side or aspect of this movement. It is
clear, therefore, that the rheomode implies a world view quite
diﬀerent from that of the usual language structure. More spe-
ciﬁcally, we see that the mere act of seriously considering such
a new mode of language and observing how it works can help
draw our attention to the way in which our ordinary language
structure puts strong and subtle pressures on us to hold to a
fragmentary world view. Whether it would be useful to go fur-
ther, however, and to try to introduce the rheomode into active
usage, it is not possible to say at present, though perhaps some
such development may eventually be found to be helpful.
wholeness and the implicate order
60

3
REALITY AND KNOWLEDGE
CONSIDERED AS PROCESS
1 INTRODUCTION
The notion that reality is to be understood as process is an
ancient one, going back at least to Heraclitus, who said that
everything ﬂows. In more modern times, Whitehead1 was the
ﬁrst to give this notion a systematic and extensive development.
In this chapter I shall discuss the question of the relationship
between reality and knowledge from such a point of view. How-
ever, while my explicit starting point is generally similar to that
of Whitehead, some implications will emerge that may be
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from those of his work.
I regard the essence of the notion of process as given by the
statement: Not only is everything changing, but all is ﬂux. That is
to say, what is is the process of becoming itself, while all objects,
events, entities, conditions, structures, etc., are forms that can be
abstracted from this process.
The best image of process is perhaps that of the ﬂowing

stream, whose substance is never the same. On this stream, one
may see an ever-changing pattern of vortices, ripples, waves,
splashes, etc., which evidently have no independent existence as
such. Rather, they are abstracted from the ﬂowing movement,
arising and vanishing in the total process of the ﬂow. Such
transitory subsistence as may be possessed by these abstracted
forms implies only a relative independence or autonomy of
behaviour, rather than absolutely independent existence as
ultimate substances. (See chapter 1 for a further discussion of
this notion.)
Of course, modern physics states that actual streams (e.g., of
water) are composed of atoms, which are in turn composed of
‘elementary particles’, such as electrons, protons, neutrons, etc.
For a long time it was thought that these latter are the ‘ultimate
substance’ of the whole of reality, and that all ﬂowing move-
ments, such as those of streams, must reduce to forms abstracted
from the motions through space of collections of interacting
particles. However, it has been found that even the ‘elementary
particles’ can be created, annihilated and transformed, and this
indicates that not even these can be ultimate substances but,
rather, that they too are relatively constant forms, abstracted
from some deeper level of movement.
One may suppose that this deeper level of movement may be
analysable into yet ﬁner particles which will perhaps turn out to
be the ultimate substance of the whole of reality. However, the
notion that all is ﬂux, into which we are inquiring here, denies
such a supposition. Rather, it implies that any describable event,
object, entity, etc., is an abstraction from an unknown and
undeﬁnable totality of ﬂowing movement. This means that no
matter how far our knowledge of the laws of physics may go, the
content of these laws will still deal with such abstractions, hav-
ing only a relative independence of existence and independence
of behaviour. So one will not be led to suppose that all properties
of collections of objects, events, etc., will have to be explainable
wholeness and the implicate order
62

in terms of some knowable set of ultimate substances. At any
stage, further properties of such collections may arise, whose
ultimate ground is to be regarded as the unknown totality of the
universal ﬂux.
Having discussed what the notion of process implies concern-
ing the nature of reality, let us now consider how this notion
should bear on the nature of knowledge. Clearly, to be consist-
ent, one has to say that knowledge, too, is a process, an abstrac-
tion from the one total ﬂux, which latter is therefore the ground
both of reality and of knowledge of this reality. Of course, one
may fairly readily verbalize such a notion, but in actual fact it is
very diﬃcult not to fall into the almost universal tendency to
treat our knowledge as a set of basically ﬁxed truths, and thus
not of the nature of process (e.g., one may admit that knowledge
is always changing but say that it is accumulative, thus implying
that its basic elements are permanent truths which we have to
discover). Indeed, even to assert any absolutely invariant element
of knowledge (such as ‘all is ﬂux’) is to establish in the ﬁeld of
knowledge something that is permanent; but if all is ﬂux, then
every part of knowledge must have its being as an abstracted
form in the process of becoming, so that there can be no
absolutely invariant elements of knowledge.
Is it possible to be free of this contradiction, in the sense that
one could understand not only reality, but also all knowledge, as
grounded in the ﬂowing movement? Or must one necessarily
regard some elements of knowledge (e.g., those concerning the
nature of process) as absolute truths, beyond the ﬂux of process?
It is to this question that we shall address ourselves in this
chapter.
2 THOUGHT AND INTELLIGENCE
To inquire into the question of how knowledge is to be under-
stood as process, we ﬁrst note that all knowledge is produced,
reality and knowledge considered as process
63

displayed, communicated, transformed, and applied in thought.
Thought, considered in its movement of becoming (and not merely in
its content of relatively well-deﬁned images and ideas) is indeed
the process in which knowledge has its actual and concrete
existence. (This has been discussed in the Introduction.)
What is the process of thought? Thought is, in essence, the
active response of memory in every phase of life. We include in
thought the intellectual, emotional, sensuous, muscular and
physical responses of memory. These are all aspects of one indis-
soluble process. To treat them separately makes for fragmenta-
tion and confusion. All these are one process of response of
memory to each actual situation, which response in turn leads to
a further contribution to memory, thus conditioning the next
thought.
One of the earliest and most primitive forms of thought is, for
example, just the memory of pleasure or pain, in conjunction
with a visual, auditory, or olfactory image that may be evoked by
an object or a situation. It is common in our culture to regard
memories involving image content as separate from those
involving feeling. It is clear, however, that the whole meaning of
such a memory is just the conjunction of the image with its feel-
ing, which (along with the intellectual content and the physical
reaction) constitutes the totality of the judgment as to whether
what is remembered is good or bad, desirable or not, etc.
It is clear that thought, considered in this way as the response
of memory, is basically mechanical in its order of operation.
Either it is a repetition of some previously existent structure
drawn from memory, or else it is some combination arrange-
ment and organization of these memories into further structures
of ideas and concepts, categories, etc. These combinations may
possess a certain kind of novelty resulting from the fortuitous
interplay of elements of memory, but it is clear that such
novelty is still essentially mechanical (like the new combinations
appearing in a kaleidoscope).
wholeness and the implicate order
64

There is in this mechanical process no inherent reason why
the thoughts that arise should be relevant or ﬁtting to the actual
situation that evokes them. The perception of whether or not any
particular thoughts are relevant or ﬁtting requires the operation
of an energy that is not mechanical, an energy that we shall call
intelligence. This latter is able to perceive a new order or a new
structure, that is not just a modiﬁcation of what is already known
or present in memory. For example, one may be working on a
puzzling problem for a long time. Suddenly, in a ﬂash of under-
standing, one may see the irrelevance of one’s whole way of
thinking about the problem, along with a diﬀerent approach in
which all the elements ﬁt in a new order and in a new structure.
Clearly, such a ﬂash is essentially an act of perception, rather than a
process of thought (a similar notion was discussed in chapter 1),
though later it may be expressed in thought. What is involved in
this act is perception through the mind of abstract orders and relation-
ships such as identity and diﬀerence, separation and connection,
necessity and contingency, cause and eﬀect, etc.
We have thus put together all the basically mechanical and
conditioned responses of memory under one word or symbol,
i.e. thought, and we have distinguished this from the fresh, orig-
inal and unconditioned response of intelligence (or intelligent
perception) in which something new may arise. At this point,
however, one may ask: ‘How can one know that such an
unconditioned response is at all possible?’ This is a vast question,
which cannot be discussed fully here. However, it can be pointed
out here that at least implicitly everybody does in fact accept the
notion that intelligence is not conditioned (and, indeed, that
one cannot consistently do otherwise).
Consider, for example, an attempt to assert that all of man’s
actions are conditioned and mechanical. Typically, such a view
has taken one of two forms: Either it is said that man is basically
a product of his hereditary constitution, or else that he is deter-
mined entirely by environmental factors. However, one could ask
reality and knowledge considered as process
65

of the man who believed in hereditary determination whether
his own statement asserting this belief was nothing but the
product of his heredity. In other words, is he compelled by his
genetic structure to make such an utterance? Similarly, one may
ask of the man who believes in environmental determination,
whether the assertion of such a belief is nothing but the spout-
ing forth of words in patterns to which he was conditioned by
his environment. Evidently, in both cases (as well as in the case
of one who asserted that man is completely conditioned by
heredity plus environment) the answer would have to be in the
negative, for otherwise the speakers would be denying the very
possibility that what they said could have meaning. Indeed, it is
necessarily implied, in any statement, that the speaker is capable
of talking from intelligent perception, which is in turn capable
of a truth that is not merely the result of a mechanism based on
meaning or skills acquired in the past. So we see that no one can
avoid implying, by his mode of communication, that he accepts
at least the possibility of that free, unconditioned perception that
we have called intelligence.
Now, there is a great deal of evidence indicating that thought
is basically a material process. For example, it has been observed
in a wide variety of contexts that thought is inseparable from
electrical and chemical activity in the brain and nervous system,
and from concomitant tensions and movements of muscles.
Would one then say that intelligence is a similar process, though
perhaps of a more subtle nature?
It is implied in the view we are suggesting here that this is not
so. If intelligence is to be an unconditioned act of perception, its
ground cannot be in structures such as cells, molecules, atoms,
elementary particles, etc. Ultimately, anything that is determined
by the laws of such structures must be in the ﬁeld of what can be
known, i.e. stored up in memory, and thus it will have to have
the mechanical nature of anything that can be assimilated in the
basically mechanical character of the process of thought. The
wholeness and the implicate order
66

actual operation of intelligence is thus beyond the possibility of
being determined or conditioned by factors that can be included
in any knowable law. So, we see that the ground of intelligence
must be in the undetermined and unknown ﬂux, that is also the
ground of all deﬁnable forms of matter. Intelligence is thus not
deducible or explainable on the basis of any branch of know-
ledge (e.g., physics or biology). Its origin is deeper and more
inward than any knowable order that could describe it. (Indeed,
it has to comprehend the very order of deﬁnable forms of matter
through which we would hope to comprehend intelligence.)
What, then, is the relationship of intelligence to thought?
Brieﬂy, one can say that when thought functions on its own, it is
mechanical and not intelligent, because it imposes its own gen-
erally irrelevant and unsuitable order drawn from memory.
Thought is, however, capable of responding, not only from
memory but also to the unconditioned perception of intelli-
gence that can see, in each case, whether or not a particular line
of thought is relevant and ﬁtting.
One may perhaps usefully consider here the image of a radio
receiver. When the output of the receiver ‘feeds back’ into the
input, the receiver operates on its own, to produce mainly irrele-
vant and meaningless noise, but when it is sensitive to the signal
on the radio wave, its own order of inner movement of electric
currents (transformed into sound waves) is parallel to the order
in the signal and thus the receiver serves to bring a meaningful
order originating beyond the level of its own structure into
movements on the level of its own structure. One might then
suggest that in intelligent perception, the brain and nervous
system respond directly to an order in the universal and
unknown ﬂux that cannot be reduced to anything that could be
deﬁned in terms of knowable structures.
Intelligence and material process have thus a single origin,
which is ultimately the unknown totality of the universal ﬂux. In
a certain sense, this implies that what have been commonly
reality and knowledge considered as process
67

called mind and matter are abstractions from the universal ﬂux,
and that both are to be regarded as diﬀerent and relatively
autonomous orders within the one whole movement. (This
notion is discussed further in chapter 7.) It is thought respond-
ing to intelligent perception which is capable of bringing about
an overall harmony or ﬁtting between mind and matter.
3 THE THING AND THE THOUGHT
Given that thought is a material process that may be relevant in
some more general context when it moves in parallel with intel-
ligent perception, one is now led to inquire into the relationship
between thought and reality. Thus, it is commonly believed that
the content of thought is in some kind of reﬂective correspond-
ence with ‘real things’, perhaps being a kind of copy, or image,
or imitation of things, perhaps a kind of ‘map’ of things, or
perhaps (along lines similar to those suggested by Plato) a grasp
of the essential and innermost forms of things.
Are any of these views correct? Or is the question itself not in
need of further clariﬁcation? For it presupposes that we know
what is meant by the ‘real thing’ and by the distinction between
reality and thought. But this is just what is not properly under-
stood (e.g., even the relatively sophisticated Kantian notion of
‘thing in itself’ is just as unclear as the naïve idea of ‘real thing’).
We may perhaps obtain a clue here by going into the origins
of words such as ‘thing’ and ‘reality’. The study of origins of
words may be regarded as a sort of archaeology of our thought
process, in the sense that the traces of earlier forms of thought
can be found by observations made in this ﬁeld. As in the study
of human society, clues coming from archaeological inquiries
can often help us to understand the present situation better.
Now the word ‘thing’ goes back to various old English words2
whose signiﬁcance includes ‘object’, ‘action’, ‘event’, ‘condi-
tion’, ‘meeting’, and is related to words meaning ‘to determine’,
wholeness and the implicate order
68

‘to settle’, and, perhaps, to ‘time’ or ‘season’. The original mean-
ing might thus have been ‘something occurring at a given time,
or under certain conditions’. (Compare to the German ‘bedin-
gen’, meaning ‘to make conditions’, or ‘to determine’, which
could perhaps be rendered into English as ‘to bething’.) All these
meanings indicate that the word ‘thing’ arose as a highly
generalized indication of any form of existence, transitory or
permanent, that is limited or determined by conditions.
What, then, is the origin of the word ‘reality’? This comes
from the Latin ‘res’, which means ‘thing’. To be real is to be a
‘thing’. ‘Reality’ in its earlier meaning would then signify
‘thinghood in general’ or ‘the quality of being a thing’.
It is particularly interesting that ‘res’ comes from the verb
‘reri’, meaning ‘to think’, so that literally, ‘res’ is ‘what is
thought about’. It is of course implicit that what is thought
about has an existence that is independent of the process of
thought, or in other words, that while we create and sustain an
idea as a mental image by thinking about it, we do not create and
sustain a ‘real thing’ in this way. Nevertheless, the ‘real thing’ is
limited by conditions that can be expressed in terms of thought.
Of course, the real thing has more in it than can ever be implied
by the content of our thought about it, as can always be revealed
by further observations. Moreover, our thought is not in general
completely correct, so that the real thing may be expected ulti-
mately to show behaviour or properties contradicting some of
the implications of our thought about it. These are, indeed,
among the main ways in which the real thing can demonstrate
its basic independence from thought. The main indication of the
relationship between thing and thought is, then, that when one
thinks correctly about a certain thing, this thought can, at least
up to a point, guide one’s actions in relationship to that thing
to produce an overall situation that is harmonious and free of
contradiction and confusion.
If the thing and the thought about it have their ground in the
reality and knowledge considered as process
69

one undeﬁnable and unknown totality of ﬂux, then the attempt
to explain their relationship by supposing that the thought is in
reﬂective correspondence with the thing has no meaning, for
both thought and thing are forms abstracted from the total pro-
cess. The reason why these forms are related could only be in the
ground from which they arise, but there can be no way of dis-
cussing reﬂective correspondence in this ground, because
reﬂective correspondence implies knowledge, while the ground
is beyond what can be assimilated in the content of knowledge.
Does this mean that there can be no further insight into the
relationship of thing and thought? We suggest that such further
insight is in fact possible but that it requires looking at the ques-
tion in a diﬀerent way. To show the orientation involved in this
way, we may consider as an analogy the well-known dance of
the bees, in which one bee is able to indicate the location of
honey-bearing ﬂowers to other bees. This dance is probably not
to be understood as producing in the ‘minds’ of the bees a form
of knowledge in reﬂective correspondence with the ﬂowers.
Rather, it is an activity which, when properly carried out, acts as
a pointer or indicator, disposing the bees to an order of action
that will generally lead them to the honey. This activity is not
separate from the rest of what is involved in collecting the
honey. It ﬂows and merges into the next step in an unbroken
process. So one may propose for consideration the notion that
thought is a sort of ‘dance of the mind’ which functions indica-
tively, and which, when properly carried out, ﬂows and merges
into an harmonious and orderly sort of overall process in life as a
whole.
In practical aﬀairs, it is fairly clear what this harmony and
order mean (e.g., the community will be successful in producing
food, clothing, shelter, healthy conditions of life, etc.), but man
also engages in thought going beyond the immediately practical.
For example, since time immemorial he has sought to under-
stand the origin of all things and their general order and nature,
wholeness and the implicate order
70

in religious thought, in philosophy, and in science. This may be
called thought that has ‘the totality of all that is’ as its content
(for example, the attempt to comprehend the nature of reality as
a whole). What we are proposing here is that such comprehen-
sion of the totality is not a reﬂective correspondence between
‘thought’ and ‘reality as a whole’. Rather, it is to be considered as
an art form, like poetry, which may dispose us toward order and
harmony in the overall ‘dance of the mind’ (and thus in the
general functioning of the brain and nervous system). This point
has been made earlier, in the Introduction.
What is required here, then, is not an explanation that would
give us some knowledge of the relationship of thought and
thing, or of thought and ‘reality as a whole’. Rather, what is
needed is an act of understanding; in which we see the totality as an
actual process that, when carried out properly, tends to bring
about an harmonious and orderly overall action, incorporating
both thought and what is thought about in a single movement,
in which analysis into separate parts (e.g., thought and thing)
has no meaning.
4 THOUGHT AND NON-THOUGHT
While it is thus clear that ultimately thought and thing cannot
properly be analysed as separately existent, it is also evident that
in man’s immediate experience some such analysis and separ-
ation has to be made, at least provisionally, or as a point of
departure. Indeed, the distinction between what is real and what
is mere thought and therefore imaginary or illusory is absolutely
necessary, not only for success in practical aﬀairs but also if we
are in the long run even to maintain our sanity.
It is useful here to consider how such a distinction may have
arisen. It is well known,3 for example, that a young child often
ﬁnds it diﬃcult to distinguish the contents of his thought from
real things (e.g., he may imagine that these contents are visible to
reality and knowledge considered as process
71

others, as they are visible to him, and he may be afraid of what
others call ‘imaginary dangers’). So while he tends to begin the
process of thinking naïvely (i.e. without being explicitly con-
scious that he is thinking), at some stage he becomes consciously
aware of the process of thought, when he realizes that some of
the ‘things’ that he seems to perceive are actually ‘only thoughts’
and therefore ‘no things’ (or nothing) while others are ‘real’ (or
something).
Primitive man must often have been in a similar situation. As
he began to build up the scope of his practical technical thought
in his dealings with things, such thought images became more
intense and more frequent. In order to establish a proper balance
and harmony in the whole of his life he probably felt the need to
develop his thought about totality in a similar way. In this latter
kind of thought, the distinction between thought and thing is
particularly liable to become confused. Thus, as men began to
think of the forces of nature and of gods, and as artists made
realistic images of animals and gods, sensed as possessing
magical or transcendent powers, man was led to engage in a kind
of thought without any clear physical referent that was so
intense, so unremittant, and so ‘realistic’ that he could no longer
maintain a clear distinction between mental image and reality.
Such experiences must eventually have given rise to a deeply felt
urge to clear up this distinction (expressed in questions such as
‘Who am I?’, ‘What is my nature?’, ‘What is the true relationship
of man, nature and the gods?’, etc.), for to remain permanently
confused about what is real and what is not, is a state that man
must ultimately ﬁnd to be intolerable, since it not only makes
impossible a rational approach to practical problems but it also
robs life of all meaning.
It is clear, then, that sooner or later, man in his overall process
of thought would engage in systematic attempts to clear up this
distinction. One can see that at some stage it has to be felt in
this process that it is not enough to know how to distinguish
wholeness and the implicate order
72

particular thoughts from particular things. Rather, it is necessary
to understand the distinction universally. Perhaps, then, the
primitive man or the young child may have a ﬂash of insight in
which he sees, probably without explicitly verbalizing it, that
thought as a whole has to be distinguished from the whole of what is not
thought. This may be put more succinctly as the distinction
between thought and non-thought, and abbreviated further to T
and NT. The line of reasoning implicit in such a distinction is:
T is not NT (thought and non-thought are different and
mutually exclusive).
All is either T or NT (thought and non-thought cover the
whole of what can exist).
In a certain sense, true thinking begins with this distinction.
Before it is made, thinking may take place but, as indicated earl-
ier, there can be no full consciousness that thinking is what is
taking place. So, thought proper begins in this way with
thought, conscious of itself through its distinguishing itself from
non-thought.
Moreover, this step in which thought proper begins is perhaps
man’s ﬁrst thought with the totality as its content. And we can
see how deeply such thought is embedded in the consciousness
of all mankind, and how it arises very early as a necessary stage
in the attempt of thought to bring sanity and order to its ‘dance’.
This mode of thought is further developed and articulated
by trying to discover various distinguishing characteristics or
qualities that belong to thought and to non-thought. Thus,
non-thought is commonly identiﬁed with reality, in the sense
of thinghood. As indicated earlier, real things are recognized
mainly by their independence of how we think of them. Further
characteristic distinctions are that real things may be palpable,
stable, resistant to attempts to change them, sources of
independent activity throughout the whole of reality. On the
reality and knowledge considered as process
73

other hand, thoughts may be regarded as mere ‘mental
stuﬀ’, impalpable, transient, easily changed, and not capable of
initiating independent lines of activity outside of themselves,
etc.
Ultimately, however, such a ﬁxed distinction between thought
and non-thought cannot be maintained, for one can see that
thought is a real activity, which has to be grounded in a broader
totality of real movement and action that overlaps and includes
thought.
Thus, as has already been pointed out, thought is a material
process whose content is the total response of memory, includ-
ing feelings, muscular reactions and even physical sensations,
that merge with and ﬂow out of the whole response. Indeed, all
man-made features of our general environment are, in this sense,
extensions of the process of thought, for their shapes, forms, and
general orders of movement originate basically in thought, and
are incorporated within this environment, in the activity of
human work, which is guided by such thought. Vice versa,
everything in the general environment has, either naturally or
through human activity, a shape, form, and mode of movement,
the content of which ‘ﬂows in’ through perception, giving rise
to sense impressions which leave memory traces and thus
contribute to the basis of further thought.
In this whole movement, content that was originally in
memory continually passes into and becomes an integral feature
of the environment, whole content that was originally in the
environment passes into and becomes an integral feature of
memory, so that (as pointed out earlier) the two participate in a
single total process, in which analysis into separate parts (e.g.
thought and thing) has ultimately no meaning. Such a process,
in which thought (i.e. the response of memory) and the general
environment are indissolubly linked, is evidently of the nature
of a cycle, as illustrated symbolically in ﬁgure 3.1 (though of
course the cycle should be regarded more accurately as always
wholeness and the implicate order
74

opening out into a spiral). This cyclical (or spiral) movement, in
which thought has its full actual and concrete existence,
includes also the communication of thoughts between people
(who are parts of each other’s environment) and it goes indeﬁn-
itely far into the past. Thus, at no stage can we properly say that
the overall process of thought begins or ends. Rather, it has to be
seen as one unbroken totality of movement, not belonging to
any particular person, place, time, or group of people. Through
the consideration of the physical nature of the response of
memory in reactions of nerves, feelings, muscular motions,
etc., and through the consideration of the merging of
these responses with the general environment in the overall
cyclical process described above, we see then that thought is
non-thought (T is NT).
Vice versa, however, we can see also that non-thought is
thought (NT is T). Thus, ‘reality’ actually is a word with a certain
implied thought content. To be sure, this may be said of any term
in our language, but, as has been seen, such terms may generally
indicate real things, which we can in principle perceive. There is
no way, however, to look at reality as if it were some sort of
‘thing’, in order to test whether our idea ﬁts or does not ﬁt this
‘thing called reality’. We have indeed already suggested in this
connection that the term ‘reality’ indicates an unknown and
undeﬁnable totality of ﬂux that is the ground of all things and of
the process of thought itself, as well as of the movement of
intelligent perception. But this does not basically alter the ques-
tion, for if reality is thus unknown and unknowable, how can we
Figure 3.1
reality and knowledge considered as process
75

be certain that it is there at all? The answer is, of course, that we
can’t be certain.
Nevertheless, it does not follow from this that ‘reality’ is a
meaningless word, for, as we have already seen, the mind in its
‘dance of thought’ can in the long run move in an orderly and sane
manner only if the ‘form of the dance’ includes some sort of
distinction between thought and non-thought (i.e., reality). We
have also seen, however, that this distinction has to be made in the
ever-changing ﬂux of process in which thought passes into non-
thought while non-thought passes into thought, so that it cannot
be regarded as ﬁxed. Such a non-ﬁxed distinction evidently
requires the free movement of intelligent perception, which can,
on each occasion, discern what content originates in thought and
what content originates in a reality that is independent of thought.
It is clear, then, that the term ‘reality’ (which in this context
means ‘reality as a whole’) is not properly to be regarded as part
of the content of thought. Or, to put this in another way, we may
say that reality is no thing and that it is also not the totality of all things
(i.e., we are not to identify ‘reality’ with ‘everything’). Since the
word ‘thing’ signiﬁes a conditioned form of existence, this
means that ‘reality as a whole’ is also not to be regarded as
conditioned. (Indeed, it could not consistently be so regarded,
because the very term ‘reality as a whole’ implies that it contains
all factors that could condition it and on which it could depend.)
So any notion of totality based on a ﬁxed and permanent distinc-
tion between thought and reality must collapse when applied to
the totality.
The original form of the ﬁxed distinction between thought
and reality (i.e., non-thought) was:
T is not NT
All is either T or NT
This form is characteristic of what is called Aristotelean logic
wholeness and the implicate order
76

(though of course it is probably as old as thought proper, while
Aristotle was merely the earliest person known to us who enun-
ciated it clearly and succinctly). This may be called the logic
proper to things. Any particular thought form that ﬁts this
logic can, of course, be applicable to a corresponding thing
only under certain conditions which are required for that thing
to be what it is. That is to say, a set of thought forms that follow
the rules of Aristotelean logic will service as adequate guides
in activities incorporating things only in some limited domain
beyond which these things must change or behave in new ways,
so that other thought forms will then be needed.
When we come to consider the ‘totality of all that is’, how-
ever, our primary concern is, as we have seen, not with con-
ditioned things but with the unconditioned totality that is the
ultimate ground of all. Here, the rules enunciated by Aristotle
break down, in the sense that there is not even a limited domain
or set of conditions under which they could apply: for, in addition
to the Aristotelean rules, we have to assert the following:
T is NT
NT is T
All is both T and NT (i.e., the two merge and ﬂow into each
other, in a single unbroken process, in which they are ultimately
one).
All is neither T nor NT (i.e., the ultimate ground is unknown,
and therefore not speciﬁable, neither as T nor NT, nor in any
other way).
If the above is combined with the original ‘T is not NT’ and ‘All
is either T or NT’, and if we further suppose that ‘T’ and ‘NT’ are
names of things, we will imply absolute self-contradiction. What
we are doing here is to regard this whole combination as an
indication that ‘T’ and ‘NT’ are not names of things. Rather, as
reality and knowledge considered as process
77

indicated earlier, they are to be considered as terms in our dis-
course whose function is to dispose the mind to an act of intelli-
gent perception, in which what is called for is to discern, in each
case, what content originates in thought (i.e., the response of
memory) and what content originates in some ‘reality’ that is
independent of thought. Since the reality that is independent of
thought is ultimately unknown and unknowable, such a dis-
cernment evidently cannot take the form of assigning a particu-
lar feature of the content to a particular ﬁxed category, T or NT.
Rather, if there is an awareness of the ever-changing totality, of
what originates in thought (i.e., in the response of memory,
which is the ﬁeld of the known), then, by implication, whatever
is not in this totality has to be treated as originating independent
of thought.
It is clearly extremely important that no part of what
originates in the response of memory be missed or left out of
awareness. That is to say, the primary ‘mistake’ that can be made
in this ﬁeld is not the positive one of wrongly assigning what
originates in thought to a reality independent of thought. Rather,
it is the negative one of overlooking or failing to be aware that a
certain movement originates in thought, and thus implicitly
treating that movement as originating in non-thought. In this
way, what is actually the one single process of thought is tacitly
treated as if it were split in two parts (but of course without one
being aware that this is happening). Such unconscious fragmen-
tation of the process of thought must lead to distortion in all of
perception.
For if one is thus led to attribute one’s own responses of
memory to a reality that would be independent of these
responses, there will be a further ‘feedback’ leading to more
irrelevant thoughts about this ‘independent reality’. These
thoughts will constitute yet further inappropriate responses of
memory which add to this ‘independent reality’ in a self-
maintaining process that is generally very hard to break out of.
wholeness and the implicate order
78

This kind of feedback (which we have indicated earlier in
connection with the analogy in which thought is regarded as
similar to a radio receiver) will eventually tend to confuse the
entire operation of the mind.
5 THE FIELD OF KNOWLEDGE, CONSIDERED
AS PROCESS
In ordinary experience, in which we deal with sensuously per-
ceivable things, it is usually possible sooner or later for intelli-
gent perception to discern clearly the totality of those aspects of
experience originating in thought (and by implication the total-
ity of those originating independently of thought). However, as
we have seen, in thought that aims to have totality as its content
it is much harder to have such clarity, on the one hand because
this thought is so intense, continuous and total that it gives a
strong impression of reality, and on the other hand because
there are no sensuously perceivable ‘things’ against which it
could be tested. It is thus quite easy, through inadequate atten-
tion to the actual process of one’s thought, to ‘slip into’ a form
of conditioned response of memory, in which one is not alert to
the fact that is still only a form of thought, a form that aims to
give a view of ‘the whole of reality’. So, ‘by default’ one falls into
the trap of tacitly treating such a view as originating independ-
ently of thought, thus implying that its content actually is the
whole of reality.
From this point on, one will see, in the whole ﬁeld accessible
to one, no room for change in the overall order, as given by
one’s notions of totality, which indeed must now seem to
encompass all that is possible or even thinkable. This means,
however, that our knowledge about ‘the whole of reality’ will
then have to be regarded as having a ﬁxed and ﬁnal form, which
reﬂects or reveals a correspondingly ﬁxed and ﬁnal form of what
this total reality actually is. To adopt such an attitude will
reality and knowledge considered as process
79

evidently tend to prevent that free movement of the mind
needed for clarity of perception, and so will contribute to a
pervasive distortion and confusion, extending into every aspect
of experience.
As indicated earlier, thought with totality as its content has to
be considered as an art form, like poetry, whose function is
primarily to give rise to a new perception, and to action that is
implicit in this perception, rather than to communicate reﬂective
knowledge of ‘how everything is’. This implies that there can no
more be an ultimate form of such thought than there could
be an ultimate poem (that would make all further poems
unnecessary).
Any particular form of thinking about the totality does indeed
indicate a way of looking at our whole contact with reality, and
thus it has implications for how we may act in this contact.
However, each such way of looking is limited, in the sense that it
can lead to overall order and harmony only up to some point,
beyond which it must cease to be relevant and ﬁtting. (Compare
with the notion of truth in function in chapter 2.) Ultimately,
the actual movement of thought embodying any particular
notion of totality has to be seen as a process, with ever-changing
form and content. If this process is carried out properly, with
attention to and awareness of thought in its actual ﬂux of becom-
ing, then one will not fall into the habit of treating the content
tacitly as a ﬁnal and essentially static reality that would be
independent of thought.
Even this statement about the nature of our thinking is, how-
ever, itself only a form in the total process of becoming, a form
which indicates a certain order of movement of the mind, and a
certain disposition needed for the mind to engage harmoniously
in such movement. So there is nothing ﬁnal about it. Nor can we
tell where it will lead. Evidently, we have to be open to further
fundamental changes of order in our thought as we go on with
the process. Such changes have to come about in fresh and
wholeness and the implicate order
80

creative acts of insight, which are necessary for the orderly
movement of such thought. What we are suggesting in this
chapter is, then, that only a view of knowledge as an integral part
of the total ﬂux of process may lead generally to a more har-
monious and orderly approach to life as a whole, rather than to a
static and fragmentary view which does not treat knowledge as
process, and which splits knowledge oﬀ from the rest of reality.
It is important in this context to emphasize that permanently
to identify certain views concerning the totality as belonging to
Whitehead, or to someone else, is to interfere with treating
knowledge consistently as an integral part of an overall process.
Indeed, whoever takes up Whitehead’s views is actually taking
these as a point of departure, in a further process of the becoming
of knowledge. (Perhaps we could say that he is working further
down the ‘stream of knowledge’.) In this process, some aspects
may change fairly slowly, while others change more rapidly, but
the key point to keep in mind is that the process has no deﬁnable
aspect that is absolutely ﬁxed. Intelligent perception is of course
needed, for moment to moment, to discern those aspects that
should properly change slowly and those that should properly
change rapidly, as one works in the ‘art form’ of creation of
ideas about ‘the totality of all that is’.
We have to be very alert and careful here, for we tend to try to
ﬁx the essential content of our discussion in a particular concept
or image, and talk about this as if it were a separate ‘thing’ that
would be independent of our thought about it. We fail to notice
that in fact this ‘thing’ has by now become only an image, a form
in the overall process of thought, i.e., response of memory,
which is a residue of past perception through the mind (either
someone else’s or one’s own). Thus, in a very subtle way, we
may once again be trapped in a movement in which we treat
something originating in our own thought as if it were a reality
originating independently of this thought.
We can keep out of this trap by being aware that the actuality
reality and knowledge considered as process
81

of knowledge is a living process that is taking place right now (e.g.
in this room). In such an actual process, we are not just talking
about the movement of knowledge, as if looking at it from the
outside. We are actually taking part in this movement, and are
aware that this is indeed what it is happening. That is to say, it is a
genuine reality for all of us, a reality which we can observe and
to which we can give our attention.
The key question is, then: ‘Can we be aware of the ever-
changing and ﬂowing reality of this actual process of know-
ledge?’ If we can think from such awareness, we will not be led
to mistake what originates in thought with what originates in
reality that is independent of thought. And thus, the art of think-
ing with totality as its content may develop in a way that is free
of the confusion inherent in those forms of thought which try to
deﬁne, once and for all, what ‘the whole of reality is’, and which
therefore lead us to mistake the content of such thought for the
overall order of a total reality that would be independent of
thought.
wholeness and the implicate order
82

4
HIDDEN VARIABLES IN THE
QUANTUM THEORY
The question of whether there are hidden variables underlying
the quantum theory was thought to have been settled deﬁnitely
in the negative long ago. As a result, the majority of modern
physicists no longer regard this question as relevant for phy-
sical theory. In the past few years, however, a number of
physicists, including the author, have developed a new approach
to this problem, which raises the question of hidden variables
again.1 It is my purpose here to review brieﬂy the main fea-
tures of what has been accomplished thus far in this new
approach, and therefore to indicate some general lines on
which theories involving hidden variables are currently
developing.
In the course of this chapter, we shall show a number of
reasons why theories involving hidden variables promise to be
signiﬁcant for the treatment of new physical problems, espe-
cially those arising in the domain of very short distances (of the
order of 10−13cm or less) and of very high energies (of the order

of 109 ev or more). Finally, we shall answer the main objections
that have been raised against the notion of hidden variables; i.e.
the diﬃculties of dealing with the Heisenberg indeterminacy
relations, the quantization of action, the paradox of Einstein,
Rosen and Podolsky, and von Neumann’s arguments against the
possibility of such variables.
1 MAIN FEATURES OF THE QUANTUM THEORY
In order to understand the way the theory of hidden variables
has developed, it is ﬁrst of all necessary to keep clearly in mind
the main features of the quantum theory. Although there are
several alternative formulations of this theory (due to Heisen-
berg, Schrödinger, Dirac, von Neumann, and Bohr), which diﬀer
somewhat in interpretation,2 they all have the following basic
assumptions in common:
1 The fundamental laws of the quantum theory are to be
expressed with the aid of a wave function (in general, many dimen-
sional), which satisﬁes a linear equation (so that solutions can be
superposed linearly).
2 All physical results are to be calculated with the aid of
certain ‘observables’, represented by Hermitian operators,
which operate linearly on the wave function.
3 Any particular observable is deﬁnite (sharply deﬁned) only
when the wave function is an eigenfunction of the corresponding
operator.
4 When the wave function is not an eigenfunction of this
operator, then the result of a measurement of the correspond-
ing observable cannot be determined beforehand. The results
of a series of measurements on an ensemble of systems
represented by the same wave function will ﬂuctuate at random
(lawlessly) from one case to the next, over the various
possibilities.
5 If the wave function is given by
wholeness and the implicate order
84

ψ = 
n
 Cnψn
where ψn is the eigenfunction of the operator in question
corresponding to the nth eigenvalue, the probability of obtain-
ing the nth eigenvalue in a large ensemble of measurements will
be given by Pn = | Cn |2.
6 Because of the non-commutation of many operators (such
as p and x) which correspond to variables that must be deﬁned
together in classical mechanics, it follows that no wave functions
can exist which are simultaneous eigenfunctions of all the
operators that are signiﬁcant for a given physical problem.
This means that not all physically signiﬁcant observables can
be determined together, and even more important, that those
which are not determined will ﬂuctuate lawlessly (at random) in
a series of measurements on an ensemble represented by the
same wave function.
2 LIMITATIONS ON DETERMINISM IMPLIED
BY THE QUANTUM THEORY
From the features described in the previous section, one sees
immediately that there exists a certain limitation on the degree
to which the results of individual measurements are determined
according to the quantum theory. This limitation applies to any
measurement that depends appreciably on the quantum proper-
ties of matter. Thus, in an ensemble of radioactive nuclei, the
decay of each nucleus can be detected individually by the click of a
Geiger counter. A more detailed study of the quantum mechan-
ics of the problem shows that the operator corresponding to the
measurement of a decay product does not commute with the
operator whose eigenfunctions represent the undisintegrated.
Thus it follows that if we begin with an ensemble of undisinte-
grated nuclei, represented by the same wave function, each
hidden variables in the quantum theory
85

individual nucleus will decay at an unpredictable time. This time
will vary from one nucleus to another in a lawless way, while
only the mean fraction that decays in a given interval of time can
be predicted approximately from the wave function. When such
predictions are compared with experiment, it is indeed dis-
covered that there is a random distribution of clicks of the
Geiger counter, together with a regular mean distribution that
obeys the probability laws implied by the quantum theory.
3 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF INDETERMINISM
IN THE QUANTUM THEORY
From the fact that quantum theory agrees with experiment in so
wide a domain (including the problem treated in the previous
section as a special but typical case), it is evident that the
indeterministic features of quantum mechanics are in some way
a reﬂection of the real behaviour of matter in the atomic and
nuclear domains, but here the question arises as to just how to
interpret this indeterminism.
To clarify the meaning of this question, we shall consider
some analogous problems. Thus, it is well known that insurance
companies operate on the basis of certain statistical laws, which
predict to a high degree of approximation the mean number of
people in a given class of age, height, weight, etc., that will die of
a certain disease in a speciﬁed period of time. They can do this
even though they cannot predict the precise time of death of an
individual policy-holder, and even though such individual
deaths are distributed at random in a way having no lawful rela-
tionship to the kind of data that the insurance company is able to
collect. Nevertheless, the fact that statistical laws of this kind are
operating does not prevent the simultaneous operation of indi-
vidual laws which determine in more detail the precise condi-
tions of death of each policy-holder (e.g., a man may cross a
road at a particular time and be struck by a car, he may be
wholeness and the implicate order
86

exposed to disease germs while he is in a weak state, etc.), for
when the same result (death) can be produced by a large num-
ber of essentially independent causes, there is no reason why
these causes should not be distributed in just such a way as to
lead to statistical laws in a large aggregate.
The importance of such considerations is quite evident. Thus,
in the ﬁeld of medical research, the operation of statistical laws is
never regarded as a reason against the search for more detailed
individual laws (e.g., as to what makes a given individual die at a
given time, etc.).
Similarly, in the ﬁeld of physics, when it was discovered that
spores and smoke particles suﬀer a random movement obeying
certain statistical laws (the Brownian motion) it was supposed
that this was due to impacts from myriads of molecules, obeying
deeper individual laws. The statistical laws were then seen to be
consistent with the possibility of deeper individual laws, for, as
in the case of insurance statistics, the overall behaviour of an
individual Brownian particle would be determined by a very
large number of essentially independent factors. Or, to put the
case more generally: lawlessness of individual behaviour in the context of a
given statistical law is, in general, consistent with the notion of more detailed
individual laws applying in a broader context.
In view of the above discussion, it seems evident that, at least
on the face of the question, we ought to be free to consider the
hypothesis that results of individual quantum-mechanical meas-
urements are determined by a multitude of new kinds of factors,
outside the context of what can enter into the quantum theory.
These factors would be represented mathematically by a further
set of variables, describing the states of new kinds of entities
existing in a deeper, sub-quantum-mechanical level and obeying
qualitatively new types of individual laws. Such entities and their
laws would then constitute a new side of nature, a side that is, for
the present ‘hidden’. But then the atoms, ﬁrst postulated to
explain Brownian motion and large-scale regularities, were also
hidden variables in the quantum theory
87

originally ‘hidden’ in a similar way, and were revealed in detail
only later by new kinds of experiments (e.g., Geiger counters,
cloud chambers, etc.) that were sensitive to the properties of
individual atoms. Similarly, one may suppose that the variables
describing the sub-quantum-mechanical entities will be
revealed in detail when we have discovered still other kinds of
experiments, which may be as diﬀerent from those of the
current type as the latter are from experiments that are able to
reveal the laws of the large-scale level (e.g., measurements of
temperature, pressure, etc.).
At this point it must be stated that as is well known – the
majority of modern theoretical physicists3 have come to reject
any suggestion of the type described above. They do this mainly
on the basis of the conclusion that the statistical laws of the
quantum theory are incompatible with the possibility of deeper
individual laws. In other words, while they would in general
admit that some kinds of statistical laws are consistent with the
assumption of further individual laws operating in a broader
context, they believe that quantum mechanics could never satis-
factorily be regarded as a law of this kind. The statistical features
of the quantum theory are thus regarded as representing a kind
of irreducible lawlessness of individual phenomena in the quan-
tum domain. All individual laws (e.g. classical mechanics) are
then regarded as limiting cases of the probability laws of the
quantum theory, approximately valid for systems involving large
numbers of molecules.
4 ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF THE
INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM-MECHANICAL
INDETERMINISM AS IRREDUCIBLE LAWLESSNESS
We shall now consider the main arguments on which is
based the conclusion that quantum-mechanical indeterminism
represents a kind of irreducible lawlessness.
wholeness and the implicate order
88

4.1 Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle
We begin with a discussion of Heisenberg’s indeterminacy prin-
ciple. He showed that even if one supposes that the physically
signiﬁcant variables actually existed with sharply deﬁned values
(as is demanded by classical mechanics) then we could never
measure all of them simultaneously, for the interaction between
the observing apparatus and what is observed always involves an
exchange of one or more indivisible and uncontrollably ﬂuctuat-
ing quanta. For example, if one tries to measure the coordinate,
x, and the associated momentum, p, of a particle, then the par-
ticle is disturbed in such a way that the maximum accuracy for
the simultaneous determination of both is given by the well-
known relation ∆p∆x h. As a result, even if there were deeper
sub-quantum laws determining the precise behaviour of an indi-
vidual electron, there would be no way for us to verify by any
conceivable kind of measurement that these laws were really
operating. It is therefore concluded that the notion of a sub-
quantum level would be ‘metaphysical’, or empty of real
experimental content. Heisenberg argued that it is desirable to
formulate physical laws in terms of the minimum possible num-
ber of such notions, for they add nothing to the physical predic-
tions of the theory, while they complicate the expression in an
irrelevant way.
4.2 Von Neumann’s arguments against hidden variables
The next of the main arguments against hidden variables, i.e.,
that of von Neumann, will now be presented in a simpliﬁed
form.
From postulates (4), (5) and (6) of section 1, it follows that
no wave function can describe a state in which all physically
signiﬁcant quantities are ‘dispersionless’ (i.e., sharply deﬁned
and free from statistical ﬂuctuation). Thus, if a given variable
hidden variables in the quantum theory
89

(say p) is fairly well deﬁned, the conjugate variable (x) must
ﬂuctuate over a broad range. Let us suppose that, when the sys-
tem is in such a state, there are hidden variables on a deeper level
which determine just how x is going to ﬂuctuate in each
instance. Of course, we would have no need to determine the
values of these hidden variables, and in a statistical ensemble of
measurements of x, we would still obtain the same ﬂuctuations
as are predicted by the quantum theory. Nevertheless, each case
that was going to give a certain value of x would belong to a
certain set of values of the hidden variables, and as a result the
ensemble could be regarded as made up of a corresponding set
of distinct and clearly deﬁned sub-ensembles.
Von Neumann argued, however, that such a set of distinct
and clearly deﬁned sub-ensembles is not consistent with cer-
tain other essential characteristics of the quantum theory, i.e.,
those associated with the interference between parts of the wave
function corresponding to diﬀerent values of x. To demonstrate
this interference, we could refrain from measuring x but
instead we do a third kind of measurement, which determines
an observable that is sensitive to the form of the wave function
over a wide region of space. For example, we could pass the
particles through a grating and measure the diﬀraction pattern.
(Von Neumann4 actually discussed the case of an observable
that corresponds to a sum of two or more non-commuting
operators; but it is evident that in an interference experiment
we realize physically an example of just such an observable,
since the ﬁnal result determines some complex combinations
of position and momentum operators for the observed
system.)
It is well known that in such an experiment a statistical inter-
ference pattern is still obtained, even if we pass the particles
through the apparatus at intervals so far apart that each particle
essentially enters separately and independently of all the others.
But, if the whole ensemble of such particles were to split into
wholeness and the implicate order
90

sub-ensembles, each corresponding to the electron striking the
grating at a deﬁnite value of x, then the statistical behaviour of
every sub-ensemble would be represented by a state correspond-
ing to a delta function of the point in question. As a result, a
single sub-ensemble could have no interference that would
represent the contributions from diﬀerent parts of the grating.
Because the electrons enter separately and independently no
interference between sub-ensembles corresponding to diﬀerent
positions will be possible either. In this way we show that the
notion of hidden variables is not compatible with the interfer-
ence properties of matter, which are both experimentally
observed and necessary consequences of the quantum theory.
Von Neumann generalized the above argument and made it
more precise; but he came to essentially the same result. In other
words, he concluded that nothing (not even hypothetical hidden
variables) can be consistently supposed to determine beforehand
the results of an individual measurement in more detail than is
possible according to the quantum theory.
4.3 The paradox of Einstein, Rosen and Podolsky
The third important argument against hidden variables is closely
connected with the analysis of the paradox of Einstein et al.5 This
paradox arose out of the point of view, originally rather wide-
spread, of regarding the indeterminacy principle as nothing more
than an expression of the fact that there is a minimum unpredict-
able and uncontrollable disturbance in every measurement pro-
cess. Einstein, Rosen and Podolsky then suggested a hypothetical
experiment, from which one could see the untenability of the
above interpretation of Heisenberg’s principle.
We shall give here a simpliﬁed form of this experiment.6 Con-
sider a molecule of zero total spin, consisting of two atoms of
spin, /2. Let this molecule be disintegrated by a method not
inﬂuencing the spin of either atom. The total spin then remains
hidden variables in the quantum theory
91

zero, even while the atoms are ﬂying apart and have ceased to
interact appreciably.
Now, if any component of the spin of one of the atoms (say A)
is measured, then because the total spin is zero, we can immedi-
ately conclude that this component of the spin of the other atom
(B) is precisely opposite. Thus, by measuring any component of
the spin of the atom A, we can obtain this component of the spin
of atom B, without interacting with atom B in any way.
If this were a classical system, no diﬃculties of interpretation
would occur, because each component of the spin of each atom
is always well deﬁned and always remains opposite in value to
the same component of the spin of the opposite atom. Thus the
two spins are correlated and this permits us to know the spin of
atom B when we measure that of A.
However, in the quantum theory we have the additional fact
that only one component of the spin can be sharply deﬁned at
one time, while the other two are then subject to random ﬂuctu-
ations. If we wish to interpret the ﬂuctuations as nothing but the
result of disturbances due to the measuring apparatus, we can do
this for atom A, which is directly observed, but how does atom
B, which interacts in no way either with atom A or with the
observing apparatus, ‘know’ in what direction it ought to allow
its spin to ﬂuctuate at random? The problem is made even more
diﬃcult if we consider that, while the atoms are still in ﬂight, we
are free to re-orientate the observing apparatus arbitrarily, and
in this way to measure the spin of atom A in some other direc-
tion. This change is somehow transmitted immediately to atom B,
which responds accordingly. Thus, we are led to contradict one
of the basic principles of the theory of relativity, which states
that no physical inﬂuences can be propagated faster than light.
The behaviour described above not only shows the unten-
ability of the notion that the indeterminacy principle represents
in essence only the eﬀects of a disturbance due to the measuring
apparatus; it also presents us with certain real diﬃculties if we
wholeness and the implicate order
92

wish to understand the quantum-mechanical behaviour of
matter in terms of the notion of a deeper level of individual
law operating in the context of a set of hidden variables.
Of course, if there are such hidden variables then they might
perhaps be responsible for a ‘hidden’ interaction between atom
B and atom A, or between atom B and the apparatus that meas-
ures the spin of atom A. Such an interaction, which would be
over and above those that are explicitly taken into account in the
quantum theory, could then, in principle, explain how atom B
‘knows’ what property of atom A is being measured; but the
diﬃculty still remains that to explain the correlation for the case
in which the apparatus was re-orientated while the atoms are
still in ﬂight, we would have to assume that this interaction is
carried through space at a speed greater than that of light. This
aspect of the problem is evidently one that any acceptable theory
of hidden variables must somehow manage to deal with in a
satisfactory way.
5 BOHR’S RESOLUTION OF THE PARADOX OF
EINSTEIN, ROSEN AND PODOLSKY – THE
INDIVISIBILITY OF ALL MATERIAL PROCESSES
The paradox of Einstein, Rosen and Podolsky was resolved by
Niels Bohr in a way that retained the notion of indeterminism in
quantum theory as a kind of irreducible lawlessness in nature.7
To do this he used the indivisibility of a quantum as his basis. He
argued that in the quantum domain the procedure by which we
analyse classical systems into interacting parts breaks down, for
whenever two entities combine to form a single system (even if
only for a limited period of time) the process by which they do
this is not divisible. We are therefore faced with a breakdown of
our customary ideas about the indeﬁnite analysability of each
process into various parts, located in deﬁnite regions of space
and time. Only in the classical limit, where many quanta are
hidden variables in the quantum theory
93

involved, can the eﬀects of this indivisibility be neglected; and
only there can we correctly apply the customary concepts of
detailed analysability of a physical process.
To deal with this new property of matter in the quantum
domain, Bohr proposed to begin with the classical level, which
is immediately accessible to observation. The various events
which take place in this level can be adequately described with
the aid of our customary general concepts, involving indeﬁnite
analysability. It is then found that up to a certain degree of
approximation these events are related by a deﬁnite set of laws,
i.e., Newton’s laws of motion, which would, in principle,
determine the future course of these events in terms of their
characteristics at a given time.
Now comes the essential point. In order to give the classical
laws a real experimental content, we must be able to determine
the momenta and positions of all the relevant parts of the system
of interest. Such a determination requires that the system of
interest be connected to an apparatus which yields some observ-
able large-scale result that is deﬁnitely correlated to the state of
the system of interest. But in order to satisfy the requirement
that we must be able to know the state of the observed system by
observing that of the large-scale apparatus, it must be possible,
in principle at least, for us to distinguish between the two sys-
tems by means of a suitable conceptual analysis, even though
they are connected and in some kind of interaction. In the
quantum domain, however, such an analysis can no longer be
correctly carried out. Consequently, one must regard what has
previously been called the ‘combined system’ as a single, indivis-
ible, overall experimental situation. The result of the operation of the
whole experimental set-up does not tell us about the system that
we wish to observe but, rather, only about itself as a whole.
The above discussion of the meaning of a measurement then
leads directly to an interpretation of the indeterminacy relation-
ships of Heisenberg. As a simple analysis shows, the impossibil-
wholeness and the implicate order
94

ity of theoretically deﬁning two non-commuting observables by
a single wave function is matched exactly, and in full detail, by
the impossibility of the operation together of two overall set-ups
that would permit the simultaneous experimental determination
of these two variables. This suggests that the non-commutativity
of two operators is to be interpreted as a mathematical represen-
tation of the incompatibility of the arrangements of apparatus
needed to deﬁne the corresponding quantities experimentally.
In the classical domain it is of course essential that pairs of
canonically conjugate variables of the kind described above shall
be deﬁned together. Each one of such a pair describes a neces-
sary aspect of the whole system, an aspect which must be com-
bined with the other if the physical state of the system is to be
deﬁned uniquely and unambiguously. Nevertheless, in the quan-
tum domain each one of such a pair, as we have seen, can be
deﬁned more precisely only in an experimental situation in
which the other must become correspondingly less precisely
deﬁned. In a certain sense, each of the variables then opposes the
other. Nevertheless, they still remain ‘complementary’ because
each describes an essential aspect of the system that the other
misses. Both variables must therefore still be used together but
now they can be deﬁned only within the limits set by Heisen-
berg’s principle. As a result, such variables can no longer provide
us with a deﬁnite, unique, and unambiguous concept of matter
in the quantum domain. Only in the classical domain is such a
concept in adequate approximation.
If there is no deﬁnite concept of matter in the quantum
domain, what then is the meaning of the quantum theory? In
Bohr’s point of view it is just a ‘generalization’ of classical
mechanics. Instead of relating to observable classical phenomena
by Newton’s equations, which are a completely deterministic
and indeﬁnitely analysable set of laws, we relate these same phe-
nomena by the quantum theory, which provides a probabilistic
set of laws that does not permit analysis of the phenomena in
hidden variables in the quantum theory
95

indeﬁnite detail. The same concepts (e.g., position and
momentum) appear in both classical and quantum theories. In
both theories, all concepts obtain their experimental content in
essentially the same way, i.e., by their being related to a speciﬁc
experimental set-up involving observable large-scale phenom-
ena. The only diﬀerence between classical and quantum theories
is that they involve the use of diﬀerent kinds of laws to relate the
concepts.
It is evident that according to Bohr’s interpretation nothing is
measured in the quantum domain. Indeed, in his point of view,
there can be nothing to measure there, because all ‘unambigu-
ous’ concepts that could be used to describe, deﬁne, and think
about the meaning of the results of such a measurement belong
to the classical domain only. Hence, there can be no talk about
the ‘disturbance’ due to a measurement, since there is no mean-
ing to the supposition that there was something there to be
disturbed in the ﬁrst place.
It is now clear that the paradox of Einstein, Rosen and Podol-
sky will not arise, because the notion of some kind of actually
existing molecule, which was originally combined, and which
later ‘disintegrated’, and which was ‘disturbed’ by the ‘spin-
measuring’ device, has no meaning either. Such ideas should
be regarded as nothing more than picturesque terms that it is
convenient to use in describing the whole experimental set-up
by which we observe certain correlated pairs of classical
events (e.g., two parallel ‘spin-measuring’ devices that are on
opposite sides of the ‘molecule’ will always register opposite
results).
As long as we restrict ourselves to computing the probabilities
of pairs of events in this way, we will not obtain any paradoxes
similar to that described above. In such a computation the wave
function should be regarded as just a mathematical symbol,
which will help us to calculate the right relationships between
classical events, provided that it is manipulated in accordance
wholeness and the implicate order
96

with a certain technique, but which has no other signiﬁcance
whatsoever.
It is now clear that Bohr’s point of view necessarily leads us to
interpret the indeterministic features of the quantum theory as
representing irreducible lawlessness; for, because of the indivis-
ibility of the experimental arrangement as a whole, there is no
room in the conceptual scheme for an ascription of causal fac-
tors which is more precise and detailed than that permitted by
the Heisenberg relations. This characteristic then reveals itself as
an irreducible random ﬂuctuation in the detailed properties of
the individual large-scale phenomena, a ﬂuctuation, however,
that still satisﬁes the statistical laws of the quantum theory.
Bohr’s rejection of hidden variables is therefore based on a very
radical revision of the notion of what a physical theory is sup-
posed to mean, a revision that in turn follows from the funda-
mental role which he assigns to the indivisibility of the
quantum.
6 PRELIMINARY INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM
THEORY IN TERMS OF HIDDEN VARIABLES
In this section, we shall sketch the general outlines of certain
proposals toward a speciﬁc new interpretation of the quantum
theory, involving hidden variables. It must be emphasized at the
outset that these proposals are only preliminary in form. Their
main purpose is twofold: ﬁrst, to point out in relatively concrete
terms the meaning of some of our answers to the arguments
against hidden variables that were summed up in the previous
sections, and second, to serve as a deﬁnite starting point for the
further and more detailed development of the theory, which
will be discussed in later sections of this chapter.
The ﬁrst systematic suggestions for an interpretation of the
quantum theory in terms of hidden variables were made by the
author.8 Based at ﬁrst on an extension and completion of certain
hidden variables in the quantum theory
97

ideas originally proposed by de Broglie,9 this new interpretation
was then carried further in a later work jointly by the author and
Vigier.10 After some additional development, it ﬁnally took a
form the main points of which will be summarized as follows:11
1 The wave function, ψ, is assumed to represent an objec-
tively real ﬁeld and not just a mathematical symbol.
2 We suppose that there is, beside the ﬁeld, a particle repre-
sented mathematically by a set of coordinates, which are always
well deﬁned and which vary in a deﬁnite way.
3 We assume that the velocity of this particle is given by
→υ  = ∇S
m
(1)
where m is the mass of the particle, and S is a phase function,
obtained by writing the wave function as ψ = ReiS/, with R and S
real.
4 We suppose that the particle is acted on not only by the
classical potential V (x) but also by an additional ‘quantum
potential’,
U = — 2
2m ∇2R
R .
(2)
5 Finally, we assume that the ﬁeld ψ is actually in a state of
very rapid random and chaotic ﬂuctuation, such that the values
of ψ used in the quantum theory are a kind of average over a
characteristic interval of time, τ. (This time interval must be
long compared with the mean periods of the ﬂuctuations
described above but short compared with those of quantum-
mechanical processes.) The ﬂuctuations of the ψ-ﬁeld can be
regarded as coming from a deeper sub-quantum-mechanical
level, in much the same way that the ﬂuctuations in the
wholeness and the implicate order
98

Brownian motion of a microscopic liquid droplet come from a
deeper atomic level. Then, just as Newton’s laws determine the
mean behaviour of such a droplet, so Schrödinger’s equation
will determine the mean behaviour of the ψ-ﬁeld.
On the basis of the above postulates, it is now possible to
prove an important theorem, for, if the ψ-ﬁeld ﬂuctuates, then
Eq. (1) implies that corresponding ﬂuctuations will be com-
municated to the particle motion by the ﬂuctuating quantum
potential (2). Thus, the particle will not follow a completely
regular trajectory but will have a track resembling that displayed
in the usual kind of Brownian-motion particle. In this track there
will be a certain average velocity given by an average of Eq. (1)
over the ﬁeld ﬂuctuations occurring during the characteristic
interval, τ. Then, on the basis of certain very general and reason-
able assumptions concerning the ﬂuctuations, which are
described in detail elsewhere,12 one can show that in its random
motions the particle will spend the mean fraction of its time in
the volume element, dV, of
P =|ψ|2 dV.
(3)
Thus, the ﬁeld ψ is interpreted mainly as determining the
motion through (1) and the ‘quantum potential’ through (2).
The fact that it also determines the usual expression for the
probability density then follows as a consequence of certain
stochastic assumptions on the ﬂuctuations of ψ.
It has been demonstrated13 that the above theory predicts
physical results that are identical with those predicted by the
usual interpretation of the quantum theory, but it does so with
the aid of very diﬀerent assumptions concerning the existence of
a deeper level of individual law.
To illustrate the essential diﬀerences between the two points
of view, consider an interference experiment in which electrons
of deﬁnite momentum are incident on a grating. The associated
hidden variables in the quantum theory
99

wave function ψ is then diﬀracted by the grating in relatively
deﬁnite directions, and one obtains a corresponding ‘interfer-
ence pattern’ from a statistical ensemble of electrons which have
passed through the system.
As we saw in previous sections, the usual point of view does
not permit us to analyse this process in detail, even conceptually;
nor does it permit us to regard the places at which individual
electrons will arrive as determined beforehand by the hidden
variables. It is our belief, however, that this process can be ana-
lysed with the aid of a new conceptual model. This model is
based, as we have seen, on the supposition that there is a particle
following a deﬁnite but randomly ﬂuctuating track, the
behaviour of which is strongly dependent on an objectively real
and randomly ﬂuctuating ψ-ﬁeld, satisfying Schrödinger’s equa-
tion in the mean. When the ψ-ﬁeld passes through the grating, it
diﬀracts in much the same way as other ﬁelds would (e.g., the
electromagnetic). As a result, there will be an interference pat-
tern in the later intensity of the ψ-ﬁeld, an interference pattern
that reﬂects the structure of the grating. But the behaviour of the
ψ-ﬁeld also reﬂects the hidden variables in the sub-quantum
level, which determine the details of its ﬂuctuations around the
mean value, obtained by solving Schrödinger’s equation. Thus,
the place where each particle will arrive is ﬁnally determined in
principle by a combination of factors including the initial pos-
ition of the particle, the initial form of its ψ-ﬁeld, the systematic
changes of the ψ-ﬁeld due to the grating, and the random
changes of this ﬁeld originating in the sub-quantum level. In a
statistical ensemble of cases having the same mean initial wave
function, the ﬂuctuations of the ψ-ﬁeld will, as has been
shown,14 produce just the same interference pattern that is
predicted in the usual interpretation of the quantum theory.
At this point, we must ask how we have been able to come to a
result opposite to that deduced by von Neumann (section 4.2).
The answer is to be found in a certain unnecessarily restrictive
wholeness and the implicate order
100

assumption behind von Neumann’s arguments. This assumption
is that the particles arriving at the grating in a given position, x
(determined beforehand by the hidden variable), must belong
to a sub-ensemble having the same statistical properties as those
of an ensemble of particles whose position, x, has actually been
measured (and whose functions are therefore all a correspond-
ing delta function of position). Now it is well known that if the
position of each electron as it passes through the grating were to
be measured, no interference would be obtained (because of the
disturbance due to the measurement that causes the system to
divide into the non-interfering ensembles represented by delta
functions as discussed in section 4.2). Hence, von Neumann’s
procedure is equivalent to an implicit assumption, that any fac-
tors (such as hidden variables) which determine x beforehand
must destroy interference in the same way as it is destroyed in a
measurement of the coordinate x.
In our model, we go beyond the above implicit assumption by
admitting at the outset that the electron has more properties
than can be described in terms of the so-called ‘observables’ of
the quantum theory. Thus, as we have seen, it has a position, a
momentum, a wave ﬁeld, ψ, and sub-quantum ﬂuctuations, all
of which combine to determine the detailed behaviour of
each individual system with the passage of time. As a result, the
theory has room to describe within it the diﬀerence between an
experiment in which the electrons pass through the grating
undisturbed by anything else, and one in which they are dis-
turbed by a position-measuring apparatus. These two sets of
experimental conditions would lead to very diﬀerent ψ-ﬁelds,
even if in both cases the particles were to strike the grating at the
same position. The diﬀerences in the subsequent behaviour of
the electron (i.e., interference in one case and not in the other)
will therefore follow from the diﬀerent ψ-ﬁelds which exist in
the two cases.
To summarize, we need not restrict ourselves to von
hidden variables in the quantum theory 101

Neumann’s assumptions that sub-ensembles are to be classiﬁed
only in terms of the values of quantum-mechanical ‘observ-
ables’. Rather, such a classiﬁcation must also involve further
inner properties, at present ‘hidden’, which can later inﬂuence
the directly observable behaviour of the system (as in the
example we have discussed).
Finally, it is possible to study in a similar way how other
characteristic problems are treated in terms of our new inter-
pretation of the quantum theory (e.g., the Heisenberg inde-
terminacy relation, and the paradox of Einstein, Rosen and
Podolsky). This has in fact been done in some detail.15 We shall,
however, defer a discussion of these questions until after we have
developed some additional ideas, because this will enable us
to treat these problems in a simpler and clearer way than was
possible previously.
7 CRITICISMS OF OUR PRELIMINARY
INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY
IN TERMS OF HIDDEN VARIABLES
The interpretation of the quantum theory discussed in the
previous section is subject to a number of serious criticisms.
First of all, it must be admitted that the notion of the ‘quan-
tum potential’ is not entirely a satisfactory one, for not only is
the proposed form, U = − (2/2m) ( 2R/R), rather strange and
arbitrary but also (unlike other ﬁelds such as the electro-
magnetic) it has no visible source. This criticism by no means
invalidates the theory as a logical self-consistent structure but
only attacks its plausibility. Nevertheless, we evidently cannot be
satisﬁed with accepting such a potential in a deﬁnitive theory.
Rather, we should regard it as at best a schematic representation
of some more plausible physical idea to which we hope to
advance later, as we develop the theory further.
Second, in the many-body problem, we are led to introduce a
wholeness and the implicate order
102

many-dimensional ψ-ﬁeld [ψ(x1, x2, . . ., xn, . . ., xN)] and a
corresponding many-dimensional quantum potential
U = — 2
2m 
N
i = 1
 ∇2
i R
R ,
with ψ = Reis/ as in the one-body case. The momentum of each
particle is then given by
Pi = S(x1 . . . xn . . . xN)
xi
.
(4)
All of these notions are quite consistent logically. Yet it must be
admitted that they are diﬃcult to understand from a physical
point of view. As best, they should be regarded, like the quantum
potential itself, as schematic or preliminary representations of
certain features of some more plausible physical ideas to be
obtained later.
Third, the criticism has been levelled against this interpre-
tation that the precise values of the ﬂuctuating ψ-ﬁeld and of
the particle coordinates are empty of real physical content. The
theory has been constructed in just such a way that the observ-
able large-scale results of any possible kind of measurements
are identical with those predicted by current quantum theory.
In other words, from the experimental results, one can ﬁnd no
evidence for the existence of the hidden variables, nor does the
theory permit their deﬁnition to be ever good enough to predict
any result more accurately than the current quantum theory
does.
The answer to this criticism must be considered in two con-
texts. First of all, it should be kept in mind that before this
proposal was made there had existed a widespread impression
that no conceptions of hidden variables at all, not even if they
hidden variables in the quantum theory 103

were abstract, and hypothetical, could possibly be consistent
with the quantum theory. Indeed, to prove the impossibility of
such a conception was the basic aim of von Neumann’s theo-
rem. Thus, to a considerable extent, the question had already
been raised in an abstract way in certain aspects of commonly
held formulations of the usual interpretation of the quantum
theory. To show that it was wrong to throw out hidden variables
because they could not be imagined, it was therefore suﬃcient
to propose any logically consistent theory that explained the
quantum mechanics, through hidden variables, no matter how
abstract and hypothetical it might be. Thus, the existence of even
a single consistent theory of this kind showed that whatever
arguments one might continue to use against hidden variables,
one could no longer use the argument that they are inconceiv-
able. Of course, the speciﬁc theory that was proposed was not
satisfactory for general physical reasons, but if one such theory is
possible, then other and better theories may also be possible, and
the natural implication of this argument is ‘Why not try to ﬁnd
them?’
Secondly, to answer in full the criticism that these ideas are
purely hypothetical we note that the logical structure of the
theory makes room for the possibility of its being changed in
such a way that it ceases to be completely identical with the
current quantum mechanics in its experimental content. As a
result, the details of the hidden variables (e.g. the ﬂuctuations of
the ψ-ﬁeld and of the particle positions) will be able to reveal
themselves in new experimental results not predicted by the
quantum theory as it is now formulated.
At this point, one might perhaps raise the question as to
whether such new results are even possible. After all, does not
the general framework of the quantum theory already ﬁt in with
all known experimental results, and if so, how could there be
any others?
To answer this question, we ﬁrst point out that even if there
wholeness and the implicate order
104

existed no known experiments that the current quantum-
theoretical framework failed to treat satisfactorily, the possibility
would always still be open for new experimental results, not
ﬁtting into this framework. All experiments are necessarily done
only in some limited domain, and even in this domain, only to a
limited degree of approximation. Room is therefore always left
open, logically speaking, for the possibility that when experi-
ments are done in new domains and to new degrees of approxi-
mation, results will be obtained that do not ﬁt completely into
the framework of the current theories.
Physics has quite frequently developed in the way described
above. Thus, Newtonian mechanics, thought originally to be of
completely universal validity, was eventually found to be valid in
a limited domain (velocity small compared with that of light)
and only to a limited degree of approximation. Newtonian
mechanics had to give way to the theory of relativity which
utilized basic conceptions concerning space and time which
were in many ways not consistent with those of Newtonian
mechanics. The new theory was, therefore, in certain essential
features qualitatively and fundamentally diﬀerent from the old
one. Nevertheless, within the domain of low velocities, the new
theory approached the old one as a limiting case. In a similar
way, classical mechanics eventually gave way to the quantum
theory, which is very diﬀerent in its basic structure, but which
still contains classical theory as a limiting case, valid approxi-
mately in the domain of large quantum numbers. Agreement
with experiments in a limited domain and to a limited degree of
approximation is evidently no proof, therefore, that the basic
concepts of a given theory have a completely universal validity.
From the above discussion we see that the experimental evi-
dence taken by itself will always leave open the possibility of a
theory of hidden variables that yields results diﬀering from
those of the quantum theory in new domains (and even in the
old domains when carried to a suﬃciently high degree of
hidden variables in the quantum theory 105

approximation). Now, however, we must have some more deﬁ-
nite ideas as to which are the domains in which we expect the
results to be new, and as to just what are the ways in which they
ought to be new.
Here, we may hope to get some clues by considering prob-
lems in a domain where current theories do not yield generally
satisfactory results, i.e. one connected with very high energies
and very short distances. With regard to such problems, we ﬁrst
note that the present relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory meets
severe diﬃculties which raise serious doubts as to its internal
self-consistency. There are the diﬃculties arising in connection
with the divergences (inﬁnite results) obtained in calculations of
the eﬀects of interactions of various kinds of particles and ﬁelds.
It is true that for the special case of electromagnetic interactions
such divergences can be avoided to a certain extent by means of
the so-called ‘renormalization’ techniques. It is by no means
clear, however, that these techniques can be placed on a secure
logical mathematical basis.16 Moreover, for the problem of mes-
onic and other interactions, the renormalization method does
not work well even when considered as a purely technical
manipulation of mathematical symbols, apart from the question
of its logical justiﬁcation. While it has not been proved conclu-
sively, as yet, that the inﬁnities described above are essential
characteristics of the theory, there is already a considerable
amount of evidence in favour of such a conclusion.17
It is generally agreed that, if as seems rather likely, the theory
does not converge, then some fundamental change must be
made in its treatment of interactions involving very short dis-
tances, from which domain all the diﬃculties arise (as one sees
in a detailed mathematical analysis).
Most of the proponents of the usual interpretation of the
quantum theory would not deny that such a fundamental
change seems to be needed in the present theory. Indeed, some
of them, including Heisenberg, are even ready to go so far as to
wholeness and the implicate order
106

give up completely our notions of a deﬁnable space and time, in
connection with such very short distances, while comparably
fundamental changes in other principles, such as those of relativ-
ity, have also been considered by a number of physicists (in
connection with the theory of non-local ﬁelds). But there seems
to exist a widespread impression that the principles of quantum
mechanics almost certainly will not have to be changed in
essence. In other words, it is felt that however radical the changes
in physical theories may be they will only build upon the prin-
ciples of the present quantum theory as a foundation, and per-
haps enrich and generalize these principles by supplying them
with a newer and broader scope of application.
I have never been able to discover any well-founded reasons as
to why there exists so high a degree of conﬁdence in the general
principles of the current form of the quantum theory. Several
physicists18 have suggested that the trend of the century is away
from determinism, and that a step backwards is not very likely.
This, however, is a speculation of a kind that could easily be
made in any period concerning theories that have hitherto been
successful. (For example, classical physicists of the nineteenth
century could have argued with equal justiﬁcation that the trend
of the times was toward more determinism, whereas future events
would have proved this speculation wrong. Still others have
adduced a psychological preference for indeterministic theories,
but this may well be just a result of their having become accus-
tomed to such theories. Classical physicists of the nineteenth
century would surely have expressed an equally powerful
psychological bias toward determinism.)
Finally, there is a widespread belief that it will not really be
possible to carry out our suggested programme of developing a
theory of hidden variables which will be genuinely diﬀerent in
experimental content from the quantum theory, and which will
still agree with the latter theory in the domain where this theory
is already known to be essentially correct. This view is held in
hidden variables in the quantum theory 107

particular by Niels Bohr, who expressed especially strong
doubts19 that such a theory could treat all signiﬁcant aspects of
the problem of the indivisibility of the quantum of action – but
then this argument stands or falls on the question of whether an
alternative theory of the kind described above can really be pro-
duced, and in the next sections, we shall see that such a position
is not a very secure one.
8 STEPS TOWARD A MORE DETAILED THEORY
OF HIDDEN VARIABLES
From the discussion given in the previous section, it is clear that
our central task is to develop a new theory of hidden variables.
This theory should be quite diﬀerent from the current quantum
theory both in its basic concepts and in its general experimental
content, and yet be capable of yielding essentially the same
results as those of the current theory in the domain in which this
latter theory has thus far been veriﬁed, and to the degree of
approximation of the measurements that have actually been
carried out. The possibility of distinguishing between the two
theories experimentally will then arise either in new domains
(e.g., very short distances) or in more accurate measurements
carried out in the older domains.
Our basic starting point will be to try to provide a more
concrete physical theory leading to ideas resembling those dis-
cussed in connection with our preliminary interpretation (sec-
tion 6). In doing this, we must ﬁrst recall that we have been
regarding indeterminism as a real and objective property of mat-
ter, but one associated with a given limited context (in this case
that of the variables of the quantum-mechanical level). We are
supposing that in a deeper sub-quantum level, there are further
variables which determine in more detail the ﬂuctuations of the
results of individual quantum-mechanical measurements.
Does the existing physical theory provide us with any hints as
wholeness and the implicate order
108

to the nature of these deeper sub-quantum-mechanical vari-
ables? To guide us in our search, we can begin by considering
the current quantum theory in its most developed form, namely
that of relativistic ﬁeld theory. According to the principles of the
current theory, it is essential that every ﬁeld operator, µ, be a
function of a sharply deﬁned point, x, and that all interactions
shall be between ﬁelds at the same point. This leads us to formu-
late our theories in terms of a non-denumerable inﬁnity of ﬁeld
variables.
Of course, such a formulation must be made, even classically,
but in classical physics one can assume that the ﬁelds vary continu-
ously. As a result, one can eﬀectively reduce the number of vari-
ables to a denumerable set (e.g., the average values of the ﬁelds in
very small regions), essentially because the ﬁeld changes over
very short distances are negligibly small. As a simple calculation
shows, however, this is not possible in the quantum theory,
because the shorter the distances one considers, the more violent
are the quantum ﬂuctuations associated with the ‘zero-point
energy’ of the vacuum. Indeed, these ﬂuctuations are so large
that the assumption that the ﬁeld operators are continuous
functions of positions (and time) is not valid in a strict sense.
Even in the usual quantum theory, the problem of a non-
denumerable inﬁnity of ﬁeld variables presents several as yet
unsolved basic mathematical diﬃculties. Thus, it is customary to
deal with ﬁeld theoretical calculations by starting with certain
assumptions concerning the ‘vacuum’ state, and thereafter
applying perturbation theory. Yet, in principle, it is possible to
start with an inﬁnite variety of very diﬀerent assumptions for the
vacuum state, involving the assignment of deﬁnite values to a set
of completely discontinuous functions of the ﬁeld variables,
functions which ‘ﬁll’ the space densely and yet leave a dense set
of ‘holes’. These new states cannot be reached from the original ‘vacuum’ state
by any canonical transformation20. Hence they lead to theories that are,
in general, diﬀerent in physical content from those obtained
hidden variables in the quantum theory 109

with the original starting point. It is entirely possible that
because of the divergences in ﬁeld theoretical results, even the
current renormalization techniques imply such an ‘inﬁnitely dif-
ferent’ vacuum state; but even more important, it is necessary to
stress that a reorganization of a non-denumerable inﬁnity of
variables usually leads to a diﬀerent theory, and that the prin-
ciples of such a reorganization will then be equivalent to basic
assumptions about the corresponding new laws of nature.
Thus far, we have restricted the above discussion to the eﬀects
of a reorganization of a non-denumerable inﬁnity of variables
within the framework of the present quantum theory, but simi-
lar conclusions will hold even for a classical theory involving a
non-denumerable inﬁnity of variables. Thus, if we once give up
the assumption of the continuity of the classical ﬁeld, we see that
there is the same scope for obtaining a diﬀerent classical theory
in such a reorganization as there is in the quantum theory.
At this point we ask ourselves whether it would ever be pos-
sible to reorganize a classical ﬁeld theory in such a way that it
becomes equivalent (at least in some approximation and within
some domain) to the modern quantum ﬁeld theory. In order to
answer this question, we must evidently reproduce from the
basic ‘deterministic’ law of our assumed non-denumerable
inﬁnity of ‘classical’ ﬁeld variables, the ﬂuctuations of quantum
processes, the indivisibility of the quantum, and other essential
quantum-mechanical properties, such as interference and the
correlations associated with the paradox of Einstein, Rosen
and Podolsky. It is with these problems that we shall concern
ourselves in subsequent sections.
9 TREATMENT OF QUANTUM FLUCTUATIONS
Let us begin by assuming some ‘deterministic’ ﬁeld theory. Its
precise characteristics are unimportant for our purposes here. All
that is important is to suppose the following properties.
wholeness and the implicate order
110

1 There is a set of ﬁeld equations which completely
determines the changes of the ﬁeld with time.
2 These equations are suﬃciently non-linear to guarantee a
signiﬁcant coupling between all wave components, so that
(except perhaps in some approximation) solutions cannot be
linearly superposed.
3 Even in the ‘vacuum’ the ﬁeld is so highly excited that the
mean ﬁeld in each region, however small, ﬂuctuates signiﬁ-
cantly, with a kind of turbulent motion that leads to a high
degree of randomness in the ﬂuctuations. This excitation guarantees
the discontinuity of the ﬁelds in the smallest regions.
4 What we usually call ‘particles’ are relatively stable and
conserved excitations on top of this vacuum. Such particles will
be registered at the large-scale level, where all apparatus is
sensitive only to those features of the ﬁeld that will last a long
time, but not to those features that ﬂuctuate rapidly. Thus, the
‘vacuum’ will produce no visible eﬀects at the large-scale level,
since its ﬁelds will cancel themselves out on the average, and
space will be eﬀectively ‘empty’ for every large-scale process
(e.g. as a perfect crystal lattice is eﬀectively ‘empty’ for an electron
in the lowest band, even though the space is full of atoms).
It is evident that there would be no way to solve such a set of
ﬁeld equations directly. The only possibility would be to try to
deal with some kind of average ﬁeld quantities (taken over small
regions of space and time). In general, we could hope that a
group of such average quantities would, at least within some
approximation, determine themselves independently of the inﬁnitely
complex ﬂuctuations inside the associated regions of space.21 To
the extent that this happened, we could obtain approximate ﬁeld
laws, associated with a certain level of size, but these laws cannot
be exact because the non-linearity of the equations means ﬁelds
will necessarily be coupled in some way to the inner ﬂuctuations
that have been neglected. As a result, the mean ﬁelds will also
ﬂuctuate at random about their average behaviour. There will be
hidden variables in the quantum theory 111

a typical domain of ﬂuctuation of the mean ﬁelds, determined
by the character of the deeper ﬁeld motions that have been left
out. As in the case of the Brownian motion of a particle, this
ﬂuctuation will determine a probability distribution
dP = P(1, 2, . . ., k . . .) d1 d2 . . . dk . . .
(5)
which yields the mean fraction of the time in which the vari-
ables, 1, 2 . . ., k . . ., representing the mean ﬁelds in the
regions, 1, 2 . . ., k . . . respectively, will be in the range d1
d2 . . . dk . . . (Note that P is in general a multidimensional
function, which can describe statistical correlations in the ﬁeld
distributions.)
To sum up, we are reorganizing the non-denumerable inﬁnity
of ﬁeld variables, and we are treating explicitly only some
denumerable sets of these reorganized coordinates. We do this
by deﬁning a series of levels by average ﬁelds, each associated
with a certain dimension, over which the averages are taken.
Such a treatment can be justiﬁed only in those cases in which the
denumerable sets of variables form a totality that, within certain
limits, determines its own motions independently of the precise
details of the non-denumerable inﬁnity of coordinates that has
necessarily been left out of account. Such self-determination is
never complete, however, and its basic limits are deﬁned by a
certain minimum degree of ﬂuctuation over a domain that
depends on the coupling of the ﬁeld coordinates in question to
those that have been neglected. Thus we obtain a real and object-
ive limitation on the degree of self-determination of a certain level,
along with a probability function that represents the character of
the statistical ﬂuctuations which are responsible for the above
described limitations on self-determination.
wholeness and the implicate order
112

10 HEISENBERG’S INDETERMINACY PRINCIPLE
We are now ready to show how Heisenberg’s indeterminacy
principle ﬁts into our general scheme. We shall do this by dis-
cussing the degree of determinism associated with a space-
averaged ﬁeld coordinate, k, and the corresponding average of
the canonically conjugate ﬁeld momentum, πk.
To simplify the discussion let us suppose that the canonical
momentum is proportional to the time derivative of the ﬁeld
coordinate, k/t (as is the case for many ﬁelds such as the
electromagnetic, mesonic, etc.). Each such ﬁeld coordinate ﬂuc-
tuates at random. This means that its instantaneous time deriva-
tive is inﬁnite (as also happens in the case of the Brownian
movement of a particle). As a result, there is no rigorous way to
deﬁne such an instantaneous time derivative. Rather, we must
discuss the average change of ﬁeld, ∆k, over a small region of
time, ∆t (just as we had to take the average also over a region of
space). The average value of the ﬁeld momentum over this time
interval is then
πk = a 
∆k
∆t 
(6)
where a is the constant of proportionality.
If the ﬁeld ﬂuctuates in a random way, then by the very deﬁ-
nition of randomness, the region over which it ﬂuctuates during
the time, ∆t is given by
(δk)2 = b∆t
or
|δk| = b1/2(∆t)1/2
(7)
where b is another constant of proportionality, associated with
the mean magnitude of the random ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld.
Of course, the precise manner of ﬂuctuation of the ﬁeld is
determined by the inﬁnity of deeper ﬁeld variables not taken
hidden variables in the quantum theory 113

into account, but in the context of the level in question, nothing
determines this precise behaviour. In other words, |δk| repre-
sents the maximum possible degree of determination of k
within the level of ﬁeld quantities averaged over similar intervals
of time.
From the deﬁnition (6), we see that πk will also ﬂuctuate at
random over the range
δπk = a | δk |
∆t
 = ab1/2
(∆t)1/2.
(8)
Multiplying (8) and (7) together, we obtain
δπk δk = ab.
(9)
Thus the product of the maximum degree of determination of πk
and that of k is a constant, ab, independent of the time interval,
∆t.
It is immediately clear that the above result shows a strong
analogy to Heisenberg’s principle,22 δpδq  h. The constant, ab,
appearing in Eq. (9) plays the role that Planck’s constant, h, plays
in Heisenberg’s principle. The universality of h therefore implies
the universality of ab.
Now a is just a constant relating the ﬁeld momentum to its
time derivative and will evidently be a universal constant. The
constant, b, represents the basic intensity of the random ﬂuctu-
ation. To suppose that b is a universal constant is the same as to
assume that the random ﬁeld ﬂuctuations are at all places, at all
times, and in all levels of size, essentially the same in character.
With regard to diﬀerent places and times the assumption of
the universality of the constant, b, is not at all implausible. The
random ﬁeld ﬂuctuations (which here play a role similar to that
of the ‘zero-point’ vacuum ﬂuctuations in the usual quantum
theory) are inﬁnitely large, so that any disturbances that might be
wholeness and the implicate order
114

made by further localized excitations or concentrations of
energy occurring naturally, or produced in a laboratory experi-
ment, would have a negligible inﬂuence on the general magni-
tudes of the basic random ﬂuctuations. (Thus, the presence of
matter as we know it on a large scale would mean the concentra-
tion of a non-ﬂuctuating part of the energy, associated with a
few extra grams per cubic centimetre on top of the inﬁnite
zero-point ﬂuctuations of the ‘vacuum’ ﬁeld.)
With regard to the problem of diﬀerent levels of space and
time intervals, however, the assumption of the universality of b is
not so plausible. Thus, it is quite possible that the quantity b will
remain constant for ﬁelds averaged over shorter and shorter time
intervals only down to some characteristic time interval ∆t0,
beyond which the quantity b may change. This is equivalent to
the possibility that the degree of self-determination may not be
limited by Planck’s constant, h, for very short times (and for
correspondingly short distances).
It is easy to suggest a theory having the characteristics
described above. Thus, suppose that the ‘zero-point’ ﬁeld ﬂuctu-
ations were in some kind of statistical equilibrium correspond-
ing to an extremely high temperature, T. The mean ﬂuctuation in
the energy per degree of freedom would, according to the equi-
partition theorem, be of the order of κT, but this mean energy is
also proportional to the mean of (/t)2 (as happens for
example in a collection of harmonic oscillators). Thus, we write
α 

t
2
 = κT = α
b2  (π)2
(10)
where κ is Boltzmann’s constant and α is a suitable constant of
proportionality.
As a result, if the time interval, ∆t, appearing in Eq. (8) is
made shorter and shorter, it will not be possible for (π)2 to
increase without limit as is implied by Eq. (8) and (9). Rather,
hidden variables in the quantum theory 115

(π)2 will stop increasing at some critical time interval deﬁned by
κT = α
b2 a2b
(∆t0)2;
or
(∆t0)2 = αa2
bκT.
(11)
For shorter time intervals (and correspondingly short dis-
tances) the degree of self-determination of the average ﬁelds
would then not be limited precisely by Heisenberg’s relations
but instead by a weaker set of relations.
We have thus constructed a theory which contains Heisen-
berg’s relations as a limiting case, valid approximately for ﬁelds
averaged over a certain level of intervals of space and time.
Nevertheless, ﬁelds averaged over smaller intervals are subject to
a greater degree of self-determination than is consistent with
this principle. From this, it follows that our new theory is able to
reproduce, in essence at least, one of the essential features of the
quantum theory, i.e. Heisenberg’s principle and yet have a
diﬀerent content in new levels.
The question of how this new content of our theory could be
revealed in experiments will be discussed in later sections. For
the moment, we restrict ourselves to pointing out that the
divergencies of present-day ﬁeld theories are directly a result of
contributions to the energy, charge, etc., coming from quantum
ﬂuctuations associated with inﬁnitely short distance and times.
Our point of view permits us to assume that while the total
ﬂuctuation is still inﬁnite, the ﬂuctuation per degree of freedom
ceases to increase without limit as shorter and shorter times are
considered. In this way, ﬁeld-theoretical calculations could be
made to give ﬁnite results. Thus, it is clear already that
divergences of the current quantum ﬁeld theory may come
from the extrapolation of the basic principles of this theory to
excessively short intervals of time and space.
wholeness and the implicate order
116

11 THE INDIVISIBILITY OF QUANTUM PROCESSES
Our next step is to show how quantization, i.e., the indivisibility
of the quantum of action, ﬁts into our notions concerning
a sub-quantum-mechanical level. To do this, we begin by
considering in more detail the problem of just how to deﬁne
the ﬁeld averages that are needed for the treatment of a
non-denumerable inﬁnity of variables. Here, we shall guide
ourselves by certain results obtained in the very analogous
many-body problem (e.g., the analysis of solids, liquids,
plasmas, etc., in terms of their constituent atomic particles). In
this problem, we are likewise confronted with the need to treat
certain kinds of averages of deeper (atomic) variables. The total-
ity of a set of such averages then determines itself in some
approximation, while its details are subject to characteristic
domains of random ﬂuctuations arising from the lower-level
(atomic) motions, in much the same way that was suggested for
the averages of the non-denumerable inﬁnity of ﬁeld variables
discussed in the previous sections.
Now, in the many-body problem, one deals with large-scale
behaviour by working with collective coordinates,23 which are an
approximately self-determining set of symmetrical functions of
the particle variables, representing certain overall aspects of the
motions (e.g., oscillations). The collective motions are deter-
mined (within their characteristic domains of random ﬂuctu-
ation) by approximate constants of the motion. For the special but
very widespread case that the collective coordinates describe
nearly harmonic oscillations, the constants of the motion are the
amplitudes of the oscillations and their initial phases. More
generally, however, they may take the form of more complex
functions of the collective coordinates.
It is often very instructive to solve for the collective co-
ordinates by means of a canonical transformation. In classical
mechanics,24 this takes the form
hidden variables in the quantum theory 117

Pk = S
qk
 (q1 . . . qk . . .; J1 . . . Jn)
Qn = S
Jn
 (q1 . . . qk . . .; J1 . . . Jn . . .)
(12)
where S is the transformation function, pk and qk are the
momenta and one coordinates of the particles, and Jn and Qn are
the momenta of the collective degrees of freedom. Here, we
suppose the Jn to be constants of the motion. In other words, we
assume that the transformation is such that, at least in the
domain in which the approximation of collective coordinates is
a good one, the Hamiltonian is only a function of the Jn, and not
of the Qn. It then follows that the Qn increase linearly with time so
that they have the properties of the so-called ‘angle-variables’.25
It is clear that a similar attack can be made on the problem of a
non-denumerable inﬁnity of ﬁeld variables subject to a non-
linear coupling with each other. To do this, we now let qk, pk
represent the original canonically conjugate set of ﬁeld variables,
and we assume that there will be a set of overall large-scale
motions which we represent by the constants of the motion, Jn
and the canonically conjugate angle-variables, Qn. It is clear that
if such overall motions exist, they will manifest themselves rela-
tively directly in high-level interactions, for by hypothesis, they
are the motions that retain their characteristic features for a
long time without being lost in the inﬁnitely rapid random
ﬂuctuations, which average out to zero on a higher level.
Our next task is to show that the constants of the motion
(which are, for harmonic oscillators, proportional to the energy
of a large-scale collective degree of freedom) are quantized by
the rule J = nh, where n is an integer, and h is Planck’s constant.
Such a demonstration will constitute an explanation of the wave-
particle duality, since the collective degrees of freedom are
already known to be wavelike motions, with harmonically
wholeness and the implicate order
118

oscillating amplitudes. In general, these waves will take the form
of fairly localized packets, and if these packets have discrete and
well-deﬁned quantities of energy, momentum, and other prop-
erties, they will at the higher level, reproduce all the essential
characteristics of particles. Yet they will have inner wavelike
motions which will reveal themselves only under conditions in
which there exist systems that can respond signiﬁcantly to these
ﬁner details.
In order to show the quantization of the constants of the
motion as described above, we ﬁrst return to the preliminary
interpretation of the quantum theory, given in sections 6 and 7.
Here, we encountered a relation very similar to (12).
Pk = S
qk
 (q1 . . . qk . . .).
(13)
The main diﬀerence between (4) and (12) is that the former
does not contain any constants of the motion, whereas the latter
does. But once the constants of the motion are speciﬁed, they are
just numbers, which need only be given certain values which
they thereafter retain. If this is done, the S of Eq. (12) will also no
longer contain the Jn as explicitly represented variables. We can
therefore regard the S of our preliminary interpretation, (4), as
the actual S function, in which the constants of the motion have
already been speciﬁed. S is then determined by the wave func-
tion, ψ = Reis/. Thus, when we give the wave function, we deﬁne
a transformation function S = Im (lnψ), which latter determines
certain constants of the motion implicitly.
In order to see more clearly how the constants of the motion
are determined by the S of Eq. (4) let us construct the phase integral
IC = 
k
Cpkδqk.
(14)
hidden variables in the quantum theory 119

The integral is taken around some circuit C, representing a set of
displacement, δqk (virtual or real), in the conﬁguration space of
the system. If Eq. (13) applies, we then obtain
IC = 
k
 S
qk
 δqk = δSC
(15)
where δSC is the change of S in going around the circuit C.
It is well known that the IC, which are the so-called ‘action
variables’ of classical mechanics, generally represent the con-
stants of the motion. (For example, in the case of a set of coupled
oscillators, harmonic or otherwise, the basic constants of the
motion can be obtained by evaluating the IC with suitably deﬁned
circuits.)26 The wave function, ψ, which deﬁnes a certain func-
tion, S, therefore implies a corresponding set of constants of the
motion.
Now, according to the current quantum theory, the wave
function, ψ = ReiS/, is a single-valued function of all its
dynamical coordinates, qk. Thus, we must have
δSC = 2ηπ = nh
(16)
where n is an integer.
The actual functions, S, obtained from the wave function, ψ,
therefore imply that the basic constants of the motion for the
system are discrete and quantized.
If the integer, n, is not zero, then as a simple calculation shows,
there must be a discontinuity somewhere inside the circuit. But
since S = Im (lnψ), and since ψ is a continuous function, a
discontinuity of S will generally occur where ψ (and therefore
R2) has a zero. As we shall see presently, R2 is the probability
density for the system to be at a certain point in conﬁguration
space. The system will therefore have no probability of being at a
wholeness and the implicate order
120

zero of ψ, with the result that the singularities of S will imply no
inconsistencies in the theory.
In many ways, the quantization described above resembles the
old Bohr-Sommerfeld rule; yet it is basically diﬀerent in its
meaning. Here, the action variable, IC, that is quantized is not
obtained by using the simple expression of classical mechanics
for the pk in Eq. (14). Rather, it is obtained by using the expres-
sion (12), which involves the transformation functions, S, a
function that depends on the non-denumerable inﬁnity of
variables, qk. In a certain sense, we can say that the old Bohr-
Sommerfeld rule would be exactly correct if it were made to
refer to the non-denumerable inﬁnity of ﬁeld variables, instead
of just to the values of the variables that one obtains by solving
the simple classical equations of motion for a small number of
abstracted coordinates, Qn.
Before going ahead to suggest an explanation of why δSC
should be restricted to the discrete values denoted by Eq. (16),
we shall sum up and develop in a systematic way the main
physical ideas to which we have thus far been led.
1. We abstract from the non-denumerable inﬁnity of vari-
ables a set of ‘collective’ constants of the motion, Jn and their
canonically conjugate quantities, Qn.
2. The Jn can be consistently restricted to discrete integral
multiples of h. Thus, action can be quantized.
3. If this set of coordinates determined itself completely, the
Qn would (as happens in typical classical theories) increase lin-
early with time. However, because of ﬂuctuations due to the
variables left out of the theory, the Qn will ﬂuctuate at random
over the range accessible to them.
4. This ﬂuctuation will imply a certain probability distribu-
tion of the Qn having a dimensionality equal to 1 per degree of
freedom (and not 2, as is the case for typical classical statistical
distributions in phase space). When this distribution is
transformed to the conﬁguration space of the qk there will be a
hidden variables in the quantum theory 121

corresponding probability function, p(q1 . . . qk . . .), which also
has a dimensionality of 1 per degree of freedom (the momenta,
pk being always determined in terms of qk by Eq. (12)).
5. We then interpret the wave function ψ = Reis/, by setting
p(q1 . . . qk . . .) = R2(q1 . . . qk . . .) and by letting S be the trans-
formation function that deﬁnes the constants of the motion of
the system. It is clear that we have in this way given the wave
function a meaning quite diﬀerent from the one that was sug-
gested in the preliminary interpretation of section 5, even
though the two interpretations stand in a fairly deﬁnite relation
to each other.
6. Because of the eﬀects of the neglected lower-level ﬁeld
variables, the quantities In will, in general, remain constant only
for some limited period of time. Indeed, as the wave function
changes, the integral around a given circuit, Σk c pkδqk = δSc will
change abruptly, whenever a singularity of S (and therefore a
zero of ψ) crosses the circuit, C. Hence discrete changes, by
some multiple of h will occur in the action variables for
non-stationary states.
12 EXPLANATION OF QUANTIZATION OF ACTION
In the previous section, we developed a theory involving a
non-denumerable inﬁnity of ﬁeld variables that has room for the
quantization of action according to the usual rules of the quan-
tum theory. We shall now suggest a more deﬁnite theory, which
will give possible physical reasons explaining why action is
quantized by the rules described above, and which will show
possible limitations on the domain of validity of these rules.
Our basic problem evidently is to propose some direct physi-
cal interpretation of the function, S which appears in the phase
of the wave function (as ψ = Reis/) and which is, according to
our theory, also the transformation function deﬁning the basic
constants of the motion (see Eq. (15)); for if we are to explain
wholeness and the implicate order
122

why the change of S around a circuit is restricted to discrete
multiples of h we must evidently assume that S is somehow
related to some physical system, in such a way that eis/ cannot be
other than single-valued.
To give S a physical meaning that leads to the property
described above, we shall begin with certain modiﬁcations of an
idea originally suggested by de Broglie.27 Let us suppose that the
inﬁnity of non-linearly coupled ﬁeld variables is in reality so
organized that in each region of space and time associated with
any given level of size there is taking place a periodic inner
process. The precise nature of this process is not important for
our discussion here, as long as it is periodic (e.g., it could be an
oscillation or a rotation). This periodic process would determine
a kind of inner time for each region of space, and it would
therefore eﬀectively constitute a kind of local ‘clock’.
Now every localized periodic process has, by deﬁnition, some
Lorentz frame in which it remains at rest, at least for some time
(i.e., in which it does not signiﬁcantly change its mean position
during this time). We shall further assume that, in this frame,
neighbouring clocks of the same level of size will tend to be
nearly at rest. Such an assumption is equivalent to the require-
ment that, in every level of size, the division of a given region
into small regions, each containing its eﬀective clock, has a
certain regularity and permanence, at least for some time. If
these clocks are considered in another frame (e.g., that of the
laboratory), every eﬀective clock will then have a certain
velocity, which can be represented by a continuous function
v(x, t).
It is now quite natural to suppose: (1) that in its own rest frame
each clock oscillates with a uniform angular frequency, which is
the same for all clocks, and (2), that all clocks in the same
neighbourhood are, on the average, in phase with each other. In
homogeneous space there can be no reason to favour one clock
over another, nor can there be a favoured direction of space (as
hidden variables in the quantum theory 123

would be implied by a non-zero average value for ∇ in the rest
frame). We can therefore write
δ = ω0δτ
(17)
where δτ is the change of proper time of the clock, and where
δ is independent of δx in this frame.
The reason for the equality of clock phases in the rest frame
for a neighbourhood can be understood more deeply as a natural
consequence of the non-linearity, of the coupling of the neigh-
bouring clocks (implied by the general non-linearity of the ﬁeld
equations). It is well known that two oscillators of the same
natural frequency tend to come into phase with each other when
there is such a coupling.28 Of course, the relative phase will
oscillate somewhat, but in the long run, and on the average,
these oscillations will cancel out.
Let us now consider the problem in some ﬁxed Lorentz frame,
e.g., that of the laboratory. We then calculate the change of δ
(x, t) which would follow upon a virtual displacement (δx, δt).
This depends only on δr. By a Lorentz transformation, we obtain
δ = ω0δτ = ω0[δt −(v·δx)/c2]
1 −υ2
c2
.
(18)
If we integrate δ around a closed circuit, the change of
phase, δc, should then be 2nπ, where n is an integer. Otherwise,
the clock phases would not be single-valued functions of x and t.
We thus obtain
 δ = ω0  (δt −v·δx/c2)
1 −υ2
c2
 = 2nπ.
(19)
wholeness and the implicate order
124

If we now suppose that each eﬀective clock has some rest mass,
m0, and if we write for the total energy of translation of the
clock, E = m0c2/1 − (ν2/c2), and for the corresponding
momentum, p = m0v/1 − (ν2/c2) we get
 (E δt − pδx) = 2nπ m0
ω0
 c2.
(20)
If we assume that m0c2/ω0 =  (a universal constant for all the
clocks) we obtain just the kind of quantization that we need, for
circuit integrals involving the translational momentum, p and
the coordinates of the clocks, x (e.g., we can set δt = 0 and
Eq. (20) reduces to a special case of Eq. (16)).
We see, then, that quantization of action can, at least in this
special case, arise out of certain topological conditions, implied
by the need for single-valuedness of the clock phases.
The above idea provides a starting point for a deeper under-
standing of the meaning of the quantum conditions, but it needs
to be supplemented in two ways. First, we must consider the
further ﬂuctuations in the ﬁeld, associated with the non-
denumerable inﬁnity of degrees of freedom. Second, we shall
have to justify the assumption that the ratio m0c2/ω0 in Eq. (20)
is universal for all the local clocks and equal to .
To begin with, we recall that each local clock of a given level
exists in a certain region of space and time, which is made up of
still smaller regions, and so on without limit. We shall see that we
can obtain the universability of the quantum of action, h, at all
levels, if we assume that each of the above sub-regions contains an
eﬀective clock of a similar kind, related to the other eﬀective clocks
of its level in a similar way, and that this eﬀective clock structure
continues indeﬁnitely with the analysis of space and time into
sub-regions. We stress that this is only a preliminary assumption,
and that later we will show that the notion of the indeﬁnite
continuation of the above clock structure can be given up.
hidden variables in the quantum theory 125

To treat this problem, we introduce an ordered inﬁnity of
dynamic coordinates, x l
i, and the conjugate momenta, pl
i. The
mean position of the ith clock at the lth level of size is repre-
sented by xl
i, and pl
i represents the corresponding momentum. To
a ﬁrst approximation the quantities of each level can be treated as
collective coordinates of the next lower level set of variables; but
this treatment cannot in general be completely exact because each
level will to some extent be inﬂuenced directly by all the other levels, in a way that
cannot fully be expressed in terms of their eﬀects on the next lower level quantities
alone. Thus, while each level is strongly correlated to the mean
behaviour of the next lower level, it has some degree of
independence.
The above discussion leads us to a certain ordering of the
inﬁnity of ﬁeld variables that is indicated by the nature of the
problem itself. In this ordering, we consider the series of
quantities, xl
i and pl
i, deﬁned above as, in principle, all independ-
ent coordinates and momenta which are, however, usually
connected and correlated by suitable interactions.
We can now treat this problem by means of a canonical trans-
formation. We introduce an action function, S, which depends
on all the variables, xl
i, of the inﬁnity of clocks within clocks. As
before, we then write
Pl
k = S
xl
k
 (xl
i . . . xl
k . . .)
(21)
where l′ represents all possible levels.
For the constants of the motion, we write
IC = 
k,l
  pl
kδxl
k = δSC
(22)
where the integrals are carried over suitable contours.
Each of these constants of the motion is now built up out of
wholeness and the implicate order
126

circuit integrals involving piδxi, but as we saw, each one of these
clocks must satisfy the phase condition pµδx
µ = 2nπ around any
circuit. Hence the sum satisﬁes such a condition, which in turn
must be satisﬁed not only in real circuits actually traversed by
the clocks but also in any virtual circuit that is consistent with a
given set of values for the constants of the motion. Because
of ﬂuctuations coming from lower levels, there is always the
possibility that any clock may move on any one of the circuits
in question; and unless the constants of the motion are deter-
mined such that δSc = 2nπ, clocks that reach the same
position after having followed diﬀerent randomly ﬂuctuating
paths will not, in general, agree with each other in their phases.
Thus, the agreement of the phases of all clocks that reach the
same point in space and time is equivalent to the quantum
condition.
The self-consistency of the above treatment can now be veri-
ﬁed in a further analysis, which also eliminates the need to
introduce the special assumption that m0c2/ω0 is universally con-
stant and equal to  for all clocks. Each clock is now regarded as a
composite system made up of smaller clocks. Indeed, to an
adequate degree of approximation, each clock phase can be
treated as a collective variable associated with the space coordinates
of the smaller clocks (which then represent the inner structure
of the clock in question). Now the action variable
Ic = c 
k,l
pl
kδql
k
is canonically invariant, in the sense that it takes the same form
with every set of canonical variables, and is not changed in its
value by a canonical transformation. Hence, if we transformed to
the collective coordinates of any given level, we would still
obtain the same kind of restriction Ic to integral multiples of h,
even if Ic were expressed in terms of the collective variables. Thus
hidden variables in the quantum theory 127

the collective variables of a given level will generally be subject
to the same quantum restriction as those satisﬁed by the original
variables of that level. In order that it be consistent for variables
of a given level to be essentially equal to collective variables for
the next lower level, it is suﬃcient that the variables of all levels
be quantized in terms of the same unit of action, h. In this way,
an overall consistent ordering of the non-denumerable inﬁnity
of variables becomes possible.
Each clock will then have a quantized value for the action
variable, Ic, associated with its inner motion (i.e., of its phase
changes). This inner motion was, however, assumed to be eﬀect-
ively that of a harmonic oscillator. Therefore, according to a
well-known classical result, the inner energy is E = Jω0/2π; and
since J = Sh, where S may be any integer, we obtain E0 = Sω0.
Now E0 is also the rest energy of the clock, so that E0 = m0c2.
Hence we obtain
m0c2
ω0
 = S.
(23)
This gives us, from Eq. (20),
 (Eδt − pδx) = 2π m0c2
ω0
 n = nSh = nh;
(24)
and since, in general, S takes on arbitrary integral values, it is also
an arbitrary integer. In this way, we eliminate the need for
assuming separately, that m0c2/ω0 is a universal constant, equal
to .
To ﬁnish this stage of the development of the theory, we must
show that the model discussed above leads to a ﬂuctuation in the
phase space of the variables of a given level, in accordance with
that implied by Heisenberg’s principle. In other words, the
quantum of action, h, must also be shown to yield a correct
wholeness and the implicate order
128

estimate of the limitation on the degree of self-determination of
the quantities of any level.
To prove the above conjecture, we must note that each variable
ﬂuctuates because it depends on the lower-level quantities (of
which it is a collective coordinate). The lower-level quantities
can change their action variables only by discrete multiples of h.
It is therefore not implausible that the domain of ﬂuctuation of a
given variable would be closely related to the size of the possible
discrete changes in its constituent lower-level variables.
We shall prove the theorem stated above for the special case
that all the degrees of freedom can be represented as coupled
harmonic oscillators. This is a simpliﬁcation of the real problem
(which is non-linear). The real motions will consist of small
systematic perturbations on top of an inﬁnitely turbulent
background. These systematic perturbations can be treated as
collective coordinates, representing the overall behaviour of the
constituent local clocks of a given level. In general, such a col-
lective motion will take the form of a wavelike oscillation, which
to a certain degree of approximation undergoes simple har-
monic motion. Let us represent the action variables and angle
variables of the nth harmonic oscillator by Jn and n respectively.
To the extent that the linear approximation is correct, Jn will be a
constant of the motion, and n will increase linearly with time
according to the equation n = ωnt + 0n, where ωn is the angular
frequency of the nth oscillator. Jn and n will be related to the
clock variables by a canonical transformation, such as (12).
Because the generalized Bohr-Sommerfeld correlation (16) is
invariant to a canonical transformation, it follows that Jn = Sh,
where S is an integer. Moreover, the coordinates and momenta of
these oscillators can be written as29
pn = 2 J n cosn,
qn = 2 J n sinn.
We now consider a higher level canonical set of variables, a
hidden variables in the quantum theory 129

speciﬁc pair of which we denote by Ql
i and πl
i. In principle, these
would be determined by the totality of all the other levels. To be
sure, the next lower level will be the main one that enters into this
determination; nevertheless, the others will still have some eﬀect.
Hence in accordance with our earlier discussions, we must
regard πl
i and Ql
i as being, in principle, independent of any given
set of lower-level variables, including, of course, those of the
next lower level.
To the extent that the linear approximation is valid, we can
write30
Ql
i = 
n
 αinpn = 2 
n
 αin Jn cosn
πl
i = 
n
 βinqn = 2 
n
 βin J n sinn
(25)
where αin and βin are constant coeﬃcients, and where, as we
recall, n is assumed to cover all levels other than l.
In order that it be consistent to suppose that Ql
i and πl
i are
canonical conjugates, it is necessary that their Poisson bracket be
unity or that

n
 
πl
i
Jn
 Ql
i
n
 − πl
i
n
 Ql
i
Jn = 1.
With the aid of Eq. (25), this becomes
Σαn βn = 1.
(26)
Eq. (25) implies a very complex motion for Ql
i and πl
i, for in a
typical system of coupled oscillators the ωn are in general all
diﬀerent and are not integral multiples of each other (except for
wholeness and the implicate order
130

possible sets of measure zero). Thus, the motion will be a ‘space-
ﬁlling’ (quasi-ergodic) curve in phase space, being a generaliza-
tion of the two-dimensional Lissajou ﬁgures for perpendicular
harmonic oscillators, with periods that are not rational multiples
of each other.
During a time interval, τ, which is fairly long compared with
the periods, 2π/ωn, of the lower-level oscillators, the trajectory
of Ql
i and πl
i in the phase space will, in essence, ﬁll a certain
region, even though the orbit is deﬁnite at all times. We shall
now calculate the mean ﬂuctuation of Ql
i and πl
i in this region by
taking averages over the time, τ. Noting that Ql
i = πl
i = 0 for such
averages, we have for these ﬂuctuations,
(∆Ql
i)2 = 4 
mn
 αmαn Jm Jn cosm cosn = 2 
m
 (αm)2 Jm
(27)
(∆πl
i)2 = 4 
mn
 βmβn JmJn sinm sinn = 2 
n
 (βn)2 Jn
(28)
where we have used the result that cos δm cos δn = sin δm sin δn = 0
for m ≠ n (except for the set of zero measure, mentioned above,
in which ωm and ωn are rational multiples of each other).
We now suppose that all the oscillators are in their lowest
states (with J = h) except for a set of zero measure. This set
represents a denumerable number of excitations relative to the
‘vacuum’ state. Because of their small number, these make a
negligible contribution to (∆Ql
i)2 and (∆πl
i)2.
We therefore set Jn = h in Eq. (28) and obtain
(∆Ql
i)2 = 2 
m
 (αm)2h;
(∆πl
i)2 = 2 
n
 (βn)2h.
We then use the Schwarz inequality
hidden variables in the quantum theory 131


mn
 (αm)2 (βn)2  | 
m
 αmβm |2.
(29)
Combining the above with Eqs. (26), (27) and (28), we obtain
(∆πl
i)2 (∆Ql
i)2  4h2.
(30)
The above relations are, in essence, those of Heisenberg. ∆πl
i
and ∆Ql
i will eﬀectively represent limitations on the degree of
self-determination of the lth level, because all quantities of this
level will evidently have to be averaged over periods of time long
compared with 2π/ωn. Thus, we have deduced Heisenberg’s
principle from the assumption of the quantum of action.
We note that Eq. (30) has already been obtained in section 10
in a very diﬀerent way – by assuming simple random ﬁeld ﬂuc-
tuations resembling those of particles undergoing Brownian
motion. Hence, an inﬁnity of lower-level variables satisfying the
conditions that Jn is discrete and equal to the same constant, h,
for all the variables, will yield a long-run pattern of motions that
reproduces certain essential features of a random Brownian-type
ﬂuctuation.
We have thus completed our task of proposing a general phy-
sical model that explains the quantization rules along with the
Heisenberg indeterminacy relations. But now, it can easily be
seen that our basic physical model, involving an inﬁnity of
clocks within clocks, leaves room for fundamental changes,
which would go outside the scope of the current quantum
theory. To illustrate these possibilities, suppose that such a struc-
ture were to continue only for some characteristic time, τ0, after
which it would cease to exist and would be replaced by another
kind of structure. Then, in processes that involve times much
greater then τ0, the clocks will still be restricted in essentially the
same ways as before, since their motions would not signiﬁcantly
wholeness and the implicate order
132

be changed by the deeper substructure. Nevertheless, in pro-
cesses involving times shorter than τ0, there will be no reasons
for such restrictions to apply, since the structure is no longer the
same. In this way, we see how Jn will be restricted to discrete
values in certain levels, while they are not necessarily restricted
in this way in other levels.
For levels in which Jn are not restricted to being multiples of h,
Eq. (30) for the ﬂuctuation of πl
i and Ql
i need no longer apply. In
place of h, there will appear a quantity, Jm, the mean action associ-
ated with the levels in question. In addition, averages of (cos m
cos n) may cease to be negligible, because the times are too
short. Thus, there is room for every conceivable kind of change
in the rules for determining Jn and in those determining the
magnitudes of ﬂuctuation associated with a given level. Never-
theless, in the quantum levels the usual rules will be valid to a
very high degree of approximation.
13 DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTS TO PROBE
SUB-QUANTUM LEVEL
We are now ready to discuss, at least in general terms, the condi-
tions under which it might be possible to test for a sub-quantum
level experimentally, and in this way to complete our answers to
the criticisms of the suggestion of hidden variables made by
Heisenberg and Bohr.
We ﬁrst recall that the proof of Heisenberg’s relations, con-
cerning the maximum possible accuracy of measurement of
canonically conjugate variables, made use of the implicit
assumption that measurements must involve only processes
satisfying the general laws of the current quantum theory. Thus,
in the well-known example of the gamma-ray microscope, he
supposed that the position of an electron was to be measured by
scattering a gamma ray from the particle in question into a lens
and on to a photographic plate. This scattering is essentially a
hidden variables in the quantum theory 133

case of the Compton eﬀect; and the proof of Heisenberg’s prin-
ciple depended essentially on the assumption that the Compton
eﬀect satisﬁes the laws of the quantum theory (i.e., conservation
of energy and momentum in an ‘indivisible’ scattering process,
wavelike character of the scattered quantum as it goes through
the lens, and incomplete determinism of the particle-like spot
on the photographic plate). More generally, any such proof must
be based on the assumption that at every stage the process of
measurement will satisfy the laws of the quantum theory. Thus
to suppose that Heisenberg’s principle has a universal validity is,
in the last analysis, the same as to suppose that the general laws
of the quantum theory are universally valid. But this supposition
is now expressed in terms of the external relations of the particle
to a measuring apparatus, and not in terms of the inner
characteristics of the particle itself.
In our point of view, Heisenberg’s principle should not be
regarded as primarily an external relation, expressing the impossi-
bility of making measurements of unlimited precision in the
quantum domain. Rather, it should be regarded as basically an
expression of the incomplete degree of self-determination character-
istic of all entities that can be deﬁned in the quantum-
mechanical level. It follows that if we measure such entities, we
will also use processes taking place in the quantum-mechanical
level, so that the process of measurement will have the same
limits on its degree of self-determination as every other process
in this level. It is rather as if we were measuring Brownian
motion with microscopes that were subject to the same degree
of random ﬂuctuation as that of the systems that we were trying
to observe.
As we saw in sections 10 and 12, however, it is possible and
indeed rather plausible to suppose that sub-quantum-
mechanical processes involving very small intervals of time and
space will not be subject to the same limitations of their
degree of self-determination as those of quantum-mechanical
wholeness and the implicate order
134

processes. Of course, these sub-quantum processes will very
probably involve basically new kinds of entities as diﬀerent from
electrons, protons, etc., as the latter are from macroscopic sys-
tems. Hence, entirely new methods would have to be developed
to observe them (as new methods also had to be developed to
observe atoms, electrons, neutrons, etc.). These methods will
depend on using interactions involving sub-quantum laws. In
other words, just as the ‘gamma-ray microscope’ was based on
the existence of the Compton eﬀect, a ‘sub-quantum micro-
scope’ would be based on new eﬀects, not limited in their
degree of self-determination by the laws of the quantum theory.
These eﬀects would then make possible a correlation between an
observable large-scale event and the state of some sub-quantum
variable that is more accurate than is permitted in Heisenberg’s
relations.
Of course, one does not expect, in the way described above, to
actually determine all the sub-quantum variables and thus to
predict the future in full detail. Rather, one aims only by a few
crucial experiments to show that the sub-quantum level is there,
to investigate its laws, and to use these laws to explain and pre-
dict the properties of higher-level systems in more detail, and
with greater precision, than the current quantum theory does.
To treat this question in more detail, we now recall a conclu-
sion of the previous section, i.e. that if in lower levels the action
variable should be divisible in units smaller than h, then the
limits on the degree of self-determination of these lower levels
can be less severe than those given by Heisenberg’s relations.
Thus, there may well be relatively divisible and self-determined
processes going on at lower levels. But how can we observe them
on our level?
To answer the above question, we refer to Eq. (25), which
indicates in typical case how the variables of a given level depend
to some extent on all the lower-level variables. Thus if πl
i and Ql
i
represent the classical level, then they would, in general, be
hidden variables in the quantum theory 135

determined mainly by the pl
i and ql
i of the quantum level; but there
would be some eﬀects due to sub-quantum levels. Usually these
would be quite small. However, in special cases (e.g., with spe-
cial arrangements of apparatus) the πl
i and Ql
i might depend
signiﬁcantly on the pl
i and ql
i of a sub-quantum level. Of course,
this would mean the coupling of some new kind of sub-
quantum process (as yet unknown, but perhaps to be discovered
later) to the observable large-scale classical phenomena. Such
a process would presumably involve high frequencies and
therefore high energies, but in a new way.
Even when the eﬀects of the sub-quantum level on πl
i and Ql
i
are small, they are not identically zero. Thus, room is created for
testing for such eﬀects by doing old kinds of experiments with
extremely high precision. For example, the relation Jn = nh was
obtained in Eq. (24) only if the quantum of action was supposed
to be universally equal to h (at all levels). Sub-quantum devi-
ations from this rule would therefore be reﬂected in the classical
level as a minute error in the relation E = nhv for a harmonic
oscillator. In this connection, recall that in classical theory there
is no special relation between energy and frequency at all. This
situation may to some extent be restored in the sub-quantum
domain. As a result, one would discover a small ﬂuctuation in
the relation between En and nhv. For example, one would have
En = nhν + ∈
where ∈ is a very small randomly ﬂuctuating quantity (which
gets larger and larger as we go to higher and higher frequen-
cies). To test for such a ﬂuctuation, one could perform an
experiment in which the frequency of a light beam was
observed to an accuracy, ν. If the observed energy ﬂuctuated by
more than ν, and if no source could be found for the ﬂuctu-
ation in the quantum level, this experiment could be taken as an
indication of sub-quantum ﬂuctuations.
wholeness and the implicate order
136

With this discussion, we complete our answer to the criti-
cisms of Bohr and Heisenberg, who argue that a deeper level of
hidden variables in which the quantum of action was divisible
could never be revealed in any experimental phenomena. This
also means that there are no valid arguments justifying the con-
clusion of Bohr that the concept of the detailed behaviour of
matter as a unique and self-determining process must be
restricted to the classical level only (where one can observe fairly
directly the behaviour of the large-scale phenomena). Indeed we
are also able to apply such notions in a sub-quantum level,
whose relations with the classical level are relatively indirect, and
yet capable, in principle, of revealing the existence and the prop-
erties of the lower level through its eﬀects on the classical level.
Finally, we consider the paradox of Einstein, Rosen and Podol-
sky. As we saw in section 4, we can easily explain the peculiar
quantum-mechanical correlations of distant systems by suppos-
ing hidden interactions between such systems, carried in the
sub-quantum level. With an inﬁnity of ﬂuctuating ﬁeld variables
in this lower level, there are ample motions going on that might
explain such a correlation. The only real diﬃculty is to explain
how the correlations are maintained if, while the two systems
are still ﬂying apart, we suddenly change the variable that is
going to be measured by changing the measuring apparatus for
one of the systems. How, then, does the far-away system receive
instantaneously a ‘signal’ showing that a new variable is going to
be measured, so that it will respond accordingly?
To answer this question, we ﬁrst note that the characteristic
quantum-mechanical correlations have been observed experi-
mentally with distant systems only when the various pieces of
observing apparatus have been standing around so long that
there has been plenty of opportunity for them to come to equi-
librium with the original system through sub-quantum-
mechanical interactions.31 For example, in the case of the mol-
ecule described in section 4, there would be time for many
hidden variables in the quantum theory 137

impulses to travel back and forth between the molecule and the
spin-measuring devices, even before the molecule disintegrated.
Thus, the actions of the molecule could be ‘triggered’ by signals
from the apparatus, so that it would emit atoms with spins
already properly lined up for the apparatus that was going to
measure them.
In order to test the essential point here, one would have to use
measuring systems that were changed rapidly compared with
the time needed for a signal to go from the apparatus to the
observed system and vice versa. What would really happen if this
were done is not yet known. It is possible that the experiments
would disclose a failure of the typical quantum-mechanical cor-
relations. If this were to happen, it would be a proof that the
basic principles of the quantum are breaking down here, for the
quantum theory could not explain such a behaviour, while a
sub-quantum theory could quite easily explain it as an eﬀect of
the failure of sub-quantum connections to relate the systems
rapidly enough to guarantee correlations when the apparatus
was changed very suddenly.
On the other hand, if the predicted quantum-mechanical
correlations are still found in such a measurement, this is no
proof that a sub-quantum level does not exist, for even the
mechanical device that suddenly changes the observing appara-
tus must have sub-quantum connections with all parts of the
system, and through these a ‘signal’ might still be transmitted to
the molecule that a certain observable was eventually going to be
measured. Of course, we would expect that at some level of
complexity of the apparatus, the sub-quantum connections
would cease to be able to do this. Nevertheless, in the absence of
a more detailed sub-quantum-mechanical theory, where this
will happen cannot be known a priori. In any case, the results of
such an experiment would surely be very interesting.
wholeness and the implicate order
138

14 CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have carried the theory far enough to show
that we can explain the essential features of the quantum mech-
anics in terms of a sub-quantum-mechanical level involving
hidden variables. Such a theory is capable of having a new
experimental content, especially in connection with the domain
of very short distances and very high energies, where there are
new phenomena not very well treated in terms of present theor-
ies (and also in connection with the experimental veriﬁcation of
certain features of the correlations of distant systems). Moreover,
we have seen that this type of theory opens up new possibilities
for elimination of divergence in present theories also associated
with the domain of short distances and high energies. (For
example, as shown in section 10, the breakdown of Heisenberg’s
principle for short time could eliminate the inﬁnite eﬀects of
quantum ﬂuctuations.)
Of course, the theory as developed here is far from complete.
It is necessary at least to show how one obtains the many-body
Dirac equation for fermions, and the usual wave equations for
bosons. On these problems much progress has been made but
there is no space to enter into a discussion of them here. In
addition, further progress is being made on the systematic
treatment of the new kinds of particles (mesons, hyperons, etc.)
in terms of our scheme. All of this will be published later and
elsewhere.
Nevertheless, even in its present incomplete form, the theory
does answer the basic criticisms of those who regarded such a
theory as impossible, or who felt that it could never concern
itself with any real experimental problems. At the very least, it
does seem to have promise of being able to throw some light on
a number of such experimental problems, as well as on those
arising in connection with the lack of internal consistency of the
current theory.
hidden variables in the quantum theory 139

For the reasons described above, it seems that some consider-
ation of theories involving hidden variables is at present needed
to help us to avoid dogmatic preconceptions. Such preconcep-
tions not only restrict our thinking in an unjustiﬁable way but
also similarly restrict the kinds of experiments that we are likely
to perform (since a considerable fraction of all experiments is,
after all, designed to answer questions raised in some theory). Of
course, it would be equally dogmatic to insist that the usual
interpretation has already exhausted all of its possible usefulness
for these problems. What is necessary at the present time is that
many avenues of research be pursued, since it is not possible to
know beforehand which is the right one. In addition, the dem-
onstration of the possibility of theories of hidden variables may
serve in a more general philosophical sense to remind us of the
unreliability of conclusions based on the assumption of the
complete universality of certain features of a given theory,
however general their domain of validity seems to be.
wholeness and the implicate order
140

5
QUANTUM THEORY AS AN
INDICATION OF A NEW ORDER
IN PHYSICS
Part A: The Development of New Orders
as Shown Through the History of Physics
1 INTRODUCTION
Revolutionary changes in physics have always involved the
perception of new order and attention to the development
of new ways of using language that are appropriate to the
communication of such order.
We shall start this chapter with a discussion of certain features
of the history of the development of physics that can help give
some insight into what is meant by perception and communica-
tion of a new order. We shall then go on in the next chapter
to present our suggestions regarding the new order that is
indicated by the consideration of the quantum theory.

In ancient times, there was only a vague qualitative notion of
order in nature. With the development of mathematics, notably
arithmetic and geometry, the possibility arose for deﬁning
forms and ratios more precisely, so that, for example, one could
describe the detailed orbits of planets, etc. However, such
detailed mathematical descriptions of the motions of the planets
and other heavenly bodies implied certain general notions of
order. Thus, the Ancient Greeks thought that the Earth was at the
centre of the universe, and that surrounding the Earth were
spheres, which approached the ideal perfection of celestial mat-
ter as one got further and further away from the Earth. The
perfection of celestial matter was supposed to be revealed in
circular orbits, which were regarded as the most perfect of all
geometrical ﬁgures, while the imperfection of earthly matter
was thought to be shown in its very complicated and apparently
arbitrary movements. Thus, the universe was both perceived
and discussed in terms of a certain overall order; i.e., the order
of degrees of perfection, which corresponded to the order of
distance from the centre of the Earth.
Physics as a whole was understood in terms of notions of
order closely related to those described above. Thus, Aristotle
compared the universe to a living organism, in which each part
had its proper place and function, so that all worked together to
make a single whole. Within this whole, an object could move
only if there was a force acting on it. Force was thus thought of
as a cause of motion. So the order of movement was determined
by the order of causes, which in turn depended on the place and
function of each part in the whole.
The general way of perceiving and communicating order in
physics was, of course, not at all in contradiction with common
experience (in which, for example, movement is possible as a
rule only when there is a force which overcomes friction). To be
sure, when more detailed observations were made on the
planets, it was found that their orbits are not actually perfect
wholeness and the implicate order
142

circles, but this fact was accommodated within the prevailing
notions of order by considering the orbits of planets as a super-
position of epicycles, i.e., circles within circles. Thus, one sees an
example of the remarkable capacity for adaptation within a given
notion of order, adaptation that enables one to go on perceiving
and talking in terms of essentially ﬁxed notions of this kind in
spite of factual evidence that might at ﬁrst sight seem to necessi-
tate a thorough-going change in such notions. With the aid of
such adaptations, men could for thousands of years look at the
night sky and see epicycles there, almost independently of the
detailed content of their observations.
It seems clear, then, that a basic notion of order, such as was
expressed in terms of epicycles, could never be decisively con-
tradicted, because it could always be adjusted to ﬁt the observed
facts. But eventually, a new spirit arose in scientiﬁc research,
which led to the questioning of the relevance of the old order,
notably by Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo. What emerged from
such questioning was in essence the proposal that the diﬀerence
between earthly and celestial matter is not actually very signiﬁ-
cant. Rather, it was suggested that a key diﬀerence is between the
motion of matter in empty space and its motion in a viscous
medium. The basic laws of physics should then refer to the
motion of matter in empty space, rather than to its motion in a
viscous medium. Thus, Aristotle was right to say that matter as
commonly experienced moved only under the action of a force,
but he was wrong in supposing that this common experience
was relevant to the fundamental laws of physics. From this it
followed that the key diﬀerence between celestial and earthly
matter was not in its degree of perfection but rather in that
celestial matter generally moves without friction in a vacuum,
whereas terrestrial matter moves with friction in a viscous
medium.
Evidently, such notions were not generally compatible with
the idea that the universe is to be regarded as a single living
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 143

organism. Rather, in a fundamental description, the universe
now had to be regarded as analysable into separately existing
parts or objects (e.g. planets, atoms, etc.) each moving in a void
or vacuum. These parts could work together in interaction more
or less as do the parts of a machine, but could not grow,
develop, and function in response to ends determined by an
‘organism as a whole’. The basic order for description of
movement of the parts of this ‘machine’ was taken to be that of
successive positions of each constituent object at successive
moments of time. Thus, a new order became relevant, and a
new usage of language had to be developed for the description
of this new order.
In the development of new ways of using language, the Car-
tesian coordinates played a key part. Indeed, the very word
‘coordinate’ implies a function of ordering. This ordering is
achieved with the aid of a grid. This is constituted of three
perpendicular sets of uniformly spaced lines. Each set of lines is
evidently an order (similar to the order of the integers). A given
curve is then determined by a coordination among the X, the Y and
the Z orders.
Coordinates are evidently not to be regarded as natural
objects. Rather, they are merely convenient forms of description
set up by us. As such, they have a great deal of arbitrariness or
conventionality (e.g., in orientation, scale, orthogonality, etc., of
coordinate frames). Despite this kind of arbitrariness, however, it
is possible, as is now well known, to have a non-arbitrary general
law expressed in terms of coordinates. This is possible if the law
takes the form of a relationship that remains invariant under
changes in the arbitrary features of the descriptive order.
To use coordinates is in eﬀect to order our attention in a way
that is appropriate to the mechanical view of the universe, and
thus similarly to order our perception and our thinking. It
is clear, for example, that though Aristotle very probably would
have understood the meaning of coordinates, he would
wholeness and the implicate order
144

have found them of little or no signiﬁcance for his aim of
understanding the universe as an organism. But once men were
ready to conceive of the universe as a machine, they would
naturally tend to take the order of coordinates as a universally
relevant one, valid for all basic descriptions in physics.
Within this new Cartesian order of perception and thinking
that had grown up after the Renaissance, Newton was able to
discover a very general law. It may be stated thus: ‘As with the
order of movement in the fall of an apple, so with that of the
Moon, and so with all.’ This was a new perception of law, i.e.,
universal harmony in the order of nature, as described in detail
through the use of coordinates. Such perception is a ﬂash of very
penetrating insight, which is basically poetic. Indeed, the root of
the word ‘poetry’ is the Greek ‘poiein’, meaning ‘to make’ or ‘to
create’. Thus, in its most original aspects, science takes on a
quality of poetic communication of creative perception of new
order.
A somewhat more ‘prosaic’ way of putting Newton’s insight
is to write A:B::C:D. That is to say: ‘As the successive positions A,
B of the apple are related, so are the successive positions C, D of
the Moon.’ This constitutes a generalized notion of what may be
called ratio. Here, we take ratio in its broadest meaning (e.g., in its
original Latin sense) which includes all of reason. Science thus
aims to discover universal ratio or reason, which includes not
only numerical ratio or proportion (A/B = C/D), but also general
qualitative similarity.
Rational law is not restricted to an expression of causality. Evi-
dently, reason, in the sense that is meant here, goes far beyond
causality, which latter is a special case of reason. Indeed, the
basic form of causality is: ‘I do a certain action X and cause
something to happen.’ A causal law then takes the form: ‘As with
such causal actions of mine, so with certain processes that can be
observed in nature.’ Thus, a causal law provides a certain limited
kind of reason. But, more generally, a rational explanation takes
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 145

the form: ‘As things are related in a certain idea or concept, so
they are related in fact.’
It is clear from the preceding discussion that in ﬁnding a new
structure of reason or rationality, it is crucial ﬁrst to discern
relevant diﬀerences. To try to ﬁnd a rational connection between
irrelevant diﬀerences leads to arbitrariness, confusion, and gen-
eral sterility (e.g., as with epicycles). So we have to be ready to
drop our assumptions as to what are the relevant diﬀerences,
though this has often seemed to be very diﬃcult to do, because
we tend to give such high psychological value to familiar ideas.
2 WHAT IS ORDER?
Thus far, the term order has been used in a number of contexts
that are more or less known to everyone, so that its meaning can
be seen fairly clearly from its usage. The notion of order, how-
ever, is evidently relevant in much broader contexts. Thus, we do
not restrict order to some regular arrangement of objects or
forms in lines or in rows (e.g., as with grids). Rather, we can
consider much more general orders, such as the order of growth
of a living being, the order of evolution of living species, the
order of society, the order of a musical composition, the order
of painting, the order which constitutes the meaning of
communication, etc. If we wish to inquire into such broader
contexts, the notions of order to which we have referred earlier
in this chapter will evidently no longer be adequate. We are
therefore led to the general question: ‘What is order?’
The notion of order is so vast and immense in its implications,
however, that it cannot be deﬁned in words. Indeed, the best we
can do with order is to try to ‘point to it’ tacitly and by implica-
tion, in as wide as possible a range of contexts in which this
notion is relevant. We all know order implicitly, and such ‘point-
ing’ can perhaps communicate a general and overall meaning of
order without the need for a precise verbal deﬁnition.
wholeness and the implicate order
146

To begin to understand order in such a general sense, we may
ﬁrst recall that in the development of classical physics the per-
ception of a new order was seen to involve the discrimination of
new relevant diﬀerences (positions of objects at successive
moments of time) along with new similarities that are to be
found in the diﬀerences (similarity of ‘ratios’ in these diﬀer-
ences). It is being suggested here that this is the seed or nucleus
of a very general way of perceiving order, i.e., to give attention to
similar diﬀerences and diﬀerent similarities.1
Let us illustrate these notions in terms of a geometric curve.
To simplify the example, we shall approximate the curve by a
series of straight-line segments of equal length. We begin with a
straight line. As shown in Figure 5.1, the segments in a straight
line all have the same direction, so that their only diﬀerence is in
the position. The diﬀerence between segment A and segment B is
thus a space displacement which is similar to the diﬀerence
between B and C, and so on. We may therefore write
A:B::B:C::C:D::D:E.
This expression of ‘ratio’ or ‘reason’ may be said to deﬁne a curve
of ﬁrst class, i.e., a curve having only one independent diﬀerence.
Next, we consider a circle, as illustrated in Figure 5.2. Here,
Figure 5.1
Figure 5.2
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 147

the diﬀerence between A and B is in direction as well as in
position. Thus, we have a curve with two independent diﬀer-
ences – which is therefore one of second class. However, we still
have a single ‘ratio’ in the diﬀerences, A:B::B:C.
Now we come to a helix. Here, the angle between lines can
turn in a third dimension. Thus, we have a curve of third class. It,
too, is determined by a single ratio, A:B::B:C.
Thus far we have considered various kinds of similarities in the
diﬀerences, to obtain curves of ﬁrst, second, third classes, etc.
However, in each curve, the similarity (or ratio) between succes-
sive steps remains invariant. Now we can call attention to curves
in which this similarity is diﬀerent as we go along the curve. In this
way, we are led to consider not only similar diﬀerences but also
diﬀerent similarities of the diﬀerences.
We can illustrate this notion by means of a curve which is a
chain of straight lines in diﬀerent directions (see Figure 5.3). On
the ﬁrst line (ABCD), we can write
A:B:S1::B:C.
The symbol S1 stands for ‘the ﬁrst kind of similarity’, i.e., in
direction along the line (ABCD). Then we write for the lines
(EFG) and (HIJ)
E:FS2::F:G and H:IS3::I:J
Figure 5.3
wholeness and the implicate order
148

where S2 stands for ‘the similarity of the second kind’ and S3 for
‘the similarity of the third kind’.
We can now consider the diﬀerence of successive similarities
(S1, S2, S3, . . .) as a second degree of diﬀerence. From this, we can
develop a second degree of similarity in these diﬀerences. S1:S2::S2:S3.
By thus introducing what is in eﬀect the beginning of a hier-
archy of similarities and diﬀerences, we can go on to curves of
arbitrarily high degrees of order. As the degrees become indeﬁn-
itely high, we are able to describe what have commonly been
called ‘random’ curves – such as those encountered in Brownian
motion. This kind of curve is not determined by any ﬁnite num-
ber of steps. Nevertheless, it would not be appropriate to call it
‘disordered’, i.e., having no order whatsoever. Rather, it has a certain
kind of order which is of an indeﬁnitely high degree.
In this way, we are led to make an important change in the
general language of description. We no longer use the term
‘disorder’ but instead we distinguish between diﬀerent degrees
of order (so that, for example, there is an unbroken gradation of
curves, beginning with those of ﬁrst degree, and going on step
by step to those that have generally been called ‘random’).
It is important to add here that order is not to be identiﬁed
with predictability. Predictability is a property of a special kind of
order such that a few steps determine the whole order (i.e., as in
curves of low degree) – but there can be complex and subtle
orders which are not in essence related to predictability (e.g. a
good painting is highly ordered, and yet this order does not
permit one part to be predicted from another).
3 MEASURE
In developing the notion of an order of high degree, we have
tacitly brought in the idea that each sub-order has a limit. Thus,
in Figure 5.3 the order of the line ABC reaches its limit at the end
of the segment C. Beyond this limit is another order, EFG, and so
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 149

on. So, the description of a hierarchic order of high degree
generally involves the notion of limit.
It is signiﬁcant to note here that in ancient times the most
basic meaning of the word ‘measure’ was ‘limit’ or ‘boundary’.
In this sense of the word, each thing could be said to have its
appropriate measure. For example, it was thought that when
human behaviour went beyond its proper bounds (or measure)
the result would have to be tragedy (as was brought out very
forcefully in Greek dramas). Measure was indeed considered to
be essential to the understanding of the good. Thus, the origin of
the word ‘medicine’ is the Latin ‘mederi’, which means ‘to cure’
and which was derived from a root meaning ‘measure’. This
implied that to be healthy was to have everything in a right
measure, in body and mind. Similarly, wisdom was equated
with moderation and modesty (whose common root is also derived
from measure), thus suggesting that the wise man is the one
who keeps everything in the right measure.
To illustrate this meaning of the word ‘measure’ in physics,
one could say that ‘the measure of water’ is between 0° and
100°C. In other words, measure primarily gives the limits of
qualities or of orders of movement and behaviour.
Of course, measure has to be speciﬁed through proportion or
ratio, but, in terms of the ancient notion, this speciﬁcation is
understood as secondary in signiﬁcance to the boundary or limit
which is thus speciﬁed; and here one can add that in general this
speciﬁcation need not even be in terms of quantitative proportion,
but rather can be in terms of quantitative reason (e.g., in a
drama the proper measure of human behaviour is speciﬁed in
qualitative terms rather than by means of numerical ratios).
In the modern usage of the word ‘measure’, the aspect of
quantitative proportion or numerical ratio tends to be
emphasized much more heavily than it was in ancient times. Yet
even here the notion of boundary or limit is still present, though
in the background. Thus, to set up a scale (e.g., of length) one
wholeness and the implicate order
150

must establish divisions which are in eﬀect limits or boundaries of
ordered segments.
By giving attention in this way to older meanings of words
along with their current meanings, one can obtain a certain
insight into the full signiﬁcance of a general notion, such as
measure, which is not provided by considering only more spe-
cialized modern meanings that have been developed in various
forms of scientiﬁc, mathematical and philosophical analysis.
4 STRUCTURE AS A DEVELOPMENT FROM
ORDER AND MEASURE
If we consider measure in the broad sense indicated above, we
can see how this notion works together with that of order. Thus,
as shown in Figure 5.4 any linear order within a triangle (such
as the line FG) is bounded (i.e., measured) by the lines AB, BC,
and CA. Each of these lines is itself an order of segments, which
is limited (i.e., measured) by the other lines. The shape of the
triangle is then described in terms of certain proportions
between the sides (relative lengths).
The consideration of the working together of order and
measure in ever-broader and more complex contexts leads to the
notion of structure. As the Latin root ‘struere’ indicates, the essen-
tial meaning of the notion of structure is to build, to grow, to
evolve. This word is now treated as a noun, but the Latin suﬃx
‘ura’ originally meant ‘the action of doing something’. To
Figure 5.4
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 151

emphasize that we are not referring mainly to a ‘ﬁnished prod-
uct’ or to an ultimate result, we may introduce a new verb, to
structate, meaning ‘to create and dissolve what are now called
structures’.
Structation is evidently to be described and understood
through order and measure. For example, consider the structa-
tion (construction) of a house. The bricks are arranged in an
order and in a measure (i.e., within limits) to make walls. The
walls are similarly ordered and measured to make rooms, the
rooms to make a house, the houses to make streets, the streets to
make cities, etc.
Structation thus implies a harmoniously organized totality of order
and measures, which is both hierarchic (i.e., built on many levels)
and extensive (i.e., ‘spreading out’ on each level). The Greek root
of the word ‘organize’ is ‘ergon’ which is based on a verb mean-
ing ‘to work’. So one may think of all aspects of a structure as
‘working together’ in a coherent way.
Evidently, this principle of structure is universal. For example,
living beings are in a continual movement of growth and evolu-
tion of structure, which is highly organized (e.g., molecules
work together to make cells, cells work together to make organs,
organs to make the individual living being, individual living
beings a society, etc). Similarly, in physics, we describe matter as
constituted of moving particles (e.g. atoms) which work
together to make solids, liquids, or gaseous structures, which
similarly make larger structures, going on up to planets, stars,
galaxies, galaxies of galaxies, etc. Here, it is important to
emphasize the essentially dynamic nature of structation, in
inanimate nature, in living beings, in society, in human com-
munication, etc. (e.g., consider the structure of a language,
which is an organized totality of ever-ﬂowing movement).
The kinds of structures that can evolve, grow, or be built are
evidently limited by their underlying order and measure. New
order and measure make possible the consideration of new kinds
wholeness and the implicate order
152

of structure. A simple example of this can be taken from music.
Here, the structures that can be worked with depend on the
order of the notes and on certain measures (scale, rhythm, time,
etc.). New orders and measures evidently make possible the cre-
ation of new structures in music. In this chapter, we are inquir-
ing into how new orders and measures in physics may similarly
make possible the consideration of new structures in physics.
5 ORDER, MEASURE AND STRUCTURE IN
CLASSICAL PHYSICS
As has already been indicated in general terms, classical physics
implies a certain basic descriptive order and measure. This may
be characterized as the use of certain Cartesian coordinates and
by the notion of universal and absolute order of time, independ-
ent of that of space. This further implies the absolute character of
what may be called Euclidean order and measure (i.e., that charac-
teristic of Euclidean geometry). With this order and measure,
certain structures are possible. In essence, these are based on the
quasi-rigid body, considered as a constituent element. The gen-
eral characteristic of classical structure is just the analysability of
everything into separate parts, which are either small, quasi-
rigid bodies, or their ultimate idealization as extensionless par-
ticles. As pointed out earlier, these parts are considered to be
working together in interaction (as in a machine).
The laws of physics, then, express the reason or ratio in the
movements of all the parts, in the sense that the law relates the
movement of each part to the conﬁguration of all the other parts.
This law is deterministic in form, in that the only contingent
features of a system are the initial positions and velocities of all
its parts. It is also causal, in that any external disturbance can be
treated as a cause, which produces a speciﬁable eﬀect that can in
principle be propagated to every part of the system.
With the discovery of Brownian motion, one obtained
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 153

phenomena that at ﬁrst sight seemed to call the whole classical
scheme of order and measure into question, for movements
were discovered which were what have been called here ‘order
of unlimited degree’, not determined by a few steps (e.g., initial
positions and velocities). However, this was explained by sup-
posing that whenever we have Brownian motion this is due to
very complex impacts from smaller particles or from randomly
ﬂuctuating ﬁelds. It is then further supposed that when these
additional particles and ﬁelds are taken into account, the total
law will be deterministic. In this way, classical notions of order
and measure can be adapted, so as to accommodate Brownian
motion, which would at least on the face of the matter seem to
require description in terms of a very diﬀerent order and
measure.
The possibility of such adaptation evidently depends, how-
ever, on an assumption. Indeed, even if we can trace some kinds of
Brownian motion (e.g. of smoke particles) back to impacts of
smaller particles (atoms), this does not prove that the laws are
ultimately of the classical, deterministic kind – for it is always
possible to suppose that basically all movements are to be
described from the very outset as Brownian motion (so that the
apparently continuous orbits of large objects such as planets
would only be approximations to an actually Brownian type of
path). Indeed, mathematicians (notably Wiener) have both
implicitly and explicitly worked in terms of Brownian motion as
a basic description2 (not explained as a result of impacts of ﬁner
particles). Such an idea would in eﬀect bring in a new kind of
order and measure. If it were pursued seriously, this would
imply a change of possible structures that would perhaps be as
great as that implied by the change from Ptolemaic epicycles to
Newtonian equations of motion. Actually, this line was not seri-
ously pursued in classical physics. Nevertheless, as we shall see
later, it may be useful to give some attention to it, to obtain a
new insight into the possible limits of relevance of the theory of
wholeness and the implicate order
154

relativity, as well as into the relationship between relativity and
quantum theory.
6 THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY
One of the ﬁrst real breaks in classical notions of order and
measure came with the theory of relativity. It is signiﬁcant to
point out here that the root of the theory of relativity was prob-
ably in a question that Einstein asked himself when he was ﬁf-
teen years old: ‘What would happen if one were to move at the
speed of light and look in a mirror?’ Evidently, one would see
nothing because the light from one’s face would never reach the
mirror. This led Einstein to feel that light is somehow basically
diﬀerent from other forms of motion.
From our more modern vantage point, we can emphasize this
diﬀerence yet more by considering the atomic structure of the
matter out of which we are constituted. If we went faster than
light, then, as a simple calculation shows, the electromagnetic
ﬁelds that hold our atoms together would be left behind us (as
the waves produced by an aeroplane are left behind it when it goes
faster than sound). As a result, our atoms would disperse, and we
would fall apart. So it would make no sense to suppose that we
could go faster than light.
Now, a basic feature of the classical order and measure of
Galileo and Newton is that one can in principle catch up with
and overtake any form of motion, as long as the speed is ﬁnite.
However, as has been indicated here, it leads to absurdities to
suppose that we can catch up with and overtake light.
This perception that light should be considered to be diﬀerent
from other forms of motion is similar to Galileo’s seeing that
empty space and a viscous medium are diﬀerent with regard to
the expression of the laws of physics. In Einstein’s case, one sees
that the speed of light is not a possible speed for an object.
Rather, it is like a horizon that cannot be reached. Even though
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 155

we seem to move toward the horizon, we never get any closer. As
we move toward a light ray, we never get closer to its speed. Its
speed always remains the same, c, relative to us.
Relativity introduces new notions concerning the order and
measure of time. These are no longer absolute, as was the case in
Newtonian theory. Rather, they are now relative to the speed of a
coordinate frame. This relativity of time is one of the radically
new features of Einstein’s theory.
A very signiﬁcant change of language is involved in the
expression of the new order and measure of time plied by rela-
tivistic theory. The speed of light is taken not as a possible speed
of an object, but rather as the maximum speed of propagation of a
signal. Heretofore, the notion of signal had played no role in the
underlying general descriptive order of physics, but now it is
playing a key role in this context.
The word ‘signal’ contains the word ‘sign’, which means ‘to
point to something’ as well as ‘to have signiﬁcance’. A signal is
indeed a kind of communication. So in a certain way, signiﬁcance,
meaning, and communication became relevant in the expression
of the general descriptive order of physics (as did also informa-
tion, which is, however, only a part of the content or meaning of
a communication). The full implications of this have perhaps not
yet been realized, i.e., of how certain very subtle notions of
order going far beyond those of classical mechanics have tacitly
been brought into the general descriptive framework of physics.
The new order and measure introduced in relativity theory
implies new notions of structure in which the idea of a rigid
body can no longer play a key role. Indeed, it is not possible in
relativity to obtain a consistent deﬁnition of an extended rigid
body, because this would imply signals faster than light. In order
to try to accommodate this new feature of relativity theory
within the older notions of structure, physicists were driven to
the notion of a particle that is an extensionless point but, as is
well known, this eﬀort has not led to generally satisfactory
wholeness and the implicate order
156

results because of the inﬁnite ﬁelds implied by point particles.
Actually, relativity implies that neither the point particles nor the
quasi-rigid body can be taken as primary concepts. Rather, these
have to be expressed in terms of events and processes.
For example, any localizable structure may be described as a
world tube (see Figure 5.5). Inside this tube ABCD, a complex
process is going on, as indicated by the many lines within the
world tube. It is not possible consistently to analyse movement
within this tube in terms of ‘ﬁner particles’ because these, too,
would have to be described as tubes, and so on ad inﬁnitum. More-
over, each tube is brought into existence from a broader back-
ground or context, as indicated by the lines preceding AD, while
eventually it dissolves back into the background, as indicated by
the lines following BC. Thus, the ‘object’ is an abstraction of
a relatively invariant form. That is to say, it is more like a
pattern of movement than like a solid separate thing that exists
autonomously and permanently.3
However, thus far the problem of obtaining a consistent descrip-
tion of such a world tube has not been solved. Einstein did in fact
very seriously try to obtain such a description in terms of a
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. He took the total ﬁeld of the whole universe
as a primary description. This ﬁeld is continuous and indivisible.
Figure 5.5
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 157

Particles are then to be regarded as certain kinds of abstraction
from the total ﬁeld, corresponding to regions of very intense
ﬁeld (called singularities). As the distance from the singularity
increases (see Figure 5.6), the ﬁeld gets weaker, until it merges
imperceptibly with the ﬁelds of other singularities. But nowhere
is there a break or a division. Thus, the classical idea of the
separability of the world into distinct but interacting parts is no
longer valid or relevant. Rather, we have to regard the universe as
an undivided and unbroken whole. Division into particles, or into par-
ticles and ﬁelds, is only a crude abstraction and approximation.
Thus, we come to an order that is radically diﬀerent from that of
Galileo and Newton – the order of undivided wholeness.
In formulating his description in terms of a uniﬁed ﬁeld,
Einstein developed the general theory of relativity. This involved a
number of further new notions of order. Thus, Einstein con-
sidered arbitrary sets of continuous curves as allowable coordinates,
so that he worked in terms of curvilinear order and measure rather than
in terms of rectilinear order and measure (though of course such
curves are locally still approximately rectilinear over short
enough distances). Through the principles of equivalence of
gravitation and acceleration and through the use of the Christof-
fel symbol Γa
bc which mathematically describes the local rate of
‘turning’ of the curvilinear coodinates, Einstein was able to
relate this curvilinear order and measure to the gravitational ﬁeld.
This relationship implied the need for non-linear equations, i.e.,
equations whose solution cannot simply be added together to
yield new solutions. This non-linear feature of the equations was
of crucial signiﬁcance not only in that it in principle opened up
the possibility of solutions with stable particle-like singularities
Figure 5.6
wholeness and the implicate order
158

of the type described above (which are impossible with linear
equations), but also in that it had very important implications
with regard to the question of analysis of the world into distinct
but interacting components.
In discussing this question, it is useful ﬁrst to note that the
word ‘analysis’ has the Greek root ‘lysis’, which is also the root
of the English ‘loosen’ and which means ‘to break up or dis-
solve’. Thus, a chemist can break up a compound into its basic
elementary constituents, and then he can put these constituents
back together again, and thus synthesize the compound. The words
‘analysis’ and ‘synthesis’ have, however, come to refer not
merely to actual physical or chemical operations with things, but
also to similar operations carried out in thought. Thus, it may be
said that classical physics is expressed in terms of a conceptual
analysis of the world into constituent parts (such as atoms or
elementary particles) which are then conceptually put back
together to ‘synthesize’ a total system, by considering the
interactions of these parts.
Such parts may be separate in space (as are the atoms), but
they may also involve more abstract notions that do not imply
separation in space. For example, in a wave ﬁeld that satisﬁes a
linear equation, it is possible to choose a set of ‘normal modes’
of motion of the entire ﬁeld, each of which can be regarded as
moving independently of the others. One can then think of the
ﬁeld analytically as if every possible form of wave motion were
constituted out of a sum of such independent ‘normal modes’.
Even if the wave ﬁeld satisﬁes a non-linear equation, one can in a
certain approximation still analyse it in terms of a set of such
‘normal modes’, but these have now to be regarded as being
mutually dependent because of a certain kind of interaction.
However, this kind of ‘analysis and synthesis’ is of only limited
validity because in general the solutions of non-linear equations
have properties that cannot be expressed in terms of such an
analysis. (In mathematical terms, it can be said, for example, that
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 159

the analysis involves series that do not always converge.) Indeed,
the non-linear equations of uniﬁed ﬁeld theory are in general of
this character. Thus, it is clear that not only is the notion of
analysis in terms of spatially separate objects generally irrelevant
in the context of such theories, but so also is the notion of
analysis into more abstract constituents that are not regarded as
separate in space.
It is important here to call attention to the diﬀerence between
analysis and description. The word ‘de-scribe’ literally means to
‘write down’, but when we write things down, this does not in
general mean that the terms appearing in such a description can
be actually ‘loosened’ or ‘separated’ into autonomously behav-
ing components, and then put back together again in a synthesis.
Rather, these terms are in general abstractions which have little
or no meaning when considered as autonomous and separate
from each other. Indeed, what is primarily relevant in a descrip-
tion is how the terms are related by ratio or reason. It is this ratio
or reason, which calls attention to the whole, that is meant by a
description.
Thus, even conceptually, a description does not in general
constitute an analysis. Rather, a conceptual analysis provides a
special sort of description, in which we can think about some-
thing as if it were broken into autonomously behaving parts,
which are then thought about as put back together again in
interaction. Such analytic forms of description were generally
adequate for the physics of Galileo and Newton, but as has been
indicated here, they have ceased to be so in the physics of
Einstein.
Although Einstein made a very promising start along this new
direction of thinking in physics, he was never able to arrive at a
generally coherent and satisfactory theory, starting from the
concept of a uniﬁed ﬁeld. As pointed out earlier, physicists were
therefore left with the problem of trying to adapt the older
concept of analysis of the world into extensionless particles to
wholeness and the implicate order
160

the context of relativity, in which such an analysis of the world is
not really relevant or consistent.
It will be helpful here to consider certain possible inadequa-
cies in Einstein’s approach to these questions, though of course
only in a very preliminary way. In this connection, it is useful to
recall that in 1905 Einstein wrote three very fundamental papers,
one on relativity, one on the quantum of light (photoelectric
eﬀects) and one on Brownian motion. A detailed study of these
papers shows that they are intimately related in a number of
ways, and this suggests that in Einstein’s early thinking he was at
least tacitly regarding these three subjects as aspects of one
broader unity. However, with the development of general relativ-
ity there came a very heavy emphasis on the continuity of ﬁelds. The
other two subjects (Brownian motion and the quantum proper-
ties of light) which involved some kind of discontinuity that was
not in harmony with the notion of a continuous ﬁeld, tended to
fall into the background, and eventually, to be more or less
dropped from consideration, at least within the context of
general relativity.
In discussing this question, it will be helpful ﬁrst to consider
Brownian motion, which is indeed very diﬃcult to describe in a
relativistically invariant way. Because Brownian motion implies
inﬁnite ‘instantaneous velocities’, it cannot be restricted to the
speed of light. However, in compensation, Brownian motion
cannot in general be the carrier of a signal, for a signal is some
ordered modulation of a ‘carrier’. This order is not separable from
the meaning of the signal (i.e., to change the order is to change the
meaning). Thus, one can properly speak of propagation of a
signal only in a context in which the movement of the ‘carrier’ is
so regular and continuous that the order is not mixed up. With
Brownian motion, however, the order is of such a high degree
(i.e., ‘random’ in the usual sense of the word) that the meaning
of a signal would no longer be left unaltered in its propagation.
Therefore, there is no reason why a Brownian curve of inﬁnite
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 161

order cannot be taken as part of a primary description of move-
ment, as long as its average speed is not greater than that of light.
In this way, it is possible for relativity theory to emerge as rele-
vant to the average speed of a Brownian curve (which would also be
appropriate for discussing the propagation of a signal), while it
would have no relevance in a broader context in which the pri-
mary law would relate to Brownian curves of indeﬁnitely high
degree, rather than to a continuous curve of low degree. To
develop such a theory would evidently imply a new order and
measure in physics (going beyond both Newtonian and
Einsteinian ideas), and it would lead to correspondingly new
structures.
Consideration of such notions may perhaps point to some-
thing new and relevant. However, before this sort of inquiry is
pursued further, it is better to go into the quantum theory,
which is in many ways even more signiﬁcant in this context than
is Brownian motion.
7 QUANTUM THEORY
The quantum theory implies a much more radical change in
notions of order and measure than even relativity did. To under-
stand this change, one has to consider four new features of
primary signiﬁcance introduced by this theory.
7.1 Indivisibility of the quantum of action
This indivisibility implies that transitions between stationary
states are in some sense discrete. Thus, it has no meaning to say
that a system passes through a continuous series of intermediate
states, similar to initial and ﬁnal states. This is, of course, quite
diﬀerent from classical physics, which implies such a
continuous series of intermediate states in every transition.
wholeness and the implicate order
162

7.2 Wave-particle duality of the properties of matter
Under diﬀerent experimental conditions, matter behaves more
like a wave or more like a particle, but always, in certain ways,
like both together.
7.3 Properties of matter as statistically revealed
potentialities
Every physical situation is now characterized by a wave function
(or more abstractly by a vector in Hilbert space). This wave
function is not directly related to the actual properties of an indi-
vidual object, event, or process. Rather, it has to be thought of as
a description of the potentialities within the physical situation.4
Diﬀerent and generally mutually incompatible potentialities
(e.g., for wavelike or particle-like behaviour) are actualized in
diﬀerent experimental arrangements (so that the wave-particle
duality can be understood as one of the main forms for the
expression of such incompatible potentialities). In general, the
wave function gives only a probability measure for the actualization
of diﬀerent potentialities in a statistical ensemble of similar
observations carried out under speciﬁed conditions, and cannot
predict what will happen in detail in each individual observation.
This notion of statistical determination of mutually incompat-
ible potentialities is evidently very diﬀerent from what is done in
classical physics, which has no place in it to give the notion of
potentiality such a fundamental role. In classical physics, one
thinks that only the actual state of a system can be relevant in a
given physical situation, and that probability comes in either
because we are ignorant of the actual state or because we are
averaging over an ensemble of actual states that are distributed
over a range of conditions. In quantum theory it has no meaning
to discuss the actual state of a system apart from the whole set of
experimental conditions which are essential to actualize this state.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 163

7.4 Non-causal correlations (the paradox of Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen)
It is an inference from the quantum theory that events that are
separated in space and that are without possibility of connection
through interaction are correlated, in a way that can be shown to
be incapable of a detailed causal explanation, through the propa-
gation of eﬀects at speeds not greater than that of light.5 Thus,
the quantum theory is not compatible with Einstein’s basic
approach to relativity, in which it is essential that such corre-
lations be explainable by signals propagated at speeds not faster
than that of light.
All of these evidently imply a breakdown of the general order
of description that had prevailed before the advent of quantum
theory. The limits of this ‘pre-quantum’ order are indeed
brought out very clearly in terms of the uncertainty relations
which are commonly illustrated in terms of Heisenberg’s
famous microscope experiment.
This experiment will now be discussed here, in a form some-
what diﬀerent from that used by Heisenberg, in order to bring
out certain new points. Our ﬁrst step is to go into what it means
to make a classical measurement of position and momentum. In
doing this, we consider the use of an electron microscope, rather
than a light microscope.
As shown in Figure 5.7, there is in the target an ‘observed
particle’ at O, assumed to have initially a known momentum
(e.g., it may be at rest, with zero momentum). Electrons of
known energy are incident on the target, and one of these is
deﬂected by the particle at O. It goes through the electron lens,
following an orbit that leads it to the focus at P. From here, the
electron leaves a track T in a certain direction, as it penetrates the
photographic emulsion.
Now, the directly observable results of this experiment are the pos-
ition P and the direction of the track T, but of course these are in
wholeness and the implicate order
164

themselves of no interest. It is only by knowing overall the
experimental conditions (i.e., the structure of the microscope,
the target, the energy of the incident beam of electrons, etc.) that
the experimental results become signiﬁcant in the context of a
physical inquiry. With the aid of an adequate description of
these conditions, one can use the experimental results to make
inferences about the position of the ‘observed particle’ at O, and
about the momentum transferred to it in the process of deﬂect-
ing the incident electron. Thus, although the operation of the
instrument does inﬂuence the observed particle, this inﬂuence
can be taken into account, so that we can infer, and thus ‘know’,
both the position and the momentum of this particle at the time
of deﬂection of the incident electron.
All this is quite straightforward in the context of classical
physics. Heisenberg’s novel step was to consider the implica-
tions of the ‘quantum’ character of the electron that provides the
‘link’ between the experimental results and what is to be inferred from these
results. This electron can no longer be described as being just a
classical particle. Rather, it has also to be described in terms of a
‘wave’, as shown in Figure 5.8. Electron waves are said to be
incident on the target, and diﬀracted by the atom at O.
They then pass through the lens, where they are further dif-
fracted and brought to focus in the emulsion at P. From here,
Figure 5.7
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 165

there starts a track T (just as happened in the classical
description).
Evidently, Heisenberg has brought in the four primarily sig-
niﬁcant features of the quantum theory referred to at the begin-
ning of this section. Thus (as happens in the interference
experiment also), he describes the link electron both as a wave
(while it is passing from object O through the lens to the image
at P) and as a particle (when it arrives at the point P and then
leaves a track T). The transfer of momentum to the ‘observed
atom’ at O has to be treated as discrete and indivisible. Between O
and P the most detailed possible description of the link electron
is in terms of a wave function that determines only a statistical
distribution of potentialities whose actualization depends on the
experimental conditions (e.g., the presence of sensitive atoms in
the emulsion, which can reveal the electron). Finally, the actual
results (the spot P, the track T, and the properties of the atom O)
are correlated in the non-causal way mentioned earlier in this
chapter.
By using all these primary features of the quantum theory in
discussing the ‘link’ electron, Heisenberg was able to show that
there is a limit to the precision of inferences that can be drawn
about the observed object, given by the uncertainty relations
(∆x × ∆p  h). At ﬁrst, Heisenberg explained the uncertainty as
Figure 5.8
wholeness and the implicate order
166

the result of the ‘uncertain’ character of the precise orbit of the
‘electron link’ between O and P, which also implied an uncertain
‘disturbance’ of the atom O when this electron was scattered.
However, Bohr6 gave a relatively thorough and consistent discus-
sion of the whole situation, which made it clear that the four
primary aspects of the quantum theory as described above are
not compatible with any description in terms of precisely
deﬁned orbits that are ‘uncertain’ to us. We have thus to do here
with an entirely new situation in physics, in which the notion of
a detailed orbit no longer has any meaning. Rather, one can
perhaps say that the relationship between O and P through the
‘link’ electron is similar to an indivisible and unanalysable
‘quantum jump’ between stationary states, rather than to the
continuous though not precisely known movement of a particle
across the space between O and P.
What, then, can be the signiﬁcance of the description that has
been given of Heisenberg’s experiment? Evidently, it is only in a
context in which classical physics is applicable that this experi-
ment can coherently be discussed in this way. Such a discussion
can therefore at most serve to indicate the limits of relevance of
classical modes of description; it cannot actually provide a
description that is coherent in a ‘quantum’ context.
Even when regarded in this way, however, the usual discus-
sion of the experiment overlooks certain key points which have
deep and far-reaching signiﬁcance. To see what these are, we
note that from a particular set of experimental conditions as
determined by the structure of the microscope, etc., one could
in some rough sense say that the limits of applicability of the
classical description are indicated by a certain cell in the phase
space of this object, which we describe by A in Figure 5.9. If,
however, there had been a diﬀerent set of experimental condi-
tions (e.g., a microscope of another aperture, electrons of diﬀer-
ent energy, etc.), then these limits would have had to be indi-
cated by another cell in phase space, indicated by B. Heisenberg
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 167

emphasized that both cells must have the same area, h, but in
doing this he left out of account the signiﬁcance of the fact that
their ‘shapes’ are diﬀerent.
Of course, in the context of classical physics (in which quan-
tities of the order of Planck’s constant, h, can be neglected), all
cells can be replaced by dimensionless points, so that their
‘shapes’ have no signiﬁcance at all. Therefore, the experimental
results can be said to do nothing more than permit inferences to
be drawn about an observed object, inferences in which the
‘shapes’ of the cells, and therefore the details of the experimental
conditions, play only the role of intermediary links in the chain
of reasoning, which drop out of the ultimate result that is
inferred. This means that the observed object can consistently be
said to exist separately and independently of the observing
instrument, in the sense that it can be regarded as ‘having’ cer-
tain properties whether it interacts with anything else (such as
an observing instrument) or not.
However, in the ‘quantum’ context the situation is very diﬀer-
ent. Here, the ‘shapes’ of the cells remain relevant, as essential
parts of the description of the observed particle. This latter there-
fore cannot properly be described except in conjunction with a
description of the experimental conditions; and if one goes in
more detail into a mathematical treatment according to the laws
of the quantum theory, the ‘wave function’ of the ‘observed
object’ cannot be speciﬁed apart from a speciﬁcation of the wave
Figure 5.9
wholeness and the implicate order
168

function of the ‘link electron’, which in turn requires a descrip-
tion of the overall experimental conditions (so that the relation-
ship between the object and the observed result is actually an
example of the correlations of the type indicated by Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen, which cannot be explained in terms of the
propagation of signals as chains of causal inﬂuence). This means
that the description of the experimental conditions does not
drop out as a mere intermediary link of inference, but remains
inseparable from the description of what is called the observed
object. The ‘quantum’ context thus calls for a new kind of
description that does not imply the separability of the ‘observed
object’ and ‘observing instrument’. Instead, the form of the
experimental conditions and the meaning of the experimental
results have now to be one whole, in which analysis into
autonomously existent elements is not relevant.
What is meant here by wholeness could be indicated meta-
phorically by calling attention to a pattern (e.g., in a carpet). In
so far as what is relevant is the pattern, it has no meaning to say
that diﬀerent parts of such a pattern (e.g., various ﬂowers and
trees that are to be seen in the carpet) are separate objects in
interaction. Similarly, in the quantum context, one can regard
terms like ‘observed object’, ‘observing instrument’, ‘link elec-
tron’, ‘experimental results’, etc., as aspects of a single overall
‘pattern’ that are in eﬀect abstracted or ‘pointed out’ by our
mode of description. Thus, to speak of the interaction of
‘observing instrument’ and ‘observed object’ has no meaning.
A centrally relevant change in descriptive order required in
the quantum theory is thus the dropping of the notion of analy-
sis of the world into relatively autonomous parts, separately
existent but in interaction. Rather, the primary emphasis is now
on undivided wholeness, in which the observing instrument is not
separable from what is observed.
Though quantum theory is very diﬀerent from relativity, yet
in some deep sense they have in common this implication of
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 169

undivided wholeness. Thus, in relativity, a consistent description
of the instruments would have to be in terms of a structure of
singularities in the ﬁeld (corresponding to what are now gener-
ally called ‘the constituent atoms’ of the instrument). These
would merge with the ﬁelds of the singularities constituting the
‘observed particle’ (and eventually with those constituting ‘the
atoms out of which the human observer is constituted’). This is
a diﬀerent sort of wholeness from that implied by the quantum
theory, but it is similar in that there can be no ultimate division
between the observing instrument and the observed object.
Nevertheless, in spite of this deep similarity, it has not proved
possible to unite relativity and quantum theory in a coherent
way. One of the main reasons is that there is no consistent means
of introducing extended structure in relativity, so that particles
have to be treated as extensionless points. This has led to inﬁnite
results in quantum ﬁeld-theoretical calculations. By means of
various formal algorithms (e.g., renormalization, S matrices,
etc.) certain ﬁnite and essentially correct results have been
abstracted from the theory. However, at bottom, the theory
remains generally unsatisfactory, not only because it contains
what at least appear to be some serious contradictions, but also
because it certainly has a number of arbitrary features which are
capable of indeﬁnite adaptation to the facts, somewhat remin-
iscent of the way in which the Ptolemaic epicycles could be
made to accommodate almost any observational data that might
arise in the application of such a descriptive framework (e.g., in
renormalization, the vacuum-state wave function has an inﬁnite
number of arbitrary features).
It would not, however, be very helpful here to make a detailed
analysis of these problems. Rather, it will be more useful to call
attention to a few general diﬃculties, the consideration of which
will perhaps show that these details are not very relevant in the
context of the present discussion.
First, quantum ﬁeld theory begins by deﬁning a ﬁeld Ψ(x, t).
wholeness and the implicate order
170

This ﬁeld is a quantum operator, but x and t describe a continu-
ous order in space and time. To bring the point out in more
detail, we can write the matrix element Ψij (x, t). However, as
soon as we impose relativistic invariance, we deduce ‘inﬁnite
ﬂuctuations’, i.e., Ψij (x, t) is in general inﬁnite and discontinu-
ous because of ‘zero-point’ quantum ﬂuctuations. This contra-
dicts the original assumption of continuity of all functions
required in any relativistic theory.
This emphasis on continuous orders is (as has been pointed
out in the previous section) a serious weakness of the theory of
relativity. If we deal with discontinuous order, however (e.g., as
in Brownian motion), then the notion of signal ceases to be
relevant (and with it, the notion of limitation to the speed of
light); and without the notion of signal in a basic role, we are
once again free to consider extended structures in a primary role
in our descriptions.
Of course, the limitation to the speed of light will hold on the
average and in the long run. Thus, relativistic notions will be
relevant in suitable limiting cases. But the theory of relativity
need not just be imposed on quantum theory. It is this
imposition of the underlying descriptive order of one theory on
another that led to arbitrary features and possible contradictions.
To see how this comes about we note that if the relativistic
notion of giving a fundamental role to the possibility of signalling
from one region point to another is to have any meaning, the source
of a signal must be clearly separated from the region in which it
is received, not only spatially but also in the sense that the two
must be essentially autonomous in their behaviour.
Thus, as shown in Figure 5.10, if a signal is emitted from the
world tube of a source of A, then it has to be propagated con-
tinuously without change of order to B, the world tube of the
receiver. However, at a quantum level of description, the time
order of events in the world tube at A and B may, according to
the uncertainty principle, cease to be deﬁnable in the usual way.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 171

This alone would make the notion of a signal meaningless. In
addition, the notion of a clear and distinct spatial separation of A
and B, as well as that of possible autonomy in their behaviour,
will cease to be relevant, because the ‘contact’ between A and B
has now to be regarded as similar to an indivisible quantum
jump of an atom between stationary states. Moreover, the further
development of this notion along the lines of the experiment of
Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen leads to the inference that the con-
nection between A and B cannot in general be described in terms
of the propagation of causal inﬂuences (which type of propaga-
tion is evidently necessary to provide for an underlying ‘carrier’
of the signal).
It seems clear, then, that the relativistic notion of a signal
simply does not ﬁt coherently into the ‘quantum’ context. This is
basically because such a signal implies the possibility of a certain
kind of analysis which is not compatible with the sort of undivided
wholeness that is implied by the quantum theory. In this con-
nection, it may indeed be said that although Einstein’s uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory denies the possibility of ultimate analysis of the
Figure 5.10
wholeness and the implicate order
172

world into autonomous component elements, nevertheless, the
notion that the possibility of a signal plays such a basic role
implies a diﬀerent and more abstract sort of analysis based on a
kind of independent and autonomous ‘information content’
which is diﬀerent in diﬀerent regions. This abstract kind of
analysis may not only be inconsistent with quantum theory but,
very probably, also with the undivided wholeness implied in the
other aspects of the theory of relativity.
What suggests itself, then, is that we seriously consider the
possibility of dropping the idea of the basic role of the notion of
signal, but go on with the other aspects of relativity theory
(especially the principle that laws are invariant relationships, and
that through non-linearity of the equations, or in some other
way, analysis into autonomous components will cease to be
relevant). Thus, by letting go of this kind of attachment to a
certain kind of analysis that does not harmonize with the ‘quan-
tum’ context, we open the way for a new theory that compre-
hends what is still valid in relativity theory, but does not deny
the indivisible wholeness implied by the quantum theory.
On the other hand, quantum theory also contains an implicit
attachment to a certain very abstract kind of analysis which does
not harmonize with the sort of indivisible wholeness implied by
the theory of relativity. To see what this is, we note that discus-
sions such as those centring around the Heisenberg microscope
emphasize the indivisible wholeness of the observing instru-
ment and the observed object only in context of the actual results
of an experiment. However, in the mathematical theory, the
wave function is still generally taken to be a description of over-
all statistical potentialities that are regarded as existing separately and
autonomously. In other words, the actual and individual object of
classical physics is replaced by a more abstract kind of potential and
statistical object. This latter is said to correspond to the ‘quantum
state of the system’, which in turn corresponds to ‘the wave
function of the system’ (or more generally to a vector in Hilbert
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 173

space). Such usage of language (e.g., to bring in words such as
‘state of a system’) implies that we are thinking of something
that has a separate and autonomous kind of existence.
The consistency of this way of using language depends to a
large extent on the mathematical assumption that the wave equa-
tion (i.e., the law governing the changes with time of the wave
function, or the Hilbert space vector) is linear. (Non-linear equa-
tions for ﬁeld operations have been proposed but, even here, this
is only a limited kind of non-linearity, in the sense that the basic
equation for ‘the state vector in Hilbert space’ is always taken to
be linear.) Such linearity of equations then allows us to regard
‘state vectors’ as having a kind of autonomous existence (similar
in certain ways to that which is attributed in classical ﬁeld theor-
ies to normal modes, but diﬀerent in that they are more
abstract).
This complete autonomy of the ‘quantum state’ of a system is
supposed to hold only when it is not being observed. In an
observation, it is assumed that we have to do with two initially
autonomous systems that have come into interaction.7 One of
these is described by the ‘state vector of the observed object’ and
the other by the ‘state vector of the observing apparatus’.
In the consideration of this interaction, certain new features
are introduced which correspond to allowing for the possibility
of actualizing the observed system’s potentialities at the expense
of others that cannot be actualized at the same time. (Mathe-
matically, one can say that ‘the wave packet is reduced’ or that ‘a
projection operation takes place’.)
There is a great deal of controversy and discussion as to pre-
cisely how this stage is to be treated, because the basic notions
involved do not seem to be very clear. However, it is not our aim
here to criticize these eﬀorts in detail. Rather, we wish merely to
point out that this whole line of approach re-establishes at the
abstract level of statistical potentialities the same kind of analysis
into separate and autonomous components in interaction that is
wholeness and the implicate order
174

denied at the more concrete level of individual objects. It is just
this kind of abstract analysis that does not cohere with the under-
lying basic descriptive order of relativity theory, for, as has been
seen, relativity theory is not compatible with such an analysis of
the world into separate components. Rather, it ultimately implies
that such ‘objects’ have to be understood as merging with each
other (as ﬁeld singularities do) to make one indivisible whole.
Similarly, one may consider the notion that through a thorough-
going non-linearity, or in some other way, quantum theory may
be allowed to change, so that the resulting new theory will also
imply undivided wholeness, not merely at the level of actual
individual phenomena, but also at the level of potentialities
treated in terms of statistical aggregates. In this way, those
aspects of quantum theory that are still valid will be able to
harmonize with those aspects of relativity that are still valid.
To give up both the basic role of signal and that of quantum
state is, however, no small thing. To ﬁnd a new theory that goes
on without these will evidently require radically new notions of
order, measure and structure.
One may suggest here that we are in a position which is in
certain ways similar to where Galileo stood when he began his
inquiries. A great deal of work has been done showing the
inadequacy of old ideas, which merely permit a range of new
facts to be ﬁtted mathematically (comparable to what was done by
Copernicus, Kepler and others), but we have not yet freed our-
selves thoroughly from the old order of thinking, using lan-
guage, and observing. We have thus yet to perceive a new order. As
with Galileo, this must involve seeing new diﬀerences so that
much of what has been thought to be basic in the old ideas will
be perceived to be more or less correct, but not of primary
relevance (as happened, for example, with some of the key ideas
of Aristotle). When we see the new basic diﬀerences, then (as
happened with Newton) we will be able to perceive a new uni-
versal ratio or reason relating and unifying all the diﬀerences.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 175

This may ultimately carry us as far beyond quantum theory and
relativity as Newton’s ideas went beyond those of Copernicus.
Of course, this cannot be done overnight. We have to work
patiently, slowly, and carefully, to understand the present gen-
eral situation in physics in a new way. Some preliminary steps of
this kind will be discussed in chapter 6.
wholeness and the implicate order
176

6
QUANTUM THEORY AS AN
INDICATION OF A NEW ORDER
IN PHYSICS
Part B: Implicate and Explicate Order in
Physical Law
1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 5 called attention to the emergence of new orders
throughout the history of physics. A general feature of the
development of this subject has been a tendency to regard
certain basic notions of order as permanent and unchangeable.
The task of physics was then taken to be to accommodate new
observations by means of adaptations within these basic notions
of order, so as to ﬁt the new facts. This kind of adaptation
began with the Ptolemaic epicycles, which continued from
ancient times until the advent of the work of Copernicus,
Kepler, Galileo, and Newton. As soon as the basic notions of

order in classical physics had been fairly clearly expressed, it
was supposed that further work in physics would consist of
adaptation within this order to accommodate new facts. This
continued until the appearance of relativity and the quantum
theory. It can accurately be said that since then the main line of
work in physics has been adaptation within the general orders
underlying these theories, to accommodate the facts to which
these in turn have led.
It may thus be inferred that accommodation within already
existing frameworks of order has generally been considered to
be the main activity to be emphasized in physics, while the
perception of new orders has been thought of as something that
happens only occasionally, perhaps in revolutionary periods,
during which what is regarded as the normal process of
accommodation has broken down.1
It is pertinent to this subject to consider Piaget’s2 description
of all intelligent perception in terms of two complementary
movements, accommodation and assimilation. From the roots ‘mod’,
meaning ‘measure’, and ‘com’, meaning ‘together’, one sees
that to accommodate means ‘to establish a common measure’
(see chapter 5 for a discussion of the broader sense of the notions
of measure that are relevant in this context). Examples of
accommodation are ﬁtting, cutting to a pattern, adapting, imitat-
ing, conforming to rules, etc. On the other hand, ‘to assimilate’
is ‘to digest’ or to make into a comprehensive and inseparable
whole (which includes oneself). Thus, to assimilate means ‘to
understand’.
It is clear that in intelligent perception, primary emphasis has
in general to be given to assimilation, while accommodation
tends to play a relatively secondary role in the sense that its main
signiﬁcance is as an aid to assimilation.
Of course, we are able in certain sorts of contexts just to
accommodate something that we observe within known orders
of thought, and in this very act it will be adequately assimilated.
wholeness and the implicate order
178

However, it is necessary in more general contexts to give serious
attention to the possibility that the old orders of thought may
cease to be relevant, so that they can no longer coherently be
adapted to ﬁt the new fact. As has been brought out in some
detail in chapter 5 one may then have to see the irrelevance of
old diﬀerences, and the relevance of new diﬀerences, and thus
one may open the way to the perception of new orders, new
measures and new structures.
Clearly, such perception can appropriately take place at almost
any time, and does not have to be restricted to unusual and
revolutionary periods in which one ﬁnds that the older orders
can no longer be conveniently adapted to the facts. Rather, one
may be continually ready to drop old notions of order at various
contexts, which may be broad or narrow, and to perceive new
notions that may be relevant in such contexts. Thus, understand-
ing the fact by assimilating it into new orders can become what
could perhaps be called the normal way of doing scientiﬁc
research.
To work in this way is evidently to give primary emphasis to
something similar to artistic perception. Such perception begins
by observing the whole fact in its full individuality, and then by
degree articulates the order that is proper to the assimilation of
this fact. It does not begin with abstract preconceptions as to
what the order has to be, which are then adapted to the order
that is observed.
What, then, is the proper role of accommodation of facts
within known theoretical orders, measures and structures? Here,
it is important to note that facts are not to be considered as if
they were independently existent objects that we might ﬁnd or
pick up in the laboratory. Rather, as the Latin root of the word
‘facere’ indicates, the fact is ‘what has been made’ (e.g., as in
‘manufacture’). Thus, in a certain sense, we ‘make’ the fact. That
is to say, beginning with immediate perception of an actual
situation, we develop the fact by giving it further order, form
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 179

and structure with the aid of our theoretical concepts. For
example, by using the notions of order prevailing in ancient
times, men were led to ‘make’ the fact about planetary motions
by describing and measuring in terms of epicycles. In classical
physics, the fact was ‘made’ in terms of the order of planetary
orbits, measured through positions and times. In general relativ-
ity, the fact was ‘made’ in terms of the order of Riemannian
geometry, and of the measure implied by concepts such as
‘curvature of space’. In the quantum theory, the fact was made in
terms of the order of energy levels, quantum numbers,
symmetry groups, etc., along with appropriate measures (e.g.
scattering cross-sections, charges, and masses of particles, etc.).
It is clear, then, that changes of order and measures in the
theory ultimately lead to new ways of doing experiments and to
new kinds of instruments, which in turn lead to the ‘making’ of
correspondingly ordered and measured facts of new kinds. In
this development, the experimental fact serves in the ﬁrst
instance as a test for theoretical notions. Thus, as has been
pointed out in chapter 5, the general form of theoretical explan-
ation is that of a generalized kind of ratio of reason. ‘As A is to B
in our structure of thinking, so it is in fact.’ This ratio or reason
constitutes a kind of ‘common measure’ or ‘accommodation’
between theory and fact.
As long as such a common measure prevails, then of course
the theory used need not be changed. If the common measure is
found not to be realized, then the ﬁrst step is to see whether it
can be re-established by means of adjustments within the theory
without a change in its underlying order. If, after reasonable
eﬀorts, a proper accommodation of this kind is not achieved,
then what is needed is a fresh perception of the whole fact. This
now includes not only the results of experiments but also the
failure of certain lines of theory to ﬁt the experimental results in a ‘common
measure’. Then, as has been indicated earlier, one has to be very
sensitively aware of all the relevant diﬀerences which underly
wholeness and the implicate order
180

the main orders in the old theory, to see whether there is room
for a change of overall order. It is being emphasized here that
this kind of perception should properly be interwoven continu-
ally with the activities aimed at accommodation, and should not
have to be delayed for so long that the whole situation becomes
confused and chaotic, apparently requiring the revolutionary
destruction of the old order to clear it up.
As relativity and quantum theory have shown that it has no
meaning to divide the observing apparatus from what is
observed, so the considerations discussed here indicate that it
has no meaning to separate the observed fact (along with the
instruments used to observe it) from the theoretical notions of
order that help to give ‘shape’ to this fact. As we go on to
develop new notions of order going beyond those of relativity
and quantum theory, it will thus not be appropriate to try
immediately to apply these notions to current problems that
have arisen in the consideration of the present set of experi-
mental facts. Rather, what is called for in this context is very
broadly to assimilate the whole of the fact in physics into the
new theoretical notions of order. After this fact has geneally been
‘digested’, we can begin to glimpse new ways in which such
notions of order can be tested and perhaps extended in various
directions. As pointed out at the end of chapter 5, we have to
proceed slowly and patiently here or else we may become
confused by ‘undigested’ facts.
Fact and theory are thus seen to be diﬀerent aspects of one
whole in which analysis into separate but interacting parts is not
relevant. That is to say, not only is undivided wholeness implied
in the content of physics (notably relativity and quantum theory)
but also in the manner of working in physics. This means that we do
not try always to force the theory to ﬁt the kinds of facts that
may be appropriate in currently accepted general orders of
description, but that we are also ready when necessary to con-
sider changes in what is meant by fact, which may be required
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 181

for assimilation of such fact into new theoretical notions of
order.
2 UNDIVIDED WHOLENESS – THE LENS AND
THE HOLOGRAM
The undivided wholeness of modes of observation, instrumenta-
tion and theoretical understanding indicated above implies the
need to consider a new order of fact, i.e., the fact about the way in
which modes of theoretical understanding and of observation
and instrumentation are related to each other. Until now, we
have more or less just taken such a relationship for granted,
without giving serious attention to the manner in which it
arises, very probably because of the belief that the study of the
subject belongs to ‘the history of science’ rather than to ‘science
proper’. However, it is now being suggested that the considera-
tion of this relationship is essential for an adequate understand-
ing of science itself, because the content of the observed fact
cannot coherently be regarded as separate from modes of
observation and instrumentation and modes of theoretical
understanding.
An example of the very close relationship between instru-
mentation and theory can be seen by considering the lens, which
was indeed one of the key features behind the development of
modern scientiﬁc thought. The essential feature of a lens is, as
indicated in Figure 6.1, that it forms an image in which a given
point P in the object corresponds (in a high degree of approxi-
mation) to a point Q in the image. By thus bringing the corres-
pondence of speciﬁed features of object and image into such
sharp relief, the lens greatly strengthened man’s awareness of the
various parts of the object and of the relationship between these
parts. In this way, it furthered the tendency to think in terms of
analysis and synthesis. Moreover, it made possible an enormous
extension of the classical order of analysis and synthesis to
wholeness and the implicate order
182

objects that were too far away, too big, too small, or too rapidly
moving to be thus ordered by means of unaided vision. As a
result, scientists were encouraged to extrapolate their ideas and
to think that such an approach would be relevant and valid no
matter how far they went, in all possible conditions, contexts,
and degrees of approximation.
However, as has been seen in chapter 5 relativity and quantum
theory imply undivided wholeness, in which analysis into dis-
tinct and well-deﬁned parts is no longer relevant. Is there an
instrument that can help give a certain immediate perceptual
insight into what can be meant by undivided wholeness, as the
lens did for what can be meant by analysis of a system into parts?
It is suggested here that one can obtain such insight by consider-
ing hologram. (The name is derived from the Greek words ‘holo’,
meaning ‘whole’, and ‘gram’, meaning ‘to write’. Thus, the
hologram is an instrument that, as it were, ‘writes the whole’.)
As shown in Figure 6.2 coherent light from a laser is passed
through a half-silvered mirror. Part of the beam goes on directly
to a photographic plate, while another part is reﬂected so that it
illuminates a certain whole structure. The light reﬂected from
this whole structure also reaches the plate, where it interferes
with that arriving there by a direct path. The resulting interfer-
ence pattern which is recorded on the plate is not only very
complex but also usually so ﬁne that it is not even visible to the
naked eye. Yet, it is somehow relevant to the whole illuminated
structure, though only in a highly implicit way.
Figure 6.1
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 183

This relevance of the interference pattern to the whole
illuminated structure is revealed when the photographic plate is
illuminated with laser light. As shown in Figure 6.3, a wavefront
is then created which is very similar in form to that coming oﬀ
the original illuminated structure. By placing the eye in this way,
one in eﬀect sees the whole of the original structure, in three
dimensions, and from a range of possible points of view (as if
one were looking at it through a window). If we then illuminate
only a small region R of the plate, we still see the whole structure, but
in somewhat less sharply deﬁned detail and from a decreased
range of possible points of view (as if we were looking through
a smaller window).
It is clear, then, that there is no one-to-one correspondence
between parts of an ‘illuminated object’ and parts of an ‘image
of this object on the plate’. Rather, the interference pattern in
each region R of the plate is relevant to the whole structure, and
each region of the structure is relevant to the whole of the
interference pattern on the plate.
Because of the wave properties of light, even a lens cannot
Figure 6.2
wholeness and the implicate order
184

produce an exact one-to-one correspondence. A lens can there-
fore be regarded as a limiting case of a hologram.
We can, however, go further and say that in their overall ways
of indicating the meaning of observations, typical experiments
as currently done in physics (especially in the ‘quantum’ con-
text) are more like the general case of a hologram than like the
special case of a lens. For example, consider a scattering experi-
ment. As shown in Figure 6.4 what can be observed in the
detector is generally relevant to the whole target, or at least to an
area large enough to contain a great many atoms.
Moreover, although one might in principle try to make an
image of a particular atom, the quantum theory implies that to
do this would have little or no signiﬁcance. Indeed, as the discus-
sion of the Heisenberg microscope experiment given in chapter
5 shows, the formation of an image is just what is not relevant in
a ‘quantum’ context; at most a discussion of image formation
serves to indicate the limits of applicability of classical modes of
description.
Figure 6.3
Figure 6.4
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 185

So we may say that in current research in physics, an instru-
ment tends to be relevant to a whole structure, in a way rather
similar to what happens with a hologram. To be sure, there are
certain diﬀerences. For example, in current experiments with
electron beams or with X-rays, these latter are seldom coherent
over appreciable distances. If, however, it should ever prove to be
possible to develop something like an electron laser or an X-ray
laser, then experiments will directly reveal ‘atomic’ and ‘nuclear’
structures without the need for complex chains of inference
of the sort now generally required, as the hologram does for
ordinary large-scale structures.
3 IMPLICATE AND EXPLICATE ORDER
What is being suggested here is that the consideration of the
diﬀerence between lens and hologram can play a signiﬁcant part
in the perception of a new order that is relevant for physical law.
As Galileo noted the distinction between a viscous medium and
a vacuum and saw that physical law should refer primarily to the
order of motion of an object in a vacuum, so we might now
note the distinction between a lens and a hologram and con-
sider the possibility that physical law should refer primarily to
an order of undivided wholeness of the content of a description
similar to that indicated by the hologram rather than to an order
of analysis of such content into separate parts indicated by a
lens.
However, when Aristotle’s ideas on movement were dropped,
Galileo and those who followed him had to consider the ques-
tion of how the new order of motion was to be described in
adequate details. The answer came in the form of Cartesian
coordinates extended to the language of the calculus (diﬀerential
equations, etc.). But this kind of description is of course
appropriate only in a context in which analysis into distinct and
autonomous parts is relevant, and will therefore in turn have to
wholeness and the implicate order
186

be dropped. What, then, will be the new kind of description
appropriate to the present context?
As happened with Cartesian coordinates and the calculus,
such a question cannot be answered immediately in terms of
deﬁnite prescriptions as to what to do. Rather, one has to observe
the new situation very broadly and tentatively and to ‘feel out’
what may be the relevant new features. From this, there will arise
a discernment of the new order, which will articulate and unfold
in a natural way (and not as a result of eﬀorts to make it ﬁt well-
deﬁned and preconceived notions as to what this order should
be able to achieve).
We can begin such an inquiry by noting that in some subtle
sense, which does not appear in ordinary vision, the interference
pattern in the whole plate can distinguish diﬀerent orders and
measures in the whole illuminated structure. For example, the
illuminated structure may contain all sorts of shapes and sizes
of geometric forms (indicated in Figure 6.5a), as well as
topological relationships, such as inside and outside (indicated
in Figure 6.5b), and intersection and separation (indicated in
Figure 6.5c). All of these lead to diﬀerent interference patterns
and it is this diﬀerence that is somehow to be described in detail.
The diﬀerences indicated above are, however, not only in the
plate. Indeed, the latter is of secondary signiﬁcance, in the sense
that its main function is to make a relatively permanent ‘written
record’ of the interference pattern of the light that is present in
Figure 6.5
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 187

each region of space. More generally, however, in each such
region, the movement of the light implicitly contains a vast
range of distinctions of order and measure, appropriate to a
whole illuminated structure. Indeed, in principle, this structure
extends over the whole universe and over the whole past, with
implications for the whole future. Consider, for example, how
on looking at the night sky, we are able to discern structures
covering immense stretches of space and time, which are in
some sense contained in the movements of light in the tiny space
encompassed by the eye (and also how instruments, such as
optical and radio telescopes, can discern more and more of this
totality, contained in each region of space).
There is the germ of a new notion of order here. This order is
not to be understood solely in terms of a regular arrangement of
objects (e.g., in rows) or as a regular arrangement of events (e.g. in a
series). Rather, a total order is contained, in some implicit sense, in
each region of space and time.
Now, the word ‘implicit’ is based on the verb ‘to implicate’.
This means ‘to fold inward’ (as multiplication means ‘folding
many times’). So we may be led to explore the notion that in
some sense each region contains a total structure ‘enfolded’
within it.
It will be useful in such an exploration to consider some
further examples of enfolded or implicate order. Thus, in a televi-
sion broadcast, the visual image is translated into a time order,
which is ‘carried’ by the radio wave. Points that are near each
other in the visual image are not necessarily ‘near’ in the order
of the radio signal. Thus, the radio wave carries the visual image
in an implicate order. The function of the receiver is then to
explicate this order, i.e., to ‘unfold’ it in the form of a new visual
image.
A more striking example of implicate order can be demon-
strated in the laboratory, with a transparent container full of
a very viscous ﬂuid, such as treacle, and equipped with a
wholeness and the implicate order
188

mechanical rotator that can ‘stir’ the ﬂuid very slowly but very
thoroughly. If an insoluble droplet of ink is placed in the ﬂuid
and the stirring device is set in motion, the ink drop is gradually
transformed into a thread that extends over the whole ﬂuid. The
latter now appears to be distributed more or less at ‘random’ so
that it is seen as some shade of grey. But if the mechanical
stirring device is now turned in the opposite direction, the
transformation is reversed, and the droplet of dye suddenly
appears, reconstituted. (This illustration of the implicate order is
discussed further in chapter 7.)
When the dye was distributed in what appeared to be a ran-
dom way, it nevertheless had some kind of order which is diﬀer-
ent, for example, from that arising from another droplet origin-
ally placed in a diﬀerent position. But this order is enfolded or
implicated in the ‘grey mass’ that is visible in the ﬂuid. Indeed, one
could thus ‘enfold’ a whole picture. Diﬀerent pictures would
look indistinguishable and yet have diﬀerent implicate orders,
which diﬀerences would be revealed when they were explicated,
as the stirring device was turned in a reverse direction.
What happens here is evidently similar in certain crucial ways
to what happens with the hologram. To be sure there are diﬀer-
ences. Thus, in a ﬁne enough analysis, one could see that the parts
of the ink droplet remain in a one-to-one correspondence as
they are stirred up and the ﬂuid moves continuously. On the
other hand, in the functioning of the hologram there is no such
one-to-one correspondence. So in the hologram (as also in
experiments in a ‘quantum’ context), there is no way ultimately
to reduce the implicate order to a ﬁner and more complex type
of explicate order.
All this calls attention to the relevance of a new distinction
between implicate and explicate order. Generally speaking, the
laws of physics have thus far referred mainly to the explicate
order. Indeed, it may be said that the principle function of Car-
tesian coordinates is just to give a clear and precise description
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 189

of explicate order. Now, we are proposing that in the formula-
tion of the laws of physics, primary relevance is to be given to
the implicate order, while the explicate order is to have a sec-
ondary kind of signiﬁcance (e.g., as happened with Aristotle’s
notion of movement, after the development of classical physics).
Thus, it may be expected that a description in terms of Cartesian
coordinates can no longer be given a primary emphasis, and that
a new kind of description will indeed have to be developed for
discussing the laws of physics.
4 THE HOLOMOVEMENT AND ITS ASPECTS
To indicate a new kind of description appropriate for giving
primary relevance to implicate order, let us consider once again
the key feature of the functioning of the hologram, i.e., in each
region of space, the order of a whole illuminated structure is
‘enfolded’ and ‘carried’ in the movement of light. Something
similar happens with a signal that modulates a radio wave (see
Figure 6.6). In all cases, the content or meaning that is
‘enfolded’ and ‘carried’ is primarily an order and a measure,
permitting the development of a structure. With the radio wave,
this structure can be that of a verbal communication, a visual
image, etc., but with the hologram far more subtle structures can
be involved in this way (notably three-dimensional structures,
visible from many points of view).
More generally, such order and measure can be ‘enfolded’
and ‘carried’ not only in electromagnetic waves but also in other
ways (by electron beams, sound, and in other countless forms of
Figure 6.6
wholeness and the implicate order
190

movement). To generalize so as to emphasize undivided whole-
ness, we shall say that what ‘carries’ an implicate order is the
holomovement, which is an unbroken and undivided totality. In
certain cases, we can abstract particular aspects of the holo-
movement (e.g., light, electrons, sound, etc.), but more gener-
ally, all forms of the holomovement merge and are inseparable.
Thus, in its totality, the holomovement is not limited in any
speciﬁable way at all. It is not required to conform to any particu-
lar order, or to be bounded by any particular measure. Thus, the
holomovement is undeﬁnable and immeasurable.
To give primary signiﬁcance to the undeﬁnable and
immeasurable holomovement implies that it has no meaning to
talk of a fundamental theory, on which all of physics could ﬁnd a
permanent basis, or to which all the phenomena of physics could
ultimately be reduced. Rather, each theory will abstract a certain
aspect that is relevant only in some limited context, which is
indicated by some appropriate measure.
In discussing how attention is to be called to such aspects, it
is useful to recall that the word ‘relevant’ is a form obtained
from the verb ‘to relevate’ which has dropped out of common
usage, and which means ‘to lift up’ (as in ‘elevate’). We can
thus say in a particular context that may be under consider-
ation, the general modes of description that belong to a given
theory serve to relevate a certain content, i.e., to lift it into
attention so that it stands out ‘in relief’. If this content is perti-
nent in the context under discussion, it is said to be relevant, and
otherwise, irrelevant.
To illustrate what it means to relevate certain aspects of the
implicate order in the holomovement, it is useful to consider
once again the example of the mechanical device for stirring a
viscous ﬂuid, as described in the previous section. Suppose that
we ﬁrst put in a droplet of dye and turn the stirring mechanism n
times. We could then place another droplet of dye nearby and
stir once again through n turns. We could repeat this process
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 191

indeﬁnitely, with a long series of droplets, arranged more or less
along a line, as shown in Figure 6.7.
Suppose, then, that after thus ‘enfolding’ a large number of
droplets, we turn the stirring device in a reverse direction, but so
rapidly that the individual droplets are not resolved in percep-
tion. Then we will see what appears to be a ‘solid’ object (e.g. a
particle) moving continuously through space. This form of a
moving object appears in immediate perception primarily
because the eye is not sensitive to concentrations of dye lower
than a certain minimum, so that one does not directly see the
‘whole movement’ of the dye. Rather, such perception relevates a
certain aspect. That is to say, it makes this aspect stand out ‘in relief’
while the rest of the ﬂuid is seen only as a ‘grey background’
within which the related ‘object’ seems to be moving.
Of course, such an aspect has little interest in itself, i.e. apart
from its broader meaning. Thus, in the present example, one pos-
sible meaning is that there actually is an autonomous object mov-
ing through the ﬂuid. This would signify, of course, that the
whole order of movement is to be regarded as similar to that in
the immediately perceived aspect. In some contexts, such a
meaning is pertinent and adequate (e.g., if we are dealing in the
ordinary level of experience with a rock ﬂying through the air).
However, in the present context, a very diﬀerent meaning is
indicated, and this can be communicated only through a very
diﬀerent kind of description.
Such a description has to start by conceptually relevating certain
broader orders of movement, going beyond any that are similar
to those relevated in immediate perception. In doing this, one
always begins with the holomovement, and then one abstracts
special aspects which involve a totality broad enough for a
Figure 6.7
wholeness and the implicate order
192

proper description in the context under discussion. In the pres-
ent example, this totality should include the whole movement of
the ﬂuid and the dye as determined by the mechanical stirring
device, and the movement of the light, which enables us visually
to perceive what is happening, along with the movement of the
eye and nervous system, which determines the distinctions that
can be perceived in the movement of light.
It may then be said that the content relevated in immediate
perception (i.e., the ‘moving object’) is a kind of intersection
between two orders. One of these is the order of movement that
brings about the possibility of a direct perceptual contact (in this
case, that of the light and the response of the nervous system to
this light), and the other is an order of movement that deter-
mines the detailed content that is perceived (in this case, the
order of movement of the dye in the ﬂuid). Such a description in
terms of intersection of orders is evidently very generally
applicable.3
It has already been seen that, in general, the movement of light
is to be described in terms of ‘the enfolding and carrying’ of
implicate orders that are relevant to a whole structure, in which
analysis into separate and autonomous parts is not applicable
(though, of course, in certain limited contexts, a description in
terms of explicate orders will be adequate). In the present
example, however, it is also appropriate to describe the move-
ment of the dye in similar terms. That is to say, in the movement,
certain implicate orders (in the distribution of dye) become
explicate, while explicate orders become implicate.
To specify this movement in more detail, it is useful here to
introduce a new measure, i.e., an ‘implication parameter’, denoted
by T. In the ﬂuid, this would be the number of turns needed to
bring a given droplet of dye into explicate form. The total struc-
ture of dye present at any moment can then be regarded as an
ordered series of substructures, each corresponding to a single
droplet N with its implication parameter TN.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 193

Evidently, we have here a new notion of structure, for we no
longer build structures solely as ordered and measured
arrangements on which we join separate things, all of which are
explicate together. Rather, we can now consider structures in
which aspects of diﬀerent degrees of implication (as measured
by T) can be arranged in a certain order.
Such aspects can be quite complex. For example, we could
implicate a ‘whole picture’ by turning the stirring device n times.
We could then implicate a slightly diﬀerent picture, and so on
indeﬁnitely. If the stirring device were turned rapidly in the
reverse direction, we could see a ‘three-dimensional scene’
apparently consisting of a ‘whole system’ of objects in
continuous movement and interaction.
In this movement, the ‘picture’ present at any given moment
would consist only of aspects that can be explicated together
(i.e., aspects corresponding to a certain value of the implication
parameter T). As events happening at the same time are said to
be synchronous, so aspects that can be explicated together can be
called synordinate, while those that cannot be explicated together
may then be called asynordinate. Evidently, the new notions of
structure under discussion here involve asynordinate aspects,
whereas previous notions involve only synordinate aspects.
It has to be emphasized here that the order of implication, as
measured by the parameter T, has no necessary relationship to
the order of time (as measured by another parameter, t). These
two parameters are only related in a contingent manner (in this
case by the rate of turning of the stirring device). It is the T
parameter that is directly relevant to the description of the
implicate structure, and not the t parameter.
When a structure is asynordinate (that is, constituted of aspects
with diﬀerent degrees of implication), then evidently the time
order is not in general the primary one that is pertinent for
the expression of law. Rather, as one can see by considering the
previous examples, the whole implicate order is present at any
wholeness and the implicate order
194

moment, in such a way that the entire structure growing out of
this implicate order can be described without giving any pri-
mary role to time. The law of the structure will then just be a
law relating aspects with various degrees of implication. Such
a law will, of course, not be deterministic in time. But, as has
been indicated in chapter 5 determinism in time is not the only
form of ratio or reason; and as long as we can ﬁnd ratio or
reason in the orders that are primarily relevant, this is all that is
needed for law.
One can see in the ‘quantum context’ a signiﬁcant similarity
to the orders of movement that have been described in terms of
the simple examples discussed above. Thus, as shown in Figure
6.8 ‘elementary particles’ are generally observed by means of
tracks that they are supposed to make in detecting devices
(photographic emulsions, bubble chambers, etc). Such a track is
evidently to be regarded as no more than an aspect appearing in
immediate perception (as was done with the moving sequence
of droplets of dye indicated in Figure 6.7). To describe it as
the track of a ‘particle’ is then to assume in addition that the
primarily relevant order of movement is similar to that in the
immediately perceived aspect.
However, the whole discussion of the new order implicit in
the quantum theory shows that such a description cannot coher-
ently be maintained. For example, the need to describe move-
ment discontinuously in terms of ‘quantum jumps’ implies that
the notion of a well-deﬁned orbit of a particle that connects the
Figure 6.8
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 195

visible marks constituting the track cannot have any meaning. In
any case, the wave-particle properties of matter show that the
overall movement depends on the total experimental arrange-
ment in a way that is not consistent with the idea of autonomous
motion of localized particles; and, of course, the discussion of
the Heisenberg microscope experiment indicates the relevance
of a new order of undivided wholeness in which it has no mean-
ing to talk about an observed object as if it were separate from
the entire experimental situation in which observation takes
place. So the use of the descriptive term ‘particle’ in this
‘quantum’ context is very misleading.
Evidently, we have here to deal with something that is simi-
lar in certain important ways to the example of stirring a dye
into a viscous ﬂuid. In both cases, there appears in immediate
perception an explicate order that cannot consistently be
regarded as autonomous. In the example of the dye, the expli-
cate order is determined as an intersection of the implicate
order of ‘the whole movement’ of the ﬂuid and an implicate
order of distinctions of density of dye that are relevated in
sense perception. In the ‘quantum’ context, there similarly will
be an intersection of an implicate order of some ‘whole
movement’ corresponding to what we have called, for example,
‘the electron’, and another implicate order of distinctions that
are relevated (and recorded) by our instruments. Thus, the
word ‘electron’ should be regarded as no more than a name by
which we call attention to a certain aspect of the holomove-
ment, an aspect that can be discussed only by taking into
account the entire experimental situation and that cannot be
speciﬁed in terms of localized objects moving autonomously
through space. And, of course, every kind of ‘particle’ which in
current physics is said to be a basic constituent of matter will
have to be discussed in the same sort of terms (so that such
‘particles’ are no longer considered as autonomous and
separately existent). Thus, we come to a new general physical
wholeness and the implicate order
196

description in which ‘everything implicates everything’ in an
order of undivided wholeness.
A mathematical discussion of how the ‘quantum’ context can
be assimilated in terms of the sort of implicate order discussed
above is given in the appendix to this chapter.
5 LAW IN THE HOLOMOVEMENT
We have seen that in the ‘quantum’ context, the order in every
immediately perceptible aspect of the world is to be regarded as
coming out of a more comprehensive implicate order, in which
all aspects ultimately merge in the undeﬁnable and immeasur-
able holomovement. How, then, are we to understand the fact
that descriptions involving the analysis of the world into
autonomous components do actually work, at least in certain
contexts (e.g., those in which classical physics is valid)?
To answer the question, we ﬁrst note that the word ‘auton-
omy’ is based on two Greek words: ‘auto’, meaning ‘self’, and
‘nomos’ meaning ‘law’. So, to be autonomous is to be self-ruling.
Evidently, nothing is ‘a law unto itself’. At most, something
may behave with a relative and limited degree of autonomy, under
certain conditions and in certain degrees of approximation.
Indeed, at the very least, each relatively autonomous thing (e.g.,
a particle) is limited by other such relatively autonomous things.
Such a limitation is currently described in terms of interaction.
However, we shall introduce here the word ‘heteronomy’ to call
attention to a law in which many relatively autonomous things
are related in this way, i.e., externally and more or less
mechanically.
Now, what is characteristic of heteronomy is the applicability
of analytic descriptions. (As pointed out in chapter 5, the root of the
word ‘analysis’ is the Greek ‘lysis’ meaning ‘to dissolve’ or ‘to
loosen’. Since the preﬁx ‘ana’ means ‘above’, it may be said that
‘to analyse’ is to ‘loosen from above’, i.e., to obtain a broad view
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 197

as if from a great height in terms of components that are
regarded as autonomous and separately evident though in
mutual interaction.)
As has been seen, however, in suﬃciently broad contexts such
analytic descriptions cease to be adequate. What is then called
for is holonomy, i.e., the law of the whole. Holonomy does not
totally deny the relevance of analysis in the sense discussed
above. Indeed, ‘the law of the whole’ will generally include the
possibility of describing the ‘loosening’ of aspects from each
other, so that they will be relatively autonomous in limited con-
texts (as well as the possibility of describing the interactions of
these aspects in a system of heteronomy). However, any form of
relative autonomy (and heteronomy) is ultimately limited by
holonomy, so that in a broad enough context such forms are
seen to be merely aspects, relevated in the holomovement, rather
than disjoint and separately existent things in interaction.
Scientiﬁc investigations have generally tended to begin by
relevating apparently autonomous aspects of the totality. The
study of the laws of these aspects has generally been emphasized
at ﬁrst, but as a rule this kind of study has led gradually to an
awareness that such aspects are related to others originally
thought to have no signiﬁcant bearing on the subject of primary
interest.
From time to time, a wide range of aspects has been compre-
hended within a ‘new whole’. But of course the general ten-
dency until now has been to ﬁx on this ‘new whole’ as a ﬁnally
valid general order that is henceforth to be adapted (in the man-
ner discussed in section 1) to ﬁt any further facts that may be
observed or discovered.
It is implied here, however, that even such a ‘new whole’ will
itself be revealed as an aspect in yet another new whole. Thus,
holonomy is not to be regarded as a ﬁxed and ﬁnal goal of
scientiﬁc research, but rather as a movement in which ‘new
wholes’ are continually emerging. And of course this further
wholeness and the implicate order
198

implies that the total law of the undeﬁnable and immeasurable
holomovement could never be known or speciﬁed or put into
words. Rather, such a law has necessarily to be regarded as
implicit.
The general question of the assimilation of the overall fact in
physics in such a notion of law will now be discussed.
APPENDIX: IMPLICATE AND EXPLICATE ORDER
IN PHYSICAL LAW
A.1 Introduction
In this appendix, the notions of implicate and explicate order
that have been introduced earlier will be put into a more mathe-
matical form.
It is important to emphasize, however, that mathematics and
physics are not being regarded here as separate but mutually
related structures (so that, for example, one could be said to
apply mathematics to physics as paint is applied to wood).
Rather, it is being suggested that mathematics and physics are to
be considered as aspects of a single undivided whole.
In discussing this whole, we begin with the general language
which is used for description in physics. We may then be said to
mathematize this language, i.e. to articulate or deﬁne it in more
detail so that it allows statements of greater precision from
which a broad range of signiﬁcant inferences may be drawn in a
clear and coherent way.
In order that the general language and its mathematization
shall be able to work together coherently and harmoniously,
these two aspects have to be similar to each other in certain key
ways, though they will, of course, be diﬀerent in other ways
(notably in that the mathematical aspect has greater possibilities
for precision of inferences). Through a consideration of these
similarities and diﬀerences, there can arise what may be called a
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 199

sort of ‘dialogue’ in which new meanings common to both
aspects are created. It is in this ‘dialogue’ that the wholeness of
the general language and its mathematics is to be seen.
In this appendix we shall then indicate, though only in a very
preliminary and provisional way, how we can mathematize the
general language for developing implicate and explicate orders
in a coherent and harmonious manner.
A.2 Euclidean systems of order and measure
We begin with the mathematical description of explicate order.
Now, explicate order arises primarily as a certain aspect of
sense perception and of experience with the content of such
sense perception. It may be added that, in physics, explicate
order generally reveals itself in the sensibly observable results of
functioning of an instrument.
What is common to the functioning of instruments generally
used in physical research is that the sensibly perceptible content
is ultimately describable in terms of a Euclidean system of order
and measure, i.e., one that can adequately be understood in
terms of ordinary Euclidean geometry. We shall therefore begin
with a discussion of Euclidean systems of order and measure.
In this discussion, we shall adopt the well-known view of the
mathematician Klein, who considers the general transformations
to be the essential determining features of a geometry. Thus, in a
Euclidean space of three dimensions, there are three displace-
ment operators Di. Each of these operators deﬁnes a set of parallel
lines which transform into themselves under the operation in
question. Then, there are three rotation operators Ri. Each of
these deﬁnes a set of concentric cylinders around the origin
which transform into themselves under the operation in ques-
tion. Together, they deﬁne concentric spheres which transform
into themselves under the whole set of Ri. Finally, there is the
dilatation operator R0, which transforms a sphere of a given
wholeness and the implicate order
200

radius into one of a diﬀerent radius. Under this operation, the
radial lines through the origin transform into themselves.
From any one set of operators Ri, R0 we obtain another set R′i,
R′0, corresponding to a diﬀerent centre, by means of a
displacement
(R′i, R′0) = Dj(Ri, R0) D−1
j .
From the Di, we obtain a set of displacements D′i in new direc-
tions by the rotation
D′i = RjDiR−1
j .
Now, if Di is a certain displacement, (Di)n will be a displacement
of n similar steps. This means that displacements can be ordered
naturally in an order similar to that of the integers. So we may
describe displacements on a numerical scale. This gives not only an
order, but also a measure (in so far as we treat successive displace-
ments as equivalent in size).
Similarly, each rotation Ri determines an ordered and meas-
ured series (Ri)n of rotations, while a dilation R0 determines an
ordered and measured series (R0)n of dilations.
It is clear that operations of this kind determine what is meant
by parallelism and perpendicularity, as well as what is meant by
congruence and similarity of geometric ﬁgures. Thus, they
determine the essential feature of a Euclidean geometry, with its
whole system of order and measure. It has to be kept in mind,
however, that the whole set of operations is what is being taken
as primarily relevant, while static elements (e.g., straight lines,
circles, triangles, etc.) are now being regarded as ‘invariant sub-
spaces’ of the operations and as conﬁgurations formed from
these subspaces.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 201

A.3 Transformation and metamorphosis
We now discuss the mathematical description of implicate order.
Implicate order is generally to be described not in terms of
simple geometric transformations, such as translations, rota-
tions, and dilations, but rather in terms of a diﬀerent kind of
operation. In the interests of clarity, we shall therefore reserve
the word transformation to describe a simple geometric change
within a given explicate order. What happens in the broader con-
text of implicate order we shall then call a metamorphosis. This
word indicates that the change is much more radical than the
change of position of orientation of a rigid body, and that it is in
certain ways more like the changes from caterpillar to butterﬂy
(in which everything alters in a thorough going manner while
some subtle and highly implicit features remain invariant). Evi-
dently, the change between an illuminated object and its holo-
gram (or between an ink droplet and the ‘grey mass’ obtained by
stirring it) is to be described as a metamorphosis rather than as a
transformation.
We shall use the symbol M for a metamorphosis and T for a
transformation, while E denotes a whole set of transformations
that are relevant in a given explicate order (Di, Ri, R0). Under a
metamorphosis, the set E will change into another set E given by
E′ = MEM−1.
This has hitherto generally been called a similarity transformation
but from now on it will be called a similarity metamorphosis.
To indicate the essential features of a similarity meta-
morphosis, let us consider the example of the hologram. In this
case, the appropriate metamorphosis M is determed by the
Green’s function relating amplitudes at the illuminated structure
to those at the photographic plate. For waves of deﬁnite
frequency ω the Green’s function is
wholeness and the implicate order
202

G(x − y)  {exp[i(ω/c)|x − y|]}/|x − y|
where x is a coordinate relevant to the illuminated structure and
y is one relevant to the plate. Thus, if A(x) is the amplitude of the
wave at the illuminated structure, then the amplitude B(y) at the
plate is
B(y)   ({exp[i(ω/c)|x − y|]}/|x − y|) A(x) dx.
The entire illuminated structure is seen from the above equation
to be ‘carried’ and ‘enfolded’ in each region of the plate in a way
that evidently cannot be described in terms of a point-to-point
transformation or correspondence between x and y. The matrix
M(x, y), which is essentially G(x − y), can thus be called a
metamorphosis of the amplitudes at the illuminated structure
into the amplitudes at the hologram.
Let us now consider the relationship between transformation
E in the illuminated structure and concomitant changes in the
hologram which follow these transformations. In the illumin-
ated structure, E can be characterized as a point-to-point corres-
pondence in which any similar locality is transformed into a
similar locality. The corresponding change in the hologram is
described by E′ = MEM−1. This is not a correspondence of points
in the hologram to each other in which the property of locality of
such sets of points would be preserved. Rather, each region of
the hologram is changed in a way that depends on all other such
regions. Nevertheless, the change E′ in the hologram evidently
determines the change E in the structure that can be seen when
the hologram is illuminated with laser light.
Likewise, in a quantum context a unitary transformation (e.g.,
as given by a Green’s function operating on the state vector) can
be understood as a metamorphosis in which point-to-point
transformations of space and time that preserve locality are
‘enfolded’ into more general operations that are similar in the
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 203

sense deﬁned above and which nevertheless are not locality-
preserving point-to-point transformations.
A.4 Mathematization of the description of implicate order
The next step is to discuss the mathematization of the language
for the description of implicate order.
We begin by considering a metamorphosis M. By applying M
again and again, we obtain (M)n, which describes the enfolding
of a given structure n times. If we then write Qn = (M)n, we have
Qn : Qn−1 = Qn−1 : Qn−2 = M.
Thus, there is a series of similar diﬀerences in the Qn (indeed, the
diﬀerences are not only similar but are also all equal to M). As
pointed out in chapter 5, such a series of similar diﬀerences
indicates an order. Since the diﬀerences are in the degree of impli-
cation, this order is an implicate order. Moreover, in so far as
successive operations M are regarded as equivalent, there is also a
measure, in which n can be taken as an implication parameter.
If we think of the example of droplets of insoluble dye stirred
into a viscous ﬂuid (so that we let M describe the change of the
droplet when the system is enfolded by a certain number of
turns), then Mn describes the change of the droplet when sub-
jected to n enfoldings. Each droplet is, however, inserted in a
position that is displaced by a certain amount relative to the
proceeding droplet. Let this displacement be denoted by D. The
nth droplet ﬁrst suﬀers the displacement Dn and then the meta-
morphosis is Mn, so that the net result is given by MnDn. Let us
further suppose that the density of dye injected with each drop-
let can vary, and denote that of the dye injected into the nth
droplet with the aid of the operation Qn = CnMnDn. The operator
corresponding to the entire series of droplets is obtained by
adding the contributions of each, to give
wholeness and the implicate order
204

Q = 
n
 CnMnDn.
Moreover, any number of structures, corresponding to Q, Q′, Q″,
etc., can also be superposed, to yield
R = Q + Q′ + Q″ + . . . .
In addition, any such structure can itself undergo a displace-
ment, such as D, and a metamorphosis, such as M, to yield
R′ = MDR.
If the ﬂuid were already a ‘uniformly grey’ background, we
could give meaning to a negative coeﬃcient Cn as signifying the
removal of a certain amount of dye from a region corresponding
to a droplet (rather than to the addition of such dye to the
region).
In the above discussion, each mathematical symbol corres-
ponds to an operation (transformation and/or metamorphosis).
There is a meaning to adding operations, to multiplying the
result by a number C, and to multiplying operations by each
other. If we further introduce a unit operation (one which leaves
all operations unaltered in multiplication) and a zero operation
(one which leaves all operations unaltered when added), we will
have satisﬁed all the conditions needed for an algebra.
We see, then, that an algebra contains key features which are
similar to the key features of structures built on implicate orders.
Such an algebra thus makes possible a relevant mathematization that
can be coherently related to the general language for discussing
implicate orders.
Now, in the quantum theory an algebra similar to the one
described above also plays a key role. Indeed, the theory is
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 205

expressed in terms of linear operators (including a unit operator
and a zero operator) that can be added to each other, multiplied
by numbers, and multiplied by each other. All the content of the
quantum theory can thus be put in terms of such an algebra.
Of course, in the quantum theory, the algebraic terms are
interpreted as standing for ‘physical observables’ to which they
correspond. However, in the approach that is being suggested
here, such terms are not to be regarded as standing for anything
in particular. Rather, they are to be considered as extensions of
the general language. A single algebraic symbol is thus similar to
a word, in the sense that its implicit meaning comes out fully
only in the way in which the language as a whole is used.
This approach is indeed used in a great deal of modern
mathematics,4 especially in number theory. Thus, one can start
with what are called undeﬁnable symbols. The meaning of such a
symbol is never directly relevant. Rather, only relationships and
operations in which these symbols take part are relevant.
What we are proposing here is that as we mathematize lan-
guage in the way indicated above, there will arise orders, meas-
ures, and structures within the language which are similar to
(but also diﬀerent from) orders, measures, and structures that
are to be perceived in common experience and in experience
with the functioning of scientiﬁc instruments. As further indi-
cated above, there can be a relationship between these two kinds
of orders, measures, and structures, so that what we talk about
and think about will have a common ratio or reason with what
we can observe and do (see chapter 5 for a discussion of this
sense of ‘ratio’ or ‘reason’).
This means, of course, that we do not regard terms like ‘par-
ticle’, ‘charge’, ‘mass’, ‘position’, ‘momentum’, etc., as having
primary relevance in the algebraic language. Rather, at best, they
will have to come out as high-level abstractions. As pointed out
in this section, the real meaning of the ‘quantum algebra’ will
then be that it is a mathematization of the general language,
wholeness and the implicate order
206

which enriches the latter and makes possible a more precisely
articulated discussion of implicate order than is possible in terms
of the general language alone.
Of course, algebra is in itself a limited form of mathematiza-
tion. There is no reason in principle why we should not ultim-
ately go on to other sorts of mathematization (involving, for
example, rings and lattices or still more general structures which
have yet to be created). However, it will be seen in this appendix
that even within the limits of an algebraic structure, one can
assimilate a very wide range of aspects of modern physics, and
one can open up a great many interesting new avenues for
exploration. It is therefore useful to go into the algebraic mathe-
matization of the common language in some detail before going
into more general kinds of mathematization.
A.5 Algebra and the holomovement
We begin our exploration of the algebraic mathematization of
the general language by calling attention to the fact that the
primary meaning of an algebraic symbol is that it describes a
certain kind of movement.
Thus, consider the set of undeﬁnable algebraic terms denoted
by A. It is characteristic of an algebra that these terms have a
relationship given by
AiAj = 
k
 λK
l jAK
where λK
l j is a set of numerical constants. This relationship means
that when a given term Ai precedes another one Aj, the result is
equivalent to a ‘weighted sum’ or superposition of terms
(so that an algebra contains a sort of ‘superposition principle’
similar in key ways to that which holds in the quantum theory).
In eﬀect, one can say that although the term Ai is ‘in itself’
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 207

undeﬁnable, it nevertheless signiﬁes a certain sort of ‘movement’
of the total set of terms, in which each symbol Aj is replaced by
(or changes into) a superposition of symbols ΣλK
l jAk.
As pointed out earlier, however, in the general language for
the description of implicate order the undeﬁnable and
immeasurable holomovement is considered as the totality in
which all that is to be discussed is ultimately to be relevated.
Similarly, in the algebraic mathematization of this general lan-
guage, we consider as a totality an undeﬁnable algebra in which
the primary meaning of each term is that it signiﬁes a ‘whole
movement’ in all the terms of the algebra. Through this key
similarity there arises the possibility of a coherent mathematiza-
tion of the sort of general description that takes the totality to be
the undeﬁnable and immeasurable holomovement.
We can now go further along these lines. Thus, just as in the
general language, we can consider relatively autonomous aspects
of the holomovement, so in its mathematization, we can con-
sider relatively autonomous sub-algebras which are aspects of
the undeﬁnable ‘whole algebra’. As each aspect of the holo-
movement is ultimately limited in its autonomy by the law of the
whole (i.e., the holonomy), so each sub-algebra is ultimately
limited by the fact that the relevant law involves movements
going outside those that can be described in terms of the
sub-algebra in question.
A given physical context will then be describable in terms of
an appropriate sub-algebra. As we approach the limits of this
context, we will discover that such a description is inadequate
and we will consider broader algebras until we ﬁnd a description
that is adequate to the new context to which we have thus been
led.
In the context of classical physics, for example, it is possible to
abstract a sub-algebra corresponding to a set of Euclidean opera-
tions E. However, in a ‘quantum’ context, the ‘law of the whole’
involves metamorphoses M which lead out of this sub-algebra
wholeness and the implicate order
208

and into diﬀerent (but similar) sub-algebras given by
E′ = MEM−1.
As pointed out, there are now indications that even the ‘quan-
tum’ algebra is inadequate in yet broader contexts. So it is nat-
ural to go on to consider still broader algebras (and ultimately,
of course, yet more general sorts of mathematization that may
prove to be relevant).
A.6 Extension of principle of relativity to implicate orders
As a step into the inquiry into more comprehensive forms of
mathematization, we shall point out the possibility of a certain
extension of the principle of relativity to implicate orders that is
suggested by considering how the quantum algebra limits the
autonomy of the classical algebra in the way described above.
Now, in a classical context, any structure can be speciﬁed in
terms of a set of operations E1, E2, E3, . . . (which describe
lengths, angles, congruence, similarity, etc.). When we go to a
broader, ‘quantum’ content, we can arrive at similar operations,
E′ = MEM−1. What this similarity means is that if any two ele-
ments, say E1 and E2, are related in a certain way in the description
of a speciﬁed structure, then there is a set of elements E1′ and E2′
describing non-local ‘enfolded’ transformations that are related
in a similar way. Or, to put it more concisely,
E1: E2 :: E1′: E2′.
From this, it follows that if we are given a Euclidean system of
order and measure with certain structures that are built on it, we
can always obtain another system E′ enfolded to relative E, and
yet capable of having similar structures built on it.
Hitherto, the principle of relativity has taken a form which
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 209

may be put as follows: ‘Given any structural relationship as
described in a frame of coordinates corresponding to a certain
velocity, it is always possible to have a similar structural relation-
ship as described in a frame of coordinates corresponding to any
other velocity.’ It follows from the discussion above, however,
that the mathematization of the general language in terms of a
‘quantum’ algebra opens up the possibility of an extension of
the principle of relativity. Such an extension is evidently similar
to the principle of complementarity, in that when conditions are
such that a given order corresponding to a set of operations
E is explicate, then another order corresponding to similar
operations E′ = MEM−1 is implicate (so that in a certain sense
both orders cannot be deﬁned together). However, it is diﬀer-
ent from the principle of complementarity in that the primary
emphasis is now on orders and measures that are relevant to
geometry, rather than on mutually incompatible experimental
arrangements.
It follows from this extension of the principle of relativity that
the idea of space as constituted of a set of unique and well-
deﬁned points, related topologically by a set of neighbourhoods
and metrically by a deﬁnition of distance, is no longer adequate.
Indeed, each set of Euclidean operations E′ deﬁnes such a set of
points, neighbourhoods, measures, etc., which are implicate
relative to those deﬁned by another set E′. The notion of space as
a set of points with a topology and a metric is thus merely an
aspect of a broader totality.
It will be helpful here to introduce a further new usage of
language. In topology one can describe a space as covered by a
complex, constituted of elementary ﬁgures (e.g. triangles or other
basic polygonal cell forms), each of which is called a simplex.
The word ‘plex’ is a form of the Latin ‘plicare’, which, as we
have already seen, means ‘to fold’. So, ‘simplex’ means ‘one-
fold’ and ‘complex’ means ‘folded together’, but in the sense of
many separate objects that are joined to each other.
wholeness and the implicate order
210

To describe the enfolding of an unlimited set of Euclidean
systems of orders and measures into each other, we may then
introduce the word multiplex (which is new in this context). This
means ‘many complexes all folded together’. Literally, this is also
what is meant by ‘manifold’. However, by custom, this last word
has come to mean ‘continuum’. So we are led to use the word
multiplex to call attention to the primary relevance of implicate
order and to the inadequacy of a description in terms of a
continuum.
Thus far, space has generally been considered as a continuum
that can be covered by a complex (which is evidently a form of
explicate ordering of the space). Such a complex can be dis-
cussed in terms of coordinate systems. Thus, each simplex can
be described with the aid of a locally Euclidean frame, and the
whole space can then be treated through the use of a very large
number of overlapping coordinate ‘patches’. Or, alternatively,
one may ﬁnd a single set of curvilinear coordinates that is applic-
able over the entire space. The principle of relativity then states
that all such coordinate systems furnish equivalent frames of
description (i.e. equivalent for the expression of ratio, or reason,
or law).
We can now go on to consider similar sets of operations E and
E′ which are implicate relative to each other. As pointed out
above, we are extending the principle of relativity by supposing
that the orders deﬁned through any two operations E and E′ are
equivalent in the sense that the ‘law of the whole’ is such that
similar structures can be built on each order. To help make clear
what is meant here, we note that the orders of movement that
are directly perceivable to the senses are generally regarded as
explicate, while other orders (such as, for example, those
appropriate to the description of ‘an electron’ in a quantum
context), are taken to be implicate. However, according to the
extended principle of relativity, one can equally well take the
‘electron’ order as explicate and our sensual order as implicate.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 211

This is to put ourselves (metaphorically) in the situation of
‘the electron’ and then to understand the latter by assimilating
oneself to it and it to oneself.
This evidently means a thoroughgoing wholeness in our
thinking. Or, as put earlier, ‘All implicates all’, even to the extent
that ‘we ourselves’ are implicated together with ‘all that we see
and think about’. So we are present everywhere and at all times,
though only implicately (that is, implicitly).
The same is true of every ‘object’. It is only in certain special
orders of description that such objects appear as explicate. The
general law, i.e., holonomy, has to be expressed in all orders, in
which all objects and all times are ‘folded together’.
A.7 Some preliminary suggestions concerning law in
a multiplex
We shall now give a few preliminary suggestions as to the lines
of inquiry into general law as formulated in terms of a multiplex
rather than in terms of a continuum.
We begin by recalling that classical descriptions are relevant
only in a context in which the expression of the law is limited to
a particular sub-algebra corresponding to a given Euclidean sys-
tem of order and measure. If this system is extended to time as
well as space, then such a law can be compatible with special
relativity.
The essential feature of special relativity is that the speed of
light is an invariant limit for the propagation of signals (and
causal inﬂuences). In this connection, we note that a signal will
always be constituted of a certain explicate order of events, and
that in a context in which this explicate order ceases to be rele-
vant, the notion of signal will also cease to be relevant (e.g., if an
order is ‘enfolded’ throughout all of space and time, it cannot
coherently be regarded as constituting a signal that would
propagate information from one place to another over a period
wholeness and the implicate order
212

of time). This means that where implicate order is involved, the
descriptive language of special relativity will, in general, no
longer be applicable.
The general theory of relativity is similar to the special theory,
in that in each region of space–time there is a light cone which
deﬁnes a limiting signal velocity. It is diﬀerent, however, in that
each region has its own local coordinate frame (denoted by m)
related to those of its neighbours (denoted by n) through certain
general linear transformations Tmn. But a local coordinate frame
is, in our point of view, to be regarded as an expression of a
corresponding Euclidean system of order and measure (which
would, for example, generate the lines of the frame in question
as invariant subspaces of the operations E). We therefore con-
sider the Euclidean systems of operations Em and En and the
transformations relating them:
En = TmnEmT−1
mn.
When we consider a series of transformations of these sys-
tems around a closed circuit of patches, we arrive at what is in
mathematical terms called the ‘holonomy group’. In one sense,
this name is appropriate, for this group does determine the char-
acter of the ‘whole space’. Thus, in general relativity, this group
is equivalent to the Lorentz group, which is compatible with the
requirement of an invariant ‘local light cone’. The use of a dif-
ferent group here would of course imply a correspondingly
diﬀerent character to the ‘whole space’.
In another sense, however, it would be better to consider the
group in question as an ‘autonomy group’ rather than as a
‘holonomy group’, for, in general relativity (as well as in a wide
class of modern ﬁeld theories), the general law is invariant to
arbitrary ‘gauge transformations’ of the frames in each region,
Em′ = RmEmR−2
m. The meaning of these transformations can be seen
by considering several neighbouring regions, each containing a
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 213

localized structure, i.e., one which has a negligible connection
with neighbouring structures (so that one may appropriately
regard the space between them as empty, or approximately so).
The signiﬁcance of gauge invariance is then that the laws are
such that any two structures can be transformed independently
of each other, at least within certain limits (e.g., as long as there
is suﬃcient ‘empty space’ between them). An example of such
relative autonomy of structures is that objects that are not too
close can be turned and translated relative to each other. Evi-
dently, it is this particular feature of ‘law of the whole’ (i.e.,
gauge invariance) which allows for relative autonomy of the
kind described above.
As we go on to a quantum context, the ‘law of the whole’
(i.e., the generalization of what is meant by ‘holonomy group’
in Rieman geometry) will involve metamorphosis M as well as
transformations T. This will bring us to the multiplex, in which
new kinds of order and measure will be relevant.
It is important, however, to emphasize that the ‘law of the
whole’ will not just be a transcription of current quantum
theory to a new language. Rather, the entire context of physics
(classical and quantum) will have to be assimilated in a diﬀerent
structure, in which space, time, matter, and movement are
described in new ways. Such assimilation will then lead on to
new avenues to be explored, which cannot even be thought
about in terms of current theories.
We shall here indicate only a few of the many possibilities of
this kind.
First, we recall that we begin with an undeﬁnable total algebra
and take out sub-algebras that are suitable for the description of
certain contexts of physical research. Now, mathematicians have
already worked out certain interesting and potentially relevant
features of such sub-algebras.
Thus, consider a given sub-algebra A. Among its terms Ai,
there may be some AN which are nilpotent, i.e., which have the
wholeness and the implicate order
214

property that some powers of AN (say (AN)s) are zero. Among
these, there is a subset of terms Ap which are properly nilpotent, i.e.
which remain nilpotent when multiplied by any term of the
algebra Ai (so that (AiAp)s = 0).
As an example, consider ﬁrst a cliﬀord algebra, in which every
term is properly nilpotent. However, in a fermionic algebra,
with terms Ci and Cj*, each Ci and Cj* is nilpotent (i.e., (Ci)2 =
(Cj*)2 = 0) but not properly nilpotent (i.e., (Ci* Cj)2 ≠ 0).
One may say that properly nilpotent terms describe move-
ments which ultimately lead to features that vanish. Thus, if we
are seeking to describe invariant and relatively permanent fea-
tures of movement, we should have an algebra that has no prop-
erly nilpotent terms. Such an algebra can always be obtained
from any algebra A by subtracting the properly nilpotent terms
to give what is called the diﬀerence algebra.
We now consider the following theorem.5 Every diﬀerent
algebra can be expressed in terms of products of a matrix algebra
(i.e., an algebra whose rules of multiplication are similar to
those of matrices) and a division algebra (i.e., an algebra in
which the product of two non-zero terms is never zero).
As regards the division algebra, the possible types of these
depend on the ﬁelds over which the numerical coeﬃcients are
taken. If this ﬁeld is that of the real numbers, then there are
exactly three division algebras, the real numbers themselves, an
algebra of order two, which is equivalent to complex numbers,
and the real quaternions. On the other hand, over the ﬁeld of
complex numbers, the only division algebra is that of the com-
plex numbers themselves (this explains why quaternions,
extended to include complex coeﬃcients, become a two-rowed
matrix algebra).
It is signiﬁcant that by mathematizing the general language in
terms of an initially undeﬁned and unspeciﬁed algebra, we
arrive naturally at the sort of algebras used in current quantum
theory for ‘particles with spin’, i.e. products of matrices and
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 215

quaternions. These algebras have in addition, however, a signiﬁ-
cance going beyond that of technical calculations carried out in
the quantum theory. For example, the quaternions imply invari-
ance under a group of transformations similar to rotations in
three-dimensional space (which can be extended in a simple
way to groups similar to the Lorentz group). This indicates that,
in some sense, the key transformations determining the (3 + 1)-
dimensional order of ‘relativist space–time’ are already con-
tained in the holomovement, described through implicate order,
mathematized in terms of algebra.
More precisely, it can be said that, starting from a general
algebraic mathematization of the language and asking for those
features which are relatively permanent or invariant (described
by algebras without properly nilpotent terms) and those features
which are not restricted to a particular scale (described by
algebras whose terms can be multiplied by an arbitrary real
number), we have arrived at transformations determining an
order equivalent to that of relativistic space–time. This means,
however, that if we considered impermanent and non-invariant
features (implying algebras with properly nilpotent terms) and
features that are restricted to particular scales (implying algebras
over the rationals or over ﬁnite number ﬁelds), then entirely new
orders (not reducible at all to (3 + 1)-dimensional order) may
become relevant. It thus becomes clear that there is here a wide
area for possible exploration.
A further area for exploration would be in the development of
a new description combining classical and quantum aspects in a
single or more comprehensive structure of language. Instead of
regarding classical and quantum languages as separate but
related by some sort of correspondence (as is generally done in
current theories), one can, along the lines already indicated in
this appendix, inquire into the possibility of abstracting these as
limiting cases of languages mathematized in terms of broader
algebras. To do this could evidently lead to diﬀerent theories,
wholeness and the implicate order
216

having a new content, going beyond those of both classical and
quantum theories. In this regard, it would be particularly inter-
esting to see if algebraic structures would be discovered which
lead also to relativistic notions as limiting cases (e.g., in terms of
algebras over ﬁnite number ﬁelds, rather than over the reals).
Such theories might be expected to be free of the inﬁnities of
current theories, and to lead to a generally coherent treatment of
the problems that the current theories cannot solve.
quantum theory as an indication of a new order 217

7
THE ENFOLDING-UNFOLDING
UNIVERSE AND
CONSCIOUSNESS
1 INTRODUCTION
Throughout this book the central underlying theme has been the
unbroken wholeness of the totality of existence as an undivided
ﬂowing movement without borders.
It seems clear from the discussion in the previous chapter that
the implicate order is particularly suitable for the understanding
of such unbroken wholeness in ﬂowing movement, for in the
implicate order the totality of existence is enfolded within each
region of space (and time). So, whatever part, element, or aspect
we may abstract in thought, this still enfolds the whole and is
therefore intrinsically related to the totality from which it has
been abstracted. Thus, wholeness permeates all that is being
discussed, from the very outset.
In this chapter we shall give a non-technical presentation
of the main features of the implicate order, ﬁrst as it arises in

physics, and then as it may be extended to the ﬁeld of con-
sciousness, to indicate certain general lines along which it is
possible to comprehend both cosmos and consciousness as a
single unbroken totality of movement.1
2 RÉSUMÉ, CONTRASTING MECHANISTIC ORDER
IN PHYSICS WITH IMPLICATE ORDER
It will be helpful to begin by giving a résumé of some of the
main points that have been made earlier, contrasting the gener-
ally accepted mechanistic order in physics and the implicate
order.
Let us ﬁrst consider the mechanistic order. As indicated in
chapters 1 and 5, the principal feature of this order is that the
world is regarded as constituted of entities which are outside of
each other, in the sense that they exist independently in diﬀerent
regions of space (and time) and interact through forces that do
not bring about any changes in their essential natures. The
machine gives a typical illustration of such a system of order.
Each part is formed (e.g., by stamping or casting) independently
of the others, and interacts with the other parts only through
some kind of external contact. By contrast, in a living organism,
for example, each part grows in the context of the whole, so that
it does not exist independently, nor can it be said that it merely
‘interacts’ with the others, without itself being essentially
aﬀected in this relationship.
As pointed out in chapter 1, physics has become almost totally
committed to the notion that the order of the universe is basic-
ally mechanistic. The most common form of this notion is that
the world is assumed to be constituted of a set of separately
existent, indivisible and unchangeable ‘elementary particles’,
which are the fundamental ‘building blocks’ of the entire uni-
verse. Originally, these were thought to be atoms, but atoms
were eventually divided into electrons, protons and neutrons.
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 219

These latter were thought to be the absolutely unchangeable and
indivisible constituents of all matter, but then, these were in turn
found to be subject to transformation into hundreds of diﬀerent
kinds of unstable particles, and now even smaller particles called
‘quarks’ and ‘partons’ have been postulated to explain these
transformations. Though these have not yet been isolated there
appears to be an unshakable faith among physicists that either
such particles, or some other kind yet to be discovered, will
eventually make possible a complete and coherent explanation of
everything.
The theory of relativity was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant indication in
physics of the need to question the mechanistic order. As
explained in chapter 5, it implied that no coherent concept of an
independently existent particle is possible, neither one in which
the particle would be an extended body, nor one in which it
would be a dimensionless point. Thus, a basic assumption
underlying the generally accepted form of mechanism in physics
has been shown to be untenable.
To meet this fundamental challenge, Einstein proposed that
the particle concept no longer be taken as primary, and that
instead reality be regarded from the very beginning as consti-
tuted of ﬁelds, obeying laws that are consistent with the
requirements of the theory of relativity. A key new idea of this
‘uniﬁed ﬁeld theory’ of Einstein is that the ﬁeld equations be non-
linear. As stated in chapter 5, these equations could have solutions
in the form of localized pulses, consisting of a region of intense
ﬁeld that could move through space stably as a whole, and that
could thus provide a model of the ‘particle’. Such pulses do not
end abruptly but spread out to arbitrarily large distances with
decreasing intensity. Thus the ﬁeld structures associated with
two pulses will merge and ﬂow together in one unbroken
whole. Moreover, when two pulses come close together, the
original particle-like forms will be so radically altered that
there is no longer even a resemblance to a structure consisting
wholeness and the implicate order
220

of two particles. So, in terms of this notion, the idea of a
separately and independently existent particle is seen to be, at
best, an abstraction furnishing a valid approximation only in a
certain limited domain. Ultimately, the entire universe (with
all its ‘particles’, including those constituting human beings,
their laboratories, observing instruments, etc.) has to be under-
stood as a single undivided whole, in which analysis into sep-
arately and independently existent parts has no fundamental
status.
As has been seen in chapter 5, however, Einstein was not able
to obtain a generally coherent and satisfactory formulation of his
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Moreover (and perhaps more important in
the context of our discussion of the mechanistic approach to
physics) the ﬁeld concept, which is his basic starting point, still
retains the essential features of a mechanistic order, for the fun-
damental entities, the ﬁelds, are conceived as existing outside of
each other, at separate points of space and time, and are assumed
to be connected with each other only through external relation-
ships which indeed are also taken to be local, in the sense that
only those ﬁeld elements that are separated by ‘inﬁnitesimal’
distances can aﬀect each other.2
Though the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory was not successful in this
attempt to provide an ultimate mechanistic basis for physics in
terms of the ﬁeld concept, it nevertheless did show in a concrete
way how consistency with the theory of relativity may be
achieved by deriving the particle concept as an abstraction from
an unbroken and undivided totality of existence. Thus, it helped
to strengthen the challenge posed by relativity theory to the
prevailing mechanistic order.
The quantum theory presents, however, a much more serious
challenge to this mechanistic order, going far beyond that
provided by the theory of relativity. As seen in chapter 5, the
key features of the quantum theory that challenge mechanism
are:
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 221

1
Movement is in general discontinuous, in the sense that action
is constituted of indivisible quanta (implying also that an elec-
tron, for example, can go from one state to another, without
passing through any states in between).
2
Entities, such as electrons, can show diﬀerent properties
(e.g., particle-like, wavelike, or something in between),
depending on the environmental context within which they
exist and are subject to observation.
3
Two entities, such as electrons, which initially combine
to form a molecule and then separate, show a peculiar
non-local relationship, which can best be described as a
non-causal connection of elements that are far apart3 (as
demonstrated in the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky and
Rosen4).
It should be added of course that the laws of quantum mechanics
are statistical and do not determine individual future events
uniquely and precisely. This is, of course, diﬀerent from classical
laws, which do in principle determine these events. Such
indeterminism is, however, not a serious challenge to a mech-
anistic order, i.e., one in which the fundamental elements are
independently existent, lying outside each other, and connected
only by external relationships. The fact that (as in a pinball
machine) such elements are related by the rules of chance
(expressed mathematically in terms of the theory of probability)
does not change the basic externality of the elements5 and
so does not essentially aﬀect the question of whether the
fundamental order is mechanistic or not.
The three key features of the quantum theory given do, how-
ever, clearly show the inadequacy of mechanistic notions. Thus,
if all actions are in the form of discrete quanta, the interactions
between diﬀerent entities (e.g., electrons) constitute a single
structure of indivisible links, so that the entire universe has to be
thought of as an unbroken whole. In this whole, each element
wholeness and the implicate order
222

that we can abstract in thought shows basic properties (wave or
particle, etc.) that depend on its overall environment, in a way
that is much more reminiscent of how the organs constituting
living beings are related, than it is of how parts of a machine
interact. Further, the non-local, non-causal nature of the
relationships of elements distant from each other evidently
violates the requirements of separateness and independence of
fundamental constituents that is basic to any mechanistic
approach.
It is instructive at this point to contrast the key features of
relativistic and quantum theories. As we have seen, relativity
theory requires continuity, strict causality (or determinism) and
locality. On the other hand, quantum theory requires non-
continuity, non-causality and non-locality. So the basic concepts
of relativity and quantum theory directly contradict each other.
It is therefore hardly surprising that these two theories have
never been uniﬁed in a consistent way. Rather, it seems most
likely that such a uniﬁcation is not actually possible. What is very
probably needed instead is a qualitatively new theory, from
which both relativity and quantum theory are to be derived as
abstractions, approximations and limiting cases.
The basic notions of this new theory evidently cannot be
found by beginning with those features in which relativity and
quantum theory stand in direct contradition. The best place to
begin is with what they have basically in common. This is
undivided wholeness. Though each comes to such wholeness in
a diﬀerent way, it is clear that it is this to which they are both
fundamentally pointing.
To begin with undivided wholeness means, however, that we
must drop the mechanistic order. But this order has been, for
many centuries, basic to all thinking on physics. As brought out
in chapter 5, the mechanistic order is most naturally and directly
expressed through the Cartesian grid. Though physics has
changed radically in many ways, the Cartesian grid (with minor
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 223

modiﬁcations, such as the use of curvilinear coordinates) has
remained the one key feature that has not changed. Evidently, it
is not easy to change this, because our notions of order are
pervasive, for not only do they involve our thinking but also our
senses, our feelings, our intuitions, our physical movement, our
relationships with other people and with society as a whole and,
indeed, every phase of our lives. It is thus diﬃcult to ‘step back’
from our old notions of order suﬃciently to be able seriously to
consider new notions of order.
To help make it easier to see what is meant by our proposal
of new notions of order that are appropriate to undivided
wholeness, it is therefore useful to start with examples that may
directly involve sense perception, as well as with models and
analogies that illustrate such notions in an imaginative and intui-
tive way. In chapter 6 we began by noting that the photographic
lens is an instrument that has given us a very direct kind of sense
perception of the meaning of the mechanistic order, for by
bringing about an approximate correspondence between points
on the object and points on the photographic image, it very
strongly calls attention to the separate elements into which the
object can be analysed. By making possible the point-to-point
imaging and recording of things that are too small to be seen
with the naked eye, too big, too fast, too slow, etc., it leads us
to believe that eventually everything can be perceived in this
way. From this grows the idea that there is nothing that cannot
also be conceived as constituted of such localized elements. Thus,
the mechanistic approach was greatly encouraged by the
development of the photographic lens.
We then went on to consider a new instrument, called the
hologram. As explained in chapter 6, this makes a photographic
record of the interference pattern of light waves that have come
oﬀ an object. The key new feature of this record is that each part
contains information about the whole object (so that there is no
point-to-point correspondence of object and recorded image).
wholeness and the implicate order
224

That is to say, the form and structure of the entire object may be
said to be enfolded within each region of the photographic record.
When one shines light on any region, this form and structure are
then unfolded to give a recognizable image of the whole object
once again.
We proposed that a new notion of order is involved here,
which we called the implicate order (from a Latin root meaning ‘to
enfold’ or ‘to fold inward’). In terms of the implicate order one
may say that everything is enfolded into everything. This con-
trasts with the explicate order now dominant in physics in which
things are unfolded in the sense that each thing lies only in its own
particular region of space (and time) and outside the regions
belonging to other things.
The value of the hologram in this context is that it may help to
bring this new notion of order to our attention in a sensibly
perceptible way; but of course, the hologram is only an instru-
ment whose function is to make a static record (or ‘snapshot’) of
this order. The actual order itself which has thus been recorded
is in the complex movement of electromagnetic ﬁelds, in the
form of light waves. Such movement of light waves is present
everywhere and in principle enfolds the entire universe of space
(and time) in each region (as can be demonstrated in any such
region by placing one’s eye or a telescope there, which will
‘unfold’ this content).
As pointed out in chapter 6, this enfoldment and unfoldment
takes place not only in the movement of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld but also in that of other ﬁelds, such as the electronic, pro-
tonic, sound waves, etc. There is already a whole host of such
ﬁelds that are known, and any number of additional ones, as yet
unknown, that may be discovered later. Moreover, the movement
is only approximated by the classical concept of ﬁelds (which is
generally used for the explanation of how the hologram works).
More accurately, these ﬁelds obey quantum-mechanical laws,
implying the properties of discontinuity and non-locality,
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 225

which we have already mentioned (and which we shall discuss
again later in this chapter). As we shall see later, even the quan-
tum laws may only be abstractions from still more general laws,
of which only some outlines are now vaguely to be seen. So the
totality of movement of enfoldment and unfoldment may go
immensely beyond what has revealed itself to our observations
thus far.
In chapter 6 we called this totality by the name holomovement.
Our basic proposal was then that what is is the holomovement,
and that everything is to be explained in terms of forms derived
from this holomovement. Though the full set of laws governing
its totality is unknown (and, indeed, probably unknowable)
nevertheless these laws are assumed to be such that from them
may be abstracted relatively autonomous or independent sub-
totalities of movement (e.g., ﬁelds, particles, etc.) having a cer-
tain recurrence and stability of their basic patterns of order and
measure. Such sub-totalities may then be investigated, each in its
own right, without our having ﬁrst to know the full laws of the
holomovement. This implies, of course, that we are not to regard
what we ﬁnd in such investigations as having an absolute and
ﬁnal validity, but rather we have always to be ready to discover
the limits of independence of any relatively autonomous struc-
ture of law, and from this to go on to look for new laws that may
refer to yet larger relatively autonomous domains of this kind.
Up till now we have contrasted implicate and explicate orders,
treating them as separate and distinct, but as suggested in chap-
ter 6, the explicate order can be regarded as a particular or
distinguished case of a more general set of implicate orders from
which latter it can be derived. What distinguishes the explicate
order is that what is thus derived is a set of recurrent and rela-
tively stable elements that are outside of each other. This set of
elements (e.g., ﬁelds and particles) then provides the explana-
tion of that domain of experience in which the mechanistic
order yields an adequate treatment. In the prevailing mechanistic
wholeness and the implicate order
226

approach, however, these elements, assumed to be separately and
independently existent, are taken as constituting the basic reality.
The task of science is then to start from such parts and to derive
all wholes through abstraction, explaining them as the results of
interactions of the parts. On the contrary, when one works in
terms of the implicate order, one begins with the undivided
wholeness of the universe, and the task of science is to derive the
parts through abstraction from the whole, explaining them as
approximately separable, stable and recurrent, but externally
related elements making up relatively autonomous sub-totalities,
which are to be described in terms of an explicate order.
3 THE IMPLICATE ORDER AND THE GENERAL
STRUCTURE OF MATTER
We shall now go on to give a more detailed account of how the
general structure of matter may be understood in terms of the
implicate order. To do this we shall begin by considering once
again the device discussed in chapter 6, which served as an
analogy, illustrating certain essential features of the implicate
order. (It must be emphasized, however, that it is only an analogy
and that, as will be brought out in more detail later, its
correspondence with the implicate order is limited.)
This device consisted of two concentric glass cylinders, with a
highly viscous ﬂuid such as glycerine between them, which is
arranged in such a way that the outer cylinder can be turned very
slowly, so that there is negligible diﬀusion of the viscous ﬂuid. A
droplet of insoluble ink is placed in the ﬂuid, and the outer
cylinder is then turned, with the result that the droplet is drawn
out into a ﬁne thread-like form that eventually becomes
invisible. When the cylinder is turned in the opposite direction
the thread-form draws back and suddenly becomes visible as a
droplet essentially the same as the one that was there originally.
It is worth while to reﬂect carefully on what is actually
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 227

happening in the process described above. First, let us consider
an element of ﬂuid. The parts at larger radii will move faster than
those at smaller radii. Such an element will therefore be
deformed, and this explains why it is eventually drawn out into a
long thread. Now, the ink droplet consists of an aggregate of
carbon particles that are initially suspended in such an element
of ﬂuid. As the element is drawn out the ink particles will be
carried with it. The set of particles will thus spread out over such
a large volume that their density falls below the minimum
threshold that is visible. When the movement is reversed, then
(as is known from the physical laws governing viscous media)
each part of the ﬂuid retraces its path, so that eventually the
thread-like ﬂuid element draws back to its original form. As it
does so, it carries the ink particles with it, so that eventually they,
too, draw together and become dense enough to pass the
threshold of perceptibility, so emerging once again as visible
droplets.
When the ink particles have been drawn out into a long
thread, one can say that they have been enfolded into the glycerine,
as it might be said that an egg can be folded into a cake. Of
course, the diﬀerence is that the droplet can be unfolded by
reversing the motion of the ﬂuid, while there is no way to unfold
the egg (this is because the material here undergoes irreversible
diﬀusive mixing).
The analogy of such enfoldment and unfoldment to the
implicate order introduced in connection with the hologram is
quite good. To develop this analogy further, let us consider two
ink droplets close to each other, and to make visualization easier
we will suppose that the ink particles in one droplet are red,
while those in the other are blue. If the outer cylinder is then
turned, each of the two separate elements of ﬂuid in which the
ink particles are suspended will be drawn out into a thread-like
form, and the two thread-like forms will, while remaining
separate and distinct, weave through each other in a complex
wholeness and the implicate order
228

pattern too ﬁne to be perceptible to the eye (rather like the
interference pattern that is recorded on the hologram, which
has, however, quite a diﬀerent origin). The ink particles in each
droplet will of course be carried along by the ﬂuid motions, but
with each particle remaining in its own thread of ﬂuid. Eventu-
ally, however, in any region that was large enough to be visible
to the eye, red particles from the one droplet and blue particles
from the other will be seen to intermingle, apparently at ran-
dom. When the ﬂuid motions are reversed, however, each
thread-like element of ﬂuid will draw back into itself until even-
tually the two gather into clearly separated regions once again. If
one were able to watch what is happening more closely (e.g.,
with a microscope) one would see red and blue particles that
were close to each other beginning to separate, while particles of
a given colour that were far from each other would begin to
come together. It is almost as if distant particles of a given colour
had ‘known’ that they had a common destiny, separate from that
of particles of the other colour, to which they were close.
Of course, there is in this case actually no such ‘destiny’.
Indeed, we have explained all that has happened mechanically,
through the complex movements of the ﬂuid elements in which
the ink particles are suspended. But we have to recall here that
this device is only an analogy, intended to illustrate a new notion
of order. To allow this new notion to stand out clearly, it is
necessary to begin by focusing our attention on the ink particles
alone, and to set aside the consideration of the ﬂuid in which
they are suspended, at least for the moment. When the sets of ink
particles from each droplet have been drawn out into an invisible
thread, so that particles of both colours intermingle, one can
nevertheless say that as an ensemble each set is, in a certain way,
distinct from the other. This distinction is not in general evident
to the senses, but it has a certain relationship to the total situ-
ation out of which the ensembles have come. This situation
includes the glass cylinders, the viscous ﬂuid and its movements,
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 229

and the original distribution of ink particles. It may then be said
that each ink particle belongs to a certain distinct ensemble and
that it is bound up with the others in this ensemble by the force
of an overall necessity, inherent in this total situation, which can
bring the whole set to a common end (i.e., to reconstitute the
form of a droplet).
In the case of this device, the overall necessity operates
mechanically as the movement of ﬂuid, according to certain
well-known laws of hydrodynamics. As indicated earlier, how-
ever, we will eventually drop this mechanical analogy and go on
to consider the holomovement. In the holomovement, there is
still an overall necessity (which in chapter 6 we called ‘holon-
omy’) but its laws are no longer mechanical. Rather, as pointed
out in section 2 of this chapter, its laws will be in a ﬁrst approxi-
mation those of the quantum theory, while more accurately they
will go beyond even these, in ways that are at present only
vaguely discernible. Nevertheless, certain similar principles of
distinction will prevail in the holomovement as in the analogy of
the device made up of glass cylinders. That is to say, ensembles
of elements which intermingle or inter-penetrate in space can
nevertheless be distinguished, but only in the context of certain
total situations in which the members of each ensemble are
related through the force of an overall necessity, inherent in these
situations, that can bring them together in a speciﬁable way.
Now that we have established a new kind of distinction of
ensembles that are enfolded together in space, we can go on to
put these distinctions into an order. The simplest notion of order
is that of a sequence or succession. We shall start with such a
simple idea and develop it later to much more complex and
subtle notions of order.
As shown in chapter 5, the essence of a simple, sequential
order is in the series of relationships among distinct elements:
A : B :: B : C :: C : D . . . .
wholeness and the implicate order
230

For example, if A represents one segment of a line, B the succeed-
ing one, etc., the sequentiality of segments of the line follows
from the above set of relationships.
Let us now return to our ink-in-ﬂuid analogy, and suppose
that we have inserted into the ﬂuid a large number of droplets,
set close to each other and arranged in a line (this time we do
not suppose diﬀerent colours). These we label as A, B, C, D . . . .
We then turn the outer cylinder many times, so that each of the
droplets gives rise to an ensemble of ink particles, enfolded in
so large a region of space that particles from all the droplets
intermingle. We label the successive ensembles A′, B′, C′, D′. . . .
It is clear that, in some sense, an entire linear order has been
enfolded into the ﬂuid. This order may be expressed through the
relationships
A′ : B′ :: B′ : C′ :: C′ : D′ . . . .
This order is not present to the senses. Yet its reality may be
demonstrated by reversing the motion of the ﬂuid, so that the
ensembles, A′, B′, C′, D′ . . ., will unfold to give rise to the
original linearly arranged series of droplets, A, B, C, D . . . .
In the above, we have taken a pre-existent explicate order,
consisting of ensembles of ink particles arranged along a line,
and transformed it into an order of enfolded ensembles, which
is in some key way similar. We shall next consider a more subtle
kind of order, not derivable from such a transformation.
Suppose now that we insert an ink droplet, A, and turn the
outer cylinder n times. We then insert a second ink droplet, B, at
the same place, and again turn the cylinder n times. We keep up
this procedure with further droplets, C, D, E . . . . The resulting
ensembles of ink particles, a, b, c, d, e, . . ., will now diﬀer in a
new way, for, when the motion of the ﬂuid is reversed, the
ensembles will successively come together to form droplets in
an order opposite to the one in which they were put in. For
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 231

example, at a certain stage the particles of ensemble d will come
together (after which they will be drawn out into a thread
again). This will happen to those of c, then to b, etc. It is clear
from this that ensemble d is related to c as c is to b, and so on. So
these ensembles form a certain sequential order. However, this is
in no sense a transformation of a linear order in space (as was
that of the sequence A′, B′, C′, D′ . . ., that we considered earlier),
for in general only one of these ensembles will unfold at a time;
when any one is unfolded, the rest are still enfolded. In short, we
have an order which cannot all be made explicate at once and
which is nevertheless real, as may be revealed when successive
droplets become visible as the cylinder is turned.
We call this an intrinsically implicate order, to distinguish it from
an order that may be enfolded but which can unfold all at once
into a single explicate order. So we have here an example of how,
as stated in section 2, an explicate order is a particular case of a
more general set of implicate orders.
Let us now go on to combine both of the above-described
types of order.
We ﬁrst insert a droplet, A, in a certain position and turn the
cylinder n times. We then insert a droplet, B, in a slightly diﬀer-
ent position and turn the cylinder n more times (so that A has
been enfolded by 2n turns). We then insert C further along the
line AB and turn n more times, so that A has been enfolded by 3n
turns, B 2n turns, and C by n turns. We proceed in this way to
enfold a large number of droplets. We then move the cylinder
fairly rapidly in the reverse direction. If the rate of emergence of
droplets is faster than the minimum time of resolution of the
human eye, what we will see is apparently a particle moving
continuously and crossing the space.
Such enfoldment and unfoldment in the implicate order may
evidently provide a new model of, for example, an electron,
which is quite diﬀerent from that provided by the current mech-
anistic notion of a particle that exists at each moment only in a
wholeness and the implicate order
232

small region of space and that changes its position continuously
with time. What is essential to this new model is that the elec-
tron is instead to be understood through a total set of enfolded
ensembles, which are generally not localized in space. At any
given moment one of these may be unfolded and therefore local-
ized, but in the next moment, this one enfolds to be replaced by
the one that follows. The notion of continuity of existence is
approximated by that of very rapid recurrence of similar forms,
changing in a simple and regular way (rather as a rapidly spin-
ning bicycle wheel gives the impression of a solid disc, rather
than of a sequence of rotating spokes). Of course, more funda-
mentally, the particle is only an abstraction that is manifest to
our senses. What is is always a totality of ensembles, all present
together, in an orderly series of stages of enfoldment and
unfoldment, which intermingle and inter-penetrate each other
in principle throughout the whole of space.
It is further evident that we could have enfolded any number
of such ‘electrons’, whose forms would have intermingled and
inter-penetrated in the implicate order. Nevertheless, as these
forms unfolded and became manifest to our senses, they would
have come out as a set of ‘particles’ clearly separated from each
other. The arrangement of ensembles could have been such that
these particle-like manifestations came out ‘moving’ independ-
ently in straight lines, or equally well, along curved paths that
were mutually related and dependent, as if there had been a
force of interaction between them. Since classical physics trad-
itionally aims to explain everything in terms of interacting sys-
tems of particles, it is clear that in principle one could equally
well treat the entire domain that is correctly covered by such
classical concepts in terms of our model of ordered sequences of
enfolding and unfolding ensembles.
What we are proposing here is that in the quantum domain
this model is a great deal better than is the classical notion of an
interacting set of particles. Thus, although successive localized
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 233

manifestations of an electron, for example, may be very close to
each other, so that they approximate a continuous track, this
need not always be so. In principle, discontinuities may be
allowed in the manifest tracks – and these may, of course, pro-
vide the basis of an explanation of how, as stated in section 2, an
electron can go from one state to another without passing
through states in between. This is possible, of course, because
the ‘particle’ is only an abstraction of a much greater totality of
structure. This abstraction is what is manifest to our senses (or
instruments) but evidently there is no reason why it has to have
continuous movement (or indeed continuous existence).
Next, if the total context of the process is changed, entirely
new modes of manifestation may arise. Thus, returning to the
ink-in-ﬂuid analogy, if the cylinders are changed, or if obstacles
are placed in the ﬂuid, the form and order of manifestation will
be diﬀerent. Such a dependence – the dependence of what mani-
fests to observation on the total situation – has a close parallel to
a feature which we have also mentioned in section 2, i.e., that
according to the quantum theory electrons may show properties
resembling either those of particles or those of waves (or of
something in between) in accordance with the total situation
involved in which they exist and in which they may be observed
experimentally.
What has been said thus far indicates that the implicate order
gives generally a much more coherent account of the quantum
properties of matter than does the traditional mechanistic order.
What we are proposing here is that the implicate order therefore
be taken as fundamental. To understand this proposal fully, how-
ever, it is necessary to contrast it carefully with what is implied
in a mechanistic approach based on the explicate order; for, even
in terms of this latter approach, it may of course be admitted that
in a certain sense at least, enfoldment and unfoldment can take
place in various speciﬁc situations (e.g., such as that which hap-
pens with the ink droplet). However, this sort of situation is not
wholeness and the implicate order
234

regarded as having a fundamental kind of signiﬁcance. All that is
primary, independently existent, and universal is thought to be
expressible in an explicate order, in terms of elements that are
externally related (and these are usually thought to be particles,
or ﬁelds, or some combination of the two). Whenever enfold-
ment and unfoldment are found actually to take place, it is there-
fore assumed that these can ultimately be explained in terms of
an underlying explicate order through a deeper mechanical
analysis (as, indeed, does happen with the ink-droplet device).
Our proposal to start with the implicate order as basic, then,
means that what is primary, independently existent, and uni-
versal has to be expressed in terms of the implicate order. So we
are suggesting that it is the implicate order that is autonomously
active while, as indicated earlier, the explicate order ﬂows out of
a law of the implicate order, so that it is secondary, derivative,
and appropriate only in certain limited contexts. Or, to put it
another way, the relationships constituting the fundamental law
are between the enfolded structures that interweave and inter-
penetrate each other, throughout the whole of space, rather than
between the abstracted and separated forms that are manifest to
the senses (and to our instruments).
What, then, is the meaning of the appearance of the appar-
ently independent and self-existent ‘manifest world’ in the
explicate order? The answer to this question is indicated by the
root of the word ‘manifest’, which comes from the Latin
‘manus’, meaning ‘hand’. Essentially, what is manifest is what
can be held with the hand – something solid, tangible and vis-
ibly stable. The implicate order has its ground in the holomove-
ment which is, as we have seen, vast, rich, and in a state of
unending ﬂux of enfoldment and unfoldment, with laws most of
which are only vaguely known, and which may even be ultim-
ately unknowable in their totality. Thus it cannot be grasped as
something solid, tangible and stable to the senses (or to our
instruments). Nevertheless, as has been indicated earlier, the
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 235

overall law (holonomy) may be assumed to be such that in
a certain sub-order, within the whole set of implicate order,
there is a totality of forms that have an approximate kind of
recurrence, stability and separability. Evidently, these forms are
capable of appearing as the relatively solid, tangible, and stable
elements that make up our ‘manifest world’. The special dis-
tinguished sub-order indicated above, which is the basis of the
possibility of this manifest world, is then, in eﬀect, what is
meant by the explicate order.
We can, for convenience, always picture the explicate order, or
imagine it, or represent it to ourselves, as the order present to the
senses. The fact that this order is actually more or less the one
appearing to our senses must, however, be explained. This can be
done only when we bring consciousness into our ‘universe of
discourse’ and show that matter in general and consciousness in
particular may, at least in a certain sense, have this explicate
(manifest) order in common. This question will be explored
further when we discuss consciousness in sections 7 and 8.
4 QUANTUM THEORY AS AN INDICATION OF A
MULTIDIMENSIONAL IMPLICATE ORDER
Thus far we have been presenting the implicate order as a pro-
cess of enfoldment and unfoldment taking place in the ordinary
three-dimensional space. However, as pointed out in section 2
the quantum theory has a fundamentally new kind of non-local
relationship, which may be described as a non-causal connec-
tion of elements that are distant from each other, which is
brought out in the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen.6
For our purposes, it is not necessary to go into the technical
details concerning this non-local relationship. All that is impor-
tant here is that one ﬁnds, through a study of the implications of
the quantum theory, that the analysis of a total system into a set
of independently existent but interacting particles breaks down
wholeness and the implicate order
236

in a radically new way. One discovers, instead, both from
consideration of the meaning of the mathematical equations
and from the results of the actual experiments, that the various
particles have to be taken literally as projections of a higher-
dimensional reality which cannot be accounted for in terms of
any force of interaction between them.7
We can obtain a helpful intuitive sense of what is meant by the
notion of projection here, through the consideration of the fol-
lowing device. Let us begin with a rectangular tank full of water,
with transparent walls (see Figure 7.1). Suppose further that
there are two television cameras, A and B, directed at what is
going on in the water (e.g., ﬁsh swimming around) as seen
through the two walls at right angles to each other. Now let the
corresponding television images be made visible on screens A
and B in another room. What we will see there is a certain
relationship between the images appearing on the two screens. For
example, on screen A we may see an image of a ﬁsh, and on
screen B we will see another such image. At any given moment
each image will generally look diﬀerent from the other. Neverthe-
less the diﬀerences will be related, in the sense that when one
image is seen to execute certain movements, the other will be
seen to execute corresponding movements. Moreover, content
that is mainly on one screen will pass into the other, and vice
versa (e.g., when a ﬁsh initially facing camera A turns through a
Figure 7.1
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 237

right angle, the image that was on A is now to be found on B).
Thus at all times the image content on the other screen will
correlate with and reﬂect that of the other.
Of course, we know that the two images do not refer to
independently existent though interacting actualities (in which,
for example, one image could be said to ‘cause’ related changes
in the other). Rather, they refer to a single actuality, which is the
common ground of both (and this explains the correlation of
images without the assumption that they causally aﬀect each
other). This actuality is of higher dimensionality than are the
separate images on the screens; or, to put it diﬀerently, the
images on the screens are two-dimensional projections (or facets)
of a three-dimensional reality. In some sense this three-
dimensional reality holds these two-dimensional projections
within it. Yet, since these projections exist only as abstractions,
the three-dimensional reality is neither of these, but rather it is
something else, something of a nature beyond both.
What we are proposing here is that the quantum property of a
non-local, non-causal relationship of distant elements may be
understood through an extension of the notion described above.
That is to say, we may regard each of the ‘particles’ constituting a
system as a projection of a ‘higher-dimensional’ reality, rather
than as a separate particle, existing together with all the others in
a common three-dimensional space. For example, in the
experiment of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, which we have
mentioned earlier, each of two atoms that initially combine to
form a single molecule are to be regarded as three-dimensional
projections of a six-dimensional reality. This may be demon-
strated experimentally by causing the molecule to disintegrate
and then observing the two atoms after they have separated and
are quite distant from each other, so that they do not interact and
therefore have no causal connections. What is actually found is
that the behaviour of the two atoms is correlated in a way that is
rather similar to that of the two television images of the ﬁsh, as
wholeness and the implicate order
238

described earlier. Thus (as is, indeed, further shown by a more
careful consideration of the mathematical form of the quantum
laws involved here), each electron acts as if it were a projection
of a higher-dimensional reality.
Under certain conditions,8 the two three-dimensional projec-
tions corresponding to the two atoms may have a relative
independence of behaviour. When these conditions are satisﬁed
it will be a good approximation to treat both atoms as relatively
independent but interacting particles, both in the same three-
dimensional space. More generally, however, the two atoms will
show the typical non-local correlation of behaviour which
implies that, more deeply, they are only three-dimensional
projections of the kind described above.
A system constituted of N ‘particles’ is then a 3N-dimensional
reality, of which each ‘particle’ is a three-dimensional projec-
tion. Under the ordinary conditions of our experience, these
projections will be close enough to independence so that it will
be a good approximation to treat them in the way that we usually
do, as a set of separately existing particles all in the same three-
dimensional space. Under other conditions this approximation
will not be adequate. For example, at low temperatures an aggre-
gate of electrons shows a new property of superconductivity, in
which electrical resistance vanishes, so that electric current can
ﬂow indeﬁnitely. This is explained by showing that the electrons
enter a diﬀerent kind of state, in which they are no longer rela-
tively independent. Rather, each electron acts as a projection of a
single higher-dimensional reality and all these projections share
a non-local, non-causal correlation, which is such that they go
round obstacles ‘co-operatively’ without being scattered or dif-
fused, and therefore without resistance. (One could compare
this behaviour to a ballet dance, while the usual behaviour of
electrons could be compared to that of an agitated crowd of
people, moving in a helter-skelter way.)
What follows from all this is that basically the implicate order
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 239

has to be considered as a process of enfoldment and unfoldment
in a higher-dimensional space. Only under certain conditions
can this be simpliﬁed as a process of enfoldment and unfold-
ment in three dimensions. Thus far, we have indeed used this
sort of simpliﬁcation, not only with the ink-in-ﬂuid analogy but
also with the hologram. Such a treatment, though, is only an
approximation, even for the hologram. Indeed, as has already
been pointed out earlier in this chapter, the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, which is the ground of the holographic image, obeys the
laws of the quantum theory, and when these are properly
applied to the ﬁeld it is found that this, too, is actually a multi-
dimensional reality which can only under certain conditions be
simpliﬁed as a three-dimensional reality.
Quite generally, then, the implicate order has to be extended
into a multidimensional reality. In principle this reality is one
unbroken whole, including the entire universe with all its
‘ﬁelds’ and ‘particles’. Thus we have to say that the holomove-
ment enfolds and unfolds in a multidimensional order, the
dimensionality of which is eﬀectively inﬁnite. However, as we
have already seen, relatively independent sub-totalities can gen-
erally be abstracted, which may be approximated as autono-
mous. Thus the principle of relative autonomy of sub-totalities
which we introduced earlier as basic to the holomovement is
now seen to extend to the multidimensional order of reality.
5 COSMOLOGY AND THE IMPLICATE ORDER
From our consideration of how the general structure of matter
can be understood in terms of the implicate order, we now come
to certain new notions of cosmology that are implicit in what is
being done here.
To bring these out, we ﬁrst note that when the quantum
theory is applied to ﬁelds (in the manner discussed in the pre-
vious section) it is found that the possible states of energy of this
wholeness and the implicate order
240

ﬁeld are discrete (or quantized). Such a state of the ﬁeld is, in
some respects, a wavelike excitation spreading out over a broad
region of space. Nevertheless, it also has somehow a discrete
quantum of energy (and momentum) proportional to its fre-
quency, so that in other respects it is like a particle9 (e.g., a
photon). However, if one considers the electromagnetic ﬁeld in
empty space, for example, one ﬁnds from the quantum theory
that each such ‘wave-particle’ mode of excitation of the ﬁeld has
what is called a ‘zero-point’ energy, below which it cannot go,
even when its energy falls to the minimum that is possible. If one
were to add up the energies of all the ‘wave-particle’ modes of
excitation in any region of space, the result would be inﬁnite,
because an inﬁnite number of wavelengths is present. However,
there is good reason to suppose that one need not keep on
adding the energies corresponding to shorter and shorter wave-
lengths. There may be a certain shortest possible wavelength, so
that the total number of modes of excitation, and therefore the
energy, would be ﬁnite.
Indeed, if one applies the rules of quantum theory to the
currently accepted general theory of relativity, one ﬁnds that the
gravitational ﬁeld is also constituted of such ‘wave-particle’
modes, each having a minimum ‘zero-point’ energy. As a result
the gravitational ﬁeld, and therefore the deﬁnition of what is to
be meant by distance, cease to be completely deﬁned. As we keep
on adding excitations corresponding to shorter and shorter
wavelengths to the gravitational ﬁeld, we come to a certain
length at which the measurement of space and time becomes
totally undeﬁnable. Beyond this, the whole notion of space and
time as we know it would fade out, into something that is at
present unspeciﬁable. So it would be reasonable to suppose, at
least provisionally, that this is the shortest wavelength that
should be considered as contributing to the ‘zero-point’ energy
of space.
When this length is estimated it turns out to be about 10−33 cm.
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 241

This is much shorter than anything thus far probed in physical
experiments (which have got down to about 10−17 cm or so). If
one computes the amount of energy that would be in one cubic
centimetre of space, with this shortest possible wavelength, it
turns out to be very far beyond the total energy of all the matter
in the known universe.10
What is implied by this proposal is that what we call empty
space contains an immense background of energy, and that mat-
ter as we know it is a small, ‘quantized’ wavelike excitation on
top of this background, rather like a tiny ripple on a vast sea. In
current physical theories, one avoids the explicit consideration
of this background by calculating only the diﬀerence between
the energy of empty space and that of space with matter in it.
This diﬀerence is all that counts in the determination of the
general properties of matter as they are presently accessible to
observation. However, further developments in physics may
make it possible to probe the above-described background in a
more direct way. Moreover, even at present, this vast sea of
energy may play a key part in the understanding of the cosmos as
a whole.
In this connection it may be said that space, which has so
much energy, is full rather than empty. The two opposing
notions of space as empty and space as full have indeed continu-
ally alternated with each other in the development of philo-
sophical and physical ideas. Thus, in Ancient Greece, the School
of Parmenides and Zeno held that space is a plenum. This view
was opposed by Democritus, who was perhaps the ﬁrst seriously
to propose a world view that conceived of space as emptiness
(i.e., the void) in which material particles (e.g., atoms) are free
to move. Modern science has generally favoured this latter atom-
istic view, and yet, during the nineteenth century, the former
view was also seriously entertained, through the hypothesis of
an ether that ﬁlls all space. Matter, thought of as consisting of
special recurrent stable and separable forms in the ether (such as
wholeness and the implicate order
242

ripples or vortices), would be transmitted through this plenum
as if the latter were empty.
A similar notion is used in modern physics. According to the
quantum theory, a crystal at absolute zero allows electrons to
pass through it without scattering. They go through as if the
space were empty. If the temperature is raised, inhomogeneities
appear, and these scatter electrons. If one were to use such elec-
trons to observe the crystal (i.e. by focusing them with an
electron lens to make an image) what would be visible would
be just the inhomogeneities. It would then appear that the
inhomogeneities exist independently and that the main body of
the crystal was sheer nothingness.
It is being suggested here, then, that what we perceive
through the senses as empty space is actually the plenum, which
is the ground for the existence of everything, including our-
selves. The things that appear to our senses are derivative forms
and their true meaning can be seen only when we consider the
plenum, in which they are generated and sustained, and into
which they must ultimately vanish.
This plenum is, however, no longer to be conceived through
the idea of a simple material medium, such as an ether, which
would be regarded as existing and moving only in a three-
dimensional space. Rather, one is to begin with the holomove-
ment, in which there is the immense ‘sea’ of energy described
earlier. This sea is to be understood in terms of a multidimen-
sional implicate order, along the lines sketched in section 4,
while the entire universe of matter as we generally observe it is
to be treated as a comparatively small pattern of excitation. This
excitation pattern is relatively autonomous and gives rise to
approximately recurrent, stable and separable projections into a
three-dimensional explicate order of manifestation, which is
more or less equivalent to that of space as we commonly
experience it.
With all this in mind let us consider the current generally
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 243

accepted notion that the universe, as we know it, originated in
what is almost a single point in space and time from a ‘big bang’
that happened some ten thousand million years ago. In our
approach this ‘big bang’ is to be regarded as actually just a ‘little
ripple’. An interesting image is obtained by considering that in
the middle of the actual ocean (i.e., on the surface of the Earth)
myriads of small waves occasionally come together fortuitously
with such phase relationships that they end up in a certain small
region of space, suddenly to produce a very high wave which
just appears as if from nowhere and out of nothing. Perhaps
something like this could happen in the immense ocean of cos-
mic energy, creating a sudden wave pulse, from which our ‘uni-
verse’ would be born. This pulse would explode outward and
break up into smaller ripples that spread yet further outward to
constitute our ‘expanding universe’. The latter would have its
‘space’ enfolded within it as a special distinguished explicate and
manifest order.11
In terms of this proposal it follows that the current attempt to
understand our ‘universe’ as if it were self-existent and
independent of the sea of cosmic energy can work at best in
some limited way (depending on how far the notion of a rela-
tively independent sub-totality applies to it). For example, the
‘black holes’ may lead us into an area in which the cosmic
background of energy is important. Also, of course, there may be
many other such expanding universes.
Moreover, it must be remembered that even this vast sea of
cosmic energy takes into account only what happens on a scale
larger than the critical length of 10−33 cm, to which we have
referred earlier. But this length is only a certain kind of limit on
the applicability of ordinary notions of space and time. To sup-
pose that there is nothing beyond this limit at all would indeed
be quite arbitrary. Rather, it is very probable that beyond it lies a
further domain, or set of domains, of the nature of which we
have as yet little or no idea.
wholeness and the implicate order
244

What we have seen thus far is a progression from explicate
order to simple three-dimensional implicate order, then to a
multidimensional implicate order, then to an extension of this
to the immense ‘sea’ in what is sensed as empty space. The next
stage may well lead to yet further enrichment and extension
of the notion of implicate order, beyond the critical limit of
10−33 cm mentioned above; or it may lead to some basically new
notions which could not be comprehended even within the pos-
sible further developments of the implicate order. Nevertheless,
whatever may be possible in this regard, it is clear that we may
assume that the principle of relative autonomy of sub-totalities
continues to be valid. Any sub-totality, including those which
we have thus far considered, may up to a point be studied in its
own right. Thus, without assuming that we have already arrived
even at an outline of absolute and ﬁnal truth, we may at least for
a time put aside the need to consider what may be beyond the
immense energies of empty space, and go on to bring out the
further implications of the sub-totality of order that has revealed
itself thus far.
6 THE IMPLICATE ORDER, LIFE AND THE
FORCE OF OVERALL NECESSITY
In this section we shall bring out the meaning of the implicate
order by ﬁrst showing how it makes possible the comprehension
of both inanimate matter and life on the basis of a single ground,
common to both, and then we shall go on to propose a certain
more general form for the laws of the implicate order.
Let us begin by considering the growth of a living plant. This
growth starts from a seed, but the seed contributes little or noth-
ing to the actual material substance of the plant or to the energy
needed to make it grow. This latter comes almost entirely from
the soil, the water, the air and the sunlight. According to modern
theories the seed contains information, in the form of DNA, and
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 245

this information somehow ‘directs’ the environment to form a
corresponding plant.
In terms of the implicate order, we may say that even
inanimate matter maintains itself in a continual process similar
to the growth of plants. Thus, recalling the ink-in-ﬂuid model of
the electron, we see that such a ‘particle’ is to be understood as a
recurrent stable order of unfoldment in which a certain form
undergoing regular changes manifests again and again, but so
rapidly that it appears to be in continuous existence. We may
compare this to a forest, constituted of trees that are continually
dying and being replaced by new ones. If it is considered on a
long time-scale, this forest may be regarded likewise as a con-
tinuously existent but slowly-changing entity. So when under-
stood through the implicate order, inanimate matter and living
beings are seen to be, in certain key respects, basically similar to
their modes of existence.
When inanimate matter is left to itself the above-described
process of enfoldment and unfoldment just reproduces a similar
form of inanimate matter, but when this is further ‘informed’ by
the seed, it begins to produce a living plant instead. Ultimately,
this latter gives rise to a new seed, which allows the process to
continue after the death of this plant.
As the plant is formed, maintained and dissolved by the
exchange of matter and energy with its environment, at which
point can we say that there is a sharp distinction between what is
alive and what is not? Clearly, a molecule of carbon dioxide that
crosses a cell boundary into a leaf does not suddenly ‘come alive’
nor does a molecule of oxygen suddenly ‘die’ when it is released
to the atmosphere. Rather, life itself has to be regarded as belong-
ing in some sense to a totality, including plant and environment.
It may indeed be said that life is enfolded in the totality and
that, even when it is not manifest, it is somehow ‘implicit’ in
what we generally call a situation in which there is no life. We
can illustrate this by considering the ensemble of all the atoms
wholeness and the implicate order
246

that are now in the environment but that are eventually going to
constitute a plant that will grow from a certain seed. This
ensemble is evidently, in certain key ways, similar to that con-
sidered in section 3, of ink particles forming a droplet. In both
cases the elements of the ensemble are bound together to con-
tribute to a common end (in one case an ink droplet and in the
other case a living plant).
The above does not mean, however, that life can be reduced
completely to nothing more than that which comes out of the
activity of a basis governed by the laws of inanimate matter alone
(though we do not deny that certain features of life may be under-
stood in this way). Rather, we are proposing that as the notion of
the holomovement was enriched by going from three-
dimensional to multidimensional implicate order and then to
the vast ‘sea’ of energy in ‘empty’ space, so we may now enrich
this notion further by saying that in its totality the holomove-
ment includes the principle of life as well. Inanimate matter is
then to be regarded as a relatively autonomous sub-totality in
which, at least as far as we now know, life does not signiﬁcantly
manifest. That is to say, inanimate matter is a secondary, deriva-
tive, and particular abstraction from the holomovement (as
would also be the notion of a ‘life force’ entirely independent of
matter). Indeed, the holomovement which is ‘life implicit’ is the
ground both of ‘life explicit’ and of ‘inanimate matter’, and this
ground is what is primary, self-existent and universal. Thus we
do not fragment life and inanimate matter, nor do we try to
reduce the former completely to nothing but an outcome of the
latter.
Let us now put the above approach in a more general way.
What is basic to the law of the holomovement is, as we have
seen, the possibility of abstraction of a set of relatively autono-
mous sub-totalities. We can now add that the laws of each such
abstracted sub-totality quite generally operate under certain
conditions and limitations deﬁned only in a corresponding total
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 247

situation (or set of similar situations). This operation will in
general have these three key features:
1
A set of implicate orders.
2
A special distinguished case of the above set, which consti-
tutes an explicate order of manifestation.
3
A general relationship (or law) expressing a force of neces-
sity which binds together a certain set of the elements of the
implicate order in such a way that they contribute to a
common explicate end (diﬀerent from that to which
another set of inter-penetrating and intermingling elements
will contribute).
The origin of this force of necessity cannot be understood solely
in terms of the explicate and implicate orders belonging to the
type of situation in question. Rather, at this level, such necessity
has simply to be accepted as inherent in the overall situation
under discussion. An understanding of its origin would take us
to a deeper, more comprehensive and more inward level of rela-
tive autonomy which, however, would also have its implicate
and explicate orders and a correspondingly deeper and more
inward force of necessity that would bring about their trans-
formation into each other.12
In short, we are proposing that this form of the law of a rela-
tively autonomous sub-totality, which is a consistent generaliza-
tion of all the forms that we have studied thus far, is to be
considered as universal; and that in our subsequent work we
shall explore the implicates of such a notion, at least tentatively
and provisionally.
7 CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE IMPLICATE ORDER
At this point it may be said that at least some outlines of our
notions of cosmology and of the general nature of reality have
wholeness and the implicate order
248

been sketched (though, of course, to ‘ﬁll in’ this sketch
with adequate detail would require a great deal of further work
much of which still remains to be done). Let us now consider
how consciousness may be understood in relation to these
notions.
We begin by proposing that in some sense, consciousness
(which we take to include thought, feeling, desire, will, etc.) is
to be comprehended in terms of the implicate order, along with
reality as a whole. That is to say, we are suggesting that the
implicate order applies both to matter (living and non-living)
and to consciousness, and that it can therefore make possible an
understanding of the general relationship of these two, from
which we may be able to come to some notion of a common
ground of both (rather as was also suggested in the previous
section in our discussion of the relationship of inanimate matter
and life).
To obtain an understanding of the relationship of matter and
consciousness has, however, thus far proved to be extremely dif-
ﬁcult, and this diﬃculty has its root in the very great diﬀerence
in their basic qualities as they present themselves in our experi-
ence. This diﬀerence has been expressed with particularly great
clarity by Descartes, who described matter as ‘extended sub-
stance’ and consciousness as ‘thinking substance’. Evidently, by
‘extended substance’ Descartes meant something made up of
distinct forms existing in space, in an order of extension and
separation basically similar to the one that we have been calling
explicate. By using the term ‘thinking substance’ in such sharp
contrast to ‘extended substance’ he was clearly implying that the
various distinct forms appearing in thought do not have their
existence in such an order of extension and separation (i.e.,
some kind of space), but rather in a diﬀerent order, in which
extension and separations have no fundamental signiﬁcance. The
implicate order has just this latter quality, so in a certain sense
Descartes was perhaps anticipating that consciousness has to be
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 249

understood in terms of an order that is closer to the implicate
than it is to the explicate.
However, when we start, as Descartes did, with extension and
separation in space as primary for matter, then we can see noth-
ing in this notion that can serve as a basis for a relationship
between matter and consciousness, whose orders are so diﬀer-
ent. Descartes clearly understood this diﬃculty and indeed pro-
posed to resolve it by means of the idea that such a relationship
is made possible by God, who being outside of and beyond
matter and consciousness (both of which He has indeed created)
is able to give the latter ‘clear and distinct notions’ that are
currently applicable to the former. Since then, the idea that God
takes care of this requirement has generally been abandoned,
but it has not commonly been noticed that thereby the possibil-
ity of comprehending the relationship between matter and
consciousness has collapsed.
In this chapter, we have, however, shown in some detail that
matter as a whole can be understood in terms of the notion that
the implicate order is the immediate and primary actuality
(while the explicate order can be derived as a particular, dis-
tinguished case of the implicate order). The question that arises
here, then, is that of whether or not (as was in a certain sense
anticipated by Descartes) the actual ‘substance’ of consciousness
can be understood in terms of the notion that the implicate
order is also its primary and immediate actuality. If matter and
consciousness could in this way be understood together, in
terms of the same general notion of order, the way would be
opened to comprehending their relationship on the basis of
some common ground.13 Thus we could come to the germ of a
new notion of unbroken wholeness, in which consciousness is
no longer to be fundamentally separated from matter.
Let us now consider what justiﬁcation there is for the notion
that matter and consciousness have the implicate order in com-
mon. First, we note that matter in general is, in the ﬁrst instance,
wholeness and the implicate order
250

the object of our consciousness. However, as we have seen
throughout this chapter, various energies such as light, sound,
etc., are continually enfolding information in principle concern-
ing the entire universe of matter into each region of space.
Through this process, such information may of course enter our
sense organs, to go on through the nervous system to the brain.
More deeply, all the matter in our bodies, from the very ﬁrst,
enfolds the universe in some way. Is this enfolded structure,
both of information and of matter (e.g., in the brain and nervous
system), that which primarily enters consciousness?
Let us ﬁrst consider the question of whether information is
actually enfolded in the brain cells. Some light on this question is
aﬀorded by certain work on brain structure, notably that of Pri-
bram.14 Pribram has given evidence backing up his suggestion
that memories are generally recorded all over the brain in such a
way that information concerning a given object or quality is not
stored in a particular cell or localized part of the brain but rather
that all the information is enfolded over the whole. This storage
resembles a hologram in its function, but its actual structure is
much more complex. We can then suggest that when the ‘holo-
graphic’ record in the brain is suitably activated, the response is
to create a pattern of nervous energy constituting a partial
experience similar to that which produced the ‘hologram’ in the
ﬁrst place. But it is also diﬀerent in that it is less detailed, in that
memories from many diﬀerent times may merge together, and
in that memories may be connected by association and by logical
thought to give a certain further order to the whole pattern. In
addition, if sensory data is also being attended to at the same
time, the whole of this response from memory will, in general,
fuse with the nervous excitation coming from the senses to give
rise to an overall experience in which memory, logic, and
sensory activity combine into a single unanalysable whole.
Of course, consciousness is more than what has been
described above. It also involves awareness, attention, perception,
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 251

acts of understanding, and perhaps yet more. We have suggested
in the ﬁrst chapter that these must go beyond a mechanistic
response (such as that which the holographic model of brain
function would by itself imply). So in studying them we may be
coming closer to the essence of actual conscious experience than
is possible merely by discussing patterns of excitation of the
sensory nerves and how they may be recorded in memory.
It is diﬃcult to say much about faculties as subtle as these.
However, by reﬂecting on and giving careful attention to what
happens in certain experiences, one can obtain valuable clues.
Consider, for example, what takes place when one is listening to
music. At a given moment a certain note is being played but a
number of the previous notes are still ‘reverberating’ in con-
sciousness. Close attention will show that it is the simultaneous
presence and activity of all these reverberations that is respon-
sible for the direct and immediately felt sense of movement, ﬂow
and continuity. To hear a set of notes so far apart in time that
there is no such reverberation will destroy altogether the sense
of a whole unbroken, living movement that gives meaning and
force to what is heard.
It is clear from the above that one does not experience the
actuality of this whole movement by ‘holding on’ to the past,
with the aid of a memory of the sequence of notes, and compar-
ing this past with the present. Rather, as one can discover by
further attention, the ‘reverberations’ that make such an experi-
ence possible are not memories but are rather active transformations
of what came earlier, in which are to be found not only a gener-
ally diﬀused sense of the original sounds, with an intensity that
falls oﬀ, according to the time elapsed since they were picked up
by the ear, but also various emotional responses, bodily sensa-
tions, incipient muscular movements, and the evocation of a
wide range of yet further meanings, often of great subtlety. One
can thus obtain a direct sense of how a sequence of notes is
enfolding into many levels of consciousness, and of how at any
wholeness and the implicate order
252

given moment, the transformations ﬂowing out of many such
enfolded notes inter-penetrate and intermingle to give rise to an
immediate and primary feeling of movement.
This activity in consciousness evidently constitutes a striking
parallel to the activity that we have proposed for the implicate
order in general. Thus in section 3, we have given a model of an
electron in which, at any instant, there is a co-present set of
diﬀerently transformed ensembles which inter-penetrate and
intermingle in their various degrees of enfoldment. In such
enfoldment, there is a radical change, not only of form but also
of structure, in the entire set of ensembles (which change we
have, in chapter 6, called a metamorphosis); and yet, a certain
totality of order in the ensembles remains invariant, in the sense
that in all these changes a subtle but fundamental similarity of
order is preserved.15
In the music, there is, as we have seen, a basically similar
transformation (of notes) in which a certain order can also be
seen to be preserved. The key diﬀerence in these two cases is that
for our model of the electron an enfolded order is grasped in
thought, as the presence together of many diﬀerent but inter-
related degrees of transformations of ensembles, while for the
music, it is sensed immediately as the presence together of many
diﬀerent but interrelated degrees of transformations of tones
and sounds. In the latter, there is a feeling of both tension and
harmony between the various co-present transformations, and
this feeling is indeed what is primary in the apprehension of the
music in its undivided state of ﬂowing movement.
In listening to music, one is therefore directly perceiving an implicate
order. Evidently this order is active in the sense that it continually
ﬂows into emotional, physical, and other responses, that are
inseparable from the transformations out of which it is
essentially constituted.
A similar notion can be seen to be applicable for vision. To
bring this out, consider the sense of motion that arises when one
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 253

is watching the cinema screen. What is actually happening is that
a series of images, each slightly diﬀerent, is being ﬂashed on the
screen. If the images are separated by long intervals of time, one
does not get a feeling of continuous motion, but rather, one sees
a series of disconnected images perhaps accompanied by a sense
of jerkiness. If, however, the images are close enough together
(say a hundredth of a second) one has a direct and immediate
experience, as if from a continuously moving and ﬂowing
reality, undivided and without a break.
This point can be brought out even more clearly by consider-
ing a well-known illusion of movement, produced with the aid
of a stroboscopic device, illustrated in Figure 7.2.
Two discs, A and B, enclosed in a bulb, can be caused to give oﬀ
light by means of electrical excitation. The light is made to ﬂash
on and oﬀ so rapidly that it appears to be continuous, but in
each ﬂash it is arranged that B will come on slightly later than A.
What one actually feels is a sense of ‘ﬂowing movement’
between A and B, but that paradoxically nothing is ﬂowing out
of B (contrary to what would be expected if there had been a
real process of ﬂow). This means that a sense of ﬂowing move-
ment is experienced when, on the retina of the eye, there are
two images in neighbouring positions one of which comes on
slightly later than the other. (Closely related to this is the fact
that a blurred photograph of a speeding car, containing a
sequence of overlaid images in slightly diﬀerent positions,
conveys to us a much more immediate and vivid sense of
Figure 7.2
wholeness and the implicate order
254

movement than does a sharp picture, taken with a high-speed
camera.)
It seems evident that the sense of unbroken movement
described above is basically similar to that arising from a
sequence of musical notes. The main diﬀerence between music
and visual images, in this regard, is that the latter may arrive so
close together in time that they cannot be resolved in conscious-
ness. Nevertheless, it is clear that visual images must also
undergo active transformation as they ‘enfold’ into the brain and
nervous system (e.g., they give rise to emotional, physical and
other more subtle responses of which one may be only dimly
conscious as well as to ‘after images’ that are in certain ways
similar to the reverberations in musical notes). Even though the
time diﬀerence of two such images may be small, the examples
cited above make it clear that a sense of movement is experi-
enced through the intermingling and inter-penetration of the
co-present transformations to which these images must give rise
as they penetrate the brain and nervous system.
All of this suggests that quite generally (and not merely for
the special case of listening to music), there is a basic similarity
between the order of our immediate experience of movement
and the implicate order as expressed in terms of our thought. We
have in this way been brought to the possibility of a coherent
mode of understanding the immediate experience of motion in
terms of our thought (in eﬀect thus resolving Zeno’s paradox
concerning motion).
To see how this comes about, consider how motion is usually
thought of, in terms of a series of points along a line. Let us
suppose that at a certain time t1, a particle is at a position x1,
while at a later time t2, it is at another position x2. We then say
that this particle is moving and that its velocity is
ν = x2 −x1
t2 −t1
.
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 255

Of course, this way of thinking does not in any way reﬂect or
convey the immediate sense of motion that we may have at a
given moment, for example, with a sequence of musical notes
reverberating in consciousness (or in the visual perception of a
speeding car). Rather, it is only an abstract symbolization of
movement, having a relation to the actuality of motion, similar
to that between a musical score and the actual experience of the
music itself.
If, as is commonly done, we take the above abstract sym-
bolization as a faithful representation of the actuality of
movement we become entangled in a series of confused and
basically insoluble problems. These all have to do with the
image in which we represent time, as if it were a series of points
along a line that are somehow all present together, either to
our conceptual gaze or perhaps to that of God. Our actual
experience is, however, that when a given moment, say t2, is
present and actual, an earlier moment, such as t1, is past. That
is to say, it is gone, non-existent, never to return. So if we say
that the velocity of a particular now (at t2) is (x2 − x1)/(t2 − t1)
we are trying to relate what is (i.e., x2 and t2) to what is not (i.e.,
x1 and t1). We can of course do this abstractly and symbolically (as
is, indeed, the common practice in science and mathematics),
but the further fact, not comprehended in this abstract sym-
bolism, is that the velocity now is active now (e.g., it determines
how a particle will act from now on, in itself, and in relation
to other particles). How are we to understand the present activ-
ity of a position (x1) that is now non-existent and gone for
ever?
It is commonly thought that this problem is resolved by the
diﬀerential calculus. What is done here is to let the time interval,
∆t = t2−t1 become vanishingly small, along with ∆x = x2−x1. The
velocity now is deﬁned as the limit of the ratio ∆x/∆t as ∆t
approaches zero. It is then implied that the problem described
above no longer arises, because x2 and x1 are in eﬀect taken at the
wholeness and the implicate order
256

same time. They may thus be present together and related in an
activity that depends on both.
A little reﬂection shows, however, that this procedure is still as
abstract and symbolic as was the original one in which the time
interval was taken as ﬁnite. Thus one has no immediate experi-
ence of a time interval of zero length, nor can one see in terms of
reﬂective thought what this could mean.
Even as an abstract formalism, this approach is not fully con-
sistent in a logical sense, nor does it have a universal range of
applicability. Indeed, it applies only within the area of continuous
movements and then only as a technical algorithm that happens
to be correct for this sort of movement. As we have seen, how-
ever, according to the quantum theory, movement is not funda-
mentally continuous. So even as an algorithm its current ﬁeld of
application is limited to theories expressed in terms of classical
concepts (i.e., in the explicate order) in which it provides a good
approximation for the purpose of calculating the movements of
material objects.
When we think of movement in terms of the implicate
order,16 however, these problems do not arise. In this order,
movement is comprehended in terms of a series of inter-
penetrating and intermingling elements in diﬀerent degrees of
enfoldment all present together. The activity of this movement then
presents no diﬃculty, because it is an outcome of this whole
enfolded order, and is determined by relationships of co-present
elements, rather than by the relationships of elements that exist
to others that no longer exist.
We see, then, that through thinking in terms of the implicate
order, we come to a notion of movement that is logically coher-
ent and that properly represents our immediate experience of
movement. Thus the sharp break between abstract logical
thought and concrete immediate experience, that has pervaded
our culture for so long, need no longer be maintained. Rather,
the possibility is created for an unbroken ﬂowing movement
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 257

from immediate experience to logical thought and back, and
thus for an ending to this kind of fragmentation.
Moreover we are now able to understand in a new and more
consistent way our proposed notion concerning the general
nature of reality, that what is is movement. Actually, what tends to
make it diﬃcult for us to work in terms of this notion is that we
usually think of movement in the traditional way as an active
relationship of what is to what is not. Our traditional notion
concerning the general nature of reality would then amount to
saying that what is is an active relationship of what is to what is
not. To say this is, at the very least, confused. In terms of the
implicate order, however, movement is a relationship of certain
phases of what is to other phases of what is, that are in diﬀerent
stages of enfoldment. This notion implies that the essence of
reality as a whole is the above relationship among the various
phases in diﬀerent stages of enfoldment (rather than, for
example, a relationship between various particles and ﬁelds that
are all explicate and manifest).
Of course, actual movement involves more than the mere
immediate intuitive sense of unbroken ﬂow, which is our mode
of directly experiencing the implicate order. The presence of
such a sense of ﬂow generally implies further that, in the next
moment, the state of aﬀairs will actually change – i.e., it will be
diﬀerent. How are we to understand this fact of experience in
terms of the implicate order?
A valuable clue is provided by reﬂecting on and giving careful
attention to what happens when, in our thinking, we say that
one set of ideas implies an entirely diﬀerent set. Of course, the
word ‘imply’ has the same root as the word ‘implicate’ and thus
also involves the notion of enfoldment. Indeed, by saying that
something is implicit we generally mean more than merely to say
that this thing is an inference following from something else
through the rules of logic. Rather, we usually mean that from
many diﬀerent ideas and notions (of some of which we are
wholeness and the implicate order
258

explicitly conscious) a new notion emerges that somehow brings
all these together in a concrete and undivided whole.
We see, then, that each moment of consciousness has a certain
explicit content, which is a foreground, and an implicit content,
which is a corresponding background. We now propose that not
only is immediate experience best understood in terms of the
implicate order, but that thought also is basically to be compre-
hended in this order. Here we mean not just the content of
thought for which we have already begun to use the implicate
order. Rather, we also mean that the actual structure, function and
activity of thought is in the implicate order. The distinction
between implicit and explicit in thought is thus being taken here
to be essentially equivalent to the distinction between implicate
and explicate in matter in general.
To help clarify what this means, let us recall brieﬂy the basic
form of the law of a sub-totality (discussed in sections 3 and 6),
i.e., that the enfolded elements of a characteristic ensemble (e.g.,
of ink particles or of atoms) that are going to constitute the next
stage of enfoldment are bound by a force of overall necessity,
which brings them together, to contribute to a common end that
emerges in the next phase of the process under discussion. Simi-
larly, we propose that the ensemble of elements enfolded in the
brain and nervous system that are going to constitute the next
stage of development of a line of thought are likewise bound
through a force of overall necessity, which brings them together
to contribute to the common notion that emerges in the next
moment of consciousness.
In this study, we have been using the idea that consciousness
can be described in terms of a series of moments. Attention
shows that a given moment cannot be ﬁxed exactly in relation to
time (e.g., by the clock) but rather, that it covers some vaguely
deﬁned and somewhat variable extended period of duration. As
pointed out earlier, each moment is experienced directly in the
implicate order. We have further seen that through the force of
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 259

necessity in the overall situation, one moment gives rise to the
next, in which content that was previously implicate is now
explicate while the previous explicate content has become
implicate (e.g., as happened in the analogy of the ink droplets).
The continuation of the above process gives an account of
how change takes place from one moment to another. In principle,
the change in any moment may be a fundamental and radical
transformation. However, experience shows that in thought (as
in matter in general) there is usually a great deal of recurrence
and stability leading to the possibility of relatively independent
sub-totalities.
In any such sub-totality, there is the possibility of the con-
tinuation of a certain line of thought that enfolds in a fairly
regularly changing way. Evidently, the precise character of such
a sequence of thoughts, as it enfolds from one moment to the
next, will generally depend on the content of the implicate order
in earlier moments. For example, a moment containing a sense
of movement tends quite generally to be followed by a change in
the next moment which is greater the stronger the sense of
movement that was originally present (so that, as in the case of
the stroboscopic device discussed earlier, when this does not
happen we feel that something surprising or paradoxical is
taking place).
As in our discussion of matter in general, it is now necessary
to go into the question of how in consciousness the explicate
order is what is manifest. As observation and attention show
(keeping in mind that the word ‘manifest’ means that which is
recurrent, stable and separable) the manifest content of con-
sciousness is based essentially on memory, which is what allows
such content to be held in a fairly constant form. Of course, to
make possible such constancy it is also necessary that this con-
tent be organized, not only through relatively ﬁxed associations
but also with the aid of the rules of logic, and of our basic
categories of space, time, causality, universality, etc. In this way
wholeness and the implicate order
260

an overall system of concepts and mental images may be
developed, which is a more or less faithful representation of the
‘manifest world’.
The process of thought is not, however, merely a representation
of the manifest world; rather, it makes an important contribution to
how we experience this world, for, as we have already pointed
out earlier, this experience is a fusion of sensory information
with the ‘replay’ of some of the content of memory (which
latter contains thought built into its very form and order). In
such experience, there will be a strong background of recurrent,
stable, and separable features, against which the transitory and
changing aspects of the unbroken ﬂow of experience will be
seen as ﬂeeting impressions that tend to be arranged and
ordered mainly in terms of the vast totality of the relatively static
and fragmented content of recordings from the past.
One can, in fact, adduce a considerable amount of scientiﬁc
evidence showing how much of our conscious experience is a
construction based on memory organized through thought, in
the general way described above.17 To go into this subject in
detail would, however, carry us too far aﬁeld. It may nevertheless
be useful here to mention that Piaget18 has made it clear that a
consciousness of what to us is the familiar order of space, time,
causality, etc. (which is essentially what we have been calling the
explicate order) operates only to a small extent in the earliest
phases of life of the human individual. Rather, as he shows from
careful observations, for the most part infants learn this content
ﬁrst in the area of sensori-motor experience, and later as they
grow older they connect such experience with its expression in
language and logic. On the other hand, there seems to be an
immediate awareness of movement from the very earliest.
Recalling that movement is sensed primarily in the implicate
order, we see that Piaget’s work supports the notion that the
experiencing of the implicate order is fundamentally much
more immediate and direct than is that of the explicate order,
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 261

which, as we have pointed out above, requires a complex
construction that has to be learned.
One reason why we do not generally notice the primacy of
the implicate order is that we have become so habituated to the
explicate order, and have emphasized it so much in our thought
and language, that we tend strongly to feel that our primary
experience is of that which is explicate and manifest. However,
another reason, perhaps more important, is that the activation of
memory recordings whose content is mainly that which is
recurrent, stable, and separable, must evidently focus our
attention very strongly on what is static and fragmented.
This then contributes to the formation of an experience in
which these static and fragmented features are often so intense
that the more transitory and subtle features of the unbroken ﬂow
(e.g., the ‘transformations’ of musical notes) generally tend to
pale into such seeming insigniﬁcance that one is, at best, only
dimly conscious of them. Thus, an illusion may arise in which
the manifest static and fragmented content of consciousness is
experienced as the very basis of reality and from this illusion one
may apparently obtain a proof of the correctness of that mode of
thought in which this content is taken to be fundamental.19
8 MATTER, CONSCIOUSNESS AND THEIR
COMMON GROUND
At the beginning of the previous section we suggested that mat-
ter and consciousness can both be understood in terms of the
implicate order. We shall now show how the notions of impli-
cate order that we have developed in connection with con-
sciousness may be related to those concerning matter, to make
possible an understanding of how both may have a common
ground.
We begin by noting that (as pointed out in chapters 1 and 5)
current relativistic theories in physics describe the whole of
wholeness and the implicate order
262

reality in terms of a process whose ultimate element is a point
event, i.e., something happening in a relatively small region of
space and time. We propose instead that the basic element be a
moment which, like the moment of consciousness, cannot be pre-
cisely related to measurements of space and time, but rather
covers a somewhat vaguely deﬁned region which is extended in
space and has duration in time. The extent and duration of a
moment may vary from something very small to something very
large, according to the context under discussion (even a particu-
lar century may be a ‘moment’ in the history of mankind). As
with consciousness, each moment has a certain explicate order,
and in addition it enfolds all the others, though in its own way.
So the relationship of each moment in the whole to all the others
is implied by its total content: the way in which it ‘holds’ all the
others enfolded within it.
In certain ways this notion is similar to Leibniz’s idea of
monads, each of which ‘mirrors’ the whole in its own way,
some in great detail and others rather vaguely. The diﬀerence is
that Leibniz’s monads had a permanent existence, whereas our
basic elements are only moments and are thus not permanent.
Whitehead’s idea of ‘actual occasions’ is closer to the one pro-
posed here, the main diﬀerence being that we use the implicate
order to express the qualities and relationships of our moments,
whereas Whitehead does this in a rather diﬀerent way.
We now recall that the laws of the implicate order are such
that there is a relatively independent, recurrent, stable sub-
totality which constitutes the explicate order, and which, of
course, is basically the order that we commonly contact in
common experience (extended in certain ways by our scientiﬁc
instruments). This order has room in it for something like
memory, in the sense that previous moments generally leave a
trace (usually enfolded) that continues in later moments, though
this trace may change and transform almost without limit. From
this trace (e.g., in the rocks) it is in principle possible for us to
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 263

unfold an image of past moments, similar in certain ways, to
what actually happened; and by taking advantage of such traces,
we design instruments such as photographic cameras, tape
recorders, and computer memories, which are able to register
actual moments in such a way that much more of the content of
what has happened can be made directly and immediately
accessible to us than is generally possible from natural traces
alone.
One may indeed say that our memory is a special case of the
process described above, for all that is recorded is held enfolded
within the brain cells and these are part of matter in general. The
recurrence and stability of our own memory as a relatively
independent sub-totality is thus brought about as part of the
very same process that sustains the recurrence and stability in the
manifest order of matter in general.
It follows, then, that the explicate and manifest order of con-
sciousness is not ultimately distinct from that of matter in gen-
eral. Fundamentally these are essentially diﬀerent aspects of the
one overall order. This explains a basic fact that we have pointed
out earlier – that the explicate order of matter in general is also
in essence the sensuous explicate order that is presented in
consciousness in ordinary experience.
Not only in this respect but, as we have seen, also in a wide
range of other important respects, consciousness and matter in
general are basically the same order (i.e., the implicate order as a
whole). As we have indicated earlier this order is what makes a
relationship between the two possible; but more speciﬁcally,
what are we to say about the nature of this relationship?
We may begin by considering the individual human being as
a relatively independent sub-totality, with a suﬃcient recurrence
and stability of his total process (e.g., physical, chemical, neuro-
logical, mental, etc.) to enable him to subsist over a certain
period of time. In this process we know it to be a fact that the
physical state can aﬀect the content of consciousness in many
wholeness and the implicate order
264

ways. (The simplest case is that we can become conscious of
neural excitations as sensations.) Vice versa, we know that the
content of consciousness can aﬀect the physical state (e.g., from
a conscious intention nerves may be excited, muscles may move,
the heart-beat change, along with alterations of glandular
activity, blood chemistry, etc.).
This connection of the mind and body has commonly been
called psychosomatic (from the Greek ‘psyche’, meaning ‘mind’
and ‘soma’, meaning ‘body’). This word is generally used, how-
ever, in such a way as to imply that mind and body are separately
existent but connected by some sort of interaction. Such a mean-
ing is not compatible with the implicate order. In the implicate
order we have to say that mind enfolds matter in general and
therefore the body in particular. Similarly, the body enfolds not
only the mind but also in some sense the entire material uni-
verse. (In the manner explained earlier in this section, both
through the senses and through the fact that the constituent
atoms of the body are actually structures that are enfolded in
principle throughout all space.)
This kind of relationship has in fact already been encountered
in section 4, where we introduced the notion of a higher-
dimensional reality which projects into lower-dimensional elem-
ents that have not only a non-local and non-causal relationship
but also just the sort of mutual enfoldment that we have sug-
gested for mind and body. So we are led to propose further that
the more comprehensive, deeper, and more inward actuality is
neither mind nor body but rather a yet higher-dimensional
actuality, which is their common ground and which is of a
nature beyond both. Each of these is then only a relatively
independent sub-totality and it is implied that this relative
independence derives from the higher-dimensional ground in
which mind and body are ultimately one (rather as we ﬁnd that
the relative independence of the manifest order derives from the
ground of the implicate order).
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 265

In this higher-dimensional ground the implicate order pre-
vails. Thus, within this ground, what is is movement which is
represented in thought as the co-presence of many phases of the
implicate order. As happens with the simpler forms of the impli-
cate order considered earlier, the state of movement at one
moment unfolds through a more inward force of necessity
inherent in this overall state of aﬀairs, to give rise to a new state
of aﬀairs in the next moment. The projections of the higher-
dimensional ground, as mind and body, will in the later
moment both be diﬀerent from what they were in the earlier
moment, though these diﬀerences will of course be related. So
we do not say that mind and body causally aﬀect each other, but
rather that the movements of both are the outcome of related
projections of a common higher-dimensional ground.
Of course, even this ground of mind and body is limited. At
the very least we have evidently to include matter beyond the
body if we are to give an adequate account of what actually
happens and this must eventually include other people, going on
to society and to mankind as a whole. In doing this, however, we
will have to be careful not to slip back into regarding the various
elements of any given total situation as having anything more
than relative independence. In a deeper and generally more suit-
able way of thinking, each of these elements is a projection, in a
sub-totality of yet higher ‘dimension’. So it will be ultimately
misleading and indeed wrong to suppose, for example, that each
human being is an independent actuality who interacts with
other human beings and with nature. Rather, all these are projec-
tions of a single totality. As a human being takes part in the
process of this totality, he is fundamentally changed in the very
activity in which his aim is to change that reality which is the
content of his consciousness. To fail to take this into account
must inevitably lead one to serious and sustained confusion in all
that one does.
From the side of mind we can also see that it is necessary to go
wholeness and the implicate order
266

on to a more inclusive ground. Thus, as we have seen, the easily
accessible explicit content of consciousness is included within a
much greater implicit (or implicate) background. This in turn
evidently has to be contained in a yet greater background which
may include not only neuro-physiological processes at levels of
which we are not generally conscious but also a yet greater
background of unknown (and indeed ultimately unknowable)
depths of inwardness that may be analogous to the ‘sea’ of
energy that ﬁlls the sensibly perceived ‘empty’ space.20
Whatever may be the nature of these inward depths of con-
sciousness, they are the very ground, both of the explicit content
and of that content which is usually called implicit. Although
this ground may not appear in ordinary consciousness, it may
nevertheless be present in a certain way. Just as the vast ‘sea’ of
energy in space is present to our perception as a sense of empti-
ness or nothingness so the vast ‘unconscious’ background of
explicit consciousness with all its implications is present in a
similar way. That is to say, it may be sensed as an emptiness, a
nothingness, within which the usual content of consciousness is
only a vanishingly small set of facets.
Let us now consider brieﬂy what may be said about time in
this total order of matter and consciousness.
First, it is well known that, as directly sensed and experienced
in consciousness, time is highly variable and relative to condi-
tions (e.g., a given period may be felt to be short or long by
diﬀerent people, or even by the same person, according to the
interests of the diﬀerent people concerned). On the other hand it
seems in common experience that physical time is absolute and
does not depend on conditions. However, one of the most
important implications of the theory of relativity is that physical
time is in fact relative, in the sense that it may vary according to
the speed of the observer. (This variation is, however, signiﬁcant
only as we approach the speed of light and is quite negligible in
the domain of ordinary experience.) What is crucial in the
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 267

present context is that, according to the theory of relativity, a
sharp distinction between space and time can not be maintained
(except as an approximation, valid at velocities small compared
with that of light). Thus, since the quantum theory implies that
elements that are separated in space are generally non-causally
and non-locally related projections of a higher-dimensional
reality, it follows that moments separated in time are also such
projections of this reality.
Evidently, this leads to a fundamentally new notion of the
meaning of time. Both in common experience and in physics,
time has generally been considered to be a primary, independ-
ent and universally applicable order, perhaps the most funda-
mental one known to us. Now, we have been led to propose that
it is secondary and that, like space (see section 5), it is to be
derived from a higher-dimensional ground, as a particular order.
Indeed, one can further say that many such particular inter-
related time orders can be derived for diﬀerent sets of sequences
of moments, corresponding to material systems that travel at
diﬀerent speeds. However, these are all dependent on a multi-
dimensional reality that cannot be comprehended fully in terms
of any time order, or set of such orders.
Similarly, we are led to propose that this multidimensional
reality may project into many orders of sequences of moments
in consciousness. Not only do we have in mind here the relativ-
ity of psychological time discussed above, but also much more
subtle implications. Thus, for example, people who know each
other well may separate for a long time (as measured by the
sequence of moments registered by a clock) and yet they are
often able to ‘take up from where they left oﬀ’ as if no time had
passed. What we are proposing here is that sequences of
moments that ‘skip’ intervening spaces are just as allowable
forms of time as those which seem continuous.21
The fundamental law, then, is that of the immense multi-
dimensional ground; and the projections from this ground
wholeness and the implicate order
268

determine whatever time orders there may be. Of course, this
law may be such that in certain limiting cases the order of
moments corresponds approximately to what would be deter-
mined by a simple causal law. Or, in a diﬀerent limiting case, the
order would be a complex one of a high degree which would, as
indicated in chapter 5, approximate what is usually called a ran-
dom order. These two alternatives cover what happens for the
most part in the domain of ordinary experience as well as in that
of classical physics. Nevertheless, in the quantum domain as
well as in connection with consciousness and probably with
the understanding of the deeper more inward essence of
life, such approximations will prove to be inadequate. One
must then go on to a consideration of time as a projection of
multidimensional reality into a sequence of moments.
Such a projection can be described as creative, rather than
mechanical, for by creativity one means just the inception of
new content, which unfolds into a sequence of moments that is
not completely derivable from what came earlier in this
sequence or set of such sequences. What we are saying is, then,
that movement is basically such a creative inception of new
content as projected from the multidimensional ground. In con-
trast, what is mechanical is a relatively autonomous sub-totality
that can be abstracted from that which is basically a creative
movement of unfoldment.
How, then, are we to consider the evolution of life as this is
generally formulated in biology? First, it has to be pointed out
that the very word ‘evolution’ (whose literal meaning is ‘unroll-
ing’) is too mechanistic in its connotation to serve properly in
this context. Rather, as we have already pointed out above, we
should say that various successive living forms unfold creatively.
Later members are not completely derivable from what came
earlier, through a process in which eﬀect arises out of cause
(though in some approximation such a causal process may
explain certain limited aspects of the sequence). The law of this
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 269

unfoldment cannot be properly understood without considering
the immense multidimensional reality of which it is a projection
(except in the rough approximation in which the implications of
the quantum theory and of what is beyond this theory may be
neglected).
Our overall approach has thus brought together questions of
the nature of the cosmos, of matter in general, of life, and of
consciousness. All of these have been considered to be projec-
tions of a common ground. This we may call the ground of all
that is, at least in so far as this may be sensed and known by us, in
our present phase of unfoldment of consciouness. Although we
have no detailed perception or knowledge of this ground it is
still in a certain sense enfolded in our consciousness, in the ways
in which we have outlined, as well as perhaps in other ways that
are yet to be discovered.
Is this ground the absolute end of everything? In our pro-
posed views concerning the general nature of ‘the totality of all
that is’ we regard even this ground as a mere stage, in the sense
that there could in principle be an inﬁnity of further develop-
ment beyond it. At any particular moment in this development
each such set of views that may arise will constitute at most a
proposal. It is not to be taken as an assumption about what the ﬁnal
truth is supposed to be, and still less as a conclusion concerning the
nature of such truth. Rather, this proposal becomes itself an active
factor in the totality of existence which includes ourselves as well
as the objects of our thoughts and experimental investigations.
Any further proposals on this process will, like those already
made, have to be viable. That is to say, one will require of them a
general self-consistency as well as consistency in what ﬂows
from them in life as a whole. Through the force of an even
deeper, more inward necessity in this totality, some new state of
aﬀairs may emerge in which both the world as we know it and
our ideas about it may undergo an unending process of yet
further change.
wholeness and the implicate order
270

With this we have in essence carried the presentation of our
cosmology and our general notions concerning the nature of the
totality to a natural (though of course only a temporary) stop-
ping point. From here on we can further survey it as a whole and
perhaps ﬁll in some of the details that have been left out in this
necessarily sketchy treatment before going on to new develop-
ments of the kinds indicated above.
the enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness 271

NOTES
1 FRAGMENTATION AND WHOLENESS
1
See, for example, J. Krishnamurti, Freedom from the Known, Gollancz,
London, 1969.
2 THE RHEOMODE – AN EXPERIMENT WITH LANGUAGE
AND THOUGHT
1
Actually, the Latin root ‘videre’ in ‘divide’ does not mean ‘to see’ but
‘to set apart’. This appears to have come about in a coincidental
manner. However, the purposes of the rheomode are served much
better by taking advantage of this coincidence, and by regarding
division as primarily an act of perception rather than a physical act
of separation.
2
Whenever a word is obtained from a form with a preﬁx, such as di-, co-,
con-, etc., in the root verb of the rheomode, this preﬁx will be separ-
ated from the main verb by a hyphen, in order to indicate how the verb
has been constructed in this way.
3
Note that, from now on, in the interests of brevity we will generally not
give as full a description of the meaning of the root form as we have
been doing thus far.

3 REALITY AND KNOWLEDGE CONSIDERED AS PROCESS
1
A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, Macmillan, New York, 1933.
2
H. C. Wyld, The Universal Dictionary of the English Language, Routledge
& Kegan Paul, London, 1960.
3
J. Piaget, The Origin of Intelligence in the Child, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1953.
4 HIDDEN VARIABLES IN THE QUANTUM THEORY
1
D. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1957.
2
See J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of the Quantum
Theory, Princeton University Press, 1955; W. Heisenberg, The Physical
Principles of the Quantum Theory, University of Chicago Press, 1930;
P. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University
Press, 1947; P. A. Schilp (ed.), Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist,
Tudor Press, New York, 1957, especially ch. 7 for a discussion of Bohr’s
point of view.
3
Ibid.
4
von Neumann, op. cit.
5
A. Einstein, N. Rosen and B. Podolsky, Phys. Rev., vol. 47, 1935, p. 777.
6
D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, New York, 1951.
7
For a discussion of Bohr’s point of view see Schilp, op. cit., ch. 7.
8
D. Bohm, Phys. Rev., vol. 85, 1952, pp. 166, 180.
9
L. de Broglie, Compt. rend., vol. 183, 1926, p. 447 and vol. 185, 1927,
p. 380; Revolution in Modern Physics, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London,
1954.
10
D. Bohm and J. V. Vigier, Phys. Rev., vol. 96, 1954, p. 208.
11
For a more detailed discussion see Bohm, Causality and Chance in
Modern Physics, ch. 4.
12
Bohm and Vigier, op. cit.; Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern
Physics.
13
Bohm, Phys. Rev., vol. 85, 1952, pp. 166, 180; Bohm and Vigier, op. cit.;
Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics.
14
Bohm and Vigier, op. cit.
15
Bohm, Phys. Rev., vol. 85, 1952, pp. 166, 180; Bohm and Vigier, op.cit.;
Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics.
16
G. Kallen, Physica, vol. 19, 1953, p. 850; Kgl Danske Videnskab. Selskab,
Matfys. Medd., vol. 27, no. 12, 1953; Nuovo Cimento, vol. 12, 1954,
notes 273

p. 217; A. S. Wightman, Phys. Rev., vol. 98, 1955, p. 812; L. van Hove,
Physica, vol. 18, 1952, p. 145.
17
Ibid.
18
Private communications.
19
Private communications.
20
Van Hove, op. cit.; private communications.
21
A similar result is obtained when one treats the large-scale properties
of an aggregate containing a great number of interacting particles.
One obtains collective properties (e.g., oscillations) that determine
themselves almost independently of the details of individual particle
motions. See D. Bohm and D. Pines, Phys. Rev., vol. 85, 1953, p. 338
and vol. 92, 1953, p. 609.
22
This analogy was ﬁrst shown by Fürth for the case of Brownian motion
of a particle. See Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, ch. 4.
23
Bohm and Pines, op. cit.
24
M. Born, Mechanics of the Atom, Bell, London, 1927; H. Goldstein,
Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, Cambridge, Mass., 1953.
25
Ibid.
26
Born, op. cit.
27
Private communication.
28
For example, a synchronous electric motor tends to run in phase with
the alternating current coming from the generator. There are
innumerable other such examples in the theory of non-linear oscilla-
tions. A fuller discussion of non-linear oscillations is given by H. Jehle
and J. Cahn, Am. J. Phys., vol. 21, 1953, p. 526.
29
Born, op. cit.
30
Somewhat more general linear combinations can be taken but they
only serve to complicate the expressions without changing the basic
features of the problem.
31
D. Bohm and Y. Aharonov, Phys. Rev., vol. 108, 1957, p. 1070.
5 QUANTUM THEORY AS AN INDICATION OF A NEW
ORDER IN PHYSICS. PART A
1
This notion of order was ﬁrst suggested to me in a private communi-
cation by a well-known artist, C. Biederman. For a presentation of his
views see C. Biederman, Art as the Evolution of Visual Knowledge, Red
Wing, Minnesota, 1948.
2
M. Born and N. Wiener, J. Math. Phys., vol. 5, 1926, pp. 84–98;
N. Wiener and A. Siegel, Phys. Rev., vol. 91, 1953, p. 1551.
notes
274

3
This notion has been discussed in chapters 1 and 3 from another
point of view.
4
For a discussion of this point see D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-
Hall, New York, 1951.
5
For an extensive discussion of this effect see ibid, ch. 22; for a later
point of view on this subject see J. S. Bell, Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 38,
1966, p. 447.
6
N. Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, Cambridge
University Press, 1934.
7
J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,
Princeton University Press, 1955.
6 QUANTUM THEORY AS AN INDICATION OF A NEW
ORDER IN PHYSICS. PART B
1
For a very clear presentation of this view see T. Kuhn, The Nature of
Scientiﬁc Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, 1955.
2
J. Piaget, The Origin of Intelligence in the Child, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1956.
3
See D. Bohm, B. Hiley and A. Stuart, Progr. Theoret. Phys., vol. 3, 1970,
p. 171, where this description of a perceived content considered as the
intersection of two orders is treated in a different context.
4
See, for example, D. F. Littlewood, The Skeleton Key of Mathematics,
Hutchinson, London, 1960.
5
See, for example, ibid.
7 THE ENFOLDING-UNFOLDING UNIVERSE AND
CONSCIOUSNESS
1
See Re-Vision, vol. 3, no. 4, 1978, for a treatment of this subject in a
different way. (Published at 20 Longfellow Road, Cambridge, Mass.
02148, USA.)
2
See D. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge &
Kegan Paul, London, 1957, ch. 2, for a further discussion of this point.
3
For a more detailed discussion of this point see, for example,
D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Foundations of Physics, vol. 5, 1975, p. 93.
4
For a detailed discussion of this experiment see D. Bohm, Quantum
Theory, Prentice-Hall, New York, 1951, ch. 22.
5
See D. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, ch. 2, for a
discussion of this feature of ‘indeterministic mechanism’.
notes 275

6
See D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Foundations of Physics, vol. 5, 1975,
p. 93, and D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, New York,
1951, for a more detailed treatment of this feature of the quantum
theory.
7
Mathematically one derives all the properties of the system from a 3N-
dimensional ‘wave function’ (where N is the number of particles)
which cannot be represented in three-dimensional space alone.
Physically one actually ﬁnds the non-local, non-causal relationship of
distant elements described above, which corresponds very well with
what is implied by the mathematical equations.
8
Notably those in which the ‘wave function’ of the combined system
can be factored approximately into two separate three-dimensional
wave functions (as shown in Bohm and Hiley, op. cit.).
9
This is just an example of the combination of wavelike and particle-
like properties of matter described in section 2.
10
This sort of calculation is suggested in D. Bohm, Causality and Chance
in Modern Physics, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1957, p. 163.
11
In section 8 we shall see that time, as well as space, may be enfolded
in this way.
12
Compare with the idea of sub-system, system, and super-system,
suggested in Bohm and Hiley, op. cit.
13
This notion has already been suggested in a preliminary way in
chapter 3.
14
See Karl Pribram, Languages of the Brain, G. Globus et al. (eds), 1971;
Consciousness and the Brain, Plenum, New York, 1976.
15
E.g., as shown in section 3, a linearly ordered array of droplets may be
enfolded together in such a way that this order is still subtly held in
the whole set of ensembles of ink particles.
16
As shown in the appendix to chapter 6, on the implicate order the
basic algorithm is an algebra rather than the calculus.
17
For a more detailed discussion, see D. Bohm, The Special Theory of
Relativity, Benjamin, New York, 1965, Appendix.
18
See ibid.
19
This illusion is essentially the one discussed in chapters 1 and 2, in
which the whole of existence is seen as constituted of basically static
fragments.
20
In some ways this idea of an ‘unconscious’ background is similar to
that of Freud. However, in Freud’s point of view the unconscious has a
fairly deﬁnite and limited kind of content and is thus not comparable
to the immensity of the background that we are proposing. Perhaps
notes
276

Freud’s ‘oceanic feeling’ would be somewhat closer to the latter than
would be his notion of the unconscious.
21
This corresponds to the quantum theoretical requirement that elec-
trons may go from one state in space to another without passing
through intermediate states.
notes 277

INDEX
accommodation: assimilation and
178; of facts within theories
179–81
action, determination of 65–6
action variables 120
Aharonov, Y. 274
algebra for implicate order 205–9,
214–17
analysis 159–61; description and
160
analytic description and
heteronomy 197–8
‘angle-variables’ 118
Aristotelean logic 76–7
Aristotle 15–16, 76–7, 142–3
assimilation and accommodation
178
asynordinate aspects of structure
194–5
atomic theory 10–11
atomistic attitude to words 52
attention, movement of 49
autonomy group 213
bees, dance of 70
Bell, J. S. 275
Biederman, C. 274
‘big bang’ theory 244
biology, molecular 18–19
Bohm, D. 273–6
Bohr, Niels 108, 133, 137, 167, 275;
his resolution of Einstein, Rosen
and Podolsky paradox 93–7
Bohr-Sommerfeld rule 121, 129
Born, M. 274
brain, information enfolded in 251,
264
de Broglie, L. 98, 123, 273
Brownian motion 153–5;
indeterminism and 87, 99; order
in 149, 153–4; in relativity theory
161–2, 171

Cahn, J. 274
Cartesian coordinates 144–5,
186–7; and explicate order
189–90, 223–4
causality 145; and laws of physics
153
causes, Aristotle’s four 15
change 260; see also motion
child thought 71–3
classical physics, order, measure
and structure in 153–5; see also
Newtonian mechanics
‘clocks’ local: in hidden variable
theory 123–33; inner motion of
128; single-valuedness of phases
of 125–7
collective coordinates 117
complex 210–11
Compton effect 134
consciousness: explicit and implicit
contents of 259; implicate order
and 248–62; relationship to
matter 248–71; stream of 14;
unconscious background to 267
constants of motion 117–21
‘constatate/ion’ 57
continuum 211
coordinates 144–5; Cartesian see
Cartesian coordinates; collective
117
cosmology and implicate order
240–5
Democritus 10, 242
Descartes, R. 249–50
description and analysis 160
determination of action 65–6
determinism: limitations on, in
quantum theory 85–6; trend
away from 107
Dirac equation for fermions 139
disorder 149; see also order(ing)
divergences in relativistic quantum
ﬁeld theory 106, 116
‘di-vidate/ion’ 47–8
division as mode of thought 2–3
dye-in-liquid model see ink-in-liquid
model
Eastern view of wholeness 29–31
Einstein, A. 36, 155, 158, 160–1,
220–1, 273
Einstein, Rosen and Podolsky
paradox 91–7, 164, 169, 172, 236,
238; Bohr’s resolution of 93–7; in
hidden variable theory 137–8
efﬁcient cause 15, 17
elementary particles: as abstracted
from deeper level of movement
62, 195, 234; ink-in-liquid analogy
for 232–4; as projections 236–40
enfoldment 228, 232–3, 234–5
epicycles, Ptolemaic 6, 143
ether 242–3
Euclidean order and measure 153;
mathematical description of
200–1
evolution of life 269
experience and knowledge 7
explicate order: Cartesian
coordinates and 190, 223–4;
mathematization of 200–1
fact: in rheomode 55–8; theory and
181–2; truth and 54–6
‘factate’ 55
ﬁeld equations, non-linearity of 220
ﬁeld variables, non-denumerable
inﬁnity of 108; in hidden variable
theory 112, 118
index 279

ﬁnal cause 15, 18
ﬂux, universal: ground of
intelligence in 14; known only
implicitly 14; mind and matter as
abstractions from 66–8; reality
as 75–6; see also holomovement
formal (formative) cause 15–19; of
fragmentation 23–4
fragmentation 1–33; formative
cause of 23–4; in individual 2; in
scientiﬁc research 4, 19–20; in
society 2, 20; of thought 78–9
Freud, S. 276–7
Galileo 186
gamma-ray microscope
experiment, Heisenberg’s 133,
173; implicate order and 196;
modiﬁed 164–8
gauge invariance 214
‘golden age’ 3
‘Golden Mean’ 27
grammatical structure 36–53
gravitational ﬁeld 158; wave-particle
modes of 241
Greek notion of measure 25–8
Heisenberg, W. 106
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy
principle 89; Bohr’s
interpretation 96; gamma-ray
microscope experiment see
gamma-ray microscope
experiment, Heisenberg’s; in
hidden variable theory 113–16,
128–32, 133–4; proof of 133
Heraclitus 61
heteronomy and analytic
description 197–8
hidden variable theory 83–140;
comparison with standard
conception 99–101; Einstein,
Rosen and Podolsky paradox in
137; explanation of wave-particle
duality by 118–19; further
developments in 139–40;
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy
principle in 113–14, 128–32,
133–4; main physical ideas of
121–2; possibility of evidence for
103–5; preliminary interpretation
97–102, and criticisms 102–8;
quantization in see quantization
in hidden variable theory; von
Neumann’s arguments against
see Neumann
Hiley, B. 275–6
hologram as illustration of
undivided wholeness 183–6,
224–5, 240
holomovement 190–9, 226–7;
algebra of 207–9; see also ﬂux,
universal
holonomy 198–9, 230
holonomy group 213–14
Hove, L. van 274
hypotheses 6
immeasurable, the 29
implicate order 188–217;
consciousness and 248–71;
contrasted with mechanistic
order in physics 218–27;
cosmology and 240–5; force of
necessity and 248; as
fundamental 235; ink-in-liquid
model see ink-in-liquid model;
intrinsically 232; life and 245–7;
manifest world and 235–6;
mathematization of 204–17;
index
280

motion and 257–8;
multidimensional 236–40;
perception of, in listening to
music 252–3; relativity and
209–13; structure of matter and
227–36
‘implication parameter’ 193
indeterminacy principle see
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy
principle
indeterminism in quantum theory:
as indicating irreducible
lawlessness 88–93;
interpretation of 86–8, 107;
mechanistic order and 222
ink-in-liquid model 188–9;
mathematization of implicate
order and 204–5; relevation of
implicate order and 191–7;
structure of matter and
227–35
insight, theory as form of 4–5, 21
intelligence 65–8; relation to
thought (q.v.) 67–8; as
unconditioned act of perception
66
intrinsically implicate order 232
Jehle, H. 274
Kallen, G. 273
Kant, I. 7, 68
knowledge: experience and 7; as
process 63–82
Krishnamurti, J. 33
Kuhn, T. 275
language: enquiry into 36–41; as
undivided ﬁeld 52; world view
and 59–60
laws of physics 153; implicate and
explicate order in 199–217
Leibniz, G. W. 263
lens: as illustration of relation
between instrumentation and
theory 182–5; as limiting case of
hologram 185; mechanistic order
and 223–4
‘levate/ion’ 45
life: evolution of 269; implicate
order and 245–7
light, speed of 155–6
limit and measure 149–51
linguistics 40
Littlewood, D. F. 275
manifest world and implicate order
235–6
many body problem 102–3, 117;
Dirac equation for fermions 139
material cause 15
mathematics and physics 199–200
matter: as abstraction from
universal ﬂux 67–8; concept of,
in quantum domain 95–6; as
projection 265–6; relationship to
consciousness 248–71; structure
of, and implicate order 227–36
measure 149–51: in classical
physics 153–5; Eastern notion of
29–32; Euclidean 153; expressed
through ratio 26–7; limit and
149–50; structure and 151–3;
Western notion of 26–9
mechanistic order in physics:
contrasted with implicate order
219–27; quantum indeterminacy
and 222; relativity theory and
220–1
meditation 25, 32
index 281

memory: brain and 264; thought
and 64, 74–5, 261
metamorphoses 202–4; similarity
202
microscope experiment see
gamma-ray microscope
experiment, Heisenberg’s
mind: as abstraction from universal
ﬂux 67; as projection 265–6; see
also consciousness
monads 263
motion 253–7; abstract
representation of, implicate
order and 257–8
multiplex 211; law in 212–17
music: experience of 252–3;
measure in 27, 29; structure in 153
necessity, force of, in implicate
order 248, 259
Neumann, J. von 273, 275; his
arguments against hidden
variables 89–91, 100–1, and
assumptions behind them 104
Newtonian mechanics 5–6; as
approximately valid 105; see also
classical physics
‘normal modes’ of wave ﬁeld 159
observer and observed 23, 168, 169,
174
order(ing) 49–50; accommodation
of fact to theory and 180–2; in
classical physics 153–5;
curvilinear 158; degrees of 147–9;
explicate see explicate order;
general notions of 141–6;
illustrated by geometrical curve
147–9; implicate see implicate
order; of indeﬁnitely high degree
149; intrinsically implicate 232;
nature of 146–9; predictability
and 149; in quantum theory
162–76; in relativity theory
155–62; simple sequential 48–9,
230–1; structure and 151–3; of
undivided wholeness 158
‘ordinate/ion’ 50
organism, world as 16, 142
Parmenides 242
particles, elementary see
elementary particles
perception, act of 65; as poetic 145;
unconditioned, intelligence as 66
physics: laws of see laws of physics;
mathematics and 199
Piaget, J. 178, 261, 273, 275
Pines, D. 274
Plato 68
plenum 243
predictability and order 149
presuppositions of enquiry, implicit
36
Pribram, K. 251, 276
primitive man, thought in 72
process: image of 61–2; knowledge
as 63–82; reality as 61–3; thought
as 63–71
projections: elementary particles as
236–40; mind and matter as
266–7; time as 269
Protagoras 28
w-ﬁeld, ﬂuctuations of 98–9; see
also quantum ﬂuctuations
psychology 19
Ptolemaic astronomy 6, 143
quantization in hidden variable
theory 117–33; explanation of
index
282

122–33; single-valuedness of
clock phases and 125–7
quantum, indivisibility of 162
quantum algebra 205–7
quantum ﬁeld theory, relativistic
109–10; divergences in 106, 116
quantum ﬂuctuations 110–12; see
also w-ﬁeld, ﬂuctuations of
quantum potential 98, 102
quantum theory 11–12; applied to
ﬁelds 240–1, see also quantum
ﬁeld theory, relativistic; concept of
matter in 95–6; hidden variables
in see hidden variable theory;
indeterminism in see
indeterminism in quantum
theory; indicating
multidimensional implicate order
236–40; interpretation of
indeterminism in 86–8;
limitations on determinism in
85–6; main features of 84–5;
mechanistic order and 221–3;
notions of order in 168–76;
relativity and 164, 169–71, 173, 223
ratio: measure expressed through
26–7; reason and 145
reality: non-thought and 73–4;
origin of word 69; as process
61–3; relation to thought 4,
68–71, 76; as undeﬁnable ﬂux 75
relativity theory 12; general 158,
212–13; implicate order and
209–13; mechanistic order and
219–20; notion of order in
155–62; quantum theory and 164,
169–73, 223; rigid bodies in 157;
signals in 156, 171–3
relevance/ant/ate 42–5, 191
renormalization techniques 106,
110, 170
rheomode 39–60; form of
expression for 41–53;
implications for world view
59–60: truth and fact in 53–8
rigid body in relativity theory 157
S function 118–19; interpretation in
hidden variable theory 122–33
S-matrices 170
scientiﬁc research fragmentation in
4, 19
scientiﬁc theories see theories,
scientiﬁc
Siegel, A. 274
signals in relativity theory 156, 171–3
simplex 210
space as full 242–5
specialization 1–2
stream of consciousness 14
‘structation’ 152
structure: in classical physics 153–5;
as development from order and
measure 151–3
Stuart, A. 275
subject-verb-object structure 37, 39
sub-quantum mechanical level:
experiments to probe 133–8; see
also hidden variable theory
superconductivity 239
synordinate aspects of structure
194
synthesis 159
theories scientiﬁc 4;
accommodation with facts
180–2: falsiﬁcation of 6;
fragmentation and 8–9: as
insights 4, 21–2
index 283

thing: as abstraction from total
process 70; origin of word 68–9;
see also reality
‘thing in itself’ 68
thought: in children 71–3; content
and process of 23: as
contribution to experience 261;
cyclical movement of 75; as
dance of mind 70–1, 76;
implicate order and 259, 260; as
insight 9; as material process 66,
74: mechanical 64–5; memory
and 64, 74, 75, 261; non-thought
and, in primitive man 72: as
process 63–71; relation to
intelligence (q.v.) 67–8; relation
to reality 4, 68–71, 75–6;
unconscious fragmentation of
78–9; with totality as content 71,
73, 79–80
time 267–9; as projection 269
totality as content of thought 71, 73,
79–80
transformations, geometric 202
truth: fact and 56; function 55–6; as
property of statements 55; in
rheomode 53–4
uncertainty principle see
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy
principle
unconscious background of
consciousness 267
undeﬁnable symbols 206
unfoldment 228, 232–5, 240
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory 157–8, 160, 172,
220
vacuum state: assumptions in ﬁeld
theoretical calculations 109; in
hidden variable theory 111
van Hove, L. 274
verb as primary 37–8, 46
‘verrate/ion’ 54
‘vidate/ion’ 46–7
Vigier, J. V. 98, 273
visual arts, measure in 27
von Neumann, J. see Neumann
vortex: image of fragmentation 24;
model of particle 12
wave equation, linearity of 174
wave function: as description of
potentialities 163; as mere
mathematical symbol 96; as
representing real ﬁeld 98
wave-particle duality 163, 165;
explanation of in hidden variable
theory 118
Western view of wholeness 25–9
Whitehead, A. N. 61, 81, 263, 273
wholeness: Eastern and Western
views of 25–33; hologram as
illustration of 183–6; in quantum
theory 169–70; in relativity theory
158
Wiener, N. 154
Wightman, A. S. 274
words, study of origins of 68–9
‘world tube’ 12–13, 157, 171–2
world views 10–15: implications of
rheomode for 59–60
Zeno 242, 255
‘zero-point’ energy 241
index
284

