
The Special Theory of Relativity


The Special Theory of Relativity
David Bohm
London and New York

First published 1965 by W.A.Benjamin, Inc.
This edition published 1996 
by Routledge
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2009.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of
Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks 
please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York NY 10016
© 1965, 1996 Sarah Bohm
Foreword © 1996 B.J.Hiley
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from 
the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book has been requested
ISBN 0-203-20386-0 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-415-14808-1 (hbk)
ISBN 0-415-14809-X (pbk)
ISBN 0-203-26638-2 (Adobe ebook Reader Format) 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingon, Oxon, OX14 4RN

The final year undergraduate lectures on theoretical physics given by David Bohm at
Birkbeck College were unique and inspiring. As they were attended by experimentalists
and theoreticians, the lectures were not aimed at turning out students with a high level of
manipulative skill in mathematics, but at exploring the conceptual structure and physical
ideas that lay behind our theories. His lectures on special relativity form the content of
this book.
This is not just another text on the subject. It goes deeply into the conceptual changes
needed to make the transition from the classical world to the world of relativity. In order
to appreciate the full nature of these radical changes, Bohm provides a unique appendix
entitled “Physics and Perception” in which he shows how many of our “self-evident”
notions of space and of time are, in fact, far from obvious and are actually learnt from
experience. In this appendix he discusses how we develop our notions of space and of
time in childhood, freely using the work of Jean Piaget, whose experiments pioneered our
understanding of how children develop concepts in the first place.
Bohm also shows how, through perception and our activity in space, we become aware
of the importance of the notion of relationship and the order in these relationships.
Through the synthesis of these relationships, we abstract the notion of an object as an
invariant feature within this activity which ultimately we assume to be permanent. It is
through the relationship between objects that we arrive at our classical notion of space.
Initially, these relations are essentially topological but eventually we begin to understand
the importance of measure and the need to map the relationships of these objects on to a
co-ordinate grid with time playing a unique role. His lucid account of how we arrive at
our classical notions of space and absolute time is fascinating and forms the platform for
the subsequent development of Einstein’s relativity.
After  presenting  the  difficulties  with  Newtonian  mechanics  and  Maxwell’s
electrodynamics, he shows how the Michelson-Morley experiment can be understood in
terms of a substantive view of the ether provided by Lorentz and Fitzgerald. The
difficulties in this approach, which assumes actual contraction of material rods as they
move through the ether, are discussed before a masterful account of Einstein’s conception
of space-time is presented. Bohm’s clarity on this topic was no doubt helped by the many
discussions he had with Einstein in his days at Princeton.
The principle of relativity is presented in terms of the notion of relationship and the
order of relationship that were developed in the appendix and he argues that a general law
of physics is merely a statement that certain relationships are invariant to the way we
observe them. The application of this idea to observers in relative uniform motion
immediately produces the Lorentz transformation and the laws of special relativity.
Interlaced with the chapters on the application of the Lorentz transformation, is a
chapter on the general notion of the falsification of theories. Here he argues against the
Popperian tradition that all that matters is mere experimental falsification. Although a
preliminary explanation might fit the empirical data, it may ultimately lead to confusion
and ambiguity and it is this that could also lead to its downfall and eventual abandonment
Foreword

this a unique presentation of special relativity.
B.J.HILEY
in favour of another theory even though it contradicts no experiment. His final chapters
on time and the twin paradox exhibit the clarity that runs throughout the book and makes

Preface
The general aim of this book is to present the theory of relativity as a unified whole,
making clear the reasons which led to its adoption, explaining its basic meaning as far as
possible in non-mathematical terms, and revealing the limited truth of some of the tacit
“common  sense”  assumptions  which  make  it  difficult  for  us  to  appreciate  its  full
implications. By thus showing that the concepts of this theory are interrelated to form a
unified totality, which is very different from those of the older Newtonian theory, and by
making clear the motivation for adopting such a different theory, we hope in some
measure to supplement the view obtained in the many specialized courses included in the
typical program of study, which tend to give the student a rather fragmentary impression
of the logical and conceptual structure of physics as a whole.
The book begins with a brief review of prerelativistic physics and some of the main
experimental facts which led physicists to question the older ideas of space and time that
had held sway since Newton and before. Considerable emphasis is placed on some of the
efforts to retain Newtonian concepts, especially those developed by Lorentz in terms of
the ether theory. This procedure has the advantage, not only of helping the student to
understand the history of this crucial phase of the development of physics better, but even
more, of exhibiting very clearly the nature of the problems to which the older concepts
gave  rise.  It  is  only  against  the  background  of  these  problems  that  one  can  fully
appreciate the fact that Einstein’s basic contribution was less in the proposal of new
formulas than in the introduction of fundamental changes in our basic notions of space,
time, matter, and movement.
To present such new ideas without relating them properly to previously held ideas gives
the wrong impression that the theory of relativity is merely at a culminating point of
earlier developments and does not properly bring out the fact that this theory is on a
radically new line that contradicts Newtonian concepts in the very same step in which it
extends physical law in new directions and into hitherto unexpected new domains.
Therefore, in spite of the fact that the study of the basic concepts behind the ether theory
occupies valuable time for which the student may be hard pressed by the demands of a
broad range of subjects, the author feels that it is worthwhile to include in these lectures a
brief summary of these notions.
Einstein’s basically new step was in the adoption of a relational approach to physics.
Instead of supposing that the task of physics is the study of an absolute underlying
substance of the universe (such as the ether) he suggested that it is only in the study of
relationships between various aspects of this universe, relationships that are in principle
observable. It is important to realize in this connection that the earlier Newtonian
concepts involve a mixture of these two approaches, such that while space and time were
regarded as absolute, nevertheless they had been found to have a great many “relativistic”
properties. In these lectures, a considerable effort is made to analyze the older concepts of
space and time, along with those of “common sense” on which they are based, in order to
reveal this mixture of relational and absolute points of view.
After bringing out some of the usually “hidden” assumptions behind common sense and
Newtonian notions of space and time, assumptions which must be dropped if we are to
understand the theory of relativity, we go on to Einstein’s analysis of the concept of

viii  Preface
simultaneity,  in  which  he  regards  time  as  a  kind  of  “coordinate”  expressing  the
relationship of an event to a concrete physical proc ess in which this coordinate is
measured. On the basis of the observed fact of the constancy of the actually measured
velocity of light for all observers, one sees that observers moving at different speeds
cannot  agree  on  the  time  coordinate  to  be  ascribed  to  distant  events.  From  this
conclusion, it also follows that they cannot agree on the lengths of objects or the rates of
clocks. Thus, the essential implications of the theory of relativity are seen qualitatively,
without the need for any formulas. The transformations of Lorentz are then shown to be
the only ones that can express in precise quantita tive form the same conclusions that
were initially obtained without mathematics. In this way, it is hoped that the student will
first see in general terms the significance of Einstein’s notion of space and time, as well
as the problems and facts that led him to adopt these notions, after which he can then go
on to the finer-grained view that is supplied by the mathematics.
Some of the principal implications of the Lorentz transformation are then explained, not
only with a view of exploring the meaning of this transformation, but also of leading in a
natural way to a statement of the principle of relativity—that is, that the basic physical
laws are the invariant relationships, the same for all observers. The principle of relativity
is illustrated in a number of examples. It is then shown that this principle leads to
Einstein’s relativistic formulas, expressing the mass and momentum of a body in terms of
its velocity. By means of an analysis of these formulas, one comes to Einstein’s famous
relationship, E=mc2, between the energy of a body and its mass. The meaning of this
relationship is developed in considerable detail, with special attention being given to the
problem of “rest energy,” and its explanation in terms of to-and-fro movements in the
internal structure of the body, taking place at lower levels. In this connection, the author
has found by experience that the relationship between mass and energy gives rise to many
puzzles in the minds of students, largely because this relationship contradicts certain
“hidden” assumptions concerning the general structure of the world, which are based on
“common sense,” and its development in Newtonian mechanics. It is therefore helpful to
go into our implicit common sense assumptions about mass to show that they are not
inevitable and to show in what way Einstein’s notion of mass is different from these, so
that it can be seen that there is no paradox involved in the equivalence of mass and
energy.
Throughout the book, a great deal of attention is paid quite generally to the habitual
tendency to regard older modes of thought as inevitable, a tendency that has greatly
impeded the develop ment of new ideas on science. This tendency is seen to be based on
the tacit assumption that scientific laws constitute absolute truths. The notion of absolute
truth is analyzed in some detail in this book, and it is shown to be in poor correspondence
with the actual de velopment of science. Instead, it is shown that scientific truths are
better regarded as relationships holding in some limited domain, the extent of which can
be delineated only with the aid of future experimental and theoretical discoveries. While
a given science may have long periods in which a certain set of basic concepts is
developed and articulated, it also tends to come, from time to time, into a critical phase,
in which older concepts reveal ambiguity and confusion. The resolution of such crises
involves a radical change of basic concepts, which contradicts older ideas, while in some
sense containing their correct features as special cases, limits, or approximations. Thus,
scientific research is not a process of steady accumulation of absolute truths, which has

Preface  ix
culminated in present theories, but rather a much more dynamic kind of process in which
there are no final theoretical concepts valid in unlimited domains. The appreciation of
this fact should be helpful not only in physics but in other sciences where similar
problems are involved.
The lectures on relativity end with a discussion of the Minkowski diagram. This is done
in considerable detail, with a view to illustrating the meaning of the principle of relativity
in a graphical way. In the course of this illustration, we introduce the K calculus, which
further brings out the meaning of Einstein’s ideas on space and time, as well as providing
a comparison between the implications of these ideas and those of Newton. In this
discussion, we stress the role of the event and process as basic in relativistic physics,
instead of that of the object and its motion, which are basic in Newtonian theory. This
leads us on to the (hyperbolic) geometry of Minkowski space-time, with its invariant
distinction of the events inside of the past and future light cones from those outside. On
the basis of this distinction, it is made clear that the relativistic failure of different
observers to agree on simultaneity in no way confuses the order of cause and effect,
provided that no signals can be transmitted faster than light.
We include in these lectures a thorough discussion of the two differently aging twins,
one of whom remains on Earth while the other takes a trip on a rocket ship at a speed
near to that of light. This discussion serves to illustrate the meaning of “proper-time” and
brings out in some detail just how Einstein’s notions of space and time leave room for
two observers who separate to have experienced different intervals of “proper-time”
when they meet again.
Finally, there is a concluding discussion of the relationship between the world and our
various  alternative  conceptual  maps  of  it,  such  as  those  afforded  respectively  by
Newtonian physics and Einsteinian physics. This discussion is aimed at removing the
confusion that results when one identifies a conceptual map with reality itself—a kind of
confusion that is responsible for much of the difficulty that a student tends to meet when
he is first confronted by the theory of relativity. In addition, this notion of re lationship in
terms of mapping is one that is basic in modern mathematics, so that an understanding of
the Minkowski diagram as a map should help prepare the student for a broader kind of
appreciation of the connection between physics and a great deal of mathematics.
The lectures proper are followed by an appendix, in which Einstein’s notions of space,
time, and matter are related to certain properties of ordinary perception. It is commonly
believed that Newtonian concepts are in complete agreement with everyday perceptual
experience. However, recent experimental and theoretical developments in the study of
the actual process of perception make it clear that many of our “common sense” ideas are
as inadequate and confused when applied to the field of our perceptions as they are in that
of relativistic physics. Indeed, there seems to be a remarkable analogy between the
relativistic notion of the universe as a structure of events and processes with its laws
constituted by invariant relationships and the way in which we actually perceive the
world through the abstraction of invariant relationships in the events and processes
involved  in our immediate contacts  with  this  world.  This analogy  is  developed  in
considerable detail in the appendix, in which we are finally led to suggest that science is
mainly  a  way of  extending  our  perceptual  contact  with  the  world,  rather  than  of
accumulating knowledge about it. In this way, one can understand the fact that scientific
research does not lead to absolute truth, but rather (as happens in ordinary perception) an
awareness and understanding of an ever-growing segment of the world with which we are
in contact.

x  Preface
Although the appendix on perception is not part of the course, it should be helpful in
calling the student’s attention to certain aspects of everyday experience, in which he can
appreciate intuitively relationships that are in some ways similar to those proposed by
Einstein for physics. In addition, it may be hoped that the general approach to science
will be clarified, if one regards it as a basically perceptual enterprise, rather than as an
accumulation of knowledge.
DAVID BOHM
London, England
January, 1964

Contents
 
 Foreword, 
 
v
 Preface, 
 vii
 
I. Introduction 
 
1
II. Pre-Einsteinian Notions of Relativity 
 
3
III. The Problem of the Relativity of the Laws of Electrodynamics 
  7
IV. The Michelson-Morley Experiment 
 10
V. Efforts to Save the Ether Hypothesis 
 13
VI. The Lorentz Theory of the Electron 
 17
VII. Further Development of the Lorentz Theory 
 19
VIII. The Problem of Measuring Simultaneity in the Lorentz Theory 
 23
IX. The Lorentz Transformation 
 27
X. The Inherent Ambiguity in the Meanings of Space-Time Measurements,
According to the Lorentz Theory 
 30
XI. Analysis of Space and Time Concepts in Terms of Frames of Reference 
 31
XII. “Common-Sense” Concepts of Space and Time 
 35
XIII. Introduction to Einstein’s Conceptions of Space and Time 
 38
XIV. The Lorentz Transformation in Einstein’s Point of View 
 44
XV. Addition of Velocities 
 48
XVI. The Principle of Relativity 
 52
XVII. Some Applications of Relativity 
 55
XVIII. Momentum and Mass in Relativity 
 60
XIX. The Equivalence of Mass and Energy 
 70
XX. The Relativistic Transformation Law for Energy and Momentum 
 74
XXI. Charged Particles in an Electromagnetic Field 
 78
XXII. Experimental Evidence for Special Relativity 
 83
XXIII. More About the Equivalence of Mass and Energy 
 86
XXIV. Toward a New Theory of Elementary Particles 
 92
XXV. The Falsification of Theories 
 94
XXVI. The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus 
 100

xii  Contents
XXVII. The Geometry of Events and the Space-Time Continuum 
 113
XXVIII. The Question of Causality and the Maximum Speed of Propagation of
Signals in Relativity Theory 
 120
XXIX. Proper Time 
 124
XXX. The “Paradox” of the Twins 
 127
XXXI. The Significance of the Minkowski Diagram as a Reconstruction of the
Past 
 134
 
 Appendix: Physics and Perception, 
 142
 Index, 
 174

I
Introduction
The theory of relativity is not merely a scientific development of great importance in its
own right. It is even more significant as the first stage of a radical change in our basic
concepts, which began in physics, and which is spreading into other fields of science, and
indeed, even into a great deal of thinking outside of science. For as is well known, the
modern trend is away from the notion of sure “absolute” truth (i.e., one which holds
independently of all conditions, contexts, degrees, and types of approximation, etc.) and
toward the idea that a given concept has significance only in relation to suitable broader
forms of reference, within which that concept can be given its full meaning.
Just because of the very breadth of its implications, however, the theory of relativity has
tended to lead to a certain kind of confusion in which truth is identified with nothing
more than that which is convenient and useful. Thus it may be felt by some that since
“everything is relative,” it is entirely up to each person’s choice to decide what he will
say or think about any problem whatsoever. Such a tendency reflecting back into physics
has often brought about something close to a sceptical and even cynical attitude to new
developments. For the student is first trained to regard the older laws of Newton, Galileo,
etc., as “eternal verities,” and then suddenly, in the theory of relativity (and even more, in
the quantum theory) he is told that this is all out of date and it is implied that he is now
receiving a new set of “eternal verities” to replace the older ones. It is hardly surprising,
then, that students may feel that a somewhat arbitrary game is being played by the
physicists whose only goal is to obtain some convenient set of formulas that will predict
the  results  of  a  number  of  experiments.  The  comparatively  greater  importance  of
mathematics in these new developments helps add to the impression, since the older
conceptual understanding of the meaning of the laws of physics is now largely given up,
and little is offered to take its place.
In these notes an effort will be made to provide a more easily understood account of the
theory of relativity. To this end, we shall go in some detail into the background of
problems out of which the theory of relativity emerged, not so much in the historical order
of the problems as in an order that is designed to bring out the factors which induced
scientists to change their concepts in so radical a way. As far as possible, we shall stress
the understanding of the concepts of relativity in non-mathematical terms, similar to
those used in elementary presentations of earlier Newtonian concepts. Nevertheless, we
shall give the minimum of mathematics needed, without which the subject would be
presented too vaguely to be appreciated properly. (For a more detailed mathematical
treatment, it is suggested that the student refer to some of the many texts on the subject
which are now available.)
To clarify the general problem of changing concepts in science we shall discuss fairly
extensively several of the basic philosophical problems that are, as it were, interwoven
into the very structure of the theory of relativity. These problems arise, in part, in the
criticism of the older Lorentz theory of the ether and, in part, in Einstein’s discovery of

2  The Special Theory of Relativity
the equivalence of mass and energy. In addition, by replacing Newtonian mechanics after
several centuries in which it had an undisputed reign, the theory of relativity raised
important issues, to which we have already referred, of the kind of truth that scientific
theories can have, if they are subject to fundamental revolutions from time to time. This
question we shall discuss extensively in several chapters of the book.
In the Appendix we give an account of the role of perception in the development of our
scientific thinking, which, it is hoped, will further clarify the general implication of a
relational (or relativistic) point of view. In this account, the mode of development of our
concepts of space and time as abstractions from everyday perception will be discussed;
and in this discussion it will become evident that our notions of space and time have in
fact been built up from common experience in a certain way. It therefore follows that
such ideas are likely to be valid only in limited domains which are not too far from those
in which they arise. When we come to new domains of experience, it is not surprising
that new concepts are needed. But what is really interesting is that when the facts of the
process  of  ordinary  perception  are  studied  scientifically,  it  is  discovered  that  our
customary way of looking at everyday experience (which with certain refinements is
carried  into  Newtonian  mechanics)  is  rather  superficial  and  in  many  ways,  very
misleading. A more careful account of the process of perception then shows that the
concepts needed to understand the actual facts of perception are closer to those of
relativity than they are to those of Newtonian mechanics. In this way it may be possible
to give relativity a certain kind of immediate intuitive significance, which tends to be
lacking  in  a  purely  mathematical  presentation.  Since  effective  thinking  in  physics
generally requires the integration of the intuitive with the mathematical sides, it is hoped
that along these lines a deeper and more effective way of understanding relativity (and
perhaps the quantum theory) may emerge.

II
Pre-Einsteinian Notions of Relativity
It  is  not  commonly  realized  that  the  general  trend  to  a  relational  (or  relativistic)
conception of the laws of physics began very early in the development of modern
science. This trend arose in opposition to a still older Aristotelian tradition that dominated
European thinking in the Middle Ages and continues to exert a strong but indirect
influence even in modern times. Perhaps this tradition should not be ascribed so much to
Aristotle as to the Medieval Scholastics, who rigidified and fixed certain notions that
Aristotle himself probably proposed in a somewhat tentative way as a solution to various
physical,  cosmological,  and  philosophical  problems  that  occupied  Ancient  Greek
thinkers.
Aristotle’s doctrines covered a very broad field, but, as far as our present discussion is
concerned, it is his cosmological notion of the Earth as the center of the universe that
interests us. He suggested that the whole universe is built in seven spheres with the Earth
as the middle. In this theory, the place of an object in the universe plays a key role. Thus,
each object was assumed to have a natural place, toward which it was striving, and which
it approached, in so far as it was not impeded by obstacles. Movement was regarded as
determined by such “final causes,” set into activity by “efficient causes.” For example, an
object was supposed to fall because of a tendency to try to reach its “natural place” at the
center of the Earth, but some external “efficient” cause was needed to release the object,
so that its internal striving “principle” could come into operation.
In  many  ways  Aristotle’s  ideas  gave  a  plausible  explanation  to  the  domain  of
phenomena known to the Ancient Greeks, although of course, as we know, they are not
adequate  in  broader  domains  revealed  in  more  modern  scientific  investigations.  In
particular, what has proved to be inadequate is the notion of an absolute hierarchial order
of being, with each thing tending toward its appropriate place in this order. Thus, as we
have seen, the whole of space was regarded as being organized into a kind of fixed
hierarchy, in the form of the “seven crystal spheres,” while time was later given an
analogous organization by the Medieval Scholastics in the sense that a certain moment
was taken as that of creation of the universe, which later was regarded as moving toward
some goal as end. The development of such notions led to the idea that in the expressions
of the laws of physics, certain places and times played a special or favored role, such that
the properties of other places and times had to be referred to these special ones, in a
unique way, if the laws of nature were to be properly understood. Similar ideas were
carried into all fields of human endeavor, with the introduction of fixed categories,
properties, etc., all organized into suitable hierarchies. In the total cosmological system,
man was regarded as having a key role. For, in some sense, he was considered to be the
central figure in the whole drama of existence, for whom all had been created, and on
whose moral choices the fate of the universe turned.
A part of Aristotle’s doctrine was that bodies in the Heavens (such as planets) being
more perfect than Earthly matter, should move in an orbit which expresses the perfection
of their natures. Since the circle was considered to be the most perfect geometrical figure,
it was concluded that a planet must move in a circle around the Earth. When observations
failed  to  disclose  perfect  circularity,  this  discrepancy  was  accommodated  by  the

4  The Special Theory of Relativity
introduction of “epicycles,” or of “circles within circles.” In this way, the Ptolemaic
theory was developed, which was able to “adjust” to any orbit whatsoever, by bringing in
many epicycles in a very complicated way. Thus, Aristotelian principles were retained,
and the appearances of the actual orbits were “saved.”
The first big break in this scheme was due to Copernicus, who showed that the
complicated and arbitrary system of epicycles could be avoided, if one assumed that the
planets moved around the Sun and not around the Earth. This was really the beginning of
a major change in the whole of human thought. For it showed that the Earth need not be
at the center of things. Although Copernicus put the Sun at the center, it was not a very
big step to see later that even the Sun might be only one star among many, so that there
was no observable center at all. A similar idea about time developed very naturally, in
which one regarded the universe as infinite and eternal, with no particular moment of
creation, and no particular “end” to which it was moving.
The Copernican theory initiated a new revolution in human thought. For it eventually
led to the notion that man is no longer to be regarded as a central figure in the cosmos.
The somewhat shocking deflation of the role of man had enormous consequences in
every phase of human life. But here we are concerned more with the scientific and
philosophical implications of Copernican notions. These could be summed up by saying
that they started an evolution of concepts leading eventually to the breakdown of the
older notions of absolute space and time and the development of the notion that the
significance of space and time is in relationship.
We shall explain this change at some length, because it brings us to the core of what is
meant by the theory of relativity. Briefly, the main point is that since there are no favored
places in space or moments of time, the laws of physics can equally well be referred to
any point, taken as the center, and will give rise to the same relationships. In this regard,
the situation is very different from that of the Aristotelian theory, which, for example,
gave the center of the Earth a special role as the place toward which all matter was
striving.
The trend toward relativity described above was carried further in the laws of Galileo
and Newton. Galileo made a careful study of the laws of falling objects, in which he
showed that while the velocity varies with time, the acceleration is constant. Before
Galileo, a clear notion of acceleration had not been developed. This was perhaps one of
the principal obstacles to the study of the movements of falling objects, because, without
such a notion, it was not possible clearly to formulate the essential characteristics of their
movements. What Galileo realized was, basically, that just as a uniform velocity is a
constant rate of change of position, so one can conceive a uniform acceleration as a
constant rate of change of velocity—i.e.,
(2–1)
where t is the time and 
 is a small increment of time. [v(t) is, of course, the velocity at
the time t, and 
 is the velocity of the time, 
.] This means that a
falling body is characterized by a certain relationship in its changing velocities, a
relationship that does not refer to a special external fixed point but rather to the properties
of the motion of the object itself.

Pre-Einsteinian Notions of Relativity  5
Newton went still further, along these lines, in formulating his law of motion:
(2–2)
where 
 is the acceleration of the body and F is the force on it. In these laws
Newton comprehended Galileo’s results through the fact that the force of gravity is
constant near the surface of the Earth. At the same time he generalized the law to a
relationship holding for any force, constant or variable. Implicit in Newton’s equations of
motion is also the law of inertia—that an object under no forces will move with constant
velocity (or zero acceleration) and will continue to do so until some external force leads
to a change in its velocity.
An important question raised by Newton’s laws is that of the so-called “inertial frame”
of coordinates, in which they apply. Indeed, it is clear that if these laws are valid in a
given system S, they will not apply in an accelerated system S! without modification. For
example, if one adopts a rotating frame, then one must add the centrifugal and Coriolis
forces. As a first approximation, the surface of the Earth is taken as an inertial frame; but
because it is rotating such an assumption is not exactly valid. Newton proposed that the
distant “fixed stars” could be regarded as the basis of an exact frame, and this indeed
proved  to  be  feasible,  since  under  this  assumption  the  orbits  of  the  planets  were
ultimately correctly calculated from Newton’s laws.
Although the assumption of the “fixed stars” as an inertial frame worked well enough
from a practical point of view, it suffered from a certain theoretical arbitrariness, which
was contrary to the trend implicit in the development of mechanics, i.e., to express the
laws of physics solely as internal relationships in the movement itself. For a “favored
role” had, in effect, been transferred from the center of the Earth to the fixed stars.
Nevertheless, a significant gain had been made in “relativizing” the laws of physics, so
as to make them cease to refer to special favored objects, places, times, etc. Not only was
there no longer a special center in space and time but, also, there was no favored velocity
of the coordinate frame. For example, suppose we have a given frame of coordinates x,
referred to the fixed stars. Now imagine a rocket ship moving at a constant velocity, u
relative to the original frame. The coordinates x, t!, as measured relative to the rocket
ship, are then assumed to be given by the Galilean transformation,1
(2–3)
1 The Galilean transformation is, in fact, only an approximation, valid for velocities that are small
compared with that of light. Further on we shall see that at higher velocities one must use the
Lorentz transformation instead.

6  The Special Theory of Relativity
(2–4)
This means that one obtains the same law in the new frame as in the old frame. This is a
limited principle of relativity. For the mechanical laws are the same relationship in all
frames that are connected by a Galilean transformation.
Nevertheless, to make subsequent developments clear, it must be pointed out that
Newton and those who followed him did not fully realize the relativistic implications of
the dynamics that they developed. Indeed, the general attitude (of which that of Newton
was typical) was that there is an absolute space, i.e., a space which exists in itself, as if it
were a substance, with basic properties and qualities that are not dependent on its
relationship to anything else whatsoever (e.g., the matter that is in this space). Likewise,
he supposed that time “flowed” absolutely, uniformly, and evenly, without relationship to
the actual events that happen as time passes. Moreover, he supposed that there is no
essential relationship between space and time, i.e., that the properties of space are defined
and determined independently of movement of objects and entities with the passage of
time, and that the flow of time is independent of the spacial properties of such objects and
entities. The inertial frame was, of course, identified with that of absolute space and time.
In a sense, it may be said that Newton continued, in a modified form, those aspects of
the Aristotelian concept of absolute space that were compatible with physical facts
available at the time. We shall see later, however, that further facts, which become
available in the nineteenth century, were such as to make Newtonian notions of absolute
space and time untenable, leading instead to Einstein’s relativistic point of view.
In other words, the velocities are taken to add linearly (which is in agreement with
“common sense”). Note especially the third equation, t!=t, which asserts that clocks are
not affected by relative motion.
Let us now look at the equations of motions in the new frame. Equation (2–2) becomes

III
The Problem of the Relativity of the 
Electrodynamics
We have seen that even in Newtonian mechanics there was a strong element of relativity.
Einstein was therefore not the first to introduce relativistic notions into physics. What he
did was to extend such notions to the phenomena of electrodynamics and optics, thus
laying the foundation for the even more important step of bringing out explicitly and in a
thoroughgoing manner the notion that all physical laws express invariant relationships
which are to be found in the changes that are actually taking place in natural processes.
Why  was  it  necessary  to  extend  relativistic  principles  to  the  phenomena  of
electrodynamics and optics? The reason is basically that light has a finite velocity of
propagation, 
 cm per sec. Now, light was originally thought to be
constituted of particles moving at this speed, but later, it was discovered to be a wave,
with interference, diffraction properties, etc. Maxwell’s equations for the electromagnetic
field vectors 
 and 
 indeed predicted waves of this kind, in such a way that their
speed  was  determined  by  the  ratio  of  electrostatic  and  electromagnetic  units.  The
calculated speed agreed with the observed speed of light, thus giving a strong indication
that light was in fact a form of electromagnetic wave. The agreement of the observed
polarization  properties  of  light  with  those  predicted  by  the  electromagnetic  theory
provided further confirmation of this assumption. Light, infrared, and ultraviolet rays, as
well as many other kinds of radiation, were then explained as electromagnetic radiations
of very high frequency, emitted by electrons, atoms, etc., moving in heated and otherwise
excited  matter.  Later,  lower-frequency  electromagnetic  waves  of  the  same  kind
(radiowaves) were produced in the laboratory. Gradually there emerged a whole spectrum
of electromagnetic radiation, as shown in Figure 3–1.
Now, just as sound waves consist of vibrations of a material medium, air, it was
postulated that electromagnetic waves are propagated in a rarefied, all-pervasive (space-
filling) medium called “the ether,” which was assumed to be so fine that planets pass
through it without appreciable friction. The electromagnetic field was taken to be a
certain kind of stress in the ether, somewhat similar to stresses that occur in ordinary
solid, liquid, and gaseous materials that transmit waves of sound and mechanical strains
(e.g., the ether was regarded as supporting Faraday’s “tubes of electric and magnetic
force”).
If this assumption is true, then the Galilean relativity of mechanics cannot hold for
electrodynamics, and particularly for light. For if light has a velocity C relative to the
ether, then by Galileo’s law (2–3) for addition of velocities, it will be C!=C!U, relative to
a frame that is moving through the ether at a speed U. Maxwell’s equations will then have
to be different in different Galilean forms, in order to give different speeds of light. The
laws of electrodynamics will have a “favored frame,” i.e., that of the ether.
Laws
 
of

8  The Special Theory of Relativity
This is, of course, not an intrinsically unreasonable idea. Thus, sound waves do in fact 
move at a certain speed Vs, relative to the air. And relative to a train moving at a speed U, 
their  velocity  is  Vs!=Vs!U.  But  here  it  must  be  recalled  that  whereas  the  air  is  a 
well-confirmed material medium, known to exist on many independent grounds, the ether 
is an unproved hypothesis, introduced only to explain the propagation of electromagnetic 
waves. It was therefore necessary to obtain some independent evidence of the existence 
and properties of the presumed ether.
One of the most obvious ideas for checking this point would have been to measure the 
velocity of light in a moving frame of reference, to see if its speed C!, relative to the moving 
frame, is changed to C!!U, where U is the velocity of the frame. For example, consider Fizeau’s 
experiment, diagrammed in Figure 3–2. Light is passed through a moving toothed wheel at A
across the distance L and reflected back by a mirror. The speed of the wheel is adjusted so 
that the reflected light comes through a succeeding tooth. With the aid of a suitable clock, 
the speed of the wheel is measured; and from this, one knows the time T for one tooth to replace 
a previous one at a given angular position of the wheel. The speed of light is then given by
(3–1)
Now, we know that the Earth must be moving through the presumed ether at some 
variable but unknown velocity V. However, it is clear that this velocity will differ in 
summer and winter, for example, by about 36 miles per sec. Let us now see if this 
difference would show up in the speed of light as observed in different seasons.
Figure 3–1

The Problem of the Relativity of the Laws of Electrodynamics  9
If C is the speed of light relative to the ether, it will be C!U relative to the laboratory, 
while the light is going toward the mirror and C+V while it is returning. The traversal 
time T is thus
(3–2)
where we have expanded the result as a series of powers of the small quantity V/C, 
retaining only up to second powers.
Note then that the observable effect is only of order V2/C2, which is of the order of 
10–8. At the same time when physicists began to study this problem seriously (toward the 
end of the nineteenth century) such an effect was too small to be detected, with the 
apparatus available (although now it can be done with Kerr cells, with results that will be 
discussed later).
Figure 3–2

IV
The Michelson-Morley Experiment
The main difficulty in checking the ether hypothesis was to obtain measurements of the
speed of light with very great accuracy. Toward the end of the nineteenth century
interferometers  had  been  developed  which  were  capable  of  quite  high  precision.
Michelson and Morley made use of this fact to do an experiment that measured very
accurately, not the velocity of light itself, but rather the ratio of the velocities of light in
two perpendicular directions; which ratio would, as we shall see, also in principle serve
as a means of testing the hypothesis of an ether.
The experimental arrangement is shown schematically in Figure 4–1. Light enters a
half-silvered mirror at A. Part of the beam goes to a mirror at B, at a distance l1 from A,
which reflects it back. Another part goes to the mirror C at l2, also to be reflected back.
The two beams combine at A again to go on to D as indicated, giving rise to an
interference  pattern.  By  counting  fringes  it  is  possible  to  obtain  very  accurate
measurements of the difference between the optical paths of the two beams.
If the Earth were at rest in the ether, and if l1 were equal to l2, there would be
constructive interference at D. But suppose 
Figure 4–1

The Michelson-Morley Experiment  11
and that the Earth is moving at a speed U in the X direction. The time for light to go from
B to C and back again is given (as in the Fizeau toothed-wheel experiment) Eq. (3–2):
(4–1)
Let t2 be the time for light to go from A to C and back. We note that while the light passes
from A to C, the mirror at C moves relative to the ether through a distance d=Ut2/2 in the
X direction. Similarly, while the light is returning, the mirror A moves the same distance
in the X direction. Then by the Pythagorean theorem, the total path length of the light ray
is (back and forth)
(4–2)
Since the speed of light in the ether is C, we have
(4.3)
(4–4)
(4–5)
The time difference is
(4–6)
If (as was the case in the actual experiment) l1=l2, then
(4–7)
 is of course proportional to the fringe shift.

12  The Special Theory of Relativity
Now suppose that the apparatus is rotated through 90°. Then, the fringe pattern should
be altered. So by rotating the apparatus, one should be able to observe a steadily changing
fringe shift, with maximum and minimum indicating the direction of the Earth’s velocity
through the ether. From the magnitude of the fringe shift, one should be able to calculate
the value U of the speed itself.
Of course, it might happen by accident that at the moment the experiment was done the
Earth would be at rest in the ether, thus leading to no observable changes when the
apparatus is rotated. But, by waiting 6 months, one could infer that the speed of the Earth
must be about 36 miles per sec, so that a fringe shift could then be observed.
Because the predicted fringe shift is of order U2/C2, it should of course be very small.
Yet, the apparatus of Michelson and Morley was sensitive enough to detect the predicted
shifts. Nevertheless, when the experiment was done, the result was negative within the
experimental accuracy. No fringe shifts were observed at any season of the year. Later,
more  accurate  experiments  of  a  similar  kind  continued  to  confirm  the  results  of
Michelson and Morley.

V
Efforts to Save the Ether Hypothesis
The Michelson-Morley experiment was doubtless one of the most crucial in modern
physics. For it contradicts certain straight-forward inferences of the hypothesis that light
is carried by an ether. It ultimately led to the radical changes in our concepts of space and
time brought in by the theory of relativity. Yet it must not be supposed that physicists
immediately changed their ideas as a result of this experiment. Indeed, as was only
natural, a long series of alternative hypotheses was tried, with the object either of saving
the ether in one way or another, or at least of saving the “common-sense” notions of
space and time that were behind Newton’s laws of motion and their invariance under a
Galilean transformation (2–3). Nevertheless, all of these attempts ultimately failed or else
led to such confusion that physicists eventually felt it wiser not to proceed further along
these lines.
We shall give here a summary of a few of the main accommodations and adjustments of
ideas that were made in order to keep older ideas of space and time, while explaining the
negative results of the Michelson-Morley experiment. [For a more thorough account of
these  efforts,  see  W.Panofsky  and  M.Phillips,  Classical  Electricity  and  Magnetism,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1955; also, C.Moller, The Theory of Relativity, Oxford,
New York, 1952.]
One of the simplest of these was the suggestion that bodies such as the Earth drag the
ether with them in their neighborhood, as a ball moving through air drags a layer of air
near its surface. As a result, the measured velocity of light would not change with the
seasons, because it would always be determined relative to the layer of ether that moves
with the Earth.
Sir Oliver Lodge tried to test for such an effect by passing a beam of light near the edge
of a rapidly spinning disk. If the disk had been dragging a layer of ether, observable
effects  on  the  light  beam  could  have  been  expected.  However,  the  results  of  this
experiment were negative.
The idea arose quite naturally that while a small object does not drag a significant
amount of ether, a larger body such as the Earth might still do so. But this explanation
was ruled out by observations on the aberration of light.
To understand this problem let us temporarily reconsider the assumption that the Earth
does not drag the ether with it. Suppose it to be moving relative to the ether at a velocity
U in the X direction (see Figure 5–1) and that an astronomer was pointing his telescope

14  The Special Theory of Relativity
at a distant star, which for the sake of simplicity we take to be in a direction perpendicular
to that of motion of the Earth (i.e., Y). The light from the star propagates through the
ether in the Y direction. However, because the telescope is moving with the Earth, it must
be pointed at a certain angle, 
 (usually very small), relative to the Y direction, such that
. Since the Earth’s velocity changes by 36 miles per sec between
summer and winter, the angular position of the star should alter by about 2!10–4 rad,
which is observable in a good telescope. And the shift is actually found.
Now, if the Earth dragged a layer of ether next to it, no such aberration (or shift) in the
position of the star should be seen. The problem is very similar to that of sound waves
incident on a moving railway train. To simplify the problem, let us again suppose the
waves to be incident perpendicular to the side walls of the train from a very distant
source, as indicated in Figure 5–2. These waves would set the walls and windows into
vibration at the same frequency and these would in turn set the air inside the train in
vibration. It is evident that since the incident sound is a plane wave, the walls of the train
will emit corresponding plane waves in the same direction. Therefore, a variation of the
speed of the train would produce no corresponding variation in the direction of the sound
inside the train. And it is evident that in a similar way, plane light waves from a distant
star incident on a moving layer of ether near the Earth’s surface would not show any
dependence of their direction on the speed of the Earth.
The experiment of Sir Oliver Lodge, along with observations on the aberration of light,
seem fairly definitely to rule out the hypothesis of an ether drift, so that this cannot be
used to explain the negative results of the Michelson-Morley experiment. Later, an
alternative
Figure 5–1

Efforts to Save the Ether Hypothesis  15
suggestion was tried—that perhaps the speed of light is determined as C not relative to
some hypothetical ether but relative to the source of the light.
Of course the source of most of the light on the Earth is the Sun, but when this light is
used it will have been reflected from bodies on the surface of the Earth. According to this
theory, the last reflection would be the main factor determining the speed of light. So
whether a lamp or reflected sunlight were used, one would expect the speed of light to be
C relative to the Earth, thus explaining the negative result of the Michelson-Morley
experiment.
This  hypothesis  was  consistent  with  many  of  the  facts  available  (including  the
observations on the aberration of light), but it ran into serious difficulties with regard to
observations on double stars. To see what these difficulties are, let us assume, for the sake
of simplicity, that there are (as shown in Figure 5–3) two stars, A and B, of equal mass
moving on opposite sides of a circular orbit around their common center of mass C
(similar results can easily be seen to follow for the more general case). Let us consider an
observer P, at a very great distance d, from the center of the orbit of the stars, so that the
angle subtended by their orbits is always very small. We consider only the light rays that
are emitted in such a way as eventually to reach the point P. Let us begin with those rays
which reach P after being emitted at the time t1, when the diameter of the orbit is along
the line PC (which is then the line of sight). By means of a little algebra (involving the
Pythagorean theorem), we can see that because of the smallness of V/C (where V is the
speed of rotation in the orbit), both rays can be regarded as traveling at the same speed
along the direction of PC (neglecting terms of order V2/C2, which are small in relation to
Figure 5–3
Figure 5–2
 ti
me taken for light from the nearer star, A, to reach P will be
discussion). 
The
certain terms of order V/C that will be seen to be relevant in the  subsequent

16  The Special Theory of Relativity
(5–1)
(where a is the radius of the orbit) and that light from the farther star, B, will be
(5–2)
As the orbits of the two stars develop (with the speed of light always being C relative to
the emitting star), the rays reaching P from A and B will begin to have different
velocities. Indeed, at the time t2 when the diameter of the orbit is perpendicular to the line
of sight, the light from A, which is receding from P, will have a velocity of C!V, while
that from B, which is approaching P, will have a velocity of C+V. (We have here used the
smallness of 
 to neglect terms of order 
). The times taken for this light to reach P
will be (in the approximations that we are using)
(5–3)
Finally, at the time t3, when the orbits have turned through 180° (so that the diameter is
once again along the line of sight), we shall have
(5–4)
Let us now compute
(5–5)
This is a first-order quantity in v/c. Moreover, since d is an astronomical order of
distance, it can easily happen that (dv)/c2>a/c. In such a case, the light emitted from star
A at t2 will arrive at P before the light emitted from this star at the time t1. Hence there
will have to be a corresponding period of time when no light from star A arrives at P
(similar results follow, of course, for star B). This would produce a rather striking and
easily observable kind of variation in the intensity of light from the double star, which has
not in fact been found. We conclude, therefore, that the hypothesis that light is emitted at
a velocity C relative to its source is not tenable.

VI
The Lorentz Theory of the Electron
An entirely different way of trying to reconcile the ether hypothesis with the results of
experiments (such as those cited in Chapters 4 and 5) was developed by Lorentz. The
theory of Lorentz actually did lead, as we shall see, to such a reconciliation; but, in doing
so, it brought up new problems of a much deeper order concerning the meaning of space
and time measurements, which laid a foundation for Einstein’s radically new concepts of
space and time.
Even though the Lorentz theory is no longer generally accepted today, it is worthwhile
to study it in some detail, not only because it helps to provide an appreciation of the
historical context out of which the theory of relativity arose, but much more because it
helps us to understand the essential content of Einstein’s new approach to the problem.
Indeed, a critical examination of the Lorentz theory leads one, on the basis of already
familiar and accepted physical notions, to see clearly what is wrong with the Newtonian
concepts of space and time, as well as to suggest a great many of the changes needed in
order to avoid the difficulties to which these concepts lead.
Lorentz began by accepting the assumption of an ether. However, his basic new step
was to study the dependence of the process of measurement of space and time on the
relationship between the atomic constitution of matter and the movement of matter
through the ether.
It was already known that matter was constituted of atoms, consisting of negatively
charged particles, called electrons, and positively charged bodies (which were shown by
Rutherford to be in the form of small nuclei) to which the electrons were attracted. The
forces between atoms, responsible for binding them into molecules, and ultimately into
macroscopic solid objects were, on plausible grounds, surmised to originate in the
attractive forces between electrons and the positively charged part of an atom, and the
repulsive forces between electrons and electrons. Consider, for example, a crystal lattice.
The places where such electrical forces come to a balance would then determine the
distance D between successive atoms in the lattice, so that, in the last analysis, the size of
such a crystal containing a specified number of atomic steps in any given direction is
determined in this way.
Lorentz assumed that the electrical forces were in essence states of stress and strain in
the ether. From Maxwell’s equations (assumed to hold in the reference frame in which the
ether was at rest) it was possible to calculate the electromagnetic field surrounding a
charged particle. For a particle at rest in the ether, it followed that this field was derivable
from a potential, 
, which was a spherically symmetric function of the distance R from
the charge, i.e., 
 (where q is the charge of the particle). When a similar
calculation was done for a charge moving with a velocity v through the ether, it was
found that the force field was no longer spherically symmetric. Rather its symmetry
became that of an ellipse of revolution, having unchanged diameters in the directions
perpendicular to the velocity, but shortened in the direction of motion in the ratio
. This shortening is evidently an effect of the movement of the electron
through the ether.

18  The Special Theory of Relativity
Because the electrical potential due to all the atoms of the crystal is just the sum of the
potentials due to each particle out of which it is constituted, it follows that the whole
pattern of equipotentials is contracted in the direction of motion and left unaltered in a
perpendicular direction, in just the same way as happens with the field of a single
electron. Now the equilibrium positions of the atoms are at points of minimum potential
(where the net force on them cancels out). It follows then that when the pattern of
equipotentials is contracted in the direction of motion, there will be a corresponding
contraction of the whole bar, in the same direction, so that it will be shortened in the ratio
. As a result, a measuring rod of length l0 at rest will, when moving
with a velocity v along the direction of its length, have the dimension
(6–1)
But if the bar is perpendicular to the direction of motion, its length will of course not be
altered.
Let  us  now  return  to  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment.  Since  the  arms  of  the
interferometer are composed of atoms, we expect them to undergo the same shift as that
given by Eq. (6–1). However, only the bar whose length is parallel to the direction of
movement will be shortened; the other will not be changed in length. Since the two bars
are assumed to be equal in length when they are at rest, we write in Eq. (4–6)
(6–2)
and obtain
(6–3)
In this way we calculate that, independent of the velocity of the Earth, there will be no
fringe shift, thus reconciling the ether theory with the results of the Michelson-Morley
experiment. This reconciliation is of course directly a result of what has since been called
the Lorentz contraction of an object moving through the ether.1
1 Fitzgerald had earlier suggested a similar contraction on ad hoc grounds, but Lorentz was the
first to justify it theoretically.

VII
Further Development of the Lorentz Theory
Although the result described in Chapter 6 is very suggestive, it does not by itself give a
complete account of all the factors that are relevant in this problem. Thus, although the
direct measurement of the velocity of light with the requisite accuracy was not possible in
the time of Lorentz, it was evidently necessary for him to predict what would happen
when such measurements became feasible (as they are now). For it might perhaps still be
possible to measure the speed v of the Earth relative to the ether by a very exact Fizeau
experiment, using the terms of order v2/c2 in Eq. (3–2) to calculate this speed.
To treat the problem Lorentz had to consider not only that rulers would contract when
moving through the ether, but also that there might be some corresponding effect on
clocks (since both a ruler and a clock are needed to measure the velocity of light in this
way). This problem is rather a complicated one to analyze, so that we shall only sketch
some of the principal factors involved.
A typical clock is a harmonic oscillator, satisfying the equation 
,
where M is its mass and K is its force constant. Its period is
(7–1)
Now, let us first consider what happens to the mass of a moving electron. As we
accelerate an electron, we create a magnetic field that is steadily increasing. As is well
known, a changing magnetic field induces an electric field. And by Lenz’s law, this
electric field is such as to oppose the electromotive force that produced the increasing
magnetic field in the first place. In other words, electromagnetic processes have a kind of
inertia, or resistance to change, which shows up, for example, in the property of the
inductance of a coil. With an electron this inertia appears as a resistance to acceleration.
A detailed calculation (which is beyond the scope of this work) shows that if an electron
is given the acceleration a, there is a “back force” given by
(7–2)
where 
 is a constant depending on the size and charge distribution of the electron. (For
a slow-moving spherical-shell charge or radius r0 and charge q, 
.) The
equation of motion of the electron is then
(7–3)

20  The Special Theory of Relativity
(over and above this reaction of the accelerating electron to the field produced by itself).
This equation can be re-written as
(7–4)
where. 
. We note that in the actual equations of motion there is an
effective mass m, which may also be called the observed mass. For it is this mass which is
measured when we observe the force needed to accelerate the particle. On the other hand,
 is called the “electromagnetic mass,” which evidently must be added to mm to give the
effective mass.
Such an effective mass is also found in hydrodynamics, where it is shown that a moving
ball drags the fluid near it, so that it has a higher resistance to acceleration than such a
ball  in  a  vacuum.  It  may  be  said  that  the  electromagnetic  field  near  the  electron
contributes similarly to the inertia.
The above considerations show that the equations of mechanics are deeply bound with
those of electrodynamics. This relationship would become especially significant if we
could  find  some  way  of  distinguishing  mm  and  
.  According  to  Lorentz  such  a
distinction should in principle, be possible. For a further calculation based on the Lorentz
theory showed that the electromagnetic mass 
 is a function of the velocity relative to
the ether.
(7–5)
where 
 is the electromagnetic mass of an electron at rest in the ether. On the other
hand, according to Newtonian concepts, the mechanical mass should be a constant,
independent of the velocity. We therefore, write for the effective mass,
(7–6)
By studies of the variation of effective mass with speed, one might then be able to
distinguish the mechanical mass mm from the electromagnetic mass 
. Such studies have in fact been made with cathode-ray measurements of e/m. These
experiments disclose that the effective mass does in fact increase with the velocity and in
the  ratio
.  Thus,  it  would  seem  either  that  all  the  mass  is
where mm is the ordinary “mechanical” mass and F is the remainder of the applied force

Further Development of the Lorentz Theory  21
electromagnetic in origin or that, for unknown reason, the non-electromagnetic mass mm
is  also  proportional  to  
.  As  far  as  the  laws  of  mechanics  are
concerned, both of these hypotheses lead to the same results, so that, in the present
discussion, we need not concern ourselves further with the question of the origin of mass.
For us it is sufficient to note that in fact we have
(7–7)
where m0 is the observed mass of the particle at rest in the ether.
It is evident then that because every particle grows heavier in a clock moving through
the ether, such a clock must oscillate more slowly. However, to calculate the period we
would have to take into account not only the change of mass but also the change in force
constant, K. This would require a rather detailed investigation of the effects of movement
through the ether in the interatomic forces—a discussion too lengthy to record here.
Such a calculation would show that 
, with the result that
(7–8)
where T0 is the period of the clock at rest in the ether and T is the period of the
corresponding clock as it moves through the ether. Thus clocks moving through the ether
slow down in the ratio
(7–9)
Now  the  person  who  is  moving  with  the  laboratory  is  also  constituted  of  atoms.
Therefore, his body will be shortened in the same ratio as his rulers, so that he will not
realize that there has been a change. Likewise, his physical-chemical processes will slow
down in the same ratio as do his clocks. Presumably his mental processes will slow down
in an equal ratio, so that he will not see that his clocks have altered. He will therefore
attribute to his rulers the same length, l0, that they would have if they were at rest in the
ether, and likewise he will attribute the same period, T0, to his clocks. In interpreting his
experimental results, we must therefore take this into account.
Let us now return to the measurement of the velocity of light by the Fizeau method.
Since the clocks and rulers of a laboratory moving with the surface of the Earth are
altered, it is best to describe this experiment by imagining ourselves to be in a frame that

22  The Special Theory of Relativity
is at rest relative to the ether. The velocity of light will then be c in this frame. Let a ray
of light enter the toothed wheel at the time t=0, as measured in the ether frame (see
Figure 3–2). We suppose that the surface of the Earth (with the laboratory) is moving
through the ether at the speed v. Let t1 be the time taken for a light ray to go from A to the
mirror  at  B,  from  which  it  will  be  reflected.  Remembering  the  movement  of  the
laboratory, we have
(7–10)
For the light ray on its way back, we similarly obtain
(7–11)
But  now  we  recall  that  the  actual  length  of  the  ruler  is  shortened  to
,  while  the  period  of  the  clock  is  increased  so  that
. Substitution of these values into Eq. (7–11) yields
(7–12)
This result is independent of the speed of the laboratory relative to the ether. But if the
observer in the laboratory does not realize what is happening to his rulers and clocks, and
measures the speed of light under the assumption that they are unaltered, he will, of
course, calculate this speed as 2l0/T0. We have thus proved that because of the Lorentz
contraction and slowing down of moving clocks, all observers will obtain the same
measured speed of light by the Fizeau method, if each one supposes his own instruments
to be registering correctly. This means, of course, that the Fizeau experiment cannot be
used to find out the speed of the Earth relative to the ether, because its result is
independent of this speed.

VIII
The Problem of Measuring Simultaneity in the
Lorentz Theory
The results of Chapters 6 and 7 show that neither the Michelson-Morley experiment nor
the Fizeau experiment can provide us with knowledge of the speed of the Earth relative to
the ether. Yet it is evident that this speed plays an essential role in the Lorentz theory. For,
without knowing it, we cannot correct our rulers and clocks to find out how to measure
the “true length” and the “true time,” which would be indicated by rulers and clocks at
rest relative to the ether.
As a further attempt to provide information on this question, let us consider yet another
way of measuring the speed of light. Consider two points A and B, separated by a
distance l0, as measured in the laboratory frame. Suppose the laboratory to be moving at a
speed v relative to the ether in the direction of the line AB. Let us send a light signal from
A to B and measure the time t0 (as indicated by laboratory clocks) needed for the signal to
pass from A to B. The measured speed of light would then be
(8–1)
If we could show that this measured speed depended in a calculable way on the speed of
the laboratory relative to the ether, then we could solve our problem of finding this speed,
thus permitting the correction of our rulers and clocks, so as to yield “true lengths” and
“true times.”
We could in principle do the experiment, if we could place equivalent clocks at A and
B, which were accurately synchronized. The difference of readings of the clock at A on
the departure of the signal and the clock at B on its arrival would then be equal to t0. But
how can we synchronize the clocks? A common way is to use radio signals. But this
evidently will not do here, because the radio waves travel at the speed of light, which is,
of course, just what we are trying to determine by the experiment. We shall therefore
propose another purely mechanical way of synchronizing the clocks. Let us construct two
similar clocks, place them side by side, and synchronize them. After we verify that they
are running at the same rate, let us separate the clocks very slowly and gently, so as not to
disturb the movements of their inner mechanisms by jolts and jarring accelerations. Then,
at least according to the usually accepted principles of Newtonian mechanics, as well as
of “common sense,” the two clocks ought to continue to run at the same rates while being
separated, so that they remain synchronous. To check on this we could bring them back
together in a similar way and see if they continue to show the same readings.
Let us now see what would happen to these clocks, if they were in a laboratory moving
at a speed v relative to the ether. Once again, we imagine ourselves to be observers at rest
in the ether. While the clocks were initially together and being compared, we would see
that they were running slower than similar clocks at rest in the ether, in the ratio

24  The Special Theory of Relativity
. Now, while clock A remains at the same place in the laboratory, clock
B is moved. While it is moving, it has a velocity 
 relative to the ether. We
assume that 
, in order to be sure that the movement is gentle and gradual. If l is
the ultimate separation as measured in the ether frame, and 
 is the time needed for
separation (also as measured in the ether frame), we have
(8–2)
While the clocks are separating, they will be running at slightly different rates. Indeed, if
v0=1/T0 is the frequency of a clock when it is at rest in the ether, then the “true”
frequency of clock A, as observed in the ether frame, will be
(8–3)
while that of clock B will be
(8–4)
Expanding in powers of 
, and retaining only first powers of 
, we obtain
(8–5)
If a time 
 is required to separate the clocks, then their phase differences will be
(8–6)
The difference in time readings will be
(8–7)

The Problem of Measuring Simultaneity in the Lorentz Theory  25
Substitution of 
 yields
(8–8)
We  see  then  that  the  clocks  get  out  of  phase  by  an  amount  proportional  to  their
separation, l0 and to v. Even if 
 is small, so that the two clocks run at nearly the same
rate while they are separating, the time interval, 
, increases correspondingly,
so that the total relative phase shift is independent of 
. Note also that by a similar
argument it can be shown that if the two clocks are brought back together again, they will
come back into phase and show the same readings.
Of course, when 
 is large, the expansion in power of 
 must be carried further,
and the phase difference between the clocks becomes a rather complicated function,
which is no longer given by Eqs. (8–6) to (8–8). We shall later show (see Chapter 28) that
when 
 approaches C, the two clocks will indeed not show the same reading if
separated and then brought together again. But for the present we restrict ourselves to
small 
, so that (8–6) to (8–8) will hold.
The above discussion demonstrates that even if two clocks are equivalently constructed
and run at the same rate while side by side, they will get out of synchronism and read
different times on being separated, although they will return to synchronous readings
when they are brought back together again (provided that their relative velocity, 
, is
never very great). On the other hand, the observer in the laboratory frame (which is
generally moving relative to the ether), who does not realize the existence of this phase
shift, will call two events simultaneous when his two clocks A and B give the same
readings. Thus, he will make a mistake about what is simultaneous and what is not.
Let us try to find the relationship between the times ascribed by a laboratory observer
and the “true” times, as measured by clocks at rest in the ether [note that according to
(8–8), when v=0, displaced clocks remain synchronous, so that such clocks at rest in the
ether do measure “true” time even if they are in different places]. Now the laboratory
clock  reading  must  not  only  be  corrected  according  to  the  formula
, but it must have the error in simultaneity removed; from Eq.
(8–8) we see that the displaced clock reads less than the undisplaced one, so that (8–8)
must be added to t!. This gives
(8–9)
Let us now return to the problem of measuring the velocity of light by emitting a flash at
A and finding the time needed for light to go a measured distance to be received at B. Let

26  The Special Theory of Relativity
us suppose that the distance and time measured with the aid of the laboratory equipment
are, respectively, l0 and t0, yielding a measured velocity of light, cm=l0/t0. Let us further
suppose that the laboratory is moving at a velocity v relative to the ether, in the direction
of the line AB. We let l be the “true” distance between A and B. But because the
laboratory is moving, the light must travel a distance l!=l+vt, where t is the “true” time
taken by light to go from A to B. Since l!=ct, we have
 
But using (8–9), and with 
, we arrive at
 
(8–10)
Comparing with (8–1) we see that the moving observer will always obtain the same
measured velocity for light (Cm=C), independent of his speed through the ether.

IX
The Lorentz Transformation
We have seen in Chapters 6, 7, and 8 that the Lorentz theory implies that several natural
methods of observing the speed of light relative to the ether (the Michelson-Morley
experiment, the Fizeau toothed-wheel experiment, and the direct measurement of the time
needed for a signal to propagate between two points) lead to results that are independent
of the speed of the laboratory instruments. The question then arises as to whether there
exists any experiment at all where results would depend on this speed, and thus permit its
being measured. In this chapter we shall show that according to the Lorentz theory no
such experiment is in fact possible.
We shall begin by finding the relationship between the coordinates x!, y!, z! of an event
with its time t!, as measured by instruments moving through the ether with the laboratory,
and the “true” co-ordinates x, y, z with the “true” time t, as measured by corresponding
instruments at rest in the ether (see Figure 9–1).
For the sake of convenience let us consider coordinate frames in which an event with
coordinates x!=y!=z!=t!=0 corresponds to one with x=y=z=t=0. We suppose that the
laboratory has a speed v in the z direction. If we consider a measuring rod fixed in the
laboratory frame, whose rear edge is at z!=0 while its front edge is at z!=l0, then Eq. (8–9)
already gives us the proper expression
Figure 9–1
for the time t corresponding to z!=l0. With z!=l0 we obtain
(9–1)

28  The Special Theory of Relativity
Since x and y are unchanged by motions in the z direction, we have
(9–2)
There remains only the problem of finding a corresponding expression for z in terms of z!
and t!. Actually, it is easier to begin by solving for z! in terms of z and t, rather than the
other way round. To do this, we first recall that in the ether frame the ruler is moving with
velocity v along the direction of its length. To simplify the problem, suppose that at t=0
the rear edge of the ruler passes z=0. In accordance with our choice of the origins of
coordinates in the two frames, this will correspond to z!=0, t!=0 in the laboratory frame.
Then, if the front edge of the ruler reaches the point z at the time t (corresponding to z!, t!
in the laboratory frame), the actual length of the ruler will be z!!=z–vt (to take into
account  its  movement).  From  the  Lorentz  contraction,  we  have
, or
(9–3)
Substituting (9–1) for t in the above, we obtain
 
A little algebra yields
(9–5)
Equations (9–1), (9–2) and (9–5) express x, y, z, t as functions of x!, y!, z!, t!, thus defining
a transformation between the “true” co-ordinates and those that are measured by an
observer moving relative to the ether with velocity V in the direction. This is called the
Lorentz transformation.
Alternatively, we could have eliminated z from (9–1), obtaining
(9–6)

The Lorentz Transformation  29
Equations (9–3), (9–6) and (9–2) now express x!, y!, z!, t! as functions of x, y, z, t. This is
the inverse Lorentz transformation from x, y, z, t to x , y!, z!, t!. The direction and inverse
forms of the transformation are of course equivalent, because one can be derived from the
other.
Let us now consider a light wave emitted from the origin (x=y=z=0) at t=0. A light
wave will be propagated through the ether at speed C, so that the wave front is defined by
the surface
(9–7)
Let us now express this in terms of x!, y!, z!, t!. Using Eqs. (9–1), (9–2), and (9–5) we
obtain
(9–8)
We see from Eq. (9–8) that the front will also be a sphere in the x!, y!, z!, t! frame
representing a wave propagated at the “measured velocity” C. This result shows that
because of the changes of rulers and clocks resulting from the motion through the ether,
the Lorentz theory implies that all uniformly moving observers will ascribe the same
velocity C to light, independent of their speed of motion through the ether. In this way we
generalize the results of Chapters 6, 7, and 8, where we have seen how particular ways of
measuring the speed of light give values that do not depend on the speed of the laboratory
frame.

X
The Inherent Ambiguity in the Meanings of
Space-Time Measurements, According to the
Lorentz Theory
Chapters 6, 7, 8, and 9 show that according to the Lorentz theory every measurement of
the velocity of light will lead to the same result, independent of the speed of the
laboratory relative to the ether. Nevertheless, this theory formulates all its laws and
equations in terms of “true” distances and times, measured by rulers and clocks that are
supposed to be at rest in the ether. Therefore, the measured distances ought to be
corrected, to take into account the effect of the movement of the instruments before we
can know what they really mean. But if the Lorentz theory is right, there can be no way
thus to correct observed distances and times. The “true” distances and times are therefore
inherently ambiguous, because they drop out of all observable relationships that can be
found in actual measurements and experiments.
What then can be the status of these “true” distances and times that are supposed to be
measured by rulers and clocks at rest in the ether? If we recall that the ether is in any case
a purely hypothetical entity, not proved on the basis of any other independent evidence,
the problem becomes even sharper. Do these “true” distances and times really mean
anything at all? Or are they not just purely conceptual inventions, like dotted lines that we
sometimes draw in our imaginations, when we apply geometrical theorems, in order to
draw conclusions concerning real objects?
The problem is not just a purely theoretical one, which arises only as a result of the
analysis of Lorentz’s theory. It is also a factual problem. For the Michelson-Morley
experiment actually gave results that were independent of the speed of the Earth, in
accordance  with  what  the  Lorentz  theory  says.  In  Lorentz’s  time,  the  Fizeau
toothed-wheel experiment was not feasible with the accuracy needed to test the theory,
but since then, electrical methods of timing pulses of light have been developed which do
have the requisite accuracy, and these experiments also give a measured speed of light
that is independent of the speed of the Earth. Moreover, as we shall see later, Einstein’s
theory of relativity, which is based on the assumption that all observers will obtain the
same measured velocity of light, has been found to be correct in so many different kinds
of experiments that one can regard this fundamental assumption as very well confirmed
indeed. Therefore, the consideration of the experimental evidence available leads to just
the same problem as that to which the Lorentz theory gives rise: “How can one measure
the ‘true’ distances and ‘times’ that refer to the frame of the ether?”
In this connection it is perhaps worth noting parenthetically that a direct measurement
of the speed of propagation of light between two points has not yet been done, probably
because of technical difficulties in synchronizing clocks in different places without using
electrical signals. With the new, very accurate cesium clocks that are now available, it
should perhaps soon be possible to do such an experiment. But considering the enormous
amount of evidence on this point that has already been accumulated in other experiments,
there seems to be little reason to suppose that this experiment would not also fail to
depend on the velocity of the laboratory relative to the presumed ether.

XI
Analysis of Space and Time Concepts in Terms of
Frames of Reference
In the preceding chapter we saw that both theoretically and experimentally, the older
concepts of space and time lead to a critical problem, which is very deep in the sense that
it goes to the root of basic notions that are at the foundation of physics, as well as of a
large part of our everyday, technical, and industrial activities. This problem is of a novel
kind. For the difficulty was not that the Lorentz theory disagreed with experiment. On the
contrary, it was in accord with all that had been observed at the time of Lorentz, and in
fact, it is also in accord with all that has been observed since then. The problem was
rather that the fundamental concepts entering into the Lorentz theory, i.e., the “true” time
and “true” space coordinates as measured by apparatus that would be at rest in the ether,
were in fact completely ambiguous. For, as we have seen, it was deduced on the basis of
the Lorentz theory itself that no means at all could ever be found to correct the readings
of laboratory instruments to give the values of the “true” coordinates and times. Indeed,
since these properties of the “ether” frame of coordinates cancel out of all observable
results, it makes no difference whether we assume that there is such a frame or not.
Of course, if some properties of the ether had turned out to be observable, then the ether
would  have  had  a  further  physical  significance.  But  if  none  of  its  properties  are
observable, it can be said to have only the role of serving as a vehicle for the notions of
absolute space and time which are basic in Newtonian mechanics. Moreover, the attempt
to adjust these notions to the observed facts had, as we have seen, led to a state of
confusion in which it was no longer clear what was meant by our basic space and time
concepts or what could be done with them.
It seems evident that what is needed here is a fresh approach to this problem, starting
not from inherently untestable hypothesis concerning the ether, but as far as possible from
facts that are known and further basic hypotheses that can at least in principle be tested
by experiment. In order to help lay the foundation for such an approach, we shall begin
by giving a preliminary analysis of some of the main facts underlying our use of space
and time coordinates.
The first relevant fact in this problem is that space and time co-ordinates consist of
relationships of objects and events to some kinds of measuring instruments, set up by the
physicist himself. For example, to measure the length of something we can use a
sufficiently rigid ruler, and find (approximately) the numbers on the ruler to which the
two ends of our object correspond. Or alternatively, we can observe its ends with a
telescope, measuring the angle subtended by the object, assuming that light travels in
straight lines. From observations made at several points separated by known distances,
we can then calculate the length of our object, with the aid of Euclidian geometry. With
regard to time, we need, of course, some kind of clock, which may consist of a pendulum
or a harmonic oscillator. Alternatively, we can use some regular natural process as a
clock,  for  example,  the  period  of  rotation  of  the  Earth  as  the  half-life  of  certain
radioactive elements.

32  The Special Theory of Relativity
isolation. The real significance of our measurements arises in the fact that we can observe
distances and time intervals in many ways, with many different kinds of instruments and
procedures, and yet obtain equivalent results. For example, measurements of length made
with different rulers yield the same value, within a certain experimental imprecision or
error, that is characteristic of the ruler. And if we use triangulation with the aid of light
rays, or still another method, we can obtain essentially the same value for the length of an
object. This result may seem obvious and even trivial, but it is a fact of extraordinary
importance, not only for science but for the whole of our lives. For example, the
possibility of making machines with interchangeable parts depends on the fact that the
measurements determining the size of one part will yield a length that is equivalent to
that given by measurements determining the size of another part, into which, for example,
the first part must fit. We can easily imagine a world in which there are no quasi-rigid
objects, in which case such measurements would of course mean almost nothing. But, in
fact, in the world in which we actually live, there is a wide-enough distribution of
quasi-rigid objects to make the results of such measurements quite significant.
In measuring time the problem is very similar. In order that such measurements shall
have their usual significance it is necessary that different instruments and procedures be
able to yield equivalent results when applied to the same sets of events. For example, two
people with good watches may agree to meet at a certain place; and if they follow the
readings on their watches they will in fact meet, in the sense of reaching that place in
such a manner that one does not have to wait for the other. Likewise, one can follow
one’s watch in catching a train that is scheduled to leave at a certain time, and generally
one will actually meet the train. Or with regard to natural phenomena, one can plan to do
a certain amount of work before sunset, and if one manages to arrange the order of work
according to the clock, one can actually do the work before it is made impossible by
darkness. It is hardly necessary to emphasize the importance of a common measure of
time in ordering, arranging, and organizing our lives, both in relation to society and in
relation to natural phenomena.
The regularity and order in the properties of space can be summed up in the notion of a
frame of reference. This is essentially a regular grid of coordinates, set up to make
possible the expression of the results of different measurements in a common language,
and thus to facilitate the establishment of relationships between these measurements. For
example, one can imagine a set of parallel regularly spaced lines, say at intervals of 1 cm.
Three similar sets of this kind are required for three-dimensional space. They are usually
taken perpendicular to each other, although nonorthogonal systems of lines are also
sometimes used. A point, P, is specified by giving it three co-ordinates, x, y, z, which are
in essence, the number of unit steps needed along each of the three sets of lines in order
to reach that point from some origin, O (which can be chosen arbitrarily according to
convenience). If we need a higher accuracy of specification, we can in principle always
divide up the grid into intervals of the necessary degree of fineness.
It is important to emphasize that these coordinates do not actually exist in space but are
a purely conceptual invention, an abstraction introduced by us for our own convenience.
Nevertheless, they do have a certain objective content, because it is possible for any
number of different observers using various kinds of measurements to agree on these
coordinates. This possibility of agreement is an extremely important fact representing the
results of countless tests over many generations of men. (Recall that in a world where
there were no quasirigid objects, our current measurement procedures would not yield
Of course it is not enough to consider only the results of individual measurements in
such systematic agreement.)

Analysis of Space and Time Concepts in Terms of Frames of Reference  33
There is, of course, some arbitrariness in the choice of a coordinate frame, so that, for
example, one observer may choose a nonorthogonal frame, while another chooses an
orthogonal frame. Even if both choose orthogonal frames, they may have different origins
as well as different orientations. But here the important fact is that there exists a set of
transformations between different systems of coordinates, which enables us to know how
the coordinates of the same point in any specified system are related to those in another
system. For example, let the coordinates of a point P be x0, y0, z0, in system A. In system
B, which is parallel to A, but whose origin is displaced by a vector with components a, b,
c, the coordinates of the same point will be
(11–1)
Similarly, if we have two coordinate frames with the same origin, such that frame B is
rotated through an angle 
 about the Z axis relative to A, the coordinates of the same
point P in these two frames are related by the equations
(11–2)
In both these transformations it is easily shown that the distance between any two points,
P and Q, is an invariant function; i.e., it is the same function of its arguments in every
coordinate frame related by these transformations (displacement and rotation). We need
not give the proof (which is essentially based on the Pythagorean theorem) but merely
state the result.
If x1, y1, z1 and x2, y2, z2 are the coordinates in the frame B of the points P and Q
respectively,  while  (
)  and  (
)  represent  the  coordinate  of  the
corresponding points in frame A, we have
(11–3)
It  is,  of  course,  also  possible  to  find  transformations  between  orthogonal  and
nonorthogonal systems of coordinates, but, of course, in nonorthogonal frames Eq. (11–3)
no longer yields an invariant function. There do, however, exist more general invariant
functions, which apply to nonorthogonal frames as well as to orthogonal frames. These
are significant for Einstein’s general theory of relativity. But for his special theory of
relativity, which we are discussing here, it is adequate to consider only orthogonal
frames,  so  that  we  shall  not  hereafter  refer  to  nonorthogonal  systems  of  space
coordinates.

34  The Special Theory of Relativity
There also exists a time frame of reference. But as far as Newtonian mechanics is
concerned, this is much simpler than the space frame. With the aid of a clock, one can of
course mark off regular intervals of time, which are in principle as fine as are needed in
any particular problem. The number of such intervals between a given event and an
arbitrary origin is equal (on a suitably chosen scale) to the time coordinate of that event.
But with regard to time, it is assumed that there is in essence only one system of time
coordinates (except for the possibility of a change of scale and of a displacement that
shifts the origin to any desired moment). This implies that given any event with time
coordinate t, as measured by an accurate clock, there exists a potentially infinite set of
events, all co-present with the first mentioned event. As a result, no observer who carries
out proper procedures for time measurement will ever find that any one of this set of
events is before or after another. If this is the case, then it makes sense to ascribe the same
time coordinate t to all these events, and to say that they are simultaneous.
Of course, this assumption has been tested by means of a tremendous range of
observations, both in common experience and in scientific observations. Thus, in actual
fact it is common for people in different places to agree to do things at the same time, as
measured by their watches. Then, even if they are in different places, they can see each
other performing the planned action, if they are in each other’s line sight. Or else, they
can use radio or electrical signals to let each other know what is happening (e.g., two
people on opposite sides of the world can agree to call each other up when their watches
have the same reading, in terms of Greenwich mean time, and they will in fact discover
that when one of them calls, the other is ready, waiting to listen).
Of course, all this experience depends on the circumstance that the speed of light, radio
waves, etc., is so great that on the ordinary scale of time and distance, the time taken for a
signal to travel from one place to another can be neglected. This is equivalent to
assuming an infinite speed of light. When the finite speed of light is taken into account,
new problems do in fact arise, which will be discussed later. But for the present, we are,
of course, concerned only with the notions of pre-relativistic physics, with the object of
making clear the background of ideas that have to be taken into account, in order to come
to more clear notions of space and time than those which had developed by the end of the
nineteenth century.

XII
In the previous chapter we saw that certain notions of space and time have been built up
in physics. These notions are founded on a tremendous amount of general experience,
observation, and experiment over many generations. They are summed up in the idea of a
space-and-time frame of reference, specified by suitable coordinates x, y, z, and t, which
have been found to be capable of being put into a unique (i.e., one-one) correspondence
with a very wide variety of actual events and objects, as observed and measured by any
qualified observer, and in many different possible ways. By thus using coordinates
associated to frames of reference, we comprehend the essential content of the facts
behind the notions of space and time that are used in physics. Actually, however, these
facts are seen to be based on a tremendous totality of observed relationships between a
very wide variety of phenomena and various kinds of measuring apparatus, the whole of
which set of relationships is such that it can be ordered, organized, and integrated into a
structure capable of being described accurately in terms of such frames of reference.
If all the facts consist of observed relationships of the kind described above, what then
is the origin of the Newtonian idea of an absolute space and time, supposed to be like a
self-existent  and  flowing  substance,  essentially  independent  of  all  relationships?
Evidently it does not come primarily from experiment and observation, but rather, as was
suggested in Chapter 2, probably from the continuation in modified form of certain
aspects of the older Aristotelian notions of space. And if we ask where Aristotle found his
ideas, the answer is not far to seek. For Aristotle was merely expressing in a systematic,
organized, and somewhat speculative form a set of notions that has in essence probably
been held by everybody for many ages before the time of the Ancient Greeks, and is still
receptacle, inside which each thing has a certain place, size, and form. Thus space is in
effect “substantialized” and taken as an absolute.
We shall discuss the problem in some detail in the Appendix where we shall show that
there is a great deal of evidence demonstrating that the notion of space described above
has been built up and learned in the early years of each person’s life. Since then the use of
this concept has become a habit, further reinforced by the structure of the common
language, in such a way that it is very difficult even to think or to say something that is
intended to deny or contradict it. Of course, such a procedure is probably to a large extent
inevitable, and it is not our intention to suggest that in everyday life we could do without
“common-sense” notions of space. However, a very serious problem arises, because we
are not ordinarily aware of this process of learning our concept of space and reinforcing it
through habit and through the structure of our language. As a result, we tend to think of it
as  necessary  and  inevitable,  something  that  cannot  be  otherwise.  Then  scientists
incorporate  such  ideas  into  their  theories,  which  now  apparently  provide  scientific
confirmation of the inescapability of these concepts. But the fact is that these concepts
are the outcome of a long process that, in effect, conditions us to believe in their
inevitability in all possible contexts and modes of existence of everything, and not merely
to  use  them  as  tentative  and  therefore  dispensible  hypotheses  when  we  enter  new
domains of study. Out of this kind of conditioning has arisen what is perhaps the principal
Common-Sense” Notions of Space and Time
our  “common-sense”  view  of  space.  In  this  view,  space  is  regarded  as  a  kind  of
“

36  The Special Theory of Relativity
problem that modern physics has had to face in new domains such as those of relativity
and the quantum theory—i.e., the difficulty of entertaining new concepts which clash
with older ones that we have held habitually since childhood in such a way that to go
beyond such ideas seems inconceivable.
With regard to the concept of time, the problem of conditioning is perhaps even more
serious than it is for that of space. Indeed, just as we are in the habit of conceiving an
absolute space, which we suppose to represent the real place, size, and form of objects,
we are also in the habit from the time of childhood onward of conceptualizing the flux of
process, both in nature and in our own “inward” psychological experiences, as ordered in
a unique and absolute time sequence. The basis of this ordering is evident. At any
moment we see the whole of our environment, as what is co-present in our perceptions
—optical, aural, tactile, etc. At the moment when we are experiencing this totality of
what we perceive, we refer to it as “now.” Because the speed of light is so great, we can
of course neglect the time needed for light to reach us, at least as far as objects in our
immediate environment are concerned, while for most purposes even the time needed for
sound to reach us can also be neglected.
Within a certain limited domain we have found that it is indeed possible to ascribe a
single, universal, well-defined time order to events, as is implicit in the notions described
above. Within this domain, many different observers, using different instruments and
procedures,  all  agree  within  an  appropriate  experimental  error  which  events  are
co-present, which are before others, and which are after. In other words, there is a good
factual basis for the assumption of the chronological order of a unique past, present, and
future, the same for all events of every kind, regardless of where they take place and how
they are observed.
As in the case of our ideas about space, the problem with our common concept of time
is evidently not that it is totally wrong. If it were, then nobody would be foolish enough
to try to hold onto it. The difficulty arises because it is adequate in a limited domain, but
in-appropriate, as we shall see when extended beyond this domain. But as a result of the
fact that this domain of adequacy includes a tremendous amount of common experience
beginning with childhood, and because this experience has been incorporated into the
structure of the language, we find it very hard to get out of the habit of regarding our
ordinary concept of time as inevitable. Indeed, this sense of inevitability extends so far
that we perceive the world only through this concept of time. As a result, we do not seem
to be able actually to imagine that things could happen differently than in a unique and
absolute time order, the same for the whole universe. Nevertheless, as we shall see
presently, the theory of relativity demands that just such a notion is what we have to
consider. We must do this only abstractly and conceptually at first, even if it contradicts
“common-sense” notions. Later perhaps, as we become familiar with such ideas, we may
begin to grasp them in a more “intuitive” fashion.
To sum up, then, the concepts of absolute space and time are based only on the
continuation of certain modes of perceiving, conceiving, experiencing, etc., arising in the
domain of everyday life, which are now habitual but which we once learned as children.
These habits seem to be adequate in their proper domain, but there do not exist any
well-confirmed facts supporting the notion that such concepts are inevitable. Indeed, as
we have seen, the physical facts concerning space and time coordinates consists only of
sets of relationships between observed phenomena and instruments, in which no absolute
space and time is ever to be seen. Likewise, as we shall show in the Appendix, the facts

“Common-Sense” Concepts of Space and Time  37
concerning perception in common experience show that this also is always concerned
with relationships, and that here, too, there is in reality no absolute space and time. This
means that both in the field of physics and in that of everyday experience, it may be
necessary to set aside the notions of absolute space and time, if we are to understand what
has been discovered in broader domains.

XIII
Introduction to Einstein’s Conceptions of Space
and Time
As soon as we come to a domain in which the time taken for light to propagate between
different points cannot be ignored, then ordinary ideas in time and space begin to lead to
difficulties and problems that cannot be resolved within their limited framework. We
have already seen, in the study of the Lorentz theory, for example, that when equivalent
clocks running together synchronously are separated by a distance l0, their relative
readings of time will change by 
, where v is the velocity of
the clocks relative to the hypothetical ether. But because there is no way to measure this
velocity, we can never know precisely how much clocks which show the same time at
different places actually deviate from being “truly” synchronous. In ordinary experience,
such  effects  are  of  course  so  small  that  they  can  be  neglected.  In  very  accurate
measurements, however, we have seen that they play a crucial role.
Even  at  the  level  of  immediate  experience,  the  ambiguity  in  what  is  meant  by
simultaneity will become significant, when very long distances are involved. Consider,
for  example,  the  problem  of  radio-television  communication  that  will  arise  when
astronauts succeed in reaching Mars. Suppose that a man on the Earth asks his friend on
Mars what is happening “now.” Because of the time needed for the signals to reach Mars
and the signals from Mars to come to the Earth, the reply will not come for 10 minutes or
more. By the time the answer is received, the information will refer, not to what is
happening “now,” but to what was happening when the signal left Mars. So we will not
know what is happening “now” on Mars.
One might perhaps wish at least to know at what time this event did happen. To do
this, one might look at the television image of a clock carried by the astronaut, a clock
that was equivalently constructed to one in the laboratory, and which was so made that it
ought to keep time properly even while it was subject to the acceleration of the rocket
ship. But, according to the Lorentz theory, this clock would measure time differently
from the one on the Earth, and be out of synchronism with the one on the Earth by
, where l0 is the distance to Mars and v is the velocity of the
clock relative to the ether. Since v is unknown, the “true” time of this event on Mars
would, for us, be ambiguous.
We might perhaps try to correct the time of the event on Mars, not by referring to the
television image of a clock in the space ship, but by “correcting” directly for the time
interval needed for light to reach us. But to make the right correction, we should have,
according to the Lorentz theory, to know the “true” distance l, as well as the true velocity
v, of the Earth relative to the ether to yield the correction, 
. Once
again, we encounter essentially the same ambiguity in theattempttofind out precisely
when an event happens on Mars.

Introduction to Einstein’s Conceptions of Space and Time  39
ambiguous when they are extended too far beyond the domains in which they arose. As
we saw in Chapter 11, these ideas are based on the intuitive notion that all that is
co-present in a given moment of what we perceive with our senses is actually happening
at the same time, “now.” But as soon as we come to distant events, such as those taking
place on Mars, we see that even when we use the fastest means of communication
available to us (radio waves or light), what we perceive, for example in the television
image, is not happening at the same time, but rather the more distant the event, the earlier
it has happened. Indeed, we know that light now visible in telescopes was emitted by
stars as much as a thousand million years ago. Thus it is clear that for long distances,
co-presence to our sense perceptions no longer means the same thing as simultaneity.
And  in  accurate  measurements  involving  shorter  distances,  essentially  the  same
conclusion  follows,  in  the  sense  that  the  events  detected  as  co-present  in  a  given
instrument  (e.g.,  what  appears  in  a  given  photograph)  are  also  not  necessarily  all
simultaneous.
What is even more significant than the nonequivalence of co-presence and simultaneity
described above is the fact that there is, as we have seen, no unique way to ascribe a
given event unambiguously to a well-defined time in the past. It follows, then, that the
whole of our intuitive notion of what is meant by “now,” as well as of past and future, no
longer refers clearly to what we can actually observe, perceive, experience, or measure.
In view of this deep and fundamental ambiguity that has developed in the application of
intuitive notions of time beyond their proper domain, our approach must be, as we
remarked earlier, to set aside this whole mode of thinking and to begin afresh. Instead of
referring to a suppositious moment of simultaneity that could be observed only if we
knew what cannot be known, i.e., our own speed relative to an intrinsically unobservable
ether, we begin our inquiry by basing ourselves as far as possible on the facts of the case
and on hypotheses that are in principle testable. What are these facts? In Chapter 10 we
have already discussed one aspect of the relevant facts, viz., that all our actual knowledge
of space and time coordinates of real events is based on, at least in principle, observable
relationships of physical phenomena to suitable measuring instruments. In order to avoid
ambiguity in our fundamental notions of space and time, it is therefore necessary to
express the whole content of physical law in terms of such relationships, and not in terms
of an ether with intrinsically untestable properties that are inherently ambiguous.
We are now ready to consider what was, in essence, Einstein’s point of departure—i.e.,
that  in  terms  of  actually  measurable  coordinates  of  the  kind  described  above,  all
uniformly moving (that is, unaccelerated) observers obtain the same measured velocity of
light, independent of their own speeds, if each uses equivalently constructed instruments
and follows equivalent measurement procedures in relation to the reference frame of his
own laboratory. (Special relativity restricts itself to relationships holding for uniformly
moving observers; to deal with accelerated observers, one must use the general theory of
relativity, which is beyond the scope of the present discussion.)
Einstein did not regard the above result as a deduction from the Lorentz theory, but as a
basic hypothesis which was evidently subject to experimental tests and which had in fact
already been confirmed in many experiments at the time Einstein first developed his
theory (having since then been confirmed in a much wider variety of experimental
contexts, and never yet having been refuted).
To see more clearly what this hypothesis implied with regard to the meaning of the
notions of simultaneity in physics, Einstein considered a simple experiment. It is only an
It is clear then that our ordinary ideas of what is the meaning of simultaneity become

40  The Special Theory of Relativity
imagined  experiment  in  the  sense  that  we  do  not,  at  least  for  the  present,  possess 
instruments sensitive enough to do what is called for. Yet this experiment is in principle 
possible; and it has the advantage that reflection on it brings out clearly the essential 
difficulty in older notions of what constitutes simultaneity of two separated events.
Consider a train moving on a railway embankment with a velocity v. Let us suppose 
that there is an observer fixed on the embankment at the point O, more or less adjoining 
the middle of the train. This observer has two colleagues situated at A and B, possessing 
well-synchronized clocks in relation to the embankment, as shown in Figure 13–1. A and 
B are assumed to be the same distance, l, from O, as measured by rulers at rest relative to 
the embankment. Suppose that O’s colleagues at A and B set off flashes of light, and that 
these flashes reach O at the same time. From the fact of their being seen together, it 
evidently does not necessarily follow that they originated at the same time. Indeed, O 
must correct, taking into account the time for light to reach him from A and from B. Since 
the distances are the same, and since the speed of light is the same in both directions, it 
follows that in this case O will calculate that the flashes occurred at the same time.
Figure 13–1
Now consider an observer O!  on the moving train. Suppose that O!  happens to be 
opposite to O when O receives the two flashes from A and B. Of course, O! will also see 
the two flashes at the same time. But he too must calculate the times at which they 
started. To do this, he must measure the distance between him and the sources of light, as 
shown by his rulers, which move with the train. He can accomplish this conveniently 
with the aid of several of his own colleagues, in different parts of the train.
Suppose that one of these colleagues happens to be at A when the flash is emitted there. 
This observer will then proceed to record the reading, C, on his ruler, for the point 
corresponding to A, at the moment that A passes him. Now, the light passes from C to O!
(or equivalently from A to O), taking some time to do so. Considering the process from 
the point of view of an embankment observer, we see that when the flash is first emitted, 
the original train observer, who will later be opposite to O, cannot yet have reached O!
but will have attained only a point D!, to the left of O!, such that the distance D!O! will be 
covered while the light is moving from A to O (or alternatively from C to O!). When this 
observer  reaches  O!  and  sees  the  flash,  the  point  C  will  have,  according  to  the 
embankment observer, moved over to C!, a distance equal to D!O!. Since the train 
observer O! regards himself as at rest, he does not take this movement into account when 
he comes to record the distance between himself and the origin of the light flash. Rather, 
he assigns the distance as C!O!, which is less than the distance AO assigned by the 
embankment observer. In a similar way, he will assign a distance EO!, for the light to 
travel from E to O!, which is greater than the distance BO assigned by the embankment 
observer.

Introduction to Einstein’s Conceptions of Space and Time  41
two observers would be compensated, because the train observer would assign a lower
speed of light (c–v) to the flash coming from c, and a higher speed (c+v) to the flash
coming from E. As a result, he would, in agreement with the embankment observer (as
well as with what “common sense” leads us to expect), calculate that the flashes at C and
E were emitted at the same time.
In fact, however, all observers must assign the same speed to light, since as we have
seen, experiments show this to be the case. Therefore the train observer can no longer
agree that the two flashes are simultaneous, because they cover different distances at the
same speed.
This is a major break with older ideas, because different observers do not agree on what
is the same time for events that are far away. It must be emphasized, however, that for
distant events the establishment of simultaneity is based only on an indirect deduction,
the result of a calculation, which expresses the correction for the time needed by a light
(or radio) signal to pass from the observed point to the point where the observation
actually takes place. Simultaneity is therefore no longer an immediate fact corresponding
to co-presence in our everyday experience. For it is now seen to depend, to a large extent,
on a purely conventional means of taking into account the time of passage of a signal.
This convention seems natural and inevitable to our “common sense,” but it leads to
unambiguous results, the same for all observers, only under conditions in which the
Galilean law for the addition of velocities is a good approximation. When the velocity of
light can no longer be regarded as effectively infinite, then the experimental facts of
physics  make  it  clear  that  the  results  will  depend  on  the  speed  of  the  observer’s
instruments.
It follows from the above discussion that simultaneity is not an absolute quality of
events,  whose  significance  is  independent  of  state  of  movement  of  the  measuring
apparatus. Rather, the meaning of simultaneity must be understood as being relative to
the observing instruments, in the sense that observers carrying out equivalent procedures
with equivalently constructed instruments moving at different speeds will ascribe the
property of simultaneity to different sets of events.
If there were some way to obtain an instantaneous signal from one event to another,
then no corrections for the time of propagation would be needed, and the above-described
relativity of simultaneity need not arise. But there is no known signal that can go faster
than light. Moreover, as we shall see later, the theory of relativity implies that such a
signal is not possible, in the sense that the assumption that such a signal is possible leads
to a contradiction with the theory of relativity. Therefore, at least as far as we now know,
and as far as the present theories of physics are concerned, a correction must always be
made in order to calculate the times of distant events, in a conventional way that depends
on taking into account the time needed for light signals to propagate between different
points, and using the fact that all observers measure the same velocity for light. Under
these conditions, the relativity of simultaneity will be an inescapable necessity.
Once we admit that simultaneity is relative to the speed of the observer, it immediately
follows that the measurements of length and time intervals must have a corresponding
relativity. To demonstrate this with regard to length, let us return to our example of the
two observers, one fixed on the railway embankment and one moving with the train.
Suppose that the observer on the embankment has laid out a ruler from A to B and sets up
clocks at A and B, synchronized by light flashes, corrected by the rule t!=t–(l/c). The
observer on the train follows the same procedure in his moving frame of reference,
Now, if Newtonian mechanics were valid, this different assignment of distances by the

42  The Special Theory of Relativity
setting up a corresponding ruler and clocks, synchronized by light flashes, corrected by
the  formula t0
A=t0–(l0
A/c)  and  t0
B=t0  –(l0
B/c),  where  l0
A and  l0
B  are  the  respective
distances from O to A and O to B as measured by rulers moving with the train.
Now, as long as a rod is not moving in relation to an observer, he can measure its length
without regard to time measurements. Thus, he can consider one end, A, “now” and the
other end, B, “a bit later,” and this will not affect the result that he gets. But if a rod is
moving in relation to an observer, he defines its lengths as the distance between its end
points at the same time. (Thus, if the observer in the embankment measured the position
of the rear of the train at one moment and the front an hour later, he could ascribe a length
of 60 miles or more to the train, evidently an absurd result.)
Now, let us suppose that the colleagues of O at A and B set off flashes, at the same
time, as measured by their clocks, at rest on the embankment, and that this is just the
moment when the ends of the train are passing A and B, respectively. Suppose likewise
that corresponding moving observers at A! and B! at the two ends of the train set off
flashes when their clocks showed the same reading. According to our discussions of
simultaneity, it follows that observers on the embankment would conclude that the flashes
said to be simultaneous by the moving observers actually occur at different times, as
calculated by embankment observers. Vice versa, the observers on the train would
calculate that the flashes said by the embankment observers to be simultaneous actually
occur at different times.
Let us say that the flashes regarded as simultaneous by the observer on the train have,
for the embankment observer, a time difference of 
t. In this time the train moves a
distance 
. The embankment observer therefore concludes that the train observer is not
really measuring the “true” length of the train, but is adding in the effects of the
displacement due to its motion during the interval 
. It is therefore not surprising that
he comes to a different result. In a similar way, the train observer concludes that the
observer on the embankment is not measuring the “true” length of the trains, so that he
too is not surprised at the difference of the results of the two observers. But we in the
analysis of the results of both observers can see more, i.e., that since the conventions of
the two observers for determining simultaneity do not have the same meaning, it follows
that there is a similar problem with regard to the conventions for defining length. In other
words, although each observer goes through the same procedure in relation to his
reference frame, using equivalently constructed instruments, the two are not in fact
referring to the same set of events when they are talking about the length of something.
A similar problem arises in the measurement of time intervals. To see these, let us
consider again our example in which the front end of the train passes A and the rear end B
at what are shown by O’s clocks at A and B to be the same time. (This fact could, for
example, be noted by O’s colleagues at A and B.) Now, consider a clock on the train,
which showed the time 
, when the front of the train passed A and 
 when it passed B.
An observer on the train would say then that a time interval 
 was
needed for the front end of the train to go from A to B. On the other hand, the observers
on the embankment would measure the time for this to happen by means of two of their
own “synchronized” clocks at A and B. If tA were the time at which the front end of the
train was seen by an observer at A to pass this point, and tB were the time at which a

Introduction to Einstein’s Conceptions of Space and Time  43
corresponding observer saw it passing B, then the observers on the embankment would
conclude that the time interval is 
. However, as we have seen, the
observers on the train would regard the clocks at A and B as not synchronous; so that they
would argue that the embankment observers were not really measuring the “true” time
interval for the train to go from A to B. And by a similar argument the embankment
observers would argue that those on the train were likewise not measuring the “true” time
interval properly. But, as in the case of length measurements, it is clear that where
moving clocks are concerned, the relativity of simultaneity implies that the definition of
time intervals also has a certain conventional aspect; as a result there is no absolute
significance to time intervals, but rather, their meaning is relative to the speed of the
instruments with the aid of which time is measured.
We see then that there is a close interrelationship of the definitions of simultaneity,
length, and time interval, and that the fact that all observers obtain the same measured
velocity for light implies that all three of these concepts must be considered not as
absolutes but rather as having a meaning only in relationship to a frame of reference.

XIV
The Lorentz Transformation in Einstein’s Point of view
The essentially relational character of space and time coordinates as described in the
previous chapter may be compared to a similar characteristic that is already familiar in
the measurement of space coordinates alone. In such a measurement each observer is able
to orient his apparatus in a different direction, so that all observers do not obtain the same
value for the x coordinate of the same point. That is to say, the x coordinate is not an
“absolute” property of a point but rather specifies a relationship between that point and a
certain frame of reference. Similarly observers moving at different speeds do not obtain
the same values for the “time coordinates” of a given event, so that this coordinate must
also correspond to some relationship to a frame of reference and not to an “absolute”
property of the event in question.
Now, in the geometry of space, it has been found that in spite of this “relativity” in the
meanings of coordinates, there are certain transformations, such as translations (11–1)
and rotations (11–2), which enable us to know when we are dealing with the same point,
even though measurements are carried out on the basis of differently oriented and
centered reference frames. Are there similar transformations in the space and time
coordinates taken together?
In Chapter 2 we saw that in Newtonian mechanics there is the Galilean transformation,
Eq. (2–3), which does in fact enable us to relate the space and time coordinates of the
same event when measurements are carried out in frames of reference that are moving
with respect to each other. However, as we have seen, the Galilean law of addition of
velocities implies that the speed of light should vary with the speed of the observing
equipment. Since this predicted variation is contrary to fact, the Galilean transformation
evidently cannot be the correct one (except as an approximation holding under conditions
in which the speed of light can be regarded as effectively infinite).
What we are seeking is a transformation between the set of space coordinates x, y, z
and time t of an event, as measured in a given frame of reference A and a corresponding
set x!, y!, z!, t! belonging to the same event, as measured in another frame of reference B,
moving in relation to the frame A. To simplify the argument, let us suppose that the
velocity of B relative to A is v, in the direction z (generalization to arbitrary directions will
be seen to be quite straightforward).
This transformation must be compatible with the fact that the measured velocity of light
is c, the same in all uniformly moving frames of reference. To express the fact, choose
our origin of space and time coordinates, O, for both frames, as the event corresponding
to the emission of a given light ray. Then, in the frame A, the light ray must after a time t
have reached a spherical surface given by
(14–1)

The Lorentz Transformation in Einstein’s Point of View  45
while in frame B it will also have reached the spherical surface
(14–2)
We therefore need a transformation which leaves the above relationship expressing the
spherical propagation of a light wave invariant.
In Chapter 9 we have already shown that there does exist a transformation leaving the
speed of light invariant, viz., the Lorentz transformation. To this we may evidently add an
arbitrary  rotation  in  space,  since  this  leaves  invariant  the  function
, while it also leaves the time invariant (t!=t),
with the result that the function 
, is also left invariant. Besides
that, there are the reflections in space and in time, such as x=–x!, t=–t!, etc., which
evidently also leave the speed of light invariant.
The question then naturally arises as to whether there are any other transformations that
leave the speed of light invariant. The answer is that if we make the physically reasonable
requirement that the transformation possesses no singular points (so that it is everywhere
regular and continuous) then it can be shown that the Lorentz transformations plus
rotations plus reflections are the only ones that are possible.
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that in Einstein’s approach one does not deduce
the Lorentz transformation as a consequence of the changes in observing instruments as
they move through a hypothetical ether, and, from this, infer that all observers will obtain
the same measured velocity, independent of their speeds. Rather, as we have already
indicated  in  earlier  chapters,  one  begins  with  the  experimentally  well-confirmed
hypothesis of the invariance of the velocity of light, as actually measured. This needs no
explanation (e.g., in terms of changes of instruments in an assumed ether), but is just our
basic starting point in further work (as in Newtonian mechanics, we start from Newton’s
laws as a well-confirmed hypothesis, and in electro-dynamics we start with Faraday’s and
Ampère’s laws). With this starting point, Einstein then goes on to show in the manner
described above that the Lorentz transformation is the only physically allowable one that
is compatible with our basic starting hypothesis.
Let us now write down the Lorentz transformation (which expresses coordinates in
system B in terms of those in system A) once again [see Eqs. (9–1), (9–2), (9–3), and
(9–5)]:
(14–3)
The inverse transformation (expressing coordinates in system A in terms of those of
system B) is

46  The Special Theory of Relativity
(14–4)
Note that the inverse transformation is obtained from the original one by replacing v by
–v. This is, of course, to be expected, since if the velocity of B relative to A is v, the
velocity of A relative to B is –v. Therefore, one is in reality using the same function of the
actual velocity when one transforms B to A as when one transforms A to B.
Note  also  that  as  v/c¡0  (which  is  equivalent  to  letting  c¡"),  the  Lorentz
transformation reduces to
(14–5)
which is just the Galilean transformation. In this way we see definitively that the older
concepts of space and time are contained in those of Einstein, as special limiting cases,
applicable when v/c is not too large.
It is evident that the Lorentz transformation implies the relativity of simultaneity,
length, and time intervals, as described in the previous chapter. For example, if we
consider a set of events which observer B described as simultaneous, so that t!=0 for all of
them, then according to Eq. (14–4) observer A will say that for these events t=vz/c2; such
events are evidently not simultaneous. Likewise, if observer A is measuring the length of
an object moving in the z direction with velocity v, he must consider the two ends at the
same  time,  as  measured  in  his  frame  (say  t=0).  From  Eq.  (14–3)  we  obtain
, or 
. Since we have chosen v as
the speed of the object, it is clear that z! is the length of the object in a frame in which it is
at rest, so that we have obtained the Lorentz contraction.
To study the change in rates of clocks, let us begin by regarding B as the frame in
which the clock is at rest (say at z!=0). Let its period be t!. Then by (14–4) we obtain
, which is just the formula for the slowing down of moving
clocks.
Because the transformation between B and A is the same one as between A and B, with
v replaced by –v, it follows that the conclusions that A draws about the change of the
relationship of B’s instruments to what is actually being measured will be drawn also by
B in relation to A’s instruments. Thus, for example, A says that he sees B’s rulers as
contracted, while B says that he sees A’s rulers as contracted.
How is it possible for each to see a contraction of the same kind in the rulers of the
other? That is, if A says that B’s rulers are shorter, why does not B say that A’s rulers are
longer? The answer is, as we have already seen, that A and B do not refer to the same set
of  events  when  they  measure  the  length  of  an  object.  Because  they  disagree  on
simultaneity, A says that B is allowing the ruler to move while making his measurements,

The Lorentz Transformation in Einstein’s Point of View  47
and thus he is measuring something different from the real length, while B says the same
about A.
One may perhaps compare this situation to what happens when two people A and B
separate, while still in each other’s line of sight. A says that B seems to be getting smaller,
while B says that A seems to be getting smaller. Why then does not B say that A seems to
be getting larger? The answer is that each is seeing something different, i.e., the image of
the world on his retina. There is no paradox in the fact that the image of A on B’s retina
gets smaller at the same time that the image of B on A’s retina gets smaller. Similarly,
there is no paradox in saying that A will ascribe a contraction to B’s ruler, while B
ascribes a contraction to A’s, simply because each is referring to something different when
he talks about the length of an object.

XV
Addition of Velocities
Earlier we saw that the Galilean transformation between coordinates x!, y!, z!, t! in a frame
B moving at velocity v in the z direction and a resting frame A, with coordinates x, y, z, t
is
(15–1)
If an observer in the frame A is watching an object moving in the X direction with
velocity u, he will see this object moving in the line given by z=ut+z0. For simplicity, let
us suppose z0=0. Then he will obtain u=z/t. To calculate what is seen by observer B, we
apply the Galilean transformation, which yields
(15–2)
The observer B will therefore ascribe to the moving object the velocity
(15–3)
This is of course, just the well-known Galilean law of addition of velocities, given in Eq.
(2–3), which we have derived again in more detail, in order to facilitate comparison with
what is done in Einstein’s approach.
If the correct transformation between A and B is that of Lorentz rather than that of
Galileo, then we begin with the expression (14–3) for B’s coordinates in terms of those of
A:
(15–4)
As in the case of the Galilean transformation, one writes z=ut as the equation of the
trajectory of the moving object, expressed in A’s frame. This yields

Addition of Velocities  49
(15–5)
From (14–3) we also obtain
(15–6)
and
(15–7)
This is the relativistic law for addition of velocities. Note that as v/c approaches zero it
approaches the Galilean law, w=u–v. More generally, however, it is evidently quite
different from the Galilean law. Indeed, as can easily be seen, it is impossible by adding
velocities that are less than c ever to exceed the speed c. To prove this, let us consider a
case in which we transform, not between A and B, but between B and A. As seen from
Eqs. (14–3) and (14–4) this involves only the replacement of v by –v. A little reflection
shows that our argument on the addition of velocities would then yield
(15–8)
where we are using a capital letter as a symbol in order to distinguish (15–8) from (15–7).
It is clear then that if u and v are positive, W<u+v, so that if we take an object with
velocity u, and then regard it from a frame with velocity –v, the object will not have what
“common sense” leads us to expect, i.e., the sum of the two velocities. As v/c approaches
unity, the new effects become more and more evident. To see what this leads to, consider
the quantity
(15–9)
As long as u2/c2<1, v2/c2<1, then c2–w2 is positive and |w|<c. Therefore, it is impossible
by adding two velocities less than c to obtain a velocity equal to that of light. (For
example,
 
let
 
u=0.9c,
 
v=0.9c;
 
then
.) On the other hand, if u=c we

50  The Special Theory of Relativity
have 
, so that we verify that the velocity of light is
the same in the new frame as it was in the old one.
The above discussion implies that the speed of light is a limit that material objects can
approach but never reach or exceed. Thus, consider a rocket ship. Suppose that a series of
bursts were fired, such that in the frame of the rocket ship each burst would lead to a
change, 
, in the velocity. From the relativistic law for the addition of velocities it
follows that no matter how long the ship continued to be accelerated in this manner, it
would never reach the speed of light, i.e., by the burning of any finite amount, however
large, of fuel. (In a later chapter we shall arrive at the same result by a different method,
showing that the ship cannot reach the speed of light because its mass would approach
infinity, so that it would become harder and harder to accelerate it as it approached the
speed of light.)
Thus far we have discussed the addition of velocities only when they are parallel, so
that the problem reduces to the one-dimensional case. But it is quite easy to extend the
results to three dimensions. Thus, suppose that in frame A an object has a velocity with
components ux, uy, uz, so that its trajectory is given by x=uxt, y=uyt, z=uzt. Suppose that a
Lorentz transformation is made with a velocity v (which can always be taken to be in the
z direction, if we assume that
our coordinate systems are suitably oriented). Then we have
(15–10)
In vector notation, this can be written conveniently as
(15–11)
where 
 is a unit vector in the direction v.
It is also sometimes convenient to write the Lorentz transformation itself in vector
notation. This yields

Addition of Velocities  51
(15–12)

XVI
The Principle of Relativity
Since the time of Aristotle and the Medieval Scholastics, physics has been developing
toward a more relational or “relativistic” point of view. Thus, Copernicus laid the
foundation for dropping the notion that there are special places in space and moments in
time, which have an absolute significance, in the sense that they must be given a unique
role for privileged position in the expression of the laws of physics. Along with this went,
of course, the realization that there is no favored “absolute direction” in space, so that the
laws of physics take the same form, no matter how the coordinate system is rotated. Then
came the discovery that the laws of mechanics are invariant to a Galilean transformation,
so that Newton’s equations express relationships of the same form, independent of the
speed of the frame of reference.
This development toward a relational point of view encountered difficulties and new
problems, when the properties of light and the phenomena of electrodynamics were
investigated. For because light had a finite speed, c, it was clear, according to the
Galilean transformation, that its speed relative to an observer ought to depend on his
reference frame. Likewise, Maxwell’s equations for the electromagnetic field, which
explained the propagation of light and other electromagnetic radiation, as well as their
polarization properties, were also seen to be evidently not invariant in form under a
Galilean transformation. In other words, there must exist a favored frame in which
Maxwell’s equations apply exactly, and in which the speed of light is c in every direction.
Nineteenth-century physicists then postulated an ether, an idea which had in effect the
function of suggesting a physical reason why such a favored frame ought to exist.
When subsequent experiments, such as that of Michelson and Morley, failed to confirm
the predictions of the simple ether theory concerning such a favored frame, Lorentz
proposed an alternative theory, explaining these negative results as a consequence of
changes in the observing instruments as they moved through the ether. This theory led
however to the difficulty that the exact values of the “true” distances and times referring
to a frame at rest in the ether became ambiguous and unknowable.
The essence of Einstein’s approach was to drop the notion of an absolute space and
time, as embodied in the ether hypothesis, and instead to carry the relational approach
into  the  phenomena  of  electro-dynamics  and  the  propagation  of  electromagnetic
radiation. As Newton’s laws of motion were seen to constitute the same relationships in
every uniformly moving frame related by a Galilean transformation, the law of the
invariance of the observed velocity of light is seen to constitute the same relationship in
every uniformly moving frame related by a Lorentz transformation. And as a more
detailed  study  shows,  Maxwell’s  equations  are  likewise  invariant  under  a  Lorentz
transformation, in the sense that these equations take the same form when expressed in
any set of frames related by this transformation (we shall discuss this further in Chapter
21). So up to this point Einstein was merely summing up what are the evident facts, that
electromagnetic radiation is observed quantitatively by means of suitable relationships
between electro-magnetic phenomena and certain instruments, and that the laws of
electrodynamics are known by experiment to imply invariant relationships among the
quantities thus observed. By this invariance of the relationships that constitute the laws of

The Principle of Relativity  53
electrodynamics (i.e., Maxwell’s equations) one refers to their taking the same form
independent of the place or time at which electromagnetic phenomena are observed, and
of the origin, orientation, and speed of the reference frames (which latter are related to
each other by displacements, rotations, and Lorentz transformations).
But now it is evident that if Newton’s laws are invariant to a Galilean transformation,
they cannot also be invariant to a Lorentz transformation. To see this in detail, let us first
write down Newton’s equations m(du!/dt!)=F in a given frame of reference B moving at a
velocity v relative to another reference frame A. We consider a particle that is moving
only in the z direction, which is also taken to be the direction of the velocity v. Then if B
and  A  are  related  by  a  Lorentz  transformation,  Eq.  (15–7)  yields
. Moreover, dt! is just a time interval, as measured in
reference frame B, being the amount of time needed for the particlae to move the distance
dz!=u! dt!. According to Eq. (14–4) the corresponding time interval dt, as measured in
frame A, will be
(16–1)
Newton’s laws of motion then become (noting that dv/dt=0)
(16–2)
It is clear that the form of Newton’s laws of motion is not invariant under a Lorentz
transformation. And since the experimental facts that have been discussed (as well as
others) make it evident that the actual transformation between coordinate frames must be
that of Lorentz and not that of Galileo, as well as that the laws of mechanics are indeed
invariant to a change of velocity of the reference frame, it follows that Newton’s laws
cannot be the correct laws of mechanics, (except as an approximation holding in the
limiting case as v/c approaches zero).
Einstein’s approach to this problem was again based on a careful consideration of the
meanings of all these facts. Now, by definition, a law of physics must be a relationship
that holds without exception. If it has exceptions, then we need a broader law, which
specifies when there will be exceptions, and why they are to be expected, or else we
cannot rely on the law at all (e.g., if it could fail to hold in arbitrary places, times, or
conditions). In other words, a general law of physics is merely a statement that certain
relationships in what can in principle be observed in nature are invariant, regardless of

54  The Special Theory of Relativity
the place, time, frames of reference, or other conditions (e.g., temperature, pressure, etc.)
under which they may be tested.
Now, if the correct transformation between different frames of reference is that of
Lorentz, it follows that the question of what are actually the laws of mechanics will have
to be considered afresh, in a new light. In doing this, we shall have to be guided by what
Einstein called the principle of relativity, which states in essence just what has been said
above, i.e., that the laws of physics must satisfy the requirement of being relationships of
the same form, in every frame of reference. This principle has two forms, that of
restricted or special relativity, which refers only to frames with a uniform velocity, and
that of general relativity, which refers to any frame (which may, for example, be
accelerated). In this work we will, of course, be concerned with the restricted principle of
relativity.
The principle of relativity may be summed up in terms of more intuitive notions, by
considering a rocket ship moving through empty space with no windows or other contacts
with the external environment. According to the principle of relativity the phenomena
observed by an observer within such a ship should not depend at all on the speed of the
ship. Evidently, the ether theory would not satisfy this requirement, because, according to
it, light would move at a speed c relative to the ether, so that the observed speed of light
would depend on the speed of the ship. More generally all electromagnetic phenomena
(determined by Maxwell’s equations valid only in the ether frame) would vary according
to the speed of the ship.
The principle of relativity has had an enormous heuristic value. That is, it has been
indispensible in helping suggest new laws and relationships, not only in the field of
mechanics but also in many other problems. Indeed, whenever we know of a relationship
that holds in some limited set of frames of reference, the principle of relativity can
usually lead us to a generalization that holds independent of the frames of reference and
that has a new content in this broader set of frames, which can then be tested by further
experiments. In the next few chapters we shall illustrate this heuristic value of the
principle of relativity in a number of special applications.

XVII
Some Applications of Relativity
In order to bring out the meaning of the principle of relativity in a more concrete form, 
we shall now give a few applications in which this principle demonstrates its power to 
lead to new results arising from the invariant generalization of relationships that were 
previously known in some more limited contexts.
First, we consider the measurement of the velocity of light in running water.1 For a 
long time this question was a key one that had to be faced by prerelativistic physics, 
which led in fact to many ambiguities and unclear points, such as, for example, that of the 
extent to which the moving water dragged the surrounding ether with it. (See C.C. 
Moller, The Theory of Relativity, for a further discussion.)
If n is the index of refraction for light in a fluid medium at rest, the phase velocity of 
light in this medium is u0=c/n. The problem is to calculate the phase velocity u when the 
fluid  is moving with velocity v. It  is evident that the  principle  of  relativity provides a 
direct and unambiguous answer to this question, without the need for any further assumptions. 
For, according to this principle, the properties of the fluid as observed in the frame in which it is 
at rest must be independent of the speed of this frame relative to the laboratory. Therefore, all 
that we need to do, in order to calculate what will be observed in the laboratory frame, is to make 
a Lorentz transformation on what is observed in the frame that moves with the fluid. So, if 
the phase velocity of light in the frame of the fluid is c/n, we can use the relativistic law for the 
addition of velocities [Eq. (15–8)] (which follows from the Lorentz transformation). This gives
(17–1)
We see that the water effectively “drags” the light to some extent but that it does not add 
the full velocity v of the water to the phase velocity c/n of the light.
This formula is, in fact, in accord with all experiments that have thus far been done. Such 
experiments may be said, in effect, to confirm the relativistic formula for addition of velocities.
The second experiment that we shall consider is the decay of mesons. As is well 
known, mesons are unstable particles, discovered to be created when cosmic rays or high-
energy particles accelerated in the laboratory are allowed to bombard blocks of matter. 
These particles all decay, transforming into other particles. There is a statistical 
distribution of decay times for an ensemble of particles, but the average time of decay 
1 Only the velocity of light in a vacuum is equal to the universal constant C, while in a material
medium the velocity of light will in general differ from C.

56  The Special Theory of Relativity
of a particular kind of meson can be measured, and, depending on the kind of particle, it
may be from 10–6 to 10–10 sec or less.
Now let 
 be the mean time for a meson at rest (or with a low velocity) to decay.
Then one can calculate the mean time for a particle of velocity v to decay. For, according
to the principle of relativity, the decay time in the frame in which the meson is at rest is
independent of the speed of the meson relative to the laboratory. In this case, the result of
the Lorentz transformation to the laboratory frame is very easy to calculate, because the
decay time 
 in effect serves as a kind of clock or natural measure of time. The decay
time in the laboratory system is then given by the well-known formula relating the
periods of clocks in the two frames,
(17–2)
As a result, moving mesons should take more time to decay than resting ones, in the ratio
. This prediction has been tested, both for mesons produced in the
laboratory and for those produced by cosmic rays. In all cases the predicted slowing
down of the rate of meson decay is confirmed. For some cosmic-ray mesons v comes
very close to c, so that the ratio 
 becomes as large as 1000; and even
in this extreme case, the relativistic formula is verified. Thus the relativistic prediction of
the different rates of clocks moving at different speeds is verified quite well.
Finally, we wish to consider the Doppler shift of light emitted by a moving body (along
with the aberration in its direction, to which it is intimately related). As in the previous
cases, we begin in the frame in which the body is at rest, in which case we know by
experiment what will happen, and then we make a Lorentz transformation to see what
will happen from the point of view of the laboratory frame.
Now, consider a body at rest, to be emitting light in some direction 
, relative to the
z0 axis. Let the frequency of the light be v0. We know that the speed of light is c, so that
the wavelength is 
.
Now, let the body move in the z direction with the velocity v, and let us observe its
light from the laboratory frame. According to the principle of relativity, what is observed
in the frame in which the atom is at rest is independent of the speed of this frame relative
to the laboratory, so that we need only make a Lorentz transformation to find out what
will be observed in the laboratory frame.
Now, we have already seen that in a Lorentz transformation the speed of light will be
the same in both frames. But the direction and the frequency of the light ray will
generally be different in the two frames.
To calculate the direction of the light ray, as observed from the laboratory frame, let us
suppose that a light ray passes through the point O, which we take to be the origin of our
coordinate system. Then if, for example, the ray is in the x0– z0 plane, it will in the time t0
reach the point 
 , 
, y0=0. To see what this ray will

Some Applications of Relativity  57
look like in the laboratory frame, we apply the Lorentz transformation given in Eq.
(14–4), obtaining
(17–3)
The direction of the light ray in the laboratory frame is then given by
(17–4)
This formula implies that for 
 the angle in the laboratory is always smaller
than it is in the original system. When v/c approaches unity [so that 
approaches zero], this effect becomes particularly important. Indeed, with cosmic rays,
there are some particles so energetic that when they collide with others, v/c is very close
to unity for the center-of-mass system of the two particles. Then, although the distribution
of particles over the angle 
 of collision may be fairly uniform in the center-of-mass
system, it is transformed into a narrow cone in the laboratory system [of width of the
order of 
. Such narrow cones are observed in certain very high energy
cosmic-ray showers originating in collisions of single particles with nuclei. [Although the
outgoing particles do not have the speed of light, they come very close to this speed, and,
as can be shown, Eq. (17–4) will apply to such particles as a good approximation.]
The observed widths of these cones is actually in good agreement with what would be
calculated according to the above argument, from the velocity of the center-of-mass
system, which can be obtained from the energy of the incident particle, observable by
independent means. It can thus be said that (17–4) is fairly well verified by experiment.
We shall now calculate the wavelength of the light as observed in the laboratory frame.
This is obtained basically from the formula for the phase of the plane wave in the
direction 
.
(17–5)

58  The Special Theory of Relativity
with 
. If we apply the Lorentz transformation (14–3) we obtain
(17–6)
Now, in the laboratory frame, the formula for the phase of the corresponding plane wave
is
(17–7)
with 
.
Comparing (17–3) with (17–6) we see that
(17–8)
(17–9)
(17–10)
Using 
 we obtain
(17–11)
The above is, of course, the same as (17–4), obtained by considering the directions of the
light rays (which are normal to the wave fronts). Evidently, the two points of view lead to
equivalent results concerning the direction of the light, as they must, since the rays’
directions are determined as the normals to the wave fronts (surfaces of constant phase
).

Some Applications of Relativity  59
(17–12)
As v/c approaches zero, the above evidently approaches the well-known nonrelativistic
formula for the Doppler shift,
 
More generally, however, there is evidently a further relativistic correction of order
. In the case that the light ray is perpendicular to the direction of motion
of the body emitting it (as measured in the laboratory frame), this formula reduces to
(17–13)
where T is the period of oscillation of the light wave.
For perpendicular incidence, the Doppler shift vanishes in the non-relativistic theory.
The reason that it does not vanish in the relativistic theory is basically that the period of
light can be regarded as a kind of “clock,” so that in the change from one reference frame
to another moving at a speed v, relative to the first, there remains an increase of this
period in the ratio 
.
Experiments  on  the  Doppler  shift  from  moving  radiating  atoms  at  perpendicular
incidence  verify  the  relativistic  formula  and  may  thus  be  regarded  as  a  further
confirmation of the relativistic prediction of the change of rate of clocks, when observed
in a system relative to which the clocks are in motion.
From (17–11) and (17–18) we obtain

XVIII
Momentum and Mass in Relativity
We have already seen from Eq. (16–2) that Newton’s laws of motion are not invariant to a
Lorentz transformation, and that the principle of relativity therefore implies that (except
in the limit as v/c approaches zero), these cannot be the correct laws of mechanics. In
accordance with the notion discussed in Chapters 15 and 16, our first problem with
regard to these laws is therefore to generalize them so as to obtain a new set of equations
that is invariant to a Lorentz transformation.
In carrying out the generalization described above, it will be convenient to write
Newton’s laws in terms of the momentum p of the body. These laws then take the form
(18–1)
(18–2)
(18–3)
In a system of bodies, the total momentum P and the total mass M are given by
(18–4)
when mi is the mass of the ith particle and vi is its velocity. The velocity of the center of
mass is
(18–5)
It is a well-known theorem in Newtonian mechanics that for an isolated system the total
momentum satisfies the equation dP/dt=0 and P=a constant vector. Similarly, it follows
from (18–3) that in such a system the total mass is also a constant.
These laws, viz., the conservation of momentum and the conservation of mass, are
evidently much simpler in form than are Newton’s equations, and should therefore be
correspondingly easier to generalize. After doing this, we shall then go on in Chapter 21
to generalize Newton’s laws themselves.

Momentum and Mass in Relativity  61
The basic idea behind our procedure is that it is essential in physical theories to be able
to analyze a whole system into parts or components. Thus in a theory of a continuous
medium, such as hydrodynamics, we regard the fluid as being constituted out of small
elements of volume, and, in a theory which explains matter as having a discrete atomic
structure, a whole system is likewise regarded as constituted out of small elements, now
taken to be the atoms. In both kinds of theories we can treat the total momentum of a
system as the sum of the momenta of its parts, likewise with the total mass and the total
energy. Moreover, at least in the domain where Newtonian theory applies, such systems
are known by experiment (as well as from the theory) to satisfy the laws of conservation
of momentum, conservation of mass, and conservation of energy.
Because of these conservation laws, the entire momentum and mass (and also the
energy) of a system can be regarded not only as sums of the corresponding properties of
the set of its parts but also as an integral whole with values of these total quantities that
remain constant, as long as the system is isolated. Indeed, such total values are evidently
independent of the changes that are going on in each of the parts, as they engage in very
complex interactions. It is this fact that is at the basis of the possibility of treating a block
of  matter  as  a  single  macroscopic  entity,  ignoring  the  unknown  and  indescribably
complicated details of the motions of its molecules.
It is clear that the property possessed by bulk matter—being capable alternatively of
analysis into parts or treatment as a single whole—is a general feature of the world. This
feature must therefore be implied by any proposed set of laws of mechanics, if they are to
be fully adequate to all the experimental facts that are available.
The characteristics described above were first achieved in non-relativistic theories. But,
according to the principle of relativity, the basic physical properties of a system do not
depend on its speed relative to an observer. Therefore, it is necessary that a system should
continue thus to be capable alternatively of being treated as a whole or by analysis into
parts, with the same conservation laws applying, even if it is moving at a high speed
relative to the laboratory. We shall see that this requirement, plus that of a Lorentz
transformation between different frames, is sufficient to determine the proper relativistic
formulas for momentum, mass, and energy.
To embody the above-described notions in terms of a mathematical theory we first
point out that if vi is the velocity of the ith particle in a system of N particles, and if mi is
its mass, the ideas discussed in the previous paragraphs imply that the total momentum of
the system P is the sum of the momenta pi=mivi of its constituent particles:
(18–6)
The total mass is, of course,
(18–7)

62  The Special Theory of Relativity
If we are to be able to continue to carry out the procedure of regarding any collection of
particles as forming a single over-all unit, it is necessary that this unit have a general
“system velocity,” which we denote by V, and that its total momentum be expressible as
P=MV, so that
(18–8)
evidently corresponds to an average velocity, with each particle contributing to this
average according to its mass.
In nonrelativistic mechanics V is also the velocity of the center of mass. It turns out,
however, that in relativity the notion of center of mass is a rather complicated one, not
having such a direct physical significance as it has nonrelativistically (essentially because
in relativity there is no unique “center-of-mass point,” which latter depends in fact on the
frame of reference1). Nevertheless, it is clear from the above definition of V as a suitable
weighted average that it will still have the appropriate properties to represent a general
system velocity.
We shall now begin the deduction of the relativistic formulas for mass and momentum
as functions of the velocity. This can conveniently be done by considering a system of
two particles assumed to be first observed in the frame B in which their general system
velocity is zero. For the present we restrict ourselves to the one-dimensional case
(generalization to three dimensions will be discussed later). If m1 and m2 are the masses
of these particles, and v1 and v2 are their velocities, then we have, for the total momentum
of the system,
(18–9)
The total mass is, of course,
(18–10)
while the general system velocity is, of course, by definition,
(18–11)
1 This point has been discussed by C.C.Moller, Ann. Inst. Henri Poincaré, 11, 251 (1949).

Momentum and Mass in Relativity  63
Let us now view this system of two particles from another frame A, such that in this
frame, the general system velocity is V! (also in the z direction). Let 
 and 
 be the
masses of the two particles in this new frame and 
 and 
 their velocities. Then by our
principle of relativity, which requires the analyzability of the system into component parts
in frame A as well as in frame B, the total momentum of the particles must be capable of
being written as a sum.
(18–12)
Likewise, we must be able to express the total mass as a sum
(18–13)
But since in the frame B, in which the general system velocity is zero, we can equally
well regard the system as a single whole with mass M=m1+m2 and the general system
velocity V (in this case, zero), it follows from the principle of relativity that the same
possibility should exist when the system is viewed from the frame A. Therefore, we must
have
(18–14)
From (18–9) we obtain
(18–15)
From (18–12), (18–13), and (18–14) it follows that
(18–16)

64  The Special Theory of Relativity
(18–17)
We now refer to the relativistic law (15–8) for the addition of velocities, which gives
(18–18)
When these are substituted into (18–17) one obtains (after a little algebra)
(18–19)
and with the aid of (18–15) this reduces to
(18–20)
The above can be expressed more conveniently as
(18–21)
But now, we can easily obtain another expression for the right-hand side of the above
equation. To do this, let us first find out how the quantity 
transforms. To do this we write
(18–22)
We then obtain
and

Momentum and Mass in Relativity  65
(18–23)
where
(18–24)
Now (18–23) must hold for arbitrary v1, v2, v1, and v2. To see what this implies, take the
logarithm of both sides:
 
or
(18–25)
On one side of the above equation appear only quantities referring to the first particle,
while on the other side there appear only quantities referring to the second particle.
Because the velocities of the two particles can be altered arbitrarily in relation to each
other, Eq. (18–25) can have a solution only if both sides are equal to a constant 
independent of all the quantities in the equations. It follows then that
(18–26)
Taking the exponential of the above equations with 
, we obtain

66  The Special Theory of Relativity
(18–27)
Consider now the special case in which v1=0. We then obtain
(18–28)
In this case m1 is the mass of the particle when it is at rest. This is, however, just the
ordinary mass that appears nonrelativistically in Newton’s equations of motion (which
apply, of course, in the limit as v/c approaches zero). Let us denote this rest mass by m1,0.
We therefore have
(18–29)
Let us go now to the still more special case in which 
. Here, we must have
 from which it follows that K=1. A similar result evidently holds for the
second particle. Therefore, we can write a formula, valid for both particles,
(18–30)
The momentum is then
(18–31)
The above are the relativistic formulas for mass and momentum, respectively. Note that
the mass depends on the velocity and is no longer a constant as it is in the Newtonian
theory.

Momentum and Mass in Relativity  67
them to any two, and then regard these two as a whole system, with total mass M=m1+m2,
total momentum P=p1+p2, and general system velocity V=P/M. This whole system can
then be treated as a single particle, and it can be regarded in combination with the third
particle, to form a new pair, to which all the conclusions that we have derived in this
chapter will apply. We can then regard the three particles as a single whole and go in this
way, by induction, till we have included all the particles in the system. It is not difficult in
this way to show that if the Eqs. (18–30) and (18–31) are taken as holding for each
particle, then the system can be analyzed into any desired sets of parts in a relativistically
invariant way, i.e., so that the same analysis will hold in all frames of reference connected
by a Lorentz transformation.
From this it follows that in every such frame we have the same functional relationships
for the total mass and the total momentum.
(18–32)
If the particles are allowed to interact, the momenta and masses of each of the particles
taken individually will in general change. Now, as we have seen in nonrelativistic
mechanics, the total momentum of the system and its total mass are conserved, even
when these properties of the various parts alter as a result of such interactions. It can
easily be seen that these properties can be generalized relativistically, in the sense that if
the total mass and total momenta are conserved in any one Lorentz frame, they will be
conserved in every other frame of this kind. To demonstrate this, we refer to Eq. (18–22)
and write for the mass of the ith particle in the “primed” system of coordinates
(18–33)
where mi is the mass of the ith particle in the “unprimed” system of coordinates and pi is
its momentum. If the total mass 
 and the total momentum 
 are conserved in
the unprimed system, then (since V! is a constant), it follows that the total mass 
 is
conserved in the “primed” system. And from Eq. (18–14) it follows that the total
momentum P!=M!V! is also conserved in the latter system.
These results can easily be extended to a system of N particles. For we can first apply

68  The Special Theory of Relativity
example, the collision of two particles. Let m1
A, m2
A, v1
A, v2
A refer to the masses and
velocities of the two particles before collision, m1
B, m2
B, v1
B, v2
B after collision. If the
particles are so slow that nonrelativistic theory can be applied, we know that
(18–34)
(conservation of total momentum)
(18–35)
(constancy of mass of each particle)
Now, if this collision is viewed from another frame in which the general system
velocity of the two atoms is high, the results of this chapter show that the conservation
law (18–34) for the total momentum will still hold in the new frame, provided that Eqs.
(18–30) and (18–31) are adopted for the mass and momentum of the particles in the new
system. However, instead of (18–35), which expresses the constancy of mass of each
particle, we shall have
(18–36)
which implies that only the total mass of the system is conserved, while that of its
separate particles will in general change [as it must, according to (18–30), because this
mass depends on the velocity of the particle, which does in fact alter in a collision].
Thus far we have derived our results under the assumption that all movement is in one
direction, that of z. When the problem is considered in three dimensions, however,
essentially the same properties are obtained, as can easily be shown by a more detailed
calculation that we shall not give here. The mass is still given by an equation similar to
(18–30), except that we must regard v as the absolute value of the velocity vector of the
particle, (vx, vy, vz), so that v2=vx
2+vy
2+vz
2.
Of course, there are now three components of the momentum. In vector notation we
have
(18–37)
To see in more detail what the relativistic conservation laws mean, let us consider, as an

Momentum and Mass in Relativity  69
(18–38)
Each component of the total momentum of an isolated system is now conserved, along
with its total mass.
The variation of mass with velocity is, of course, just what is predicted by the Lorentz
theory, which regards it as a consequence of the “back emf” acting on the electron that is
induced by the changing magnetic field produced by the electron as it is accelerated (see
Chapter 6).
In Einstein’s point of view we do not deny that a part, or perhaps even all, of the mass
of the electron may thus be electromagnetic in origin. However, we do not regard the
determination of the relationship of mass to velocity as dependent on particular models of
the electron, such as that suggested by Lorentz. Rather, we see that independent of the
origin of the mass it must have this particular dependence on the velocity, if the general
features of the laws of physics described in this section are to be relativistically invariant,
i.e., the same in all frames of reference related by a Lorentz transformation.

XIX
The Equivalence of Mass and Energy
We now come to a crucial further step made by Einstein, which greatly extended the
revolutionary  effect  of  his  relativistic  point  of  view,  i.e.,  the  demonstration  of  the
equivalence of mass and energy through the by-now very well known formula E=mc2.
To develop this notion, we begin with Eq. (18–37) for the mass of a moving object,
. For small v/c we can expand m as a series of powers of v/c,
keeping only the terms up to v2/c2. The result is
(19–1)
If we multiply this by c2, we obtain
(19–2)
But m0v2/2 is just the nonrelativistic expression for the kinetic energy T of a body moving
with speed v, and m0c2 in just a constant. We then have, for such a body
(19–3)
The conservation of total mass of a system, obtained in the previous chapter, then
becomes equivalent to the law of conservation of total energy of a collection of bodies, at
least in the nonrelativistic limit. But the principle of relativity requires that if such a law
holds in any one frame, it will hold in all frames. It follows then that Eq. (19–3) must
represent the kinetic energy of a particle in any frame, even when the expansion in terms
of v2/c2 is no longer a good approximation.
The significance of this result can be seen more clearly if one transfers m0c2 to the
other side of the equation. We then write for the energy of the body
(19–4)

The Equivalence of Mass and Energy  71
We can always do this, because in nonrelativistic theory the energy is in any case
undefined to within an arbitrary constant. Mathematically speaking, Einstein’s procedure
here is equivalent to defining this arbitrary constant, so that the energy of a particle at rest
is taken to be
(19–5)
Physically, this corresponds to assuming that even a particle that is not in motion has the
rest energy given by (19–5).
What is the meaning of this rest energy? We can perhaps bring this out by noting that a
typical object which is visibly at rest is constituted of parts (i.e., molecules, atoms, nuclei,
etc.) which are actually in a state of violent movement, such that on the average the
effects of the movement cancel out when observed on a macroscopic scale. Nevertheless,
according to the arguments given in the previous chapter, all these movements are
contributing to the masses of the constituent particles, according to the formula
(19–6)
The total mass of the system is then
(19–7)
where T is the total kinetic energy of the various particles. On multiplying by c2 we have
 
Now, is there any way of checking experimentally whether the internal state of movement
contributes to the mass? The answer is that there are several possible ways of doing this.
The most obvious idea would be to raise the temperature of a body and to see if the
weight increased by the amount Q/c2, where Q is the heat energy absorbed by the body.
The difficulty is that with temperature changes that are available (a few thousand degrees
centigrade, at the most), 
 is too small a quantity to be detected by methods that are
now available. (This is basically because c2 is such a large number.) Similarly, if we
allow two systems to combine chemically and to give off the energy 
, the sum of the
masses should be less than its original value by 
. But, once again, this is too small
to be detected experimentally.

72  The Special Theory of Relativity
Some  time  after  Einstein  demonstrated  the  equivalence  of  mass  and  energy
theoretically, experimental studies of nuclear transformations were carried out, in which
great enough quantities of energy were given off, so that the difference between the sum
of the masses of the products and that of the initial reactants was actually measurable
with the equipment that was then available. Many such measurements were made; these
all confirmed Einstein’s prediction that the change in mass of the whole system is equal
to Q/c2.
The experiments cited above show that at least a part of the rest mass of an object can
be ascribed to internal movements, in such a way that when these movements alter and
give off an energy Q, the mass of the system decreases by Q/c2. But can we verify
Einstein’s statement that all of the rest mass of an object can be related in a similar way
to an energy?
Some years after the first nuclear transformations were investigated, new particles,
called positrons, were discovered, having the same mass as an electron, but opposite
charge. It was found that when an electron meets a positron, the two particles can
annihilate each other, leaving no particles at all, but giving off gamma rays with total
energy 
 (which is ultimately transformed into heat as a result of collisions
of the gamma rays with electrons and atoms). In this way it was shown that all of the rest
energy of an electron is potentially transformable into other forms of energy, such as heat.
Since the discovery of the positron, particles called “antiprotons” (with negative charge
and the same mass as that of the proton) have been found, which can similarly annihilate
protons. Indeed, it is now known that to each kind of fundamental particle there exists an
antiparticle, of the same mass and definitely related properties (such as charge and spin),
which combines with the particle to give nothing but energy, in one form or another. Vice
versa, it has been shown that a gamma ray colliding with a nucleus can be absorbed, and
its energy transformed into the rest energy of, for example, an electron-positron pair,
which is created in this process, under conditions in which no such particles existed
before. So there has been conclusive experimental proof that either a part or the whole of
the “rest energy” of a body can be transformed into other forms of energy, and that the
inverse process of transforming other forms of energy into rest energy is also possible.
The only reason that the equivalence of mass and energy was not observed earlier is, as
we have already suggested, that before the discovery of nuclear processes, the mass Q/c2,
associated with the energy Q, was too small to be detected. Conversely, this means of
course that the enormous reserves are “locked” in the rest energy of matter. These
reserves are what are being liberated, in part, by nuclear fission in atomic piles, as well as
by “fusion” processes that go on spontaneously in the Sun and in the stars.
Einstein gave a simple physical way of seeing why mass and energy are related by the
formula E=mc2. To do this, he considered a box of mass MB, at rest in the laboratory.
Suppose that this box contained a distribution of radiant electromagnetic energy in
thermodynamic equilibrium with the walls. Let the energy of this radiation be denoted by
ER.
Now, it is well known that electromagnetic energy exerts a radiation pressure in the
walls of the box, similar to that produced by a gas. When the box is at rest or in uniform
motion, the total force exerted on any one wall is cancelled by that exerted on the

The Equivalence of Mass and Energy  73
opposite wall. But if the box is given an acceleration a, then while the acceleration is
taking place the radiation which reflects off the rear wall will gain more momentum than
the radiation which reflects off the front wall will lose.
When one carries out a detailed calculation of the resulting changes of pressure on the
moving  walls,  one  discovers  that  the  radiation  exerts  a  net  force  on  the  box  of
, which opposes the acceleration. The equation of motion of the
system will then be
(19–8)
where F is the applied force. This reduces to
(19–9)
So the radiant energy ER adds an “effective mass” ER/c2 in the sense that it contributes in
the same way as such a mass would to the inertia, or resistance to acceleration, which is
one of the characteristic manifestations of that physical property called by the name of
“mass.”
It can be seen that the case considered by Einstein is very similar to that discussed in
the previous chapter, where we studied the effects on the total mass of the internal
movements of its various particles. Einstein refers instead to the effects of the internal
movements of electromagnetic radiation, thus helping to bring out the point that the
contribution to the mass is independent of the nature of the energy.

XX
The Relativistic Transformation Law for Energy
and Momentum
We have seen in earlier chapters that the momentum and energy of a given object (along
with its mass, which is proportional to its energy) depends on the speed of that object,
according to the formulas
(20–1)
(20–2)
Suppose now that E and p are known in a given frame A. Can we find a transformation,
analogous to the Lorentz transformation of x. and t, which gives the values, E! and p as
measured in another frame B, moving at a velocity V relative to A?
To simplify the problem, we begin by restricting ourselves to the one-dimensional case
(which we take to be in the direction of z). Suppose that we are given E and p in frame A.
We wish then to calculate the corresponding E! and p! in frame B. Let v be the velocity of
the body in frame A and v! in frame B.
In doing this we can begin with Eq. (18–22). Note, however, that in (18–15), (18–17),
and (18–19) the symbol v! refers to the velocity of the object as measured in a frame
moving at a speed V!=–V, relative to the frame A. Taking the reciprocal of both sides of
the equation, and substituting v!=–V, we obtain
(20–3)
Since
 
,
 
,
 
and
, this leads to
(20–4)

The Relativistic Transformation Law for Energy and Momentum  75
Moreover, by the relativistic law for the addition of velocities,
 
so that
(20–5)
Equations  (20–4)  and  (20–5)  are  essentially  the  same  relationship  as  the  Lorentz
transformation (14–3), with p taking the place of x and E/c2 taking the place of t.
Therefore, the energy and momentum of a body in one frame can be calculated from that
in another frame by a transformation analogous to that of Lorentz.
This argument is easily extended into three dimensions. As happens with x and y we
have
(20–6)
In vector notation this becomes
(20–7)
(20–8)
where 
 is a unit vector in the direction of V.
It follows from the above that the same, proof which shows that the expression (1–7)
for  the  interval  
 is  invariant  under  a  Lorentz
transformation will suffice to demonstrate a similar invariance for the quantity, E2–c2p2.
To see what this quantity means, let us evaluate it in a frame in which the body is at

76  The Special Theory of Relativity
rest, so that p=0. Then, 
. But E2–c2p2 is an invariant,
and so it must have the same value in every frame, which is
(20–9)
A case of special interest arises when the rest mass is zero. Here we have
(20–10)
If we choose the direction of the z axis as that of p, this becomes
(20–11)
The interesting point is that the theory of relativity implies that a particle of zero rest
mass can have a nonzero energy and momentum. To see what this means, let us consider
a particle of very small rest mass m0, and then let m0 approach zero. If its velocity is v, its
energy and momentum are
(20–12)
If v/c is fixed at a value less than unity, E and p approach zero as m0 approaches zero. But
if  we  let  v/c  approach  unity,  while  m0  approaches  zero,  in  such  a  way  that
 remains equal to a constant R, then we obtain
(20–13)
which is in accord with (10–10). Therefore, a body can have nonzero energy and
momentum, even though its rest mass is zero, if and only if it is moving at the speed of
light.
Another way of looking at this problem is to note that if 
, then as a particle is
accelerated toward the velocity of light, its energy, 
, and

The Relativistic Transformation Law for Energy and Momentum  77
its momentum, 
 approach infinity. Since, in reality, only
finite sources of energy and momentum are available, such a particle can never actually
reach the speed of light. But if m0=0, then, as we have seen, it can be moving at the speed
c with finite energy and momentum.
The conclusion that no object can ever be at the speed of light evidently applies, then,
only to something with a nonzero rest mass. However, something having no rest mass can
exist only in a state of movement at the speed of light. Thus, it may be said that while
nothing can be accelerated to the speed of light, there can be things which move at the
speed of light, not as a result of a previous acceleration, but rather, because that is the
only state in which they can exist.
We shall discuss later the physical meaning of movement at the speed of light.

XXI
Charged Particles in an Electromagnetic Field
We have already seen that the relativistic expressions for momentum, mass, and energy
are quite different from those applying in Newtonian theory, reducing to the latter only in
the limit v/c¡0. For an isolated system, the laws of movement then take the relativistic
form
(21–1)
To these we must add the law of conservation of mass. In Newton’s theory this was
implicit in the assumption that mi, the mass of the ith body is a constant, or that dmi/dt=0
[Eq. (18–3)]. In Einstein’s theory, however, the mass of a given body can vary. However,
mass and energy are equivalent, according to the relationship E=mc2. Therefore, the
conservation of the total mass 
 and the conservation of the total energy,
 of an isolated system are essentially the same law, in the sense
that one follows from the other.
The  conservation  law  dM/dt=0,  or,  alternatively,  dE/dt=0,  now  replaces  the
nonrelativistic law dmi/dt=0, as well as the nonrelativistic expression for the conservation
of the total energy of the system.
We shall now generalize these laws to a nonisolated system, i.e., to a system on which a
net force F is acting. To simplify the problem, let us consider a system consisting of a
single body, with velocity v. Then, we tentatively propose as the proper relativistic laws
(21–2)
(21–3)
These have the same form as do the corresponding expressions in the Newtonian theory.
However, their physical meaning is different, because p and E are now defined by the
relativistic expression p=mv, E=mc2, with, 
, rather than by
the Newtonian expression.
It is evident, however, that to obtain equations of motion which remain invariant in
form (i.e., which constitute the same relationships) in every Lorentz frame, it is not
enough to give p and E a proper relativistic definition. It is also necessary to define the

Charged Particles in an Electromagnetic Field  79
force F in such a way that it will express the same kind of relationship, independent of the
speed of the reference frame. Now, this cannot actually be done until we have some more
specific expressions for the force, such as that due to an electromagnetic field, to
gravitation, or to other forces (e.g., those arising in nuclear interactions). In this work we
shall in fact discuss only the electromagnetic forces, showing in detail that they do lead to
invariant relationships for the equations of motion. It may be stated, however, that all
forces with properties that are known can be expressed in such a way as to lead to
similarly invariant equations of motion, but the proof of the statement is beyond the
scope of the present work.1
The force on a body of charge q under an electric field 
 and a magnetic field 
 is
(21–4)
Noting  that  
,  we  obtain  the  well-known  Lorentz  equations  of
motion for such a body:
(21–5)
(21–6)
For our purposes these can more conveniently be expressed in differential form with
,
(21–7)
(21–8)
1 There are further forces (notably the forces between atomic nuclei), which are so poorly
understood as yet that little can be said about them in this regard. However, there is at present no
reason to suppose that they lead to equations of motion that are not invariant under a Lorentz
transformation.

80  The Special Theory of Relativity
when dx is the vector for the distance moved by the body in the time interval dt.
The above laws were first observed to hold in frames of reference which are such that
the  velocity  v  of  the  electron  is  small  compared  with  c.  However,  we  are  now
investigating the conditions under which these laws will hold, independent of the speed
of the frame of reference. In other words, if (21–7) and (21–8) hold in some frame A, we
wish to find out how the quantities 
 and 
, as observed in another frame B, must
be related to 
 and 
 in order that the equations in frame B will have the same form,
when expressed in terms of the new variables.
(21–9)
(21–10)
We now express dp and dE! in terms of dp and dE by the Lorentz transformations
(20–7) and (20–8) and express dx and dt! in terms of dx and dt by the similar
transformation (15–12). In doing this we take the differentials of the corresponding
equations,  noting  that  V  and  
 are  constants.  We  obtain  [with
(21–11)
(21–12)
Substitution of (21–7) and (21–8) for dE and dp yields
(21–13)

Charged Particles in an Electromagnetic Field  81
(21–14)
Equations  (21–11)  and  (21–12)  together  yield  [with  
]
(21–15)
Now, the above equation must be true for arbitrary particle velocity v=dx/dt. Hence it
must hold independent of dx and dt. The reader will readily verify that this is possible
only if the coefficients of dx and dt are separately zero, or if
(21–16)
It will now be convenient to express the field quantities 
 and 
, 
 in terms
of components 
, 
; 
, 
 which are parallel to V and 
, 
; 
, 
, which are perpendicular to V. From 
 it follows that 
.
Since  
 and  
,  it  follows  [using
 and 
] that
(21–17)
By going through a similar procedure with Eqs. (21–11) and (21–13) the reader can
verify that we obtain the corresponding equations:
(21–18)

82  The Special Theory of Relativity
(21–19)
The equations for 
 and 
 can be combined into the set
(21–20)
(21–21)
The above equations define the transformation laws for 
 and 
 that will lead to the
same equations of motion [(21–7) to (21–10)] for a charged particle, independent of the
speed of the frame of reference.
It should be noted that the transformation relationships (21–20) and (21–21) can also be
shown to lead to an invariant form for Maxwell’s equations. (To do this is beyond the
scope of the present work, but for a further discussion on this point see C.C.Moller, The
Theory  of  Relativity,  and  W.Panofsky  and  M.Phillips,  Classical  Electricity  and
Magnetism.) Therefore, what has been achieved is the demonstration that the laws of
electrodynamics (Maxwell’s equations) and the laws of motion of a charged particle in an
electromagnetic field can both be expressed in an invariant form (i.e., as the same set of
relationships in all frames of reference connected by Lorentz transformations).
Finally, it should be noted that the transformation laws for 
 and 
 give the kind
of results that would be expected from a consideration of the laws of electrodynamics.
Thus Faraday’s law of induction implies that a wire passing through a magnetic field
 with velocity V will have emf induced in it proportional to V and the field 
 but
perpendicular to both. Equations (21–20) and (21–21) express what is essentially the
same conclusion. Thus, if in frame A we have 
 and 
, then on going to
the  frame  B,  moving  at  speed  V  in  which  the  wire  is  at  rest,  we  will  have
. The emf (as experienced in the frame on which the wire is
at rest) will then be proportional to 
Similarly, if in frame A we have 
 and 
, then (21–18) and (21–19)
imply that in a frame moving at a velocity V relative to A, there will appear a magnetic
field 
. This can be shown to lead to results equivalent to
Maxwell’s  “displacement  current,”  
,  which  implies  that  an
object passing through a static electric field will, in the frame in which it is at rest,
experience a corresponding magnetic field (which could be shown up, for example, if the
object were a magnetic dipole tending to orient itself in relationship to this “induced”
magnetic field).

XXII
Experimental Evidence for Special Relativity
We shall here give a brief review of the experimental evidence confirming the special
theory of relativity. In doing this we must keep in mind that the special theory depends
crucially on two points.
1. The principle of relativity, which asserts that the laws of physics are always the same
relationships independent of the speed of the reference frame.
2. The expression of the relationship between two reference frames moving at different
but uniform velocities as a Lorentz transformation.
The  experimental  evidence  confirming  the  principle  of  relativity  is  actually
overwhelming, in the sense that in no field has one ever discovered any dependence of
the forms of the laws of physics on the velocity of the reference frame. We shall therefore
confine  ourselves  here  to  a  discussion  of  the  evidence  confirming  the  Lorentz
transformation.
In  our  discussion  of  the  ether  theory  (see  Chapter  9)  we  saw  that  the  Lorentz
transformation is completely equivalent to a combination of three effects:
1. The Lorentz contraction of a moving object in the ratio 
.
2. The lengthening of the period of a moving clock in the ratio 
.
3. The change in reading of two equivalent moving clocks a distance x apart by
.
This
 means,  of  course,  that two such moving clocks fail to register the same time after
they are separated, even if they were in perfect synchronism while they were adjacent to
each other.
As was shown in Chapter 6 the Michelson-Morley experiment may be regarded as an
excellent confirmation of the Lorentz contraction. The more modern and very exact
measurements of  the  velocity  of  light  by  the  equivalent  of  the  Fizeau method,  as
discussed in Chapter 7, depend on the combination of the Lorentz contraction and the
change of periods of clocks. Since the Lorentz transformation itself is already checked by
the Michelson-Morley experiment, we may regard the Fizeau method as confirming the
variation  of  the  rates  of  clocks,  with  their  velocity,  as  predicted  by  the  Lorentz
transformation. However, there exists more direct verification of the variation of the rate
of clocks. Thus in Chapter 16 we have discussed the observations on the mean time decay
of rapidly moving mesons and the Doppler shift for light viewed perpendicular to the
direction  of  motion  of  the  source,  both  of  which  have  provided  very  accurate
confirmation of the predictions of the Lorentz transformation concerning the increase of
period that should be observed for moving clocks.
The  direct  experimental  confirmation  of  the  remaining  prediction  concerning  the
nonsimultaneity of separated clocks is rather more difficult to obtain. At first sight it
would seem that one could test this by considering the relativistic law for the addition of
velocities (15–7) and (15–8), the derivation of which depended on the formula (15–6),
expressing just the property of nonsimultaneity of such clocks that is under discussion.

84  The Special Theory of Relativity
This law has been quite accurately confirmed, for example, by the measurement of the
speed of light in flowing water, described in Chapter 17. Unfortunately, such a test is not
unambiguous in its significance, because, as can be shown (see, for example, C.C.
Moller, The Theory of Relativity) nonrelativistic theories of electro-magnetic phenomena
can  be  made  to  give  the  same  results  as  relativistic  theories  to  the  order  of  the
experiments that are available. As a result, the agreement of experiments measuring the
speed  of  light  in  flowing  water  with  the  predictions  of  relativity  does  not  prove
conclusively  that  the  formulas  for  nonsynchronization  of  moving  clocks  is  correct,
because  other  assumptions  concerning  electromagnetic  processes  might  lead  to
essentially the same result.
Another line of approach, offering practically conclusive confirmation on this point,
can be obtained by reconsidering the results of Chapter 8, when we showed in the
development  leading  to  Eq.  (8–8)  that  once  we  accept  the  formula
 for the slowing down of clocks, it follows necessarily that
when two initially synchronous moving clocks separate (slowly and without jarring
movements) they will get out of synchronism by 
. This
conclusion is just a consequence of the fact that while the clocks are separating, they
must run at different rates; and it evidently follows quite independent of the hypotheses of
an  ether.  Since  experiment  has  already  confirmed  the  formula
, the prediction of the Lorentz transformation that equivalent
clocks  will  get  out  of  phase  by  
 may  be  regarded  as
essentially verified.
A more direct way of checking the above prediction has already been suggested at the
end of Chapter 10, viz., to measure the speed of light on the basis of the time tA–tB taken
for light to pass between two points A and B, the times tA and tB being read from
equivalent  cesium  clocks  that  were  first  synchronized  and  then  separated.  This
experiment  may  perhaps  soon  be  technically  feasible.  As  indicated  in  Chapter  10,
however, there seems to be little reason to suppose that the results would differ from
those predicted with the aid of a Lorentz transformation.
The predictions of Einstein’s theory with regard to the equivalence of mass and energy
have been so thoroughly verified that further discussion of this point seems unnecessary.
In this regard, even the detailed relationships (20–4), (20–5), and (20–6), expressing the
Lorentz transformation of energy and momentum, have been verified in the study of
collisions of particles of very high energy, such as those produced in accelerators in the
laboratory and encountered naturally in cosmic rays.
Similarly, the invariance of the Lorentz equations (21–2) and (21–3) for a moving
charged  particle  has  been  verified,  even  when  v/c  is  close  to  unity,  while  the
transformation laws, (21–20) and (21–21), for the electromagnetic field are also well
verified experimentally.
The experimental evidence that we have cited as confirming the special theory of
relativity seems very strong indeed. Besides, there is a great deal of additional evidence,
which we have not discussed here. Moreover, it should be kept in mind that a large part
of this evidence came, especially in the early days when the theory was new and not

Experimental Evidence for Special Relativity  85
generally accepted, from experiments designed at least to probe and test the theory and, if
possible, to refute it. In view of its ability to withstand such probes and criticisms, as well
as to lead fruitfully to new results, many of them unexpected, it may be said that the
theory of relativity is now as well confirmed as is any aspect of physics that is known
today.
Nevertheless, as is true of any theory in science, it must not be supposed that relativity
is an iron-clad certainty, which should not be questioned, and which could never be
shown to be wrong in certain respects, an approximation to the facts, or of limited
validity for other reasons. For example, there is even now an appreciable number of
scientists who are inclined to suspect that the theory of relativity (both special and
general) may be wrong when applied in the domain of very small distances (much less
than the presumed size of the “elementary” particle). Besides, there seem to be reasons to
suspect that relativity may not be adequate when applied to extremely large distances of
the order of the presumed “size” of the universe (out to where the “red shift” becomes
appreciable). In addition, the theory of relativity may break down in yet other ways. It is
therefore necessary, especially when we enter into new domains of phenomena, to apply
the theory of relativity in a tentative manner, being alert and ready to criticize it, and if
necessary to replace it with a more nearly correct theory, which may be as radically
different from relativity as relativity is from Newtonian mechanics.

XXIII
More About the Equivalence of Mass and Energy
The equivalence of mass and energy, which follows from the theory of relativity, is so
much at variance with the older classical concepts that it seems worthwhile to discuss the
general implications of this fact in some detail. Indeed, experience shows that students
often have considerable difficulty in understanding the full implications of Einstein’s
notions of mass and energy. Typical questions that arise are: “Is mass the same thing as
energy?”  “Is  the  world  constituted  only  of  energy?”  “What  is  mass,  if  it  can  be
transformed into energy and vice versa?” And for that matter, “What is energy?”
Let  us  begin  by  considering  where  the  common  conception  of  a  body  with  a
well-defined  and  constant  mass  comes  from.  This  idea  is  evidently  based  on  the
observation that the world contains a large number of objects and entities, which can be
compared  with  regard  to  size,  shape,  weight,  etc.,  and  which  can  be  regarded  as
constituted of definite quantities or masses of certain substances, such as rock, soil, water,
metal, wood, etc. We find, of course, that these substances wear away, break down, melt,
corrode, decay, evaporate, and burn up into nothing but gases. So it is evident that they
are not in fact individually permanent or constant in mass, though they may undergo
negligible visible changes in such properties, some for short periods of time and others
over longer periods of time.
Our  mode  of  thought  is  such,  however,  that  somehow  we  seem  to  believe  that
somewhere there must be an absolutely permanent basis for everything.
Early scientists, for example, supposed that atoms were absolutely permanent entities,
the basic “building blocks” of the universe, so that the ever-changing appearances of
large-scale  matter  were  regarded  as  nothing  but  consequences  of  the  underlying
movements of its permanent atomic constituents. But then the atoms were seen to be
constituted  of  moving  structures  of  “elementary  particles”  (electrons,  protons,  and
neutrons) with the result that atoms could be altered, transformed into other atoms, built
up and torn down, etc. It was then assumed, however, that there is something else that is
absolutely permanent, i.e., the elementary particles. But as we have seen, nuclear and
other processes have been discovered, in which even these particles are transformed into
each  other  and  annihilated  and  created,  with  the  liberation  and  absorption  of
corresponding amounts of energy. So once again the search for absolutely permanent
entities and substances has been foiled. Rather, it is clear that both in common experience
and in scientific investigations, the objects, entities, substances, etc., that we actually
experience, perceive, or observe have always (thus far) shown themselves to be only
relatively invariant in their properties, this relative invariance having often been mistaken
for absolute permanence.
If mankind has never yet encountered anything that is absolutely permanent, where then
does this idea come from, an idea of great persistence which returns perennially in the
face of new experiences and observations, which again and again show it to be contrary
to  the  available  facts?  Some  light  can  be  thrown  on  this  question  by  considering
investigations of the development of the concept of the object in infants and young
children.  (These  investigations  have  been  carried  out  along  with  studies  of  the
development of their concepts of space and time, and are discussed in more detail in the

More About the Equivalence of Mass and Energy  87
Appendix.) The existing evidence shows that very young infants do not seem actually to
have the notion of a permanent object. Rather, their behavior in relation to objects is such
as to suggest that they regard them as coming into existence when they are first seen and
going out of existence when they vanish from the field of perception. Only gradually
does the infant build up the notion of an object that exists even when he does not perceive
it. The notion of a permanent quantity of matter is developed still later; and even children
of three or four years of age are often quite confused on this question. But in time the
concept  is  formed,  and  eventually  it  becomes  habitual,  so  that  in  every  field  we
automatically tend to seek bodies, entities, or substances of fixed characteristics, and
even begin to feel that we cannot imagine a world that is not built out of some kinds of
permanent entities or substances.
The notion that there must exist some absolutely permanent kinds of entities is not only
based on habits of thought beginning in early childhood in the manner described above.
As happens with the similar notions of absolute space and time, it also originates, at least
in part, in the structure of our common language. Thus when we see something with
relatively invariant properties we give it a name. But this name remains the same, even
though the object changes. Because it has the same name, we tend to think of it as being
the same thing. An extreme case is that of a human being. Each person has the same
name that he had 10, 20 or 30 years ago. Yet he is evidently a very different person, both
physically and mentally. In fact, he is different from what he was yesterday or even a
minute ago. Similarly, a block of metal is always changing, its atoms are moving, it is
oxidizing, becoming fatigued, etc. In certain limited contexts and for short periods of
time, these changes can be neglected. So the constancy of the name of an object leads to
an adequate conception of it only in a certain limited domain. Our difficulties arise
because out of a habit that goes back to the very beginning of the use of language by the
human race (as well as to its beginnings in the childhood of each individual), we identify
things; i.e., we unconsciously assume that whatever has the same name is at least in
essence the same thing.
Let us now return to the problem of mass and energy in physics. We have given the
name “mass” to certain properties observed in common experience. These properties
have since then been given more refined meanings in physics. Besides referring to the
common notion of “quantity of the permanent substance of matter,” mass refers in
physics to two more precisely defined properties. One of these is inertia, or resistance to
acceleration, and the Other is gravitation.
We shall begin by discussing the inertial aspect of mass. In Newtonian mechanics, the
equation ma=F implies that the force needed to give an object a specified acceleration is
proportional to its mass. But this mass would not have its usual significance if it were not
a constant. In other words, Newton’s equations (18–1) and (18–2) are not defined without
(18–3), i.e., (dm/dt)=0, or m=constant. The importance of this latter equation is often
missed, just because of our everyday habit of thinking of mass as a “permanent” property
of substances. In reality, however, it is not from the common idea of mass that we know
the constancy of the proportionality factor m between the force and acceleration of a
given object. Rather, it is an observed fact that this proportionality factor is an invariant
in all experiments referring to the domain of Newtonian mechanics.
The second important manifestation of the mass of an object in physics is that it occurs
as a constant proportionality factor occurring in the law of gravitational force between it

88  The Special Theory of Relativity
and another such object, 
, where r is the distance between the objects
and G is the gravitational constant. An important further fact is that in all experiments
available to date, the mass appearing in the above equation has always been proportional
to the inertial mass appearing in the equations of motion. Because of this constancy of the
ratio between gravitational and inertial masses, one tends to identify them; that is, one is
led to give them the same name and, therefore, to regard them as the same thing. In doing
this we are very likely also unconsciously to replace the precise physical meanings of
gravitational and inertial masses by the common notion of mass as “quantity of the
permanent substance of matter.”
In the relativistic domain of large v/c we find (as we have seen in Chapter 20) that
Newton’s laws of motion must be replacedbyEinstein’s, which are
 
The mass is therefore no longer an invariant in the broader domain. So it is clear that
mass is in fact just a relative invariant, in the sense that its changes can be neglected only
in the Newtonian domain.
The problem of the gravitational aspect of mass cannot be dealt with in the special
theory of relativity; it requires the general theory. But it will suffice here to mention
briefly that in the general theory Einstein regards the exact proportionality between
gravitational and inertial masses, which has thus far been observed, as suggesting that
these two kinds of mass represent different but related aspects of some single broader set
of concepts and laws, which encompasses both the phenomena of inertia and those of
gravitation. This notion he embodies in his “principle of equivalence” between the effects
of acceleration of the coordinate frame and those of a gravitational field. Here the notion
of equivalence has a meaning similar to that arising in the “equivalence” of mass and
energy; i.e., it refers to an inherent relationship between two different quantities, implying
that one is necessarily proportional to the other. On this basis Einstein succeeded in
developing a coherent and unified theory, which, in effect, explains gravitational and
inertial mass as different aspects of a single underlying process, treated by the laws of
general relativity, of which restricted relativity is, of course, a special and approximate
limiting case, more or less as Newtonian mechanics is a corresponding limiting and
approximate case of special relativity.
It seems clear that we have been applying the same name “mass” to properties that
become very different, as we go outside the Newtonian domain. Indeed, because the mass
of a body is not invariant in the relativistic domain, it follows that the relativistic concept
of mass contradicts the common notion of mass as “quantity of the permanent substance
of matter.” Since this common notion can be applied correctly only in the Newtonian
domain, it follows that in the theory of relativity we are using the word “mass” in a sense
that is not compatible with its common everyday meaning. Rather, in relativity mass
refers merely to certain proportionality factors that enter into the laws of inertia and
gravitation.

More About the Equivalence of Mass and Energy  89
mass is not an inevitable one, but has been built up in the development of the human race,
and learned by each child, to such a degree that it becomes habitual and then seems to be
a necessary idea, which could not be otherwise. As in the case of ordinary notions of
space and time, these habits of thought appear to be adequate in a certain limited domain.
It is important, however, not to continue with these habits beyond the domain in which
they are appropriate.
Let us now consider what is the meaning of energy. In physics, energy was originally
defined as “quantity of motion”; but this led to a great deal of argument in early days as
to which was the “real” quantity of motion, energy or momentum. Since then, it has been
seen that this argument was pointless, since there is no unique “quantity of motion.”
Rather, energy and momentum are both invariant functions, in the sense that the total of
these quantities, summed over all component parts of an isolated system, does not change
with time.
As different parts of a system interact there is a process of exchange of energy (and
momentum) between them. In this process the total quantity is conserved, but the energy
of each part will of course alter. For this reason alone the total energy of a system is only
a relatively invariant function, being constant when the system in question is isolated, but
not when it is brought into interaction with its environment.
Interactions may involve not only mechanical exchanges but also changes of energy
into different forms. Thus, mechanical energy can be transformed into an equivalent
amount of electrical energy and vice versa, while there is a similar possibility of a mutual
transformation between both of these kinds of energy and equivalent quantities of heat
(which is the energy of random molecular movement, a movement that cancels out as far
as the large-scale level is concerned). This transformability between different forms in
equivalent amounts is indeed what is most characteristic of energy in physics.
Because the total energy of an isolated system is conserved, there is a tendency for us to
think of it as a permanent substance, like a fluid that flows from one part of the system to
another. But no one has ever perceived, or otherwise observed, such a substance. Rather,
the energy always appears as a relatively invariant function in a movement. Thus, for an
isolated body, the function mv2/2 is such an invariant, in the sense that it remains constant
as long as the body is isolated, and that in a system of such bodies capable of interaction,
the sum of the energies of the bodies remains constant (whereas, for example, the
function m2v5/2 would not have these properties). Similarly, an electric current I flowing
through a coil of inductance L has energy LI2/2, which is conserved if there is no
resistance, and which can be transformed into a corresponding quantity of mechanical
energy with the aid of a motor, and into heat energy with the aid of a resistance. We
emphasize then that energy is always an invariant, but transformable, aspect and function
of some kind of movement and never appears as an independently existing substance.
Even potential energy is defined just as the capacity for doing work, i.e., for creating a
corresponding movement, measured in terms of mechanical, electrical, thermal, or other
forms of energy.
In the earlier stages of the development of physics, it was in principle possible to think
of all movement as a quality or property of some kind of particles. With the discovery
that mass (and even the particles themselves) can be “annihilated,” with the liberation of
equivalent amounts of energy, this way of thinking ceased to be tenable. But if the energy
does not belong to such particles, how then are we to conceive of it? If energy has
In this connection it is important to recall that, in any case, the common concept of

90  The Special Theory of Relativity
meaning only as a relatively invariant function of movement, and if there are no basic and
permanent constituents of the universe which possess this movement, what can we mean
by the terms “energy” and “movement”?
To answer these questions it will be helpful to begin by introducing a distinction
between two kinds of energy. On the one hand, there is the energy of outward movement
which occurs on the large scale, for example, when a body changes its position or
orientation as a whole. On the other hand, there is the energy of inward movement, for
example, the thermal motions of the constituent molecules, which cancel out on the large
scale. It is characteristic of inward movement that it tends to be to-and-fro, oscillating,
reflecting back and forth, and so on. (In Einstein’s example of the box containing
radiation, discussed earlier, the light reflecting back and forth can be regarded as inward
movement.)
It is evident that the terms “inward” and “outward” are inherently relational in their
meanings. Thus, relative to the large-scale level, molecular movement is “inward,”
because its over-all outward effects cancel on the large scale. However, relative to the
molecular level, it is “outward,” because the molecules do undergo a displacement
through space that is significant on this level. On the other hand, the electronic and
nuclear motions are still “inward” relative to the molecular level, although they must be
regarded as “outward” when we go to still deeper levels, where their movements result in
significant space displacements.
With these notions in mind, let us now return to the question “What is mass?” We first
point out that in Einstein’s theory, mass and energy are not regarded as originating in
essentially different ways. Rather, they are to be thought of as two different but related
aspects of a single total process of movement. In such a movement there is a relatively
invariant  capacity  to  do  work,  to  interact  with  other  systems,  and  to  set  them  in
movement, at the expense of the movement in the original system. This is called energy.
In addition, such a system has a certain inertia, or resistance to acceleration, as well as a
certain gravitational attraction to other bodies. Both of these are proportional to a
property called by the name of “mass.” Now, we have already seen that if there is inward
movement in a body (random molecular motion or the motion of light rays reflecting
back and forth), then this movement contributes an amount, 
 , to the inertial mass,
according to the formula 
 
 , where 
 is the energy associated with this
movement. Moreover, as we have also pointed out, in the general theory of relativity,
Einstein shows that such energy contributes to the gravitational mass in the same way.
Since relativity requires us, in any case, to set aside the notion of mass as “quantity of the
permanent substance of matter,” it follows from Einstein’s theory that whenever a system
possesses a certain kind of energy, contributing a part 
 to its total energy E, it has all
the properties (i.e., inertial and gravitational) that physics ascribes to a corresponding
contribution 
 to its mass, which is a part of the total mass m=E/c2.
In this connection it must be noted that every form of energy (including kinetic as well
as potential) contributes in the same way to the mass. However, the “rest energy” of a
body has a special meaning, in the sense that even when a body has no visible motion as
a  whole,  it  is  still  undergoing  inward  movements  (as  radiant  energy,  molecular,
electronic, nucleonic, and other movements). These inward movements have some “rest
energy” E0 and contribute a corresponding quantity, m0=E0/c2 to the “rest mass.” As long

More About the Equivalence of Mass and Energy  91
as the energy is only “inward,” the rest mass remains constant, of course. But as we have
seen, internal transformations taking place on the molecular, atomic, and nuclear levels
can change some of this to-and-fro, reflecting “inward” movement into other forms of
energy whose effects are “outwardly” visible on the large scale. When this happens, the
“rest energy” and with it, the “rest mass,” undergo a corresponding decrease. But such a
change of mass is seen to be not in the least bit mysterious, if we remember that inertial
and gravitational masses are merely one aspect of the whole movement, another aspect of
which is an equivalent energy, exhibited as a capacity to do work on the large scale. In
other words, the transformation of “matter” into “energy” is just a change from one form
of  movement  (inwardly,  reflecting,  to-and-fro)  into  another  form  (e.g.,  outward
displacement through space).
It is particularly instructive to consider how, in this point of view, one understands the
possibility for objects with zero rest mass to exist, provided that they are moving at the
speed of light. For if rest mass is “inner” movement, taking place even when an object is
visibly at rest on a certain level, it follows that something without “rest mass” has no
such inner movement, and that all its movement is outward, in the sense that it is
involved in displacement through space. So light (and everything else that travels at the
same speed) may be regarded as something that does not have the possibility of being “at
rest” on any given level, by virtue of the cancellation of inner “reflecting” movements,
because it does not possess any such inner movements. As a result it can exist only in the
form of “outward” movement at the speed c. And as we recall, the property of moving
with the speed of light is invariant under a Lorentz transformation, so that the quality of
the movement as purely “outward” does not depend on the frame of reference in which it
is observed. (On  the other hand, movements at speeds less than c can always be
transformed into rest by a change to a reference frame with velocity equal to that of the
object under consideration).

XXIV
Toward a New Theory of Elementary Particles
The full development of the point of view outlined in the previous chapter, concerning
the transformation between “rest energy” and other forms of energy, implies that we shall
eventually have to understand the so-called “elementary” particles as structures arising in
relatively invariant patterns of movement occurring at a still lower level than that of these
particles. In such structures even the “rest energy” of an elementary particle would be
treated as some kind of “inner,” to-and-fro reflecting movement, on a level which is even
below that on which nuclear transformations take place.
At present the study of the structure of the “elementary” particles is indeed one of the
principal concerns of physical research. A great many clues have been accumulated,
which suggest that there does actually exist a new level of the kind mentioned above, in
terms of which such structure may perhaps eventually be understood. However, it seems
likely that the laws of this level will be as new relative to those of the nucleonic and
atomic levels as those of the latter are in relation to the large-scale level. The present
situation in elementary particle physics may perhaps be compared with that existing in
atomic physics before the time of Niels Bohr, in the sense that a great deal of systematic
factual information has been collected, suggesting the need for a fundamentally new set
of theoretical concepts, which is, however, yet to be developed. Nevertheless, it is already
clear that the “creation” of a particle should correspond to setting up some characteristic
relatively invariant kind of movement in a level below that of the elementary particles,
with the aid of the necessary quantity of energy, and its “annihilation” to the ending of
this pattern of movement, with the liberation of a corresponding quantity of energy. What
seems essential here is to set aside the notion of “elementary” particles as the permanent
substance of matter, and to regard them as only relatively fixed kinds of entities, which
come into being when certain kinds of movement take place, and pass out of being when
these kinds of movement cease.
At this point, questions naturally arise. One is: “May we not find new kinds of entities
below the level of elementary particles which do in fact constitute the real permanent
substance of matter?” Of course, we have no way at present to know what will be
discovered in future research on this problem. But it may perhaps be instructive to make a
few observations here, which we can carry out on the basis of what we already know.
Naturally, these observations will have to be somewhat speculative, but it is hoped that
they will serve to help clarify the meaning of this question.
We begin by asking: “Does the assumption of the absolute permanence of entities or
substances ever make a real contribution to the laws of physics, or is it not like the
Ptolemaic epicycles and the ether theory, in the sense that it is factually not necessary and
as far as the theory is concerned, a source of confusion?” To show that this question is
well founded, we shall begin by considering everyday life, where as we have seen from
our continually changing immediate perceptions, we have been able to abstract certain
objects, entities, etc., having more or less constant characteristics, such as shape, size,
hardness, and other qualities. Knowing that all these objects can be broken, corroded,
melted, burned, or that they are subject to decay, is it not better to refer to them, in effect,
as  relatively  fixed  and  invariant,  rather  than  as  entities  with  absolutely  permanent

Toward a New Theory of Elementary Particles  93
properties? Indeed, if we do this, we can then think of their various movements and
transformations, outward and inward, without contradicting the above-described facts,
because we have not made the false assumption that since the objects have a fixed name
they must always remain essentially the same sorts of things. Thus, it is evident that on
the level of ordinary experience, clarity is gained and confusion is decreased if we admit,
from  the  outset,  that  objects  and  entities  need  have  only  relatively  invariant
characteristics and that our descriptions of their actions are only approximations, in the
sense that all the movements in the atomic, nuclear, and lower levels are (correctly for
this level) being ignored. When these movements are taken into account, transformations
in which “substances” such as liquids, solids, metals, and gases are created and destroyed
can be understood quite simply, as the outcome of “inward” movements on lower levels.
But then when we come to the molecular, atomic, and “elementary” particle levels, we
again note a similar process. Thus, an atom, which is a fixed entity on its own level (the
very word “atom” means “indivisible” in Greek) is found to be just as capable of
fundamental  transformations  which  are  the  outcome  of  “inward”  movements  of  its
electrons, protons, and neutrons as are the entities on the large-scale level. And, indeed,
nowhere have we ever encountered entities which do not have these characteristics.
Can we not then simply refrain from making assumptions concerning the absolute
permanence of what is, in the nature of the case, unknown? As can be done in large-scale
experience, we can instead regard entities and structures encountered on lower levels as
relatively invariant or relatively fixed in their characteristics. In the domain in which
these entities or structures are relatively invariant, we may refer to their movements and
transformations in a way rather similar to that adopted with regard to the objects of
everyday experience. Evidently nothing is lost when we thus replace the notion of
absolute permanence by that of relative invariance.
The notion that something is absolutely permanent is moreover evidently one that can
never be proved experimentally. For no one can be sure that even if certain things have
not changed over a given domain of experience, they will never change, as our domain of
experience is broadened (as has indeed actually happened with everything that was ever
thought to be absolutely permanent).
It is evident then that by considering entities and structures as relatively invariant, with
an as yet unknown domain of invariance, we avoid making unnecessary and unprovable
assumptions  concerning  their  absolute  invariance.  Such  a  procedure  has  enormous
advantages in research, because one of the main sources of difficulty in the development
of new concepts—not only in physics, but also in the whole of science—has been the
tendency to hold onto old concepts beyond their domain of validity; this tendency is
evidently enchanced by our habit of regarding the entities and structures that we know as
absolutely permanent in their characteristics.

XXV
The Falsification of Theories
These concepts may perhaps be further clarified by the consideration of a point that has
been very strongly emphasized by Professor Popper, i.e., that the falsification of a theory
is,  in  many  ways,  even  more  significant  than  its  verification.  For  example,  the
demonstration that the Galilean transformation is false led eventually to the revolutionary
changes attending the development of the theory of relativity. Similarly, experiments
showing  the  falsity  of  the  predictions  of  classical  physics  for  atomic  spectra,  the
photoelectric effect, and the distribution of black-body radiation led to the even more
revolutionary changes that the quantum theory brought in. And the more recent evidence
suggesting that our ideas concerning the existence of “permanent” elementary particles
are false seems to be laying the foundation for a transformation of our basic concepts that
will  make  even  the  changes  introduced  by  relativity  and  quantum  theory  seem
comparatively small.
It is clear that the falsification of old theories has actually had a key role in the
development of physics (and indeed of the whole of science). A little reflection on this
problem shows, however, that such a process is a necessary part of the development of a
science, and that in order to permit this development to take place properly, it is indeed
essential that scientific theories be falsifiable.1
Consider, for example, the Ptolemaic theory, which allowed the addition of arbitrary
sets of epicycles in such a way as to be able to accommodate any conceivable set of
observations. Such a theory could not be disproved by any set of experiments whatsoever.
But theories which are inherently unfalsifiable in this way do not really say anything new
about the world. For their ability to accommodate themselves to any factual discoveries
whatsoever  means  that  they  exclude  no  possibility  at  all,  and  therefore,  have  no
well-defined implications concerning what is as yet unknown. At best, they constitute a
useful way of summarizing existing facts. On the other hand, a theory such as that of
Newton or Einstein cannot be adjusted to fit arbitrary experimental results, and is
therefore capable of leading to definite predictions about phenomena that were not known
when the theory was first formulated. If such a theory is wrong, it can therefore be
checked and shown to be false. This possibility is inseparable from its ability to say
something new about the world, and thus to constitute a genuinely scientific theory (i.e.,
genuine in the sense that it affords correct knowledge going beyond the experimental
facts which helped lead to its proposal).
A theory that has a real predictive content must then, as it were, “stick its neck out.”
But if it does this it is likely in time to “have its neck chopped off.” Indeed, this is what
did happen eventually to a great many theories such as Newtonian mechanics, which
were confirmed up to a point but then shown to be false. Moreover, it seems likely that
eventually this will be the fate of all theories. Thus Einstein’s special theory of relativity
1 For a more detailed discussion of Professor Popper’s point of view on this question, see
K.R.Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1963.

The Falsification of Theories  95
approximations and limiting cases.2 Moreover, as we have already remarked, classical 
mechanics has beenshown to be false, in the sense that it is an approximation and limiting 
case of quantum mechanics, which is a very different kind of theory. And now it seems 
likely that current elementary particle theory, along with quantum mechanics, will be 
shown to be false, in the sense of being approximations to some as-yet-unknown theory 
of a new kind that is still more general.
If useful scientific theories are not only falsifiable, but also very probably actually 
false, what then can it mean to seek truth through scientific research? Does not Professor 
Popper’s thesis thus disclose a deep kind of confusion in the whole purpose of science, its 
goals, aims, procedures, and achievements?
This problem has its roots in a certain attitude toward truth in science, which has, like 
the concepts of absolute space and time, and of permanent substance, become so habitual 
that it may seem inevitable. This attitude regards basic scientific laws as absolute truths, 
in the sense that such laws are assumed to hold exactly (i.e., without approximation) in 
unlimited domains, under all possible conditions, so that they will never be subject to 
modification, contradiction, and fundamental change. For example, before the advent of 
relativity and quantum theory, Newton’s laws of motion, along with his concepts of space 
and time, were regarded as absolute truths of this kind. Later, many scientists probably 
began to regard relativity and quantum theory as “really absolute” truths, whereas they 
felt that Newtonian mechanics had been a false version of such “eternal verities.”
Where did the notion of absolute truth come from? It is evident that at least as far back 
as  the  Middle Ages  this  notion  was  quite  prevalent.  For  example,  the  doctrines  of 
Aristotle were then commonly regarded as absolute truths. And if we go back further in time it 
seems clear that there is no society known in historical records which did not accept some
kinds of doctrines, notions, or ideas as absolute truths. Thus, the search for an absolute truth 
seems to be based on the continuation of a tradition having very deep roots in the distant past.
But, as with the case of the permanent substance, mankind has never encountered any 
general statements that were not approximations, having limited domains and conditions 
of validity. Moreover, even if there did exist general statements which had not yet been 
shown to be thus limited in their validity, there would (as in the case of the hypothesis of 
absolutely permanent substances) be no way to be sure that they would continue to be 
verified, as the domain under consideration is extended indefinitely. Thus, the notion of 
absolute truth is not based on facts, and can indeed never be proved by any experiments.
It is clear, moreover, that the assumption that a given law is absolutely true is never 
necessary.  For  any  laws  that  are  thus  asserted  as  absolute  truths  can,  with  greater
cannot be entirely true, if only because it is an approximation to the general theory. And 
Einstein implicitly recognized that even the general theory is not entirely true, when he 
engaged in his search for a still more general “unified field theory” that he hoped would 
contain  general  relativity,  electrodynamics,  and  elementary  particle  theory,  as
2 Recall also that, as pointed out in Chapter 22, there are yet other reasons why it is suspected that
there may be limits to the validity of the theory of relativity.

96  The Special Theory of Relativity
faithfulness to the facts of the case, be asserted as relationships holding in some domain.
The extent of such a domain can be indicated when the law is ultimately falsified in
further research and investigation and replaced by a new law or set of laws containing the
older ones as approximations or limiting cases. For example, Newtonian mechanics was
found, as we have seen, to fail as the velocity becomes appreciable compared with that of
light, where it has to be replaced by Einstein’s theory, which showed that the domain of
Newton’s law is that of sufficiently low velocities.
It must not be supposed, however, that we can eventually come to know the domain of
validity of a given law completely and perfectly, and thus obtain another kind of absolute
truth, which would assert that at least in a specified and well-defined domain, a given law
is always applicable. For our knowledge of this domain is itself incomplete. Thus, with
regard to Newton’s laws, it was found that even in the low-velocity domain delimited by
the theory of relativity, these laws fail in the atomic level, where quantum theory is
needed, and probably on the extra-galactic scale of space and time, as well as in the
interiors of superdense stars, where general relativistic effects become important. As we
cannot be sure that there are not further as-yet-unknown limitations on Newton’s laws,
which will be revealed in future research, we can only say that it is necessary always to
be  alert  to  the  possibility  of  discovering  additional  limitations  on  the  domain  of
applicability of any given law, even after some of the limitations of this kind have already
been disclosed.
It seems clear, however, that as long as, generally speaking, laws can be discovered
having domains of validity going in any way at all beyond the facts in which they are
based, then the conditions will exist in which scientific research can be carried out by
methods currently in use. For such research evidently does not require that any of these
laws be absolute truths, provided that they can be confirmed objectively in certain
domains and similarly falsified in broader domains.
In terms of the notion of law, described above, Professor Popper’s thesis on the need for
falsifiability of theories is seen to arise quite naturally. For now we need no longer
suppose that a scientific theory is either completely true, and therefore an “eternal verity,”
or else completely false, and therefore of no significance whatsoever. Rather, a law of
nature is, by our very way of conceiving it, seen to express the fact that in a certain set of
changes taking place in nature, as well as in a corresponding set of changes of points of
view, reference frames, modes of investigation, etc., certain general relationships can be
discovered, which remain the same throughout all these changes. But this invariance is to
be conceived of as only relative, in the sense that as the domain is broadened, we leave
room in our minds to entertain the notion that the law may break down. That is to say, it
may be falsified in some future set of experiments. We do not commit ourselves as to
when,  where,  and  how  it  will  be  falsified  but  leave  this  to  be  shown  by  future
developments themselves. The essential point is only that our minds are not closed on
this question. Instead, we are always ready for a falsification when it comes, without
having at that time to face a “crisis” in which our notions of absolute truths and “eternal
verities” are shattered and overthrown once again, as has happened perennially since the
human race began its quest for this kind of truth.
As important as the falsifiability of a theory is, it is evident that we do not propose
theories merely in order to show that they are wrong. Rather, as we have already
indicated, an acceptable scientific theory must also be able to withstand a certain number
of experimental tests and criticisms, which show that it leads to true inferences, going

The Falsification of Theories  97
beyond the facts on which the theory was originally based. Of course, some statements
may have such small domains of validity of their predictive inferences that they are either
trivial or of a rather narrow significance (e.g., the pencil is on the table). A genuinely
scientific law is one that has a fairly broad domain of validity. So one of the aims of
scientific research is to find laws with the broadest possible domains of validity.
Indeed, without the development of such laws, science as we know it would be almost 
impossible. For a great deal of scientific research is, and must be, based on the effort to 
show that a theory already well-confirmed in a broad domain, can continue to be applied 
to ever greater accuracy and in ever new kinds of problems. A theory of this kind thus
helps indicate the kinds of questions that are likely to be relevant in our investigations of
nature. In the absence of such a theory, research tends to degenerate into a kind of
random or disorderly collection of isolated facts, most of which are not, in general, very 
relevant to each other or to the disclosure of laws of nature.
Nevertheless, it will eventually happen, as we have seen, that further efforts to confirm
a successful theory of the kind described above will eventually lead either to falsification 
or else to arbitrary ad hoc hypotheses, involving an intolerable degree of confusion and
ambiguity, which is in essence more or less equivalent to a falsification. Such a result 
contributes to the delimitation of the domain of validity of the theory in question but, even
more, it usually provides significant clues or indications, helping to lead to newer laws
having broader domains of validity and yet incorporating those predictions of older laws
that are known to be correct (in terms of suitable approximations as limiting cases). These
clues do not, of course, directly show what forms the newer laws must take. Finding such 
laws actually depends on a creative step by some scientist, in which he sees a new way of 
looking at things (a new hypothesis, a new idea, etc.) that resolves the problems that were
insoluble in the older point of view. Nevertheless, the possibility of such creative new
steps depends on a background of scientific development in which the activities  of
confirmation  and  falsification  of  older  theories  work  together  in  a complementary
way,  as  equally  necessary  aspects  of  the  development  of  scientific knowledge.
After a new theory has demonstrated that it has an additional predictive content going
beyond the facts which helped to suggest it, it tends, in its turn, to take on the role of an
accepted framework, the development and articulation of which will lead to the kinds of 
questions that are likely to be relevant in further investigation of nature. Eventually, 
however, the new theory suffers the fate of its predecessors.1
It is clear, then, that the discovery of truth in science is a process that is never finished,
and is not the quest for some fixed and well-defined set of principles, the knowledge of
which would constitute a final goal of scientific investigations. Moreover, the discovery
of truth is not a process of coming nearer to some such set of principles step by step, as a
limit which can never be reached, but which can be approached in some convergent way.
Nor is truth to be compared to some substance that can at least be gathered, bit by bit, to
be accumulated into a continually growing pile or “treasure” of truths.
1 For a further discussion of this kind of development of scientific theories see T.S.Kuhn, “The
Structure of Scientific Revolutions,” International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, Vol. 11, No. 2, 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962.

98  The Special Theory of Relativity
The idea of an absolute truth that we do not know and that we are nevertheless
approaching continuously is evidently just as unprovable and unnecessary as is the idea
that we already possess, or can come eventually to know completely, such an absolute
truth. All that we actually know and all that we really need to say is that each set of
scientific  laws  has  some  as-yet  incompletely  known  domains  of  validity.  It  is  not
necessary to commit ourselves in any way at all about a suppositions absolute truth that
we do not and cannot know but which we assume can be approached. Moreover, besides
being unnecessary and unfounded, such a commitment tends to confuse us for it suggests
that the march towards truth will be on some line, or set of lines, which continues
previous trends in such a way that the difference between the predictions of our laws and
the real state of affairs is always getting smaller. But the actual progress of science does
not suggest such a process of steady convergence. Rather, as in the case of relativity and
quantum theory, it shows that, generally speaking, older ideas are on a completely wrong
track when extended beyond their proper domains, and that radically new ideas are
needed, which contradict the old ones while at the same time containing them, in some
sense, as limiting cases and approximations. So the notion of a steady and convergent
approach toward some fixed kind of absolute truth is indeed very misleading.
In a similar way the idea of steadily accumulating pieces of an absolute truth is also
contrary to the facts of the case. For this idea suggests that although we do not know the
whole of the absolute truth, we do have parts of it, which are absolutely true, independent
of other parts, which will be discovered later. But as we have seen, each such part (e.g.,
Newtonian mechanics) has only a certain domain of validity, the full and precise limits of
which are never completely known, in the sense that later discoveries may always
contradict earlier laws in some as yet unpredictable ways. Therefore, a given “partial
truth” can in no sense be regarded even as a kind of “brick” that can be added to others,
so that mankind can, for example, be regarded as building an ever-growing structure of
truth, each part of which can always be relied on (at least in certain domains that have
already been fully delimited).
Truth is thus seen to be apprehended in an essentially dynamic way, in the sense that
our  knowledge  of  it  can  undergo  fundamentally  new  developments  at  any  point,
developments that contradict the older structure of ideas in unexpected ways and contain
unexpected basically new features. At each stage this knowledge has the form of a body
of theories which have thus far demonstrated the ability not only to explain the facts
known when they were first proposed, but which have also correctly predicted broad
ranges of further phenomena, going beyond these facts. It may be expected that most of
these theories will continue to be valid in some range of further experiments, which are
designed to apply them, articulate them, question them, and test them in broader domains.
But from time to time, parts of the whole body of theory, either large or small, will be
falsified, with the result that new theories will have to be developed. In this process there
is no permanent accumulation of theories, nor is there an approach to any particular form
as a convergent limit. What has been achieved at any given stage is, of course, eventually
recorded in journals and textbooks, which make it available for technical application, for
study,  and  for  further  development  and  criticism  by  investigators.  But  it  is  in  the
confrontation of new problems to which older theories are always giving rise that

The Falsification of Theories  99
meeting what has hitherto been unknown to him.
We shall go into this question further in Section A-4 of the Appendix.
scientific truth has its essential life in a kind of “growing region” where man is always

XXVI
The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus
Thus far we have discussed Einstein’s relativistic notions of space and time from a
physical and mathematical point of view–the mathematical treatment being based largely
on the formulas (14–3) and (14–4) for a Lorentz transformation. We shall now give a
geometrical way developed by Minkowski for considering the meaning of the theory of
relativity, which helps to bring out the significance of the theory in a different light.
We begin with the so-called “Minkowski diagram” for space and time (see Figure
26–1). In discussing this diagram we first consider an observer 
, at rest in the
laboratory. We represent the time coordinate as measured by this observer by the line OA
and one of the space coordinates (z) by the line OB. In principle we should include the
other two space coordinates, x and y, so that the diagram ought to be four-dimensional.
However,  for  many  purposes  it  will  be  sufficient  to  deal  with  z  and  t,  so  that  a
two-dimensional diagram will suffice.
Each point on this diagram refers to an event (such as the flashing of a light signal).
Every real event must, of course, take place during some interval of time and occupy
some region of space. However,
Figure 26–1

The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus  101
if the time interval is very short and the region of space is correspondingly small, we may 
replace the actual extended event by the simplifying abstraction of a point event.
Let the point O represent such an event, happening at the time t=0 to an observer, 
located at z=0. If the observer is at rest relative to the laboratory, then the events which
describe what happens to him over a period of time will be located on the line OA, which 
is the t axis of our diagram. Such a line is called a world line. The line OB then represents
all the events which are simultaneous to O, as measured by such an observer.
It will be convenient to adopt time units such that the velocity of light c is unity. We 
can do this by writing 
. Then, if we suppose that the axis OA represents the time
in terms of units of 
, we see that the paths of light rays, 
, are represented by
the two lines OC and OD, at 45° relative to the z and 
 axes.
Of course in three dimensions there are many possible directions for a light ray, so that 
the whole set of light rays through O is represented by a cone. The lines OC and OD then
correspond to the intersection of this “light cone” with the 
 plane.
Let us now consider a second observer, 
, moving in a rocket ship at a speed v
relative to the laboratory. His trajectory, 
, then defines a corresponding
world line OE with an inclination relative to the 
 axis, given by tan 
. In
accordance with the results of Chapter 13, such an observer will ascribe simultaneity to a
different set of events than that regarded as simultaneous by the observer 
, fixed in the
laboratory.  Indeed,  if  
 and  z!  are  the  coordinates  as  measured  by  
,  then  the
expression 
 determines which events are taken by him to be simultaneous. But
from Eq. (14–3) we see that 
 implies 
, or 
.
This locus is indicated by the line OF, inclined at the angle 
relative to
the z axis.
According to the principle of relativity, as described in Chapters 16 and 17, there is no 
“favored” system of coordinates, so that all the basic laws of physics constitute the same
relationships in every reference frame. It should therefore be just as correct to use a Minkowski 
diagram, in which the rocket-ship observer is taken to be at rest while the laboratory is moving 
at a speed –v relative to the ship. We illustrate this possibility in Figure 26–2, where O!A!
represents the world line of the rocket ship and O!B! represents the set of events regarded as
simultaneous by the observer in the rocket ship. The world line  of  the  laboratory  observer  is 
then  given  by  O!E!,  while  the  events  that  are simultaneous to O! for the laboratory observer 
are on the line O!F! (corresponding to the velocity –v of the laboratory relative to the ship)
One of the simplest and most elegant ways of further developing the meaning of the
principle of relativity in terms of the Minkowski diagram is with the aid of what has been 
called the “K calculus.” This calculus1 begins by considering a set of observers, each of 
whom is equipped with an equivalently constructed clock, and with a radar set capable of 
sending out pulses that are timed by this clock, so that they are spaced at regular 
intervals. Besides having a radar transmitter, each observer is supposed to be equipped 
1 This calculus was exposed by H.Bondi in a public lecture.

102  The Special Theory of Relativity
Figure 26–2
with a receiver, which can register the times of arrival (as measured on his clock), both of 
his own signals as they come reflected back from objects in his environment and of the 
signals emitted by other observers.
Let us begin by considering ourselves to be at rest in the laboratory, which is sending 
out signals at the regularly spaced intervals N1, N2, N3, etc., as indicated in Figure (26–3). 
These travel at the speed of light, and are received by the rocket observer (with world line 
OE) at intervals indicated by N1, N2, N3, etc. Let T0 be the time between pulses, as 
measured by the laboratory clock. Now the rocket observer will measure some other 
time, T, as the interval between reception of successive pulses. In general, T and T0 must 
evidently differ. Indeed, even in Newtonian theory, T will not be the same as T0, because 
of the Doppler shift. In relativity theory, however, we shall see that the ratio is a different 
function of the velocity of the rocket ship than it is in Newtonian theory.
(26–1)

The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus  103
Now,  according  to  the  principle  of  relativity  there  should  exist  a  corresponding 
possibility of a similar experiment, in which the rocket observer sends out regular pulses 
at M1, M2, M3, etc., as shown in Figure 26–4, the interval between these pulses being T0, 
as measured by his clock. The pulses are received by the laboratory observer at M1, M2,
M3, etc., with an interval between them which we denote by T!. We then define the ratio
Figure 26–3

104  The Special Theory of Relativity
Figure 26–4
(26–2)
which we shall presently evaluate with the aid of further arguments.

The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus  105
(and also 
, 
, etc.), which indicate the paths of radio signals, with a slope of
45°, indicating that in both frames the speed of light has the same value, c. This is how
we embody in the Minkowski diagram the observed fact that the speed of light is
invariant, the same for all observers.
Evidently the experiments carried out in the two frames are equivalent, and are to be
symmetrically  described,  when  each  is  referred  to  the  frame  of  the  corresponding
observer. Thus in each experiment regular signals are being sent out at intervals of T0, as
measured by the clock that controls the emission of the signals in question. In each
experiment the signals move at the speed c, and are received by an observer receding
from the source at a speed, v. According to the principle of relativity, whenever two
different observers thus carry out equivalent procedures, the laws applying in these
procedures should be the same. We conclude then that the ratio 
must be
the same as the ratio 
, or that
(26–3)
It must be remembered, however, that the above is true only in a relativistic theory, in
which  light  has  the  same  speed  in  every  frame  of  reference.  Thus  in  Newtonian
mechanics the light rays would be represented as lines at 45° to the axes only in a frame
at rest in the ether, so that the reasoning by which we showed the equality of k and k!
would not have gone through.
We can now go on to derive the value of k as a function of the relative velocity v of the
two observers. To do this we consider an experiment in which the laboratory observer
(indicated by the world line OA in Figure 26–5) exchanges signals with the moving
observer (with world line OE). Let us suppose that at the beginning of the experiment the
two observers pass very close to each other, at the place and time corresponding to the
origin O. Then, because a signal takes a negligible time to pass between the observers at
this moment, they will be able to synchronize their clocks. For the sake of convenience
we suppose that both observers set their clocks so that the moment O corresponds to
 
The laboratory observer then sends a signal at the point corresponding to N and the time
T0, as measured by his clock. This is received on the
Note that in Figures 26–3 and 26–4 we have drawn the lines 
, 
, etc.
o N!. The rocket observer attributes to the time
rocket ship at the point corresponding 
t

106  The Special Theory of Relativity
(26–4)
But now let us suppose that on receiving the signal at N! the rocket observer immediately
sends out a signal of his own. This will be received in the laboratory at the point
corresponding to N!!, at the time T1. However, as we have seen, the principle of relativity
implies that from which it follows that
(26–5)
We  shall  now  do  a  bit  of  elementary  geometry.  Because  (NN!)  and  (N!N!!)  both
correspond to light rays at 45° to the axis, we have
Figure 26–5

The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus  107
(26–6)
(26–7)
(26–8)
We have thus obtained the factor K, which is the essential quantity in the K calculus. Note
that it is unity for v=0, as it must be. For positive v it is greater than unity, and for
negative v it is less than unity.
The K factor is, in fact, just the relativistic Doppler shift (for a zero angle of viewing),
which we have previously obtained in a much more roundabout way in Eq. (17–12) with
the aid of the Lorentz transformation. However, this time we have derived the formula
very directly from the principle of relativity, using the invariance of the velocity of light
as measured by observers moving at different speeds.
The K calculus can, in fact, be used to obtain the basic formulas that we have
previously derived from the Lorentz transformation. To illustrate this possibility, let us
begin by deducing the formula comparing the rates of equivalent clocks moving at
different  speeds.  Now,  referring  to  Figure  26–5,  we  know  that  in  the  interval
corresponding to (ON!) the rocket observer will register a time of
(26–9)

108  The Special Theory of Relativity
On the other hand, because the line (N!S) is perpendicular to the axis OA, the laboratory
observer will regard the event N! as simultaneous with S. Therefore, the laboratory
observer will attribute to N' the time coordinate
(26–10)
It follows then that the ratio t/T of times measured for the same event (N!) by the
laboratory observer and the rocket observer, respectively, is
(26–11)
We have thus directly deduced the “slowing down” of moving clocks, without the aid of
the Lorentz transformation. We can now deduce the relativistic formula for addition of
velocities with equal directness. To do this consider a third observer, as indicated in
Figure 26–5, with world line OG, one having a velocity w relative to the laboratory. It is
possible to obtain the K factor corresponding to this observer in two different ways. First,
we begin in the laboratory frame, emitting a signal at the point N corresponding to the
time T0. This is received by the observer OG at the point R, at the time corresponding to
(26–12)
where 
. But we can also obtain the formula for
T2 in two stages. First, we consider the signal from N arriving at N' at the time (measured
by the rocket-observer’s clock)
(26–13)
where 
. Then, the rocket observer immediately
sends out a signal (which coincides with N!R). If the observer OG has a velocity of u, as
measured in the frame of the rocket ship, then according to the principle of relativity we
have

The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus  109
(26–14)
From this it follows that
(26–15)
(26–16)
Thus, the K factor for a pair of transformations in sequence is just the product of the
individual K factors for each of the transformations. With the aid of a little algebra we
obtain
(26–17)
which is just the relativistic formula for addition of velocities, given in Eq. (15–8).
Finally, the K calculus can be used to obtain the Lorentz transformation itself. Before
doing this, it is useful to note that because the speed of light is the same for all observers,
we do not need separate standards of time and distance. Rather, once one has a clock, the
standard of distance is already implied. For if one sends out a radar signal to an object at
a distance d, then if 
 is the time needed for the signal to go from the source to the
object and be reflected back, the distance d of the object is
(26–18)
For this reason it is sufficient if all observers have equivalently constructed clocks. It is
not necessary to assume in addition that they have standard meter sticks. This makes the
logical foundations of the procedure of measurement very simple, because one can use
the periods of vibrations of atoms or molecules as standard clocks, which can be
depended on to function in equivalent ways for all observers.
To deduce the Lorentz transformation we refer to Figure 26–6. Let us suppose that the
laboratory observer OA and the rocket observer OE pass each other at O, corresponding
to the zero of time for both of them. The laboratory observer sends a pulse at M,
corresponding to a time T1 as measured by his clock. At N this pulse passes the rocket
observer, who simultaneously sends out his own pulse, at the time T1, as measured by his

110  The Special Theory of Relativity
clock. The two pulses travel together until they reach an object with world line ST,
striking it at P. The reflected pulses return, striking the rocket ship at Q, at the time 
indicated by the clock of the rocket observer. The pulses continue to strike the laboratory
at R, at the time T2 indicated on the laboratory clock.
Figure 26–6

The Minkowski Diagram and the K Calculus  111
(26–19)
(26–20)
(26–21)
By the principle of relativity, the rocket observer will have an equivalent set of formulas.
(26–22)
But according to the K calculus,
(26–23)
From the above, we have (with 
),
(26–24)
This gives (for the one-dimensional case) the invariance of the formula for the interval
obtained in Eqs. (9–7) and (9–8) from the Lorentz transformation.
From (26–20) we obtain
(26–25)
And after a bit of algebra, this reduces to
Now, the laboratory observer attributes to the event P the time and space coordinates

112  The Special Theory of Relativity
(26–26)
which is, of course, just the Lorentz transformation.
In terms of the K calculus, it can fairly directly be seen why two different observers
attribute simultaneity to a different set of events. Indeed, Eqs. (26–20) to (26–22) merely
assert that when any observer sends out a radar pulse, then that observer defines the time
of the event P to be simultaneous with an event in his world line that is halfway between
the point of emission of the radar pulse and the point of reception of its reflection. Thus,
in Figure 26–6 the laboratory observer defines P to be simultaneous with H, which is the
midpoint between M and R, while the rocket observer defines P to be simultaneous to G,
which is halfway between N and Q. We have already called attention to the conventional
aspect of simultaneity in the theory of relativity in Chapter 12, where we discussed it
qualitatively  in  terms  of  the  example  of  observers  on  a  railway  train  and  on  the
embankment. Here we see in more precise terms just how the equality of the velocity of
light for both observers, plus the fact that they use equivalent conventions for defining
simultaneity, implies that they cannot agree on which events occur at the same time; and
thus we exhibit the source of the different loci of simultaneous events for different
observers, as shown in Figures 26–1 and 26–2.
It is evident that the K calculus provides us with a very direct way of obtaining many
of the relationships that were historically derived first on the basis of the Lorentz
transformation. The advantage of the K calculus is that it makes the connection between
these relationships and the basic principles and facts underlying the theory very evident.
Indeed, starting with the principle of relativity and the invariance of the velocity of light,
we  have  seen  that  the  Lorentz  transformation  itself  follows  simply  from  certain
geometrical and structural features of the patterns of certain sets of physical events.
Nevertheless, as elegant and direct as it is, the K calculus has not yet been developed far
enough to replace the Lorentz transformation in all the different relationships that are
significant in the theory of relativity. Thus, the situation at present is that the Lorentz
transformation approach and the K-calculus approach complement one another, in the
sense that each provides insights that are not readily obtained in the other. In addition, the
K calculus is fairly new, so that most of the existing literature is expressed in terms of the
Lorentz  transformation  approach.  Although  it  is  possible  that  the  K  calculus  may
eventually be developed far enough to replace the Lorentz transformation as a foundation
of  the  mathematical  theory,  it  seems  that  for  some  time,  at  least,  the  Lorentz
transformation will continue to be the main mode of expressing the theory, while the K
calculus will serve to provide additional insights into the meaning of the theory.

XXVII
The Geometry of Events and the Space-Time Continuum
In  the  previous  chapter  we  saw  in  terms  of  the  Minkowski  diagram  how  physical 
phenomena are described in terms of events (such as the emission and absorption of 
signals)  and  processes  (such  as  the  transmission  of  a  radar  signal  from  emitter  to 
receiver). Even a continuously existing object (such as an observer) is described by his 
world  line,  which  is  really,  in  effect,  the  locus  of  a  continuous  series  of  events, 
representing the successive places and times at which he exists. Actually, of course, all 
real objects (including observers) are extended in space as well, so that they are described 
by means of “world tubes” (one of which is indicated in Figure 27–1 by its boundaries as 
MM! and NN!). Inside such a tube, a very complex set of events and processes is 
generally taking place (e.g., movements of the various constituent parts of the object, 
going all the way down to its molecules, atoms, electrons and protons, etc.).
Implicit in the Minkowski diagram is a very radical change in our concepts concerning 
the general nature of things. To see how this comes about we begin by recalling that in 
Newtonian theory there is a unique meaning to simultaneity. It therefore makes sense to 
suppose that at each moment the world is constituted by various objects (whether they be on 
Figure 27–1

114  The Special Theory of Relativity
the large-scale or on the atomic or electronic level). In the next moment these objects will 
still be in existence, but each of them will have moved from one place to another. The task 
of physics is then regarded as the analysis of the world into the permanent basic objects which 
constitute it, including following the movements of these objects with the passage of time.
In Chapter 24 we indicated that because all known objects (including the so-called 
“elementary particles”) can be created, destroyed, and transformed in various ways, the notion  
described  in  the  previous  paragraph  has  already  demonstrated  itself  to  be inadequate, with 
regard to the experimental facts that are now known concerning physical phenomena. But 
relativity provides further theoretical reasons against the notion that at each moment the world is 
constituted of some arrangement of uniquely defined objects. For as we have seen, the no-
tion of “the same time” now has meaning only in relationship to the frame of the observer. 
Different observers do not agree on which events constitute “the same time,” and therefore they 
do not agree on what are the basic properties of the “objects” (such as length, mass, etc.).
By introducing the Minkowski diagram we have dealt with the problem described above. For 
the “object” is now replaced by a structure and pattern of events and processes (e.g., the 
world line or the world tube representing an observer). The usual type of relatively per-
manent object now corresponds to a pattern of events and processes that tends to remain 
similar to itself over an indefinitely long period of time. An object that is not permanent 
corresponds, of course, to a pattern that alters and transforms, beginning in some region 
(where the object is “created”) and ending in another region (where the object is “destroyed”).
In the procedure described above, the analysis of the world into constituent objects has 
been replaced by its analysis in terms of events and processes, organized, ordered, and 
structured so as to correspond to the characteristics of the material system that is being 
studied. It follows that space and time taken jointly constitute the means by which the 
characteristics of physical phenomena are to be treated. In this sense, space and time 
together are playing a role similar to that played by space alone in Newtonian mechanics. 
That is to say, the nature of things is being described in terms of a kind of “geometrical” 
pattern in space and time, as exhibited in the Minkowski diagram.
In the geometry of space, there is a thoroughgoing unification of its three dimensions, based 
on the fact that each of the dimensions can be related to the others by means of a rotation. 
Algebraically, a rotation through an angle about the z axis is represented by the transformation
(27–1)
Without such a transformation we would hardly even be justified in regarding the three 
dimensions as united into a single space as “continuum” (e.g., in an arbitrary graph, in 
which one physical quantity such as temperature is plotted against another, such as 
pressure, there is no such unification). The question then naturally arises as to whether, in

The Geometry of Events and the Space-Time Continuum  115
the “geometry” of space and time taken together, there is not a similar unification of
space and time dimensions, so that they also form a single continuum. (Recall that in
Newtonian mechanics, time is independent of space, so that no such unification occurs
there.)
To see that there is in fact some kind of unification of space and time in the theory of
relativity  it is  necessary only  to  refer  to  the  Lorentz  transformation,  in  which  the
coordinates z, 
 are expressed in terms of z!, 
. This transformation evidently at least
resembles a rotation. To bring out this resemblance in more detail we can introduce a
hyperbolic angle 
, defined by
(27–2)
(27–3)
The Lorentz transformation can then be written
(27–4)
We see that (27–4) differs from the rotary transformation (27–1), first, in that the
hyperbolic functions cosh 
 and sinh 
 replace the trigonometric functions cos 
 and
sin 
, and, second, in that the coefficients of sinh 
 both have a minus sign, whereas in
(27–1) one of the coefficients of sin 
 has a plus sign, while the other has a minus sign.
Nevertheless, the analogy to a rotation is still quite strong, and for this reason the
transformation (27–4) is called a hyperbolic rotation.
The essential difference between trigonometric rotations and hyperbolic rotations is in
the  functions  that  are  invariant  under  these  respective  transformations.  Thus  in  a
trigonometric  rotation,  in  the  XY  plane,  what  is  invariant  is  the  distance  function,
. In a hyperbolic rotation in the 
 plane, what is invariant is 
,
which differs from distance function in that 
 and z2 enter with opposite signs, whereas
in the latter, x2 and y2 enter with the same sign.
If we now consider the three dimensions of space as well as the dimension, we see from
Eq. (9–7) that the function
(27–5)

116  The Special Theory of Relativity
is an invariant both under arbitrary Lorentz transformations in space and time and under
arbitrary rotations in space (as well as under reflections of x, y, z, 
). And more
generally, if one considers two events with coordinates x1, y1, z1, 
 and x2, y2, z2, 
,
then the corresponding invariant, which is called the interval between the two events, is
(27–6)
It is easily seen that the function (27–6) is a generalization of the distance functions
(11–3) that apply in ordinary three-dimensional space. However, (27–6) applies in space
and time together, provided that 
 undergoes a Lorentz transformation, which is a
hyperbolic rotation, rather than an ordinary rotation.
It seems clear then that in relativistic physics, space and time are united into a
four-dimensional continuum, in which they can be transformed into each other in such a
way that the function s2 given in (27–6) is invariant. This continuum is called space-time
rather than “space and time,” the hyphen emphasizing the new kind of unification.
It should be noted that in spite of the above-described unification of space and time
brought about in the theory of relativity, there remains a rather important and peculiar
distinction  between  them,  resulting  from  the  fact  that  
 and
 
 appear  with  opposite  signs  in  the
formula for the invariant interval s2. Because of this, it is possible for s2 to be positive,
negative, or zero, for distinct pairs of events. Indeed, since s2=0 represents the light cone,
it is clear that this cone constitutes the boundary between events with positive and
negative values of s2. If in Figure 27–2 we choose one of the events, O, as the origin of
coordinates (so that 
, then we see that for another event,
P, inside the light cone, s2 is positive, while for events such as E, which are outside the
light cone, s2 is negative. But because s2 is an invariant, it follows that the property that
one event is inside, outside, or on the light cone of another is the same in every frame of
reference. So although space and time can, to some extent, be transformed into each other
in a change of reference frame, there are certain limits on this transformation, in the sense
that an interval inside the light cone cannot be transformed into one outside the light
cone, or on the light cone.
Now, the simplest case of an interval inside the light cone is one in which x=y=z=0.
Such an interval represents only a time difference. Under a Lorentz transformation, this
interval goes over to one with new coordinates, x!, y!, z!, 
, such that x!, y!, and z! are in
general not zero. Nevertheless, the square of the interval, being invariant, will remain
positive. For this reason, intervals with positive values of s2 are called “time-like,”
because in some reference frames they correspond to a simple time difference of events
happening at the same place.
On the other hand, the simplest case of an interval outside the light cone is one in which
. Such an interval, which corresponds to a separation of events in space, is

The Geometry of Events and the Space-Time Continuum  117
represented by a negative value of s2. If one transforms to a new frame of reference, then
in general 
 will cease to be zero, but s2 remains invariant, and therefore negative.
Figure 27–2
Such intervals are called “space-like,” because in some reference frames they correspond
to a spatial separation of simultaneous events.
To sum up, then, it is clear that while space and time coordinates can be transformed
into each other as a result of a change of velocity of the reference frame, the distinction
between space-like and time-like events is an invariant, the same for all observers.
Likewise, the character of being on the light cone, and therefore neither a space-like nor a
time-like interval, is also an invariant one. So a certain subtle kind of difference between
space and time is preserved (in the sense of a lack of complete interchangeability under
transformation), in spite of the fact that space-time is unified into four-dimensional
continuum (whereas if z and 
 had been subject to an ordinary trigonometric rotation, a
complete equivalence of space and time would have resulted, so that an interchange of z
and 
 would have been possible, as one can interchange x and y by a 90° rotation).
One  can  obtain  further  insight  into  the  invariant  distinction  between  space-like,
time-like, and “null” intervals (i.e., intervals on the light cone, for which s2=0) by
measuring the coordinates u, v of an event P in the Minkowski diagram along the
direction of the light rays. Such a procedure corresponds to a 45° rotation of the 
 axes.

118  The Special Theory of Relativity
(27–7)
So in terms of our new set of axes, the invariant s2 is the product of u and v. A light ray
corresponds to s2=0, and therefore either to u=0 or v=0. The locus u=0 signifies the line
OC, while v=0 signifies OD.
A point such as P, which is (see Figure 27–2) inside the light cone and later than O, has
positive values for both u and v. On the other hand, a point such as Q, which is inside the
light cone but earlier than O, has negative values of u and v. Points outside the light cone
(such as F) must have either positive u and negative v or positive v and negative u.
Let us see how u and v change under the Lorentz transformations (27–4). We have
(27–8)
(27–9)
We see then that under a Lorentz transformation, u and v undergo an especially simple
transformation, in that each is respectively multiplied by a factor (
 and 
) which is
the reciprocal of that by which the other is multiplied (so that uv remains invariant). As a
special case we consider a light ray (u=0, or v=0), which now immediately leads to u!=0
or v!=0, thus showing the invariance of the speed of light in a very direct way.
The Lorentz transformation is evidently a stretching along the direction of one of the
light rays by a factor 
 and a contraction along the direction of the other one by the
reciprocal factor, 
. If we consider any element of “area” in space-time, it is clear that
under such a transformation this element is subject to a kind of “shearing,” with the
“axes” of the shear on the lines corresponding to the two light rays. So instead of a real
(or trigonometric) rotation, the space-time transformation is a hyperbolic rotation, which
is, as we have seen, actually a shearing in the pattern of events.
We obtain

The Geometry of Events and the Space-Time Continuum  119
Now in the shearing transformation described above, u and v are multiplied by factors
 and 
, which are always positive. From this it follows that the distinction of
events inside the light cone of O as earlier or later than O is an invariant one. Thus, we
have not only the invariant characteristic of events as being inside, outside, or on the light
cone of O, but also the invariance of the property that events inside the light cone are in
the future of O (later than O) or in the past of O (earlier than O).
In a similar way one easily sees that for events on the light cone there is also an
invariant distinction between those that are earlier and those that are later. For on the light
cone, either u=0 or v=0, and whichever is not zero must be positive for an event later than
O, negative for one earlier than O.
On the other hand, the characteristic of being earlier or later than O is not invariant, for
an event outside the light cone. Referring to Figure 26–1 let us consider, for example, the
event B, which is simultaneous with O in the laboratory frame. In the frame of the
observer 
, moving at a speed v relative to the laboratory (with world line OE), an
event measured by him to be simultaneous to O will correspond to a point, such as B!,
which is on the line OF, and which is therefore not simultaneous to O in the laboratory
frame. If we consider all possible values for the velocity v, we see that any point outside
the light cone through O will be regarded as simultaneous to O by some observer and
either in the past of O or in the future of O by different observers with suitable velocities.
So while events inside each other’s light cones do have a unique time order (in the sense
that all observers will agree on which is earlier and which is later), events outside each
other’s light cones do not.

XXVIII
The Question of Causality and the Maximum
Speed of Propagation of Signals in Relativity Theory
We have seen in the previous chapter that for a pair of events outside each other’s light
cones, different observers will not in general agree on which is earlier and which is later.
At first sight one might think that this ambiguity could mix up the question of causality.
Thus it is a truism that if A is a cause of B, it must occur either earlier than B or at the
same time as B. An event that is expected tomorrow cannot be taken as a cause of what is
already happening today. For, by the cause of an event B, one means one of the
conditions A that, being present and active, leads to the arising of B. Thus a fire acting
today may set off some explosives now, but tomorrow’s fire will not set off these
explosives today.
It seems clear that if we were allowed to interchange the order of past, present, and
future in a completely arbitrary way, the result would be confused, both in physics and in
everyday life. Suppose, for example, that one observer sees that the burning of some fuel
is followed by the heating of water, and that for another observer, the water was heated
first, while the fuel was seen to be burned later. Or suppose that one observer first became
hungry and then ate food which satisfied his hunger, while another observer who was
satisfied ate food and then became hungry. One could go on to multiply such instances
without limit, showing clearly that we could not make sense of the world if we could
make arbitrary changes in the time order of events. The question is then to see whether
or not the relativistic ambiguity in time order of events outside the light cone of an
observer will confuse the problem of cause and effect.
In answering this question we first recall that, as pointed out in Chapter 14, no object,
influence, or force, etc., can move or otherwise be transmitted faster than the speed of
light c. It is then easy to see that as long as this condition is satisfied, the relativistic
ambiguity in time order will not mix up the question of causality. For if one event A is to
be a cause of another event B, there must be some kind of physical action of contact
between them. (If there is no physical contact at all, then one cannot be a cause of the
other.) But if such physical action is not transmitted faster than light, then any two events
which are causally connected will, as we have seen in the previous chapter, have a unique
and unambiguous time order. In other words, if a cause A is earlier than its effect B for
one observer, this relationship will hold for all observers. Therefore, the order of cause
and effect will be invariant, so that no confusion will result in this order when different
observers consider the same set of events, each in his own frame of reference.
On the other hand, if any influence could go faster than light, then the notion of the
order of cause and effect would become completely mixed up. To see this, consider an
extreme case, in which one assumes that physical influences could be transmitted with
infinite velocities, so that two distant observers could be in simultaneous contact. Let one
of these observers, 
, be represented in Figure 28–1 by the world line OA, while the
other, 
, with the same speed, is taken to have the world line MN. By our hypothesis,

The Question of Causality and the Maximum Speed of Propagation  121
the observer 
 at the time represented by O could be in immediate physical contact with
the other observer 
 at the time represented by M, so that each could, for example, use
this contact to signal to the other.
Now, if there were no principle of relativity with the invariance of the speed of light,
this assumption would entail no logical self-contradictions. Indeed, it corresponds only to
the “common-sense” notion that what we see at a given moment is in immediate contact
with us and is all happening at the same time, which we call “now.”
Let us go on, however, to consider the further implications of the principle of relativity,
as developed by Einstein, i.e., that the laws of physics have the same form for all
observers, and that all observers ascribe the same speed to light. As we have seen earlier,
it follows from this that two relatively moving observers do not agree with each other as
to which set of events is simultaneous. Thus the observer 
 with world line OE will
regard the events on the line OF as simultaneous with O, while 
 (with world line OA)
regards events on OB as simultaneous. But according to the principle of relativity all the
general laws holding in the frame of 
 also hold in the frame of 
. Therefore, if it is
assumed that 
 can be in contact with an event M
Figure 28–1
that is simultaneous to O in his 
observer, 
, can be in frame, the  relatively moving contact with an event S that
 is simultaneous to O in his frame of reference.

122  The Special Theory of Relativity
 Let us now consider the observer 
 with world line MN. At the time corresponding 
to S his world line would intersect that of an observer 
, with world line M!N!, moving
at the same speed as 
. Two observers at the same point S, but with different speeds, 
can evidently be in essentially immediate contact, so that there need be no time lapse (or 
a negligible one) for a signal to pass from one to the other. Then, according to the
principle of relativity, 
 should have the same ability to signal immediately to 
 at O
(which is simultaneous with S in his frame) that 
 has to signal to 
 at M. The
observer 
 could then signal to 
 at O, and 
 could signal to 
 at M (which is
simultaneous to O in the frame of reference of 
 and 
). By this cycle of signals S 
could communicate with M and vice versa. But M is in the past of S. So, in effect, S could 
communicate with his own past at M, and tell his past self what his future is going to be. 
But on learning this M could decide to change his actions, so that his future at S would be 
different from what his later “self” said it was going to be. For example, the past self 
could do something that would make it impossible for the future one to send the signal. 
Thus, there would arise a logical self-contradiction.
By a generalization of the above line of argument, it can easily be shown that a similar 
contradiction would arise if one assumed that physical contact were transmitted with any 
speed greater than that of light.
We see then that as long as we accept Einstein’s theory of relativity it leads to an 
absurdity  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  action  through  physical  contact  capable  of 
constituting the basis of a signal that is transmitted faster than light. In other words, either 
we have to assume that no physical action faster than light is possible, or else we have to 
give up Einstein’s form of the principle of relativity. But thus far this form of the 
principle of relativity has been factually confirmed. Besides, as we have already seen, no 
physical actions have ever been discovered which are actually transmitted faster than 
light (e.g., material objects cannot be accelerated to the speed of light, because this would 
require infinite energy, while no fields are known which propagate influences faster than 
light). Of course, Einstein’s theory is, like all other theories, in principle capable of being 
falsified as experiments are extended into broader domains. But as long as we remain in 
the domain where this theory is valid (and thus far, known experiments are and have been 
in such a domain), it will not be possible to have physical actions that are transmitted 
faster than light.
Given an event O, any other event P must, as we have seen, fall into one of a certain 
set of regions of space-time, which are subject to an invariant distinction (see Figure 
27–2). If it is inside or on the light cone, then this event is either in the future of O or in 
the past of O. Because this distinction is independent of the frame of reference, it can be 
said to be in a certain sense “absolute” (at least in the domain in which Einstein’s theory 
holds). The “forward” light cone through O, plus all that is in it, is then called the 
“absolute future” of O, while the corresponding “backward” light cone, and all that is in 
it, is called the “absolute past” of O. The region outside the light cone has very aptly been 
called the “absolute elsewhere” of O. For this region has no direct contact with O at all, 
and therefore it is essentially “elsewhere.” Thus, if we consider a distant star, we have 
contact only with what that star was a long time ago. That this star exists “now” is only a 
likely inference, based on our general knowledge of the properties of stars. But actually
 

The Question of Causality and the Maximum Speed of Propagation  123
we do not know that it exists “now.” For example, it may already have exploded. Later we
(or other observers) may see this explosion. But whatever happens to this star in what is
“now” our absolute elsewhere can have no contact with us “now.” (Later we shall have to
be represented by another point on our world line, which is different from the one that
represents us now.)
When two events are in each other’s absolute elsewhere, so that they can have no
physical contact, it makes no difference whether we say they are before or after each
other. Their relative time order has a purely conventional character, in the sense that one
can ascribe any such order that is convenient, as long as one applies his conventions in a
consistent manner. And as we have seen, observers, moving at different speeds, and
correcting for the time 
, taken by light to reach them from a point at a distance r by the
formula 
, will arrive at different conventions for assigning such events as
before,  after,  and  simultaneous  with  some  event  taking  place  in  the  immediate
neighborhood of the observer. But as long as there is no physical contact, which is the
basis of the relationship of causal connection of events, it does not matter what we say
about which is before and which is after. On the other hand, as we have seen, where such
casual contact is possible, the order of events is unambiguous, so that the Lorentz
transformation will never lead to confusion as to what is a cause and what is an effect.

XXIX
Proper Time
Until now we have been discussing the implication of the special theory of relativity,
which is valid for observers moving with a constant velocity. As we remarked earlier
(Chapter 16) the principle of relativity cannot correctly be applied in the reference frame
of an accelerated observer, if we stay within the domain of the special theory. In other
words, to obtain laws which constitute the same relationships (i.e., have the same form),
even for accelerated frames of reference, it is necessary to broaden our conceptual basis
and to go onto the general theory of relativity. Nevertheless, this does not mean that the
special theory can make no predictions at all as to what will happen to accelerated
observers. It only means that if we wish to make such predictions we shall have to adopt
the standpoint of an unaccelerated observer, when we formulate the basic laws of physics.
Starting from this standpoint it is then possible, at each moment, to transform their
implications, so as to see what they would entail, when viewed from the accelerated
frame. (A similar procedure is in fact developed in Newtonian mechanics, whose laws are
based on an inertial frame, and can yet be transformed into an accelerated frame leading
to additional terms in the equations of motion, such as centrifugal and Coriolis forces.)
To study this question we first note that in the reference frame of an observer moving
with constant velocity, an accelerated observer is represented by a curved world line (see
Figure 29–1) which stays somewhere inside the light cone of any point O, through which
it passes. Now consider a particular point P on this world line, and a nearby point Q. If Q
is sufficiently close to P we can approximate the curve by differentials of the coordinates
tQ–tP=dt and zQ–zP =dz. At the point P let the velocity of the accelerated observer be v
and at Q let it be v+dv.
The basic notion which makes possible the deduction of the implications of the special
theory of relativity in an accelerated frame of reference is that of the locally co-moving
unaccelerated frame. To see what this notion implies, let us begin at the point P, moving
at velocity v. The actual observer is, as we have assumed, accelerated. But we can
imagine an unaccelerated observer at P moving with (constant) velocity v. The important
point with regard to such an observer is that over a sufficiently short period of time, dt,
the velocity of the accelerated observer relative to the co-moving observer will be of the
order of dv, which is very small. We have already seen that for low velocities

Proper Time  125
Einstein’s theory approaches Newton’s laws as a limiting case. Therefore, at least over
some period of time dt, one can discuss the movements of the system in terms of
Newton’s laws applying in the reference frame having the constant velocity v. One can
then see the implications of these laws in the laboratory frame by means of a Lorentz
transformation. When dv becomes appreciable we simply go to another frame with
constant speed v+dv, etc. Thus by considering a series of such co-moving frames, we can
calculate what will be seen by an observer with a fixed velocity (e.g., in the laboratory
frame) with the aid of a corresponding series of Lorentz transformations. Or, vice versa,
we can use a similar procedure to start with what is observed in the laboratory frame, to
calculate what would be seen by a co-moving observer at any given moment.
An important example of the procedure described above is the calculation of the
so-called “proper time” that is registered by a clock accelerated along a given world line,
such as OPQ. In doing this we make use of the principle described above, i.e., that during
a sufficiently short interval of time, dt (in which dv is very small), the clock as seen in the
co-moving reference frame will behave essentially as it would according to Newtonian
mechanics, which asserts that the rate of properly constructed clocks do not depend on
how they are accelerated. Therefore, over the interval dt, the clocks will register an
interval dt0 that is related to dt by a Lorentz transformation from the frame of the
co-moving observer to that of the laboratory. This relationship is most easily obtained by
considering the invariant function
(29–1)
Figure 29–1

126  The Special Theory of Relativity
In the co-moving frame we have dt!=dt0 and dz!=0 (because in this frame the clock is at
rest). Therefore ds2=c2 dt0
2 and
(29–2)
The interval 
 of “proper time” registered by the accelerated clock in its movement
between t1 and t2 can then be calculated by integrating (29–2). The result is
(29–3)
This formula is easily extended to the three dimensions of space, for which it continues to
hold if we replace v2 by the square of the total velocity 
.
It is clear from (29–3) that because 
, the proper time registered
by a clock moving in relation to a given frame of reference is generally less than the time
difference, as measured by clocks which are fixed in that frame of reference.

XXX
The “Paradox” of the Twins
On the basis of the results of the previous chapter we can now describe a well-known
apparent paradox to which the theory of relativity leads.
Consider a pair of “identical” twins. Let one of them take a voyage in a rocket ship,
which we suppose to be capable of attaining a speed close to that of light, while the other
remains on the Earth. When the twin who has made the voyage returns to the Earth, the
clocks in his rocket ship will show the elapse of a time interval,
 
while similarly constructed clocks of the twin who remained on the Earth will show the
elapse of a time interval 
. But as we have seen earlier, all physical,
chemical, nervous, psychological, etc., processes will be subject to the same Lorentz
transformation that applies to clocks. Therefore, the twin who took the journey will in
every way have experienced less time than did the one who remained on the Earth, And if
the speed of the rocket ship was close to that of light, this time difference could be quite
appreciable. For example, if 20 years passed for a man who remained on the Earth, only
one or two years might have passed for the man who was in the rocket ship.
Before proceeding to discuss the significance of this conclusion, let us first note that it
does not violate the principle of relativity, which asserts that the laws of physics must
constitute the same relationships, independent of how the frame of reference moves. For
as we pointed out in the previous chapter we have thus far restricted ourselves to the
special theory of relativity, in which the laws of physics are invariant only for observers
moving at a constant speed. The conclusions of this theory evidently cannot be applied
symmetrically in the frames of both observers, since one of them is accelerated and the
other is not. For this reason it is not legitimate to interchange observers, and to say, for
example, that the observer in the rocket ship should equally well see his twin in the
laboratory as having aged less than he has. Rather, as long as we remain within the
special theory of relativity, we must give the unaccelerated reference frame a unique role
in the expression of the laws of physics; and in this way we explain how observers who
have suffered different kinds of movements can, on meeting again, find that they have
experienced different amounts of time.
To obtain laws that are the same for accelerated as for unaccelerated observers, we must
go on to the general theory of relativity. But to do this we must bring in the gravitational
field. As Einstein has shown, in an accelerated frame of reference, new effects must
occur, which are equivalent to those that would be produced by a gravitational field.
Indeed, from the point of view of the accelerated observer, one could say that there is an
additional effective gravitational field, which acts on the general environment (stars,
planets, Earth, etc.) and explains its acceleration relative to the rocket ship.

128  The Special Theory of Relativity
According to the general theory of relativity, two clocks running at places of different
gravitational potential will have different rates. If the observer on the rocket ship uses the
same laws of general relativity that are used by the observer on the Earth, but considers
the different gravitational potentials that are appropriate in his frame of reference, he will
then predict a difference of the rates of the two kinds of clocks. And, as a further
calculation shows, he will come to the same conclusions about this time difference as are
obtained by the observer on the Earth (for whom the laws of general relativity reduce to
those of special relativity because he is not accelerated). So the different degree of
“agings” of the two twins is fully compatible with the principle of relativity, when the
theory is generalized sufficiently to apply to accelerated frames of reference.
Why does the different aging of the two twins seem paradoxical to most people, when
they first hear of it? The answer is basically in the habitual mode of thought, whereby we
automatically regard all that is co-present in our sense perceptions as happening at the
same time, which we call “now.” Thus, on looking out at the stars in the night sky we
cannot avoid seeing the whole firmament as existing “now,” simultaneous with our act of
perception. As a result we are led, almost without further conscious thought, to the
supposition that if a rocket ship went out in space, we could keep on watching it, or
otherwise remain in immediate contact with it, comparing each event that happened to it
(e.g., the ticking of a clock) with corresponding events that are happening to us at the
same time. When it returned, it would then be seen to have experienced the same amount
of time, as indeed does happen with all systems with which we are familiar (which latter
of course move at speeds that are very low in relation to that of light).
It is of course by now very well known to us that what we see in the night sky is not
actually happening at the same moment at which we perceive it, but rather that all that we
see is past and gone (the distant nebulae, for example, are seen as they were a hundred
million years ago or more). Moreover, our judgement as to when what we see actually did
exist is based on the correction, 
, for the time light takes to reach us. And, as
we have brought out in earlier chapters, this correction is not the same for all observers,
but depends on their speeds. As a result, our habitual procedure of assigning a unique
time to each event no longer has much meaning. And if distant events do not have a
unique time of occurrence, the same for all valid methods of measuring it, then there is no
longer any good reason to suppose that two observers who separate and then meet will
necessarily have experienced the same amount of time.
To bring out more sharply the kind of problem to which our intuitive notions of
simultaneity tend to give rise, let us consider what would actually happen if each
observer were to send out to the other a regular light or radio signal (say one per second)
as measured by his own clocks. Each observer could then “see” how time was passing for
the other one, so that he could presumably check up on just how it was possible for the
two of them to experience different amounts of time.
Let us begin with a discussion of what would be seen by the observer who remained in
the laboratory. To simplify the problem, we suppose that the rocket ship is initially
accelerated to a velocity v in so short a time interval that we can regard the acceleration
as effectively instantaneous. We suppose the the rocket ship moves away from the
laboratory at constant velocity v in the z direction over a time interval T/2, as measured in
the laboratory frame. Then another burst is fired, and the velocity is reversed (t0–v). The

The “Paradox” of the Twins  129
ship continues for another time interval of T/2 until it returns to the Earth, after which it is
very suddenly decelerated to the speed of the Earth. (This assumption of sudden bursts of
acceleration does not change any essential feature of the problem.) The world line of the
rocket ship is shown in the Minkowski diagram (Figure 30–1) as OEA. The regular light
signals given off by the moving observer are indicated by lines such as 
, 
,
etc.
At first the observer OA will receive signals at 
, 
, 
, etc., whose frequency
is reduced by the effects of the Doppler shift, according to the relativistic formula
(17–12).1 If 
 is the period of the clock in the rocket ship, which determines these
pulses, then the time 
 between pulses as seen in the laboratory will be (since 
)
(30–1)
On the other hand, after the rocket ship is accelerated at E it will be approaching the
laboratory, so that after E the laboratory observer will see pulses with a decreased period.
(30–2)
Because of the equality of the velocity of recession of the rocket and its velocity of
approach, it is clear that the rocket ship will put out the same number, N/2, of pulses on
its way out and on its way back (N being the total number of pulses emitted over the
whole journey).
The total time over which these pulses are received by a laboratory observer will be
(30–3)
which shows, of course, that these pulses will be received in the laboratory over a period
of time longer than 
, which would be regarded as being taken by an observer on the
rocket ship.
The important point to note here is that the laboratory observer cannot directly know
how time is passing for the rocket observer,
1 Alternatively, one could use the K calculus, as developed in Chapter 26.

130  The Special Theory of Relativity
Figure 30–1
because signals between the two are altered by the Doppler shift. In other words, what is
directly observable in the laboratory frame is, first of all, a set of slower pulses and later,
another set of faster ones (e.g., if he were to watch the moving observer, he would first
see the latter’s life slowed down, and then speeded up). It is only by means of a
calculation that the laboratory observer can “correct” for the effects of the recession or
approach of the rocket ship. In this calculation he takes the speed of light to be c. But, as
we have seen, if all observers take the speed of light to be c, then those with different
speeds are in fact making a different correction. As a result, the twin in the laboratory
attributes simultaneity to events on lines parallel to OB, while the twin on the rocket
attributes simultaneity to events in lines parallel to OP, until he reaches the point of
acceleration E, after which he attributes simultaneity to events in lines parallel to OQ.
Thus, as the twin on the rocket goes, say, from M3 to M4 he does not attribute the same

The “Paradox” of the Twins  131
lapse of time to the process as the observer in the laboratory does, because he takes his
zero of time to correspond to the sloping line OP and not the horizontal line OB. After
acceleration at E, he takes the line OQ to be corresponding to his zero of time. In this way
we see that there is room for a difference in how much time is actually registered by the
clocks of observers who separate and then meet again.
One can obtain further insight into this problem by considering what the rocket-ship
observer would find as he looked at a set of light signals sent out uniformly by the
laboratory observer (see Figure 30–2). Because of the Doppler shift, the pulses sent out
between O and E! would be received between O and E with a reduced frequency, while
those sent out between E! and A would be received with an increased frequency.
Just before the acceleration at E, the observer on the rocket ship regards events on the
line EG (parallel to OP) simultaneous with E, but just after acceleration he takes events
on the line EH (parallel to OQ) as simultaneous with E. So we see that there is a sudden
jump in the time coordinate ascribed to a given event, and that after the acceleration at E
an event such as 
 is ascribed a smaller time coordinate than it had before (the
difference corresponding to the line GH). It is this jump in the ascription of time
coordinates that implies that there is room for more signals to come from the laboratory
observer to the moving observer than the other way round, even though both are using
similarly constructed clocks. And since this jump occurs only in the rocket frame and not
in the laboratory frame, it is clear that the situation is not symmetrical between both
observers.
If the rocket observer were watching the fixed observer, he would then see the life of
the latter slowed down at first and later speeded up, but he would find over the whole
course of the journey that the effect of the speeding up more than balanced that of the
slowing down. He would not therefore be surprised to discover on meeting with his twin
that the latter had experienced more of life than he had.

132  The Special Theory of Relativity
We  see  then that there is actually  nothing paradoxical in the relativistic conclusion that
an accelerated clock will register less time in passing between two points than would an
unaccelerated  clock  passing  between  the  same  points.  This  is  possible  because  in
relativity theory time is not an absolute, with a universal moment “now,” the same for all
coexistent observers. Rather it is a much more subtle sort of notion, which can be
different in relation to different frames of reference. There is room for many different
kinds of time, as registered by clocks and physical processes that are subject to different
kinds of movement. In many ways physical time thus begins to show some of the
properties of our own experience with time in immediate perception. Thus, it is well
known that a given interval as measured physically by a clock may seem long or short, an
eternity or a mere moment, depending on how much is happening during the interval. (In
Section A-3 of the Appendix we shall go into this problem of perception of time in more
detail.) Until the development of the theory of relativity, it seemed that physical or
chronological time did not share such a relativity and dependence on conditions. But now
we see that this is because it had been studied only in the limited domain of low
Figure 30–2

The “Paradox” of the Twins  133
velocities. As the domain is broadened to include velocities appreciable in comparison
with c, we have begun to find in chronological time a dependence on conditions that is
not entirely dissimilar to what we experience in immediate perception. In other words, all
forms of time, including the chronological and the perceptual, are means of ordering
actual events and measuring their relative duration. The notion that there is one unique
universal order and measure of time is only a habit of thought built up in the limited
domain of Newtonian mechanics. It is valid in that domain, but becomes inadequate as
the domain is extended. And perhaps as the domain is broadened still further we may
well have to modify our conceptions of time (and space) yet more to enrich them, and
perhaps to change them radically, in such a way that even current relativistic notions are
treated as approximations and special limiting cases.

XXXI
The Significance of the Minkowski Diagram as a
Reconstruction of the Past
Because of the relativistic unification of space and time into a single four-dimensional
space-time  continuum,  there  is  a  tendency  to  interpret  the  Minkowski  diagram  as
representing a kind of arena or field of action, the whole of which an observer can
actually see at any given moment. That is to say, almost unconsciously, one is led to
adopt the point of view of an observer who is, as it were, standing outside of space and
time, surveying the whole cosmos from beginning to end, as a man in an aeroplane
surveys the landscape beneath him. The world lines of other observers then tend to be
thought of as tracks which are being traversed by these observers, much as a railway train
observed from an aeroplane would be seen to progress along its own track.
A little reflection shows, however, that this view of the Minkowski diagram must be
very  far  from  the  truth  indeed.  Consider,  for  example,  an  observer  at  rest  in  the
laboratory, whose world line is given by OA in Figure 31–1. At each moment such an
observer is to be represented by some point in the diagram such as P. Such an observer
cannot survey the whole Minkowski diagram. On the contrary, he can only know of
events that are inside his past light cone, PM, and PN. Therefore, both his absolute future
and his absolute elsewhere are unknown to him.
The real situation, as experienced by an observer at some moment P, is indeed
strikingly different from what is shown in the Minkowski diagram. Not only is an
observer’s knowledge restricted to the part of the Minkowski diagram that is in his
absolute past, but, even more, he never sees his own past actually happening, as it is
represented in this diagram. For at any given moment we are experiencing only what is
actually present at that moment. What we see at a given moment as past no longer
actually exists at that moment. What is

The Significance of the Minkowski Diagram as a Reconstruction of the Past  135
left of the past is only a trace, existing in the present. This trace may be in our memories,
or in a photographic plate, or it may be left in the structure of things (e.g., the rings of
trees, the skeletons of prehistoric animals, the layers of rock and earth studied in geology,
etc.). From these traces we reconstruct the past in our thoughts, as well as with the aid of
pictures and models. Thus it is evident that the reconstructed dinosaur is not the real
dinosaur, just as the photograph of a past event is not that event itself. Because memories
are so full of life, movement, color, and feeling, we often tend to become confused about
them, and in effect to treat them as if what we remember still existed. But in fact all that
appears in memory is also only a trace of the past that is gone. This trace is in our brain
cells and, as it were, “replayed” in the present, much as one can replay a phonograph
record, or re-project a film.
On the basis of our knowledge, not only of immediate events and facts from the past,
but  also  of  general  regularities,  trends,  and  laws  that  have  been  abstracted,  either
consciously or intuitively from this experience, both individual and collective, we are
able to project a probable future. But while we are projecting it, this future also does not
exist.  It  is  in  fact  nothing  more  than  an  image,  an  expectation,  a  thought.  If  our
projections are well founded, then the actual future, when it comes, may be close to what
was expected. But, generally speaking, our projections are very often wrong, either
because our knowledge of the laws and regularities of nature is inadequate, or because
our knowledge of the relevant facts is inadequate. Moreover, it is clear from our general
experience that all such predictive projections are subject to contingencies, i.e., to factors
Figure 31–1

136  The Special Theory of Relativity
originating outside the domains that are accessible to our investigations at a given
moment, factors which are thus unknown to us and which may yet play a crucial role in
determining what will actually happen.
An important example of the significance of contingencies is provided by the theory of
relativity. Thus, as we have seen, an observer at a given moment P can have information
only about what is in his absolute past. Even if he is in communication with other
observers, he can only hear what they have seen in their absolute pasts, at times which
are also in his absolute past. So whether knowledge originates in the experience of the
individual or in the collective experience of a group of people or of a society, it must
always be based on what is past and gone, at the moment when it is under consideration.
However, a great many features of nature are so regular and ordered that they do not
change significantly with the passage of time. For such features knowledge based on the
past in this way will provide a good approximation. Nevertheless, as we have seen in
earlier chapters, we can never know a priori what is the proper domain of laws found to
hold in past investigations, so that we must always be ready for the possibility that in
later experiments in new domains, past regularities will cease to hold.
Even if we have some fairly reliable knowledge about the general laws of nature, as
abstracted from past experience, observation, and experiment, it seems clear that we
cannot avoid contingencies, just because we cannot know completely and with certainty
what is in the absolute elsewhere. For example, if in Figure 26–4 an observer P has seen a
particle moving on a world line OV in his absolute past, he can reasonably assume that
the particle continues to exist on the line VW, which is the extension of OV into the region
outside the light cone of P. If he had a great deal of information about what happened
inside his past light cone, he might then be able to develop a fairly extensive projected
notion of what is going on outside his light cone. But this projected picture is always
subject to contingencies, because something unknown to P may always be taking place in
his absolute elsewhere (e.g., a meteor, might enter the laboratory unexpectedly from outer
space, thus altering the instruments, and deflecting the particle away from the projected
continuation of its world line along VW). And evidently what happens in the absolute
future of P is dependent on what is in his absolute elsewhere, so that his future is also
subject to contingencies.
At first sight, one might be inclined to ask whether or not a complete and certain
knowledge of the absolute past of P would not make possible a correspondingly complete
and certain projection of what is happening in the absolute elsewhere of P, and thus in
principle permit the removal of contingency. But this question is not very relevant,
because such a complete and certain knowledge of the past is evidently impossible.
Indeed,  such  a  knowledge  would  entail  going  infinitely  far  back,  and  making
observations and measurements of correspondingly great sensitivity and precision, since
in many cases what happens in our future may be critically dependent on small things
that took place long ago. But the traces of the distant past tend to be wiped out and
confused to our observations. The further back one goes, the more sensitive and accurate
must be the measurements and the better must be our knowledge and understanding of
the laws of nature, in order to interpret the traces that we observe at present so as to
reconstruct the past correctly. Evidently, it is impossible to have the perfect sensitivity
and accuracy of instruments and the perfect knowledge and understanding of the totality
of the laws of nature that would be needed to obtain complete and certain information
about our own absolute past, even at a given moment of our existence. This means that

The Significance of the Minkowski Diagram as a Reconstruction of the Past  137
projections from our absolute past to our absolute elsewhere are necessarily incomplete.
There is therefore always much that is unknown in our absolute elsewhere; and, for this
reason alone, predictions concerning the future will be subject to contingencies, arising
from what is unknown at the moment when the prediction is made. Of course, we may
come to know about these later (when they will have become a part of our absolute
pasts), but then there will be a new absolute elsewhere, not known at the moment in
question. So there will always be that which is unknown.
It can be seen that all these considerations arise out of the need to take into account the
important fact that the observer is part of the universe. He does not stand outside of space
and time, and the laws of physics, but rather he has at each moment a definite place in the
total process of the universe, and must be related to this process by the same laws that he
is trying to study. As a result, because of the very form of these laws of physics, which
imply that no physical action can be transmitted faster than light, there are certain
limitations on what can be known by such an observer at a given moment.
In the quantum theory the consequences of the fact that the observer is part of the
universe are even more striking. For when one takes into account the indivisible quanta
of action which connect the observer with what he observes, one sees that every act of
observation brings about an irreducible participation of the observer in what he observes,
a participation which entails a disturbance of the observed system. As a result, there is, as
Heisenberg  showed  in  his  discussion  of  the  indeterminacy  principle,  a  minimum
uncertainty in the accuracy of every kind of measurement. But it is perhaps not so
generally realized that the relativity theory by itself leads to the necessity of a sort of
inherent uncertainty in our predictions, different from that which follows from quantum
theory, and yet not entirely dissimilar in its implications.
Let us now return to the fact that the past of a given moment, such as P, does not
actually  exist,  as  shown  in  the  Minkowski  diagram,  but  that  is  in  reality  only  a
reconstruction (from which we can, of course, project a probable future). We have seen
an example of this in the previous chapter, where one person in the laboratory observes
his twin in the rocket ship and vice versa. What each of these people actually observes is
at first a slowing down of the processes seen to be happening in the other, because the
rocket ship is going away from the laboratory, and later a speeding up of these processes,
because it is approaching. At a given moment an observer has a memory or some other
record of what has been seen up to that moment. He does not take this memory or record
as representing directly what actually happened. Rather, he must interpret or “correct” it
for the effects of the time needed by light to reach him, this correction being based on his
knowledge of the general laws of physics, at least in so far as they relate to the
propagation of light and other kinds of signals. Such a procedure evidently amounts to a
reconstruction of what is supposed actually to have happened to the other observer. The
correctness of this reconstruction depends on the correctness of his knowledge of the
laws of propagation of signals. Thus he may know only the nonrelativistic laws, in which
case  his  reconstruction  would  contain  certain  kinds  of  errors  (significant  at  high
velocities) which could be avoided by the use of relativistic laws.
A similar reconstruction is needed to arrive at the length of an object. Thus consider a
ruler, moving with velocity v, relative to the laboratory, with end points indicated in
Figure 27–1 by the world lines RR! and SS!. What is its length at the time corresponding
to the moment O in the world line of the laboratory observer? Evidently this observer
could not be in contact with the events R and S at the time corresponding to the event O.

138  The Special Theory of Relativity
Rather, he could learn about these (e.g., with light signals) only later; and from this
knowledge he could make a kind of mental reconstruction of the ruler as it had been at
the time corresponding to C.
By definition the length of the ruler must be, of course, the distance between its end
points, taken at the same time, as calculated by the observer in question, taking into
account the time needed for light to reach him from various parts of the ruler. To obtain
the  necessary  data  for  such  a  calculation,  he  could,  for  example,  take  a  series  of
photographs of the ruler, and knowing the distance of the camera from the ruler and the
direction  in  which  the  camera  was  sighting,  he  could  use  well-known  geometrical
methods to calculate the length of the ruler. In studying how he must do this, we can see
very clearly how certain relativistic properties such as the Lorentz contraction of moving
objects are very much a matter of conventional definition of the properties in question.
Thus, if the ruler had been moving along the direction of its length and photographed
from a long distance away at some angle, 
, to its direction of motion, then this
photograph would not by itself show the distance between the end points of the ruler at
the same time (Figure 31–2). Rather, the camera merely selects all the light rays that
happen to pass through the shutter in the (negligibly short) interval during which the
latter is open. Using the approximations following from the assumption that the ruler
subtends a very small angle, 
, at the camera C, we readily calculate that the light
rays thus selected from the rear, B, of the ruler have started later than those from the
front, A, by a time interval 
, where l is the length of the
ruler. Thus 
. Because of the movement of the
ruler the length that it shows on the photograph will be 
.
Therefore, the observer will have to “correct” for this effect, if he wishes to obtain the
“length” of the ruler at a given value of his time coordinate. To make this correction he
must know the velocity of the ruler. This he can find, for example from a series of
photographs taken over a sequence of
Figure 31–2
In the above examples we have illustrated how abstract are properties, such as length
and frequency, in the relativistic domain. They are seldom, if ever, directly perceived as
times, as measured by his clocks, if he observes the
 changes in position of the ruler.

The Significance of the Minkowski Diagram as a Reconstruction of the Past  139
such. Rather, they come out only after a process of reconstruction, based on a great deal of
knowledge of the past, both general and specific.
Basically, however, all our knowledge has the character described above. Thus it is
evident that what we know about prehistoric times comes entirely from reconstructions of
traces of these times that still exist. But our knowledge of historic times is also only a
reconstruction, based in addition on records of what people have said and done (records
that are often false, misleading, incomplete, etc.). And even our knowledge of our own
immediate past is also a similar reconstruction, based on what we can remember of it. So
the whole of the past is a kind of reconstruction. To be sure, much of it is carried out by
habitual expectation of certain kinds of regularities, requiring little or no conscious
thought. Yet it cannot be denied that the past is gone, and that all that is left of it are
traces, which we interpret, organize, and structure into some approximate and generally
incomplete knowledge of what actually happened. This knowledge has a certain limited
and partial degree of truth, which makes it a useful general guide for future actions,
provided that one is alert to recognize its errors as they show themselves.
With all this in mind, let us now come to the question of what the Minkowski diagram
can actually mean. The answer is that this diagram is a kind of map of the events in the
world, which can correctly give us the order, pattern, and structure of real events, but
which is not in itself the world as it actually is. Thus, everyone is familiar with the fact
that a map of the world is made of paper, ink, etc., and that the map is not the world.
Nevertheless, a good map has a structure that is in certain ways similar to the structure of
the world. Thus, on such a map, if a certain city C is shown to be between two other cities
A and B, we shall actually find as we go from A to B that C is encountered between them.
(A bad map would, of course, be one whose structure was not similar to the structure of
that of which it was supposed to be the map).
It may be said then that physics has developed a kind of map of the events taking place
in the world such that for example, if event B is seen on the map as lying between events
A and C, we should find that C is actually observed to happen after A and before C. In
Newtonian mechanics the associated map implied a complete unrelatedness of space and
time, so that if any observers found that a given event A was before another B, it was
implied that all observers would actually encounter the same order. On the basis of
Einstein’s theory, however, physicists have now developed a more subtle map, in which
space and time are inherently related, in the manner specified in the Minkowski diagram.
On this map, if two events are in each other’s absolute elsewhere, it is implied that
observers moving at different speeds may attribute a different time order to the events,
some saying that A is before B and others that B is before A. However, if the events are
inside each other’s light cones, the map implies that all observers will agree on which is
earlier and which is later (so that there can be no ambiguity in the order of causally
connected sets of events).
It is clear that even in the case of the geography of the Earth, a map is an elaborate
reconstruction, based on a tremendous number of observations, organized, ordered, and
structured in accord with certain geometrical principles that have been abstracted from a
wide range of past experiences. Very often there are errors in the map that are corrected
on the basis of further observation; and at times there have been fundamental changes in
the structure of the map, resulting from the extension of experience into broader domains
(e.g., when the notion of a flat Earth was replaced by that of a spherical Earth). Moreover,
no one expects the map to be complete. Rather, it is only a general guide, so that to see
what a given country is actually like you must go there.

140  The Special Theory of Relativity
In a similar way the physicist’s notions of space and time are based on a reconstruction,
in accord with appropriate geometrical, dynamical, and structural principles that have
been abstracted from a wide range of past experiences. These too have errors that have to
be corrected on the basis of further observations, and can be subjected to fundamental
structural alterations, as experience is extended into new domains. And, likewise, the map
is never complete. Indeed, it is based only on what is past and gone. But when all of this
is put into the structure of a good conceptual map, it can serve as a general guide for what
to expect in the future. However, to see what the future is really like, we must, of course,
wait until it actually takes place. And from time to time, there will be surprises, not
corresponding at all to what is on our map.
The difference between a map and the region of which it is the map is so self-evident
that no one is likely to confuse the map with what it is supposed to represent (any more
than someone is likely to confuse a picture of a meal with a real meal that can nourish
him). But our ideas of space and time (whether gained in common experience or in
physical research) seem to be comparatively easily confused with what actually happens.
Thus, when Newton proposed the idea of absolute space and time physicists did not say
that this is only a kind of conceptual map, which may have a structure that is partly true
to that of real physical processes and partly false. Rather, they felt that what is is absolute
space and time. Now that this notion has been seen to have only a limited degree of
validity, the tendency is probably to feel that what is is relativistic space-time, as shown
in the Minkowski diagram.
Much confusion can be avoided on this point if we say that both Newtonian and
Einsteinian space-time are conceptual maps, each having a structure that is, in its domain,
similar to that of real sets of events and processes that can actually be observed. Room is
then left in our minds to entertain the notion that as physics enters new domains, still
other kinds of conceptual maps may be needed.
Any map of this kind is what the world is not. That is, the map is an idea, a picture, a
description, or a representation, while the world is not any of these things. But as happens
with all thought, adequate ideas imply a structure similar to the structure of what is. And
the test for the adequacy of an idea is to see whether the structure disclosed in actual
experience is similar to that implied by our ideas. If it is not, then we need new concepts,
implying another structure, which is adequate to that disclosed in the facts that are
actually observed.
In all maps (conceptual or otherwise) there arises the need for the user to locate and
orient himself by seeing which point on the map represents his position and which line
represents the direction in which he is looking. In doing this, one recognizes, in effect,
that every point and direction of observation yields a unique perspective on the world.
But with the aid of a good map having a proper structure, one can relate what is seen
from one perspective to what is seen from another, in this way abstracting out what is
invariant under change of perspective, and leading to an ever-improving knowledge and
understanding of the actual character of the territory under investigation. Thus, when two
observers with different points of view communicate what they see, they need not argue,
offering opinions as to which view is “right” and which view is “wrong.” Rather, they
consult their maps, and try to come to a common understanding of why each man looking
at the same territory has a different perspective and comes therefore to his own view,
related in a certain way to that of the other. (Of course, if after reasonable efforts they

The Significance of the Minkowski Diagram as a Reconstruction of the Past  141
cannot do this they may begin to suspect that they may need maps with different
structures.)
In Newtonian mechanics the importance of the location and perspective of the observer
was very much underemphasized. Of course, physicists have probably always realized
that each observer does actually have a perspective. However, they may have felt that
such a perspective need play no part in the fundamental laws of physics. Rather, they
assumed that a physical process takes place in an “absolute” space and time that is
independent of the way in which it is measured and observerd, so that the perspective of
the observer (or of his instruments) does not appear at all in these laws. On the other
hand, in Einstein’s point of view, it is clear that any particular example of a Minkowski
diagram is a map corresponding to what will be observed in a system moving in a certain
way and oriented in a certain direction. Therefore, this map already has some of the
observer’s perspective implicit in it. Moreover, as we have seen, even an observer with a
given velocity has, at each moment, a different perspective on the universe, because he
has information only about his absolute past, which corresponds to a different region of
space-time in each moment of such an observer’s existence. Thus, whether we consider
what is seen by different observers or by the same observer at different times, it is
necessary continually to relate the results of all these observations, by referring them to a
space-time map with a correct structure, and in this way to develop an ever-growing
knowledge and understanding of what is invariant and therefore not dependent on the
special perspective of each observer.
It is seen then that while relativity does emphasize the special role of each observer in a
way that is different from what is done in earlier theories, it does not thereby fall into a
kind of “subjectivism” that would make physics refer only to what such an observer finds
convenient or chooses to think. Rather, its emphasis is on the hitherto almost ignored fact
that each observer does have an inherent perspective, making his point of view in some
way unique. But the recognition of this unique perspective serves, as it were, to clear the
ground for a more realistic approach to finding out what is actually invariant and not
dependent on the perspective of the observer.

APPENDIX
Physics and Perception
A-l. INTRODUCTION
Throughout this book we have seen that in Einstein’s theory of relativity, the notions of
space, time, mass, etc., are no longer regarded as representing absolutes, existing in
themselves as permanent substances or entities. Rather, the whole of physics is conceived
as  dealing  with  the  discovery  of  what  is  relatively  invariant  in  the  everchanging
movements that are to be observed in the world, as well as in the changes of points of
view, frames of reference, different perspectives, etc., that can be adopted in such
observations. Of course, the laws of Newton and Galileo had already incorporated a
number of relativistic notions of this kind (e.g., relativity of the centre of coordinates, of
the orientation, and speed of the frame of reference). But in them the basic concepts of
space, time, mass, etc., were still treated as absolutes. Einstein’s contribution was to
extend these relativistic notions to encompass the laws, not only of mechanics, but also
those of electrodynamics and optics, in the special theory, and of gravitation in the
general theory. In doing this he was led to make the revolutionary step to which we have
referred, i.e., of ceasing to regard the properties of space, time, mass, etc., as absolutes,
instead treating these as invariant features of the relationships of observed sets of objects
and events to frames of reference. In different frames of reference the space co-ordinates,
time, mass, energy, etc., to be associated to specified objects and events will be different.
Yet there are various sets of transformations (e.g., rotations, space displacements, Lorentz
transformations) relating the many aspects of the world, as observed in any one frame to
those as observed in another. And in these transformations, certain functions (such as the
interval and the rest mass) represent invariant properties, the same for all frames of
reference, within the set in question. Of course, such invariance will in general hold only
in some domain, so that as the domain under investigation is broadened, we may expect
to come to new invariant relationships, containing the older ones as approximations and
limiting cases. The lawfulness of nature is thus seen to correspond just to the possibility
of finding what is invariant. But because each kind of invariance is only relative to a
suitable domain, science may be expected to go on to the discovery of ever new kinds of
invariant relationships, each of which contributes to the understanding of some new
domain of phenomena.
At first sight the point of view described above may seem to be very different to that of
“common sense” (as well as of the older Newtonian physics). For are we not in the habit
of regarding the world as constituted of more or less permanent objects, satisfying certain
permanent  laws?  That  is  to  say,  in  everyday  life  we  never  talk  about  “invariant
relationships,” but rather we refer to tables, chairs, trees, buildings, people, etc., each of
which is more or less unconsciously conceived as being a certain kind of object or entity,
which, added to others, makes up the world as we know it. We do not regard these objects
or entities as relative invariants which along with their properties, and the laws that they
satisfy, have been abstracted from the total flux of change and movement. There appears
then to be a striking difference between the way we conceive the world as observed in

143
immediate experience (as well as in the domain of classical nonrelativistic physics) and
the way it is conceived in relativity theory.
In this Appendix we shall show that the difference between the notions of common
experience and those of relativity theory arise mainly because of certain habitual ideas
concerning this experience, and that there is now a great deal of new, but fairly well
confirmed, scientific evidence suggesting that our actual mode of perception of the world
(seeing it, hearing it, touching it, etc.) is much closer in character and general structure to
what is suggested by relativistic physics than it is to what is suggested by prerelativistic
physics. In the light of this evidence it would seem that nonrelativistic notions appear
more natural to us than relativistic notions, mainly because of our limited and inadequate
understanding of the domain of common experience, rather than because of any inherent
inevitability of our habitual mode of apprehending this domain.
A-2. THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR COMMON NOTIONS IN INFANTS
AND YOUNG CHILDREN
The evidence in favor of the suggestion at the end of Chapter 1 comes from many
different fields. We shall begin with the fascinating studies of the development of
intelligence in infants and young children carried out by Piaget.1 On the basis of long and
careful observations of children of all ages from birth up to 10 or more years, he was
actually able to see the development of our customary ideas of space, time, the permanent
objects, the permanent substance with the conserved total quantity, etc., and thus to trace
the process in which such notions are built up until they seem natural and inevitable.
The very young infant does not behave as if he had the adult’s concept of a world
separate from himself, containing various more or less permanent objects in it. Rather,
Piaget gives good evidence suggesting that the infant begins by experiencing an almost
undifferentiated totality. That is to say he has not yet learned to distinguish between what
arises inside of him and outside of him, nor to distinguish between the various aspects of
either the “outer” or the “inner” worlds. Instead there is experienced only one world, in a
state of continual flux of sensations, perceptions, feelings, etc., with nothing recognizable
as  permanent  in  it.  However,  the  infant  is  endowed  with  certain  inborn  reflexes,
connected with food, movements, etc. These reflexes can develop so as to selectively
accommodate different aspects of the environment; and in this way the environment
begins effectively to be differentiated to the extent of taking on certain “recognizable”
features. But at this stage recognition is largely functional (e.g., some objects are “for
eating,” some “for drinking,” some “for pulling” etc.), and there seems to be little or no
development of the adult’s ability to recognize an object by the shape, form, structure, or
 other perceived characteristics.
1 J.Paiget, The Origin of Intelligence in the Child, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, (1953).
J.Piaget and B.Inhelder, The Child’s Conception of Space, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London,
(1956).
Appendix: Physics and Perception  

144 
needs, indicated by sensations, such as hunger, etc. In the next stage, however, there
develops  the  so-called  “circular  reflex,”  which  is  crucial  to  the  development  of
intelligence. In such a reflex there is an outgoing impulse (e.g., leading to the movement
of the hand) followed, not mainly by the satisfaction of need, but rather by some
incoming sensory impulse (e.g., in the eye, ear, etc.). This may be said to be a beginning
of real perception. For the most elementary way of coming into contact with something
that is not just the immediate satisfaction of a bodily need is by incorporating it into a
process in which a certain impulse toward action is accompanied by a certain sensation.
This principle of the circular reflex is carried along in all further developments. Thus, at
a certain stage, the infant begins to take pleasure in operating such reflexes, in order, as
Piaget puts it, “to produce interesting spectacles.” He finds, for example, that pulling a
certain cord will produce an interesting sensation of movement in front of him (e.g., if the
cord is attached to a colored object). It must not be supposed that he understands the
causal connection between the cord and the movement, or even that he foresees the
sensation of movement in his imagination and then tries to realize it by some operation.
Rather, he discovers that by doing such an operation he gets a pleasant sensation that is
recognizable. In other words, recognition that a past event has been repeated comes first;
the ability to call up this event in the memory comes only much later. Thus, at this stage,
he only knows that a certain operation will lead to some recognizable experience that is
pleasurable.
The ability to recognize something as similar to what was experienced before is
certainly a necessary prerequisite for beginning to see something relatively permanent in
the  flux  of  process  that  is  very  probably  the  major  element  in  the  infant’s  early
experiences. Another important prerequisite for this is the coordination of many different
kinds of reflexes that are associated to a given object. Thus, at first the infant seems to
have little or no realization that the object he sees is the same as the object he hears.
Rather, there seem to be fairly separate reflexes, such as listening, looking with the eyes,
etc. Later, however, these reflexes begin to be coordinated, so that he is finally able to
understand that he sees what he hears, grasps what he sees, etc. This is an important step
in the growth of intelligence, for in it is already implicit the notion that will finally
develop—of a single object that is responsible for all of our different kinds of experience
with it.
The infant is, however, as yet far from the notion of a permanent object, or of
permanent causal relationships between such objects. Rather, his behavior at this stage
suggests that when presented with something familiar he now abstracts certain vaguely
recognizable totalities of sensation and response, involving the coordination of hand, eye,
ear, etc. Thus there is a kind of a germ of the notion of the invariant here; for in the total
flux of experience he can now recognize certain invariant combinations of features of the
pattern. These combinations are themselves experienced as totalities, so that the object is
not recognized outside of its customary context.
Later the infant begins to follow a moving object with his eyes, being able to recognize
the invariance of its form, etc., despite its movement. He is thus beginning to build up the
reflexes needed for perceiving the continuity of existence of certain objects, apart from
their customary contexts. However, he still has no notion of anything permanent. Rather,
he behaves as if he believed that an object comes into existence where he first sees it and
passes out of existence where he last sees it. Thus, if an object passes in front of him and
disappears later from his field of view, he looks for it, not in the direction where he has
At first these reflexes and functions are carried out largely in the satisfaction of primary
Appendix: Physics and Perception

145
last seen it, but rather toward the place where he first saw it, as if this were regarded as the
natural source of such objects. Thus, if an object goes behind an obstacle, he does not
seem to have any notion of looking for it there. The realization that this can be done
comes only later, after the child has begun to work with what Piaget calls “groups of
operations.” The most elementary of these is the “group of two.” That is, there are
operations such as turning something round and round, hiding it behind an obstacle and
bringing it back to view, shaking something back and forth, etc., which have in common
that there is an operation, the result of which can be “undone” by a second operation, so
that the two operations following each other lead back to the original state of affairs. It is
only after he understands this possibility that the infant begins to look for an object
behind the obstacle where it vanished from view. But his behavior suggests that he still
does not have the idea of a permanent object, existing even when he doesn’t see it.
Rather, he probably feels that he can “undo” the vanishing of an object, by means of the
“operation” of putting his hand behind the obstacle and bringing forth the object in
question.
In this connection we must recall that the infant still sees no clear and permanent
demarcation  between  himself  and  the  world,  or  between  the  various  objects  in  it.
However,  he  is  building  up  the  reflexes  and  operations  needed  to  conceive  this
demarcation later. Thus, he is beginning to develop the notion of causality, and the
distinction of cause and effect. At first he seems to regard causality as if it were a kind of
“sympathetic” magic. He may discover that certain movements applied to a string or
other object near him will produce corresponding movements elsewhere. He does not
immediately realize the need for a connection, but often acts as if he expected the results
to follow directly as a kind of magical response to his movements. This is, of course, not
really unexpected, if one considers that the child does not yet clearly distinguish what is
inside him from what is outside. Thus, in many cases, movements will in fact produce
perceptible internal effects without a visible intermediary connection. Therefore, as long
as the child views all aspects of his experience as a single totality, with no clear
distinction of “within” and “without,” there is nothing in his experience to deny the
expectation of such sympathetic magical causality. Later, however, he begins to see the
need for intermediate connections in causal relationships, and still later he is able to
recognize other people, animals, and even objects as the causes of things that are
happening in his field of experiencing.
Meanwhile, the notions of space and time are being built up. Thus as the child handles
objects and moves his body he learns to coordinate his changing visual experiences with
the tactile perceptions and bodily movements. At this stage, his notion of groups of
movements is being extended from the “group of two” to more general groups. Thus, he
is learning that he can go from one place A to another B by many different paths, and that
all these paths lead him to the same place (or alternatively that if he goes from A to B by
any one path, he can “undo” this and return to A by a large number of alternative paths).
This may seem to be self-evident to us, but for an infant living on a flux of process it is
probably a gigantic discovery to find out that in all of this movement there are certain
things that he can always return to in a wide variety of ways. The notion of the reversible
group of movements or operations thus provides a foundation on which he will later erect
that of permanent places to which one can return, and permanent objects, which can
always be brought back to something familiar and recognizable by means of suitable
operations (e.g., rotations, displacements, etc.).
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

146 
Meanwhile the child is gradually learning to call up images of the past, in some
approximation  to  the  sequence  in  which  it  occurred,  and  not  merely  to  recognize
something as familiar only after he sees it. Thus begins true memory, and with it the basis
for the notion of the distinction of past time and present time (and later future time, when
the child begins to form mental images of what he expects).
A really crucial step occurs when the child is able to form an image of an absent object,
as existing even when he is not actually perceiving it. Just before he can do this he seems
to deal with this problem as if he regarded the absent object as something that he (or
other people) can produce or create with the aid of certain operations. But now he begins
to form a mental image of the world, containing both perceived and unperceived things,
each  in  its  place.  These  objects,  along  with  their  places,  are  now  conceived  as
permanently existing, and in a set of relationships corresponding perfectly to the groups
of movements and operations already known to him (e.g., the picture of a space in which
each point is connected to every other by many paths faithfully represents the invariant
feature of his experience with groups of operations, in which he was able to go from one
point to another by many routes).
At this stage it seems that the child begins to see clearly the distinction between himself
and the rest of the world. Until now he could not make such a distinction, because there
was  only  one  field  of  experiencing  what  was  actually  present  to  his  total  set  of
perceptions. However, with his ability to create a mental image of the world, i.e., to
imagine it, he now conceives a set of places which are permanent, these places being
occupied by various permanent objects. But one of these objects is himself. In his new
mental “map” of the world he can maintain a permanent distinction between himself and
other objects. Everything on this map falls into two categories—what is “inside his skin”
and what is not. He learns to associate various feelings, pleasures, pains, desires, etc.,
with what is “inside his skin,” and thus he forms the concept of a “self,” distinct from the
rest of the world, and yet having its place in this world. He similarly attributes “selves” to
the insides of other people’s skins, as well as to animals. Each “self” is conceived as both
initiating causal actions in the world and suffering the effects of causal actions originating
outside of it. Eventually he learns to attribute to inanimate objects a lower and more
mechanical kind of “selfhood” without feelings, aims, and desires, but still having a
certain ability to initiate causal actions, and to suffer the effects of causes originating
outside of it. In this way the general picture of a world in space (and time), constituted of
separate and permanent entities which can act on each other causally, is formed.
The notions of an objective world and of a subject corresponding to one of the objects
in the world are, as we have seen, thus formed together, in the same step. And this is
evidently necessary, since the mental image of the world that serves as a kind of
conceptual “map” requires the singling out of one of the objects on this “map” to
represent the place of the observer, in order that his special perspective on the world at
each moment can be taken into account. That is to say, just as the relativistic “map,” in
the form of the Minkowski diagram (as discussed at the end of Chapter 29), must contain
something in it to represent the place, time, orientation, velocity, etc., of the observer, so
the mental map that is created by each person must have a corresponding representation
of that person’s relationship to the environment.
It must not be supposed, of course, that the child knows that he is making a mental
image or map of the world. Rather, as Piaget brings out very well, young children often
find it difficult to distinguish between what is imagined or remembered in thought and
Appendix: Physics and Perception

147
what is actually perceived through their senses (e.g., they may think that other people are
able to see the objects that they are thinking about). Thus the child will take this mental
map as equivalent to reality. And this habit is intensified with each new experience,
because once the map is formed it enters into and shapes all immediate perceptions, thus
interpenetrating the whole of experience and becoming inseparable from it. Indeed, it is
well known that how we see something depends on what we know about it. (E.g., an
extreme case is that of an ambiguous picture, subject to two interpretations, one obvious
and the other less so. Once a person is told about the second interpretation, in many
cases, he can no longer see the picture in the original way.) Thus, over a period of years
we learn to see the world through a certain structure of ideas, with which we react
immediately to each new experience before we even have time to think. In this way we
come to believe that certain ways of conceiving and perceiving the world cannot be
otherwise, although in fact they were discovered and built up by us when we were
children, and have since then become habits that may well be appropriate only in certain
domains of experience.
It is very hard to do full justice to the scope and range of Piaget’s work in a summary of
this kind. Besides covering a great many points concerning the period of infancy that
have not been mentioned here, he goes on to discuss the development of intelligence after
the child learns to talk and to engage in thought more or less as it is known by adults.
Here, the child has to solve a new set of problems. For he must translate into the structure
of thought and language that immediate perceptual structure of the world which is
represented on the mental “map” to which we have referred. This process is inevitably
attended by a great deal of confusion, in which the child’s ideas and words frequently
contradict what he must be perceiving. Yet, step by step, the child learns to know which
figures are closed, which curves are smooth, which things are inside or outside others,
etc. These are the so-called “topological” relationships. He then discovers the facts of
perspective (which are behind projective geometry) and learns how to recognize the sizes
and shapes of objects, thus becoming familiar with that set of relationships the essence of
which is summed up in Euclidean geometry. In this process, he also learns the need for
logical  thought,  when  he  wishes  to  reflect  on  the  structure  of  the  world,  and  to
communicate with other people, as well as when he wishes to apply his ideas to a
practical problem. (Piaget makes it clear that at first logic plays only a very small role in
the thinking of children.) Thus in a continuing process of development the child builds up
his knowledge and understanding of the world, with the aid of related sets of mental
images, ideas, descriptions in words,’ etc., implying a structure similar to that of various
aspects of the world as he directly perceives it.
It will be relevant for our purposes here to discuss briefly the development of the
child’s concept of the constancy of the number of objects, and of the total quantity of
matter in them, because these concepts have evidently played a fundamental role in
physics. As Piaget demonstrates, a child who has recently begun to talk does not at first
have the notion that a set of objects has a fixed number, independent of how they are
moved and rearranged. Rather, he forms at each instant a general perceptual estimate of
whether a given collection seems to be more, or less, or equal to another, and does not
hesitate to say that two initially equal collections are unequal, after they have been
subject to some rearrangements in space (even though the numbers of objects have
actually remained constant).
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

148 
fact that the child does not yet have the idea of the conservation of the number of objects
as they move and change their relationships to each other and to the observer. Indeed, this
notion is developed only in a series of stages. First, the child learns to establish a
one-to-one correspondence between objects that are in simple relationship, such as
parallel rows. When he loses sight of this correspondence (e.g., when the objects are
rearranged and are no longer in rows) he cannot yet think of them as having the same
number. Later, as he learns to put them into correspondence again, he forms an idea
similar to that of the “reversible group,” i.e., that certain sets of objects can be brought
back by suitable operations into their original state of one-to-one correspondence. From
here he forms a new concept or “mental map” of the objects as having at all times a fixed
number, which faithfully portrays the structure of his operations with such sets as capable
of being put back into correspondence. Then, gradually, he forgets the operations that
establish  correspondence  and  thinks  of  the  number  of  objects  as  a  fixed  property
belonging to a given total set, even when these move and rearrange.
The procedure of thinking of numbers as an inherent and permanent property of a set
becomes so habitual that the problem “What is number?” is considered as being too
obvious to require much discussion. Yet when modern mathematicians came to study this
question, what they had to do was in effect to uncover the operational basis on which
each child originally develops his concept of number (thus reaching the definition of
equality of cardinal numbers of two sets in terms of one-to-one correspondences between
numbers of a set). We see then that the deepest problems are often found in the study of
what  seems  obvious,  because  the  “obvious”  is  frequently  merely  a  notion  that
summarizes the invariant features of a certain domain of experience which has become
habitual and the basis of which has dropped out of consciousness. So to understand the
obvious it is necessary very often to go to a broader point of view, in which one brings to
light the basic operations, movements, and changes, within which certain characteristics
have been found to be invariant.
A very similar problem arises with regard to conservation of the quantity of matter or
substance. Thus, when a given quantity of liquid is distributed into many containers of
various shapes, the young child does not hesitate to say that the total quantity of water
has  increased  or  decreased,  according  to  the  impressions  that  the  new  distribution
produces in his immediate perceptions. Later, when he sees the possibility of bringing the
water back into the original container, where it has the same volume as it had originally,
he is led to the idea of a constant quantity of liquid. The necessity for this step in the
development of the child’s conceptions is evident. For a priori there is no reason to
suppose that the quantity of a given substance is conserved. This idea comes forth only as
a result of the need to understand certain kinds of experience. Then later, one forgets that
such an idea had to be developed. It becomes habitual, and eventually it seems inevitable
to  suppose  that  the  world  is  made  of  certain  basic  substances  that  are  absolutely
permanent in their total quantities. Then, when we do not find this absolute permanence
in the level of common experience, we postulate it in the atomic level or somewhere else.
As in the case of numbers, some very deep problems arise here in the effort to
understand what seems obvious. Nothing seems more obvious than the notion of a
permanent quantity of substance. Yet, to understand this idea more deeply, we must go on
to a broader context, in which such a notion need not apply. We can then see that such
conceptions arise when the child discovers a kind of relative invariance under certain
operations, e.g., of pouring the liquid back into the original container. So we find that in
The results described above will be seen to be not surprising, if one keeps in mind the
Appendix: Physics and Perception

149
the understanding of immediate perception, one must do essentially what is done in the
theory of relativity, i.e., to give up the concept of something that is absolutely permanent
and constant, to see the constancy of certain relationships or properties in a broad domain
of  operations  involved  in  observation,  measurement,  etc.,  in  which  the  conditions,
context, and perspective are altered.
To sum up the work of Piaget, then, we recall that the infant begins with some kind of
totality of sensation, perception, feeling, etc., in a state of flux, in which there is little or
no  recognizable  structure  with  permanent  characteristics.  The  development  of
intelligence then arises in a series of operations, movements, etc., by which the child
learns about the world. In particular, what he learns is always based on his ability to see
invariant relationships in these operations and movements, e.g., an invariant kind of
correspondence between what he sees and what he hears, etc., an invariant relationship
between cause and effect, an invariant form to an object as he follows it with his eye, an
invariant possibility of “undoing” certain changes by means of suitable operations, etc.,
etc. The perception of each kind of invariance is then followed by the development of a
corresponding mental image (and later a structure of organized ideas and language)
which functions as a kind of “map” representing the invariance relationships correctly, in
the sense that it implies invariant features similar to those disclosed in the operations
(e.g., the mental image of a space with permanent positions connected by an infinity of
possible paths corresponds to the operational experience of being able to reach the same
place by many different routes). Very soon immediate perception takes on the structture
of these “maps,” and, after this, one is no longer aware that the map only represents what
has been found to be invariant. Rather, the map begins to interpenetrate what is perceived
in such a way that it seems to be an inevitable and necessary feature of the whole of
experience, so obvious that it is very difficult to question its basic features.
The work of Piaget indicates that in order to understand the process of perception it is
necessary to go beyond the habitual standpoint, in which one more or less confuses the
general structural features of our mental “maps” with features of the world that cannot be
otherwise, under any conceivable circumstances. Rather, one is led to consider the
broader totality of our perceptive process as a kind of flux, in which certain relatively
invariant features have emerged, to be represented by such “maps,” in the sense that
these faithfully portray the structure of such features. But as we have seen in this book, a
similar step is involved in going from a nonrelativistic point of view in physics to a
relativistic point of view. For in doing this we cease to regard our concepts of space, time,
mass, etc., as representing absolutely permanent and necessary features of the world, and,
instead, we regard them as expressing the invariant relationships that actually exist in
certain domains of investigation.
A-3. THE ROLE OF THE INVARIANT IN PERCEPTION
The work of Piaget, discussed in the previous section, shows that the development of
intelligence seems to be based on the ability to realize what is invariant in a given domain
of operations, changes, movements, etc., and to grasp these relationships by means of
suitable  mental  images,  ideas,  verbal  expressions,  mathematical  symbolism,  etc.,
implying a structure similar to that which is actually encountered. We shall now cite some
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

150 
evidence coming from the direct study of the process of perception, which strongly confirms the 
implications of this point of view, and considerably extends their domain of applicability.
There is a common notion of perception as a sort of passive process, in which we simply 
allow sense impressions to come into us, there to be assembled into whole structures, recorded 
in memory, etc. Actually, however, the new studies make it clear that perception is, on the 
contrary, an active process, in which a person must do a great many things in the course 
of which actions he helps to supply a certain general structure to what he perceives. To be 
sure, this structure is objectively correct, in the sense that it is similar to the structure of the kind 
of things that are encountered in common experience. Yet  the  fact  that  a  great  deal  of  
what  we  see  is  ordered  and  organized  in  a  form determined by the functioning of our 
own bodies and nervous systems has very far reaching implications for the study of new 
domains of experience, whether in the field of immediate perception itself or in science 
(which generally depends on instrumentally aided perception, in order to reach new domains).
One can see the active role of the observer most clearly by first considering tactile 
perception. Thus, if one tries to find the shape of an unseen object simply by feeling it, 
one must handle the object, turn it round, touch it in various ways, etc. (This problem has 
been studied in detail by Gibson and his co-workers.1)
In such operations one seldom notices the individual sensations on the fingers, wrist joints, 
etc. Rather, one directly perceives the general structure of the object, which emerges, 
somehow, out of a very complex change in all the sensations. This perception of the structure 
depends on two nervous currents of energy—not only the inward current of sensations 
to which we have referred above, but also an outward current determining movements of the 
hand. For knowledge of this structure is implicit in the relationship between the outward and 
the inward currents (e.g., in the response to certain movements of turning, pressing, etc.).
It is evident, then, that tactile perception is evidently inherently the result of a set of active  
operations,  performed  by  the  percipient.  Nevertheless,  the  outgoing  impulses leading to the 
movement of the hand and the influx of sensations are either not noticed or else they are only 
on the fringe of awareness. What is perceived most strongly is actually the structure of the object 
itself. It seems clear that out of a remarkably complex and variable flux of movement with 
their related sensual responses, the brain is able to abstract a relatively invariant structure of the 
object that is handled. This invariant structure is evidently not in the individual operations 
and sensations but can be abstracted only out of their totality over some period of time.
At first one might think that in vision the situation is basically different, and that one 
just passively “takes in” the picture of the world. But more careful studies show that 
vision involves a similar active role of the percipient, and that the structure of what one 
sees is abstracted out of similar invariant relations between certain movements and the 
changing sensations which are the eye’s response to these movements.
1 See J.G.Gibson, Psychological Review, 69, 477 (1962).
Appendix: Physics and Perception

151
demonstrated  by  Ditchburn,1  who  has  discovered  that  the  eyeball  is  continually 
undergoing small and very rapid vibrations, which shift the image by a distance equal 
roughly to that between adjacent cells on the retina of the eye. In addition, it has a slower 
regular drift, followed by a “flick” which brings the image more or less back to its 
original center. Experiments in which a person looked at the whole field of vision through 
mirrors arranged to cancel the effects of this movement led at first to a distorted vision 
and soon to a complete breakdown of vision, in the sense that the viewer could see 
nothing at all, even though a clear image of the world was being focussed on his retina.
Ditchburn has explained this phenomenon by appealing to the fact that when a constant 
stimulus is maintained on nerve cells for some time, they accommodate; i.e., the strength 
of their response tends to decrease, eventually falling below the threshold of what is 
perceptible. Under conditions in which the pattern of intensity of light on the whole retina 
is kept fixed by mirrors that compensate for the movements of the eyeball, it is then to be 
expected that such a process of accommodation will take place. In this way one can 
explain the distortion and eventual fading away of what is in the field of view, as 
observed in the experiments of Ditchburn. In normal vision, however, accommodation 
will be only partial, because the vibration and other movements of the eyeball will always 
be producing corresponding changes in the pattern of light on the retina. The response of 
the nerves connected to a given retinal cell will therefore depend less on the light 
intensity at the point in question than on the way in which this light intensity changes 
with position. This means that the excitation of the optic nerve does not correspond to the 
pattern of light on the retina, but rather to a modified pattern in which contrasts are 
heightened, and in which a strong impression is produced at the boundaries of objects, 
where the light intensity varies sharply with position. In this way one obtains an emphasis 
on the outlines and forms of objects which helps to lead to their being perceived as 
separate and distinct, a perception that would not be nearly so clear and noticeable if the 
eye were sensitive to the light intensity itself, rather than to its changes.
Platt1 has made the interesting suggestion that our ability to discern the straightness of 
lines with great accuracy depends on the drift and “flick” motions which we have 
mentioned, or on motions that are similar to them. Now, Hubel and Wiesel2 have shown 
by following the connections from the optic nerve through the retinal ganglion cells into 
the brain that certain kinds of regions on the retina resembling segments of short linear 
bars are mapped into corresponding cells of the cortex. This mapping could explain our 
ability to make relatively crude discriminations as to which segments of the visual field 
are lines (with an accuracy corresponding to the width of the bars, which is  generally of
1 J.R.Platt, Principles of Self Organising Systems, Zopf and von Fuerster (eds)., Pergamon, 1961;
Information Theory in Biology, Yockey, Quastler, and Platzman, (eds.), Pergamon, 1958; and 
Scientific American, 202, 121, June 1960.
One  of  the  most  elementary  movements  that  is  necessary  for  vision  has  been
1 R.W.Ditchburn, Research, 9, 466 (1951), Optica Acta, 1, 171 and 2, 128 (1955).
2 D.H.Hubel, Scientific American, 209, 54, November 1963.
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

152 
the order of several times the space between retinal cells). On the other hand, as Platt has 
pointed out, one can observe breaks in perfect linearity corresponding on the retinal 
image to about a thirtieth of the space between cells. The problem that interested Platt is 
that of explaining how this remarkable accuracy is made possible.
Platt’s proposal is based on noting that the movements of the eyeball are rotations. In a 
small rotation of the eyeball around an axis in a plane parallel to the foveal part of the 
retina  (i.e.,  the  small  region  of  central  vision  that  is  involved  whenever  precise 
discrimination of shape, size, etc., is to be made), the effect is to give the image in this 
region a corresponding linear movement. For a general figure, such a movement will 
produce some change in the pattern of stimulus, which will, of course, be perceptible. But 
for the special case of a segment of a straight line that is parallel to the direction of 
displacement of its image, the line will displace into itself. Therefore, the image will be 
invariant under this movement. Platt then postulates that the brain has a way of being 
sensitive to such invariance, thus permitting it to recognize the property of straightness.1
It is evident that the accuracy of discrimination in the process need not be limited by the 
distance between cells of the retina. For if a line is not straight it will produce a variation 
in the pattern of excitation of the nerves. This variation can be detected even if the failure of per-
fect linearity is in a region smaller than the size of a retinal cell, provided that  there  is  sufficient  
sensitivity  to  small  changes  in  the  pattern  of  light  intensity following on such cells.2
It is characteristic of perception, however, that usually there are many alternative 
mechanisms for obtaining the same kind of information, which can reinforce or aid each 
other. Thus, the mapping of bar-like regions on the retina into cells of the cortex of the 
brain disclosed by Hubel and Wiesel can give us a rough perception of straight lines, 
which may be supplemented by the process suggested by Platt, when finer discriminations 
are to be made. Moreover, from a consideration of Piaget’s work discussed in Section 
2A, it seems likely that, starting from childhood, each person builds up certain ways of 
knowing which lines are straight, by comparison with a sort of memory of grids of lines, 
learned by experience over a long period of time. In addition, yet other mechanisms are 
implicit in the work of Held, Gibson, and others, which we shall discuss presently.
1 The fact that straight lines do not disappear altogether from the field of vision as a result of
accommodation could be accounted for by many possible mechanisms, e.g., by supposing that 
when their observed intensity starts to fade significantly the eyeball undergoes a “flick” that moves 
the line over to a fresh section of the foveal region.
2 Rotations of the eyeball around an axis perpendicular to the plane of the fovea would permit a
correspondingly accurate process of recognizing uniform curvature (i.e., that there are no changes 
of curvature in a small region of arc.)
Appendix: Physics and Perception

153
The essential point that we wish to emphasize in the work concerning the eye is that 
nothing is perceived without movements or variations in the image on the retina of the 
eye, and that the characteristics of these variations play a large part in determining the 
structure that is actually seen. It is important that such variations shall not only be a result 
of changes that take place naturally in the environment, but that (as in the case of tactile
perception) they also can be produced actively by movements in the sense organs of the 
observer  himself.  These  variations  are  not  themselves  perceived  to  any  appreciable
extent. What is perceived is something relatively invariant, e.g., the outline and form of 
an object, the straightness of lines, the sizes and shapes of things, etc., etc. Yet the
invariant could not be perceived unless the image were actively varied.
Experiments by Held and his co-workers and by Gibson1 make it clear that movements
of the body also play an essential role in optical perception, particularly the coordination 
between such movements and the resulting changes that are seen in the optical image of
the world. For example, when people are furnished with distorting spectacles (which 
cause straight lines to appear to be curved) and allowed to enter a room patterned in a 
way that is not previously known to them, they eventually learn to “correct” the effects of
this distortion by the spectacles, and cease to see the curvature that must actually be 
present in the image of a straight line on the retinas of their eyes. Later, when they take
off the spectacles, they see straight lines as curved, at least for a while. (A more extreme 
case of such an experiment is to allow a person to see the world through spectacles that 
invert the image. After some time he sees it right side up, but when he takes off the
spectacles he sees it upside down again, for a while.)
The interesting point of these experiments is that the “relearning” of what corresponds 
to a straight line depends very strongly on the ability to move the body actively. Thus 
people who are free to walk around are able to adjust their vision to their spectacles fairly 
rapidly, whereas people who passively undergo equivalent movements in chairs either 
never learn to do so or else are very much less effective in such learning. So it is clear 
that what is essential is not only that there shall be appropriate variations of the image on 
the  eye,  resulting  from  movement,  but  also  that  some  of  these  variations  shall  be 
produced actively by the percipient. In other words, as in the case of tactile perception, 
what one actually sees is determined somehow by the abstraction of what is invariant 
from a set of variations in what is seen, this variation having been produced, at least in 
part, as an essential aspect of the process of observation itself.
In the above experiment one may conjecture plausibly that through experiences with 
movement starting with early childhood (as discussed in the work of Piaget), each person 
already has some sort of Euclidean structure built into his bodily movements. As far as 
one can verify by trying to walk to the edge of a room with his eyes closed, he seems to 
have in his nervous system some kind of ability or skill which makes it possible for him 
to abstract from all the changing movements and sensations in his body some information
1 For a discussion of these experiments see R.Held and S.J.Freedman, Science, 142, 455 (1963);
Psychology, A Study of Science, S.Koch (ed.), McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959, p. 456; R.Held and
J.Rekosh, Science, 141, 722 (1963).
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

154 
concerning the straightness of his path, the amount of turning, etc. In normal vision
(without  distorting  spectacles),  when  one  walks  along  such  a  mechanically  sensed
straight line, the image on the retina of the eyes undergoes a projective transformation (at
least approximately) in which the apparent shapes of figures change, but in which straight
lines are transformed into straight lines. Therefore, as one walks in a straight line, the
mechanically derived information on the invariance of direction of movement will agree
with what is implied by the corresponding optical information, abstracted from the
projective transformation of lines in the field of vision. However, when one is wearing
distorting spectacles, what is mechanically sensed as walking a straight line will be
optically sensed as walking a curved line. Thus, there is a contradiction between what one
sees and what one perceives through feeling, movement, kinesthetic sensations, etc. It
seems then, that below the level of consciousness, the brain and nervous system are
trying to resolve this contradiction by testing various hypotheses as to what actually
constitutes a straight line.1 When a hypothesis isfound that removes the contradiction
between what is seen and what is felt mechanically, then this hypothesis is, as it were,
embodied directly in the structure that we perceive. Therefore, a person who is wearing
distorting lenses eventually ceases to perceive an optically curved line under conditions
in which he mechanically senses a straight line, but rather he comes to see and feel the
same straight line (as in the work of Piaget discussed in the previous section, where the
child learns to perceive an invariant correspondence between what he sees, what he hears,
what he grasps, etc.).
In the discussion of the work of Ditchburn, Hubel and Wiesel, and Platt we have
already seen that the optic nerve does not transmit a simple “copy” of the image on the
retina of the eye, but rather that it tends to emphasize certain structural features by
heightening contrasts and being sensitive to the presence or absence of lines and other
such figures. From the work of Held and Gibson, however, it is clearly seen that the
picture that we perceive actually contains structural features which are not even on the
retina of the eye at a given moment, but which are detected with the aid of relationships
observed over some period of time.
The perceived picture is therefore not just an image or reflection of our momentary
sense impressions, but rather it is the outcome of a complex process leading to an
ever-changing (three-dimensional) construction which is present to our awareness in a
kind of “inner show.” This construction is based on the abstraction of what is invariant in
the relationship between a set of movements produced actively by the percipient himself
and the resulting changes in the totality of his sensual “inputs.” Such a construction
functions, in effect, as a kind of “hypothesis” compatible with the observed invariant
features of the person’s over-all experience with the environment in question. (For
example, the perception of a straight line corresponds to a hypothesis on what is invariant
in the optical, mechanical, and other changes that have been experienced in relationships
with this line, as a result of the movements that have been made in a person’s perceptual
contacts with it.)
1 Platt, for example, has suggested that the brain may find some new combination of rotations of
the eyeball, about an axis parallel to the retina and perpendicular to it, which can consistently be
coordinated with the mechanically sensed straight line.
Appendix: Physics and Perception

155
Not only is the process of construction dependent on the abstraction of invariant rela-
tionships  between  movement  and  sense  perceptions,  as  described  above;  it  also 
depends on all that is known by the percipient. For example, if a person looks at a letter at 
a distance too great for clear distinct vision, he will see something very vague and 
indistinct in form. But if he is told what the letter is, its image will suddenly appear with 
comparatively  great  clarity.  Or  alternatively,  he  can  drop  a  small  coin  on  a  highly 
patterned carpet, where he will generally find that it is lost to his sight. Then, if he catches 
a glint of reflected light, the coin that he knows that he has lost will suddenly stand out in 
his perception. Its image must have been on the retina of the eye all the time, but it did 
not enter the “inner show” of perception until the reflected glint contradicted the percep-
tion of a carpet with nothing on it, and also suggested the lost coin that he knows about.
Gibson1  describes  a  great  many  experiments  which  further  bring  out  the  general 
properties of perception described above. He shows that in the perception of depth, or the three-
dimensional character of the world, binocular vision is only one of the relevant factors. Another 
important factor is just the changing optical appearance of things as we move. Thus, as we walk, 
the image of an object that we are approaching gets larger. The closer the object is, the more 
rapidly does its apparent size change. In this way (as well as in many other ways, such as 
the placing of shadows, the relative haziness of distant objects, etc.), the brain is able to abstract 
information cencerning the distance of objects in the dimension along the line of sight. On 
the basis of such information, it is continually “constructing”  the  field  of  what  is  perceived  
in  the  manner  that  has  already  been described, i.e., by introducing various “hypotheses” as to 
what is invariant. For example, if one misjudges the distance of something, one will also 
misjudge its size. As one walks, one may sense that the object is not varying its apparent size in 
the way implied by our judgement of its distance. Suddenly, there will appear in the field 
of perception a different way of seeing the object, which is consistent with the new information.
We see then that what actually appears in the field of perception, at least when one is 
viewing something relatively static, is a structure, order, and arrangement of things 
regarded as invariant in their sizes, shapes, and spatial relationships. This construction 
in the “inner show” is such that the assumption that it is invariant explains not only its 
present optical appearance but also the alterations in its appearance that have been experi-
enced as a result of past movements, as well as all that we know or think we know about 
it. At each moment such a construction has a tentative character, in the sense that it may 
be subject to changes, if what it implies leads to contradictions in later experiences at-
tending subsequent movements, probings, tests, etc. Here we see an essential role of the 
active movements of the percipient, for it is through these that the current “hypotheses” 
in the “inner show” of perception are always being tested, corrected, modified, etc.
Thus far we have been considering only the case in which a percipient moves in a 
relatively static environment. If movements are taking place in his environment as well, 
then there is the additional problem of knowing which of the observed changes are due to
1 J.G.Gibson and E.J.Gibson, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 129 (1957).
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

156 
the movements of the observer and which are due to movements of what is in the
environment. This problem is dealt with, in effect, by the capacity to abstract a higher
order type of invariant, i.e., a relatively invariant state of movement.
Generally speaking, as a person moves in his environment his brain begins (largely
unconsciously) to note those features which do not change significantly as a result of
these movements. These are treated as a distant and relatively fixed background, against
which other movements can be perceived. The closer objects do, of course, change their
apparent sizes, shapes, etc., appreciably in a systematic way as a person walks, moves his
head, etc. It seems that the brain has developed the ability to be sensitive to such apparent
movements and changes in the nearby environment, especially when they are coordinated
with movements produced by the percipient himself. This permits the elimination of the
self-produced movements in the field of what is perceived, so that the construction of the
“inner show” corresponds to a generally static world, in which the percipient himself is
seen to be moving. Therefore, as a person walks around a room, he does not feel the room
to be moving, whirling around, and changing its shape, etc. Rather, he perceives the room
as fixed and himself as moving, in such a way as to explain all the variations in what he
has perceived. But if, for example, he has suffered damage to the delicate balancing
mechanism in the inner ear, he can no longer coordinate his mechanical perceptions with
his optical perceptions. He may then suffer vertigo, and feel that the world is moving
around him. The difference between these two modes of perception is very striking to
anyone who has ever experienced it.
On the basis of the elimination of the movement of the percipient, the brain is then able
to go to the next level of abstraction, in which it senses the movement of some part of the
field of vision against a background that is perceived as fixed. The simplest case arises
when a given object merely suffers a dislocation in space and perhaps also a rotation. In
this case one is able to perceive the object as actually having a constant size and shape,
despite the fact that its image on the retina is changing all the time. This perception is
inextricably bound up with the ability to see such an object as possessing a certain state
of motion, rather than as a series of “still” pictures of the object in question, each in a
slightly different position. It is almost as if the brain were able to establish a co-moving
reference frame, in which a moving object could be seen to have a constant shape. In this
way, the brain seems to include in its construction process the ability to abstract a certain
state of  movement,  which  under  the  assumption  of  an  object of  a  given  shape  is
compatible with the changes that have been perceived in the appearance of the object
over some period of time.
Of course, there will then be further kinds of changes which cannot be explained in this
way (e.g., an object may actually grow in size, change its form, etc.). These will have to
be perceived in terms of more subtle internal changes in the object in question.
The problem of how movement is perceived is far from being fully solved. Yet it is
already clear that such perception cannot be based merely on “sense impressions” at a
given moment. Rather, the “inner show” that we perceive embodies certain structural
features, based not only on abstractions from immediate sensations, but also on a series of
abstractions over a more or less extended set of earlier perceptions. Indeed, without such
a series of abstractions we could not be able to see a world having some well-defined
order, organization, structure, etc. Even a static environment is effectively presented in
the “inner show” as a tentative and hypothetical structure, which when assumed to be
invariant, will be compatible with the changing experiences that the percipient has had
Appendix: Physics and Perception

157
with this environment, in movements that he himself has produced. And an environment 
which is itself changing is presented in the “inner show” as a structure expressed in terms 
of invariant states of movement of parts of the environment which account for earlier
changing experiences that are not explained by the movements of the percipient.
There may also arise an ambiguity in the attribution of movements to the observer or to
various parts of the environment. Thus, if a person is sitting in a train that is not moving,
and watches another moving train through the window, he may find that he perceives
himself as moving, and that he even gets some of the physical (kinesthetic) sensations of
movement. But when he fails to feel the expected shaking and vibration of the train, he 
begins to look more carefully, and can soon see in the environment certain further clues, 
suggesting that the other train is moving and that he is at rest. Suddenly his mode of 
perception of the world changes. This is a striking demonstration of how our perceptions
of the world are a construction in the “inner show,” based on the search for a hypothesis 
that  is  compatible  with  all  that  we  have  experienced  in  connection  with  a  certain 
situation. So we do not perceive just what is before our eyes. We perceive it organized
and structured through abstractions of what kind of invariant state of affairs (which may 
include invariant states of movement) will explain immediate experience and a wide 
range of earlier experiences that led up to it.
Results of the kind described above led Gibson1 to suggest a new concept of what constitutes 
perception. He emphasizes the need to drop the idea that perception consists of passively
gathering sense impressions, which are organized and structured through principles supplied 
only by the observer. Indeed, the isolated sense impression is seen to be an extremely high level
abstraction, which does not play any significant part in the actual  process  of  perception.
Instead,  we  are  sensitive  directly  to  structure  of  our environment itself. In the last 
analysis the observer therefore does not supply the structure of his perceptions, so much
as he abstracts it. Or as Gibson himself puts this point, the structure of our environment
is the stimulus that gives rise to what we perceive (i.e., to the construction in the “inner
show” that is presented in our awareness). With regard to optical perception, for example,
Gibson points out that through each region of space there passes an infinity of rays of
light, going in all directions. These rays of light implicitly contain all the information about 
the structure of the world that we can obtain from vision.1 But an eye fixed in a certain
position cannot abstract this information. It must move in many ways, and at least some
part of these movements must be produced by the observer himself, because (as was first 
brought out by Held and his co-workers) structural information is abstracted mainly from
invariant relationships between the outgoing nervous excitations that give rise to these 
movements and the corresponding ingoing nervous excitations that result from them.
Gibson raises a related set of questions regarding the role of time in perception. A typi-
cal question is, for example; “When does a particular stimulus come to an end?” The old-
er way of looking at this problem is to refer to what is called the “specious present.” That
is, it is found that there is an interval of time, of the order of a  tenth  of a  second, which
1 J.G.Gibson, American Psychologist, 15, 694 (1960).
1 The same principle applies to the radio telescope, which is in contact (as it were) with the
structure of the whole universe, through a similar set of radio waves.
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

158 
is “speciously” experienced as a single moment, in the sense that people do not seem to
be able clearly to discriminate changes that take place in times less than this. From this
notion it would follow that all our perceptions can in principle be uniquely ordered in 
time, within an accuracy of a tenth of a second or so. Nevertheless, Gibson raises
questions which suggest that it is a source of confusion to try to understand the essential 
features of the process of perception by referring it in this way to such a time order.
To see why Gibson questions the simple time order of perceptions described above, let
us recall that we do not perceive momentary sensations, to any appreciable extent. 
Rather, we perceive an over-all structure that is abstracted from these, a structure
evidently built up over some period of time. We have already seen in connection with
optical perception, for example, that clues obtained over some time may come together at
a given moment and give rise to a new structure of what is perceived. It evidently makes
no sense to say that this new structure is based only on the very last clue to be received. 
Rather, it is based on the whole set of clues. This means that a given stimulus to our 
perceptions is not restricted to the smallest time interval that can be discriminated. 
Rather, it may be said that some stimuli take place over much longer intervals.
In music the property of stimuli is much more clearly seen. As one is listening to a tune,
the notes heard earlier continue to reverberate in the mind, while each new note comes
in. One may suddenly understand (i.e., perceive the over-all structure) of a piece of music
at a certain moment in this process. But evidently the very last note to be received is not the sole 
basis of such an understanding. Rather, it is the whole structure of tones reverberating in
the mind. These tones have manifold relationships, which are not restricted to their time
order. To grasp these relationships is essential to the understanding of the music. The ef-
fort to regard the essential content of the music in terms of its time order could then lead
to too narrow a way of looking at the problem, which would tend to produce confusion.
In a similar way one can consider the problem of how one perceives rhythm. At any 
moment there is only one beat to be heard. But one beat is not a rhythm. Evidently it is
the reverberation of a whole set of beats in the mind, all in a certain relationship that
constitutes the perception of rhythm. The stimulus that constitutes a rhythm cannot then 
refer only to a single moment of time. So it seems important to realize that the essential
features of perception will not always be understood by stringing out what is perceived in
a time order.
Indeed, in many cases it is not possible to assign a unique moment of time to a given 
feature of what is perceived. While listening to a piece of music one may be appreciating
a rhythm that is based on many seconds, a theme that may require a minute or more to be
apprehended, and we may be looking at a stop-watch, seeing the movements of the hand
that perhaps indicates some fraction of a second. When one says “now,” what does one
mean by this? Does it refer to the perception of a certain position of the indicator on the
watch, the perception of a certain part of the rhythm, the perception of some part of the 
theme, or perhaps to something else?
Appendix: Physics and Perception

159
It would seem then that the effort to order the totality of one’s perceptions in terms of a 
single, unique time order must lead to confusion and absurdity. Certain perceptions can
thus be ordered (e.g., those that are similar to seeing the indicator on the watch dial). But
to understand the process of perception in a broader context, we must see that the
structures that are perceived are not as rigidly related to such a time order as our 
customary notions might lead us to think. There is a loose time order, in the sense, for
example, that today’s perceptions are not strongly related to yesterday’s events (although 
these do in fact still “reverberate” in us and help to shape present perceptions). Yet the
hard  and  fast  notion  that  each  perception  is  uniquely  ordered  as  earlier,  later,  or 
simultaneous with another (within the period of the “specious present”) seems to lead to a
kind of confusion, indicating that it probably has little relevance to the actual facts of 
perception.
It may perhaps be instructive to consider a simple example of a physical problem in 
which the attempt to regard the time order of events as basic to the understanding of a
process leads to a type of confusion similar to that in which it results when applied to
perception. Suppose, for the sake of our discussion, that there were beings on Mars, and 
that they had become interested in studying the radio signals coming from the Earth. 
When they came to observe television signals they would not be able to make a great deal 
of sense of them, if they supposed that the essential principle of these signals were some 
kind of formula or set of relationships determining their time order. The signals can in
fact be understood properly only when it is realized that they originate in a series of
whole pictures, which are then translated systematically into a time series of pulses. The
principles governing the actual order of pulses are therefore to be grasped in terms of a
spatial structure very different from that of the time order that is received in the radio 
signals. Or, to put it differently, the order of the signals is not essentially related to the 
order of time. In a similar way, the structure of our perceptual process may also not be 
essentially related to some hypothetical series of instants, but may be based on entirely 
different kinds of principles involving (like the television signal) the integration of what 
is  received  over  suitable  intervals  of  time,  extending  far  beyond  the  period  of  the
“specious present.”
If a given perception integrates what comes in over such extended periods of time, does 
this mean that memory is the main factor that determines the general structure of what we 
perceive? (Memory being the ability, for example, to recall approximately the sensations, 
events, objects, etc., that were experienced in the past.) Gibson does not accept the notion
that the structure in our perceptions comes mainly from memory, although of course 
memories do evidently have some influence in shaping such perceptions. He suggests that
the main process is what he calls “attunement” to what one perceives. Thus, as one sees 
something new and unfamiliar he first vaguely perceives only a few general structural
features. Then as he moves in relation to what he is looking at and perhaps probes as 
well, he starts to abstract more of the details of the structure, and his perceptions sharpen. 
Perhaps one could compare this process to a kind of skill, which is also not based simply 
on memory of all the steps by which the skill was acquired.
Both in the case of perception and in that of building a skill, a person must actively 
meet his environment in such a way that he coordinates his outgoing nervous impulses
with those that are coming in. As a result the structure of his environment is, as it were,
gradually incorporated into his outgoing impulses, so that he learns how to meet his
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

160 
environment with the right kind of response. With regard to learning a skill it is evident 
how this happens. But in a sense the perception of each kind of thing is also a skill, 
because it requires a person actively to meet the environment with the movements that are 
appropriate for the disclosure of the structure of that environment. (This fact would also 
be evident if it were not for our habitual notion that perception is a purely passive affair.)
If we learn the structure of things by “attunement” it seems clear that the very general features 
of our ability to apprehend the structure of the world will, in many cases, go back to what was 
learned in early childhood. It is here that the studies of the process of perception can link up with 
the work of Piaget, discussed in the previous section. For there we saw how the infant begins 
with a limited set of inborn reflexes. When these are developed into the “circular reflex” he has 
the most basic feature of perception, i.e., the ability to be sensitive to a relationship between 
outgoing and incoming nervous impulses, a relationship that is characteristic of what is to be 
perceived. From here on he is able to “attune”  himself  step  by  step  with  his  environment,  
by  abstracting  from  such relationships what is invariant in its general structure. In doing this 
he builds up his notions of space, time, causality, the division of the world into permanent 
objects (one of which is himself), the notion of permanent substance, permanent numbers 
of objects, etc., etc. All of these notions are interwoven into the fabric of perception, in the sense 
that they help shape the structure of what appears in the “inner show” that is present in our 
awareness. So while we are able to “attune” ourselves to new kinds of structures when we 
meet something new, there seem to be certain general structural features, of the kind described 
above, which were first learned in childhood, and which are present in all that we perceive.
The over-all or general structure of our total perceptual process can be regarded not only from 
the standpoint of its development from infancy but can also be investigated directly in the adult. 
Such studies have been made by Hebb and his group,1 by isolating individuals in environments 
in which there was little or nothing to be perceived. The extreme cases of such isolation 
involved putting people in tanks of water at a comfortable temperature, with nothing to be 
seen or heard, and with hands covered in such a way that nothing could be felt. Those in-
dividuals who were hardy enough to volunteer for such treatment found that after a while 
the structure of the perceptual field began to change. Hallucinations and other self-induced per-
ceptions, as well as distortions of awareness of time,  became  more  and  more  frequent.  
Finally,  when  these  people  emerged  from isolation,  it  was  found  that  they  had  un-
dergone  a  considerable  degree  of  general disorientation,  not  only  in  their  emotions  
but  also  in  their  ability  to  perceive.  For example, they often found themselves unable 
to see the shapes of objects clearly, or even to see their forms as fixed. They saw changing 
colors which were not there, etc. etc. (In time, normal perception was, of course, regained.)
The results of these experiments were rather difficult to understand in detail, but their 
over-all implication was that the general structural “attunements,” built into the brain 
since early childhood, tend to  disintegrate when there is no appropriately structured envi-
ronment  for  them to work on 
1 See survey by R.Held and S.J.Freedmon, Science, 142, 455 (1963); also the Symposium on
Sensory Deprivation, The Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, No. 1, January 1961.
. If we  compare these  attunements  to some  kinds of 
Appendix: Physics and Perception

161
skills,  needed  in  meeting  our  typical  environment,  then  perhaps  it  is  not  entirely 
unexpected that they should decay when they are not used. But what is still surprising is 
the  extremely  great  speed  with  which  such  “skills”  built  up  over  a  lifetime  
candeteriorate.  To  explain  this  it  has  been  proposed  that  when  there  is  no  external 
environment for the brain to work on it starts to operate on the internal environment, i.e., 
on the impulses produced spontaneously on the nervous system itself. But these impulses 
do not seem actually to have a well-defined structure that is comprehensible to us. So in 
the  active  effort  to  “attune”  to  a  structure  that  is  either  nonexistent  or  else 
incomprehensible to the people who actually did the experiment, the older adjustments, 
built up over a lifetime, are mixed up and broken down.
The above hypothesis has to some extent been confirmed by experiments in which 
people looked for a long time at a television screen containing a changing random 
(unstructured) pattern of spots. A disorientation of perception resulted which was similar 
to that obtained in the experiments in which subjects were isolated. Thus it could be 
argued that in the effort to adjust to a nonexistent or incomprehensible structure in its 
general environment, the brain began to break down the older structural “attunement” 
that was appropriate to the normal environment in which people generally live.
The implications of these experiments are so far reaching as to be rather disturbing. 
Nevertheless, it can be seen that, on the whole, they tend to carry further what is already 
suggested in the work of Piaget and in the results that have been summarized in this 
section. For in all of this we have seen that in perception there is present an outgoing 
nervous impulse producing a movement, in response to which there is a coordinated 
incoming set of sensations. The ability to abstract an invariant relationship in these 
nervous impulses seems to be what is at the basis of intelligent perception. For the 
structure that is present in the “inner show” is determined by the need to account for what 
is invariant in the relationship of the outgoing movements and the incoming sensations. 
In this way the percipient is not only always learning about his environment but is also 
changing himself. That is, some reflection of the general structure of his environment is 
being built into his nervous system. As long as his general environment is not too 
different in structure from what has already thus been built into his nervous system he can 
make adjustments by “attuning” to the new features of the environment. But in an 
environment without such a perceptible structure, it seems that there is a tendency for this 
attunement to be lost, in the search for a structure which either does not exist or which 
has features that are beyond the ability of the percipient to grasp if it does exist.
These results lead us back to the old question first formulated by Kant, as to whether 
our general mode of apprehending the world as ordered and structured in space and time 
and through causal relationships, etc., is objectively inherent in the nature of the world, or 
whether it is imposed by our own minds. Kant proposed that these general principles 
constituted a kind of a priori knowledge, built into the mind, which was a necessary 
precondition for any recognizable experience at all, but which may not be a characteristic 
of “things in themselves.”
It would seem that Kant’s proposal was right in some respects but basically wrong in 
that he had considered the problem in too narrow a framework. It is certainly true that at 
any given moment we meet new experience with a particular structural “attunement” in
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

162 
the brain that is a necessary condition for perception of recognizable aspects of the world.
This “attunement” is responsible for our ability to see a more or less fixed set of things at
each moment, organized in space, causally related, changing in a simply ordered time
sequence, etc. When this “attunement” is broken down by long isolation from perception
or by perception of an environment without visible structure, then the experiments cited
above do indeed show that the process of recognizable experiencing of an environment is
seriously interfered with.
On the other hand, a broader view of this problem shows that an adult’s attunement to
the general structure of the world has been built up in a development, starting with
infancy. In the beginning of this development the child must discover the structure of his
environment in a long process in which he experiments with it, operates on it, etc. His
procedure in doing this is perhaps not basically different from that used in scientific
research. He is interested in his environment, probing it, testing it, observing it, etc., and,
as it were, always developing new perceptual “hypotheses” in the “inner show” that
explain his experiences better. In doing this he is “attuning” himself to his environment,
developing the right responses to perceive its structure adequately. As he gets older this
whole process tends to fall into the domain of habit. But whenever he meets something
strange and unexpected, he is able to abstract new structural features, by a continuation of
the kind of interested experimentation and observation that is characteristic of early
childhood.
Of course, a person finds it hard to change very general structural features, such as the
organization of all experience in terms of space, time, causality, etc. Yet the experiments
cited above suggest that there seems to be no inherent need to continue any particular
structure, and that the brain probably is capable of abstracting a very wide variety of
kinds of structural features that may be actually present in the part of the environment
that is available to his senses, provided that there is appropriate interest, leading to the
proper kind of experimentation, probing, etc. At any given moment the structure that we
already know depends on past experiences, habits, etc.; this in turn is dictated in part by
the general environment that people have actually lived in, and in part by the interests
that determine to which structural features people will have payed a great deal of
attention. So we do in fact approach new experiences, as Kant suggested, with some kind
of already given general structural principles. Yet the experiments cited here suggest that
Kant was wrong in regarding any particular set of principles of this kind as inevitably
following a priori from the very nature of the human mind. Rather, along the lines
suggested by Gibson, it would seem that a person might become “attuned” to any
structural features of his environment to which his nervous system could respond, and in
which he was sufficiently interested.
In terms of the notions described above we can see that while our perceptions do have a
subjective side, dependent on the particular background and conditioning of each person,
as well as on the general background and conditioning of the whole of humanity, they
also have a kind of objective content, which can go beyond this particular and limited
background. For the general structure of our perceptions (resulting from this background)
can be regarded as a kind of hypothesis, with the aid of which we approach subsequent
experiences in which things have changed not only of their own accord, but also because
of our own movements, actions, and probings, which alter our own relationships to our
environments. To the extent that the new experiences fit into the continuation of the old
structure without contradictions, these hypotheses are effectively confirmed. But if we are
Appendix: Physics and Perception

163
alert, we will sense contradictions which they arise (as we have already seen, in numerous
examples discussed earlier). When this happens the brain is sensitive to the discovery of
new relationships, leading spontaneously to further hypotheses, which are embodied in
the appearance of new structures in the “inner show.” Anyone can see this happening as
he approaches a distant object that is unknown to him, or as he approaches something
unknown in the obscure light, for example, of the moon. He will see various forms,
shapes, objects, etc., which appear and then disappear, because they are not compatible
with further experiences resulting from his movements, probings, etc. So there is a
continual process of “trial and error” in which what is shown to be false is continually
being set aside, while new structures are continually being put forth for “criticism.”
Eventually there develops in this way a perception which stands up to further movements,
probings, etc., in the sense that its predictive implications are actually borne out in such
experiences.  (Of  course,  even  this  is  always  tentative,  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be
contradicted later.)
The objective content of our perceptions is then implicit in the process of falsification
and confirmation described above. Indeed, the very fact that our vision of the world can
be falsified as a result of further movement, observation, probing, etc., implies that there
is more in the world than what we have perceived and known. That is to say, we do not
actually create the world. In fact, we only create an “inner show” of the world in response
to our movements and sensations. It is, however, the possibility of confirmation of the
“inner show” which demonstrates that there is more in it than merely a summary of past
experiences. For this “inner show” is based on the abstraction of the general structure of
these past experiences, the structure having predictive inferences for later experiences.
For example, as we approach the front of an object such as a house, we (largely
unconsciously) predict a great many structural features of the parts of the object that are
not yet visible. Thus, on seeing the front and one side of the house, along with parts of its
roof, we infer that it has other sides, that these have certain parallel lines, certain angles,
etc. These inferences may come partially from memory, having gone round similar
houses previously. But in large part they come, not from the simple recall of earlier
experiences  themselves,  but  from  the  general  structural  principles  that  have  been
abstracted from a very wide range of such experiences (e.g., the three dimensionality of
space, the existence of straight lines, parallel lines, and right angles, all of which together
imply a certain general field of possibilities for the unseen sides of an object, independent
of the particular memories of similar objects that we may possess).
A little reflection shows that there is an enormous number of cases in which the above-
described kinds of predictive inferences based on the general structure of our perceptions
have turned out to be correct. That is to sray, the “world” that we see in immediate
perception has, at a given moment, a general structure, which has withstood a long series
of tests, in the observations that have led up to the moment in question. And as a rule it
happens that the natural projection of this structure in accordance with the known state of
movement of the observer and of what is in the field of perception will continue to be
more or less in accord with later observations in a great many respects. This means that
the general structure of our perceptions has a certain similarity to the general structure of
what is actually in our environment. Yet, the similarity is not perfect, as is evidenced by
the appearance of contradictions, unexpected events, etc., which necessitate continual
changes in what is “constructed” in the field of perception, and are not merely the result
of the natural projection from what was perceived earlier. In this way we are continually
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

164 
being confronted with what is not even implicitly contained in our earlier perceptions, 
thus we are being reminded that there is a reality beyond what we have already perceived,
aspects of which are always in the process of being revealed in our further perceptions.
A-4. THE SIMILARITY BETWEEN THE PROCESS OF PERCEPTION 
AND THE PROCESS BY WHICH SCIENCE INVESTIGATES THE
WORLD
In the previous sections of this Appendix we have discussed studies of the development of the 
process of perception in an individual human being from infancy, as well as direct studies of 
how this process takes place in adults. What comes out of these studies can be summed up in the 
statement that in the process of perception we learn about the world mainly by being sensitive to 
what is invariant in the relationships between our own movements, activities, probings, etc., and 
the resulting changes in what comes in through our sense organs. These invariant relationships 
are then presented immediately in our awareness as  a  kind  of  “construction”  in  an  “inner 
show,”  embodying,  in  effect, a hypothesis  that  accounts  for  the  invariant  features  that
have  been  found  in  such experiences up to the moment in question. This hypothesis is, how-
ever, tentative in the sense that it will be replaced by another one, if in our subsequent move-
ments, probings, etc., we encounter contradictions with the implications of our “constructions.”
Throughout this book, however, we have seen that research in physics has shown basic
features very similar to those of perception described above, and that with the further 
development of physics, into its more modern forms (in particular, with the theory of relativity),
this  similarity  has  tended  to  become  stronger.  Thus,  those  aspects  of Newtonian
mechanics which eventually proved to be correct consisted of the discovery of the invariance of
certain relationships (Newton’s laws of motion), in a wide variety of systems, movements, 
changes of frames of reference, etc. On the other hand, those features of the theory which were
considered to represent absolutes (i.e., absolute space, absolute  time,  the  notion  of  permanent
substances  with  fixed  masses,  etc.)  were eventually shown to be unnecessary, and indeed
important sources of confusion and error, in  the  effort  to  extend  scientific  knowledge  of  the 
laws  of  movement  into  broader domains. Einstein’s major steps were based on setting aside 
such ideas of an absolute, and on extending into broader domains the notion of the laws of
physics as invariant relationships (e.g., so as to include velocities comparable to that of light). In
doing this he was led also to drop the notion of fixed quantities of substances, having constant
masses. Instead, mass was seen to be only a relatively invariant property, expressing a re-
lationship between energy  of  a  body  and  its inertial resistance to  acceleration,  along 
with  its gravitational properties. Further developments in modern physics, including quantum 
theory and the studies of the transformations of the so-called “elementary” particles (as discussed 
in Chapter 23) suggest that the notion of permanent entities constituted of substances  with 
unchanging  qualitative  and  quantitative  properties  may  have  to  be dropped altogether, 
and that physics will be left with nothing but the study of what is relatively invariant in as wide 
as possible a variety of movements, transformations of coordinates, changes of perspective, etc.
Appendix: Physics and Perception

165
Moreover (as we saw in Chapter 24), it seems that the notion that science is collecting absolute 
truths about nature, or even approaching such truths in a convergent fashion, is not in good 
accord with the facts concerning the actual development of scientific theories thus far, and has 
indeed also been a major source of confusion in scientific research. Rather, as Professor Popper 
has emphasized, science actually progresses through the putting forth of falsifiable hypotheses, 
which are confirmed up to a certain point and thereafter, as a rule, eventually falsified. New hy-
potheses are then put forth, which are criticized and tested by a process of “trial and error” 
very similar to that to which our immediate perceptions are continually being subjected.
The interesting point that has emerged from a simultaneous consideration of what has 
developed in modern science and of what has been disclosed in modern studies of the process of 
perception is that the new ideas required to understand the both of them are rather similar. 
In this section we shall give some arguments in favor of the suggestion that this similarity 
is not accidental but rather has a deep reason behind it. The reason that we are  proposing  is  that  
scientific  investigation  is  basically  a  mode  of  extending  our perception of the world, 
and not mainly a mode of obtaining knowledge about it. That is to say, while science does 
involve a search for knowledge, the essential role of this knowledge is that it is an adjunct 
to an extended perceptual process. And if science is basically such a mode of perception, then, 
as we shall try to show, it is quite reasonable that  certain  essential  features  of  scientific  
research  shall  be  rather  similar  to corresponding features of immediate perception.1
Since science has generally been regarded thus far as basically a search for knowledge, it will 
be necessary to begin by going more deeply into the question of the relationship between 
knowledge and immediate perception. Now, as we have seen, what appears in immediate 
perception already embodies a kind of abstraction of the general structure of what  has  been  
found  to  be  invariant  in  an  earlier  active  process  of  probing  the environment that has led 
up to the perception in question. We propose that knowledge is a higher-level abstraction, based 
on what is found to be invariant in a wide range of experiences involving immediate perception.
We can perhaps explain this notion most directly by first referring to Piaget’s account 
of the development of the child’s concept of space (discussed in Section A-2). At first the 
child discovers a group of operations, such that he can go from one place to another by a 
certain route, and return invariantly to the same place by a wide range of different routes. 
Later the child is able to imagine (i.e., to produce a mental image) of a space, containing 
even objects that are no longer in his field of immediate perception, and also an imagined 
object  that  corresponds  to  himself.  The  structure  of  this  mental  image  faithfully 
corresponds to what has been found by the child to be invariant in his earlier experiences 
with groups of movements. This mental image therefore abstracts a kind of “higher-order 
invariant,” i.e., something that has been invariant in a wide range of immediate perceptions.
1 The similarity between scientific research and perception has already been noted by several
authors. See N.H.Hanson, Patterns of Discovery, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1958, 
and T.Kuhn, The Nature of Scientific Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1963.
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

166 
When we use the words “to abstract” we do not wish to suggest that there is merely a
process  of  induction,  or  of  taking  out  some  kind  of  summation  of  what  has  been
experienced  earlier.  Rather,  each  abstraction  constitutes,  as  it  were,  a  kind  of
“hypothesis,” put forth to explain what has been found to be invariant in such earlier experi-
ences. Only the abstractions which stand up to further tests and probings will be retained. 
Eventually, however, these become habitual, and we cease to be aware of their basically 
hypothetical and tentative character, regarding them instead as inherent and necessary features 
of all that exists, in every possible domain and field of experiencing and investigation.
Piaget then goes on to describe how with the development of language and logical
thinking the child goes on to make still higher level abstractions, in which there are
formed structures of words, ideas, concepts, etc., which express the invariant features of 
the world that he abstractly considers in his perceptions. Evidently there is in principle no
limit to this process of abstraction. Thus science and mathematics may be said to form 
still  higher  level  abstractions  (formulated  in  words,  diagrams,  and  mathematical 
symbols), expressing the invariant features of what has been found in experiments and 
observations  (which  latter  are  carried  out  in  terms  of  the  ordinary  abstractions  of 
everyday language and common sense). Thus all knowledge is a structure of abstractions,
the ultimate test of the validity of which is, however, in the process of coming into 
contact with the world that takes place in immediate perception.
It can be seen that a crucial state in this over-all process of abstraction is the setting
aside of certain parts of what appears in the “inner show” as not directly representing
immediate perception. These are what we imagine, conceive, symbolize, think about, etc. 
These  parts  are  then  seen  to  be  related  to  immediate  perception  as  abstractions, 
representing the general structural features of this perception, much as a map represents 
the terrain of which it is a map.1 However, as has been pointed out in Section A-2, a
young child does not readily distinguish between what has been imagined and what is seen
in response to immediate perception. In this way, there arises the habit of confusing our
abstract conceptual “maps” with reality itself, and of not noticing that they are only maps.
 When the child grows older he is able to avoid this confusion in superficial problems,
but when it comes to fundamental concepts, such as space, time, causality, etc., it is much
more difficult to do so. As a result, the adult continues the habit of looking, as it were, at 
his comparatively abstract conceptual maps, and seeing them as if they were inherent in
the nature of things, rather than understanding that they are higher-level abstractions, hav-
ing only a kind of structural similarity to what has been found to be invariant in lower 
levels. It is this confusion, based on habits of very long standing, which makes a clear 
discussion of such fundamental problems so difficult.
We can perhaps best illustrate these notions with the aid of a simple example. Suppose 
that we are looking at a circular disk. Now its immediate appearance to our eyes will be
that of an ellipse, corresponding to its projection on the retina of the eyes (as would, for 
example,  be  portrayed  by  an  artist,  who  was  trying  to  draw  it  in  perspective). 
Nevertheless, we know that it is really a circle. What is the basis of this knowledge?
1 See also Chapter 29, where a similar role has been suggested for the Minkowski diagram in
physics.
Appendix: Physics and Perception

167
What actually happens is, as we have indicated earlier, that the eye, the head, the body,
etc., are always moving. In these movements the appearance of the disk is always
changing, undergoing in fact a series of projective transformations that are related in a
definite way to the movements in question. By various means (some of which are
discussed in Section A-3) the brain is able to abstract what is invariant in all this
movement, change of perspective, etc. This abstraction, expressed in terms of the notion
that a circular object accounts for all the changing views of it, is the basis of the
“construction” of it that we perceive in the “inner show.” The “hypothesis” that this
object is really a circle is then further probed and tested in subsequent ways of coming in
contact with it perceptually, and it is retained as long as it stands up to such probing and
testing.
But the realization that the perceived object is a circle depends also on knowledge
going beyond the level of immediate perception. Thus from early childhood a person has
learned to imagine looking straight at the object in a perpendicular direction, and seeing
its circular shape (as well as feeling it to be circular when his hands grasp it). He may
also have learned further to imagine himself represented as a point on a diagram, and to
follow the course of the light rays from the circle to his point of perspective, thus being
able to see how the circular shape is transformed into an elliptical appearance. If he has
been further educated, he can go to a still higher level of abstraction, by mathematically
calculating the correct shape of the disk, from a knowledge of its appearance in several
views and from a knowledge of the relationship of the observer to the disk in all of these
views (distance, etc.). In carrying out this calculation he will do consciously on a higher
level of abstraction what his brain does spontaneously on a lower level, i.e., to find a
single structure that accounts for what is invariant in our changing relationships with the
object under discussion.
We see then that there is no sharp break between the abstractions of immediate
perception and those which constitute our knowledge, even if we carry this knowledge to
the  highest  levels  reached  by  science  and  mathematics.  From  the  very  first,  our
immediate  perceptions  express  a  “construction”  in  an  “inner  show,”  based  on  a
preconscious abstraction of what is invariant in, or active process of coming into contact
with, our environment. Each higher level of abstraction repeats a similar process of
discovery of what is invariant in lower levels, which is then represented in the form of a
picture, an image, a symbolic structure of words and formulas, etc. These higher-level
abstractions then contribute to shaping the general structure of those at lower levels, even
coming down to that of immediate perception. So between all the levels of abstraction
there is a continual two-way interaction.
Consider, for example, the experience of looking out at the night sky. Ancient man
abstracted from the stars the patterns of animals, men, and gods, and thereafter was
unable to look at the sky without seeing such entities in it. Modern man knows that what
is really behind this view is an immeasurable universe of stars, galaxies, galaxies of
galaxies, etc., and that each person, having a particular place in this universe, obtains a
certain perspective on it, which is what is seen in the night sky. Such a man does not see
animals, gods, etc., in the sky, but he sees an immense universe there. But even the view
of modern science is probably true only in a certain domain. So future man may form a
very different notion of the invariant totality that is behind our view of the night sky, in
which present notions will perhaps be seen as a simplification, approximation, and
limiting case, but actually very far from being completely true. Can we not say then that
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

168 
at every stage man was extending his perception of the night sky, going from one level of 
abstraction to another, and in each stage thus being led to hypotheses on what is invariant, 
which are able to stand up better to further tests, probings, etc.? But if this is the case, 
then the most abstract and general scientific investigations are natural extensions of the 
very same process by which the young child learns to come into perceptual contact with 
his environment.
As we have pointed out on several occasions (e.g., in the discussion of Piaget’s work in 
Section  A-2  and  of  the  perception  of  movement  in  Section  A-3)  one  of  the  basic 
problems that has to be solved in every act of perception is that of taking into account the 
special point of view and perspective of the observer. The solution of this problem 
depends essentially on the use of a number of levels of abstraction, all properly related to 
each other. Thus a person not only perceives the immediate elliptical appearance of the 
disk in front of him. He can also perceive the changes in appearance of the disk, which 
result from certain movements which he himself actively undertakes. From these changes 
his brain is able to abstract information about his relationship to the disk (e.g., how far 
away it is). The essential point here is that through many levels of abstraction, all going 
on simultaneously in the mind, it is possible to perceive not only a projection of the 
object of interest but also the relationship of the observer to the object in question. From 
this it is always possible in principle to obtain an invariant notion as to what is actually 
going on. This is represented in a higher level of abstraction, for example, by imagining 
space containing the disk and the observer himself, in which both are represented in their 
proper relationships. When a person says that the object is really circular, he is then 
evidently not referring to an immediate sensation of the shape of the object but to this 
extended process of abstraction, the essential results of which are represented in this 
imagined space, containing both the object and himself.
A very similar problem arises in science. Here, the hands, body, and sense organs of the 
observer are generally, in effect, extended by means of suitable instruments, which are in 
certain ways more sensitive, more powerful, more accurate, as well as capable of new 
modes of making contact with the world. But in the essential point that the observer is 
actively probing and testing his environment, the situation is very similartowhat it is in 
immediate perception, unaided by such instruments.
In such tests there is always some observable response to this probing and testing; and 
it is the relationship of variations in this response to known variations in the state of the 
instruments that constitutes the relevant information in what is observed (just as happens 
directly with the sense organs themselves).
As in the case of immediate perception, however, such an observation has very little 
significance until one knows the relationship of the instrument to the field that is under 
observation.  It  is  possible  to  know  this  relationship  with  the  aid  of  a  series  of 
abstractions. Thus in any experiment one not only knows the observed result; one knows 
the structure of the instrument, its mode of functioning, etc., all of which has been found 
out with the aid of earlier observations and actions of many kinds. In other words, in each 
process of observation there is always implicit an observation of the observing instrument 
itself,  carried  out  in  terms  of  different  levels  of  conceptual  abstractions.  But  to 
understand  the  observation  one  always  needs  certain  modes  of  thinking  about  the 
problem, in which the instrument and what is observed are represented together, so that 
one can see “a total picture” in which an invariant field of what is being studied stands in 
a certain relationship to the instrument, this relationship determining, as it were, how
what is in the field “projects” into some observable response of the instrument.
Appendix: Physics and Perception

169
In Chapter 29 we have already called attention to a special case of the problem 
discussed above. Thus, in the theory of relativity one uses the Minkowski diagram, in
which  one  can  in  principle  represent  all  the  events  that  happen  in  the  whole  of 
space-time. However, each example of such a diagram must contain a line corresponding
to the world line of the observer whose results are under discussion. This is usually
represented by the axis of the diagram. Then, if we wish to discuss the results of another
observer, we must include in the diagram a representation of his world line. In a similar
way  we  must  choose  a  point  to  represent  the  place  and  time  which  determine  the
perspective of a given observation. By taking all of this into account we are able, from
the response of the observing instruments (which is relative to their speed, time and place
of functioning, etc.), to calculate the invariant properties of what is observed, in such a 
way that the different results of different observers are explained by their differing 
relationships to the process under investigation. It can be seen then that relativity theory
approaches the universe in a way very similar to that in which a person approaches his 
environment in immediate perception. In both these fields all that is observed is based on
the abstraction of what is invariant as seen in various movements, from various points of
view,  perspectives,  frames  of  reference,  etc.  And  in  both  the  invariant  is  finally 
understood with the aid of various hypotheses, expressed in terms of higher levels of
abstraction, which serve as a kind of “map,” having an order, pattern, and structure 
similar to that of what is being observed.
The tendency for the use of such maps to become habitual is also common to scientific
investigation and to immediate perception. When this happens a person’s thinking is 
limited to what can fit into such maps, because he thinks that they contain all that can
possibly  happen,  in  every  condition  and  domain  of  experience.  For  example,  the
common-sense  notion  of  simultaneity  of  all  that  is  co-present  in  our  immediate
perceptions is abstracted into the Newtonian concept of absolute time, with the result that 
it seems incomprehensible that two twins who are accelerated in different ways and then 
meet may experience different amounts of time (see Chapter 28). But in Section A-3, we 
saw that the notion of a single unique time order does not seem to apply without
confusion in the field of our immediate perceptions either. The main reason that this has
been so little noticed is probably our habit of taking seriously only what fits into our 
habitual perception of all that happens, both inwardly and outwardly, as being in such a
unique and universal time order.
It may be remarked in passing that in the quantum theory the point of view described 
above is carried even further. The reason is basically the indivisibility of the quantum of
action, which implies that when we observe something very precisely at the atomic level,
it is found that there must be an irreducible disturbance of the observed system by the 
quanta needed for such an observation (the fact behind the derivation of Heisenberg’s
famous uncertainty principle). On the large-scale level the effects of these quanta can be
neglected.  Therefore,  although  the  observer  must  engage  in  active  movements  and
probings  in  order  to  perceive  anything  whatsoever,  he  can  in  principle  (at  least  in
largescale optical perception) refrain from significantly disturbing what he is looking at.
At the quantum level of accuracy, however, the situation is different. Here, the light
quanta may be compared to a blind man’s fingers, which can give information about an 
object only if they move and disturb the latter. The blind man is nevertheless able to 
abstract certain invariant properties of the object (e.g., size and shape), but in doing this,
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

170 
his brain spontaneously takes into account the movement which his perceptual operations
impart to the object. Similarly, the physicist is still able to abstract certain invariant
properties of atoms, electrons, protons, etc. (e.g., charge, mass, spin, etc.); but in so doing
he must consciously take into account the operations involved in his observation process
in a similar way. (To discuss this point in detail is, of course, beyond the scope of the
present work; but these questions will be treated in subsequent publications.)
A-5. THE ROLE OF PERCEPTION IN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
In the previous discussion we have seen the close similarity between our modes of
immediate perception of the world and our modes of approach to it in modern scientific
investigations. We shall now go on to consider directly the centrally perceptual character
of scientific research, which we suggested at the beginning of Section A-4.
While  man’s  scientific  instruments  do  constitute,  as  we  have  seen,  an  effective
extension of his body and his sense organs, there are no comparable external structures
that substitute for the inward side of the perceptive process (in which the invariant
features of what has been experienced are presented in the “inner show”). Thus, it is up to
the scientist himself to be aware of contradictions between his hypotheses and what he
observes, to be sensitive to new relationships in what he observes, and to put forth
conjectures  or  hypotheses,  which  explain  the  known  facts,  embodying  these  new
relationships, and have additional implications with regard to what is as yet unknown, so
that they can be tested in further experiments and observations. So there is always finally
a stage where an essentially perceptual process is needed in scientific research—a
process taking place within the scientist himself.
The importance of the perceptual stage tends to be underemphasized, however, because
scientists pay attention mostly to the next stage, in which hypotheses that have withstood
a  number  of  tests  are  incorporated  into  the  body  of  currently  accepted  scientific
knowledge. In effect they are thus led to suppose the essential activity of the scientist is
as the accumulation of verified knowledge, toward which goal all other activities of the
scientist are ultimately directed.
If such knowledge could constitute a set of absolute truths, then it would make at least
some kind of sense to regard its accumulation as the main purpose of science. As we have
seen, however, it is the fate of all theories eventually to be falsified, so that they are
relative truths, adequate in certain domains, including what has already been observed,
along with some as yet further unknown region that can be delimited, to some extent at
least, in future experiments and observations. But if this is the case then the accumulation
of knowledge cannot be regarded as the essential purpose of scientific research, simply
because the validity of all knowledge is relative to something that is not in the knowledge
itself. So one will not be able to see what scientific research is really about without taking
into account what it is to which even established and well-tested scientific knowledge
must continually be further related, if we are to be able to discuss its (necessarily
incompletely known) domain of validity.
There is also a similar relative validity of the knowledge that we gain in immediate
perception. But in this field the reason for this is fairly evident. Indeed, the world is so
vast and has so much that is unknown within it that we are not tempted to suppose that
Appendix: Physics and Perception

171
what we learn from immediate perception is a set of absolute truths, the implications of
which could be expected to be valid in unlimited domains of future experience. Rather,
we realize that immediate perception is actually a means of remaining in a kind of contact
with a certain segment of the world, in such a way that we can be aware of the general
structure of that segment, from moment to moment, if we carry out the process of
perception properly. In this contact we are satisfied if we are able to keep up with what
we see and perhaps, in some respects, get a little ahead of it (e.g., in driving an
automobile, we can, to a certain extent, anticipate the movements of other automobiles,
people, the turns in the road, etc.). Thus, in the process of immediate perception, one
obtains a kind of knowledge, the implications of which are valid in the moment of contact
and for some unpredictable period beyond this moment. The major significance of past
knowledge of this kind is then in its implications for present and future perceptions,
rather than in the accumulation of a store of truths, considered to be absolute.
Thus our knowledge of what happened yesterday is in itself of little significance
because yesterday is gone and will never return. This knowledge will be significant,
however, to the extent that its implications and the inferences that can be drawn from it
may be valid today or at some later date.
Of course, scientific theories evidently have much broader domains of validity of their
predictive inferences than do the “hypotheses” that arise in immediate perception (these
broader domains being purchased, however, at the expense of the need to operate only at
very high levels of abstraction). Because the domain of validity is so broad, it often takes
a long time to demonstrate its limits. Nevertheless, what happens in scientific research is,
in regard to the problem under discussion, not fundamentally different from what happens
in immediate perception. For in science too the totality of the universe is too much to be
grasped definitively in any form of knowledge, not only because it is so vast and
immeasurable, but even more because in its many levels, domains, and aspects it contains
an inexhaustible variety of structures, which escape any given conceptual “net” that we
may use in trying to express their order and pattern. Therefore, as in the field of
immediate perception, our knowledge is adequate for an original domain of contact with
the world, extending in an unpredictable way into some further domains. Since the goal
of obtaining absolutely valid knowledge has no relevance in such a situation, we are led
to suggest that scientific research is basically to be regarded as a mode of extending
man’s perceptual contact with the world, and that the main significance of scientific
knowledge is (as happens in immediate perception) that it is an adjunct to this process.
The basically perceptual character of scientific research shows up most strongly when
the time comes to understand new facts, as distinct from merely accumulating further
knowledge. Everyone has experienced such a process on various occasions in his life.
Suppose something unfamiliar is being explained (e.g., a theorem in geometry). At first a
person is able to take in only various bits of knowledge, the relationship of which is not
yet clear. But at a certain stage, in a very rapid process often described as “click” or as a
“flash,” he understands what is being explained. When this happens he says “I see,”
indicating the basically perceptual character of such a process. (Of course, he does not
see with optical vision but rather, as it were, with the “mind’s eye.”) But what is it that he
sees? What he perceives is a new total structure in terms of which the older items of
knowledge all fall into their proper places, naturally related, while many new and
unsuspected relationships suddenly come into view. Later, to preserve this understanding,
to communicate it to other people, to apply it, or to test its validity, he may translate it
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

172 
into words, formulas, diagrams, etc. But initially it seems to be a single act, in which older
structures are set aside and a new structure comes into being in the mind.
When the need arises to develop new theories, the basically new step is generally an act
or a series of acts of understanding. Previous to such understanding, scientists are facing
a set of problems, to which the older theories give rise, when applied in new domains.
This  process  eventually  leads  to  an  awareness  of  contradictions,  confusions,  and
ambiguities in the older theories, when applied in the new problems. Then if the scientist
is ready to set aside older notions his mind may become sensitive to new relationships in
terms of which facts, both old and new, may be seen. Out of this sensitivity develops a
new understanding, i.e., the expression of the old facts in terms of a new structure, having
further implications going beyond those of the older points of view.
Of course, we must not suppose that all such acts of understanding lead immediately to
correct theories. Far from it, many of them are found to be incapable of solving the basic
problems under consideration. Hence each such understanding must be tested to see what
the domain of validity actually is. To do this, it is necessary logically to work out the
implications of the new structure of ideas that has emerged into the mind. Nevertheless,
as important as these latter steps are, they all depend on the essentially creative acts of
understanding, without which science would eventually either stop developing or else
stagnate in a bounded domain that never went beyond some limited circle of ideas.
There seems to be no limit to the possibility of the human mind for developing new
structures in the way described above. And it is this possibility that seems to be behind
our ability to put forth new theories and concepts, which lead to knowledge that goes
beyond the facts that are accessible at the time when the theories are first developed. It
should be recalled that this possibility exists as much in immediate perception as in
scientific research, since very often what is constructed in the “inner show” leads, as we
have seen earlier, to many correct predictive inferences for future perceptions. It is
evident that such an ability cannot be due merely to some sort of mechanism that
randomly puts forth “hypotheses” until one of them is confirmed. Rather, for reasons that
are as yet not known, the human mind in its general process of perception, whether on the
immediate level or on the highest level involved in understanding, can create structures
that have a remarkably good chance of being correct in domains going beyond that on
which the evidence for them is founded. On the basis of this possibility, the process of
“trial and error” can efficiently weed out those structures that are inappropriate. At the
same time it can help provide material, the criticism of which leads to a fresh act of
understanding or perception, in which yet newer structures are put forth which are
generally likely to have a broader domain of validity and better correspondence to the
facts than the earlier ones had.
To sum up, the essential point is that through perception we are always in a process of
coming into contact with the world, in such a way that we can be aware of the general
structure of the segment with which we have been in contact. Science may then be
regarded as a means of establishing new kinds of contacts with the world, in new
domains, in new levels, with the aid of different instruments, etc. But these contacts
would mean very little without the act of understanding, which corresponds on a very
high level to that process by which what has been invariant is presented in terms of
structure in the “inner show” of immediate perception. It need then no longer be puzzling
that science does not lead to knowledge of an absolute truth. For the knowledge supplied
by science is (like all other knowledge) basically an expression of the structure that has
Appendix: Physics and Perception

173
been revealed in our process of coming from moment to moment into contact with a world
the totality of which is beyond our ability to grasp in terms of any given sets of percepts,
ideas, concepts, notions, etc. Nevertheless, we can obtain a fairly good grasp of that with
which we have thus far been in contact, which is also valid in some domain, either large
or small, beyond what is based on this contact. By remaining alert to contradictions and
sensitive to new relationships, thus permitting the growth of a fresh understanding, we
can keep up with our contact with the world, and in some ways we can anticipate what is
coming later.
In science this process takes place at a very high level of abstraction, on a scale of time
involving years. In immediate perception it occurs on a lower level of abstraction, and it
is very rapid. In science the process depends strongly on collective work, involving
contributions of many people, and in immediate perception it is largely individual. But
fundamentally both can be regarded as limiting cases of one over-all process, of a
generalized kind of perception, in which no absolute knowledge is to be encountered.
Appendix: Physics and Perception 

INDEX
Aberration of light, 18
Absolute time and space, 48–49
(see also Time)
Absolute truth (see Truth)
Abstraction in perception, 219–223
Addition of velocities, Galilean law, 66
relativistic law, 67
Annihilation and creation of particles, 111
Aristotle, doctrines of, 4
principles of, 5
Atomic constitution of matter and the ether (see Ether)
Atomic theory, 111
Causality
compatible with relativity, 156
definition of, 155–156
impossible with signals faster than light, 156–166
irrelevant for events in absolute elsewhere, 159
Chronological order, 50
Clock rates, relativity of, 59–60
Clock rates according to Lorentz transformation (see Lorentz)
Conception of mass, origin of (see Mass)
Concepts as maps expressing relative invariance, 195
Conservation of energy, 82, 92, 100
of mass, 82, 100
of matter, concept of, 195
of momentum, 82
of number of objects, concept of, 193–196
Contraction according to Lorentz transformation (see Lorentz),
Coordinates, relational notion of, 48–51
Copernican theory, 6
Decay of mesons as natural clocks, 76–77
(see also Time)
Ditchburn, 198–199
Domains of truth of theories (see Theories)
Doppler shift of light emitted by a moving body, 77–80
relativistic, 80
Double star observations, 20
Effective mass of radiant energy (see Mass)
Einstein
basic hypothesis of, 55
point of departure for theories of, 54–55
railway train experiment, 55–57

Index  175
Electrical forces as states of stress and strain in the ether (see Ether)
Elementary particles, structure of, 119–120
Energy
conservation in a collection of bodies, 92, 100
deduction of relativistic formula, 84–90
equivalence with mass, 91, 93, 108, 110
of inward and outward movement, 116
kinetic, 92
rest, 92
transformations, 115
Equivalence of mass and energy (see Mass and Energy)
Ether
according to Lorentz theory, 23
and atomic constitution of matter, 24
drag, 18
hypothesis of, 11, 14, 17
and stresses and strains representing electrical forces, 24
Events, geometry of, 146–150
and processes replacing objects in relativity theory 148
(see also Minkowski diagram)
Experimental confirmation of relativity theory (see Relativity)
Falsifiability of theories (see Theories)
Falsification and confirmation of theories (see Theories)
Fizeau’s method of measuring the speed of light, 12, 19, 107
Frames of reference
for expression of space and time concepts, 42–47
inertial, 7
space, 44–46
space and time, 48
time, 46–47
Galileo, laws of, 6
transformation of, 8
(see also Laws)
Gibson, 197, 201, 204, 207
Gravitational mass (see Mass)
Hebb, 212
Held, 201
Hubel, 199, 200
Hyperbolic rotations in relativity, 149
Identification of things, 112
Inertia, law of (see Laws)
“Inertial frame” of coordinates (see Frames of reference)
Inertial mass (see Mass)
Invariance of speed of light under Lorentz transformation (see Lorentz)

176  Index
Kant, 213–214
K calculus, 133–145
Lorentz transformation in, 141
Laws
of addition of velocities in relativity, 67
Copernican, 6
of Galileo, 6
of inertia, 7
of Lorentz, 23–26
of Maxwell, 11
of Newton, relativistic, 100–105
of Newton in terms of momentum, 81
relational conception of, 4–9
Laws of physics failure of in Newton’s equations, 72
invariance of, 71
in relation to light cones, 150–154
relational concept of, 4–9
Length, relativity of, 58–59
Light (see Speed of light)
Lodge’s experiment, 18
Lorentz
contraction, 25, 64, 106
equations, invariance of, 108
theory of clocks, 26–30, 64
theory of electrons, 23–26
theory of ether, 23
theory of invariance of speed of light, 38, 62
theory of simultaneity, 31
theory of synchronization of clocks, 32
transformation, 36–39, 106
transformation in Einstein’s theory, 61–63
transformation in K calculus, 141
transformation in vector notation, 69
Mapping of percepts in concepts in young children, 192
Mass
conservation of, 82, 100
effective, 27
electromagnetic, 29
as energy of inward and outward movement, 116–117
and equivalence with energy, 91, 93, 108, 110
as explained by internal movement, 93, 117
gravitational aspect of, 113–114
inertial aspect of, 112–113
mechanical, 27
observed, 27
origin of conception of, 110–114
of radiation, effective, 95
relativistic formula for, 84–90

Index  177
at rest, as equal to zero at speed of light, 118
rest, invariance of, 98
Maxwell, equations of (see Laws)
Measurements
in Lorentz theory, 40–1
as relationships of phenomena to instruments, 54
with rulers, 43
of time, 44
Michelson and Morley experiment, 14, 25, 107
Minkowski diagram, 131–133
events in, 131
as a map of events, 180–184
not a kind of arena, 173–175
principle of relativity in terms of K calculus, 133–145
as a reconstruction, 174–180
and the role of the observer, 182–184
world line in, 132
Momentum, conservation of, 82
deduction of relativistic formula, 88
Newton’s laws of motion, 6, 7
relativistic form, 160
(see also Laws)
Newton’s laws in terms of the momentum, 81
(see also Laws)
Nuclear transformations, 93
Observer as part of universe, 177
Paradox of “twins” in relativity, 165–167
Particles, annihilation of, 93
Perception
and abstraction, 219–223
as active process, 197–207
as attunement, 210–212
breakdown of, 212–213
as construction, 203
as construction of hypotheses, 215–217
as extended by science, 223–224, 230
as mapping, 225
optical, 198–207
role of in scientific research, 226–227
and its similarity to scientific research, 218–226
tactile, 197–198
in terms of structure, 207–215
of time, 208–211
and understanding in science, 228–229
Piaget’s observations on intelligence of children, 187–197
Platt, 199
Popper’s thesis (see Falsifiability of theories)

178  Index
Principle of relativity (see Relativity)
Principle of relativity in Minkowski diagram (see Minkowski diagram)
Proper time (see Time)
Ptolemaic theory, 5
Recognition, process of, 188–189
Reflexes
circular, 188
coordination of, 188–189
functional, 187–188
Relational conception of the laws of physics (see Laws of physics)
Relationships of physical phenomena to suitable measuring instruments (see Measurements)
Relative invariance
domain of 121
instead of permanence of things, 111–112
in physics, 185–186
in perception, 186
of properties of matter, 120–122
Relative truth of theories (see Theories)
Relativity
of chronological time compared with psychological time, 172
confirmation of theory of, 106–109
and conservation laws, 89
in electrodynamics, 70
general, 55, 166–170
in laws of electrodynamics and optics, 10
in older laws of physics, 70
in pre-Einsteinian laws of physics, 1, 4–10
principle of, 8, 73–74, 106, 133
special, 55
Rest mass explained as inward movement, 117
(see also Mass)
Rest mass, invariance of (see Mass)
Science, as an essentially
perceptual process, 226
as an extension of perception, 223–224, 230
Signal velocity, speed of light as limit on, 57
Simultaneity
ambiguity of in relativity, 107
its ambiguity in Lorentz theory, 32, 52
failure of intuitive notions of, 167–169
meaning of, 53
as nonabsolute in Einstein’s theory, 57
nonequivalence with co-presence, 54
Space
absolute, 8, 48
in common sense, 49
coordinates as relationships, 61
infants notions of, 190–191

Index  179
in Kant’s view, 214–215
measurements, 43
new concepts of, 44–50
relativity of, 58–59
and time as continuum, 150
unification with time in relativity, 149
Speed of light
as effectively infinite, 47
as finite, 47
invariance of, 62
invariance in Lorentz theory, 38
as limit on signal velocity, 57, 68
measured by Fizeau’s method, 12, 19, 107
in running water, 75
Speed of light as maximum
possible velocity of motion of objects, 68, 155–162
“System velocity,” general, 83–84
Theories
domains of truth of, 126
falsifiability of, 123–125, 218
falsification and confirmation of, 128
(see also Truth)
relative truth of, 127
Time
absolute, 9, 48, 50
ambiguity in notions of, 54
concept of, 50
coordinates as relationships, 61
differences, 139
frame of reference, 46–47
infants notions of, 190–191
in Kant’s view, 214–215
measured by meson decay, 76–77
measured by moving clock, 107
measurements, 44
perception of, 208–211
proper, 163–164
relativity of, 59–60
unification with space in relativity, 149
Transformation
between systems of space coordinates, 45
Galilean, 8
laws for electric and magnetic fields, 104
laws for energy and momentum, 96–99
nuclear, 93
Truth, absolute, 125–130
dynamic apprehension of, 130

180  Index
Understanding in science as a form of perception (see Perception)
Unification of coordinates in geometry, 148
of space and time in relativity, 149
Velocity of light in running water (see Light)
Wiesel, 199, 200
World line in Minkowski diagram (see Minkowskidiagram)
Zero rest mass, 118
(see also Mass)

