
CAUSALITY AND CHANCE 
IN MODERN PHYSICS 
BY 
DAVID BOHM 
Foreword by 
LOUIS DE BROGLIE 
New edition with new Preface 
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL 
LONDON, MELBOURNE AND HENLEY 

F1nt puhlishecl in 1957 by Rvwh-dge & Kega11 Paul pie 
NL'w edition with new Preface published in 1984 by 
Rowlcdge & Kegan Puul pie, 39 Store Street, 
Lomlon WCI E 7DD, England 
46../ St Kilda Ruud, Melbourne,, 
Victoria 3004, Australia and 
Broadway House, Newtown Road, 
Jfco11Jcy-011-Thames, Oxon RG9 1 EN, England 
Printed in Great Britain by 
St Edmundsbury Press, Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk 
© by Rowh•clge & Kega11 Paul Ltd. 
Sew Prefac(' © Dai·id Bohm 1984 
So part of this book may he re1>rod11n·d in 
a11y form witliout J'L'rmissicm from t/z(' 
J'lllilishl'r, 1•xc1•pt for tilt• c111otatio11 of 
bri1j. p11s.mg1·s in aitici.m1 
British Library Catalog11i11g in Publication Dara 
Bohm. /)cn·ic/ 
< '1111.\<Zl1tr and cl11111c1• i11 moclan physics. 
I. l'hnics-J>Jiilo.rnphv 
/. J'itfr 
530'.0l 
QC6 
ISBN 0-7 /02-0031-5 

CONTENTS 
PREFACE TO NEW EDITION 
FOREWORD BY LOUIS DE BROGLIE 
I CAUSALITY AND CHANCE IN NATURAL 
LAW 
page 1x 
XIII 
I Introduction 
I 
2 Causality in Natural Processes 
4 
3 Association l'. Causal Connection 
5 
4 Significant Causes in a Given Context 
7 
5 More General Criteria for Causal Relationships 
IO 
6 Causal Laws and the Properties of Things 
12 
7 One-to- Many and Many-to-One Causal 
Relationships 
16 
8 Contingency, Chance, and Statistical Law 
20 
9 The Theory of Probability 
25 
10 General Considerations on the Laws of Nature 
28 
11 Conclusion 
32 
II CAUSALITY AND CHANCE IN CLASSICAL 
PHYSICS: THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
MECHANISM 
1 Introduction 
:! Classical Yiechanics 
3 Tt.e Pt::oኈo;:hy of ኇ1ech:rnism 
.!. ቾቿ-, -e·. : -; ::-. Ѭ:-_: ѭ :.·.;.:. :· ѫ- :' = ች{ Ѫ :--.::.::i ! ѩ ::-_ cኀኁ ኂኃኄ:al 
?:-:.ኅ.ኆ! 
5 Wavê Theory of Light 
6 Field Theory 
7 On the Question of What is the Nature of the 
Electromagnetic Field 
8 Field Theories and Mechanism 
9 Molecular Theory of Heat and the Kinetic 
Theory of Gases 
v 
34 
34 
3 fj 
4( I 
41 
43 
45 
47 


PREFACE TO NEW EDITION 
More than twenty-five years have passed since this book was first 
published, and I have be:n asked to write a brief preface, 
surveying and evaluating what has come out of the ideas that are 
presented in it. 
The book begins with a discussion of causality and chance in 
natural law in general, which is followed by a more detailed 
explanation of how these categories manifest themselves in 
classical physics. What was particularly important in the develop­
ment of classical physics was that it led to the notion that the 
universe may be compared to a gigantic mechanism. As brought 
out in the book, however, more recent developments in physics, 
notably relativity and quantum theory, do not fit in with such a 
mechanistic philosophy. Rather, they very strongly suggest the 
need for 
a radically 
new over-all approach, 
going 
beyond 
mechanism. The usual interpretation of the quantum theory docs 
not give a clear idea of how far-reaching is this change, because it 
functions solely as a mathematical algorithm, a set of rules, 
permitting only the calculation of the probable results of a 
statistical ensemble of similar measurements. In Chapter IV, an 
alternative interpretation is discussed, in which the electron (for 
example) is assumed to be a particle that is always accompanied by 
a new kind of wave field. Although in the form first proposed, this 
interpretation gives the same predictions for all experimental 
results as does the usual one, it provides new insights into the 
physical meaning of the quantum theory. It is thus able to bring 
out in a striking way how far this theory has actually gone from the 
mechanistic notions underlying classical physics. 
This interpretation in terms of particle plus field was regarded, 
however, as furnishing only a provisional mode of understanding 
the quantum theory, which should serve as a point of departure 
implying the possibility of further new kinds of extension of the 
theory. How well then have subsequent developments borne out 
this aim? In my view, a great deal has come out of this line of 
thought, especially with regard to the development of further new 
ix 

Preface to New Edition 
ways of thinking of the relationship of whole and parts. that are 
implied in this approach. 
The first important step in this development was to study in 
more detail just what is implied in the suggested new interpre­
tation of the quantum theory, beginning with the one-body 
system1 and going into the many-body system.2•3 In these studies 
(especially 
those 
involving 
the 
working 
out 
of 
detailed 
trajectories) it became clear that even the one-body system has a 
basically non-mechanical feature, in the sense that it and its 
environment have to be understood as an u11divided whole, in 
which the usual classical analysis into system plus environment, 
considered as separately external, iƻ no longer applicable. This 
wholeness becomes even more evident in the many-body system, 
in which there is, in general, a non-local interaction between all 
the constituent particles, which does not necessarily fall off when 
these particles are distant from each other. What is yet more 
striking is that the inter-relationships of the parts (or sub-wholes) 
within a system depends crucially on the state of the whole, in a 
way that is not expressible in terms of properties of the parts 
alone.4 Indeed, the parts are organized in ways that flow out of the 
whole. The usual mechanistic notion that the organization. and 
indeed. the entire behaviour. of the whole derives solely from the 
parts and their predetermined inter-relationships thus breaks 
down. 
The law of the whole can be shown to imply that at the ordinary 
level of experience (as well as at that covered by classical physics). 
the whole falls approximately into a structure of relatively 
independent sub-wholes, interacting more or less externally and 
mechanically. Nevertheless, in a more accurate and more funda­
mental description, quantum wholeness and non-locality are seen 
to be the major factors. This is brought out especially in the 
experiment of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, which emphasizes 
these features in a very clear way. Various refinements and 
modifications of this experiment have been developed, and with 
the aid of the well-known Bell Inequality. a very accurate test for 
non-locality has been made possible. A number of experiments, 
leading to the latest one by. Aspect,5 strongly confirm the 
predictions of the quantum theory. and indicate that classical 
notions of locality and analysability have broken down. The new 
interpretation of the quantum theory gives a clear and simple 
intuitively understandable account of how a quantum system can 
be an undivided whole, in which non-local connections of the kind 
described above may take place. 
This quality of indivisible wholeness and non-locality also gives 
x 

Preface to New Edition 
insight into another paradoxical feature of the quantum theory. 
the "collapse of the wave function", which is, in the usual 
interpretation, said to take place in a measurement.6 By applying 
this interpretation to a measurement process, one sees that no 
such "collapse" is needed. In this way, it is possible to understand 
the universe as a unique and independent actuality, which includes 
both observer and observed. Moreover, one obtains a new 
perspective on the question of whether or not the universe is 
completely determinate. Each object, event, process, etc. is 
determined in principle, 
but ultimately, 
the ground of this 
determination is the undivided totality of the universe itself. The 
latter is indeed self-determined. Nevertheless, one can see that 
there is no mechanistic determinism of the parts, according to 
relationships that would be predetermined apart from the state of 
the whole. 
Indeed, when this interpretation is extended to field theories,7 
not only the inter-relationships of the parts, but also their very 
existence is seen to flow out of the law of the whole. There is 
therefore nothing left of the classical scheme, in which the whole is 
derived from pre-existent parts related in pre-determined ways. 
Rather, what we have is reminiscent of the relationship of whole 
and parts in an organism, in which each organ grows and sustains 
itself in a way that depends crucially on the whole. 
An additional development carrying the notion of wholeness 
even further is that of the implicate (or enfolded) order. 8 (To give 
some idea of the meaning of the word "enfold" in this context, we 
can usefully consider how the points of contact made by folds in a 
sheet of paper may contain the essential relationships of the total 
pattern displayed when the sheet is unfolded.) The proposal is that 
all the objects. entities, forms, etc. that appear an ordinary 
experience are enfolded in the over-all field, and that there is a 
constant movement of unfoldment and enfoldment, in which they 
arc created. sustained, and ultimately dissolved. In this way, each 
element is internally related to the whole, in the sense that the 
whole is actively enfolded in it. This means that the dynamic 
activity, internal and external, which is fundamental to what each 
part is, is based on its enfoldment of the entire universe. and 
therefore of all the other parts. One thus obtains a yet deeper 
understanding of the undivided wholeness of the universe, which 
makes possible an additional insight into the universe of this 
wholeness. 
Further investigations along these lines are now going on. In 
these investigations, the properties of space-time are regarded as 
unfolding from a deeper enfolded structure, in which the basic 
xi 

Preface to New Edition 
principles or order, arrangement, connection, and organization 
are quite different from those of ordinary geometry. New 
mathematical forms are being developed to deal with such 
structures in a precise way.9 This development goes even further 
beyond mechanism than do those described earlier. Indeed, it 
implies something close to the qualitative infinity of nature, as 
proposed in this book, but now we have an infinite whole, which, 
according to its own principles, determines a hierarchy of sub­
wholes, in such a way that each of them is relatively autonomous, 
independent, and stable. 
To sum up, then, the ideas proposed in this book have in fact 
served as a point of departure for further developments, which, a!' 
it were, unfold what was implicit in them. This development is still 
continuing to provide yet more insights into the deeper meaning of 
the quantum theory. And I feel that there is good reason to expect 
that such insights will lead, sooner or later, to further mathe­
matical proposals, that would make definite empirical predictions 
in new domains, beyond what can be covered by the present 
general form of the mathematical laws of the quantum 
theory. 
REFERENCES 
1 C. Philippidis, C. Dewdney, and B. Hiley, Nuovo Cimento, 
52B, 15 (1979). 
2 D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Foundations of Physics, 5, 93 (1975). 
3 D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Foundations of Physics, 12, 1001 (1982). 
4 D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Foundations of Physics, to be published. 
5 A. Aspect, Phys. Rev. 140, 1944 (1976). 
6 D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Foundations of Physics, to be 
published. 
7 Ibid. 
8 D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, London (1980). 
9 D. Bohm, P. Davies and B. Hiley, Preprint. 
xii 

FOREWORD 
By Louis de Broglie 
THOSE who have studied the development of modern physics know 
that the progress of our knowledge of microphysical phenomena 
has led them to adopt in their theoretical interpretation of these 
phenomena an entirely different attitude to that of classical physics. 
Whereas with the latter, it was possible to describe the course of 
natural events as evolving in accordance with causality in the frame­
work of space and time (or relativistic space-time), and thus to present 
clear and precise models to the physicist's imagination, quantum 
physics at present prevents any representations of this type and makes 
them quite impossible. It allows no more than theories based on 
purely abstract formulre, discrediting the idea of a causal evolution 
of atomic and corpuscular phenomena; it provides no more than 
laws of probability: it considers these laws of probability as having a 
primary character and constituting the ultimate knowable reality: it 
does not permit them to be explained as resulting from a causal 
evolution which works at a still deeper level in the physical world. 
We can reasonably accept that the attitude adopted for nearly 30 
years by theoretical quantum physicists is, at least in appearance, the 
exact counterpart of information which experiment has given us of 
the atomic world. At the level now reached by research in micro­
physics it is certain that the methods of measurement do not allow 
us to determine simultaneously all the magnitudes which would be 
necessary to obtain a picture of the classical type of corpuscles (this 
can be deduced from Heisenberg's uncertainty principle), and that 
the perturbations introduced by the measurement, which are im­
possible to eliminate, prevent us in general from predicting precisely 
the result which it will produce and allow only statistical predictions. 
The construction of purely probablistic formulre that all theoreticians 
use today was thus completely justified. However, the majority of 
them, often under the influence of preconceived ideas derived from 
positivist doctrine, have thought that they could go further and assert 
that the uncertain and incomplete character of the knowledge that ex­
periment at its present stage gives us about what really happens in 
micro physics is the result of a real indeterminacy of the physical states 
xiii 

Foreword 
and of their evolution. Such an extrapolation does not appear in any 
way to be justified. It is possible that looking into the future to a deeper 
level of physical reality we will be able to interpret the laws of prob­
ability and quantum physics as being the statistical results of the 
development of completely determined values of variables which are 
at present hidden from us. It may be that the powerful means we are 
beginning to use to break up the structure of the nucleus and to make 
new particles appear will give us one day a direct knowledge which 
we do not now have of this deeper level. To try to stop all attempts 
to pass beyond the present viewpoint of quantum physics could be 
very dangerous for the progress of science and would furthermore be 
contrary to the lessons we may learn from the history of science. 
This teaches us, in effect, that the actual state of our knowledge is 
always provisional and that there must be, beyond what is actually 
known, immense new regions to discover. Besides, quantum physics 
has found itself for several years tackling problems which it has not 
been able to solve and seems to have arrived at a dead end. This 
situation suggests strongly that an cff ort to modify the framework 
of ideas in which quantum physics has voluntarily wrapped itself 
would be valuable. 
One is glad to see that in the last few years there has been a 
development towards re-examining the basis of the present inter­
pretation of microphysics. The starting point of this movement was 
two articles published at the beginning of 1 952 by David Bohm in 
the Physical Review. A long time ago in an article in the Journal de 
Physique of May 1927 I put forward a causal interpretation of wave 
mechanics which I called the "theory of double solutions" but I 
abandoned it, discouraged by criticisms which this attempt roused. 
In his 1952 paper Professor Bohm has taken up certain ideas from 
this article and commenting and enlarging on them in a most in­
teresting way he has successfully developed important arguments in 
favour of a causal reinterpretation of quantum physics. Professor 
Bohm's paper has led me to take my old concepts up again, and with 
my young colleagues at the Institute, Henri Poincare, and in par­
ticular M. Jean-Pierre Vigier, we have been able to obtain certain 
encouraging results. M. Vigier working with Professor Bohm himself 
has developed an interesting interpretation of the statistical signifi­
cance of llf'i2 in wave mechanics. It seems desirable that in the next few 
years efforts should continue to be made in this direction. One can, 
it seems to me, hope that these efforts will be fruitful and will help to 
rescue quantum physics from the cul-de-sac where it is at the 
:noment. 
In order to show the legitimacy and also the necessity of such 
·itttempts, Professor Bohm has thought that the moment had come 
xiv 

Foreword 
to take up again in his researches the critical examination of the 
nature of physical theories and of interpretations which are suscep­
tible to explaining natural phenomena as fast as science progresses. 
He has compared the development of classical physics, where in 
succession the viewpoint of universal mechanism, and then of the 
general theory of fields, and then of statistical theories have appeared, 
one after the other, with the introduction by quantum physics of its 
own new conceptions. He has shrewdly and carefully analysed the 
idea of chance and has shown that it comes in at each stage in the 
progress of our knowledge, when we are not aware that we are at 
the brink of a deeper level of reality, which still eludes us. Convinced 
that theoretical physics has always led, and will always lead, to the 
discovery of deeper and deeper levels of the physical world, and that 
this process will continue without any limit, he has concluded that 
quantum physics has no right to consider its present concepts definitive, 
and that it cannot stop researchers imagining deeper domains of 
reality than those which it has already explored. 
I cannot give here a complete account of the thorough and fasci­
nating study which Professor Bohm has made. The reader will find a 
very elegant and suggestive analysis which will instruct him and 
make him think. No one is better qualified than Professor Bohm to 
write such a book, and it comes exactly at the right time. 
xv 


CHAPTER ONE 
Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
l. INTRODUCTION 
IN nature nothing remains constant. Everything is in a perpetual 
state of transformation, motion, and change. However, we discover 
that nothing_ simply _§urges _up ouĀ of _nothing without having anāĂ­
cederits that existed before. Likewise, nothing ever disappears with­
out a trace, in the sense that it gives rise to absolutely nothing existing 
at_lată! time_§. This general characteristic of the world can be ex­
pressed in terms of a principle which summarizes an enormous 
domain of diferent kinds of experience and which has never yet 
been contradicted in any observation or experiment, scientific or 
otherwise; namely, eve!)'thing _c._omes_ from_ other things and giyĄs 
rise to other things. 
This principle. is not yet a statement of the existence of causality 
in nature. Indeed, it is even more fundamental than is causality, for 
it is at the foundation of the possibility of our understanding nature 
in a rational way. 
To come to causality, the next step is then to note that as we study 
processes taking place under a wide range of conditions, we discover 
that inside of all of the complexity of change and transformation 
there are relationships that remain effectively constant. Thus, objects 
released in mid-air under a wide range of conditions quite consist­
ently fall to the ground. A closer study of the rate of fall shows that 
in so far as air resistance can be neglected, the acceleration is con­
stant; while stil more general relationships can be found that hold 
when air resistance has to be taken into account. Similarly, water put 
into a container quite invariably "seeks its own level" in a wide 
range of conditions. Examples of this kind can be multiplied without 
limit. From the extreme generality of this type of behaviour, one 
begins to consider the possibility that in the processes by which 
one thing comes out of others, the constancy of certain relationships 
inside a wide variety of transformations and changes is no coinci­
dence. Rather, we interpret this constancy as signifying that such 
l 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
relationships are necessary, in the sense that they could not be 
Otherwise, beȻause they are iJ!ȼerent al!d essȽntial Ⱦpects o(what 
1W.DgLɅ!<;.. The necessary relationships between objects, events, 
conditions, or other thmgs at a given tame anCithoseat -latertimes 
are then termed causal laws. 
-
--
--· 
--
At this point, however, we meet a new problem. For the necessity 
of a causal law is never absolute. For example, let us consider the 
law that an object released in mid-air will fall. This in fact is usually 
what happens. But if the object is a piece of paper, and if "by 
chance" there is a strong breeze blowing, it may rise. Thus, wȿe 
that one must conceive of the law of nature as necessary only if one 
ɀbstracts* from contingencies, representmg essentiallyinal!P-enaent 
factors which may exist outside the scope of things that can be 
treateɁJ?y the laws under consideration, and which. do not fofiow 
necessarily from anything that may be specified under the context 
of these laws. Such contingencies lead to chance.t Hence, we co_n­
ceive ofJ.P.!liɂY. o(a law of nature as conditional, since it applies 
only to the extent that these contiilgeriCies maybe neglecteo:-Tnrnany 
case5,tneya-re-indeed negligible. For examPJe;lnthe ·motion of the 
planets, contingencies are quite unimportant for all practical pur­
poses. But in most other applications, contingency is evidently much 
more important. Even where contingencies are important, however, 
one may abstractly regard the causal law as something that would 
apply if the contingencies were not acting. Very often we may for 
practical purposes isolate the process in which we are interested 
from contingencies with the aid of suitable experimental apparatus 
and thus verify that such an abstract concept of the necessity of the 
causal relationships is a correct one. 
Now, here it may be objected that if one took into account every­
thing in the universe, then the category of CQ!l-ɃingɄn_cy .1\'_0Ul!i disap­
ቻ,!', anaaflthat hapéenswoulcY-be seen to follow necessarily and 
inevitably. On the other hand, there is no known causai faw that 
realy-does this. It is true that in any given problem we may, by 
• Throughout this book, we shall use the word "abstract" in its literal 
sense of "taking out". When one abstracts something, one simplifies it 
by conceptually taking it out of its full context. Usually, this is done by 
taking out what is common to a wide variety of similar things. ·Thus, 
·abstractions tend to have a certain generality. Whether a particular 
abstraction is valid in a given situation then depends on the extent to 
which those factors that it ignores do in fact produce negligible effects in 
he problems of interest. 
t We are here taking the word "contingency" in its widest sense; 
'i."lmely, the opposite of necessity. Thus, contingency is that which could 
:>e otherwise. Chance wil then later be seen to be a certain very common 
·arm of contingency, while causality will likewise ·be seen to be a special 
ut very cor1mon form of necessity. 
2 

Introduction 
broadening the context of the processes under consideration, even 
find the laws which govern some of the contingencies. Thus, in the 
case of the piece of paper being blown around by the wind, we could 
eventually study the laws which determine how the wind will blow. 
But here we will meet new contingencies. For the behaviour of the 
wind depends on the locations of the clouds, on the temperatures 
of bodies of water and land, and even as shown in some of the latest 
meteorological studies, on beams of electrons and ultraviolet rays 
which may be emitted with unusual intensity during sunspots. This 
means, however, that we must now go into the laws governing the 
formation of clouds, of land masses, of bodies of water, and of the 
processes in which the sunspots originate. Thus far, no evidence has 
been discovered that the possibility of tracing causal relationship in 
this way will ever end. In other words, every real causal relation­
ship, .whl¿h_QÀcessÁr!ly operates 
__ in ቺ finifecontext,-has 0een-fouèd 
tq..J>Â- subject to contingenÅs arising o_utsidÃ- tÄ . context_in 
question.* 
To understand the relationship between causality and contingency 
that has actually been found thus far, we may compare these two 
categories to two opposite views of the same object. Each view is an 
abstraction which by itself gives an adequate idea of certain aspects 
of the object, but which will lead to erroneous results if we forget 
that it is, after all, only a partial view. Each view, then, limits the 
other, corrects the other, and through its relationship with the other 
enables us to form a better concept of what the object is. Of course, 
we may take an infinity of different views, but associated with each 
view there is always an opposite view. Thus, while we can always 
view any given process from any desired side (e.g. the causal side) by 
going to a suitable context, it is always possible to find another con­
text in which we view it from the opposite side (in this case, that of 
contingency). 
In sum, then, we may say that the processes taking place in nature 
have been found to satisfy laws that are more general than those of 
causality. For these processes may also satisfy laws of chance (which 
we shall discuss in more detail in Sections 8 and 9), and also laws 
which deal with the relationships between causality and chance. 
The general category of law, which includes the causal laws, the laws 
of chance, and the laws relating these two classes of law, we shal 
cal by the name of laws of nature. 
• Various purely philosophical efforts to define causal Jaws that are 
completely free of contingency have ben made. Such efforts are baseç 
oo a mechanistic point of view towards the world. The inadequacy of this 
point of view wil be made clear in Chapter II and in Chapter V. 
3 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
2. CAUSALITY IN NATURAL PROCESSES 
The causal laws in a specific problem cannot be known a priori; they 
must be found in nature. However, in response to scientific experience 
over many generations along with a general background of common 
human experience over countless centuries, there have evolved 
fairly well-defined methods for finding these causal laws. The first 
thing that suggests causal laws is, of course, the existence of a regular 
relationship that holds within a wide range of variations of con­
ditions. When we find such regularities, we do not suppose that they 
have arisen in an arbitrary, capricious, or coincidental fashion, but, 
as pointed out in the previous section, we assume, at least pro­
visionally, that they are the result of necessary causal relationships. 
And even with regard to the irregularities, which always exist along 
with the regularities, one is led on the basis of general scientific 
experience to expect that phenomena that may seem completely 
irregular to us in the context of a particular stage of development of 
our understanding will later be seen to contain more subtle types of 
regularity, which will in turn suggest the existence of still deeper 
causal relationships. 
Having found some regularities which we provisionally suppose 
are the results of causal laws, we then proceed to make hypotheses 
concerning these laws, which would explain these regularities and 
permit us to understand their origin in a rational way.* These 
hypotheses will in general lead to new predictions, of things not 
contained in the empirical data which gave rise to them. Such pre­
dictions may then be tested, either by simple observation of pheno­
mena that take place of their own accord, or by the more active 
procedure of doing an experiment, or of applying the hypotheses as 
a guide in practical activities. 
In observations and experiments, an effort is made to choose 
conditions in which the processes of interest are isolated from the 
interference of contingencies. Although no such effort can lead 
to a complete avoidance of contingencies, it is often possible to 
obtain a degree of isolation that is good enough for practical 
purposes. If, then, the predictions based on our hypotheses are 
·consistently verified in a wide range of conditions, and if, within the 
I 
degree of approximation with which we are working, all failures of 
verification can be understood as the results of contingencies that it 
•By explanation, of a given thing, one means the demonstration that 
\this thing follows necessarily from other things. An explanation therefore 
lreduces the number of arbitrary elements in any given context. 
4 

Causality in Natural Processes 
was not possible to avoid,• then the hypothesis in question is ac­
cepted as an essentially correct one, which applies at least within 
the domain of phenomena that have been studied, as well as very 
probably in many new domains that have not yet been studied. If 
such a verification is not obtained, then it is of course necessary to 
go back and to seek new hypotheses until it has been obtained. 
Even after correct hypotheses have been developed, however, the 
process does not stop here. For such hypotheses will, in general, lead 
to new observations and experiments, and to new kinds of practical 
activities, out of which may come the discovery of new empirical 
regularities, which in turn require new explanations, either in terms 
of a modification of existing hypotheses or in terms of a funda­
mental revision of one or more of the hypotheses underlying these 
hypotheses. Thus, theoretical explanations and empirical verifica­
tions each complement and stimulate the other, and lead to a con­
tinual growth and evolution of science, both with regard to theory 
and with regard to practice and to experiment. 
It is necessary, however, to make the presentation of causality 
given in this section more precise. This we shall now proceed to do 
with the aid of a wide range of examples, which show how various 
aspects of causal relationships actually manifest themselves in 
specific cases. 
3. ASSOC IA Tl ON V. CAUSAL CONNECTION 
The first problem that we shall consider is to analyse more carefully 
the relationship between causality and a regular association of 
conditions or events. For a regular association between a given set, 
A, of events or conditions in the past, and another set, B, in the 
future does not necessarily imply that A is the cause of B. Instead, it 
may imply that A and B are associated merely because they are both 
the result of some common set of causes, C, which is anterior to 
both A and B. For example, before winter the leaves generally fall 
off the trees. Yet the loss of the leaves by the trees is not the cause of 
winter, but is instead the effect of the general process of lowering of 
temperature which first leads to the loss of leaves by the trees and 
later to the coming of winter. Clearly, then, the concept of a causal 
relationship implies more than just regular association, in which one 
set of events precedes another in the time. What is implied in addition 
is that (abstracted from contingencies, of course) the future effects 
come out of past causes through a process satisfying necessary 
• E.g. when we see a piece of paper in mid-air that is not falling, we 
must find that something is happening (for example a breeze is blowing) 
which accounts for the failure of our prediction that objects released in 
the earth's gravitational field will fall towards the earth. 
5 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
relationships. And, as is evident, mere association is not enough to 
prove this kind of connection. 
An important way of obtaining evidence in favour of the assump­
tion that a given set of events or conditions comes necessarily from 
another is to show that a wide range of changes in one or more of 
the presumed causes occurring under conditions in which other 
factors are held constant always produces corresponding changes in 
the effects. The more co-ordinations of this kind that one can 
demonstrate in the changes of the two sets of events, the stronger is 
the evidence that they are causally related; and with a large enough 
number one becomes, for practical purposes, certain that this hypo­
theses of causal connection is correct. To obtain such a demon­
stration, however, an active interference on our part by means of 
experiments will usually be required, although in some cases enough 
changes of the right kind will occur naturally so that it will be 
adequate to make a wide range of observations in the phenomena 
that are already at hand. 
We may illustrate how suitable experiments and observations 
make possible a distinction between a regular association of events 
and causality by means of an example taken from the field of 
medicine. Originally, it was noticed that the disease malaria was 
associated with the damp air of night. Thus, it was thought that the 
damp night air was the cause of malaria. But this hypothesis did not 
explain the known facts very well. For it was found that malaria 
could exist even in places where the air was dry, while it was often 
absent in places where the air was very damp. But it was noted that 
in places where the night air was damp, there were many mos­
quitoes, which could bite people who left their windows open. The 
hypothesis then considered was that the mosquito carried something 
from the blood of a sick person to the blood of a healthy person, 
which could cause malaria. Such a hypothesis could explain why 
malaria was generally found in damp places, since in such places 
there are many mosquitoes. It also explained why malaria could be 
produced even in dry places, so long as there were occasional pools 
in which mosquitoes could breed. Finally, it explained why damp 
places could exist without malaria, provided that there were no 
people with the disease in the neighbourhood. Thus, a hypothesis 
had been produced which could explain a wide range of facts, at 
least in a general sort of way. To verify this hypothesis, however, 
experiments were needed, specially designed in order to eliminate 
the possibility that mosquitoes were only regularly associated with 
the disease, while damp air would be one of the real causes. Various 
volunteers were taken, and divided into three groups. All groups were 
isolated to prevent bites by mosquitoes that may have been in the 
6 

Association v. Causal Connection 
neighbourhood by chance. The first group was not allowed to be 
bitten by mosquitoes at all, the second was bitten only by mos­
quitoes which had no access to people with malaria, and the third 
was bitten by mosquitoes that had bitten people having malaria. 
All three groups were divided into two parts: one part exposed to 
damp air, the other part not. Only those in the third group caught 
malaria, and of these, only those who had been bitten by a special 
type of mosquito (Anopheles). The change between damp and dry 
air made no difference in any of the groups, thus showing that this 
factor had been a mere association* and not a true cause. On the 
other hand, the elimination of the Anopheles mosquitoes or the 
lack of contact with people who were infected with malaria elimin­
ated the disease. The true cause, therefore, had to be something 
transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito from the blood of a sick 
person to the blood of a healthy person. Later work showed that 
this something is a definite bacterium. 
This example shows the value of controlled experiments in 
distinguishing a true cause from an irrelevant association. It also 
shows how a search for an improved explanation of the facts will 
often help disclose some of the true causes. Finally, it shows the 
importance of discovering such a cause; for this discovery made 
possible the control of malaria, as well as aiding in the search for 
remedies which would kill the malaria-producing bacterium. 
4. SIGNIFICANT CAUSES IN A GIVEN CONTEXT 
We have simplified the problem considerably in the previous 
example, by supposing that there is only one cause of malaria. In 
reality, the problem is much more complex than has been indicated. 
For not everybody who is bitten by an infected mosquito gets sick. 
This fact is explained by a more detailed understanding of the pro­
ceses involved in getting sick. Thus, the bacteria produce substances 
that interfere with the functioning of the body and tend to make a 
person sick. But the body can produce substances which interfere 
with the functioning of the bacteria. Thus, two opposing tendencies 
are set up. Which one will win depends on complex factors concern­
ing the functioning of microbes and of the body, which are not yet 
fuly understood. But we see that it is too simple to think of the 
microbe as the only cause of malaria. Actually, it merely tends to 
initiate the processes which lead to sickness, and thus merely con­
tributes to the production of malaria. 
But now, if we admit the idea that each condition or event has 
• It is clear that the damp air and the growth of mosquitoes generally 
bave a common cause (i.e. bodies of stagnant water), which explains why 
they arc frequently associated. 
7 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
many contributing causes, we are led to a series of new problems. 
First of all we note that all events and objects in the universe have 
thus far shown themselves to be interconnected in some way even if 
perhaps only slightly. Strictly speaking, then, one should say that 
everything may have an infinite number of contributing causes. But 
in practice most of these have a negligible effect in the problem of 
interest. Thus we may define the "significant causes" of a given 
effect as those conditions or events which, in the context of interest, 
have appreciable influence on the effects in question. 
As an example, consider the problem of malaria again. Now the 
moon exerts a gravitational force on every object in the universe, 
and therefore it must have an influence both on the malaria bacterium 
and on the person who might get malaria. In practice, however, this 
influence is usually negligible. But not always. For the moon can 
raise tides, which can push back a stream that flows into the sea, 
and thus create fresh water pools in which mosquitoes might breed. 
In certain cases, therefore, the moon could be an indirect con­
tributing cause of malaria. Hence, the question of what are the 
"significant causes" in any particular problem cannot be solved 
a priori, but must in general be decided in each case only after a 
careful study, with the object of finding the factors that are necessary 
in the context of interest for the production of the essential features 
of the effect in question. 
Even after we have settled which factors may be neglected, 
serious problems remain for us to solve. One of those is that of 
knowing when we have included all of the significant causes. For 
the mere proof that a change of the presumed cause has an appre­
ciable influence on the effect when other presumed causes are held 
constant shows only that we have discovered one of the significant 
causes. As a means of indicating at least when we have failed to 
discover all of the significant causes, there has evolved the test of repro­
ducibility. This test is based on the principle that if we reproduce 
all of the significant causes, then the effect must be reproduced at 
least in its essential aspects. Thus, a discovery that the results of an 
experiment are not reproducible suggests that one or more of the 
significant causes are varying from one experiment to the next, 
and thus producing a variation in the effect. This is essentially an 
application of the principle introduced at the beginning of this 
chapter; namely, that everything comes from something else. Thus, 
in this case, we do not admit the possibility of arbitrary variations 
of an effect that are totally unrelated to variations in the state of the 
things from which the effect came. If unexplained variations in the 
effect are found, it is then necessary to discover, by means of care­
fully controlled experiments guided by hypotheses based on the 
8 

Significant Causes in a Given Context 
available facts, what is responsible for the lack of reproducibility 
of the effects. For example, in the case of the disease malaria, we 
have already cited the fact that the bite of an infected mosquito does 
not always transmit the disease. This lack of complete reproduci­
bility suggests that there are other factors involved; and indeed, as 
we have seen, the known significant causes of malaria are quite 
complex, involving, as they do, factors of blood chemistry, general 
health, etc., in a way that is at present only partially understood. 
The test of reproducibility enables us to tell why we have not yet 
included all of the significant causes. But there exists no test which 
could prove that we have included all of those causes. For it is 
always possible that the significant causes may include additional 
factors, as yet unknown, which have never yet varied sufficiently in 
the course of experiment and observations thus far carried out to 
change the effects appreciably. For example, in the nineteenth cen­
tury it was thought that a person would have an adequate diet if he 
obtained a certain minimum quantity of fats, proteins, carbo­
hydrates, and various minerals; and such a hypothesis was appar­
ently verified by the fact that people obtaining an adequate supply 
of these materials from common foods suffered no visible nutritional 
deficiencies. But in a wider group of observations, in which it was 
noted, for example, that people who ate mainly rice from which the 
husks of the grain had been removed, suffered from the disease 
beri-beri, while people who ate the whole grain did not. It was 
therefore suspected that the husks of the grain contained additional 
substances needed in a complete diet. Later investigations disclosed 
the existence of a whole host of such substances, now called vitamins. 
The vitamins had indeed always been necessary for a healthful diet; 
but ·in most places they were so widely distributed that vitamin 
deficiencies had not been common enough to call attention to the 
existence of these very important needs of the human body. Thus, as 
the range of variation of experimental or observation conditions is 
widened, we must always be prepared for the possibility of dis­
covering new significant causes in any particular field. 
In order to deal with the problems raised by our inability to know 
al of the significant causal factors that may contribute to a given 
effect, there has evolved a distinction between immediate causes and 
conditions (or background causes). The immediate causes may be 
defined as those which, when subjected to the changes that take place 
in a given context, will produce a significant change in the effects. 
The conditions may be defined as those factors which are necessary 
for the production of the results in question, but which do not change 
1uficiently in the context of interest to produce an appreciable 
change in the effects. For example, one might say that fertile soil 
9 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
plus plenty of rainfall provides the general conditions (or back­
ground) needed for the growth of good crops. But the immediate 
cause would be the planting of the appropriate seeds. 
The distinction between immediate causes and conditions is, 
however, an abstraction, useful for analysis but not strictly correct. 
For the background can always be changed, provided that con­
ditions are altered sufficiently. We have seen, for example, in the case 
of the investigation of the cause of beri-beri, the origin of this dis­
ease had been confused by the existence of a general background in 
which most foods had enough vitamins for an adequate diet. But 
later investigations disclosed conditions in which this background 
did not exist. 
Not only can background conditions be changed by external 
factors, but very often they can be changed significantly, after 
enough time, by the processes taking place in the background itself. 
For example, the cutting down of forests followed by the planting 
of crops may exhaust the fertility of the soil, and may even change 
the climate and the annual rainfall appreciably. In physics, the 
influence of any process on its "background" is even more strikingly 
brought out by Newton's Law that action and reaction are equal. 
From this law, it follows that it is impossible for any one body to 
affect another without itself being affected in some measure. Thus, 
in reality, no perfectly constant background can exist. Nevertheless, 
in any given problem a large number of factors may remain constant 
enough to permit them to be regarded, to an adequate degree of 
approximation, as forming a constant background. Thus, the dis­
tinction between immediate causes and conditions, or background 
causes, is relative and dependent on the conditions. Yet, because we 
can never be sure that we have included all of the significant causes 
in our theory, all causal laws must always be completed by specifying 
the conditions or background in which we have found that they are 
applicable. 
5. MORE GENERAL CRITERIA FOR CAUSAL RELATIONSHIPS 
Even when reproducible and controlled experiments are not possible, 
and even when the conditions of the problem cannot be defined with 
precision, it is still often possible to find at least some (and in prin­
ciple an arbitrarily large number) of the significant causes of a given 
set of phenomena. This can be done by trying to find out what past 
processes could have been responsible for the observed relationships 
that now exist among these phenomena. 
A very well-known example of a science in which reproducible 
and controlled experiments are impossible (at least with methods 
10 

Criteria for Causal Relationships 
available at present), and in which the conditions of the problem 
canot be defined very well, is geology. In this science, the most 
important method of formulating theories is to try to reconstruct the 
past history of the earth on the basis of observations of existing 
structures of rocks, mountains, seas, etc. We then ask, "What could 
have caused these present structures to be what they are?" We may 
se, for example, a set of layers of rock folded diagonally. The 
clistcncc of such a structure suggests that the layers were deposited 
J.orizontaly, when the region was at the bottom of a sea or a lake. 
The layers were then pushed up and folded over by the movements 
otthc earth. 
Although this explanation seems very plausible:, there is clearly 
IO way to prove it by controlled and reproducible experiments or 
observations carried out under prescribed conditions, as all of the 
proceses in question happened a long time ago, and the scale of the 
phenomena is, in any case, too large for us to do an experiment to 
·· ftrify such a theory. Moreover, because the number of geological 
formations available for study is limited, and because each formation 
lau so many individual peculiarities that it is, to some extent, a 
problem in itself, we cannot hope that there would be enough 
uturaly occurring variations in the various significant causes to 
abstitute for an experiment with controlled variations under pre­
ICribed conditions. 
Docs this mean that there is no way to verify hypotheses con­
caning the causes of geological formations? Clearly not. First of all, 
dae is the general consistency with which a very wide body of data 
can be explained. For example, the same type of assumption that 
would explain the folded structures of rocks in some places could 
also explain the fact that the shells of marine animals are often 
found at high altitudes, indicating that these regions were once 
below the sea, and further verifying the idea that over long periods 
ot time the earth moves a great deal. Examples of this kind can be 
.Wtiplied. Thus we obtain support for the theories of geology. Still 
llOl'C support can be obtained if the theories will correctly predict 
mew discoveries. For example, according to certain theories of how 
oil was formed, we expect to find oil in certain types of places and 
u in others. If oil is fairly consistently found where predicted, 
ud if it is not found where the theory says it should not be found, 
dim we obtain an important verification of the hypotheses concem­
iag the origin of oil. 
· 
Of course, hypotheses of the type that we have discussed above 
wil, in general, be subject to corrections, modifications and exten­
lios, which may have to be made later when new data become 
available. In this respect, however, the situation in geology is not 
11 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
basically different from that in fields where reproducible experi­
ments and observations can be done under specified conditions. 
In such fields, too, hypotheses are subject to later corrections, 
modifications, and extensions. For example, even Newton's laws of 
motion,* which for over two hundred years were regarded as 
absolutely correct expressions of the most fundamental and univer­
sal laws of physics, and which had behind them the support of an 
enormous number of reproducible and very precise experiments and 
observations carried out under well-defined conditions, were ulti­
mately found to be only an approximation. This approximation is 
very good at velocities that are low compared with that of light, 
but at higher velocities it ceases to be good. Here, one must use 
Einstein's theory of relativity, which yields approximately the same 
results as do Newton's laws of motion at velocities low compared 
with that of light, but which leads to completely different results at 
higher velocities. It goes without saying, of course, that in the future 
we may discover new conditions (not necessarily related to the 
velocity) in which the theory of relativity is found to be an 
approximation, which therefore has to be corrected, modified, 
and extended. Indeed, as was pointed out in Section 2, this is the 
normal pattern by which a science progresses, both on its theoretical 
and on its practical and experimental sides ; i.e. by a continual 
application of the theory to new problems and new conditions, 
and by a continual revision and improvement of the theory in the 
light of what has been learned in these new applications. 
In the last analysis, then, the problem of finding the causal laws 
that apply in a given field reduces to finding an answer to the 
question, "Where do the relationships among the phenomena that 
we are studying come from ?" If reproducible controlled experi­
ments or observations carried out under specified conditions are 
possible, these make available an important and very effective tool 
for verifying our hypotheses concerning the causal relationships. 
Whether such experiments are available or not, hypotheses can 
always be verified by seeing the extent to which they explain cor­
rectly the relevant facts that are known in the field in question, and 
the extent to which they permit correct predictions when the theory 
is applied to new phenomena. And as long as these possibilities 
exist, progress can always be made in any science towards obtaining 
a progressively better understanding of the causal laws that apply 
in the field under investigation in the science in question. 
6 .  CAU SAL LA W S  A N D  T H E  P R O P E R T I E S  OF T H I N G S  
Thus far, we have been tending to centre our attention on the aspect 
• We shall discuss these laws in more detail in Chapter II. 
12 

Causal Laws and the Properties of Things 
of the prediction of the course of events by means of causal laws ; 
for example, the appearance of disease upon exposure to germs, the 
growth of seeds in proper soils, the improvement of health with 
changes in nutrition, the development of geological formations, etc. 
We shall now consider another equally important and indeed very 
closely related side of causality, namely, the predictions of the 
properties of things, both qualitative and quantitative. 
Elementary aspects of this side of causality are met quite fre­
quently in common life. Thus, an egg left in boiling water for a while 
wil get hard ; a hard brittle piece of glass heated to a high tempera­
ture becomes soft and malleable. Water cooled below a certain 
temperature becomes a solid, and heated above a certain tempera­
ture becomes a vapour. At a less elementary level, we have the 
chemical reaction of various substances to yield qualitatively new 
types of substances. We have also the hardening of metals by alloy­
ing or by heat treatment. There is no limit to the number of examples 
of this kind that can be found, but in all of them the essential point 
is that causal connections exist which permit the prediction of the 
new properties that things develop after they have undergone cer­
tain processes, treatments, reactions, etc. 
The cases cited above all have in common that the new properties 
are predicted on the basis of the notion implicit in the concept of 
causality, that changes that have been found to take place in the 
past wil occur again in the future if similar conditions are repro­
duced. Hence, while it is predicted that certain changes of properties 
•il take place under certain conditions, the new properties them­
seh·es are not predicted ; they are simply taken from the results of 
prt\ious observations or experiments. A more subtle type of causal 
law is one that permits the prediction of some of the new properties 
oC things even before these things have yet been observed or pro­
duced experimentally. For example, chemists studying a series of 
compounds of a certain type may notice a systematic variation in 
properties as one goes from one member of the series to the next. 
Thus. in the case of a certain class of hydrocarbons, the boiling­
point decreases systematically as the number of carbon atoms in a 
901cule increases. It then becomes possible to predict that a new 
type of molecule having more carbon atoms than any of those yet 
produced will very probably have a still lower boiling-point. In 
plysic:s, similar predictions can be made. Thus, it was discovered 
dw there exist isotopes of each element, which are different kinds 
ol atoms having the same chemical properties but different atomic 
weights. With the aid of physical theories concerning the motions of 
llOm1, it was shown that different isotopes should diffuse at different 
mes .,.·hen subjected to differences in concentration. On the basis 
1 3  

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
of this predicted difference of properties of different isotopes, a 
method was then developed which made possible the large-scale 
separation of the two isotopes of uranium. This method of separa­
tion is one of the essential factors that makes a nuclear reactor 
possible. In connection with the same general subject, it was pre­
dicted on the basis of existing theory that uranium exposed to 
neutrons should be transformed into a new element, plutonium, 
that had not previously been observed or produced anywhere else. 
Many physical and chemical properties of this new element were 
predicted approximately. Examples of predictions of this kind are 
becoming more and more common all the time in many branches 
of physics. 
The fact that such predictions are possible shows that the causal 
laws are not like externally imposed legal restrictions that, so to 
speak, merely limit the course of events to certain prescribed paths, 
but that, rather, they are inherent and essential aspects of these 
things. Thus, the qualitative causal relationship that water becomes 
ice when cooled and steam when heated is a basic part of the essential 
properties of the liquid, without which it could not be water. 
Similarly, the chemical law that hydrogen and oxygen combine to 
form water is a basic property of the gases hydrogen and oxygen, 
without which they could not be hydrogen and oxygen (just as water 
could not be water if it did not become hydrogen and oxygen when 
subjected to electrolysis). Similarly, the various quantitative laws 
are also an essential part of the things to which they appertain. Thus, 
some of the properties by which we recognize a liquid are the value 
of the temperature at which it boils, the value of its electrical con­
ductivity, the value of its density, the values of the frequencies of 
the spectral lines that it absorbs or emits (which determine its 
colour), and by a great many other such quantitative properties. 
Likewise, the general mathematical laws of motion satisfied by bodies 
moving through empty space (or under any other conditions) are 
essential properties of such bodies, without which they could not 
even be bodies as we have known them. Examples of this kind could 
be multiplied without limit. They all serve to show that the causal 
laws satisfied by a thing, either when left to itself or when subjected 
to specified external conditions, are inextricably bound up with the 
basic properties of the thing which helps to define what it is. Indeed, 
we cannot conceive how a thing could even have any properties at 
all if it did not satisfy some kind of causal laws ; for the mere state­
ment that a thing has a certain property (for example, that it is red) 
implies that it will react in a certain way when it is subjected to 
specified conditions (e.g. the red object exposed to white light will 
reflect mostly red light). In other words, the causal laws that a thing 
14 

Causal Laws and the Properties of Things 
satisfies constitute a fundamental and inseparable aspect of its mode 
of being.* 
In order to understand just why and how the causal laws are so 
closely bound up with the definition of what things are, we must 
consider the processes in which things have become what they are, 
starting out from what they once were and in which they continue 
to change and to become something else again in the future. Gener­
ally speaking, such processes are studied in detail in a particular 
science only after it has reached a fairly advanced stage of develop­
ment, while in the earlier stages the basic qualities and properties 
that define the modes of being of the things treated in that science 
are usually simply assumed without further analysis. Thus, in the 
earlier stages of the development of biology, the various classifica­
tions of living beings according to their basic properties and modes 
of life were simply accepted as eternal and inevitable categories, 
the reasons for the existence of which did not have to be studied any 
further. Later, however, there developed the theory of evolution, 
which explained many of the fundamental traits that define the mode 
of being of each species in terms of the process of transformation 
limited by "natural selection", a process in which each species has 
come to obtain its present character and which is presumably con­
tinuing, so that new species may appear in the future. Likewise in 
physics, the earliest steps involved the simple acceptance of certain 
characteristic properties of matter (e.g. density, pressure, electrical 
resistance, etc.), without further analysis, while later there came 
theories which explained and predicted these properties approxi­
mately in terms of processes taking place at the atomic level and at 
other deeper levels. As examples we may consider the prediction of 
the different rates of diffusion of different isotopes and the pre­
diction of the properties of the new element, plutonium, both of 
which have already been cited in this section. Until recently, in 
physics, such explanations of properties and qualities have tended 
to be mainly in terms of inner processes of the types described above, 
i.e. processes which take place within matter, at deeper levels. 
However, lately there has developed a tendency to introduce 
evolutionary theories into physics, especially in connection with the 
eforts in the science of cosmology to explain how the particular 
Kgment of the universe that is at present accessible to our observa· 
lions came to have its particular properties. These theories aim at 
the explanation of the formation of galaxies, stars, and planets, the 
aplanation of the distribution of chemical elements in various parts 
• Or, as we pointed out in Section I ,  the inner character of a thing and 
iu relationships to external causal factors are united in the sense that the 
two together are what define the causal laws satisfied by that thing. 
1 5  

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
of space, etc., in terms of an historical and evolutionary process, in 
which matter starting out in an earlier state gives rise to the cos­
mological order that we are now studying. Vice versa, in biology 
there has developed a growing tendency to explain various specific 
properties of living being in terms of processes (chemical, physical, 
etc.) taking place within the living organism. Similar trends are to be 
found in other sciences, such as chemistry, geology, etc. Thus, with 
the further development of the various sciences, we are obtaining a 
progressively better understanding of how the causal laws governing 
the various processes that take place in nature become indissolubly 
linked with the characteristic properties of things, which help define 
their modes of being. 
7 .  ONE-TO - M A N Y  A N D  M A N Y - TO-O N E  C A U SAL 
R E LATIONS H I P S  
It is now necessary to consider more general types of causal relation­
ships that do not determine the effect uniquely. In real problems, it 
is very rarely possible to deal with all the causes that are significant, 
even in a well-defined context, in which conditions (or the back­
ground) do not change appreciably. Usually we are able to treat 
only some of the significant causes. Naturally, as we have seen in 
Section 3, the effects are not completely reproducible and therefore 
not completely predictable. Nevertheless, just because we do not 
have at our disposal all the significant causes in a given problem, 
it does not mean that no predictions at all can be made. For, in such 
cases, it is generally possible to predict effects approximately, in the 
sense that they will be within a certain possible range. For example, 
if a gun is aimed at a certain point, the projectile does not land 
precisely at the place predicted by Newton's laws of motion (which 
are the causal laws that are pertinent in this problem). It is found, 
however, in a long series of similar shots, that the results cluster in a 
small region near the point that was calculated. A similar pattern 
of behaviour is demonstrated very generally in all fields in which 
causal laws are used for making predictions. For in every such 
prediction there is always a certain range of error, which may vary 
in a way that depends on the conditions of the problem, but which 
can never be eliminated completely. Thus, it is a general feature of 
causal relationships that they do not in reality determine future 
effects uniquely. Rather, they make possible only a one-to-many 
correspondence between cause and effect, in the sense that a speci­
fication of certain causes will in general limit the effect to a certain 
range of possibilities. 
Of course, the fact that a causal relationship fails to determine 
16 

One-to-Many Causal Relationships 
future effects uniquely does not mean that nothing determines these 
effects. I ndeed, this would be contrary to the pri nciple that every­
thing comes from other thi ngs (described in Section I ). I n  fact the 
more detailed determination of the effect depends on causes that lie 
outside the context of those that have been taken into account in 
the problem u nder investigation. In some cases, these additional 
causes could be taken into account with the aid of a more precise 
measurement of the causal factors already considered. Thus, in the 
case of aiming the gun, the first step in improving the precision 
would be to try to determine the angle of firing and the position of 
the gun more carefully. More generally, however, the precise deter­
mination of the effect eventually requires qualitatively new types of 
causal factors to be taken into account. For example, if we tried to 
obtain unlimited precision in the prediction of the trajectory of the 
shell, we should discover more and more significant factors on which 
this trajectory depended ; e.g. the irregularities in the structure of the 
gun, air currents, small variations in temperature, pressure, humid­
ity, and eventually even the motions of the molecules of which the 
gun, shell, air, and target are composed. Similar problems would 
arise i n  the effort to decrease the error in any causal prediction, 
with the purpose of obtaining u nlimited precision. In other words, 
as we try to narrow down the range of a one-to-many causal 
relationship, we generally discover that each new order of magnitude 
of precision ·requires us to take into account new and quali tatively 
different causal factors on which the result depends. 
In this connection, let us note that the one-to-many character of 
a causal law has no essential relationship to a lack of kno wledge on 
our part concerning the additional causal factors to which the more 
precise details of the effect can be traced. Indeed, even if we did trace 
these details to such factors, so that we could make better predic­
tions, it would still remain true that in the context in which these 
details do nof appear, the law would continue to be valid in an 
objective sense as a one-to-many law. In other words, a one-to-many 
law represents an objectively necessary causal connection, but in 
this case, what is necessary is that the effect remain within certain 
bounds ; and not, as in simpler types of causal laws, that the effect be 
determined uniquely. 
Oosely related to the one-to-many causal relationships are another 
type, which we may call the many-to-one causal relationships. A 
many-to-one causal relationship is one i n  which many different 
kinds of causes can produce essentially the same effect. An example 
is that al the rain that falls within a certain watershed will, inde­
pendently of precisely where it drops, reach the sea in a certain place 
(Le. where the main river of the watershed flows into the sea). 
17 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
Likewise, independently of an enormous number of possible varia­
tions in the details of the environment in which a given creature 
lives, it can be predicted that this creature must eventually die. 
Examples of this kind are to be found in every field. Thus, in 
physics, if a body is disturbed or set into motion when it is near a 
position of stable equilibrium, it will eventually (because of friction) 
come back to its equilibrium position , independently of a wide range of 
possible initial motions, Indeed, in every field, all qualitative causal 
laws have a many-to-one character. For the prediction of a given 
quality may in general be made independently of a wide range of 
details, especially those of a quantitative nature. Thus, i n  the ex­
ample of the transformation of water into steam , this transformation 
takes place independently of the q uantity of heat supplied, provided 
that this quantity is more than that needed to furnish the so-called 
latent heat of evaporation (plus, of cou rse, that needed to heat the 
water to the boiling-point). Moreover, not only qualitative but also 
quantitative laws may have a many-to-one character. Thus, the laws 
of thermodynamics deal with the properties of matter in thermal 
equil ibrium. Quantitative relationships that are independent of the 
details of the processes by which equilibrium was attained are 
valid for equilibrium conditions. *  
I t  must b e  remembered, however, that only some o f  the properties 
of an effect are unaffected by a wide range of variations in the 
causes. Indeed, according to the principle enunciated at the beginning 
of Section 1 ,  no aspect of anything ever disappears completely 
without having some effect, so that it would be impossible for the 
two different causes to lead to completely identical results. Thus, if 
the water falling inside a particular watershed is stored in a dam, 
it might generate power, while if it is allowed to flow in its natural 
irregular path, it might instead flood the land and destroy cities. 
But independently of these details, the water in it will eventually 
reach the sea at the mouth of the main river in the watershed. 
Similarly, the ways in which a given creature lives will have effects 
on futu re generations as well as on the environment in general, even 
though, no matter what it does, it will die. Thus, while it is possible 
for certain aspects of an effect to come about independently of a 
wide range of causes, one discovers that as the effect is considered 
• Many-to-one and one-to-many laws are interwoven into a unity, ou 
they must be, because they both describe the same process. Thus, the la\\1 
of thermodynamics not only have a many-to-one character, but also a 
one-to-many character, coming from the possibility of error, originating 
in the fact that the cancellation of statistical fluctuations in the above 
motions (see Chapter II, Section 14) that give rise to the laws of thenno­
dynamics, is never perfect. Similar interweaving is found on closer 
analysis in all cases of one-to-many and many-to-one laws. 
1 8  

One-to-Many Causal Relationships 
either in more detail or in a broader context, each different kind of 
cause produces some difference in the effect. 
The existence of one-to-many and many-to-one causal relation­
ships is a very important characteristic of causal laws in general. 
To see one reason why this characteristic is so important, let us 
recall that incomplete precision in causal predictions comes from the 
fact that a given result depends on a great many factors that lie 
outside the context treated in a given problem. From a purely 
logical point of view, it would always be conceivable that these 
unknown, or at best poorly known, factors could produce vari­
ations in the effects of interest that went beyond any specified 
limits. Because, in such a wide range of fields, these factors do 
produce effects that stay within bounds, and which thus give rise 
to the one-to-many causal relationships, it is possible to study a given 
problem, in some degree of approximation, without first taking into 
account the infinity of factors that are needed for a perfectly precise 
prediction of any given result. The existence of many-to-one causal 
relationships evidently also contributes towards this possibility ; 
since this means that many results can be studied independently of a 
very wide range of complicated details unknown to us or for other 
reasons too difficult to be studied under present conditions. We see, 
then, that the objectively one-to-many and many-to-one character 
of the causal relationships help to make it possible for us to have 
approximate knowledge about certain limited aspects of the world, 
Y•ithout our first having to know everything about everything in the 
whole universe. And thus these causal relationships also help to 
make possible the characteristic scientific procedure of studying a 
problem step by step, each step laying the foundation for making 
the deeper, more detailed, or more extensive study that leads to the 
next. • 
Within the general framework of one-to-many and many-to-one 
causal relationships, the one-to-one relationship is then an idealiza­
tion which is never realized perfectly. Under certain limited con­
ditions it may be approached so closely that, as far as what is 
• A  well -known example of this procedure occurs in physics. Thus, the 
int la\l.s of physics to be discovered were those of macroscopic physics. 
Tbcn, ቯith the aid of these laws, the next step was to the laws of atomic 
siyucs. As we shall show in more detail in Chapter II, Section 1 0, the 
pouibility of studying the laws of macroscopic physics without first know­
ilc those of atomic physics comes from the many-to-one character of the 
sutistical aspects of the laws of atomic physics, which permits a certain 
11proximate autonomy of the laws of the higher level. The next step was 
IO ro. in a similar way, from the atomic level to the level of the nucleus, 
ቷnow we wll se in later chapters (especially IV and V), physics seems 
IQdy to penetrate once again in a similar way to a still deeper level. 
1 9  

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
essential in the context of interest is concerned, we may consider 
the causal relationship as being approximately one-to-one. The 
nearest case known to a set of one-to-one causal relationships arises 
in connection with an isolated mechan ical system, which can be 
treated in terms of Newton's laws of motion. These laws gi ve a onc­
to-one connection between the positions and velocities of all the 
parts of the system at a given instant of t i me and their positions 
and velocities at any other instant of time.* This one-to-one con­
nection is an idealization for several reasons. Fi rst of all, no mech­
anical system is ever completely isolated. 
Disturbances arisi ng 
outside the system will destroy the perfect one-to-one character of 
the connection. Secondly, even if we co u ld isolate the system com­
pletely, there would still exist dist u rbances coming fro m motions 
at the molecular level. Of course, one could i n  principle try to take 
these i nto account by applying the laws of motion to the molecules 
themselves, but then one would discover still further disturbances 
comi ng from 
the quantum-mechanical and 
other deeper-lyi ng 
properties of matter. t Thus, there is no real case known of a set of 
perfect one-to-one causal relationships that could in principle make 
possible predictions of unlimited precision, without the need to take 
into account qualitatively new sets of causal factors existing outside 
the system of interest or at other levels.t 
8 .  CONTI N G E N C Y ,  C H A N C E , A N D  S T A T I S T I C A L  L A W  
Now contingencies are, a s  w e  have pointed out in Section l ,  possi­
bilities existing outside the context under discussion. The essential 
characteristic of continge ncies is that th<.:ir nature cannot be defi ned 
or i nferred solely in terms of the properties of things withi n  the 
context in question. In other words, they have a certain relative 
independence of what is inside this context. However, as we have 
seen, our general experience shows that all things are interconnected 
in some way and to some degree. Hence we never expect to find 
complete independence. But to the extent that the interconnection is 
negligible, we may abstract out from the real process and its inter­
connections the notion of chance contingencies, which are idealized, 
as completely independent of the context under discussion. Thus, 
like the notion of necessary causal connections, the notion of chance 
contingencies is seen to be an approximation, which gives a partial 
treatment of certain aspects of the real process, but which eventually 
has to be corrected and completed by a consideration of the causal 
• These laws will be discussed in more detail in Chapter I I .  
t These will be discussed in Chapters I l l ,  IV, and V .  
t In Chapter V we shall discuss the question o f  whether such relation­
ships are in principle even possible. 
20 

Co11ti11ge11cy, Chance, and Statistics 
interconnections that always exist between the processes taking 
place in different contexts. 
In order to bring out in more detail what is meant by chance, we 
may consider a typical chance event ; namely, an automobile acci­
dent. Now it is evident that j ust where, when, and how a particular 
accident takes place depends on an enormous number of facto rs, a 
slight change of any one of which could greatly change the character 
of the accident or even avoid it altogether. For example, in a col­
lision of two cars, if one of the motorists had started out ten seconds 
earlier or ten seconds later, or if he had stopped to buy cigarettes, 
or slowed down lo avoid a cat that happened to cross the road, or 
for any one of an u nlimited number of similar reasons, this par­
ticular accident would not even have happened ; while even a slightly 
different turn of the steering wheel might either have prevented 
the accident altogether or might have changed its character com­
pletely, either for the better or for the worse. We see, then, that 
relative lo a context in which we consider, for example, the actions 
and precautions that can be taken by a particular motorist, each 
accident has an aspect that is fortuitous. By this we mean that what 
happens is contingent on what are, to a high degree of approxi­
mation, independent factors, existing outside the context in question, 
which have no essential relationship to the characteristic traits that 
define just what sort of a person this motorist is and how he will 
behave in a given situation. For this reason, we say that relative to 
such a context a particular collision is not a necessary or inevitable 
development, but rather that it is an accident and comes about by 
chance, from which it also follows that, within this context, the 
question of j ust where, when, and how such a collision will take place, 
as well as that of whether it will take place or not, is unpredictable. 
So much for an individual accident. Let us now consider a series 
of similar accidents. First of all, we note that there is an irregular and 
unpredictable variation or fluctuation in the precise details of the 
various accidents (e.g. precisely when and where they take place, 
precisely what is destroyed, etc.). The origin of this variation is 
easily understood, since a great many of the independent factors on 
which the details of the accidents depend fluctuate in a way having 
no systematic relationship to what a particular motorist may be 
doing. 
As the number of accidents under consideration becomes larger 
and larger, however, new properties begin to appear ; for one finds 
that individual variations tend to cancel out, and statistical regu­
larities begin to show themselves. Thus, the total number of acci­
dents in a particular region generally does not change very much 
from year to year, a nd the changes that do take place often show a 
21 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
regular trend. Moreover, this trend can be altered in a systematic 
way by the alteration of specific factors on which accidents depend. 
Thus, when laws are passed punishing careless driving and requir­
ing regular inspection of mechanical parts, tyres, etc., the mean rate 
of accidents in any given region has been almost always found to 
undergo a definite trend downward. In the case of an individual 
motorist taking a particular trip, no very defin ite predictions can in 
general be made concerning the effects of such measures, since 
there are still an enormous number of sources of accidents that have 
not yet been eliminated ; yet statistically, as we have seen, variations 
in a particular cause produce a regular and predictable trend in the 
cff cct.  
The behaviour described above is found i n  a very wide range of 
fields, including social, economic, medical, and scientific statistics 
and many other applications.* In all these fields, there is a character­
istic irregular fluctuation or variation in the behaviour of individual 
objects, events, and phenomena, the details of which are not pre­
dictable within the context under discussion . This is combined with 
regular trends in the behaviour of a long series or large aggregate 
of such objects, events, or phenomena. These regular trends lead to 
what we may call statistical laws, which permit the approximate pre­
diction of the properties of the "long run" or average behaviour 
of a long series or large aggregate of individ uals, without the need 
to go to a broader context in which we would take into account 
additional causal factors that contribute to govern ing the details of 
the fluctuations of the individual members of such series of aggre­
gates. 
The tendency for contingencies lying outside a given context to 
fluctuate approximately independently of happenings inside that 
context has demonstrated itself to be so widespread that one may 
enunciate it as a principle ; namely, the principle of randomness. By 
randomness we mean just that this independence leads to fluctuation 
of these contingencies in a very complicated way over a wide range 
of possibilities, but in such a manner that statistical averages have a 
regular and approximately predictable behaviour. t 
It is clear, then, that when we know that a certain fluctuation is 
due to chance contingencies lying outside the context of the causal 
laws under discussion, we know more than the mere fact that the 
causal laws in question do not give perfectly accurate predictions ; 
we know also that the contingencies will produce complicated 
• We shall discuss some of these further applications in more detail in 
Chapter 11, Section 14. 
t For a more precise definition of randomness, see D. Bohm and 
W. Schutz.er, Supplemento al Nuovo Cimento, Series X, n. 4, p. 1 004 (1 955). 
22 

Contingency, Chance, and Statistics 
fluctuations having regular statistical trends. Consider, for example, 
the problem of error in measurement discussed in the previous 
section. Such errors are generally divided into two classes, systematic 
and random. Systematic errors arise, but they are j ust due to external 
causes, and not to real chance contingencies that fluctuate inde­
pendently of the context in quest ion. To reduce systematic errors, 
we must obtain an improved understanding and control of the fac­
tors that are responsible for the error. The random part of the error 
can, however, be reduced simply by taking the average of more and 
more measurements. For, according to a well-known theorem, the 
effects of chance fluctuations tend to cancel out in such a way that 
this part of the error is inversely proportional to the square root of 
the number of measurements. This shows how the fat:t that a certain 
effect comes from chance contingencies implies more than the fact 
that the causes lie outside the context u nder discussion. It implies, in 
addition, a certain objective characteristic of randomness in the 
factors in which the effect originates. 
We see, then, that it is appropriate to speak about objectively 
valid laws of chance, which tell us about a side of nature that is not 
treated completely by the causal laws alone. Indeed, the laws of 
chance are just as necessary as the causal laws themselves.* For 
example, the random character of chance fluctuations is, in a wide 
variety of situations, made inevitable by the extremely complex 
and manifold character of the external contingencies on which the 
fluctuations depend. {Thus random errors in measurement arise, as 
we have seen, in a practically unlimited number of different kinds of 
factors that are essentially independent of the quantity that is being 
measured.) Moreover, this random character of the fluctuations is 
quite often an inherent and indispensable part of the normal func­
tioning of many kinds of things, and of their modes of being. Thus, 
it would be impossible for a modern city to continue to exist in its 
normal condition unless there were a tendency towards the cancella­
tion of chance fluctuations in traffic, in the demand for various kinds 
of food, clothing, etc., in the times at which various individuals get 
sick or die, etc. In all kinds of fields we find a similar dependence on 
the characteristic effects of chance. Thus, when sand and cement are 
mixed, one does not carefully distribute each individual grain of 
sand and cement so as to obtain a uniform mixture, but rather one 
stirs the sand and cement together and depends on chance to produce 
a uniform mixture. In Chapter II, Section 1 4, we shall consider more 
complex examples connected with the motions of atoms to produce, 
partly with the aid of the cancellation of chance fluctuations, 
• Thus, necessity is not to be identified with causality, but is instead a 
wider ca tcgory. 
23 

Causality a11d Cha11ce i11 Natural Law 
u niform and predictable properties at the macroscopic domain 
(e.g. pressure, temperature, etc.). Here we shall see that the mode 
of bei ng of m atter in the macroscopic domain depends on the 
cancellation of chance fluctuations arisi ng in 
the microscopic 
domain. 
Not only are the regular relationships which come out of the 
tendency towards cancellation in a large number of chance fluctu­
ations i m porta nt, but u nder certain conditions eve n the fact that the 
chance fluctuations cover a wide range of possibilities i n  a compli­
cated way may be extremely important. For one of the most charac­
teristic features of chance fluctuations is that in a long enough time or 
in a large e11ough aggregate, every possible combi nation of events or 
objects will eventually occur, even combinations which would at 
first sight seem very unlikely to be produced. In such a situation, 
those combinations which result in some irreversible change or in 
some qualitatively new line of development are particularly signi­
ficant, because once they occur, then the chance process comes to 
an end, and the system is irrevocably launched on its new path. As 
a result, given enough "mixi ng" or "shuffiing" of the type connected 
with chance fluctuations, we can i n such situations predict the ulti­
mate result, often with impressive certainty. 
A very interesting example of the p roperty of chance described 
above occurs in connection with a current theory of the origin of 
life, suggested by Opharin. This theory is based o n  the hypothesis 
that perhaps a billion years ago or more, the atmosphere of the 
earth contained a high concentration of hydrocarbons, ammonia, 
and various simple organic compounds that would result from the 
combinations of these substances. Under the action of ultraviolet 
light, high temperature, electrical discharges, and the catalytic 
action of various minerals, these compounds would have tended to 
associate and to form ever more complex molecules. As the seas and 
the atmosphere were stirred up by storms and in other ways, all 
sorts of chance combinations of these compounds would have been 
produced. Eventually, after enough hundreds of millions of years, 
it would have been possible for just those combinations to occur 
which corresponded to the simplest possible forms of living matter. 
This point would, however, have been marked by a qualitative 
change that did n ot reverse ; for the living matter would begin to 
reproduce at the expense of the surrounding organic material (since 
this is one of the basic characteristics that distinguishes living from 
non-living organic matter). From here on, the process would have 
been removed from the domain of pure chance. Moreover, as 
conditions changed, the living matter would start to evolve in 
accordance with the laws of transformation that have already been 
24 

Contingency, Chance, and Statistics 
studied in considerable detail in biology ; and eventually it would 
give rise t o  the manifold forms of life that exist today. 
We see, then, the important role of chance. For given enough 
time, it makes possible, and indeed even inevitable, all ki nds of 
combinations of things. One of those combinations which set in 
motion irreversible processes or lines of development that remove 
the system from the influence of the chance fl uctuations is then 
eventually certai n to occur. Thus, one of the effects of chance is to 
help "stir thi ngs up" in such a way as to permit the initiation of 
qualitatively new lines of development . 
9 .  T H E  T H EORY O F  PROB A B I L I T Y  
Just a s  the causal laws came to be expressed more precisely with the 
aid of certain kinds of mathematical formalisms (for example, the 
differential calculus), a characteristic mathematical i nstrument, 
known as the theory of probability, evolved for the expression of the 
laws of chance. In this section, we shall sketch briefly how this form 
of mathematics arose and what it means. 
Historically, the n otion of probability was first given a precise 
form in connection with gambling games. A good example is fur­
nished by the game of dice. If we follow the results of each i ndividual 
throw of the dice, we discover that they fluctuate irregularly from 
one throw to the next, in the way that is characteristic of chance 
events, as described in the previous section. As a result, we cannot 
predict what will be obtained in any given throw, either on the basis 
of the results of earlier throws, or on the basis of anything else that 
can be specified within the context of the game. Despite the unpre­
dictable variations in the results of individual throws described 
above, h owever, gamblers have developed the custom of betting on 
a given combination, and of giving certain odds that depend on the 
combination i n  question . Experience has demonstrated that corre­
sponding to each possible combination, there seems to exist a set of 
appropriate "fair odds'', such that if these odds are offered, then i n  
the l o n g  r u n  t h e  gambler will neither win n o r  lose systematically. 
The problem that was attacked by the earliest mathematicians to 
turn their attention to this subject* was to find a theoretical way of 
calculating what these "fair odds" should be. I n  the case of the 
throws of a die, for example, this problem was solved by supposing 
that all six faces of each die are "equally likely" in each throw. 
Thus, the probability that a given die will co me out a five is 1 /6, and 
since the dice are "independent", the probability that both will 
come out fives is the product of the separate probabilities that each 
• Among the earliest mathematicians to work with the concept of 
probability were Pascal, Fermat, Bernoulli, and Laplace. 
25 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
one individually will come out a five, which is I /6 x 1/6 = 1/36. 
Hence, the "fair odds" in this case are 36 to l .  
Although the method of solution of the problem indicated aqove 
certainly worked in connection with games of chance, it involved the 
i ntroduction of the rather vague notion of eq ual "likelihood" or 
"equiprobability" of the various possible results of a throw. This 
notion initially contained a mixtu re of two very different i nter­
pretations of probability, which we may call respectively, the "sub­
jective" and the "objective". In the subsequent development of the 
subject, these two interpretations became distinct ; and in order to 
permit a clearer presentation of the essential ideas, we shall give 
here only the more definite interpretations that developed later. 
In the subjective interpretation of probability, it is supposed that 
probabilities represent, in some sense, an incomplete degree of 
knowledge or information concerning the events, objects, or con­
ditions under discussion. Thus, in the case of the game of dice, we 
have no way of knowing with certainty before the dice are thrown 
what the results of each individual throw will be (since these results 
are determined by the initial positions and velocities of the various 
parts of the dice in each throw which are not accessible to us in 
practice). Hence, if the dice are, as far as we can tell, symmetrically 
constructed, we know of no reasons favouring the suggestion that 
we will obtain any one side instead of another, and we therefore 
. assign equal probabilities to each side. In this point of view, then, 
probability is regarded as something that measures or reflðcts a 
degree of our information , so that it is an essentially subjective 
category, which would cease to be necessary or even to have mean­
ing if we could obtain precise knowledge concerning the initial 
motions of the dice in each throw. 
The above interpretation of probability as representing nothing 
more than our own mental reflexes under conditions in which we 
do not have complete knowledge is, however, not adequate to treat 
an essential aspect of the problem of what is meant by probability. 
For it gives us no idea at all of why probability can be used to make 
approximate predictions about the actual relative frequency with 
which a given face of the die will be obtained after a large number 
of throws. Thus, the mere fact that we do not know any reasons 
that would favour one face over another does not by itself neces­
sarily imply approximately equal relative frequencies for all possible 
results. I ndeed, from the fact that we do not know anything at all 
about the initial motions of the dice as they are thrown, we can 
conclude only that we do not know anything at all about what the 
final results will be, not only in each i ndividual case, but also in an 
arbitrarily long series of cases. For precisely among the things that we 
26 

The Theory of Probability 
do not know about these initial motions there could conceivably 
exist a hidden tendency in them to favour one result over another. 
Vice versa, even if we were somehow able to know the initial con­
ditions beforehand for each individual throw, this would not change 
the fact that in a typical series these conditions arc in the long run 
and on the average distributed in such a way as to lead to approxi­
mately equal relative frequencies for each face. As a result, the 
theory of probability would in such cases provide a good approxi­
mation to the relative frequencies that would be predicted with the 
aid of perfect knowledge of the initial conditions determining each 
individual event. 
Evidently, then, the applicability of the theory of probability to 
scientific and other statistical problems has no essential relationship 
either to our knowledge or to our ignorance. Rather, it depends only 
on the objective existence of certain regularities that arc character­
istic of the systems and processes under discussion, regularities 
which imply that the long run or average behaviour in a large 
aggregate of objects or events is approximately independent of the 
precise details that determine exactly what will happen in each 
individual case. 
On the basis of the above considerations, we are then led . to 
interpret the probability of, for example, a given result in the game 
of dice as an objective property associated with the dice that are 
being used and with the process by which they arc thrown, a property 
that can be defined independently of the question of whether or not 
we know enough to predict what will happen in each individual 
throw. The significance of this property is that in the long run, and 
on the average, the relative frequency with which a given result will 
be obtained will fluctuate near a value that tends to come closer and 
closer to its probability. This, then, is the conception of probability 
that is relevant in statistical problems that arise in scientific research 
and in other fields. Of course, the word "probability" as commonly 
used also has the subjective meaning of describing how likely we 
think a given inference or conclusion drawn on the basis of incom­
plete knowledge may be. This meaning has, however, no essential 
relationship to the procedure by which we use the theory of proba­
bility in science and in other fields to make approximate predictions 
concerning relative frequencies of the various combinations of 
objects and events that occur in statistical aggregates, without the 
need to take into account precisely what each member of the aggre­
gate is doing. 
In order to understand in more detail the origin of the long run or 
average regularities that underlie the applicability of the theory of 
probability in games of dice (and in other gambling games), it is 
27 

Causaliry and Chance in Narural Law 
necessary only to note that in such games all the conditi ons are 
available for the applicability of the concept of chance and that of 
statistical law arising out of the effects of chance, as discussed in the 
previous section. Thus, if the die is thrown from an appreciable 
height, there is t i me for it to tum one or more times before it lands. 
The face on which it lands will then be sensitive to the init ial motions, 
so that small variations in these motions can change any one fi nal 
result into any other. Moreove r, the h u man body, on whose motions 
the initial conditions are contingent, is a very complex system, whose 
functioning depends on an enormous number of va ried ki nds of 
fluctuating factors. Thus, it is q uite u nderstandable that in a large 
number of th rows the initial motions t ransmit ted from the hand to 
the die fluctuate sufficiently to make the final results vary over the 
full range of possibilities that are open. And since the multitude of 
factors in the human body are essentially i ndependent of the initial 
orientations of the die, it is hardly surprising that in the long run 
and on the average no particular face tends to be favoured in these 
fluctuations, so that the individual throws fluctuate at random while 
statistical regularities appear in the mean relative frequencies with 
which each face is obtained . Thus, we have just the kind of depen­
dence of the results in question on randomly fluctuating and i nde­
pendent contingencies lying outside the context under discussion, 
which is, as we have seen in the previous section, characteristic of 
chance phenomena. 
With the aid of tht> concept of probability, it has been possible to 
develop an extensive mathematical theory, which yields expressions 
for the probabilities of complex combinations of events in terms of 
those of simpler events. This theory has demonstrated its utility in 
the many fields where there exist objects or events depending on 
chance contingencies arising outside the con text under discussion .  
I n  the applications o f  this theory i t  must be remembered , however, 
that, as pointed out in Section I, the causal laws and the laws of 
chance rogerher are what bring about the actual development of 
th ings, so that either of them al one is at best a partial and approxi­
mate representation of reality, which eventually has to be corrected 
with the aid of the other. 
1 0 .  G E N E R A L  C O N S I D E R A T I O N S  O N  T H E  L A W S  O F  
N A T U R E  
We shall now give a brief summary of the essential chara cteristics 
of the laws of nat ure, as they have demonstrated themselves i n  the 
various examples considered in this chapter ; and with the aid of this 
summary we shall obtain a further insight into the general st ructure 
of these laws . 
28 

Co11sideratio11s 011 the Laws of Nature 
First of all, our basic starting-point in studying the laws of nature 
was to consider the processes by which any one thing comes from 
other thi ngs i n  the past and helps to give rise to still other thi ngs 
in the future. Now this process cannot be studied i n  its totality 
which is i nexhausti ble, both i n  its quantitative aspects and in 
the complexity of its details. However, it is a fact, verified by 
human experience transmitted through our genera l culture si nce 
even before the beginnings of civilization, as well as by the ex­
perience of many generations of scientists, that parts of the pro­
cesses descri bed above can be studied approximately, under speci­
fied conditions, and in limited contexts. This is possible because 
there is an objective but approximate autonomy in the behaviour 
of these various parts of the processes rclntive to a ny particular 
context.* 
When we study any particular set of processes within one of its 
relatively autonomous contexts, we discover that certai n relation­
ships remain constant under a wide range of changes of the detailed 
behaviour of the things that enter i nto this context. Such constancy 
is i nterpreted not as a coincidence, but rather as an objective 
necessity inherent i n  the nature of the things we arc studying. These 
necessary relationships arc then manifestations of the causal laws 
applying in the context i n  question. These laws do not have to deter­
mine a given effect uniquely. I nstead, they may (i n  the case of onc-to­
many relationships) determine only that the effect must remain 
withi n a certain range of possibilities. 
On the other hand, actual experience shows that the necessity of 
causal relationships is always limited and conditioned by contin­
gencies arising outside the context i n  which the laws in question 
operate. These conti ngencies satisfy certain characteristic laws of 
their own : viz. the laws of chance, an approximate mathematical 
expression of which is given by the theory of probability. 
Of course, by broadening the context, we may sec that what were 
chance contingencies in the narrower context present the aspect of 
being the results of necessary causal connections in the broader con­
text. But, then, these necessary causal connections are subject to 
still newer contingencies, coming from still broader contexts. Thus, 
we never really can eliminate contingencies. Rather, the categories 
of necessary causal connection and chance contingencies are seen to 
represent two sides of all processes. To consider only one of these 
sides, then, always constitutes an approximation that ca nnot apply 
• The reasons for this autonomy will be discussed in some detail in 
Chapter V. We have already given some of them in connection with the 
discussion of one-to-many and many-to-one laws in Section 7 of the 
present chapter. 
29 

Causality and Chance in Natural Law 
without limit, but that must eventually be corrected and supple­
mented by taking into account the other side. 
The two sides of natural processes appear also in connection with 
statistical laws. Viewed from the side of chance contingencies, a 
statistical law is a regularity arising from the cancellation of chance 
fluctuations in a large aggregate of objects or events. But we may 
adopt the opposite view by considering the totality of all objects or 
events in a statistical aggregate as a single entity. The statistical laws, 
then, are approximate causal laws that apply to this new kind of 
entity. Thus, we see again how the same phenomena may be viewed 
from either side, depending on the context under discussion. 
Besides having the two-sided character of necessity and contin­
gency, the laws of nature show a richness of structure of a much 
more general character. Thus, considering the causal laws abstracted 
from contingencies, we find first of all that one obtains levd after 
level of approximation, each involving qualitatively different kinds 
of causal factors. Even choosing only the significant causes that vary 
appreciably in the conditions of interest, we are still left with the 
possibility of one-to-many, many-to-one and one-to-one laws. 
Among the one-to-many aspects of the causal laws, one must con­
sider the fact that every law has associated with it a certain error. 
This error arises essentially not because of a lack of knowledge on 
our part, but rather because of the neglect of objective factors 
existing outside the context under investigation. Even if we knew of 
these factors and could take them into account by going to a broader 
context, this would not change the fact that there exists a law, apply­
ing in the narrower context, which contains an error that would 
show up when we compared the predictions of the laws of the 
narrower context with those of the broader context. Then we have the 
many-to-one laws (such as qualitative relationships, statistical 
relationships, laws of thermodynamics, etc.) which have a certain 
degree of validity that is objectively independent of a wide range of 
details. Finally, there are the one-lo-one relationships, which are 
abstractions that apply approximately in many cases when the 
many-to-one and one-to-many character of the laws can be neglected. 
Of course, all of these kinds of laws are interwoven into a unified 
fabric of law, as they have to be, since, after all, they apply to differ­
ent aspects of the same sets of processes. 
Then, when we do not abstract from contingencies, we must 
consider the laws of chance, which reflect all the richness of structure 
of the causal laws, as they must, since they treat just the opposite 
side of the same processes. Indeed, the interconnections among the 
various possible kinds of law are manifold and complex, involving 
laws reflecting laws, laws within laws (i.e. ever higher levels of 
30 

Co11sideratio11s 011 the Laws of Nature 
accuracy), and laws which contain other laws as limiting and special 
cases. (E.g. relativity contains Newtonian mechanics as a limiting 
case when the velocity is small compared with that of light.) More­
over, this whole structure is an objective and necessary consequence 
of the very character of these laws, and is not just a special conse­
quence of our way of thinking about things. 
We may compare the structure of the totality of natural law to an 
object with a very large number (in reality infinite) of sides, having 
facets within facets, facets reflecting facets, facets consisting of 
mosaics of facets, etc. To know what the object is, then, we must 
have a large number of different kinds of views and cross-sections. 
Each view or cross-section then contributes to our understanding of 
many aspects of the object. The relationships between the views 
are, however, equally important, for they serve to correct the errors 
which arise as a result of regarding one or a limited number of views 
as a complete representation of the whole object ; and they also 
indicate qualitatively new properties not apparent in the separate 
views (as two plane views of a scene taken from diff ercnt angles 
permit us to infer its three-dimensional character). We see, then, 
that while each view and cross-section may vary depending on our 
own relationship to the object, we can obtain a closer and closer 
approximation to a concept of the real nature of the object by 
considering more and more views and cross-sections and their 
relationships. This concept, then, becomes less and less dependent 
on our own relationship to the object as the number of views and 
cross-sections is increased. 
To pursue our analogy further, we may say that with regard to the 
totality of natural laws we never have enough views and cross­
scctions to give us a complete understanding of this totality. But as 
science progresses, and new theories are developed, we obtain more 
and more views from different sides, views that are more compre­
hensive, views that are more detailed, etc. Each particular theory 
or explanation of a given set of phenomena will then have a limited 
domain of validity and will be adequate only in a limited context and 
under limited conditions. This means that any theory extrapolated 
to an arbitrary context and to arbitrary conditions will (like the 
partial views of- our object) lead to erroneous predictions. The 
finding of such errors is one of the most important means of making 
progress in science. A new theory, to which the discovery of such 
errors will eventually give rise, does not, however, invalidate the older 
theories. Rather, by permitting the treatment of a broader domain 
of phenomena, it corrects the older theories in the domain in which 
they are inadequate and, in so doing, it helps define the conditions 
under which they are valid (e.g. as the theory of relativity corrected 
3 1  

Causality a11d Cha11ce in Natural Law 
Newton's laws of motion, and thus helped to define the conditions 
of validity of Newton's laws as those in which the velocity is small 
compared with that of light). Thus, we do not expect that any causal 
relationships will represent absolute truths ; for to do this, they 
would have to apply without approximatio11, and unconditionally. 
Rather, then, we see that the mode of progress of science is, and has 
been, through a series of progressively more fundamental, more 
extensive, and more accurate conceptions of the laws of nature, each 
of which contributes to the definition of the condit ions of validity of 
the older conceptions (just as broader and more detailed views of 
our object contribute to defining the limitations of any particular 
view or set of views). 
At any particular stage in the d evelopment of science, our con­
cepts concerning the causal relationships will then be true only 
relative to a certain approximation and to certain conditions. 
Indeed, it is for j ust this reason that so many different kinds of 
explanations and theories applying to the same set of phenomena 
are possible. Each different theory or explanation focuses on a 
certain aspect of the laws of nature that is important u nder certain 
conditions, and treats this aspect within a certai n  degree of approxi­
mation. But to the extent that different theories and explanations 
treat the same domain and to the approximation with which they are 
able to do this, they must agree. Hence, the possibility of so many 
different kinds of explanations and theories of the same sets of 
phenomena does not imply that the laws of nature are arbitrary or 
conventional rules, that could be changed at will in accordance with 
our tastes, or with what is convenient for us in various kinds of 
problems. Rather it is merely a consequence of the infinite richness 
of the real relationships existing in natural processes and of our need 
to express partial aspects of these infinitely rich relationships in 
terms of finite laws based on experiments and observations done up 
to a particular period of time, which can reflect adequately only a 
limited part of the infinite totality that exists in nature. 
1 1 . C O N C L U S I O N  
In conclusion, i t  should b e  clear that the existence of natural law 
as we have described it in this chapter is of greatest importance in 
all branches of science. 
In addition, however, the possibility of a science also depends on 
the particular structure of the laws of nature (e.g. existence of many­
to-one and one-to-many laws, as well as other characteristics to be 
described in Chapter VI) which is such that there exist relatively 
autonomous contexts that can be studied separately to some degree 
of approximation, without our first having to learn everything about 
32 

Conclusion 
everything with perfect precision. In particular, this characteristic 
of the causal laws is the objective factor determining the division of 
the study of the world among the various sciences, as well as the 
concepts and methods that are appropriate to each particular 
science. Then, in a given science, it is this property of the natural 
laws which makes possible the existence of various branches, 
domains, and levels, all having an approximate autonomy. However, 
since the natural laws imply some kind of intercon nection of all 
aspects of the world, as well as their approximate autonomy, this 
means that wider studies carried out in broader domains or in wider 
contexts permit a demonstration of the relationships between the 
various branches, domains, and levels in a given science, and be­
t ween the various different sciences, as well as a penetration to new 
domains not hitherto known or investigated. 
33 

C H A P T E R  T W O  
Causality and Chance i n  Classical Physics : 
The Philosophy of M echanism 
1 .  I N T R O D U C T I O N  
THE previous chapter was devoted to a general discussion of 
causality and chance. We shall now proceed to show in some detail 
how these categories manifest themselves in classical physics (which 
is roughly that branch of physics that had its fundamental develop­
ment between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries, inclusive). 
This subject is not only of considerable interest in itself, but it also 
has a great deal of bearing on the questions concerning the appli­
cability of the concept of causality that have been raised during the 
twentieth century in connection with the quantum theory. For, as 
we shall see in later chapters, the inadequacy in the microscopic 
domain of the mechanistic form of determinism into which causality 
was restricted by classical physicists helped to provoke a very strong 
reaction in the opposite direction, and thus helped to encourage 
modern physicists to go to the opposite extreme of denying causality 
altogether at the atomic level. It will therefore be worth our while 
here to study fairly carefully just what were the notions of causality 
and chance that came to be associated with classical physics and 
just what were the problems that arose in connection with the 
applications of these notions. Then, in later chapters, but especially 
in Chapter V, we shall criticize the mechanistic point of view and 
develop in some detail a more general point of view, in which the 
problems described above do not arise. 
2 .  C L A S S I C A L  M E C H A N I C S 
The most important developments in physics between the sixteenth 
and the nineteenth centuries were founded on a certain body of very 
general, very comprehensive, and very precisely expressed theory 
usually referred to as classical mechanics, which concerns itself 
primarily with the laws governing the motions of bodies through 
34 

Classical Mechanics 
space. Now in the earlier stages of their development (as in the times 
of the ancient Greeks), the laws of mechanics had generally been 
given a vague and qualitative form.• With the work of Galileo and 
others, however, the tendency to express the laws of physics (and to 
some extent of chemistry and other sciences) in a precise quantita­
tive form began to assume a very great importance. This trend to­
wards quantitative precision in the expression of physical law con­
tinued to grow, and first reached its full development with Newton's 
laws of motion. These laws, which state that the acceleration of a body 
is directly proportional to the force acting on it and inversely pro­
portional to its mass, are expressed mathematically by means of the 
differential equation, 
-+ 
-+ 
d2x 
F = m ­
d12 
-+ 
-+ 
where x is the position vector of the body, F the force acting on it, 
and m is its mass. 
Newton's laws of motion imply that the future behaviour of a 
system of bodies is determined completely and precisely for all time 
in terms of the initial positions and velocities of all the bodies at a 
given instant of time, and of the forces acting on the bodies. These 
forces may be external forces, which arise outside the system under 
investigation, or they may be internal forces of interaction between 
the various bodies that make up the system in question. 
In many problems the external forces are small enough to be 
neglected (i.e. the system may be regarded as isolated), while the 
internal forces can be represented solely in terms of functions of the 
positions and velocities of the centres of mass of the bodies. This 
approximation is particularly good in the problem of the motion of 
the planets around the sun. In such a case, Newton's laws determine 
the future motions of the bodies in terms of nothing more than the 
positions and velocities of the bodies at a given instant of time. Thus, 
they constitute a set of "one-to-one" causal relationships, of the 
type described in Chapter I, Section 7. For given the complete set 
of causes (i.e. the initial positions and velocities of each body), 
then the complete set of effects (i.e. the later positions and velocities 
of each body) is determined uniquely. 
More generally, however, no system of bodies is ever really com­
pletely isolated, nor can the forces between bodies ever really be 
• Some precise expression of the laws of statics had already ben 
given, even by the ancient G reeks (e.g. by Archimedes), but the laws of 
mechanics in general were expressed quite vaguely, and in most cases 
incorrectly. 
35 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
expressed in terms only of the positions and velocities of the centres 
of mass of these bodies. Thus, even in astro nomy, the isolation of 
the solar system is not perfect. Distant stars have some effects, even 
though these are small, while comets fro m interstellar space may 
occasionally enter the solar system and even deflect the orbit of a 
planet appreciably. Similarly, there is a small tidal friction which 
makes the planetary motions depend slightly on the configurat ions 
of land, water, and other fluids on the planets , and which is slowly 
causing the planets to circle closer to the sun and the moon to the 
earth . In all other problems, one likewise fi nds t hat t he system is 
never completely isolated, and that it can never really be analysed 
i nto bodies for which the external motions arc completely indepen­
dent of the internal motions.* Thus, generally speaking, the com­
plete set of causes needed to determine the fu t ure motions uniquely 
must include both the initial posi tio ns and velocit ies of the bodies 
and the various forees, both external and i nternal, that act on t he 
bodies. 
3 .  T H E  P H I LO S O P H Y  OF M E C H A N I S M  
It is clear that Newton's laws o f  motion represented a n  enormous 
progress in the expression of causal relationships in the science of 
mechanics. For in place of crude and qualitative laws of mechanics 
that had been characteristic of the ancient and medieval periods, 
Newton's laws evidently represent a fundamentally new kind of law, 
making possible precise quantitative predictions, which permit a 
much more accurate test of the law, and serve as correspondingly 
precise guides in our efforts to alter and control the behaviour of 
mechanical systems. 
The very precision of Newton's Jaws led, however, to new prob­
lems of a philosophical order. For, as these laws were found to be 
verified in wider and wider domains, the idea tended to grow that 
they have a universal validity. Laplace, during the eighteenth century, 
was one of the first scientists to draw the full logical consequences 
of such an assumption. Laplace supposed that the entire universe 
consisted of nothing but bodies u ndergoing motions through space, 
motions which obeyed Newton's Jaws. While the forces acting 
between these bodies were not yet completely and accurately known 
in all cases, he also supposed that eventually these forces could be 
known with the aid of suitable experiments. This meant that once 
the positions and velocities of all the bodies were given at any instant 
of time, the future behaviour of everything in the whole universe 
would be determined for all time. Laplace then imagined a superior 
being who could know all these positions and velocities, and who 
• In this connection, see Section 13 of this chapter. 
36 

The Philosophy of Mechanism 
could calculate with complete precision everything that would 
happen in the universe. Thus, for this being, nothing unexpected 
could ever come into the world, since everything, even in the infinite 
future, would happen in a way that had been predetermined and, 
indeed, predetermined throughout the entire infinite past . 
Here we have an interesting and important new development. For 
as long as Newton's laws of motion are applied to some limited 
system or domain, they merely form t he basis of the science of 
mechanics which expresses in a precise mathematical form the 
causal laws that apply to that particular system or domain. When 
expressed in this manner, the science of mechanics evidently docs 
not necessarily imply a completely determinate prediction of the 
future behaviour of the entire universe. For besides the fact that we 
arc treating only a specified mechanical system to what must in 
gcnernl be only a li mited degree of approximation, we must also 
wnsidcr the po:-.si bility that i n  new doma ins of phenomena or under 
new conditions not yet studied in physics, it is possible that newer 
and more detailed expressions of the laws of nature may be needed, 
expressions whieh might not even be possible in terms of the general 
mathematical and physical scheme underlying Newton's laws of 
motion. Thus, the conclusion that there is absolutely nothing in the 
entire universe that does not fit into the general theoretical scheme 
associated with Newton's laws of motion evidently has implicږtiom. 
not necessarily following from the science of mechanics itself, but 
rather from the unlimited extrapolation of this science to all possible 
sets of conditions and domains of phenomena . Such an extrapolati on 
is evidently then not founded primarily on what is known scienti ­
fically. Instead, it is in a large measure a consequence of a philo­
sophical point of view concern ing the nature of the world, a point 
of view which has since t hat time come to be known as mechanism. 
Now, as we shall see in this chapter and in other parts of the book, 
the mechanistic philosophy has taken many specific forms through ­
out the development of sቶience. The most essential aspects of 
this philosophy seem to the author, however, to be its assumption 
that the great diversity of things that appear in all of our experience, 
every day as well as scientific, can all be reduced completely a nd 
perfectly to nothing more than consequences of the operation of an 
absolute and final set of purely quantitative laws determi ning the 
behaviour of a few kinds of basic entities or variables. In this con­
nection it must be stressed, however, that the mere use of a purely 
quantitative theory does not by itself imply a mechanistic point of 
view, as long as one admits that such a theory may be incomplete. 
Hence, mechanism cannot be a characteristic of any theory, but 
rather, as we have already stated above, a philosophical attitude 
37 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
towards that theory. Thus, it would have no meaning to say, for 
example, that Newtonian mechanics is mechanistic ; but it has 
meaning to say that a particular scientist (e.g. Laplace) has adopted 
a mechanistic attitude towards this theory. 
The first known form of mechanism was the atomic philosophy of 
Democritus and Leucippus, in which it was assumed that everything 
in the universe could be reduced to nothing more than the effects of 
the motions of atoms through space. The idea underlying Laplacian 
determinism was essentially the same one, with the addition, how­
ever, of the assumption that motions of these atoms are governed by 
Newton's laws, so that a precise calculation of the future behaviour 
of the universe is in principle possible. In this point of view, then, all 
the various qualitative properties that appear at the large scale, 
such as hardness, fluidity, colour, texture, etc., are regarded as 
purely subjective categories, since they do not appear in the basic 
laws governing the motions of the atoms, but are thought of as 
nothing more than intermediary concepts that we find it convenient 
to utilize in our thinking about the arrangements and motions of 
molecules en masse. The fundamental properties that are objective 
and not the result of our special ways of thinking about things, are 
assumed to be the basic quantitatively specifiable properties of the 
atoms-their positions, velocities, sizes, shapes, masses, the laws of 
force between them, etc. 
I n  this early form of the mechanistic philosophy, the basic 
elements out of which the world was assumed to be constructed 
were effectively conceived of as mechanical parts, each of which has 
its place in a universal machine (which is frictionless because the 
laws of classical mechanics imply the conservation of mechanical 
energy). The nature of these parts is rigidly fixed and does not grow 
out of the context in which they are placed, nor does it change as 
a result of the actions of other parts. In this sense, the universal 
frictionless mechanism is an idealization of the machines with 
which we are familiar, for the latter are not frictionless, nor are their 
various parts unaffected by the actions of other parts (e.g. they 
break, wear out, etc.). 
Now, as we shall see in later chapters, the philosophy of mechan­
ism eventually came to be a very serious restriction on the further 
development of science. Nevertheless, for its time, it was an enor­
mous step forward from the scholastic form of the Aristotelian 
philosophy that was prevalent during the Middle Ages. For in the 
scholastic philosophy every different thing and every different 
property and quality of things was conceived of as separate and 
completely distinct from all the others. Thus, scientific investigations 
guided by this philosophical point of view tended to consist mainly 
38 

The Philosophy of Mechanism 
of the arrangement of things into various systems of classifications, 
which were regarded as eternal and unvarying in their nature. The 
mechanistic philosophy, however, suggested that beneath all this 
diversity, disparity, and apparent arbitrariness of qualities existed a 
set of simple and rationally understandable universal mechanical 
processes. These processes explained why things took the diverse 
forms that they did, and why they underwent the transformations 
that they did, in a way that was in principle subjected to complete 
calculation and verification, and that in practice could at least be 
calculated and verified within some degree of approximation. Thus, 
the mechanistic philosophy made possible a much more unified and 
dynamic point of view towards the universe than had been available 
during the Middle Ages. This point of view enabled one to sec 
clearly the close relationships existing between a wide range of 
problems not even considered in the scholastic philosophy (e.g. the 
precise predictions of the influence of one planet on the motions of 
others, the determination of the trajectories of shells fired from guns, 
etc.). 
4. D E V E L O P M E N T S  A W A Y  F R O M  M E C H A N I S M  I N  
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S  
Even during the period of the greatest triumphs of mccha.11ism, 
physics began to develop in new directions, tending to lead away 
from the general conceptual framework that had been associated 
with the original form of the mechanistic philosophy. The most 
important of these developments were those connected with the 
formulation of the basic laws of the electromagnetic field, with the 
elaboration of the kinetic theory of gases, and with the initiation of 
the use of statistical explanations for the laws of thermodynamics 
and other macroscopic properties of matter, rather than completely 
determinate types of explanations that had previously been the ideal 
in physics. 
Although none of these developments stood in complete contra­
diction with a mechanistic point of view, each of them showed the 
need for a progressive enrichment of the basic concepts and qualities 
which were needed for expressing the laws of physics as a whole. 
The need for such enrichment time after time could in principle 
already have suggested to physicists that their basic philosophical 
point of view was not really adequate for the understanding of 
nature as a whole. Of course, it did not actually do this, because 
physicists made various adjustments, compromises, and extensions 
of their concepts, each time supposing that at last they had reached 
the ultimate general conceptual framework and system of basic 
qualities and motions that would, once and for all, permit the 
39 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
expression of the absolute and final laws of physics. Thus, they 
were enabled to retain an essentially mechanistic point of view, in 
spite of the many changes that occurred in the basic formulation of 
physical laws. 
Throughout the rest of this chapter, then, we shall give a fairly 
detailed account of these later developments, taking some pains to 
bring out clearly just how the mechanistic philosophy can accom­
modate itself to deal with them. Further criticism of the mechanistic 
philosophy will then be deferred until later chapters, especially 
Chapter V, where we shall propose an alternative point of view. 
5 .  WAV E T H E O R Y  O F  L I G H T  
One o f  the first new developments in physics that helped lay the 
foundation for important steps away from mechanism was the wave 
theory of light. This development was important for two reasons : 
first because it helped give rise to field theories {to be discussed in 
Fig. 1 
Section 6), and secondly because it provided a set of concepts which 
were to prove to be of crucial importance in connection with the 
quantum theory (to be discussed in Chapter Ill). 
Now, during the time of Newton it was not known whether light 
consisted of small particles moving very rapidly in straight lines 
(except when they were refracted or reflected by material bodies) or 
of a form of wave motion. Gradually, however, evidence accu­
mulated suggesting that light is a form of wave motion. The most 
important of this evidence came from the experiments demon­
strating the existence of interference. A parallel beam of light is 
allowed to fall on a slit, A (see Fig. I). Some of the light passes 
through the slit and reaches a screen, S. Another slit, B, is then 
opened. Now, if light consisted of a rain of small particles, the region 
on the screen between slits A and B should everywhere be illuminated 
more intensely than if slit A alone were open. For to these particles 
of light reaching the screen from A must be added those coming 
from B. 
40 

Wal'C Theory of L(·¸ht 
On the other hand, in reality, one fin'is on t he screen a set of 
alternate bright and dark fringes fairly close together. The fringes 
disappear when one of the slits is closed. This shows that when the 
light from A and from B come together, the net result may be an 
absence of light. Such a result would be very difficult to understand 
if light consisted simply of particles. H owever, it would be easy to 
understand if one assumed that light was a form of wave motion. 
For at certain points on the screen the waves coming from A could 
cancel those coming from B, producing dark ness, while at other 
points they could add up, producing more light. The wave theory 
explained not only this experiment, but a great many others, in a 
quantitative way. I t  also made possible the calculation of the length 
of these waves, which was found to be of the order of 5 x IQ-i ems. 
The very short length of these waves explained why light usually 
seems to go in straight lines and to act as if it were made of particles. 
By analogy, one may consider waves in water. Very short water 
waves will be stopped by a barrier which is appreciably bigger than 
the length of the waves. B ut a wave that is much longer than the 
barrier will go around the barrier. Light shows a similar behaviour. 
Thus, if a very fine wire is viewed with the aid of a distant light the 
outlines of the wire seem to be indistinct. This phenomenon is known 
as diffraction. But if we take a large object, such as a house; the 
bending of the light waves as they pass the edge of the house is 
negligible and the light effectively goes in a practically straight line, 
as if it were made up of small particles moving in a straight line. 
If light consists of waves, the question then arises : "How arc these 
waves carried ?" Since light is transmitted through a vacuum, it is 
clear that light-waves are not carried in any common material 
medium, as arc the waves of water and sound. We shall consider this 
question further in Section 7, after we have discussed field theories 
in Section 6. 
6 .  F I E L D  T H E O R Y  
We are now ready t o  consider the development o f  the fi rst important 
new type of causal law that occurred during the nineteenth century ; 
viz. that of field theory. 
Recall that, in Newtonian mechanics, one always postulated that 
things were constituted of bodies interacting according to specified 
forces. A knowledge of the position and velocities of the bodies in a 
given isolated system would then permit us to predict all the motions 
taking place within that system. But throughout the nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries, the need for considering new kinds of 
causal factors gradually came to be recognized . For in order to 
express the laws of electricity and magnetism, it was fo und that. the 
4 1  

Causaliďy and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
Newtonian scheme of bodies was not adequate. It was possible, 
however, to treat this problem by introducing, in addition to the 
bodies, a new set of entities known as the electric and magnetic 
fields. Whereas the mode of existence of the bodies required that 
they be localized in some definite region of space, the fields were 
conceived of as continuously distributed throughout space as a whole. 
At each point in space and at each instant of time, however, the 
components of the electric and magnetic fields were assumed to have 
definite values. The values of the components of the electric field at 
a given point were defined in terms of the force that would be exerted 
on a unit electric charge placed at the point in question, while the 
values of the components of the magnetic field were defined in terms 
of the force that would be exerted on a unit magnetic pole at that 
point. 
Now as long as the fields arc static, the electric and magnetic 
fields remain clearly separated and independent of each other. 
When the fields are changing with time, however, characteristic new 
phenomena appear. For example, if electric charges are in motionԊ 
we obtain an electric current and with it a magnetic field. Similarly 
a magnet in motion creates an electric field. Thus, electric and 
magnetic fields are not independent entities, but, rather, each helps 
to determine the other. Indeed, the experiments of Faraday dis­
closed a set of precisely specifiable quantitative relations between 
the magnetic and electric fields. Maxwell, basing himself in part on 
these experiments, later extended the relations found by Faraday 
and developed a set of partial differential equations, now known as 
Maxwell's equations. These equations determine how the fields will 
change in terms of the values of the field quantities at each instant 
of time and i n  terms of the motions of all of the charged bodies in 
the system. B{Jt since the electric and magnetic fields contribute to 
the forces acting on the bodies, it is clear that fields and bodies co­
determine each other. The combined laws (Newton's equations for 
the bodies plus Maxwell's equations for the fields) then form a 
unified and extended set of basic causal laws, generalizing the laws 
of Newton, which, as we recall, were expressed solely in terms of the 
motions of the bodies. Thus, the complete causal laws now include 
both bodies and fields. 
The field theory of Maxwell led to many new predictions, that 
were later verified experimentally. One of the most important of 
these was that waves should be possible, in which the electric and 
magnetic fields oscillated in amplitude, in much the same way that 
the height of a pool of water oscillates when there is a wave on the 
surface of the water. It was deduced from Maxwell's equations that 
these waves should be propagated with a definite and predictable 
42 

Field Theory 
velocity, which could be calculated on the basis of numbers coming 
out of measurements that had already been made in connection with 
electrical and magnetic fields. When this number was calculated, it 
was found that the predicted velocity of these electromagnetic waves 
was, within experimental error, equal to the measured velocity of 
light. The fact that light is a wave has already been suggested by 
experiments on interference ; but now the theory of Maxwell went 
further, for by predicting the velocity of light solely on the basis of 
measurements made in electricity and magnetism, it created strong 
evidence that waves of light were just the kind of waves predicted 
by Maxwell's equations. 
Since the time of Maxwell, an enormous amount of experimental 
evidence corroborating the electromagnetic theory of light has been 
accumulated. These experiments, which cover a wide range of fields, 
extending from optics and infra-red spectroscopy through ultra­
violet rays, X-rays, gamma rays, etc., provide a very convincing set 
of confirmations of the theory of Maxwell. 
7 .  O N  T H E Q U E S T I O N  O F  W H A T IS T H E  N A T U R E  O F  
T H E  E L E C T R O M A G N E T I C  F I E L D  
. 
Having seen that there is a great deal of evidence suggesting that 
light consists of waves in the electromagnetic field, we are now led 
to raise the question : "What is the electromagnetic field?" Faraday, 
Maxwell, and other scientists of the time had postulated that all 
space is full of a very fine medium that they called the "ether". 
They supposed that, like air and water, this medium could support 
internal stresses and could therefore undergo wave motion. The 
internal stresses of the ether manifested themselves to us as electric 
and magnetic fields. They also hoped in this way to explain gravita­
tional forces, as a different kind of internal stress of the ether. 
Many experiments were therefore done with the purpose of finding 
direct experimental evidence of the existence of the ether, among 
the most famous of which was the Michelson-Morley experiment. 
We cannot go into details here, but shall merely state the net con­
clusion : viz. that all experiments aimed at detecting the ether gave 
negative results. Thus no experimental proof that the ether really 
exists could be found. This created a serious problem. For real 
physical effects such as light and gravitation could be transmitted for 
long distances through apparently empty space. To emphasize the 
seriousness of the problem, let us note that a steel cable having the 
diameter of the earth would not be strong enough to hold the earth 
in its orbit around the sun. Yet the gravitational force that holds the 
earth in its orbit is transmitted across 93,000,000 miles of space 
43 

Causality mu/ Chance i11 Classical Physics: Philosophy of .Mechanism 
without any traces of a material medi um i n  which these forces 
might be carried. 
As yet, the problem of what material medium, if any, carries the 
electromagnetic field cannot be said to have been dealt with com­
pletely. What has happened is that scientists have gone around the 
problem. For, as time passed, it gradually became clear that to make 
theories of the ether without experimental cl ues as to what the ether 
might be was largely empty speculation. I nstead, what was done was 
simply to assume the existence of the fields wi thout reference to the 
question of whether or not the ether existed . The fields could i n  
principle h e  defined a t  each point in space, and their variation in 
t i me was determi ned hy Maxwel l's equations. But as far as all 
physical phenomena that had yet bee n observed were concerned , the 
q uestion of a material medium or "ether" in which these fields might 
be represented as states of stress or motion was i rrelevant. Thus, 
even i f  an ether did exist, then at least wi thin the context of the 
experi ments that were possible at the time, all results would have 
been just the same as i f  it did not exist. I n  other words, all that had 
been significant thus far were the fields themselves. As a result, 
there arose the notion that the fields are qual itatively new ki nds of 
entities. which we have the same right to postulate as we have to 
postulate material bodies (such as atoms), provided that such a 
postulate will hel p in the explanation of a large range of facts and 
experimental results. This point of view, which seems to have been 
suggested first by Lorentz, was later carried much further by 
Einstein. It is now held by a majority of physicists. 
The introduction of the fields evidently i nvolves a fundamental 
modification of our concept of matter and of space. Thus, the field 
concept implies that even when space contains no bodies as we know 
them, it could still be the site of continuously varyi ng fields. These 
fields can be shown to carry energy, momentum, and angular 
momentum, so that they are even able to simulate some of the 
properties of moving bodies.* Indeed, Einstein has gone further ; for 
he has made the very interesting suggestion that special kinds of 
fieldst might exist, having modes of motion in which there would be 
pulse-like concent rations of fields, which would stick together stably, 
and would act almost exactly like small moving bodies. He further 
proposes that perhaps the so-called fundamental particles of physics, 
such as electrons and protons, may consist of such modes of motion 
• Thus, the momentum of a beam of light leads to a measurable 
radiation pressure on a surface analogous to the pressure that would be 
exerted on this surface by a rain of molecules. 
t These would be fields satisfying non-linear equations. Sec Chapter III, 
Section 3, for a discussion of some of the properties o f  non-linear 
equations. 
44 

The Nature of the Electromagnetic Field 
of the fields. Whether we accept these proposals or not, however, 
it is clear that many of the basic properties of a material system, 
which determi ne i ts characteristic modes of behaviour (e.g. the 
forces acting on the various bodies within the system, the total 
energy, momentum, and angular momentum of the system, etc.) 
depend just as much on the fields as on the bodies. Thus, the con­
cept of matter has effectively been expanded to include the notion 
of the field as representing the extension through a broad region 
of space of certain manifestatio ns of a material system . 
8 .  F I E L D  T H E O R I E S  A N D  M E C H A N I S M  
The hypothesis made towards the end of the ni neteenth century that 
the field exists in i ts own right as a q ualitatively new k i nd of entity 
was an important step away from mechanism. To be s ure, as early 
as the eighteenth century, the concept of densi ty and velocity fields 
had been used in hydrodynamics. But these fields were regarded a s  
being nothing more than a n  approxi mate means of dealing with 
certain over-all properties of the molecules constituti ng the fluid. 
The same poi nt of view was carried i nto electrodynamics by Faraday, 
Maxwell, and other scientists of the time when they supposed that 
the electromagnetic field represented nothing more than states of 
motion or of internal stress in the ether. The notion that the fields 
represented entities that had a certain existence in thei r  own right, 
then constituted a genuine e nrichment in the conceptual basis of 
physics. For in addition to formulating physical laws in terms of the 
motions of bodies through space, physicists now also formulated 
such laws in terms of a qualitatively new kind of motion, namely, 
that of involving a set of changing amplitudes of fields at various 
points in space.* 
• It is true that it is not absolutely necessary to use the field concept in 
the problems described here. Thus, it is possible to eliminate the fields 
in terms of the motions of the particles, with the aid of the retarded 
potentials. This leads to an expression of the force acting on a given 
body at a certain time in terms of the motions of all the bodies, over a 
period of time that becomes infinite if we wish thus to take into account 
the effects of sources of electromagnetic radiations that are arbitrarily far 
away from the body in question. 
To specify the motions of all bodies over all time is, however, not only a 
clumsy procedure, which would obviously be inadequate to treat even a 
simple problem such as the propagation of a radio wave along a wave 
guide ; but it also docs not seem to be the specification that corresponds to 
the form that physical laws take as one considers a broader or deeper 
range of problems. For example, black-body radiation strongly suggests 
that there is a field that absorbs the energy emitted by matter since the 
mean energy absorbed is exactly what would be absorbed by a set of 
equivalent oscillators. When we come to quantum electrodynamics, the 
field concept demonstrates important further advantages. For here the 
45 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
On the other hand, as field theories came to be an accepted part 
of the structure of modern physics, a great many physicists began to 
give them what is, in its essence, a mechanistic interpretation. For 
instead of assuming that the whole of nature can be reduced to the 
motions of a few kinds of bodies, they assumed that the whole of 
nature can be reduced to nothing more than a few kinds of bodies 
and a few kinds of fields. Or with Einstein, they may have assumed 
that the whole of nature could be reduced to nothing more than 
fields alone. Thus, these physicists effectively argued that the 
philosophy of mechanism was right in general but wrong in the 
detail that it had previo usly left out an important set of mechanical 
parameters, the fields, which were actually needed for the complete 
specification of the state of everything in the whole universe.* It is 
true that the fields, being continuous, required a non-countable 
infinity of variables for their mathematical expression.t Thus, the 
mechanistic programme of predicting the future behaviour of the 
universe by knowing the initial values of all the mechanical para­
meters involved (in this case, those connected both with the fields 
and with the bodies) was now clearly impossible in practice. 
Nevertheless, this behaviour could still be conceived of as deter­
mined in principle by these mechanical parameters. Thus, one could 
also imagine that the super-being of Laplace was endowed with the 
power of dealing with a non-countable infinity of variables, so that 
he could then calculate the future of the universe with complete 
precision, although the labour involved would obviously be in­
finitely greater than a universe consisting of nothing but bodies. It 
very existence of particles is understood in terms of the notion of quantized 
states of the fields, so that one can likewise understand the "creation" and 
"destruction" of such particles as changes in the state of excitation of the 
fields. Similarly, the quantum fluctuations of the vacuum, which have 
demonstrated their importance in many experiments, are likewise de­
scribed in a very natural way in terms of the field concept. On the other 
hand, the "creation" and "destruction" of particles cannot even be 
treated in terms of retarded potentials while the treatment of the quantum 
fluctuations in these terms is very artificial. Thus, the field point of view 
is strongly favoured in a rather wide range of problems. 
• This view is at present most frequently embodied in the formulation 
of the laws of nature in terms of a "variational principle", in which these 
laws are derived by minimizing a "Lagrangian". To treat the fields, one 
then simply adds the "field Lagrangian" to the "particle Lagrangian". 
Thus, the "field co-ordinates" are regarded as additional mechanical 
variables that have to be added to the particle variables to constitute a 
generalized mechanical system. 
t If we consider a system enclosed in a box, it is true that the field 
variables become countable (e.g. a Fourier series). However, to treat the 
universe as a whole, we are not permitted to assume such a box. Hence, 
the variables are not countable in the problem under discussion here. 
46 

Field Theories and Mechanism 
is clear, then, that the point of view described above retains the most 
essential and characteristic feature of mechanism (see Section 3), 
namely, to reduce everything in the whole universe compictely and 
perfectly to purely quantitative changes in a few basic kinds of 
entities (in this case, bodies and fields, or fields alone, as in the point 
of view of Einstein), which themselves never change qualitatively. 
It is, to be sure, a more subtle and elaborate form of mechanism 
than that of Laplace, but in becoming more subtle and elaborate, it 
did not cease to be mechanistic. 
9. M O L E C U L A R  T H E O R Y  OF H E A T  A N D  T l l E  K I N ET I C 
T H E O R Y  O F  G A S E S  
Along with the field theory and the theory of light there developed 
another new branch of physics, namely the molecular theory of 
heat and the kinetic theory of gases, which, as we have already pointed 
out, also played an important role in the gradual process of under­
mining mechanism that took place during the eighteenth and nine­
teenth centuries. 
As is well known, it was shown by Mayer, Joule, and others that 
water is heated when it is set in agitated and turbulent motion, for 
example, by a moving paddle-wheel. Joule then measured the heat­
ing which results when such a wheel is turned by a weight tlr<1.t is 
allowed to fall through a predetermined distance. The heat pro­
duced was found to be always proportional to the energy liberated 
by the falling weight. Vice versa, heat engines were constructed 
(e.g. steam engines) which turned heat into mechanical energy. 
Again there was the same proportionality between heat and 
mechanical energy. 
A theory of heat was then developed. It was postulated that heat 
is a form of chaotic molecular motion. Thus, as the paddle-wheel 
turned, it created vortices in the water. These vortices gradually 
became smaller and more and more chaotic until they approached 
a molecular level in size. At this stage, the energy of the regular 
mechanical motion of paddle-wheel had been transformed completely 
into energy of irregular or chaotic molecular motion. Although this 
irregular chaotic motion is not directly visible on the macroscopic 
scale, it nevertheless manifests itself to us as "heat". It may also 
manifest itself as a mechanical pressure. 
Thus, a kinetic theory of gases was developed, based on the 
assumption that a gas consisted of molecules in irregular or chaotic 
motion. As a first approximation, these molecules were thought of 
as having a small but finite size. But in a gas, this size was supposed 
to be much less than the mean distance between the molecules. 
Thus, the molecules move freely through space, except for occasional 
47 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
collisions. These collisions produce abrupt changes, both in the 
direction and in the magnitude of the velocity. I t  can be seen 
intuitively that in time a very irregular more or less random distri­
bution of particle positions and directions of motion is to be 
expected, because of these collisions. 
Let us now consider the effect of this irregular motion on the walls 
of the container. The walls will be struck almost continually, and 
each molecule will transmit a small momentum to the wall. The net 
effect will be similar to that of a rai n of grains of sand. Because of 
the random distribution of the particles, an al most continuous 
pressu re will he produced on the walls. It is this pressure which 
tends to ca use a ta nk of compressed air to ex plode, and which pro­
vides the force that moves the piston in a steam engine or gasoline 
engine. Thus, we obtain an explanation of pressure i n  terms of the 
so-called kinetic theory of gases. 
One of the strongest of the earlier experimental indications of the 
reality of random molecular motion came from a study of the 
Brownian motion. The botanist Brown discovered in 1 824 that sub­
microscopic spore particles suspended in water exhibit an irregular 
and perpetual motion, without 'any visible source of energy. A 
similar behaviour was later observed with smoke particles suspended 
in air. For a long time efforts at explaining this phenomenon met 
with failure ; but finally, after many hypotheses had been tried, it 
was shown that the Brownian motion could be explained both 
qualitatively and quantitatively as an effect of chaotic molecular 
motion. To do this, we first note that, although each smoke particle 
is small, it still contains of the order of 108 atoms or more. Thus, 
when it is struck by a molecule of the gas in which it is suspended, 
it will receive an impulse which causes it to change its velocity 
slightly. Now the gas molecules are moving quite rapidly (with velo­
city of the order of 101 cm./sec.), but because the smoke particle is 
much heavier than an atom, the result of its being struck by an 
individual atom will be a comparatively small change of velocity. 
Since it is being struck continually and in a very irregular way by 
the gas molecules, we expect to obtain a corresponding slow but 
irregular fluctuation in the speed of the smoke particle. The larger 
the particle, the less will be the fluctuation. Thus, some fluctuation 
in velocity will persist even for particles of macroscopic size (such 
as a chair), but its magnitude will be completely negligible. To 
obtain an appreciable effect we need to go to sub-microscopic 
bodies. 
When the mean speed of fluctuation for particles of a given size 
was calculated, it was found to agree with that observed, within 
experimental error. Thus, the Brownian motion provided an 
48 

Molecular Theory of Heat 
important piece of evidence backing up the hypothesis of irregular 
molecular motions. Later, more direct evidence was found ; for with 
modern techniques and apparatus it became possible to measure 
the velocities of individual atoms, and thus to show that they are 
really moving irregularly with the distribution of velocities predicted 
by the theory. 
1 0 . 
ON 
T H E  RELATIONS H I P 
B ET W E E N  
M I C R O S C O P I C  A N D  
M A C R O S C O P I C  
L E V E L, 
A C C O R D I N G  
T O  
T l l E  
M O L E C U L A R  
T H E O R Y  
The kinetic theory of gases described in the previous section was 
important, not only in itself but also because it was the first example 
within physics of a qualitatively new aspect of the laws of nature; 
viz. that the large-scale over-all statistical regularities can appear at 
the macroscopic level which are largely independent of the precise 
details of the complicated and irregular motions taking place at the 
atomic level. Because this kind of regular over-all statistical law has 
by now become quite common, not only in physics but also in many 
other fields, we shall give here a fairly detailed analysis of how such 
laws arise, for the case of the molecular theory of heat and the kinetic 
theory of gases. 
Let us begin by considering a box of gas containing something of 
the order of 1 021 molecules, each of which is moving in a very 
irregular path as a result of continual collisions with the other 
molecules. Clearly, to solve for the precise motions of each molecule 
would be a hopeless task. For, first of all, the problem is far beyond 
the domain of possibility, if only because of its sheer mathematical 
difficulty. But even if we could solve the mathematical problems 
involved we would be blocked by the practical impossibility of 
measuring the initial position and velocity of each molecule, which 
information is needed in order to make precise predictions in terms 
of the science of mechanics. And even if this information were 
available, it might not suffice, because our knowledge of the basic 
laws of mechanics themselves may not be perfect. Indeed, if one 
thinks with more care of the character of molecular motions, one 
sees that they possess an enormous instability. For example, a slight 
change of the initial angle of motion of any molecule will change 
appreciably its direction of motion after the first collision. This 
change would in turn lead to a still bigger change in the next col­
lision, etc., and the cumulative effects of these changes would 
eventually carry the molecule in question to a very different region 
of space. Thus, the slightest error in any aspect of the theory, either 
the mathematics, or the knowledge of initial conditions, or the 
expression of the basic causal laws themselves, would in time lead 
49 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
to enormous errors i n  the predictions concerning the details of the 
molecular motions. 
We sec, then, t hat if we seek to make a detailed prediction of the 
behavio ur of an individual system contai ning something of the 
order of 1 023 molecules, we will be stopped on all sides. On the other 
hand, the very same factors that make such a detailed prediction 
impossible are also those that make possible a general prediction of 
the over-all or macroscopic average properties of the system with­
out the need for precise information about exactly what the indi­
vidual molecules are doing. We note that macroscopic average 
quantities (such as the mean number of molecules i n  a given region 
of space or the mean pressure o n  a given surface) arc extremely 
inscnsitfre to the precise motions and arrangements in space of the 
individual molecules. This i nsensitivity origi nates, at least in part, 
in the fact t hat an enormous number of different motions and 
arrangements in space can lead to practically the same values for 
these quantities. For example, if we interchange two molecules in 
space, we get a different set of microscopic conditions, but macro­
scopically the effects are the same. And if in a given region of space, 
a given molecule changes its direction of motion, the effects of this 
change on large-scale averages can be well compensated by suitable 
opposite changes in the motions of neighbouring molecules. Thu.>, 
irregular motions of many molecules will produce fluctuations, the 
effects of which tend , in the long run and on the average, to cancel 
out. Indeed, the above considerations are verified in quantitative 
detail in studies carried out in the science of statistical mechanics, 
which show that almost all possible i nitial conditions for the mole­
cular positions and velocities lead to irregular motions in which the 
large-scale averages fluctuate very close to practically determinate 
mean values. Because these mean values depend almost entirely only 
on the general over-all properties of the molecules, such as the mean 
density, the mean kinetic energy, etc., which can be defined directly 
at the large-scale level, it becomes possible to obtain regular and 
predictable relationships involving the large-scale level alone. 
It is clear that one is justified in speaking of a macroscopic level 
possessing a set of relatively autonomous qualities and satisfying a 
set of relatively autonomous relations which effectively constitute a 
set of macroscopic causal laws.* For example, if we consider a mass 
of water, we know by direct large-scale experience that it acts in its 
own characteristic way as a liquid. By this we mean that it shows all 
the macroscopic qualities that we associate with liquidity. For ex­
ample, it flows, it "wets" things, it tends to maintain a certain 
vol ume, etc. In its motions it satisfies a set of basic hydrodynamic 
• E.g. the laws of thermodynamics and macroscopic physics in general. 
50 

Microscopic and Macroscopic Levels 
equations* which arc expressed in terms of the large-scale properties 
alone, such as pressure, temperature, local density, local stream 
velocity, etc. Thus, if one wishes to understand the properties of the 
mass of water, one does not treat it as an aggregate of molecules, 
but rather as an entity existing al the macroscopic level, following 
laws appropriate to that level. 
This docs not mean, of course, that the molecular constitution of 
a liquid has no connection with its macroscopic properties. On the 
contrary, if we study the relationship between the two, we can even 
sec why a relatively autonomous level is possible. The reason is just 
the insensitivity of the over-all large-scale behaviour to precisely what 
the individual molecules arc doing. Part of this insensitivity comes 
from the cancellation of the effects of these individual motions 
described above. Another part comes from the effects of the inter­
molecular forces. The fo r<.:cs between the molecules arc such that 
they are in approximate balance when the liquid has a certain 
density. If the density is increased, so that the molecules arc brought 
closer together, repulsive forces appear which automatically tend to 
bring the density back to its original value ; while if the density is 
decreased, attractive forces between the molecules begin to manifest 
themselves ; which likewise tend to bring the density back to its 
original value. Hence, there exists, in addition to the canccllatio1! of 
the effects of the details of molecular motion, a certain stability of 
the characteristic modes of macroscopic behaviour, which tend to 
maintain themselves not only more or less independently of what 
the individual molecules are doing, but also of the various distur­
bances to which the system may be subjected from outside. 
The concept of relatively autonomous levels has been found to 
have a rather wide range of application. Thus, even in physics, it 
has been discovered that beneath the atomic level lies the level of 
the so-called "elementary particles" of physics, such as electrons, 
protons, neutrons, etc. And as we shall see later, especially in 
Chapter IV, there seems to be a new and as yet very poorly known 
level even below that of these elementary particles. In the other 
direction we have the molecular level (whose laws are studied 
mainly in chemistry, but partly in physics), the level of living matter 
(studied mainly in biology) which itself has many levels, as well as 
still other levels which the reader will easily think of. t In all these 
levels, however, we find the typical relative autonomy of behaviour, 
and the existence of sets of qualities, laws, and relationships which 
are characteristic of the level in question. 
• The Napier-Stokes equations. 
t As we shall see in Chapter V, this stratified structure may well be 
infinite, but it is not necessarily so. 
51 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mecha11ism 
1 1 . Q U A L I T A T I V E  A N D  Q U A N T I T A T I V E  C H A N G ES 
A very important further contribution of the atomic theory to t he 
enrichment of the conceptuul st ructure of phyትics was t o  pe rmit a 
clari lication of t he relationship between qual itative and quant ita tive 
changes i n  terms of some simple examples which could be st udied 
in considerable detail. As an illust ration of how t his was done, we 
shall discuss the transformation from gas to liq uid to solid. 
I n  the early phases of the development of physics, t he qualitat ive 
properties associuted with the gaseous, l iquid , a nd solid pha<;es of 
matter were simply assumed without f urthcr analysis. With t he 
development of the atomic t heory, however, it became possi ble to 
explain them, at least approximately, in terms of the qua11titatil'ely 
specifiable motions of the atoms and molecules of which the matter 
in question was constituted. The general l i nes of such an explana­
tion are more or less as follows. 
In the gaseous phase the molecules arc, as we have seen, i n  
perpetual and chaotic motion. O f  course t here exist attractive forces 
bet\veen the molecules, but the mean k inetic energy of random 
motion is so high that the molecules do not form stable combina­
tions and, instead, more or less uniformly fill the entire space avail­
able to them. This is a characteristic property of the gaseous phase. 
As the temperature is lowered, the mea n kinet ic energy of the 
molecules decreases, and t he inter-molecular forces begin to play a 
more important role. Thus, as we come near to t he point of con­
densation of the gas, clusters consisting of a few molecules continu­
ally tend to be formed as a result of the mutual attractions of the 
molecules, but the mean kinetic energy is so high that these clusters 
break up almost as soon as they are formed. As the temperature is 
lowered further, the clusters tend to get larger ; then, at a certain 
critical temperature, a qualitatively new phenomenon appears. 
Molecules continue to condense on a given cluster more rapidly 
than they leave. Thus, the clusters grow and become small droplets, 
after which the droplets later unite to form the new liquid p hase. 
In this phase the substance does not fill the entire space available to 
it, but occupies a certain characteristic and definite volume, which 
is determined by the balancing of the attractive and the repulsive 
tendencies in the mutual interactions of all the molecules. Among 
t he addit ional new qualities that appear i n  this phase is a relative 
incompressibility, the ability to "wet" surfaces, to dissolve various 
solids, and many others, all of which can be explained approxi­
mately by a more detailed analysis of the molecular motions, which 
we shall not, however, give here. 
As the temperature of the liquid is lowered, further quantitative 
52 

Qua/i1atfre a11d Quantitatfre C!ta11ges 
changes occu r i n  its various properties (e.g. increase in density a nd 
i n  viscosity). These come from the decrease in mean molecular 
k inetic energy. Then, as the point of solidification is approached, 
i ncipient crystals, consisting of a small number of atoms arranged 
i n  regular and periodic lattices, begin to form. The tendency to form 
such crystals is again due to t he inter-molecular forces, which arc 
such that a lattice of this kind represents the most stable possible 
con figuration. These crystals, however, break up almost as soon as 
they arc formed, because of the disruptive cff ccts of the random 
t hermal motions. Below a certain critical temperature, however, t he 
crystals begin to grow at a rate, on the average, faster than they 
break up, and the liquid is transformed into the qualitatively new 
phase of a crystalline solid. In this phase the substance tends not 
only to occupy a definite volume, but also to maintain a fixed shape, 
resisting efforts to deform it, and returning after it has been deformed 
to its o rigi nal shape. Qualitative changes are also generally observed 
i n  many other properties (e.g. ability to transmit light, to polarize 
it, pat tern shown on X-ray diffraction, etc.). As the temperature is 
lowered st ill further, additional quantitative changes in the pro­
perties of t he crystal take place, coming from the continual decrease 
of the mean kinetic energy of vibration of the molecules around their 
mean positions in the crystal lattice. 
We sec, then, that quantitative changes in the mean kinetic energy 
of molecular motion lead to a series of qualitative changes in the 
properties of matter in bulk. These qualitative changes arc generally 
foreshadowed as one approaches a critical temperature. As one 
passes such a critical temperature, however, two things happen. 
Fi rst, conditions are created in which completely different qualities 
come into bei ng (e.g. the tendency in the case of the liquid phase to 
occupy a definite volume). Secondly, even those properties (such as 
specific heat, density, etc.) which are common to both phases show 
discontinuities i n  their quantitative behaviour as one passes through 
a transition point. 
Let us now t ry to express more precisely j ust what i s  essent ial in 
a qual i ta tive transformation. The most essential and characteristic 
feature of a qualitative transformation is that new kinds of causal 
factors begin to be significant in a given context, or to "take con­
trol" of a certain domain of phenomena, with the result that there 
appear new laws and even new kinds of laws, which apply i n  the 
domai n i n  question. Thus, as we have seen, the volume of a gas is 
determi ned by the container, while that i n  the liquid phase is deter­
mi ned primarily by the inner conditions of the liquid itself. Hence, 
there appears a new quality ; viz. a tendency to maintain a certain 
vol ume, which is reflected i n  a new form for the law relating the 
53 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
volume of the liquid to its other properties (such as temperature and 
pressure). Similarly, while the shape of a liquid is determined by 
that of the container, the shape of a solid is, like its vol ume, deter­
mined primarily by its own inner conditions. Thus, the new quality 
of rigidity appears, along with new laws that govern its character­
istics.* 
1 2 . C H A N C E ,  S T A T I S T I C A L  L A W ,  A N D  P R O D A D I L I T Y  
I N  P H Y S I C S  
Still another extremely sign ificant new development o f  the concep­
tual structure of classical physics came from the introd uction of the 
concepts of chance, statistical law, and probability i n  con nection 
with the explanation of Brownian motion, the laws of thermo­
dynamics, and other macroscopic properties. We shall therefore give 
here a brief account of how these concepts were applied in the field 
of atomic physics, for the purpose of calculati ng the statistical 
properties of large aggregates of atoms or molecules. 
The modes of motion of atoms or molecules in such aggregates 
present all of the characteristic properties needed to give rise to 
chance fluctuations. Thus, as we have seen in connection with the 
discussion of levels given in Section 1 0, the details of the motions of 
individ ual rr.olccules are (because of their extreme i nstability) very 
sensitive to exactly how the various other molecules arc moving, 
and are also (because of collisions) extremely complicated and sub­
ject to very irregular and rapid fluctuations in their velocities, 
fluctuations which are effectively random. t As a result, the motions 
of each molecule are evidently contingent on an enormous number 
of rapidly fluctuating factors. Hence, within the limited context in 
which we consider only a particular molecule, it may be expected that 
a description of the motion as being subject to chance fluctuations 
should be substantially correct. Moreover, when we have to deal 
with a large number of molecules under uniform conditions (e.g. a 
box of gas), it is already evident, i n  qualitative terms at least, that in 
the long run and on the average each molecule will spend about the 
same fraction of time in any one region of space as in any other 
region of equal volu me. t Thus, there is a uniform probability through-
• It should also be added that, as pointed out in Chapter I, Section 7, 
qualitative transformations satisfy many-to-one causal rclationship.s tæat 
are independent of a wide range of variations in the detailed quant1tat1ve 
conditions accompanying the transformation. 
. . 
t For a further discussion of the randomness of the veloc1t1es, se 
D. Bohm and W. Schutzer, Nuovo Cimento. (To be published.) 
. 
t A rigorous mathematical proof of this can be carried out for certain 
simple systems, but the mathematical difficulties have thus far been too 
great to permit a general treatment of this problem, which would be 
54 

Chance, Statistics, and Probability 
out the whole box of occupying any particular region having a 
specified volume, regardless of where that region is. Finally, because 
of the randomness arising from the collisions, there will be no 
tendency i n  the long run for any one molecule to remain near any 
other specified molecule, so that each molecule has on the avcrnge 
a high degree of i ndependence i n  its motions relative to that of the 
others. 
Under these conditions, the theory of probability permits the 
calculation of a large number of properties of a statistical aggregate 
of molecules. The simplest example of the application of the t heory 
is to note that an cqui-probability distribution for the molecules 
implies that the mean or average density will be constant every­
where, a well-known property of a gas confined i n  a box under 
uniform conditions. Not only average properties, but also the mean 
fluctuations away from the ai•erage, can thus be predicted. This can 
be done with the aid of a well-known theorem, from which one 
concludes that, in this problem, the mean fractional fluctuation away 
from an average will be vn: where n is equal to the number of 
elements considered i n  obtaining this average. Thus, let us take a 
case of a gas with a mean density of 1017 molecules per cubic centi­
metre. If we consider a cube of side 1 0-• cm. (with a volume of 
1 0 - 1• cm.3), it will on the average contain 100 molecules. Because of 
the random motions of the molecules, however, this number will 
actually fluctuate rapidly with time ; and according to the theorem 
cited above, the mean fractional fluctuation will be about 10. If we 
consider a cube of J0-3 cm. on a side, however, the mean number of 
particles i n  the cube will be 1 08, and the mean fractional fluctuation 
in this number will be only l ·O X 1 0-•. And with cube IO cm. on a 
side, the mean number of molecules in the cube will be 1 020, while 
the mean fractional fluctuation will be only l ·O x 10- 10• This 
example shows quantitatively how, as we consider the average 
containing more and more clements in a statistical aggregate, the 
cha nce fluctuations tend to cancel out more and more completely, 
thus creating the conditions for the appearance of a statistical law 
that grows more and more nearly determinate as the number of 
clements increases without limit. 
A systematic application of the theory of probability to atomic 
physics is carried out in the study of statistical mechanics, which 
equivalent to proving the so-called "quasi-ergodic theorem". (The con­
jecture that this theorem applies in typical problems of the kind described 
here is, however, made extremely plausible by the qualitative arguments 
that we have given here, as well as by the fact that such a theorem has in 
fact been proved for simple systems. See, for example, D. Bohm and 
W. Schutzer, op. cit.) 
55 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
makes possible fairly precise calculation of a great many macro­
scopic properties of the system (e.g. entropy, heat capacity, equation 
of state, etc.) on the basis of the microscopic laws, and which also 
provides a model permitting a quantitative treatment of the way in 
which the macroscopic laws of thermodynamics arise out of the 
microscopic motions. It has also been applied in the study of Brown­
ian motion, and in the study of the fluctuations of the macroscopic 
properties of matter near the critical points of liquids. Thus, the 
theory of probability has made an important contribution to our 
understanding of the relationship between microscopic and macro­
scopic levels by permitting us to take into account chance pheno­
mena originating in the microscopic level without the need for either 
a precise and a detailed calculation of the motions of all the indi­
vidual molecules in a large aggregate or a precise knowledge of the 
laws of the microscopic level. 
1 3 . T H E E N R I C H M E NTS OF THE C O N C E P T U A L  S T R U C T U R E  O F 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S A N D  TH E P H I L O S O P H Y  O F  M E C H A N I S M  
We have seen in the preceding sections that, even apart from the 
development of the notion of fields, there occurred during the eigh­
teenth and nineteenth centuries a number of very important addi­
tional steps that considerably enriched the conceptual structure of 
physics. These included the introduction of the concept of levels, 
that of quantitative changes that lead to qualitative changes, and 
that of chance fluctuations that tend towards approximately deter­
minate laws for the mean behaviour of large aggregates. While, as 
we have already pointed out in Section 4, none of these concepts is 
in direct contradiction to a mechanistic philosophy, every one of 
them constitutes, in its general trend and spirit at least, a step away 
from the idea that there is an absolute and final fu ndamental law, 
which is purely quantitative in form, and which would by itself 
permit, in principle at least, the complete and perfect calculation 
of every feature of everything in the whole universe. 
To see why these new concepts tend to lead away from mechanism 
we first recall that in the original form of the mechanistic philosophy, 
both the notion of qualitative changes and that of chance were 
regarded as nothing more than subjective aids to our thinking about 
the properties of matter en masse, so that they did not represent 
anything that was actually supposed to exist objectively in material 
systems. We have already seen in Section I I ,  however, that at least 
within the macroscopic domain, in a qualitative transformation, 
new qualities satisfying new laws become the significant and domin­
ant causes in the domain in question. Moreover, the objective reality 
of the breaks in quantitative macroscopic properties, as well as that 
56 

Conceptual Structure of Classical Physics 
of the insensitivity of the qualitative change to quantitative details 
also cannot be denied. Similarly, it is evident (on the basis of the 
discussions given in Chapter I, Sections 8 and 9) that chance 
fluctuations exist objectively within specified contexts, and that the 
theory of probability provides a relatively precise mathematical 
expression of objective properties of these fluctuations, including the 
statistical regularities which arise on the basis of the cancellation 
of large numbers of chance fluctuations. 
It is a most important characteristic of the mechanistic philosophy, 
however, that it permits one to make a limitless number of adjust­
ments in his detailed point of view, without giving up what is essen­
tial to the mechanistic positivn. Thus, with the notion of qualitative 
changes, a great many physicists have effectively accepted the idea 
that these may well be objective (or at least as objective as anything 
else is). Nevertheless, they assert that such changes are not of 
fundamental significance, because they must, in principle at least, 
follow completely and perfectly in all of their details, in every respect, 
and without any approximation, from the quantitative laws of 
motion of the fundamental elements that make up the system, what­
ever these elements may be. Hence, it is maintained that qualitative 
changes arc like passing shadows that have absolutely no indepen­
dent existence of their own, but which depend for all their ·attri­
butes on the quantitative laws governing the basic elements entering 
into the theory. It is evident that such an attitude implies also that 
the notion of a series of levels of law is likewise nothing more than 
a set of approximations to the absolute and final fundamental law, 
approximations in which the laws of the various levels depend 
completely for all their characteristics on the fundamental law, 
while the fundamental law has no dependence whatever on the laws 
of the various levels. Similarly, it is consistent with this point of 
view to suppose that chance and statistical laws arise out of nothing 
more than the sheer complexity and multiplicity of the motions of 
the basic entities entering into the fundamental causal law and that 
into the formulation of this latter law no clement of chance whatever 
will appear. 
We recall that historically the mechanistic philosophy was 
expressed in terms of the assumption that the basic units out of 
which the universe was supposed to be built are indivisible atoms. 
The purely quantitative laws governing the motions of these atoms 
were then regarded as the laws from which everything else followed. 
It was discovered later, however, that the atoms are not really the 
fundamental units, because they are composed of electrons, protons, 
and neutrons in motion. From this fact one could already see that 
the ass um pt ion of the complete reducibility of everything in the whole 
57 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
universe to nothing more than the Jaws governing the motions of the 
atoms could not be perfectly valid, because the existence of an inner 
structure for the atoms permits the Jaws that govern them to be 
influenced by conditions existing at the large-scale level. Hence, the 
Jaws of the macroscopic level and those of the atomic level will 
actually be subject to mutual and reciprocal relationships. 
As an example, let us consider the temperature of a substance. 
According to the atomic theory, this temperature is determined 
completely and perfectly by nothing more than the mean kinetic 
energy of the chaotic part of the molecular and atomic motions.• 
At temperatures of a few thousand degrees absolute, however, 
molecules and atoms dissociate int" electrons and ions having 
qualitatively new properties compared with those of the undis­
sociated systems, while at temperatures of the order of millions of 
degrees (existing in the interiors of stars), even the nuclei begin to 
transform, so that any atoms of a particular kind are always turning 
into atoms of other kinds. When these processes become important, 
the idea that the temperature is nothing more than a shadow-like 
property, determined solely by the mean kinetic energy of chaotic 
atomic and molecular motions, ceases to be able to represent the 
relevant features of the problem adequately. For an essential effect 
of the raising of the temperature is that the concept of the motions 
as reducible to displacements of atoms and molecules through space 
eventually becomes completely inapplicable. Hence, as long as we 
stay within the framework of the atomic theory, we are compelled to 
admit that large-scale properties such as the temperature may have a 
certain measure of relatively autonomous and independent being, in 
the sense that they contribute to the definition of the inner character­
istics of the atoms, to the laws governing their external behaviour, 
and even to the conditions determining whether or not atoms of a 
given kind (or atoms of any kind at all) can exist. Under limited 
sets of conditions and for limited contexts, the effect of the large­
scale laws on those of the atomic level are so small that we can ignore 
them, and then the notion of a complete determination of the 
macroscopic laws by those governing the atomic motions becomes a 
good approximation. But the original mechanistic assumption that 
this determination is not approximate and conditional, but instead 
perfect and absolute, is now seen not to be in accordance with the 
facts that have been discovered in the further progress of physics. 
In answer to the above criticisms, the more modern mechanistic 
position is, of course, that the difficulties are due to the fact that the 
atoms are obviously not the fundamental elements, and that, instead, 
one must go to the electrons, protons, and neutrons, which are really 
• Se, for example, Section 9. 
58 

Conceptual Structure of Classical Physics 
the fundamental ones. From the laws applying to these entities, we 
will then be able to deduce all the properties of the atoms, and to 
continue the deduction on to show that the laws of the macroscopic 
level also follow completely and perfectly from the same basis. Thus, 
we were right in our general goal, but wrong in prematurely 
supposing that we had reached it in the laws of the atomic level. 
New developments in modern physics show, however, that this 
point of view cannot be correct, either. For the further progress of 
physics has disclosed that even the electrons, neutrons, and protons 
are not immutable, and that, under suitable conditions, they can be 
transformed into each other and into a whole host of qualitatively 
different kinds of particles called mesons, hyperons, etc. Such 
transformations take place when particles of very high energy collide 
with each other.* One can readily conceive of a macroscopic 
environment in which the temperature was so high that the mean 
particle energies were in the range in which these transformations 
could take place ; and indeed, it is quite possible that such tempera­
tures may eventually be produced artificially, or that they may even 
have existed naturally in the earlier phases of the development of the 
universe. t In such an environment, conditions at the large-scale 
level would significantly influence even the kinds of basic particles 
i nto which any system has to be analysed. As a result, the goal of 
deducing the laws of the higher levels completely and without 
approximation from those applying to electrons, protons, and neu­
trons, etc., proves to be unattainable, j ust as happened when the 
attempt was made to do this with the atoms as the fundamental 
units. 
Of course, there is once again an easy way out of these difficulties, 
without leaving the framework of the mechanistic point of view. 
One merely needs to suppose that the really fundamental laws are 
not even the current ones applying to the motions of the electrons, 
protons, neutrons, mesons, etc., and that there must be a still more 
fundamental set of laws, which will finally settle the question, once 
and for all. But now the essentially philosophical assumption behind 
the mechanistic point of view has exposed itself clearly. For now one 
sees that not only are there no known cases of laws that accomplish 
the mechanistic aim, but even more, that even if we did have a law 
which seemed to explain everything that was known at a given time, 
we could never be sure that the next more accurate experiment or 
the next new kind of experiment would not show up some inade­
quacies that would lead eventually to a still more general and deeper 
• These energies must be of the order of hundreds of millions of electron 
volts. 
t This point is discussed in Chapter V, Sections 8 and 1 1 .  
59 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
set of laws. Indeed, this latter has been what has happened i n  physics 
thus far, with all the laws that have at one time or another been 
thought to be the final ones. Thus, the possibility wil l always be 
open that there will be a reciprocal influence between higher-level 
laws and those of any given lower level. Thi s  reciprocal influence 
may be negligible under familiar conditions, but very important 
under new conditio ns. The assumption that any given law is so 
fundamental that there is absol utely no rcciproc.il influence of this 
kind whatever is therefore one that cannot be proved on the basis of 
any conceivable kinds of experimental facts. 
Similar conclusions can easily be obtained conce rn i ng the relation­
ship of qualitative changes to the q uantitative laws from which they 
can be predicted approximately. For we can readily see that there is 
a reciprocal i nfluence of the qualitative state of matter on the 
quantitative laws which apply in any particular domain or lcvd. 
Thus, for example, the precise form of the forces between molecules, 
which enter into the formulation of thei r laws of motion, depend in 
a fundamental way o n  the qualitative state of matter (e.g. is it a gas, 
a liquid or a solid, * etc.). Of course, we can u nderstand this depen­
dence approximately by considering the motions of the electrons, 
protons, and neutrons that constitute the atom ; but, once again, the 
same basic problem arises. For it is possible to change the qualitative 
state of matter so much that even the basic q uantitative prope rties 
of these latter particles will alter signi ficantly. Thus, there are certai n 
very dense stars, i n  which there are no such things, properly speaking, 
as atoms, but in which there are just dense masses of electrons, 
neutrons, and protons.t Under these conditions, there arc good 
reasons to suppose that many basic quantitative properties of the 
electrons, neut rons, and protons should be quite different from what 
they are under more usual conditions. t  Thus, we see that even the 
quantitative laws governing the electrons, protons, and neutrons 
depend somewhat on the qualitative state in which m atter fi nds itself. 
Hence, we have not yet reached the goal of finding a p urely quanti­
tative law which completely and without approximation explains all 
* For example, there may exist "many body" forces, which cannot. be 
expressed as a sum of two body interactions, "exchange forces" ቸesultmg 
from the storing of electrons in a metal , directional forces resu lting fቹom 
the distortion of the atoms and molecules taking place when they are m a 
lattice, etc. 
t The stars are so dense that the nuclei of the various atoms are practi­
cally in contact all the time. 
! For example, because of the rapid exchange of mesons between these 
particles, the nuclear forces, magnetic moments, quadrupole moments, 
etc., are very probably quite different from what they are when the 
particles are present only in a low density. 
60 

Co11ccpt11al Structure of Classical Physics 
qualities, so that the latter can have no possibility of making an 
i ndependent contribution of their own to the expression of the laws 
of the whole system. Moreover, no experiment could possibly prove 
that a given set of quantitative laws nei•er depends on the qualitative 
state of matter, si nce evidently, under new conditions 
not yet 
i nvestigated, or in studies carried out to a higher level of approxi­
mation, such a dependence might eventually appear. Thus, the 
assumption that all qualitative changes arc, at bottom, just passive 
"shadows" of quantitative changes of some basic set of entities, 
like the one that higher level laws arc reducible completely to those 
of some fundamental level, cannot be founded on any conceivable 
kinds of experimental facts. 
We can easily see that a similar result follows with regard to the 
attitude towards causality and chance that was characteristic of the 
mechanistic philosophy i n  the form tha t  it had developed towards 
the end of the nineteenth century. Thus, as we have already pointed 
out in Chapter I, all causal laws known up to the present have been 
found to lead eventually to contingencies that arc outside the scope 
of what can be trea ted by the causal laws i n  question. For example. 
as we saw in Section 2 of the present chapter, every mechanical law 
applies only to an isolated system, because its behaviour depends on 
boundary conditions that are determined in essentially i ndcpeȏ1dent 
systems external to the one under consideration. Even if we consider 
the entire universe as a single mechanical system, so that there is no 
outside, *  then the same kind of problem arises. Thus, when we try 
to trace the causes of what happens at the macroscopic level with 
greater and greater precision, we eventually find dependence on the 
chance fluctuations of the essentially independent atomic motions. 
But these, in turn, depend in part on essentially independent chance 
fluctuations at the electronic and nuclear level (as well as on quan­
tum-mechanical fluctuations which we shall discuss in Chapter I I I). 
These latter motions in turn depend i n  part on random fluctuations 
at still deeper levels, connected with the structure of the electrons , 
protons, neutrons, etc. (e.g. mesonic motions and probably even in 
a level below that of the elementary particles). Hence, there is no 
known case of a causal law that is completely free from dependence on 
contingencies that are i ntroduced from outside the context treated 
by the law in question. Moreover, even if we had an example of a 
law that seemed to be completely free from such contingencies, the 
• No meaning can be given to such a treatment in terms of predictions 
of actual experiments. It is, however, a useful philosophical abstraction 
to think of such a treatment, provided that we recognize that it merely 
serves as the basis for a discussion of certain important philosophica l 
questions. 
6 1  

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
same general problem would arise as i n  the problem of reciprocal 
relationships between levels and between qualitative and quantitative 
laws. For the next step in scientific research might always disclose 
new factors existing outside the original context, on which the pre­
dictions of the laws in question were contingent. Thus, the notion 
that there is a final causal law completely free of contingency and 
from which all chance fluctuations can in principle be ded uced com­
pletely and perfectly could not be based on any experimental facts. 
In conclusion, we see that the mechanistic asŜumption that all 
the various levels, all qualitative changes, and all chance fluctuations 
will eventually be reducible completely, perfectly, and uncon­
ditionally to effects of some fixed and limited scheme of purely 
quantitative law, does not and cannot follow from any specific 
scientific developments. This assumptio n is therefore essentially 
philosophical in character. Whether it is desirable to make such an 
assumption will then be discussed in more detail in later chapters. 
1 4 . A N E W  P O I N T  OF V I E W TO W A R D S  P R O B A B I L I T Y  
A N D  S T A T I S T I C A L  L A W - I N D E T E R M I :-: I S T I C  M E C I I A N I S M  
I n  response to the many difficult pro blcms presented by the inter­
pretation of chance phenomena and the associated statistical laws, 
there developed around the beginning of the twentieth century a 
new philosophical point of view towards these questions, which 
recognized the objective and fundamental character of chance and 
of the property of probability. This point of view eventually led, 
however, to the denial that determinate laws have any real signi­
ficance, other than as approximations to the laws of probability 
which are valid when we are dealing with a statistical aggregate of 
things or processes. 
The essential change brought in by this new point of view was the 
introduction of an element of arbitrariness into the theory. One still 
thought of the u niverse as a gigantic mechanical system with the 
property that everything in it can in pri nciple be reduced completely 
and perfectly to nothing more than the results of purely quantit<1tive 
changes taking place i n  suitable mechanical parameters. But instead 
of having its behaviour determi ned completely in terms of definite 
laws governing these parameters, this universal system could con­
tinually be subject to irregular alterations in the course of its motion. 
Since the parameters of the system are already assumed to describe 
everything that exists in the world, there is then evidently no place 
from which these irregular alterations in the motion could come. 
Thus, they could not have the character of ordinary chance fluctua­
tions, which represent the effects of contingencies that cannot be 
taken into account in the context under discussion. Rather, they 
62 

l11determi11istic Mechanism 
would represent a kind of fundamental and irred ucible arbitrariness 
or lawlessness in the detailed behaviour of the world. Such a 
behaviour we may call by the name of "absolute chance", because 
it is not conceived of as being arbitrary and lawless relative to a 
certain limited and definite context, but rather as something that 
is so in all possible contexts. 
The absolute arbitrariness and lawlessness in the detailed be­
haviour of individual phenomena is not assumed, however, to extend 
to a statistical aggregate. Instead it is supposed that the laws of 
nature can be expressed in terms of probabilities, which define, at 
least approximately, the long run and average behaviour that will 
be obtained in such statistical aggregations. All possible laws of 
nature are thus assumed to be expressible i n  terms of a set of purely 
quantitative relationships among the appropriate probabilities. For 
example, the notions of qualitative change and of relatively autono­
mous levels are still regarded as nothing more than approximate 
means of treating certain large-scale consequences of a basic and 
final fu ndamental law that is purely quantitative. But now this law 
is supposed to be probabilistic and not deterministic. 
The point of view described above evidently renounces an impor­
tant aspect of the various forms of the mechanistic philosophy that 
appeared from the sixteenth through the nineteenth centl_1ries ; 
namely, their determinism. But in doing this, it has conserved and 
in fact enhanced the central and most essential characteristic of this 
philosophy ; namely, the assumption that everything in the whole 
universe can be reduced completely and perfectly to nothing more 
than the effects of a set of mechanical parameters u ndergoing purely 
quantitative changes. The fact that the details of these changes are 
completely arbitrary and lawless does not, however, make such a 
point of view essentially less mechanistic than the one in which 
these details are assumed to be determined by suitable properties of 
the system itself. I ndeed, the introduction of absolute arbitrariness 
and lawlessness i nto a theory is analogous to taking as a model of 
the world, not an idealized frictionless machine of the type envisaged 
by Laplace but, rather, an idealized roulette wheel that would 
give an irregular distribution of results depending on nothing 
else at all (i nstead of on a multitude of factors lying outside the con­
text available to people who play the game, as happens with real 
roulette wheels). The question of what constitutes a mechanistic 
philosophy, therefore, cuts across the problems of determinism and 
indetermi nism. For this reason, we shall call the philosophy de­
scribed in this section by the name of "indeterministic mechanism'', 
to disti nguish it from the deterministic mechanism which we have 
described previously. 
63 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
The nucleus of the i ndeterministic mechanist point of view to­
wards chance is already presented in the work of von Mises* on the 
theory of probability. In this work, von Mises introduces the notion 
that i n  a genuinely random distribution of objects or events of the 
types to which we apply the theory of probability, there are no 
causal relationships at all, and that the distribution is completely 
"lawless". This means, however, that, whereas he admits that deter­
minate laws can arise as approximations to the effects of laws of 
probability, which hold where large enough numbers of objects or 
events are i nvolved, t he supposes that no analogous possibility 
exists by which laws of probability can arise as approximations to the 
effel:ts of determinate laws. Thus, in this point of view, laws of 
probability are regarded as having a more fundamental character than 
is possessed by determinate laws. 
There has been an extensive development of the poi nt of view 
described above, b ut it has been carried to its logical conclusion only 
in connection with the usual i nterpretation of the quantum theory. 
We shall discuss this problem in more detail in the next chapter. 
Here, however, we may mention that the laws of the quantum 
domain are found to have a basically statistical character, which is 
such that, in general, they are expressed in terms of certai n proba­
bilities. At the large-scale level, these possibilities lead to practically 
determinate predictions ; and in this way the familiar causal laws of 
classical mechanics emerge as statistical approximations. It is then 
assumed, however, as we shall see in more detail in the next chapter, 
that the probabilistic form of the current quantum theory can never 
be shown to be the result of an approximation to some deeper set 
of more nearly determinate laws. Thus, one is led to the conclusion 
that even the most fundamental laws of physics are, at bottom, 
nothing more than laws of probability, and that i ndividual processes 
and events taking place in the atomic domain are completely lawless, 
in the sense suggested by -Yon Mises. 
We have thus come to an interesting inversion. For deterministic 
mechanists regard chance as reducible completely and perfectly to an 
approximate and purely passive reflection of determinate law. On 
the other hand, i ndeterministic mechanists such as von Mises and 
the proponents of the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, 
regard determinate law as reducible completely and perfectly to an 
approximate and purely passive reflection of the probabilistic 
relationships associated with the laws of chance. 
• R. von Mises. Wahrscheinlichkeit, Statistik und Wahrlteit, dritte Auf. 
Wien, Springer ( 1 95 1). 
t E.g. the laws determining the pressure produced by a large number 
of molecules. 
64 

Indeterministic Mechanism 
Now, i n  connection with the indetermi nistic mechanist point of 
view, a basic question that must be settled is whether the details of 
chance fluctuations are ever really completely arbitrary and lawless 
relative to all possible contexts. In answer to this question, we fi rst 
remark that in a very wide range of applications of the concept of 
chance it has actually been possible, as we poi nted out in Chapter I, 
Sections 8 and 9, to show at least qualitatfrely that by broadening 
the context sufficiently we find more and more nearly unique causal 
relationships applying within the chance fluctuations. Moreover, i n  
many cases, one can even demonstrate the same conclusion quanti­
tatfrely. For example, it has been proved mathematically that there 
exists a wide class of determinate sequences involving complicated 
chains of events or events determined by a large number of inde­
pendent causal factors, which possess, to an arbitrarily high degree 
of approximation, the essential statistical properties that are 
characteristic of distribution treated i n  terms of the theory of 
probability.* Thus, one sees that the possibility of treating causal 
laws as statistical approximations to laws of chance is balanced by 
a corresponding possibility of treating laws of probability as statistical 
approximations to the effects of causal laws. I t  follows from this, 
however, that the original notion of von Mises that the laws of 
probability apply to a "completely lawless" d!stribution of ob-jects 
or events can never be given a clear meaning in any specific problem 
or application. For the possibility is always open that any given set 
of laws of probability applying within a given context will eventually 
be seen to be approximations to new kinds of causal laws applying 
in broader contexts. 
The assumption that any particular kind of fl uctuations arc 
arbitrary and lawless relative to all possible contexts, like the similar 
assumption that there exists an absolute and final determinate law, 
is therefore evidently not capable of being based on any experimental 
or theoretical developments arising out of specific scientific problems, 
but i t  is instead a purely philosophical assumption. The question of 
whether it is desirable to make such an assumption we shall discuss 
in the next chapters. 
1 5 . S U M M A R Y  ON M E C H A N I S M  
We have seen that the philosophy of mechanism which started out 
with such brilliant prospects duri ng the time of Newton, ran into a 
series of difficult problems that began to become especially serious 
• See, for example : H. Wcyl, Ann. der Mathematik, 11, 333 ( 1 9 1 6) ;  
H .  Steinhaus, Studio Mathematica, 1 3, I (1 953) ; G .  Klein and T. Prigogine, 
Physica, 19, 74, 89, and 1 053 (1 953) ; D. Bohm and W. Schutzer, Supple­
mento al Nuovo Cimento, Vol. II, Series X, n. 4, p. 1004 (1 955). 
65 

Causality and Chance in Classical Physics: Philosophy of Mechanism 
during the nineteenth century. These problems were resolved by 
means of a series of successive accommoda tions and modifications, 
which retained, however, the essential characteristic of assuming 
that, in principle , everything would finally be reducible completely 
and perfectly to an ultimate set of purely quantit a tive laws, involving 
perhaps bodies alone, perhaps bodies and fields, or perhaps fields 
alone. The various qualitative changes occurri ng in matter as well 
as the existence of various levels would then o ne day be seen to be 
merely a result that follows completely and perfectly, in pri nciple at 
least, from the fundamental quantitative laws. 
We have seen, however, that this poi nt of view does not very well 
fit the experimental facts that are available up t o  the present. For 
further progress in physics has shown that all the various purely 
quantitative theories that were at different times thought to be the 
fundamental ones are actually approximations to still deeper and 
more general theories containing qualitatively new types of basic 
entities that are related by correspondingly new types of laws. 
Moreover, the possibility will always be open that, as has so often 
happened already, future experimental results m ay show the need 
for still further changes of a far-reaching character in our basic 
theories. As a result, there is no conceivable way of proving that the 
laws of the various levels and of qualitative changes are completely 
and perfectly reducible to those of any given quantitative theory, 
however fundamental that theory may seem to be. 
The problem of probability and chance proved to be a particularly 
difficult one for a mechanistic philosophy . For, besides leading to 
problems very similar to those that arise in connection with the 
concepts of levels and of qual itative changes, it brought the mechan­
ists on to one horn or the other of a dilemma ; namely, the need to 
decide, once and for all, and without any possibility of experimental 
proof, whether determinate law is the fundamental category, while 
chance and probability are only passive reflections, or whether 
chance and probability are fundamental and determinate law is 
only a passive reflection . 
It should be noted, however, that all the new developments that 
occurred in the conceptual structure of physics during the nineteenth 
century were in such a sense as to suggest that none of the various 
possible mechanistic schemes, deterministic and indeterministic, that 
have been suggested at different times are really fundamental, but 
that rather, what should be our fundamental starting-point is the 
ful richness of the patterns of natural law described in Chapter I. 
This pattern implies that all the laws o f  the various levels and all the 
different general categories of law, such as qualitative and quantita­
tive, determinate and statistical, etc., represent different but neces-
66 

Summary on Mechanism 
sarily interrelated sides of the same process. Each side gives an 
approxi mate and partial view of reality that helps correct errors 
coming from the sole use of the others, and each t reats adequately 
an aspect of the process that is not so well treated or perhaps even 
missed altogether by the others. Within the framework of this 
general pat tern, one can quite easily i ntegrate all the new develop­
ments in physics that we have described here, and a great deal more 
besides. Thus, there is no need to make conti nual assumptions that 
certain types or categories of law arc the fi nal ones from which 
everythi ng else follows completely and perfectly, assumptions which 
ca n never be proved experimentally and which a re always subject 
to bei ng disproved with the further progress of science. Nor do we 
have to be faced with unresolvable d ilemmas, s uch as that of mak i ng 
a fi nal decision wit hout any possible experimental proof whether 
determi nistic or probabilistic laws arc really the fundamental ones. 
We recognize the contribution to our understanding of nature made 
by every concept and by every category of law, and we leave for 
further scientific research the problem of finding out the extent to 
which any one concept or category of law can, within some degree 
of approximation and under some conditions, be shown to follow 
necessarily from any other specified set of concepts and categories 
of law. 
After pursuing further the course of development of the indeter­
ministic form of the mechanist philosophy in the quantum theory in 
Chapter III, and proposi ng a new interpretat ion of the quantum 
theory in Chapter IV, we shall then return i n  Chapter V to this 
problem, to give a more detailed exposition of how modern physics 
fits into t he above-mentioned genera l pattern of natural law. 
67 

C H A P T E R T H R E E 
The Quantum Theory 
l .  I N T R O D U C T I O N  
I N  the previous chapter we have given a discussion on the evolution 
of classical physics, starting with Newton's laws of motion, and 
continuing on to all the new developments which occurred up to the 
end of the nineteenth century. Throughout this time, however, the 
general philosophical view held by physicists was that of deter­
ministic mechanism .  For it was felt that even though the details of the 
theories that were then current would eventually have to u ndergo 
various modifications in response to the results of further experi­
ments, the basic general scheme in which all theories are formulated 
in terms of differential equations determining the future behaviour 
of everything in the universe completely in terms of their states at a 
given i nstant of time would never have to be changed. For example, 
Lord Kelvin, one of the leadi ng physicists of the time, expressed the 
opi nion that the basic general outline of physical theories was pretty 
well settled, and that there remained only " two small clo uds" on the 
horizon, namely, the negative results of the Michelson-Morley 
ex periment and the failure of Rayleigh-Jeans law to predict the dis­
tribution of radiant energy i n  a black body. I t  must be admitted that 
Lord Kelvin knew how to choose his "clouds", since these were 
precisely the two problems that eventually led to the revolutionary 
changes in the conceptual structure of physics that occurred in the 
twentieth century in connection with the theory of relativity and the 
quantum theory. 
Now, while the theory of relativity brought about important 
modifications in the specific forms in which the causal laws are 
expressed in physics, it did not go outside the previously existing 
theoretical scheme, in which the values of suitable parameters at a 
given instant of time would in principle determine the future 
behaviour of the universe fo r  all time. We shall, therefore, not 
discuss the theory of relativity in this book, in which we are interested 
68 

Introduction 
primarily in the q uestion of causal i ty, because this theory raised no 
q uestion that went to the root of the problem of causality. 
On the other hand, the quantum theory had, from the point of view 
of a discussion of causality, an effect that was much more revolut ion­
a ry than that of relativity. I ndeed, it was the first example in physics 
of an essentially statistical theory. For the quantum mechanics did 
not start from a treatment of the laws of individ ual micro-objects 
and then apply st atistical considera t ions to those laws, as is done in 
classical mechan ics (sec Chapter I I ,  Section 1 4). Rather, from the 
very beginning, it took the form of a set of laws which gave in general 
only sta tist ical predictions, without even raising the q uestion as to 
what might be the laws of the individ ual systems that entered into the 
statistical aggregates t reated in the theory. Moreover, as we shall see, 
the i ndeterminacy p rinciple of Heisenberg led physicists to conclud·c 
that in i nvest iga t ions carried out to a quantum-mecha n icnl level of 
accu racy no precise causal laws could ever be found for the detailed 
behaviour of such individual systems, and thus they were led to 
renounce causality itself in connection with the atomic domain. 
We shall see, however, that the indeterminacy principle necessi­
tates a renunciation of causality only if we assume that this pri nciple 
has an absolute and final validity (i.e. without approximation and 
in every domain that will ever be investigated in physics). On the 
other hand, if we suppose that this principle applies only as a good 
approximation and only in some limited domain (which is more or 
less the one in which the current form of the quantum theory would 
be applicable), then room is left open for new kinds of causal laws 
to apply in new domains. For example, as we shall see, there is good 
reason to assume the existence of a sub quantum-mechanical level 
that is more fundamental than that at which the present quantum 
theory holds. Within this new level could be operating qualitatively 
new ki nds of laws, lead ing to those of the current theory as approx i­
mations and limiting cases in much the same way that the laws of the 
atomic domain lead to those of the macroscopic domain. The inde­
terminacy principle would then apply only in the quantum level, and 
would have no relevance at all at lower levels. The treatment of the 
indeterminacy principle as absolute and final can then be criticized 
as constituting an arbitrary restriction on scientific theories, since 
it does not follow from the quantum theory as such , but rather from 
the assumption of the unlimited validity of certain of its features, an 
assumption that can in no way ever be subjected to experimental 
proof. 
We see, then, that in certain respects twentieth-century physicists 
have continued the classical tradition of conceiving of the general 
features of their theoretical schemes as not subject to future modi-
69 

The Quantum Theory 
fications in new domains or i n  more accurate im·estigations ofalready 
known domains. But these general features do not fit i nto a deter­
ministic mechanist scheme, but rather i nto an indeterministic 
mechanist scheme. However, the indeterministic mechanism takes a 
more subtle form than it had in the earlier versions described i n 
Chapter II. Thus, although a great many of the proponents of the 
usual i nterpretation of the quantum theory have had the express 
purpose of going outside the limits of a mechanistic philosophy, 
what has actually happened has just been a swi tch from deter­
ministic to indeterministic mechanism. 
2 .  O R I G I N  O F  T H E  Q U A N T U M  T H E O R Y * 
The first evidence in favour of the quantum theory came from the 
work of Planck and Einstein. Let us recall that classical physics was 
characterized by the assumption that the bodies of which matter was 
composed moved continuously and exchanged energy continuously 
with the electromagnetic waves such as those of light, which we 
discussed in the previous chapter. On the other hand, Planck and 
Einstein, studying certain experiments i n  which matter exchanged 
energy with light, came to the conclusion that the light transmits 
energy to matter in the form of "quanta" or bundles, of size E = lzv 
where v is the frequency of the light wave and h is a universal 
constant, which was later called Planck's constant. 
Let us now consider some of these experiments in more detail. 
To do this, it is necessary first to discuss classical theory a little 
further. According to the evidence of i nterference and diffracti on, 
which we discussed in the previous chapter, light consists of waves. 
With the aid of Maxwell's equations, and experiments such as those 
of Hertz, strong evidence was obtai ned in favour of the conclusion 
that these waves are electromagnetic in nature. Now, just as a water 
wave can be created by a body disturbing the surface of the water, 
when it moves up and down, an electromagnetic wave can be pro­
duced when a charged particle, such as an electron, moves through 
space with oscillatory motion, and thus disturbs the electric and 
magnetic fields. In both cases the wave spreads out continuously. 
In the case of electrons, this motion can create light-waves, radio 
waves, or other types of electromagnetic waves, dependi ng on the 
frequency. Water waves can set floating objects in oscillatory motion 
with an energy proportional to the intensity of the wave. Similarly, 
with light-waves, the electromagnetic fields will act on charged 
particles such as electrons and impart to them an oscillatory motion, 
with an energy proportional to the intensity of the light-wave. 
* For a more detailed discussion of this subject, see D. Bohm, Quantum 
Theory, Prentice Hall, New York ,  1 95 1 ,  Part I. 
70 

Origin of the Quantum Theory 
This theory was tested experimentally by studying the photo­
electric effect. In such a study, light shines on a metal surface, A, 
placed in a glass tube that has been evacuated (see Fig. 2). Previous 
experiments had shown that a metal contains electrons in large 
numbers. Thus, it would be possible for electrons occasionally to be 
liberated from the illuminated metal surface. A plate, B, is therefore 
placed in the tube to collect any electrons that may be liberated 
from the illuminated surface, A. These electrons would give rise to 
an electric current, which can be measured by means of a galvano­
meter, G. 
The first result of the experiment is that when the plate, A, is 
illuminated, a current is actually observed in the galvanometer, thus 
demonstrating the liberation or electrons by light from the metal 
surface. The next step is to measure the energy of these electrons. 
This is done by establishing an electric potential difference between 
A and B, in such a direction as to tend to turn the electrons around 
before they reached the plate, B. Thus, as the potential difference 
B 
Fig. 2 
was increased, more and more electrons are turned around ; and at a 
certain critical value the current becomes zero. This critical value is 
clearly equal to the maximum kinetic energy with which electrons 
are liberated. A more careful analysis of the way in which the current 
varies with potential permits one to deduce the distribution of kinetic 
energies of the electrons. An analysis of the data from such an 
experiment established the following result : 
When the plate, A, is illuminated with light of frequency, v, the 
electrons all gain the same amount of energy, E = hv, which depends 
only on the frequency of the light, but not on its intensity. Thus, 
when the light is very weak, the electrons still gain the same energy, 
E = hv, but correspondingly fewer electrons are liberated. 
This result is in clear contradiction to the predictions of classical 
theory which state that the energy gained should depend continu­
ously on the intensity of the radiation, so that with weaker light less 
energy should be gained. Indeed, taken by itself this experiment 
would suggest that light does not consist of waves, but of swarms of 
7 1 

The Quantum Theory 
small discrete particles, of energy, E 
= /11•, so that when one of the 
particles strikes an electron, i t  ca n t ra nsfer the discrete energy, 
E = 111•. A weak light-wave would have few such particles and an 
intense wave would have many. Th is model had , in fact, already 
been suggested earlier by Planck on t he basis of a study of the d is­
tribution of energy emitted by a hea ted black body. Planck had 
shown that classical theory led to a q uite defi nite pred ict ion for this 
energy distribution, which was wrong. But the assumption that 
energy comes in packets, or q uanta with e ne rgy E = hi-, explai ned 
these experiments very nicely. The same consta nt. h, th at was needed 
in Planck's theory also predicted co rrectly the energy of electrons i n  
the photo-electric effect. Thus, the evidence was very strong that 
light energy real ly comes in the form of qua nta . 
On the other hand, the evidence that light consists of d i screte 
particles comes into conflict with the experi ments on interference, 
which seem to demand that light is a continuous form of wave 
motion . Consider, for example, the experi ment discussed in the 
previous chapter in which a beam of l ight is incident on two slits. 
If only the first slit is open, we get a certain more or less uniformiy 
varying pattern of light on the screen . But if another slit, B, is opened , 
we get a set of alternate bands of light and d ark ness. Thus, the open­
ing of the second slit, B, can create dark ness at certain points, where 
with one slit alone there was ligh t. This was explai ned by assumi ng 
that the motions d ue to the waves corning th rough the second slit 
could at certai n poi nts cancel these due to the waves comi ng through 
the first, thus producing darkness. But if light consists of a swarm of 
particles, then the opening of t he second slit should in general be 
expected to increase the amount of l ight reaching each point on the 
screen, and should, at least, never decrease i t .  
At first sight, i t  m ight b e  thought that this phenomenon could 
perhaps be explained by supposi ng that light consists of a swarm of 
quanta which interact with each other so that when two slits are 
open, the paths of the particles of l ight would be mod i fied in such a 
way that they could not arrive at the dark parts of the fringes . But 
later experiments done by Vavilov, using light so weak that only one 
quantum could e nter the apparatus at a time, showed that this 
explanation is not tenable. For i n  this case each individ ual quantum 
liberates a si ngle electro·n. But after a large number of quanta have 
passed through the system, each separately and independently, there 
will appear a statistical pattern i n  the locations of the points from 
which electrons were liberated ; and this pattern wil l approach the 
classical pattern of fringes of light and darkness. Thus, the opening 
of a second slit can prevent a separate and independent q uantum from 
reaching certain dark points in the pattern which it could reach if 
72 

Origin of the Qua11tu111 Theory 
that slit were closed. Hence even an individual quantum shows some 
wave-like properties. On the other hand, it also shows some particle­
like properties, not only because it gives up to an electron a field 
quantum of energy, E = 111•, but also because in a beam containing 
a small number of quanta there are statistical fluctuations i11 the time 
and place of liberation of an electro11 which are just those that would 
come from a beam of particles distributed in space in a highly irregular 
or "ra11do111" way (such as one would expect to have if the particles 
were emitted by some source undergoing chaotic molecular motion). 
We seem to be faced with a paradox. One set of experiments 
suggests that light is a form of wave motion, while another suggests 
equally strongly that it consists of discrete particles or quanta. How 
this paradox is to be resolved will, however, be discussed later. 
For the present, we shall continue our presentation of the develop­
ment of the quantum theory. 
The next step was due to Bohr. There had already developed an 
extensive body of investigations, leading to the conclusion that 
matter is made of atoms, and that these atoms are in turn made of 
light negatively charged particles called electrons which circulate 
around a heavy positively charged nucleus, in much the same way 
as the planets circulate around the sun. As the electron goes around 
the nucleus, it should emit electromagnetic wa\es of the same r.-e­
qucncy as that of rotation. This frequency could be calculated, and 
was found to be of the order of 1 ou cycles per second, which is of 
the order of that of light. Thus, one could explain qualitatively how 
light is emitted by matter. 
When the process of emission of light was studied in more detail, 
however, a number of serious contradictions between the existing 
theory and experiment were discovered. The most striking of these 
arose out of the mere fact, at first sight almost trivial, that atoms 
exist stably. For according to classical theory, a moving charged 
particle such as an electron should lose energy by radiating electro­
magnetic waves at a rate which was shown by calculations based on 
Maxwell's equations to be proportional to the square of the accelera­
tion of the electron. An electron moving in a curved orbit is always 
being accelerated towards the centre of the atom. Thus, it should 
continually be losing energy. This energy can come from only one 
source, the potential energy of attraction of the nucleus for the 
electron. But for this potential energy to be liberated the electron 
must fall towards the nucleus. Thus, we predict that the electron 
will move in a spiral orbit, and will reach the nucleus in a time that 
calculation shows to be an extremely small fraction of a second. 
However, what happens in reality is that the electron stops radiating 
when it reaches a certain normal radial orbit characteristic of the 
73 

The Quantum Theory 
atom i n  question,* in which it remains i ndefinitely thereafter as long 
as it is not disturbed . Hence, some new factor must be present, not 
contained in classical theory, which explains why the electron stops 
radiati ng when it reaches the normal radius of the atom. 
Another important contradiction between classical theory and 
experiment arose in a detailed study of the freq ue ncies of the radia­
tion emitted by atoms. According to classical theory, there should 
exist a continuous range of possi ble sizes of orbits of the electrons. 
And si nce each different size of orbit led in general t o  a different 
frequency of revolution of the electro n  around the nucleus , there 
should be possible a corresponding cont i n uo us range of frequencies 
of the light emitted. Indeed, because of the chaotic character of 
motion at the atomic level, a given sample of matter, such as a tube 
of hydrogen gas, should contain atoms with a chaotically distributed 
range of sizes of orbits which, because there are so many atoms 
( 1 020 or more), would appear practically continuous. Thus, a con-
c 
Fig. 3 
tinuous range of frequencies of light should be emitted. I n  reality, 
however, only certain discrete frequencies are obtai ned experi­
mentally. 
Bohr analysed this problem very carefully, and finally was able to 
resolve the above contradictions with experiment (as well as a 
number of others which we have not mentioned here) by means of a 
totally new kind of hypothesis. He postulated that the continuous 
range of orbits permitted by classical theory were not in reality 
possible, and that the electro n could follow only certain discrete (i.e. 
quantized) orbits, such as those illustrated in Fig. 3. By post ulating 
that among these there existed a smallest possible orbit (indicated 
by A in the figure) with a lowest possible energy, he i m mediately 
• Experiments had already indicated that this size is of the order of 
10-s cm. 
74 

Origin of the Quantum Theory 
explai ned the stability of atoms. For once the electron entered this 
orbit, it would not be able to lose any more energy, because no more 
orbits of lower energy would be available for it to go to. Thus, it 
would remain i n  this orbit until it was disturbed from outside. 
If, for one reason or another, the electron were in an orbit, for 
exam ple, C, with an energy Ee, higher than that i n  the bot­
tom orbit, then Bohr postulated that it could j ump from that orbit 
to a lower one, for example, B, rad iating the full energy difference 
Ee - E11, i n  one si ngle quantum of light, wit h  a frequency given by 
the Einǎtein relation Ee - Eu = hv. This postulate clearly has as a 
conseq uence that only discrete frequencies of light ca n be emitted, 
corresponding to the discrete jumps between the various possi ble 
energy levels. 
Having resolved the contradictions between theory and experi­
ment in a qualitatfre way, Bohr proceeded to derive a quantitatfre rule, 
permitting him to calculate the allowed energy levels and the corre­
sponding frequencies of light emitted at first for hydrogen atoms, and 
later for a few other simple kinds of atoms. This quantitative rule 
permitted for these cases a prediction of the frequencies emitted 
with a very high order of precision. These predictions enormously 
i ncreased the plausibility of the theory ; for they i nvolved such a 
large number of frequencies and reached such a high level of pre­
cision that it would have been difficult to believe that the agreemen t  
was a coincidence. 
Thus Bohr had presented very convincing evidence i n  favour of the 
idea that not only does the energy of light come in discrete packets 
or quanta, but also that of electrons. Further i nvestigations, which 
we shall not discuss here, established a similar disconti nuity in all 
forms of energy. I n  other words, a basic "atomicity" of energy i n  
general had been disclosed. The size of the basic units was, however, 
not the same under all possible conditions. For example, with light 
it was proportional to the frequency, but in atoms it depended on 
more complex rules. 
It must be emphasized, however, that it had not been explained 
why the energy is atomic i n  character. The atomicity had just been 
postulated; and on the basis of this postulate, many properties of 
atoms and of radiation were explai ned, which had been in contra­
diction with the conclusion drawn from classical physics that the 
energy can vary in a conti nuous way. Moreover, no explanation was 
offered for the process by which a quantum was emitted and 
absorbed, during the course of which the electron obviously had to 
jump from one d iscrete orbit to another. At this level of the theory, 
it was merely accepted that these processes occur somehow, in a 
way that it was hoped would be understood better later (as i t  was 
75 

The Q11a11t11111 Theory 
also hoped in connection with the problem of the very existence of 
discrete orbits). 
A first step towards a better u nderstand ing of the discrete energies 
of atomic orbits was made by de Broglie. De B roglie's starti ng-point 
was in the suggestion that just as light -waves had a particle-like 
character, atomic particles might also have a wave-like character. 
In doing this, he was guided by the appearance in connection with 
many different kinds of classical waves of sets of discrete frequencies. 
For example, a string fixed at each end m ust vibrate in integral 
multiples or "harmonics" of a certain "fundamental" frequency, 
determined by the length, density, and tension of the cord. Likewise, 
sound waves in a box can have only discrete frequencies, but these 
arc in a more complicated relation than just that of i ntegral multiples. 
Jn general, whenever a wave is confined to oscil late within a definite 
space, it may be shown to have discrete possible frequencies of 
oscillation. 
De Broglie then postulated that there exists a new kind of wave 
connected with an electron. As to the precise nature of this wave, 
most of its properties will not be important at this level of the theory. 
What is important here is that if it is confined within an atom, it will 
have discrete frequencies of oscillation. If we now postulate that 
the Einstein relation, E = hi•, connecting the energy of the wave to 
its frequency applies to these waves just as it applies to light-waves, 
then the discrete Jrequendes will imply discrete energies. 
The next step was to put this qualitative theory into a more 
quantitative form. De Broglie did this by showing, on the basis of 
arguments coming from the theory of relativity, that the Einstein 
relation , E = hi•, led to another relation, p = hf). connecting the 
wave-length, )., of these waves with the momentum, p, of the elec­
tron. When the wave-length, .A, was evaluated for an electron 
of a typical momentum encountered under usual experimental 
conditions, it was found to be of the order of atomic dimensions. 
Now, from experience with light and other types of waves, we 
already know that a wave-like character is manifested clearly only 
when the wave meets obstacles that are not too much larger than a 
wave-length in size ; otherwise it goes i n  a practically straight line 
as if it were a particle . Thus at the large-scale level, de Broglie 's 
waves would not show themselves clearly, and the electron would 
act as if it were nothing but a classical particle. At the atomic level , 
however, the wave connected with the electron would produce 
important new effects. Among these would be the appearance of 
discrete frequencies of vibration resulting from confinement of the 
waves within an atom. Using the relation which he had discovered 
(p = hj}.) and the Einstein relation, E = hi., de Broglie was then 
76 

Origin of the Quantum 111eory 
able to calculate both the frequencies and the corresponding energies 
of the discrete possible modes of vibration of these waves ; and 
out of these calculations he obtained exactly the same energies as 
those coming from Bohr's theory. Thus, the Bohr energy levels were 
explicable in terms of an assumed wave, provided that one also 
assumed that the energy of this wave was related to its frequency by 
the Einstein relation, E = hv. 
Later experiments done by Davisson and Germer on the scattering 
of electrons from metallic crystals disclosed a statistical pattern of 
strong and weak scattering very similar to the fringes obtained by 
passing a beam of light quanta through a set of slits. The idea was 
then suggested that perhaps here the waves postulated by de Broglie 
were manifesting themselves, and that the regular array of atoms 
in the crystal was playing the role which the set of slits plays in 
optical interference experiments. When the length of the assumed 
wave was calculated on the basis of the observed pattern of strong 
a nd weak scattering, it was found to agree with that obtained from 
de Broglie's theory. Thus, the conjecture that electrons have some 
wave-like properties received a brilliant experimental confirmation. 
Later, similar experiments showed that other particles, such as 
protons, molecules, neutrons, etc., have similar wave-like properties, 
which also satisfy the de Broglie relations. Thus, by now we h3Ve 
the point of view that all matter has such wave-like properties. 
Meanwhile, the wave theory of de Broglie had been developed into 
a much more precise form by Schrodinger, who obtained a partial 
differential equation for these waves, which determines their future 
motions in much the same way that Maxwell's equations determine 
the future motions of waves in the electromagnetic field. Schrodinger's 
equations permitted the precise calculation of energy levels in a very 
wide variety of atomic systems, which it was not possible to treat 
either by Bohr's theory or by de Broglie's theory ; and such calcula­
tions led to a very impressive agreement with experiment in all cases. 
Moreover, the Schrodinger equation permitted a continuous treat­
ment of how the wave moves in a transition from one allowed 
energy level to another, and thus led to the hope that perhaps the 
mystery of how a transition between allowed energy levels takes 
place could now be solved. 
At this point new and apparently somewhat paradoxical limita­
tions on the wave theory were discovered. For Schrodinger originally 
proposed that the electron should be thought of as a continuous 
distribution of charge. The density of this charge he assumed was 
related to the wave amplitude tp, by the relation, (! 
= J 1p J 2 .  Thus, the 
waves of de Broglie and Schrodinger were to be interpreted as waves 
of electric charge. In favour of this suggestion, if the electric charge 
77 

The Quantum Theor v  
were assumed to be related to the wave a m plit ude in this way, then 
Schrodinger's equation led automa tically to the conclusion that the 
total amount of charge would rema i n  co nst a n t , no matter how it 
flowed from place to place (i.e. it would be co nserved), thus demon­
strating a consistent feature of the i nte rpretation. 
Unfortunately, however, the interpre tation was tenable only as 
long as the Schrodinger wave remained confined within an atom. 
In free space, a simple calculation showed that, according to 
Schrodinger's equation, the wave must spread out rapidly over all 
space without limit. On the other hand, the electro n  is always 
actually found within a comparatively small region of space, so that 
its charge density clearly cannot in general be eq ual t o  the value, 
(! = 1 11' 1 2, postulated by Schro<linger. 
To deal with this problem, Born proposed that the wave intensity 
represents not an actual charge density of the electron, but rather 
the probability density that the electron, conceived of as a small 
localized particle, shall be found at a certain place. Thus, the fact 
that the wave amplitude for a free electron spreads out over all 
space is no longer in contradiction with the appearance of the elec­
tron ·itself at a certain place. The conservation of 1 11' 12 can then be 
interpreted in terms of the fact that the t otal probability that the 
particle can be found somewhere in space must remain equal to unity 
with the passing of time. 
It was not experimentally feasible to verify Born's hypothesis directly 
by observing the locations of particles i n  a statistical aggregate, but 
it was possible to verify it indirectly. Th us , in a t ransi tion between 
allowed energy levels, the change of the Schrodinger wave from one 
mode of vibration to another now had to be interpreted in terms of 
a continuously changing probability that the electron had one energy 
or the other.* Thus, it was possible to calculate probabilities of tran­
sition between energy levels under various conditions ; and these 
probabilities were found to be in agreement with experiment. So 
much indirect evidence in favour of Born's hypothesis has by now 
been accumulated that physicists generally accept Born's interpre­
tation of the Schrodinger wave function, 1f', as being correct. 
Let us now sum up the results that had been obtained thus far: 
(1) Energy in general appeared to have a certain atomicity, both 
in the form of light quanta and in the form of discrete allowed 
energy levels for matter. 
(2) All manifestations of matter and energy seemed to have two 
• Hence, the problem of describing what actually happeቴs in an iታdi­
vidual transition process had not yet been solved. With the mterpreta.t1on 
of Born , the Schrodinger wave only treated the mean behav10ur m a 
statistical ensemble of cases. 
78 

Origin of the Quantum Theory 
possible aspects, that of a wave and that of a particle. The numerical 
value, E, of the energy in t he particle-like manifestations was always 
related to the frequency, v, in the wave-like manifestations by the 
Einstein relation, E = hv. The numerical value, p, of the momentum 
i n the particle-like manifestation was likewise related to the wave­
length, J., by the de Broglie relation, p = lt/J.. 
(3) The basic laws of atomic physics appeared to be statistical in 
form. Thus, the Schrodinger wave function permitted in general 
o nly the prediction of the probability that a certain result could be 
obtained in an observation of an atomic system. Likewise, experi­
ments with beams of ligh t  quanta (as well as a subsequent detailed 
theory of quantum electrodynamics) showed that o ne obtained 
random statistical fluctuations in the times and places at which 
photo-electrons were liberated, and that, in general, only the 
probability of such a process seemed to be predictable. 
Nevertheless, some properties of the individual systems could be 
predicted with certainty, for example, the energy levels. 
3 .  ON T H E  P R O B L E M  OF F I N D I N G A C A U S A L  
E X P L A N A T I O N  O F  T H E  Q U A N T U M  T H E O R Y  
At this point, physicists faced a very difficult problem. A number 
of rather puzzling general properties of matter had been fou"1;d, 
including a peculiar combination of wave and particle-like properties 
that seemed very difficult to explain, as well as a very strange 
combi nation of determinate and statistical aspects of a type that had 
never been met before. Nevertheless, although the new phenomena 
were very unusual, it was by no means true that they suggested no 
hints at all as to how they might be given a causal explanation. 
In order to help clarify the position eventually adopted by most 
modern theoretical physicists with regard to the interpretation of the 
quantum theory, as well as to clarify the criticisms of this position 
that we shall make later in this chapter, we shall give here a very 
brief sketch indicating in a general way a possible line of research 
along which one could have sought a causal explanation of the 
quantum theory. More detailed proposals with this end in view will, 
however, be discussed only in the next chapter. The main purpose 
of the discussion here will be merely to help bring out more clearly 
the full implications of the usual interpretation of the quantum 
theory by introduci ng an opposing point of view, as a sort of counter­
foil, which serves to show what the usual point of view denies. 
To show the lines along which one could have sought such a causal 
explanation of the quantum theory, let us begin with point (3), the 
appearance of a peculiar combination of statistical and individ ual 
laws. Hitherto in physics (as in other fields) when one had met 
79 

The Quantum Theory 
with an irregular statistical fl uctuation in the behaviour of the 
individual members of an aggregate, o ne assumed that these i rregular 
fluctuations also had causes, which were however as yet unknown to 
us, but which might in time be d iscovered. Thus, in the case of the 
Brownian motion, the postulate was made that the visible irregular 
motions of spore particles originated in a deeper but as yet i nvisible 
level of atomic motion. Hence, all the factors determining the 
i rregular changes in t he Brownian motion were not assumed to exist 
at the level of the Brownian motion itself, but rather, most of them 
were assumed to exist at the level of atomic motions. Therefore, if 
we st udy the level of Brownian motion itsel f, we can expect to 
treat, in general, o nly the statistical regularities, but for a st udy of 
the precise details of the motion, this level will not be complete. 
Similarly, one might suppose that in its present state of develop­
ment, the quantum theory is also not co mplete enough to treat 
all the precise details of the motions of individual electron, light 
quanta, etc. To treat such details, we should have to go to some as 
yet u nknown deeper level, which has the same relationship to the 
atomic level as the atomic level has to that of B rownian motion. 
Of course, some of the properties at the atomic level are determinate, 
but this creates no difficulties of principle, si nce it is quite possible 
that the factors determining just these properties can be defined in the 
atomic level alone, while these determining other properties cannot. 
Thus, we can understand why the atomic theory has, i n  general, to 
deal with probabilities, even t hough it can p redict some properties 
of individual systems. 
Once we admit that the entire conceptual framework of the exist­
ing quantum theory may not be adequate for a treatment of all the 
detailed properties of individual systems, then an unlimited n umber 
of new possibilities open up, since the as yet unknown properties of 
the deeper level are completely at ou r disposal. For example, we can 
already see in a qualitative way how the Einstein relation, E = hv, 
connecting the frequency of an oscillation with its energy might be 
explained. Thus, even in classical physics, many examples of oscil­
lations satisfying non-linear equations* were known, in which there 
were only certain discrete stable frequencies of oscillation, and in 
which the energy was related to the frequency in a definite way (e.g. 
the motions of the electron in a synchro-cyclotront). Jt is t rue that 
• A linear equation is one having the property that the Ŋum of two. of 
its solutions is also a solution of the same equation. A non-lmear equation 
does not have this property. For this reason it is much more difficult to 
treat mathematically, as no such simple relations exist, in general, among 
its solutions. 
t See, for example : D. Bohm and L. Foldy, Phys. Rev., 72, 649 (1947). 
80 

On the Problem of finding a Causal Explanation 
none of t hese classical systems had the particular relation, E = /11•. 
But the essential fact is that they have some defi nite relation between 
the energy and frequency, which depends on the specific form of the 
equations of the oscillator, which in turn depends on the specific 
physical system under consideration. Thus, what is suggested is that 
we have to deal at the sub-atomic level wit h  some k i nds of system 
that has a non-linear set of equations governing its oscillations, 
but just such a type of non-linearity as to lead to discrete freq uencies 
of oscillation sat isfying the Einstein relation E = /11• (and also the 
de Brogl ie relation, p = hf).). Once this is achieved, then we would 
automatically be able to explai n the appearance of discrete energy 
levels i n  matter and the appearance of electromagnetic energy i n  
quanta., M o reover, the tra nsitions between discrete energy levels 
would also be explained, for it is well known from classical systems 
satisfyi ng non-linear equations that between the stable frequencies 
of oscillations exist unstable regions, i n  which the system tends 
rapidly to move from one stable mode to another. If we suppose that 
these transitions are very rapid compared with processes taking 
place at the atomic level, t hen as far as purely atomic phenomena arc 
concerned they may be 
regarded as effectively discontinuous. 
Nevertheless, at a deeper level, they are continuous. Thus, we ex­
plain the "atomicity of energy" at a certain level, but can also con­
ceive of the division of these "indivisible atoms of energy" at a inore 
fundamental level ; as, for example, atoms of matter, originally 
found to be indivisible at a certain level, were later found to be 
analysable into electrons, protons, and neutrons at a more funda­
mental level. 
4 .  T H E I N D ET E R M I N A C Y  P R I N C I P L E  
In general qualitative terms, we see from the preceding discussion 
that the prospects for finding a causal explanation of the quantum 
theory were by no means hopeless. Nevertheless, most physicists at 
the time were very reluctant to embark on such a path, for various 
reasons, partly of a practical order and partly of a philosophical 
order. The practical reasons were that to do so, one would have to 
develop a complex theory on the basis of little experimental evidence, 
requiring, moreover, the solution of some as yet unsolved mathe­
matical problems of the highest order of difficulty (i.e. the properties 
of the sol utions of non-linear equations). The philosophical reasons 
were based on the famous indeterminacy principle of Heisenberg, 
which we shall now proceed to discuss. 
To come to the indeterminacy principle, we may ask ourselves the 
following q ucstion : "Suppose that there is some underlying irregular 
but precisely defi ned motion of the electron, arising at a deeper level , 
c.c.-6 
8 1  

The Quantum Theory 
which could explain the probabilities defined by the Schrodinger 
wave function, 11'· Would it be possible by actually observing the 
motion to ascertain its character?" Thus, the first moderately direct 
determination of the character of random motion at the atomic level 
came from observations of the related irregular Brownian motions 
of bodies that were small, but nevertheless much bigger than an 
atom. Similarly. the character of the random motion at a sub-atomic 
level would perhaps be indicated by some residual irregularity in the 
motion of an electron in an atom. 
To answer this question, we may analyse the process of observa­
p' 
\ 
I 
\ ,.../., / 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ . I 
\ I 
p 
Fig. 4 
tion of an atomic particle, such as an electron, 
as it goes around the nucleus. Let us fi rst con­
sider the process of observing it with a micro­
scope. Now, because the light which is used in 
a microscope always comes in the form of dis­
crete packets or quanta, we cannot avoid dis­
turbing the electron when we look at it. For we 
must use at least one quantum of light to see 
it. And when this quantum collides with the 
electron, there will be a minimum disturbance 
in the latter's motion, which comes from the 
light that we use in the process of observation. 
The energy of a quantum is E = hv. This 
suggests that to reduce the disturbance we 
migh · use electromagnetic waves of low fre­
quency, so that we thus obtain a smaller quantum. 
But here we meet another difficulty. Light not 
only acts like a particle but also like a wave. It 
can be demonstrated using the wave theory of 
light that a light-wave scattered from a definite 
point, P (see Fig. 4), into a lens, does not form 
a definite image point, P1, but instead forms a 
small poorly defined image region which is proportional in size to 
the wave-length. But the wave-length is inversely proportional to the 
frequency, v .  Thus, if the frequency is low, the wave-length will be 
big; and the image in the microscope will be so poor that we will 
not know exactly where the electron is. 
We are therefore confronted by two difficulties. Because of the 
particle character of light, we cannot avoid disturbing the particle 
momentum, creating an unpredictable and uncontrollable distur­
bance* which we denote by Lip. Because of the wave character of 
• The disturbance is unpredictable and uncontrollቲble because frr:m 
the existing quantum theory there is no way of knowmg or controlling 
beforehand what will be the precise angle, 0, with which the light quantum 
82 

The Indeterminacy Principle 
light, we cannot avoid an uncertainty, L1x, i n  the position of the elec­
tron, coming from lack of sharpness of the i mage. A simple calcula­
tion which we shall not, however, give here leads to the indeterminacy 
relations of Heisenberg, L1pL1 x ==. h, where h is Planck's constant. 
This result shows that there is a reciprocal relationship between 
the possible precision of definition of the momentum and that of the 
position. The more accurately the position is determi ned, the less 
accurately the momentum can be defined, a nd vice versa. This is 
because a n  accurate definition of the position requires the use of 
light of short wave-lengths, so that a large but unpredictable and 
uncontrollable momentum is transferred to the electron ; while an 
accurate determination of the momentum requires light quanta of 
very low momentum (and therefore long wave-length), which leads 
to a large angle of diffraction in the lens and a correspondingly poor 
definition of the position. 
At first sight, one might try to reduce the indeterminacy in the 
measurement by observing the electron by means other than inter­
action with light quanta. For example, there have been developed 
electron microscopes which are able to bring beams of electrons to 
a focus. Thus, we could substitute a beam of electrons for the beam 
of light quanta. A more extensive study of the problem shows, how­
ever, that the situation would not be changed essentially ׀y this 
procedure. For, as we have seen, all energy comes in quanta, and all 
matter shows the property of acting both like a wave or like a par­
ticle. The quantum theory, therefore, implies that the indeterminacy 
relationships will also apply to observations taken with the electron 
microscope and indeed to those taken with any other kind of appara­
tus that we might care to try. 
The fact that the quantum theory implies that every process of 
measurement will be subject to the same ultimate limitations on its 
precision led Heisenberg to regard the indeterminacy relationships, 
such as L1pL1 x ::=. h, as bei ng a manifestation of a very fundamental 
and all-pervasive general principle, which operates throughout the 
whole of nat ural law. Thus, rather than consider the indetermi nacy 
relationships primarily as a deduction from the quantum theory in 
its current form, he postulates these relationships directly as a basic 
law of nature and assumes instead that all other laws will have to be 
consistent with these relationships. * He is thus effectively supposing 
will be scattered into the lens. This leads to an uncertainty in the momen­
tum transfer to the electron. If we knew the angle, 0, we could solve for 
the momentum transfer (.dp ::=_ h sin O/J.), and correct for it, so that there 
would be no uncertainty in the momentum of the electron. 
• W. Heisenberg : The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Dover 
Publications (1 930), (See. P. 3). 
83 

The Quantum Theory 
that the indeterminacy relationship should have an absolute and 
final validity. which will conti nue i ndelini tcly, even if, as seems ra ther 
likely. the current form of the quantum t heory sho uld event ually 
have to be corrected , extended, or even changed i n  a fundamental 
and revol utionary way. Indeed , the general point of view of H eisen­
berg (and of most of the proponents of the usu a l  interpretation of 
the q uantum theory) is that future devel opments i n  physics wi ll, if 
anythi ng, be in the direct ion of m a k i ng the behav i o u r  o f  thi ngs even 
less precisely defi nable than is possi ble i.n tern;<; o r  t he cu rrent 
quantum theory, * so that the current form of the quantum t heory 
sets a limit to the p recision of all possi ble measu rements which, 
in any case, could certai nly not be exceeded . 
5. R E N U N C I A T I O N  O F  C A U S A L I T Y  I N  C O N N E C TI O N W I T H  T H E  
A T O M I C  D O M A I N  A 
C O N S E Q U E N C E  O f  T H E  I N D E T E R M I N A C Y  
P R I N C I P L E  
The indetermi nacy principle raised a nu mber o f  important new 
philosophical questions not appearing in cl assical mechanics. These 
questions helped to lead physicists, as we shall see, to renou nce t he 
concept of causality in connection with the at omic domain, and thus 
to adopt a very different philosophical poi n t  of view from that which 
had prevailed up to the advent of the modern quantum theory. 
To appreciate t he role that the i ndetermi nacy principle played in 
hel pi ng t o  bring about a renunciation of causality, let us recall that 
i n  classical mechanics it is just the i nitial values and initial rates of 
change of all the mechanical variables defini ng the state of a given 
system that determi ne the future motions of the system i n questi on . 
According to the indeterminacy pri nciple, however, there exists a 
fundamental limitation, arising from the very laws of nature at the 
quantum-mechanical level, which is such that we are unable to obtain 
the data needed to specify completely the initial values of the various 
parameters that determine the behaviour of such a mechanical 
system . 
Of course, one might assume that the i ndeterminacy i n  the position 
and the momentum of the electron is a conseq uence of the fact that 
these variables, which after all are suggested only by the extra­
polation of classical physics to the atomic domain , arc not a com­
plete descri ption of the e lectron. I nstead one might suppose t hat a 
more nearly complete description would require qualitatively new 
kinds of variables (such as, for example those discussed i n  Section 3 
• Thus, for example, Heisenberg has recently proposed that for dis­
tances shorter than a certain "fundamental length" of the order of i o-13 
cm., even the properties of space and time should cease to be definable. 
84 

No Causality in the Atomic Domain 
in connection with a possible sub-quantum mechanical level), 
variables not even appeari ng in the current quantum theory. Hence, 
if we defi ne only the position and the momentum variables, which 
provide a n  adequate approxi mation to a determinate sprcification 
solely at the large-scale level, we will discover that the behaviour 
of the electron can not be predicted, because determining factors 
that arc important at the atomic level have been left out of the 
theory. 
The proponents of the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, 
however, have adopted the hypothesis of Heisenberg, mentioned at the 
end of Section 4. They do not assume t hat the i ndetermi nacy 
pri nci ple is just a consequence of the quantum theory i n  i ts current 
stage of development, which could therefore turn out to have only a 
limited ra nge of validity if, as seems likely it is later discovered that 
the present form of the theory must be modified, corrected, or 
extended. Instead they assume that this pri nci ple represents a n  
absolute a n d  fi n a l  limitation o n  o u r  ability t o  defi ne the state o f  
thi ngs b y  means of measurement o f  a n y  kinds that are now possible 
or that ever will be possible. 
I f  o ne makes the assumption described above, then one comes to a 
concl usion having very far-reachi ng consequences. For even if a 
sub-q uantum mechanical level containing "hidden" variable؊ of the 
type descri bed previously should exist, these variables would then 
never play any real role in the prediction of any possi ble kind of 
experi mental resul ts. In fact, if this hypothesis is true, the future 
behaviou r  of a system would, at least as far as we arc concerned, be 
predictable to just that degree of accuracy corresponding to the 
limits set by the indetermi nacy principle, and to no higher degree. 
Thus, it is concluded that the present general form of the quantum 
theory is able to deal with every kind of measurement that we could 
possibly carry out. Any theory (such as one i nvolving "hidden" 
variables) which claims to deal with more than this would then be 
just a metaphysical exercise of t he i magination, because nothing in 
physics would be different from what it would be if these "hidden" 
variables did not exist.* 
• For this reason, the term "indeterminacy principle" is more appro­
priate than the more commonly used term "uncertainty principle". For, 
as far as any physically observable variables are concerned, it is not to be 
supposed that these are just "uncertain" to us, because we are not able 
to measure them with complete precision. Rather, one assumes that their 
very mode of being requires them to be indeterminate. Of course, the 
"metaphysical" h idden variables might be uncertain, but since they 
would 1n any case never be observable, their being uncertain would have 
no more real meaning to us than the number of angels that can dance on 
the head of a pin. 
85 

The Quantum Theory 
The above conclusion has been made even stronger with the aid 
of a theorem of von Neumann. • For accord i ng to this theorem i t  
would not only b e  i mpossible to verify experimentally any causal 
theory that aimed to predict the detailed behaviour ·of an i ndividual 
system at the atomic level, but it is impossible even to concefre of 
such an explanation. For von Neumann proved that no conceivable 
distribution of motions o f  "hidden" parameters in the observed 
system could lead to precisely the same results as t hose of Schro­
di nger's equati on, plus the probability interpretation of the wave 
function. Thus, for example, o ne could no lo nger i magi ne that even 
a Laplacian super-being who o btained i nformation without dis­
turbing the system by means of a measureme nt could make precise 
predictions about the future. Jn this way, the i ndetermi nacy pri nci ple 
is supplemented ; for the impossibility of m a k i ng measurements 
more precise than the limits set by this pri nci ple should, according 
to the theorem of von Neumann, be regarded as a result of the fact 
that nothing even exists corresponding to a set of "hidden" para­
meters having a degree of precision of defi nition going beyond these 
limits. Thus, the renunciation of causality in the usual interpretation 
of the quantum theory is not to be regarded as merely the result of 
our inability to measure the precise values of the variables that 
would enter into the expression of causal laws at the atomic level, 
but, rather, it should be regarded as a reflection of the fact that no 
such laws exist. t 
We see, then, that the assumption of t he i ndeterminacy principle 
as an absolute and final law that is supposed to apply to all pro­
cesses that can possibly take place in the world implies a breakdown 
of causality in connection with phenomena that depend significantly 
on the laws of the atomic domain. A nd in this respect, it must be 
emphasized that such phenomena are not restricted to j ust those 
things that go on in the atomic domain alone, nor just to "hidden" 
or unobservable properties of things. Real and observable physical 
phenomena are being assumed to have no causes. For observing 
apparatus is now available that is sensitive enough to respond in a 
macroscopically observable way to 
the properties of individual 
atoms and individual quanta of electromagnetic radiation (for ex­
ample, Geiger counters, Wilson chambers, sci ntillation counters, 
etc.). In general, however, measurements carried out on i ndividual 
atoms or i ndividual quanta with such types of apparatus produce 
• J. von Neumann, Mathematische Grund/agen der Quantenmechanik 
(Verlag. Julius Springer, Berlin, 1 932). 
. 
t Thus, the name of .. indeterminacy principle" is further just1fie, for 
now we are led to conclude that the question of .. metaphysical" vanables 
about whose values we are uncertain cannot even arise. 
86 

No Causality in the A tomic Domain 
results that show an irregular fluctuation from one observation to the 
next, with a regular mean behaviour in a statistical aggregate con­
taining a large number of observations. This regular mean behaviour 
can be predicted to a high degree of approximation in terms of the 
present quantum theory from the Schrodingcr wave function, VJ, 
with the aid of the probability. But the existing quantum theory 
yields no way even i n  principle of predicting how the indfridual 
measurements will fluctuate from one case to the next. More than 
this, it docs not even have anything in it to which we might at least 
q ualitatively ascribe the origin of any p<1rticular i ndividual fluctua­
tion. Of course, as we have already pointed out, we m ight consider 
the possibility that such fluctuations originate i n  i rregular motions 
of some new kinds of entities at a deeper level. But here it is con­
cluded from the i ndeterminacy princi ple that even if such a deeper 
level exists the properties of the new entities could never be measured 
with sufficient precision to make possible a precise prediction of the 
i rregular fluctuations in the results of individual measurement 
processes, while von Neumann's theorem implies that such a deeper 
level of precise causal law could not even exist. Thus, one is led to 
the conclusion that the precise manner of occurrence of these 
irregular fluctuations cannot be traced by means of experiments to 
any kind of causes at all, and that, indeed, it does not even h؋wc any 
causes. 
I n  this respect, the i rregular fluctuations treated i n  the quantum 
theory are conceived of as being quite different from all other types 
of irregular fluctuations that have ever been encountered. For ex­
ample, i n  Chapter I, we considered the statistical distribution in the 
rate of automobile accidents, which fluctuates irregularly from day 
to day, and from place to place. Even the precise details of such 
fluctuations are found in general, however, to be traceable to a 
large number of contributing causes, many of which are admittedly 
very difficult to investigate in detail. Nevertheless, no one doubts, 
for example, that just what will happen to an individual person in a 
particular accident (e.g. will a certain bone be broken?, etc.) is 
determined by suitable causes, some of which may be known and 
some of which may not be k nown. But in the usual i nterpretation 
of the quantum theory, the precise magnitudes of the irregular 
fluctuations in the results of i nd i vidual measurements at the 
atomic level arc not supposed to be determined by any kinds of 
causes at all, either k nown or unknown. I nstead, it is assumed 
that in any particular experiment, the precise result that will be 
obtained is completely arbitrary in the sense that it has no relation­
ship whatever to anything else' that exists in the world or that ever 
has existed. Thus, we have an example of the conception of 
87 

The Quantum Theory 
"completely lawless" fluctuations discussed in Chapter 1 1 ,  Section 
1 6.* 
From the way in which the i ndeterminacy pri nciple was proved , 
one might perhaps obtain the impression that t h e  i rregular fl uctu­
ations i n  the results of measurements of the propert ies of i ndividual 
atoms do, after all, have a cause ; for they have been ascribed to the 
disturbance of the observed object by t he measuri ng apparatus. A 
more careful analysis shows, however, that one ca n not consistently 
make any precise ascription of causes i n  this way, w ithi n t he frame­
work of the usual interpretatio n  of the quan t u m  theory. For it 
must be remembered that the observing apparat us i s  also subject to 
the laws of the quantum theo ry. Thus, to suppose that there exist 
in the observing apparatus a set of well-defi ned but irregularly 
dist ributed causal factors which in pri nci ple determine precisely 
what will be the disturbance of the observed system in each i ndi­
vidual meas urement process would , according to the i ndeterm i nacy 
princi ple, merely be a purely metaphysical assumption, si nce no 
additional measurements carried out on the observing apparatus 
itself could ever determine the precise conditions of these hypo­
thetical causal factors. Moreover, accord i ng to von Neu mann's 
theorem, the same impossibility of conceiving of precisely definable 
causal factors would hold for the observi ng apparatus as holds for 
the observed system . Hence, in the usual i n terpretation of the quan­
tum theory, there is simply no room anywhere for the assumption 
of add itional causal factors to which one could even in princi ple 
ascribe the origin of the precise details of the i rregular fl uctuat ions 
in the results of measurements of the propert ies of individual atoms. 
The above conclusion has been made even sharper as a result of an 
example suggested by Ei nstein , Rosen, and Podolskyt which gives 
a case in which one can demonstrate explicitly t he inconsistency of 
supposing that the precise details of the fluct uati ons described by the 
indeterminacy pri nciple could be ascribed t o  distu rbances o f  th e 
• To emphasize what this conception means in practice, consider the 
process of alpha-particle emission in the radio-active decay of a nucleus, 
for example, of uranium. In a large aggregate of such nuclei, the precise 
time of decay of an individual nucleus fluctuates irregularly from one 
nucleus to another, but the mean decay time is predictable, and equal to 
about two thousand million years. Now consider any one of these i ndi­
vidual nuclei , the decay of wh ich can be detected by means of a Geiger 
counter. Whether this nucleus will decay tomorrow, next week, or in two 
thousand million years from now is something that the present quantum 
theory cannot predict. According to the usual interpretation, however, 
nothing determines this time. It is supposed to be completely arbitrary, 
and not capable of ercr being related to anything else by means of any 
kinds of laws at all. 
t A. Einstein, N. Rosen, and B. Podolsky, Phys. Rev., 47, 777 (1 935). 
88 

No Causality in 1he A tomic Domain 
observed object by the observing apparat us. I n  a nswer to this ex­
ample , Bohr* pointed out that in the usual i nterpretation of the 
quant um theory one m ust regard the measuring a pparntus a nd 
observed object as a single indivisible system, because they :ire united 
by an indivisible quantum which connects them d u ring the process 
of interaction .t The quantum must belong somehow both to the 
observed object and to the measuri ng apparatus, and yet it m ust be 
i ndivisible. This is possible only if the combined system consisting 
of t he observing a pparatus and the observed system is, in some sense, 
a single i ndivisible entity which cannot correctly be ana lysed (even 
conceptually) i nto more elementary parts. Thus, there could be no 
meani ng to t he effort to trace the observed fl uctuations i n  the 
results of i ndividual measurements lo c:rnsal factors exist i ng in one 
part (the measu ri ng apparatus), since it must not even be concei ved 
of as a dist i nct pa rt, a nyway. Hence, one !m s no choice i n  t he usual 
interpretat ion of the quantum theory but l o  give up altogether the 
notion that the precise details of the observable fl uctuations i n the 
results of i ndividual measurements of a quantum-mechanical level 
of accuracy have some as yet unknown kinds of causes ; a nd i nstead , 
one has to assume that these d etails are completely arbitra ry a nd 
lawless. 
6. R E N U N C I A T I O N  OF C O N C E P T O F  C O N T I N U I T Y  I N "T l l E  
A TO M I C  D O M A I N  
I n  add ition t o  leading to the conclusio n  that causality docs not apply 
lo the details of individ ual fluctuation processes con nected wit h  the 
atomic domain , the usual i nterpretation of the quantum theory has 
led to a renu nciation of the concept of conti nuity of motion wit hin 
the same domain. 
To show h ow this has come about, we shall begi n by consideri ng 
certain experi mental methods of observing the a pproximate posi ­
tions and velocities of an individ ual electron. Thus, if a free electron 
of high energy passes through a photographic plate, it lea ves a record 
of its track i n the fo rm of sma l l  grains or sil ver, which a ppea r in 
the microscope more or less as shown i n  Fig. 5. These grai ns of 
silver arc deposited as a resul t  of the i nteraction of the electron with 
atoms near which it passes : but this i n teraction must take place i n  
the form o f  quanta ; hence t h e  indeterminacy pri nciple will apply. 
Now, the appearance of a grain of si lver enables us to conclude 
that an electron passed near enough to permit an i nteraction. Thus, 
• N. Bohr, Phys. Rev., 48, 696 ( 1 935). 
t For a fuller discussion of this problem, sec Paul Arthur Schilp, 
edi tor, Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist (Library of Living Philo­
sophers, Evanston, I llinois, 1 949). 
89 

Tlze Quantum Theory 
the grains of silver approximately localize the path of t h e  electron . 
But because of the i ndetermi nacy pri nci pl e, we k now that a n  indeter­
minate momentum was transmitted to the electron i n  each inter­
action, so that we cannot predict exactly where the electron will go 
after it leaves the photographic plate. This i ndeterminacy is, how­
ever, small, so that i t  is only in a very accurate measurement that i t  
becomes important. B u t  if we needed a very accurate prediction o f  
the notion, we could not b e  able t o  gel i t  i n this way o r in any other 
way. 
Accord ing 
to 
our customary way of reasoni ng, 
we 
would 
suppose that the t rack of grains of silver indicates that a real elec­
tron moves con t i nuously through space i n  a pat h somewhere near 
these grai ns, and by interaction caused the formation of the grains. 
But accord ing to the usual interpretatio n of the quantum theory, 
. . . . 
. 
. 
. 
. . . . 
. 
. 
Fig. 5 
/ 
I 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
. P  ࡿ 
.
.
.
.
•
•
• 
it would be incorrect to suppose that this really happened . All that 
we can say is that certain grains a ppea red, but we must not t ry to 
imagine that these grains were prod uced by a real object moving 
through space i n  the way i n which we usuaily think of objects 
moving through space. For altho ugh this idea of a continuously 
moving object is good enough for a n  approxi mate theory, we would 
discover that it would break down in a very exact theory. Moreover, 
if we tried to sec by experi ment whether an electron really moved 
between the poi nts on the track , for example, by means of a very 
precise microscopic observation of t he position as i t  passed some 
point, say P, we would d iscover that beca use of the t ransfer of a 
quantum the track would change in an u npredictable and uncon­
trollable way and become another t rack (as shown in t he figure). 
Thus, according to this view, the notion of a moving electron which 
supplies a continuous connection between the poi nts at which a 
track is observed is at best a purely metaphysical one that co uld 
never be subjected to experimental verification. 
At this p oint, one might suggest that perh aps the notion of the 
electron as a small moving body is too simple for this problem, 
90 

No Continuity in the Atomic Domain 
a nd that our difficulties come from the effort to force o ur co ncept 
of the electro n i nto a mould that was after all suggested mainly by 
experience in the classical domai n .  I n  the quantum domain, it may 
therefore be necessary to introduce co ncepts more complex and 
subtle than that of a particle moving thro ugh space in a line and 
leaving a t rack. For example, in terms of the notion of a su b­
q uantum mecha nical level discussed in Sectio n  3, it would be pos­
sible for the electron to be a very complex st ructure i n  a deeper sub­
stratum or field, which had a tendency to behave i n  a wave -l ike way 
and yet to produce particle-like concentrations of energy. • The 
complex entity could leave an approximately localized t rack of 
water d roplets, which would be produced, for example, by the con­
cent rations of energy described above. 
We must emphasize here, however, that the point of view of Bohr 
and other proponents of the usual interpretations of the q uantum 
theory implies that any explanation of the appearance of the series 
of droplets i n  terms of some deeper sub-stratum of continuous motion 
which leads to concentrations of energy on the water d roplets is just 
as metaphysical as is the explanation in terms of a moving particle. 
I n  other words, in a co nsistent formulation of this point of view, 
it is assumed that the limits on the divisibility of energy transfers 
which are characteristic of the current quantum theory must -'lpply, 
unco nt radicted and without approximation, in every domai n  that 
will ever be investigated. Thus, the indivisibility of quantum tra ns­
fers, and with it the need for renouncing the co ncept of conti nuity, 
is regarded as an absol ute and final characteristic, which will con­
ti nue to appear no matter how far physics may progress in the future. 
7. 
R E N U N C I A T I O N  
OF 
A L L  
W E L L - D E F I N E D  
C O N C E P T U A L  
M O D E L S  J N  T l l E M I C R O S C O P I C D O M A I N -T H E  P R I N C I P L E  O F  
C O M P L E M E N TA R I T Y  
We sec from the preceding sections that the usual interpretation of 
the quantum theory requires us to renounce the concepts of ca usality 
and conti n uity of motion at all possible levels, at least as far as a 
very precise trea tment is concerned. The renunciation implies what 
Bohr has called an "irrational trait" in the process of transfer of a 
q uantum from o ne system to anothcr.t By this one means that no 
rational concept of the details of the process can ever be obtai ned. 
This is because if contin uity and causality arc given up, then one is 
no lo nger able to describe or even to think about any well-defined 
connections between the phenomena at a given time and those at an 
• A model of this type will be discussed in Chapter I V, Sections 2 and 6. 
t N. Dohr : Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature. 
91 

The Quantum Theory 
-،arlier time. As a result, we have no way to express precisely t he 
::iual ities and properties that might define the modes of bei ng of 
individ ual micro-objects, or to formulate precise laws that might 
,ipply to such micro-objects. A simil ar poi n t of view is i ndeed al ready 
!implicit in Bohr's conclusion, described in Section 5, that in an 
observation carried out to a quantum-mechanical level of accuracy, 
one must regard the entire ensemble consisti ng of observi ng appar­
atus and observed system as i ndivisibly u n i ted by the quanta con ­
necting them. Thus, because the process i n  which a quantum is 
transferred from one system to the other cannot be subjected to a 
detailed rational analysis, there is no way to descri be p recisely the 
properties and qualities that characterize the system under observn­
tion, as distinguished from those of the observi ng apparat us . 
I n  order to ill ustrate the mean in g of the poi nt of view described 
above, Jct us consider as an example the process of observing an atom 
with the aid of suitable apparat us. As we have seen , the quanta by 
which the observi ng apparatus interacts with the atom wil l change 
the latter i n a way that cannot be predicted , controlled, described, or 
even conceived of. Hence, each different apparat us in a sense creates 
a different kind of atom. Even this terminol ogy is too picturesque, 
however. because it implies an atom ha\'ing defin ite properties when 
it is not observed, which a re cha nged by i n tera ction with a measuri ng 
apparatus . But i n  the u sual interpretation of the q uantum theory, 011 
atom has 110 properties at all when it is not obserrcd. I ndeed, one may 
say that its only mode of being is to  be observed ; for the notion of 
an atom existi ng with u niquely definable properties of its own even 
when i t is not interacting with a piece of observing apparatus, is 
meaningless within the framework of this point of view. 
If the notion of the objective existence of atoms and other such 
micro-objects with u niquely definable properties of their own must 
be given up, then the question naturally arises, "With what does the 
quantum mechanics actually deal ?" The answer given by Roh r (and 
within the framework of the usual i nterpretation the only possible 
consistent answer) is that it deals not with the properties of micro­
objects as such but, rather, with nothing more than the relationships 
among the observable large-scale phenomena. The phenomena are, 
howe\ cr, considered as i nd ivisible wholes, which it would be wrong 
to analyse, even abstractly and concept ually, as made up approxi­
mately of d i fferent parts, consisting of various k inds of micro­
objects. * The role of the theory is then regarded as merely the calcu-
* The idea is roughly similar to that of Gestalt psychology, which, 
roughly speaking, assumes that our perceptions and ideas havࡾ properties 
similar to those ascribed by Bohr to matter in general ; that 1s, they are 
"wholes" not analysable even abstractly into parts . . 
92 

The Principle of Complementarity 
lation of the probability d istributions for the various possi ble types 
of phenomena. 
It is clear that the point of view described above leads us to 
renounce our hitherto successful practice of thinking of an i ndividual 
system as a unified and precisely definable whole, all of whose aspects 
are, in a manner of thinking, simultaneously and unambiguously 
accessible to our conceptual gaze. Such a system of concepts, which 
is sometimes called a "model " ,  need not be restricted to pictures, 
but may also include, for example, mathematical concepts, as long 
as t hese are supposed to supply a precise representation of the ob­
jects that are being described. The usual i nterpretation requires us, 
however, to renounce even mathematical models. Thus, the Schro­
dinger wave function, tp, is in no sense regarded as a conceptual 
model of an i ndividual system, since it does not provide a precise 
description of the behaviour of this system, but permits at most a 
description of the mean behaviour of a statistical aggregate of 
systems. 
The general point of view described above has been given its 
most consistent and systematic expression by Bohr, in terms of the 
principle of complementarity. For a comprehensive treatment of 
this principle the reader is referred to other sources.* Herc we shall 
give only a brief summary. 
In place of a precisely definable conceptual model, the principle 
of complementarity states that we are restricted to complementary 
pairs of inherently i mprecisely defined concepts, such as position and 
momentum, wave and particle, etc. The maxi mum degree of pre­
cision of either member of such a pair is reciprocally related to that 
of the opposite member. The specific experi mental conditions then 
determine how precisely each member of a complementary pair of 
concepts should be defined in any given case. But no single over-all 
concept is supposed ever to be possible, which would represent all 
significant aspects of the behaviour of an i ndividual system pre­
cisely. 
The essential step made by Bohr was then to demonstrate that t he 
laws of the quantum theory permit one consistently to renounce the 
notion of unique and precisely defined conceptual models in favour 
of that of com plementary pairs of imprecisely defi ned models. Th us, 
he was able to prove that the use of complemen tary pairs of im­
precisely defined concepts provides a possible way of discussing the 
behaviour of matter in the quantum-mechanical domain. But then 
Bohr's general point of view concerning the principle of comple-
• For a very thorough discussion of this principle, sec Paul Arthur 
Schilp, editor, Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist (Library of Living 
Philosophers , Evanston, Illinois, 1 949). 
93 

The Quantum Theory 
mentarity goes further than this. For his assumption that t he basic 
properties of matter can never be u nderstood rationally in terms of 
unique and u nambiguous models i m pl ies t hat the use of com­
plementary pairs of imprecisely defined concepts \\ i l l  be necessa ry 
for the detailed treatment of every dom a i n  that will ever be i nvesti­
gated. Thus, the l i mitations on our concepts i m pl icit in t he pri nciple 
of complementarity are regarded as absolute a nd fi nal .  
8. C R I T I C I S M  O F  C O N C L U S I O N S  D R A W N  I N  T l l E  U S U A L  I N T E R ­
P R E T A T I O N  O F  T H E  Q U A N T U M  T l l E O R Y O N  T l l L  ll A S l S O F  T H E  
I N D E T E R M I N A C Y  l' R l N C l l' U' 
The conclusions cited in the previous secti o ns have been ad opted by 
most theoretical physicists, who felt that, al though they were per­
haps difficul t to accept, they were in a considera ble measu re a 
necessary consequence of the experimental facts leading to the 
quantum theory. There were, however, a few physicists such as 
Einstein and Planck, who continued to believe that one should seek 
a more complete theory that would explai n the i ndivid ual quantum 
processes in more or less the manner i nd icated i n  Section 3. Now one 
may ask how such a point of view could be maintai ned, despite the inde­
termi nacy principle which would seem to indicate t hat at best such a 
theory would be merely an empty metaphysical speculation that 
could never be verified by experiment ; if not, as suggested by van 
Neumann's theorem, just simply an impossibility. The answer is 
that in the chain of reasoning from which these conclusions have 
been d rawn there are serious weaknesses. 
Let us begin with a discussion of the i ndetermi nacy principle. We 
recall that in the proof of this principle, it was t:ssential to use th ree 
properties ;  namely, the quantization of energy and moment u m  i n  all 
interactions, the existence of wave-l i ke and particle-l ike aspects of 
these quanta, and the unpred ictable and u ncontrollable character of 
certain featu res of the i ndividual quantum process. I t  is certainly 
true that these properties follow from the curre n t  general form of t he 
quantum theory. But the q uestion we raised i n  Section 3 was prt:­
cisely that of whether or not there exists a deeper sub-q uan t u m  
mechanical level of continuous and causally determined motion, 
which could lead to the Jaws of quantum mechanics as an approxi­
mation holding at the atomic level. For if such a sub-q uant u m  
mechanical level exists, then, as we have seen, the basic assumpt ions 
cited above, which are necessary for the valid ity of the i ndeterminacy 
principle, would not hold at this lower level. *  Hence, the i ndeter-
• For example, a quantum could be divided, and in principle predicted 
and controlled in terms of the new kinds of causal factors existing at this 
level. 
94 

Criticism of the lndetermi11acy Principle 
minacy pri nciple simply has nothing whatever to say about the 
precision that might be obtained in measurements that utilize 
physical processes tak i ng place at such a rnb-quantum mechanical 
level. 
I t  would appear, therefore, that the concl usions concerning the 
need to give up the concepts of causality, continuity of motion, 
and the o bjective reality of i ndivid użil micro-objects have been too 
hasty. For it is quite possible that while the q uant um theo ry, and 
with it the i ndeterminacy principle, a rc valid to a very high degree 
of approximation i n  a certain domain, t hey bot h cease to have 
relevance in new domains below that in which the current theory is 
applicable. Thus, the conclusion that t here is no deeper level of 
causally determined motion is just a piece of circular reasoning, 
since i t  wil l  follow only i f  we assume beforehand that no such level 
exists. 
A rat her simi lar a nalysis can be made with regard to von Neu­
mann's theorem. For the theorem is based on the i mpl icit assum p­
tion that no matter how far we may go i n  our studies of nat ure, we 
shall always find that the state of a system can be defined at least i n  
part with the aid o f  "observables" which satisfy certain rules o f  the 
current quantum theory. * Von Neumann then raised the qe!cstion, 
" I n addition to these 'observables', arc there any other at present 
'hidden' variables, which would help define the state of the system 
more precisely than is now possible in terms of the current formula­
tion of the quantum theory ?" His proof that this is impossi ble 
depends, in an essential way, however, on the assumption that at 
least part of t he specification of the state of t he system wil l  always 
be in terms of these observables, while the h idden variables wil l at 
most serve to make more precise the specification already given by 
t he observables. Such an assumption evidently severely l i m i ts the 
forms of the t heories that may be t aken into consideration. For it 
leaves out the i m portant possi bility that as we go lo a sub-quantum 
mecha n ical level the entire sch·mc of observables sa tisfying cert a i n  
rules that arc appropriate to the quant um-mechanical level will 
brea k  down, to be replaced by something very difTcrcnt. I n  other 
words, it is qu ite possi ble that the whole system of observables 
applies to a good degree of approximat ion in the usual quantum­
mcchanical domain but becomes completely i napplicable in the 
treat ment of deeper lying levels. In this case, the proof of von Neu­
mann's theorem would not be relevant, since the conditions con-
• For example, their eigen values arc obtained from linear Hermitean 
operators, their probability distributions from the square of the absolute 
value of the coefficient in a suitable expansion of the wave function, 
etc. 
95 

The Quan/um Theory 
sidered here go beyond the implicit assumptions needed to carry out 
the proof. * 
We see, then , that both i n  the case of t he indetermi nacy pri nciple 
and in that of von Neuma nn's t heorem, conclusions have been 
drawn concerning the need to renou nce causality, continu i ty, and 
the objective reality of i ndividual micro-objects, which follow neit her 
from the experimental facts underlying the quant u m  mechanics 
nor from the mathemat ical equations i n  terms of wh ich the t heory is 
expressed. Rather, they follow from t he ass u m pt i on (usually im­
plicit rather t han explicit) that certain features associated with the 
current formulation of the theory are absolute and fi nal, in the sense 
that they will never be contradicted in fut u re theories and will never 
be discovered to be approximations, holding only in some lim ited 
domain. Such an assumption so severely l i m its the possible forms of 
future t heories t hat it effect ively prevents us from considering a 
sub-quantum mechanical level in which cou ld take place new k i nds 
of motion to which would a pply new k i nds o f  causal laws. 
We may now ask why the proponents of t he usual i nterpretation 
have made assumptions of so far-reachi ng a character on the basis of 
no experimental or theoretical evidence . The full consideration of 
this question would requi re a book in itself, but here we shall 
content ourselves with giving t wo of the most important reasons. 
Fi rst of all there appears to have existed, especi ally among those 
physicists such as Heisenberg and ot hers, who first discovered the 
quantum theory, a rather widespread i mpression that the h u man 
brain is, broadly speaking, able t o  conceive of only t wo kinds of 
things. namely, fieldst and particles. !  The reason generally given for 
this conclusion is that we can only conceive of what we meet in 
everyday experience, or at most i n  experience with t hings that are in 
the domain of classical physics where, as is well k nown, all pheno­
mena fall into one or other of these two classes. Thus, when we 
come to the microscopic doma i n ,  where, as we have seen, neither 
the field nor t he particle concept is adequate, we are su pposed to haw 
passed beyond the domain of what we can co nceive of. It is found, 
howeve r, that even in this domain we can predict certain statist ical 
results, with the aid of suitable mathematical calculations. Thus, it 
• Von Neumann's theorem makes additional assumptions that need not 
be true. See D. Bohm, Phys. Rev., 85, 1 66, 1 80 (1952). 
t Let us recall that fields have usually manifested themselves as waves 
in physics. 
t For an exposition of one of the earliest proposals of this point of 
view, see, for example, W. Heisenberg, The Physical Princip{eå of the 
Quantum Theory, p. 5. A very clear and comprehensive expos1uon of a 
similar point of view is also given by C. F. von Weizsacker, The World 
View of Physics, London (1952), p. 104. 
96 

Criticism of the l11determi11acy Principle 
is concluded t hat conceptual thinking will be restricted to the classi­
cal domain only, while outside this domain the only thing left to do 
will be to engage in purely technical mani pulations of mathematical 
symbols according to suitable prescriptions which it is the busi ness 
of theo retical physicists to discover. As a result, any effort at con­
ceiving of a sub-quantum mechanical level is foredoomed to failure, 
since even if such a level should actually exist, we could never have 
direct experience with the entities in it, and could, therefore, never 
hope to i magine what these entities might be like. 
The second reason why modern theoretical physicists have not 
gencrnlly been i nterested in considering the possibility of a sub­
quantum mechanical level has been the widespread adoption of the 
thesis that we should not postulate the existence of entities which 
cannot be observed by methods that a rc already available. This 
thesis stems from a general philosophical point of view containing 
various branches such as "positivism", "operationalism", "empiri­
cism", and others, which began to attain a widespread popularity 
among physicists d u ri ng the twentieth century.* Since we do not yet 
know how to detect the new entities that might exist in the sub­
quantum mechanical level, the point of view described above leads 
us to refrai n from even raising the question as to whether such" a level 
exists. Of course, if future experiments should eventually disclose 
such entities, then we would naturally start to make theories con­
cerning them, but unless and u ntil this happens, the point of view 
described above directs us to consider only the kinds of quantities 
appearing in the current t heories. 
The answer to these two objections to the sub-quantum mechani­
cal level is quite straightforward . 
First of all, the notion that our concepts come only from every­
day experience evidently leads to an excessively one-sided point of 
view on this question. For it is well known that the evolution of 
our concepts has been due also to scientific experience. For example, 
a great part of our concept of the motion of bodies comes from an 
imagi native analysis of the experimental and theoretical results of 
the science of mechanics. I n  this respect , mathematics i n  general 
and the differential calculus in particular have played a key role i n  
guiding the development o f  a clear concept o f  accelerating motion. 
It is practically impossible to gain such a clear concept on the basis 
of everyday experience alone, or indeed even on the basis of labora-
* A leading nineteenth-century exponent of the positivist point of view 
was Mach. Modern positivist philosophers appear to have retreated some­
what from the extreme position of Mach, but the reflection of the position 
still remains in the philosophical point of view implicitly adopted by a 
large number of modern theoretical physicists. 
97 

The Quantum Theory 
tory experience alone, not supplemented by such a deeper imagina­
tive analysis . Thus, one of the most d i fficult problems that Galileo 
faced i n  understanding the laws of fall ing bodies was just to clarify 
the concept of acceleration , and t o  do this. he fou nd it qu ite essential 
to use an algebraic expression for the speed of m otion. Similarly, 
most of our concept of a wave comes from a theoretical and experi­
mental study of the interference and propagation of waves in various 
sciences, such as optics and acoustics, a nd very little comes from 
actually watching water waves i n  everyday experience . In this respect, 
Huyghen's principle as well as va rious mathematical treatments of 
interference and wave propagation constit ute an esse ntial part of the 
modern concept of wave m otio n. 
We see, then, that although the prim it i ve concepts gained in 
everyday expe rience may well serve as starti ng-points for research in 
physics (and in other sciences), the new laws discovered i n  this 
research, both those which take a mathematical form and those 
which have a more qualitative mode of expression, hel p lead to a 
progressive enrichment and refi nement of these concepts, until i n  
time they develop into something quite different from what they 
were when the research started. Now that we are faced with the 
problem of u nderstanding the new k i nds of laws to which our 
research in the quantum domain has led us, the normal continuation 
of this procedure would, therefore, be t o  take the field and particle 
concepts of classical physics as starting-points, and to modify and 
enrich them in such a way t h at they arc able to deal with the new 
combination of wave and particle properties that is implied by the 
quantum theory. I ndeed , a number of concrete efforts in this direc­
tion have already been made, and we shall describe them in Chapter 
IV. Of course, we do not expect the process of development of con­
cepts to stop at this point, either, but rather, as happened in classical 
physics, we may hope that a series of such modifications and enrich­
ments, each of which helps us attain a better understanding of what 
is happening in the quantum-mechanical domain, will eventually 
point the way to revolutionary changes in the whole conceptual 
structure. Naturally, it is quite possible that we may encounter 
severe difficulties in such efforts to develop radically new concepts 
appropriate to the quantum-mechanical domai n .  Nevertheless, the 
possibility of such difficulties can hardly be regarded as a good 
excuse for throwing up our hands in despair before any serious 
efforts in this direction have been made at all and for asserti ng that 
our brains are simply not adequate to the job of imagining what we 
have not met in everyday experience or in experience in the classical 
domain. 
Let us now discuss the second reason generally given for not 
98 

Criticism of the f!ldeterminacy Principle 
considering the possibility of a sub-quantum mechanical level, 
namely, the positivist principle that we should not postulate the 
existence of entities that we do not already know how to observe. 
This principle evidently represents an extraphysical limitation in the 
possible kinds of theories that we choose to take into consideration. 
The word "extraphysical" is used here advisedly, since we can in no 
way deduce, either from the experimental data of physics, or from 
its mathematical formulation, that it will necessarily remain for ever 
impossible for us to detect entities which we do not at present know 
how to observe. 
There is no reason why an cxtraphysical general principle could 
not conceivably serve as a useful working hypothesis. This particular 
extraphysical principle cannot, however, be said to be a good work­
ing hypothesis. For the history of scientific research is full of ex­
amples in which it was very fruitful indeed to assume that certain 
objects or clements might be real, long before any procedures were 
known that would permit them to be observed directly. The atomic 
theory is just such an example. For the possibility of the actual 
existence of individual atoms was first postulated in order to explain 
various large-scale regularities, such as the laws of chemical com­
bination, the gas laws, etc. On the other hand, it was of course 
possible to treat these large-scale reguiarities directly fr1 terms of 
macroscopic concepts alone, without the need for the introduction 
of atoms. Certain nineteenth-century positivists (notably Mach) 
therefore insisted on purely philosophical grounds that the concept 
of atoms was meaningless and even "nonsensical" because it was 
not then possible to observe them as such. Nevertheless, evidence 
for the existence of individual atoms was eventually discovered by 
people who took the atomic hypothesis seriously enough to suppose 
that individunl atoms might exist, even though no one had actually 
observed them. We evidently have here a close analogy to the usual 
interpretation of the quantum theory, which avoids considering the 
possibility of a sub-quantum mechanical level, because it cannot be 
observed by methods that are at present available. 
The history of the development of science shows very generally 
that there are two ways in which scientific progress can be made ; 
first, by the discovery of new facts, which ultimately lead to new 
kinds of concepts and theories ; and secondly, by the explanation of 
a wide range of existing facts in terms of new concepts and theories, 
which ultimately lead to new kinds of experiments and thus to the 
discovery of new facts. In the light of this historical experience, 
positivism is seen to lead to a one-sided point of view of the possible 
means of carrying out scientific research. For while it recognizes the 
importance of the empirical data, positivism flies in the face 
99 

The Quantum Theory 
of the historically demonstrated fact that the proposal of new 
concepts and theories havi ng certa i n spec u l a t i ve aspects (e.g. t he 
atomic t heory) has quite frequently tu rned o u t  to be a s  important i n  
the long r u n  a s  new empirical disco\'crics h a\ 'e been. 
As an alternati\'e t o  the positivist procedure of assigni ng reality 
only to that which we now know how to observe, we arc adopting 
in this book a poi nt of view i n t roduced i n  Chapter I ,  and further 
developed i n  Chapter V, which we bel ie\ 'c co rresponds m ore cl osel y 
to the conclusions that can be d rawn from ge nera l  experience i n  
actual scientific research. In this poi nt o f  vie\\ , we assume that the 
world as a whole is objectively real , and t hat, as fa r as we know, it 
has a precisely describable and ana lysa bl e structu re of u nl i mited 
compl exity. Thus structure must be u nderstood wit h  the aid of a 
series of progressively more fundamen tal , more extensive, a nd more 
accurate concepts, which series wil l  fu rn ish , so t o  speak , a better and 
better set of views of the infinite st ructure of obj ective reality. We 
should, however, never expect to obt ain a complete theory of this 
structure, because there are almost certainly more elements i n  i t  than 
we can possibl y  be aware of at any particular stage of scientific 
development. However, any specified clement can i n  principle 
ultimately be discovered, but never al l of them. 
The point of view described above evidently i mplies that no theory, 
or feat ure of any theory, should ever be regarded as absol ute and 
final. Thus, with regard to the current formulation of the quantum 
theory, we are led to criticize assumptions such as those of Heisen­
berg and Bohr, that the indetermi n acy principle and the restricti on 
to complementary pairs of concepts will persist no mat ter h ow far 
physics may progress into new domai ns. It shoul d be clear, however, 
that in making such criticisms, it is not our i ntention to i mpl y that 
the quantum theory is not valid o r useful in its own domain. On the 
contrary, the quantum theory is evidently a brilliant attainment of 
the highest order of importance, a theory whose value it would be 
absurd to contest.. And similarly, Born's probability interpretation of 
the Schrodinger wave function, Heisenberg's indeterminacy pri nciple, 
and Bohr's demonstration that in the quantum domain matter 
shows very general kinds of opposing modes of behaviour u nder 
different conditions (e.g. wave and particle), must all be recognized 
as making extremely important contributions to the expression of 
the laws of the quantum-mechanical domain. What we wish to 
stress here is, however, that the brilliant achievements of the quan­
tum mechanics in no way depend on the notion that the features 
mentioned above (or any other features) of the cu rrent theory 
represent absolute and final limitations on the laws of nature. For 
all these achievements could equally well be obtained on the basi s 
1 00  

Criticism of the /11determi11acy Principle 
of the more modest assumption that such features apply with i n  some 
limited domain a nd to some limited degree of approximation, the 
precise extent of which limits remains to be discovered. In this way 
we avoid t he making of arbitrary a priori assumptions which evi­
dently could not conceivably be subjected to experimental proof, 
and we leave the way open for the consideration of basically new 
k i nds of laws that might apply in new domains, laws that cannot be 
considered if we assu me the absol ute and final validity of certain 
features of the theories that arc appropriate to the qua ntum­
mcchanical domain. 
A mong the new kinds of laws that one is now permitted to con­
sider if one ceases to assume the a bsolute and final validity of the 
i ndeterminacy principle, a very i nteresting and suggestive possi­
bility is then that of a sub-quantum mechanical level containing 
hidden variables. As we saw i n  Section 3, such a framework of law 
appears to contain the possibil i ty of explaining, at least qualitatively, 
the main feat u res of the current quantum t heory, as app roxi mations 
holdi ng i n  an appropri ate domain. M oreover, i n  the discussion given 
in t his section, we sec that no good reasons have been add uced for 
not consideri ng such theories ; and i ndeed, we shall discuss a number 
of speci fic examples of this kind of t heory in Chapter I V. 
9. T I I E  U S U A L I N T E R P R E T A T I O N  O F  T J I E Q U A N T U M  T H E O R Y  
A F O R M  O F  I N D E T E R M I N I S T I C M E C H A N I S M  
The assumption of the absolute and final validity of t he i ndeter­
mi nacy pri nciple, which impl i es that the details of quantu m  fluctua­
tions have no causes at all, evidently resembles very much that 
underlyi ng the philosophy of indeterministic mechanism d iscussed 
i n  Chapter I I ,  Section 1 4. I t  is, however, in certain aspects more 
subtle, so that without careful analysis of the problem, one may fail 
to sec j ust what has been assumed. 
In the earl ier forms of indetermi nistic mechanism, it was supposed, 
either expl icitly or i mplici tly, that the whole universe could be 
descri bed completely and perfectly in terms of nothi ng more than 
certain mathematically definable parameters . These parameters were 
assumed to u ndergo arbitrary and lawless fluctuations, the proba­
bi lity distri butions of which, however, satisfy a set of purely quantita­
tive Jaws, which are, in fact, the only kinds of laws that were sup­
posed to be satisfied by anything in the whole world. I n the quantum 
theory, the nearest thing that one might find corresponding to such 
basic mathematical parameters would be the values of the Schro­
di ngcr wave fu nction at every point i n  space and time, which arc, as 
we saw i n  Section 2, determined i n  terms of their i nitial values for all 
time in terms of Schrodinger's equation. But, as we have poi nted out 
101 

The Quantum Theory 
in Section 7, the Schrodinger wave fu nction i s  n ot regarded as 
corresponding precisely to any property of matter that is supposed 
to exist. Rather, it is regarded essent ially as nothing more than an 
intermediate and p urely mathematical symbol w hich can be manipu­
lated according to certain prescri bed rules in such a way as t o  permit 
a correct calculation of the probab ili ties of \'a ri o u s  k i nds of experi­
mental results. 
But now the question arises, "What is t he ࡽignificancc of the 
properties whose probabilities can t h us be ca lcui ated from t he tp 
function ? " As we have seen i n  Sections 5 and 7 ,  Bohr has shown 
that in the usual i nterpretation of the quantum t heory such proper­
ties must not be regarded as ex i !ti n g  ohjcct i\'cly i n  the o bserved 
system. There do exist, however , certa i n  thi n gs which according to 
his point of view a rc adm itted to be, to all i n te nts and p urposes, 
objecti ve ;  viz. the observable la rge -sc ale phenomena. 
Let us review briefly the way in which such phenomena are 
treated in the usual interpretation of the q uantum theory. One can 
calculate the relationships between these phenomena approximately 
in terms of the laws of classical mecha nics, b ut, as we have seen in 
Section 5, i n  the context of greater precision of experimentation one 
discovers a random fluctuation i n  t he precise details of these pheno­
mena, not expl ai nable by cl assical theory. I t  is the n assumed that 
these fluctuations are completely a rbi trary and l awless, havi ng no 
causes at all. Thus, the theoret ical explanatio n and predicti on of 
these details are supposed to lie for e\'er outside the scope of what 
we ca n hope to accomplish in physics, or in any other science. The 
subject -matter of physics is then by definition i nherently and un­
avoidably restricted to nothi ng more than the calculation of the 
probability distributions of the various possible k inds of phenomena, 
distributions which are derivable from a certain general physical 
and mathematical scheme, which grew out of Schrodinger's eq ua­
tion.* In other words, it is supposed that t here is nothing in the 
universe that will not eventually be found to fit into this scheme, 
the general features of which are thus regarded as absolute and final. 
It is clear, then, that we have been led to a point of view that is 
• This scheme is that of a wave function defined in a configuration 
space, satisfying a purely linear set of equations, and related to the 
phenomena through the calculation of the probabilities of various 
"observables", in terms of the mean values of the associated "operators" . 
This scheme leads to the indeterminacy principle as an inherent and 
inescapable limitation on the precision with which the basic properties 
of matter can be defined, described, and even conceived of. Indeed, oe 
may define this mathematical scheme as being precisely the one that is 
needed if the hypothesis of the absolute and final validity of the inde­
terminacy principle is to be maintained. 
102 

/11determi11istic Mechanism 
precisely that of indetermin istic mechanism. The i ndetermi nistic 
mechanism applies, however, neither to the real micro-objects of 
t he type contemplated in earlier indeterministic mechanist schemes, 
nor even to a set of purely mathematical parameters, such as appear 
i n  Schrodinger's equation . It applies, rather, only to the obserl'able 
large-scale phe110111e11a. Thus, by denying the objective reality of 
the microscopic domain, and by the associated renunciation of 
causality and continuity, it becomes possible to save the most essen­
tial and characteristic feature of the mecha n ist posi tion ; viz. the 
assumption that every objective and definable property i n  the world 
can be described in terms of nothing more than a set of purely 
quantitative laws of probability fitting i nto a certa i n  general 
physical a nd mathema tica l scheme that is a bsolute and fi nal . 
The assumption described a bove is evidently very similar to that 
of nineteenth-cen tu ry physicists who regarded the general physica l 
and mathematical scheme of classical physics as having an absolute 
and final validity. I ndeed , j ust as classical physicists fel t  that diffi­
culties, such as t hose arising from the fail ure of t he Rayleigh-Jeans 
law, were only "small clouds" soon to be dispelled by some change 
i n  the details of the determi nistic kinds of theories that were then 
currently held, modern physicists feel that the present crisis in phy ­
sics* will be resolved by revising the details of the general kinds of 
probabilistic theories that are now current. What is common to both 
classical physicists and modern physicists is, therefore, a tendency 
to assume the absolute and final charncter of the general features of 
the most fundamental t heory that happens to be available at the 
time at which they a rc working . Thus, the usual i n terpretation of t he 
quantum theory represents, in a certain sense, a rather natural con­
tinuation of the mechanistic attitude of classical physicists, suitably 
adj usted to take i nto account the fact that the most fundamental 
theory now available is probabilistic in form, and not deterministic. 
• This crisis will be described in Chapter IV. 
103 

C H A PT E R  F O U R 
Alternative Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
I .  I N T R O D U C T I O I'  
I N  the previous chapter, we saw t hat the usual i n terpretation o f  tht: 
quantum theory req uires us to give up the concepts of causa l i ty, 
continuity, and the obj ective real ity of i nd ividual micro-objects, i n  
connect ion with t h e  quantum-mechanical domain. I nstead i t  leads 
to a poi nt of view in which physics is said to be i nherently a nd un­
avoidably restricted , in this domain a nd below. to the m;rnipulation 
of mathematical symbols according to sui1ablc t echniq ues that per­
mit, in general, the calculation only of the probable behaviour of 
the phenomena that can be observed in the macroscopic d omai n .  
These far-reaching changes i n  the conceptual structure o f  physics 
have been based on the assumption t h a t  certain features of the 
current formulation of the quantum theory, viz. the indeterminacy 
principle and the appearance of a characteristic set of opposing 
"complementary" pairs of modes of behaviour (e.g. wave-like and 
particle-like), are absolute and final f catures of the laws of nature, 
which will continue to apply, u ncontradicted and without approxi­
mation, in every d omain that will ever be the subject of physical 
i nvestigation. 
I n  Section 8 of the previous chapter, we have demonst rated that 
it is not necessary to make this assumption, and that i ndeed such an 
assumption constitutes a dogmatic restriction on the possible forms 
of future theories. In the present chapter, we shall, however, go 
further and actually sketch the general outlines of some s pecific 
theories which allow us to interpret the quantum mechanics i n  a 
new way. These theories permit the representation of quant um­
mechanical effects as arising out of an objectively real sub-stratum 
of continuous motion, existing at a lower level , and satisfyi ng new 
laws which are such as to lead to those of the current quan t u m  
theory as approximations t h a t  are good only in what we shall call 
the quantum-mechanical level. 
The new theories serve two principal purposes. Fi rst of all, t hey 
1 04 

bitroduction 
help to put into a more specific form the criticisms of the usual inter­
pretation of the quantum mechanics made in Cha pter I I  I .  For by 
furnishing a concrete cxቼmplc of theories that can be constructed 
from other poi nts of view, they provide a demonstration of the 
falsity of the hitherto current impression that we had no choice 
but to adopt the usual i nterpretation because any other was thought 
to be i nconceivable. Secondly, and perhaps even more importa nt, 
these theories may serve as useful starting-points in investigations 
aimed at the understanding of new domains of phenomena that arc 
not yet very well understood . 
I n  con nection with the second point mentioned above, Jct us recall 
that t here now exists a crisis i n  physics, arising from t he i nadequacy 
of c ur rent theories i n the t reatment of phenomena i nvolving very 
h igh energies and very short d istances (of the order of 1 0  13 cm. or 
Jess). Of course, the proponents of t he usual i nterpretation of the 
quantum theory arc, on the whole, quite aware of this crisis. Never­
theless, as we pointed out i n  Chapte r I l l, Section 4, thei r general 
conclusion has been that the success of probabilistic theories of t he 
type of the current quantum mecha n ics i nd icates that i n  the next 
domain it is very likely that we shall be led to theories t hat arc, if 
anything, even more probabilistic than those of the current quantum 
domain. A more careful consideration of čhe problem shov1s that 
this conclusion carries very lit tle weight. Thus, for example, ni ne­
teenth-century physicists could equally well have claimed that the 
unbroken success of the deterministic Jaws of classical mechanics 
in three centuries of applications was a very st rong indicat ion that 
progress into new domai ns would be very likely to lead to laws that 
were, if anything, even more determi nistic than those that already 
existed. (I n  fact, many physicists of the time did hope that the 
laws of classical statistical mechan ics would eventually be deduced 
completely and perfectly from a deterministic basis.) Thus. it would 
seem that historical experience should teach us not to make si mple 
extrapolations of previous trends, when we come to the question of 
what is the degree to which the laws of new domai ns wil l  show a 
statistical or a precisely determi nate cha racter. Rather it seems clea r 
that one should not decide this question a priori, but, instead, one 
should be ready to try various kinds of Jaws and to sec which k i nd 
permits the greatest progress i n  t he understanding of t he new 
domains. 
I t  is in just t his spirit described above that we wish the theories 
discussed i n  this chapter to be considered .  We regard them, not as 
absolute and fi nal laws which wc arc layi ng down from a priori 
considerations, or even as dcfmitivc theories of the nex t level to be 
treated in physics. Rather, we consider them to be purely provisional 
1 05 

Altematfre Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
proposals with which we are beginning and from which we hope to 
go forward. Indeed, as we shall sec, a considerable amount of pro­
gress has already been made since proposals of this kind were first 
formulated, and the theories ha vc undergone, as is to be expected 
in normal scientific work in any field, a conti n ual process of enrich­
ment and refinement. We hope that this process will eventually lead 
to superior theories that are qualitatively different from the ones that 
served as starting-points, yet perhaps related to them in the same 
sense that a mature person is related to the child from which he began. 
2 .  G E N E R A L  C O N S I D E R A T I O N S  ON T l l E S U ll - Q U A N T U M  
M E C H A N I C A i. L L V l . I . 
Before going on to consider in detail some of the specific theories 
to which we have referred in Section I ,  we shall first make a number 
of general points concerning the sub-quantum mechanical level, 
which can be discussed without the aid of such specific theories. 
We note, first of all, that if one adopts the hypothesis of a sub­
quantum mechanical level containing hidden variables, then, as 
pointed out in Chapter I l l ,  Section 3, we are led to regard the 
statistical character of the current quantum theory as originating in 
random fluctuations of new kinds of entities, existing in the lower 
level. If we consider only those entities which can be defined at the 
quantum-mechanical level alone, these will be subjected to a genuine 
indeterminacy in their motions, because determining factors that are 
important (i.e. the hiden variables) simply cannot be defined in this 
level. Hence, as in the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, 
we regard the indeterminacy implied by Heisenberg's principle as an 
objective necessity and not just as a consequence of a simple lack of 
knowledge on our part concerning some hypothetical .. true" states 
of the quantum-mechanical variables. Thus, it is not the existence of 
indetermination and the need for a statistical theory that distin­
guishes our point of view from the usual one. For these features are 
common to both points of view. The key difference is that we regard 
this particular kind of indeterminacy and the need for this particular 
kind of statistical treatment as something that exists only within the 
context of the quantum-mechanical level, so that by broadening the 
context we may diminish the indeterminacy below the limits set by 
Heisenberg's principle. 
To go beyond the limits set by Heisenberg's principle, it will be 
necessary to use new kinds of physical processes that depend signi­
ficantly on the details of what is happening at the sub-quantum 
mechanical level. As we shall see later, there is some reason to believe 
that such processes could perhaps be found in the domain of very 
high energies and of very short distances. It is clear, however, that 
106 

The Sub- Qua11/11m Mcclumica/ lc l'cl 
in any process which ca n be treated to an adequate degree of a pproxi­
mation by the laws of t he current quantum theory, the entit ies 
existing in the lower level can not be playi ng a ny very significant 
role. Very little i nformation about these entities could then be 
obta i ned by observi ng t he results of this k i nd of process. I n  such an 
observa tion, Heisenberg's pri nciple would, therefore, a pply to a 
very high degree of approxi mation as a correct limitat ion on how 
wel l  the state of a n  i ndividual physical system could be determined , 
while evidently, if we observed the system with the aid o f' physica l 
processes sensitive to the precise states of the hidden variables, this 
limitation would cease to be a ppl icable. 
To i l l ustra te in  more detail what t he i ndeterminacy pri nciple 
would mean i n  terms of a su b-quantum mecha nical level, it will be 
helpful to retu rn here to the analogy of Brownian movement, a l ready 
considered in Chapter 1 1 1 ,  Section 3. 
As we have seen, the motion of a smoke particle is subject to 
random fl uctuations, origi nating in col lisions with the atoms which 
exist at a lower level . As a result of these collisions, i ts motions 
cannot be com pletely determi ned by any variables (e.g. the position 
and velocity of the particle) existi ng a t  t he level of the Brownian 
motion itself. I ndeed, t he lack of determination is not only qualita­
tively analogous to t hat obtained i n  the qllant u m  theory, but, as 
has been shown by Furth,m * the analogy even extends to the quant i­
tative form of the i ndeterminacy relations. Thus if we observe a 
movi ng smoke particle throughout some short interval of time, L1 t, 
we will find ra ndom fluctu ations of magnitude LJ X  in  the mea n 
position , and of magnitude , LJ P, in its mean moment um, which 
satisfy the rclationshipt 
LI PLJ X  .., C 
Here C is a constant, which depends on the temperat u re of the gas, 
as well as on other properties such as its viscosi ty. If the reader will 
refer to Chapter III, Section 4, he will sec that the form of this 
relationship is j ust the same as that of Heisenberg, except that the 
Planck's constant, h, has been replaced by the constant, C, which 
depends on the state of the gas. 
• The reference numbers refer to the Bibliography at the end of this 
chapter. 
t Basical ly, this relationship comes from the formula (Llx)2 = allt for 
the mean square of the distance moved by the particle in its random 
motions during the time, At. Thus we have for the root mean square 
fluctuation in the momentum (assuming zero mean velocity to simplify 
the argument) [ (;2) r = a1(Ll 1)1• 
Then, with Ll X 
= [(Llx)2]1, we get 11 X LI P  = ma
= C. 
107 

A !te ma tire Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
There is. however, an i mportant respect i n  which the analogy 
between the Brownian motion and the quan t u m  theory is not com­
plete. This difference arises essen tially in the fact that C is not a 
universal constant whereas h is. As a result, i n  principle at least , 
one is able by changing conditions suitably to make C arbitrarily 
small (e.g. by lowering the temperature) and thus reduce the i nde­
tem1inacy below any desired value. On the other h and, the constant, 
h, docs not depend on cond iti ons i n  any k nown way, so t hat Heisen­
berg's rela t ions i m ply, as far as we have been a ble to tell, an i ndc­
tcrmin[icy t hat is un iversal ,  at least within the q ua n t u m-mechanical 
domai n .  This means that while we can by a suita ble choice of 
conditions cons t ruct apparatus (e .g. a microscope) which is not 
significantly affected by the kind of B rownian motion that we wish 
to observe. \VC ca nnot obtain a simila r result in con nect ion wi t h  t he 
quantum-med1a n ica l i ndeterm inacy. To improve the ana logy, we 
should therefore have to suppose that in the q uantum domai n we are 
effectively restricted to using appa rat us that is itself undergoi ng the 
Brownian motion to an extent that is compa rable with that under· 
gone by the micro-systems that we are trying to obser\'e. If we recall, 
however, that in our point of view, all matter in all its known 
manifestations is conti nually undergoing fluctuations originating in 
the sub-quantum mechanical level, we can see that the above exten­
sion of the analogy is justifiable. Considering that these fluctuations 
are present everywhere with essentially the same characteristics, we 
concl ude that the universal a nd uniform character of the limitations 
implied by Heisenberg's principle in the quantum domain would not 
be an unexpected consequence of our assum ptions . 
To O'Vcrcome these limi tations we should, as we have already 
pointed out, have to take advantage of properties of matter that 
depended significantly on the sub-quantum mechanical level. One 
way to do this would be to make our observations with the aid of 
processes t hat were very fast compared with the sub-quantum 
mechanical fl uctuations, so that the whole measurement would be 
O\'er before t hese fluctuations could have changed thi ngs by very 
much (j ust as to photogra ph a rapidly moving object we need a very 
fast camera). Such rapid processes are most l i kely to be obtai ned i n  
the high energy domain since, from the Einstein relation, E = In·, 
a high energy, E, implies a process of high frequency, v. 
1 
Finally, the analogy of Brownian motion also serves to bring out 
two different limiting modes in which the indeterminacy originati ng 
in random sub-quantum mechanical fluctuations may manifest i tself. 
For let us consider, not the Brownian motion of smoke particles, but 
rather that of very fine droplets of mist. It is evident that there is a 
certain indeterminacy i n  the motion of these droplets that could be 
108 

The Sub-Quantum Mechanical Level 
removed only by goi ng to a broader context, includi ng the a i r  
molecules wit h  which these droplets arc conti nually being struck. I t  
remains true, however, t hat in their i rrcgulnr Brownian motions the 
d roplets retain thei r characteristic mode of existence as very small 
bodies of water. On the other hand, as we approach the cri tical 
tempera! urc and pressure of the gas* a new behaviour appea rs ; for 
the fmc droplets begin to become unstable. The s ubstance then 
enters a phase in which the d roplets a rc always fo r m i n g  a nd d is­
solvi ng a nd, as a result, the substance becomes opa lescent. 
Herc we have a new k i nd of fluctuation, which leads to a n  i nde­
terminacy in the very mode of existence of the substance ( i .e. between 
existence in t he form of droplets and existence in the form of a 
homogeneous gas). 
Similarly, it is possible that the very mode o f  existence of the 
elect ron wi ll event ually be fo u nd t o  be i ndeterminate, when we have 
understood the detailed character of quantum fluctuations. I ndeed , 
!he fact that the electron shows a characteristic wave particle d uality 
i n  its behaviour would suggest that perhaps this second kind of 
i ndeterminacy will turn out to be the relevant one ; for if such an 
i ndeterminacy exists, it would lead to a concept of the electron as an 
entity that was continually fluctuating from wave-like to particle­
like character, and thus capable of demonstrating both modes of 
behaviour, each of which would, however, be emphasized differ­
ently i n  the different kinds of environment supplied ,  for example, by 
different arrangemen ts of laboratory apparatus. 
Of course, we have no way at present to decide which of these 
interpretations of the indeterminacy pri nciple is the correct one. 
Such a decision will be possible only when we shall have found an 
adequate theory that goes below the level of the quantum theory. 
Meanwhile, however, it is important to keep bot h possibilities i n  
mind. In the subsequent work, we shall therefore discuss examples 
of both kinds of theories. 
3. B R I E F 
H I S T O R I C A L  
S U R V E Y  O F  P R O P O S A L S  F O R  
A L T E R N A T I V E  I N T E R P R E T A T I O N S  O F T H E Q U A N T U M 
T H E O R Y  
I t i s  significant to note that the fi rst steps towards a n  alternative 
in terpretation of the quantum theory were taken about thi rty years 
• The critical temperature and pressure define a point at which the 
distinction between gas and liquid disappears. Above this point there is no 
sharp qualitative transi tion between liquid and gas, while below it such a 
transformation can take place. If we hea t a liquid confined in a strong 
container past its critical point, the meniscus separating gaseous and 
liquid phases disappears, showing that there is now only one phase, which 
may be thought of as a very dense gas. 
109 

Alternative Interpretations of the Quamum Theory 
ago by de Brogl ie<2> and by M a del ung'31 at more or less t he same 
time as the usual i nterpretation was being bro ught into its current 
definitive form. Neither of these steps '' as. howeyer, carried far 
enough to demonst rate the possibilit y of a consistent treatment of all 
the essential aspects of the quan t u m t heory. I ndeed, the i nterpre­
tation of de Broglie was subjected to severe criticisms by some of the 
proponents of the usual i nterpret at ion .t4 ' Partly as a result of these 
crit icisms and partly as a result of add itionă:! criticisms which he 
made himself, de Broglie ga ve up his proposa ls for a long time.<6> 
After these efforts had died o u t ,  it was not u ntil about 1 950 that 
a systematic tendency to q uestion t he usua l  i n terpretation of the 
quantum theory began to devclo p o n  an appreciable scale. Among 
the m ost thoroughgoing of the earlier cri tical cff orts in this direction 
were those of Blokhinzhev and Terlctzkyt01• These physicists m ade 
it clear that it is not necessary to adopt the i nterpretation of Bohr 
and Heisenberg, and showed that instead, one may consistently 
regard the current quantum theory as an essentially statistical t reat­
ment, which would eventually be supplemented by a more detailed 
theory permitting a more nearly complete t reatment of the behaviour 
of the individual system . They did not, however, actually propose 
any specific theories or models for the t reatment of the individual 
systems. Then in 1 95 1 ,  part ly as a result of the stimulus of discussions 
with Dr. Einstein, the author began to seek such a model ;  and 
indeed shortly thereafter<7> he found a si mple causal expl anation of 
the qua n t u m mechan ics which, as he later learned, had already been 
proposed by de Brogl ie in 1 927. M eanwhile, however, the theory had 
been carried far enough so t hat the fundamental object ions that had 
been raised against the suggestions of de B roglie had been answered. 
This was done mainly with the aid of a theory of measurements<sl 
which showed that the new i nterpretation was consistent with all 
the essential ch aracteristics of the quantum theory. Partly as a result 
of this work, and part ly as a result of additional suggestions made by 
Vigier"'>, de Broglie<S> then returned to his origi nal proposals, si nce 
he now felt that the decisive objections against them had been 
answered. 
At this stage, as pointed out in Section I ,  the author's pri nci pal 
purpose had not been to propose a definitive new theory, but was 
rather mainly to show, with the aid of a concrete example, that 
alternative interpretations of the quantum theory were in fact 
possible. Indeed, the theory in its original form, although com­
pletcly consistent in a logical way, had many aspects which seemed 
qu ite artificial a nd unsatisfactory.°0> Nevertheless, as arti ficial as 
some of these aspects were, it did seem that the theory could serve 
as a useful starting-point for further developments, which i t  was 
1 10 

Brief llistorica/ Suney 
hoped could modify and enrich it sufllcicntly to remove these un­
satisfactory features. Such developments, which have in fact 
occurredui. 1 2 > ,  at least in part, and which arc still going on, will 
be discussed in more detail in Section 5. Meanwhile, however, a 
number of largely independent cff orts have been made in the same 
general direction by Vigicr111, TakabayasiU3l, Fcnycs< 1 ' l, WcizclU6> 
and many others. While none of the cff orts cited above has been able 
to avoid completely some kinds of artificial or otherwise unsatis­
factory features, each of them introduces new ideas that arc we ll 
worth further study. It is clear, then, that even if none of the alter­
native interpretations of the quantum theory that have been pro­
posed thus far has led to a new theory that could be regarded as 
definitive, the eff orl to find such theories is nevertheless becoming a 
subject of research on the part of more and more physicists, who arc 
apparently no longer completely satisfied with continuing on the 
lines of research that arc accessible within the framework of the usual 
interpretation. 
4. A S P E C I F I C  E X A M P L E O F  A N  A L T E R N A T I V E  
I N T E R P R ET A T I O N  O F  T H E  Q U A N T U M  T H E O R Y  
In this section, we shall sketch in a qualitative way a specific ex.ample 
of an alternative interpretation of the quantum theory. This example 
is not the original one proposed by the author, but already contains a 
number of modifications and new features, which arc aimed at 
removing some of the u nsatisfactory aspects of the earlier proposals. 
We begin by recalling that in the quantum-mechanical domain 
matter is able, under different conditions, to show either wave-like or 
particle-like behaviour, so that it is evident that the wave concept 
and the particle concept arc each, by themselves, incapable of dealing 
with the full richness of properties demonstrated by matter in this 
domain. Now, the first and simplest idea to suggest itself in the face 
of this problem is that perhaps the difficulty arises out of the fact 
that in previously existing theories only two possibilities were con­
sidered, namely, that of the pure wave and that of the pure particle, 
these two possibilities being regarded as mutually exclusive. On the 
other hand, it is evidently possible that in any given process, both 
wave and particle could be present together in some kind of inter­
connection. Of course, this proposal docs not constitute a very great 
enrichment of the concepts that were hitherto used, but, as we shall 
see, it is already able to represent the essential properties of matter 
in the quantum domain. 
We now formulate this point of view in more detail. We first 
postulate that connected with each of the "fundamental" particles of 
physics (e.g. an electron) is a body existing in a small region of 
1 1 1  

A ltematfre Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
space. The probable size of this region we shall discuss later, but for 
the present we assume only that it is smaller than the size of an atom, 
and i ndeed so small that in most applica t i ons at the atomic level 
the body can be approximated as a mathem a t ical poi nt (j ust as i n  
the earliest forms of the atomic theory o ne was a ble fo r  many pur­
poses to approx i nw te atoms as poi nts). 
The nex t step is to assume that associa ted wi t h  this body there 
is a Wa\'e, without which the body i s  never fou nd .  This wave will be 
assumed t o  be a n  oscillation i n  a new k i nd of freld, which is rep re­
sented mathcmϨ1tic.i lly by t he tp field of Schri.id i ngcr. l n other words, 
we n o  longer suppose tlrnt t he Schrod inger wave fu nction is nothing 
more than a mathcma tic<1l symbol conven ient t o  m a n i pulate i n  order 
to calculate certai n probabilities, but, i nstead , represents an object­
i\'ely real field, somewhat like the gravitati onal and the electro­
magnetic, but havi ng some new characteristics of its own . Instead 
of satisfying Maxwell's equations or the equat ions of the gravi­
tational field, this field satisfies Schrodi nger's equation, which pro­
vides, however, as in the case of the other fields, a partial differential 
equation determining the future changes of the field i n  terms of its 
value at all points i n  space at a given i nstant of t i me.* 
We now ass u me that the ip field a nd the body a rc interconnected 
in the sense that the ip field exerts a new kind of "quantum-mech­
anical" force on the body, a force that first begi ns to manifest itself 
strongly in the atomic domain ,  so that we ca n understand why it has 
not previously turned up i n  the study of the l arge-scale domai n. We 
also suppose that the body may exert a reciprocal i nfl uence on t he 
1p field, but that this reciprocal infl uence is small enough to be neglected 
in the quantum-mechanical domain, eve n though it is, as we shall 
see later, likely to be significant in the sub-quantum mechanical 
c!o:Tlain. 
As to the precise character of the quantum-mechanical force 
exerted by the ip field on the body, this is not very i mportant at 
the level of the theory at which we are worki ng, because a very wide 
range of kinds of forces could lead to essentially the same results. 
All that is important fo r  the prese nt is to suppose that the force 
is such as to produce a tendency to pull the body into regions where 
I 'P I is largest. t 
• The 'P field is complex, but this crea tes no real difficulty, since wϩ ca.n 
always write it as U + iV where U and V are real. Thus, the ip function is 
just a short-hand way of talking of two coupled real fields (see D. Bohm, 
Quantum Theory, Chapter I II). 
7 Note that the "quantum-force" in this model is quite different from 
what it was in some of the earlier models, discussed in references (7) and 
(8). In these earlier models this force was assumed to be derived from a 
"quantum-potcnlial"-h2LPR/2mR , where ip "'Ѩ Re i.;h and R and S are 
1 1 2 

A Specific Example 
If the above tendency were all that were present, the body would 
eventually 
fi nd 
i tsel f  at the place where the lJI field had the 
highest intensity. We now fu rther assu me that this tendency is 
resisted by ra ndom motions u ndergone by t he body, motions which 
arc a na logous to the Brownian movement. These ra ndom motions 
clearly could have many sources . They coukl , for exa m ple, come t'rorn 
rn nd om fluctuat ions in the 'I' field itself. I ndeed , it has been cha rac­
teristic of a l l  other fields k nown thus far that typical sol u t ions to t he 
field eq uations represent i n  genera l  only some k i nd of a ve rage 
mot ion. For exa m ple, n:al elect romagnetic fields do not oscillate in 
some si mple a nd regular way, but in gcncrn l t hey lwvc com plicated 
a nd 
i rregular fl uctuations (e.g. t hose 
represe nting the t hcrm:i l 
radiation comi ng from atoms i n  the walls of conta i ners, etc.). 
Similarly, hyd rodynamic fields, representi ng the velocity and densi ty 
di stributions of real flu ids, generally show t urbulent fl uctuations, 
abou t a n  a verage sat isfyi ng certai n ki nds o f  simpl ified hyd ro­
dynamica l eq uations. Hence, it is not u nrea sonable to suppose that 
the rp field is u ndergoi ng random fl uct uation abo ut a n  average that 
satisfies Schrodi ngcr's equation a nd that these fl uctuations communi­
cate themselves to the body. The details of these fl uctuations would 
then represe nt propert ies of the field associa ted wi t h  a sub-quantum 
mecha nical level , si nce the quantu m-mechanical level i s  treated in 
terms of the mea n part, wh ich satisfies Schrodi ngcr's equation. On 
the other hand, the bodies could obtai n a ra ndo m  motion from a 
sub-q uantum mechanical level i n  other ways, for example, as i n  
ordinary B rownian motion, by di rect i nteraction wi th new ki nds of 
entities existing in this lower level. I ndeed, at the present stage of 
the t heory, it is not relevant where such fluct uati ons come from. 
All that is i m portant here is to assuml! tha t t hey exist and to sec 
thei r e ffects. The question of thei r origin can then a ppropri a tely be 
raised only i n  a study of the sub-quantum mechanical level. 
Once adm itting the ex istence of these fl uctuations, we then sec 
that they will produce a tendency for the body lo wander in a more 
or less ra ndom way over the whole space accessi ble to it. But this 
tendency is opposed by t he "qua ntum-force" which pulls the body 
i nto the places where the 'I' field is most intense. The net result wi ll 
be to produce a mean distribution i n  a statistical e nsemble of bodies, 
which fa vours t he regions where the 'I' field is most intense, but wh ich 
still leaves some chance for a typical body to spend some t i me i n  the 
places where t he ip field is relati vely weak. Indeed, a rather simi lar 
real. Herc 1 1 0  such a specific assumption is needed. The present model has 
the advantage that it is conceptually simpler than some of the earl ier 
models. Moreover, as we shall sec in Section 6, it 1s closer to wha t is 
suggested by effort!> to go to the theory of relativity and of electron spin . 
I I 3 

Alternative Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
behaviour is obtained i n  classical Brownian mo t i o n  of a particle in 
a gravitational field, where the random motion which tends to carry 
the particle into all parts of the containers is opposed by the gra\i­
tational field, which tends to pull it towards the bottom. In this 
case, the net effect is to produce a probability distribution,• 
P = e·111ࡼ'/xT, which describes a tendency for t he particles to con­
centrate at the bottom and yet occasionally i n  t heir random motions 
to be thrown up to great heights. In t h e  q uantum-mechanical prob­
lem, one can show by means of a t rea t me n t  that is given elsewheret 
that wi th physically reasonable assum pt i o ns concern i n g  t he quantum 
force a nd t he random motions comin g fro m  the sub-quantum 
mechanical level, we obtain Born's proba bility distribution, P= I Y'I'· 
What is the meaning of this result ? It mea ns that instead of start­
ing from Born's probability distribution as a n  absolute and final and 
unexplainable property of matter, we have shown how this property 
p 
Fig. 6A . 
could come out of random motions originating in a sub-quantum 
mechanical level . 
A more detailed treatment (a ppearing in references (7), (8), and 
(1 1)) shows that the above result is sufficient to lead to an inter­
pretation that is consistent wit h  all the essential results of the 
quantum theory. Here, however, we shall illustrate only one way in 
which th is happens, namely, t h e  explanation of the wave-particle 
duality. To do this, we consider an experiment i n  which electrons 
:ire sen t  separa tely and independently with perpendicular incidence 
into a system containing two slits, illustrated i n  Fig. 6A. Every 
electron is assumed to have initial ly the same momentum, and 
• Herc /11 is the mass of the particle, z its height, T is the temperature 
of the medium, g the gravitational constant, and x is Boltzman's constant 
t See reference (1 1). 
1 1 4 

A Specific Example 
therefore the same wave function,* which i n  fact takes the form of a 
pl;ine wave incident perpendicularly on the slit system. These waves 
11111 be diffracted through the slit system as shown in the figure, and 
1 p .. mern of high and low intensity wi ll be obtained at the detecti ng 
screens, just as in the case of light q uanta, discussed in Cha pter I l l. 
The small body connected with the electron undergoes, however, a 
random motion. Thus, i t  follows an irregul a r  path starting out from 
point P, as indicated in Fig. 6A. Each electron then arrives at the 
s..-reen at a certain point. A fter a large number of elect rons have 
p.li.)Cd through the slit system, we will obtain a stat istical pattern 
of such points, in which the density of electrons is proportio nal to 
the field intensity, I "P 1 2, at the screen. The statistical tendency to 
appear where I tp I 2 is greatest is due to the effects of the "quantum­
force" while the random motions explain why the precise points at 
11hich the various particles appear fluctuate in an irregular way. 
p 
B 
Fig. 6B. 
ȫow suppose that we close slit B. The wa ve pattern will now, as 
ibown in Fig. 6a, cease to have strong and weak fri nges. Th us, a new 
pattern of electrons is obta ined at the screen. Hence, the closi ng of 
wt B i nfluences even those pa rticles that pass through slit A ,  beca use 
it infl uences the "quantum-force" f cit by the particle as it moves 
bo:tv. een the slit system and the screen. 
In this way, we can understand how the wave-pa rticle duality 
originates. On the other hand, i n  the usual interpretation, no s uch 
an understanding is possible. All that we ca n do is to accept without 
funber discussion the fact that electrons enter t he slit system, and 
• This follows from the de Broglie relationship, p = h/J. ;  for the 
s.:hrOdinger fields of all the electrons will then take the same form, 
ѧ A. Actually of course, all waves must consist of packets, bu t in this 
ä. the packet is so much bigger than the slits that we can approximate 
it as an infinite plane wave. See, for example, D. Bohm , Quantum Theory, 
Chlpter 3. 
1 1 5 

A lternatil'e lnterprctatio11s of the Q11a11tu111 Theory 
ippear at the screen with an i nterference pattern .  As to how th is 
:Jme about, such a question can not even be raised within t he framc­
"·ork of the usual i nterpretation. Th u s, accordi ng to t he pri nciple of 
:omplemcntarity, described i n  Chapter I I I , Sec t i o n  7, we may use 
he wave model to discuss h ow the slit system govern-; the statistical 
ntcrfcrcncc pattern and we may use the pa rticle m odel to discuss 
he fact that individual spots are recei ved at the sc reen and not a 
:ontinuous d ist ribution of matter. But no ove r- a l l notion is su p­
Josed to be available that could even perm i t u s  to co nsider the 
iuestion of how a single material system, co nceived of as fol l owi ng 
;ome in principle precisely definable and u nambiguous ( i . e. u nique) 
:ourse of motion, could bring about both t he statist ica l i nterference 
Jattern and the appearance of a series of discrete spots on the screen. 
3ut, as we have seen here, this result was ach ieved by the si m ple 
:xpcdicnt of considering that the elect ron is a co m bi n a ti on of par­
iclc and field, interconnected and unde rgoi ng suitable ra ndom 
iuctuations i n  its motions . 
Finally, let us note that in o u r  model we h a  vc not i nsisted on a 
JUrely causal theory, for we have also utilized the assumpt ion of 
·andom fluctuations originating at a deeper level. The essential 
Joint here is. however, that the laws of the sub-q u :rn t u m  mecha n ical 
cvcl, both causal and statistical, arc qualitatively d i ffe rent from those 
)f the quantum level, and lead to those of the latter le, cl only as a n  
ipproximation. Thus, there is n o  reason \\'hy Sch rodi ngcr's equat i o n  
;hould have any relevance at the lower level. si nce t h i s  equation was 
issumed to be an average h old ing only at the h igher level. I ndeed, 
.he 'I' field itself may wc11 be only an average of new k i nds of vari ables 
.hat are defined at the lower level. 
It is also quite possible th at the approximation i n v.1l ich we 
neglect the reciprocal action of the body on the 'i' field would break 
·fown here. Moreover, it is quite evident that the approx i mation in 
which we regard the body as a poi nt (and thus n eglect i l s  inner 
';tructurc) must break down i n  processes t aking place at the lower 
level. 
In general, then, one secs that an e normous ran ge of possi bi l i t ies 
for new k i nds of theories has been o pened u p, leading t o  the current 
theory in the quantum domain as a good approx imation, and to 
extremely d i fferent kinds of theories in new domains. These possibi­
lities could n ot be considered if we mai ntained the assumption of the 
absolute and final validity of the indeterminacy principle, and with it 
the usual interpretation of the quantum theory. And as we shall sec 
later, there is good reason to supp ose that some of these possibi lities 
are likely to be helpful in the treatment of the new domains of pheno -
1mcna associated with very high energies and very short distances. 
I 
1 1 6  

Criricisms of New /11terpretatio11 
5. C R I T I C I S M S  O F  S U G G ES T E D  N E W  I N T E R P R E TA T I O N  
0 1' T I I E  Q U A N T U M  T l l E O R.Y 
We shall now discuss a number of significant criticisms of the 
i nterpretation of t he quantum theory that has been introduced in 
Section 4. 
First of all, it m ust be pointed out that, as presented thus far, 
the theory docs not take i nto account certain important problems 
such as those raised by the electron spi n  and the theory of relativity. 
Whi lt: it is true that Schrodingcr's equation, which neglects spin and 
relativity, is, up to a certain poi nt, a fairly good approximation, it is 
not adequate either i n  the domai n of very high energies or even i n  a 
very precise treatment of the low energy domain. Si nce i t  is our 
express purpose to a pply the new interpretation in the domain of h igh 
energies, it is evidently necessary that we go on to the consideration 
of spin and relativity. This will require that we treat the Dirac 
equation, which takes into account the effects of these general 
propert ies. 
Secondly, even in the domain of low energies, a serious problem 
confronts us when we extend the theory given in Section 4 to the 
treatment of more than one electron. This dilTiculty a rises in the 
circumstance that, for this case, Schrodingcr's eq uation (and also 
Dirac's equation) do not describe a wave in ordinary three-dimen­
sional space, but instead they describe a wave in a n  abstract 3N­
dimcnsional space, when N is the number of particles.* While our 
theory can be extended formally i n  a logically consistent way by 
introduci ng the concept of a wave in a 3N-dimcnsional space,t it is 
evident that this procedure is not real ly acceptable in a physical 
theory, and should at least be regarded as an artifice that one uses 
provisional ly u n t i l  one obtai ns a better theory in which everything 
is expressed once more in ordinary three-dimensional space. 
Final ly, our model in which wave and particle a re regarded as 
basical ly d i fferent entities, which i nteract in a way that is not 
essc•1lial to their modes of bei ng, docs not seem very plausible. 
The fact that wave a nd particle are never fou nd sepa rately s uggests 
instead that t hey a rc both different aspects of some fundamental ly 
new k i nd of entity w hich is likely to be quite d i fferent from a si mple 
wave o r a simple particle, but which leads to these two limiting 
• The notion of a JN-d imensional space is a purely mathematical 
concept. A point in three-dimensional space can be described by three 
numbers, which arc its three co-ordinates. One can in a purely mathe­
matical way general ize this idea. Thus, wi th fo u r  numbers we can descri be 
the co-ordinates of a point in a four-dimensional space, and wi th N such 
numbers the co-ordinates in an N-dimensional space. 
t This is done in references (7) and (8). 
' 
1 1 7 

A lternative /11terpretatio11s of the Quantum Theory 
manifestations as approximations that a re valid under appropriate 
conditions. 
lt must be emphasized, however, that these criticisms are in no 
way directed at the logical consistency of the model , or at its ability 
to explain the essential characteristics of the q uantum domain. 
Rather, they are based on broad criteri a ,  which suggest that many 
features of the model are implausible and, more generally, that the 
interpretation proposed in Section 4 does not go deep enough. 
Thus, what seems most likely is that this i nterpretation is a rather 
schematic one which simplifies what is basically a very complex 
process by representing it in terms of the concepts of waves and 
particles in interaction. 
6. F U R T H E R  D E V E L O P M E N T S  OF T H E  T H E O R Y  
We shall now consider a number o f  modifications and enrichments 
of the theory, which are aimed at resolving the problems raised by 
the criticisms discussed i n  Sectio n 5. 
We begin with the consideration of the problem of spin. Here our 
first step was to try to extend the theory to the Pauli equation, wh ich 
takes spi n i nto account, but still neglects the effects of relativity, 
so that it is good only at velocities that a re low compared with that 
of light. 
In order to deal with this problem, we have been led to consider 
several comparatively new ideas. Our first new step is to cease to 
approximate the body connected with the electron as a mathematical 
point. The most elementary new mode of motion that a body of 
non-zero size can have (relative to that possessed by a point) is 
rotation about its centre of mass. I ndeed , as is shown in any element­
ary text on mechanics, if such a body is regarded as completely rigid, 
then its internal motions can be described completely in terms of 
three angles (the Euler angles) which determine its orientation in 
space. Of course, no real body can be perfectly rigid, but we may 
assume that the body with which we have to deal is rigid enough , so 
that we can ,  at least as far as the level of i nterest is concerned, ignore 
the effects of its lack of rigidity. The electron spin is then i nterpreted 
in terms of the rotation of this body, which gives rise to an "intrin­
sic" angular momentum, over and above that which is due to i ts 
orbital motion. 
On the basis of this more extensive model, we are then able to 
arrive at a complete and consistent interpretation of the Pauli 
equation. We d o  not wish here to enter into its details, which are 
given elsewhere,u2i but we shall merely point out that to deal with 
electron spi n it was sufficient to make an extension of the theory, 
which was quite natural, and which was indeed in a sense even con-
1 18 

Further Developments of the Thl'ory 
tained implicitly in the previous theory, namely, to take into account 
the fact that the bodies with which we arc concerned arc not poi nts. 
The next step was to extend this theory to the Dirac equation, 
and thus to take relativity i nto account . •  We shall not d iscuss the 
details of this theory here, for they a rc purely technical. It is worth 
mentioning, however, that something new comes out of the model, 
for we now find that this model permits the 'I' field to oscillate i n  
several different ways. I n  one o f  these ways, it satisfies the Dirac 
equation, but as in the case of the model of the Sch rodingcr eq uation 
discussed i n  Section 4, i t  does this only i n  an approximation applyi ng 
to small oscillations of the field around a randomly fluctuating 
background that averages out to zero. But then it can oscillate in 
such a way that certai n  functions of the "P field satisfy Maxwell's 
equation, which, as we saw in Chapter II, Section 6, arc the eq ua­
tions satisfied by the electromagnetic field. Moreover, it is found 
that in a higher approxi mation these two oscillations arc coupled, 
in the proper way (i.e. in the way that is found to be needed in current 
theories to lead to correct treatments of the relationship between 
the electron a nd the electromagnetic fields). Thus, we are able from 
a single theory to obtain a unified treatment of two kinds of fields, 
which were previously simply post ulated separately, along with 
their coupling. Moreover, the theory is rich enough so that it could 
lead to still more modes of oscillation, and we shall sec in Section 8 
that these might be important in connection with new k inds of 
particles, such as mesons, which arc found in very high energy 
processes. 
With regard to the second criticism mentioned i n  Section 5, 
namely, the need to i ntroduce fields i n  a multi-dimensional space 
in order to treat the many-body problem, work now in progress has 
already gone a long way towards i ndicating a possible solution to 
this diflkulty. t This work is based on using as a starting-point, not 
the many-body Schrodinger equation, which is defined in a multi­
dimensional space, but rather the so-called 
"second-quantized" 
field theory whose basic' quantities arc defi ned i n a three-dimensional 
space. Th is theory is now generally regarded by most theoretical 
physicists as the best and most fundamental existing formulation of 
the q uantum theory itself. 
In this theory the starting-point is to suppose that the basic 
entities arc fields, such as electromagnetic, electro nic, mesonic, 
etc. These fields arc then regarded as mechanical systems, subject 
• This work has only recently ben completed and will be published 
later. 
t De Broglie and Vigier have proposed another direction in which a 
solution to this problem can be sought. See references (5) and (9). 
1 1 9 

A lrematil'e /11terpretatio11s of th<' Q11a11t1111 1 Tl:eory 
to the general laws of the q uantum theory. These laws i m ply a 
number of important properties of t he fields. These a rc :  
( I )  Even in the vacuu m, the fields are u ndergoing violent a nd very 
rapid random fluctuations. These fluctuations serve, 
h owc\cr, 
as a uniform backgrou nd that is not d i rectly obse rvable at t he 
macroscopic level, because they average o u t  t o  prod uce a n egligible 
effect at this level . 
(2) On top of these random fluctuations there ;!rl.'. comparatively 
small systematic oscillations. These oscil lations do n lH cancel out at 
the macroscopic level, but add u p  lo produce cu m u l ative effects that 
are detected there. Matter as it is commonly met at higher levels is 
the resul t of these systematic oscillations. Th us, to have a n  electron 
in a certain region of space means, in this t heory, to have in this 
region a systematic but l ocalized oscillatio n .  responsible for all the 
manifestations here which define the properties of the electron 
(charge, mass, momentum, angular momentu m, etc.). 
(3) The laws of the quantum theory imply that certain properties 
of the field will be discrete (e.g. charge, mass, e nergy, momentum, 
angular momentum) . This discreteness is responsible for the partielc­
like properties of the field. 
In the usual interpretation, the quantum field t heory is l i ke all 
other forms of the quantum theory, regarded as n othing more than 
a means of manipulati ng mathematical symbols so as to get correct 
answers for certain experimental results. Th us, the propert ies 
described above are not taken very seriously, and are indeed regarded 
as at best convenient ways of talk ing about these mathematical 
manipulations. On the other hand, we are adopting here a point of 
view in which we suppose that microscopic processes really tak e  
place, and that it is our objective to understand how this happens. 
Thus, we arc led to try to develop furthe r  the model described above ,  
which is very strongly suggested b y  t h e  q u a n t u m  field theory. 
In this con nection it is rather interesting that our model of the 
Dirac equation ,  obtained on a rather d i lTcrcn t basis, has many 
features similar to that suggested by second q ua n t ization. I ndeed ,  
when the two models are brought together, we are led to a new 
theory, in which both the Dirac equation and the second q uantiza­
tion theory come out as approximations h ʴlding only in the quan­
tum-mechanical level, but not in the sub-quantum mecha n ical 
level .  I t has not yet been possible to work out the full i mplications 
of this theory, bu t already there is much evidence i n  favour of the 
following general picture, namely, that the field acts as a wave , and 
yet (because of non-linear terms in the equations) shows a tendency 
to produce discrete and particle-like concentrations of energy, 
charge, momentum, mass, etc. Thus, we are led to a point of view 
1 20 

Further De1•e/op111e11ts of the Theory 
rather like that suggested in Section 2 i n  con nection with the Brown­
ian mot ion of m ist droplets near the critical point, namely, that the 
particle-like concentrations are always forming and dissolving. Of 
course, if a particle in a certain place dissolves, it is very likely to 
re-form nearby. Thus, on the large-scale level, the particle-like 
manifestation remai ns in a small region of space, followi ng a fairly 
well-defined t rack, etc. On the other ha nd, at a lower level, the par­
ticle docs not move as a permanently existing entity, but is formed 
i n  a random way by suitable concentrations of the field e nergy. 
M oreover, it is clear that the completion of this model would 
an swer not only the second criticism in Section 5, but also the third 
one. For in this case, wave and particle aspects of matter would 
arise out of the motions of a more complex kind of entity existing 
at a lower level and would not be simply postulated as separate but 
interacting e ntities. 
It is clear, then, that while we have not yet produced a definitive 
theory of t he sub-quantu m mechanical level that would lead to all 
the features of the current quantum theory in a natural way as 
approximations holding at a certain level, several lines of research i n  
t h i s  direct ion are now open, s o  that t he prospects fo r  achieving such 
a theory are by no means distant. 
7. T l l E  C U R R E N T  C R I S I S  IN M I C R O S C O P I C  P H Y S I C S 
We shall now discuss briefly the current crisis in microscopic physics, 
in order to lay a foundation for an explanation of some of the 
advantages of the point of view towards the quantum theory 
that we have developed in this chapter. 
Let us first discuss the theoretical aspects of th1.> crisis.* When 
one applies the existing quantum theory to the electrodynamics of 
"elementary" particles (such as electrons, protons, etc.), internal 
inconsistencies seem to arise in the theory. These i nconsistencies arc 
connected with the prediction of infinite values for various physical 
properties, such as the mass and the charge of the electron. A l l  these 
infinities arise from t he ext rapolation of the current theory to d is­
tances that are unlimitedly small .  Among the things that make such 
an extrapolation necessary, one of the most important is the assu m p­
tion, which seems to be an intrinsic part of current theories that 
"elementary" particles, such as electrons, arc mathematical poi nts i n  
the sense that they occupy no space a t  all. O n  t h e  other hand, in 
spite o f  ma ny yea rs o f  active searching on the part o f  theoretical 
• This problem is, in its details, very complex, and cannot be discussed 
without the aid of a lengthy and elaborate mathematical treatment. 
We shall, therefore, give here only a qualitative summary of the essential 
aspects of the problem. 
1 2 1  

A lternatfre Interpretations of rhe Quantum Theory 
physicists throughout the whole world, no way has yet been found 
to incorporate consistently into the current quantum theory the 
assumption that the electron occupies a finite region of space.* 
While it has been suggested that perhaps the infinities come from an 
inadequate technique of solving the equations (i.e. perturbation 
theory), persistent efforts to improve this technique have not yet 
produced any favourable results, and indeed those results that have 
been obtained favour the conclusion that basically it is not the 
mathematical technique that is at fault, but rather the theory itself 
is not logically consistent. 
Within the framework of the present theory, it is still possible to 
calculate many results, namely, those '.vhich do not depend critically 
on the assumed size of the particle. A f cw years ago, important new 
successes in 
this 
direction were obtained 
by Tomanaga061, 
Sehwingcr<rn, and FeymanU8>, with the prediction of certain very 
fine details of the spectrum of hydrogen gas, as well as with experi­
ments that measured the magnetic moment of the electron. I.mprcs­
sive as these results are, considered as examples of extraordinarily 
complex calculations that led to correct experimental predictions, 
they throw little light, however, on the problem of the infinities that 
is one of the most irnportant manifestations of the current crisis in 
physics. For a closer examination of these calculations shows that 
they do not depend significantly on what happens at distances that 
are much shorter than the Compton wave-length of the electron 
(about 3 x 1 0-11 cm.), while other considerations which we shall 
discuss presently suggest that the failure of current theories should 
first become important around 10 13 cm. The agreement of these 
calculations with experiment then constitutes an excellent verifica­
tion of the current quantum theory in the domain in which all other 
indications suggest that it ought to be valid. However, it has also 
become clear that because this kind of experiment is so insensitive 
to the details of what happens in the domain of very short distances, 
it docs not provide a very promising tool for investigating this 
domain. 
On the other hand, experiments with particles of very high energy 
(of the order of 1 00 million electron volts or more) have led to a 
bewildering array of new phenomena, for which there is no adequate 
treatment in the existing theory. For as we have already pointed out 
in previous chapters, one discovers that the so-called "elementary 
particles" of physics, such as protons and neutrons, can now trans­
form into each other. Moreover, many new particles, the positron, 
the neutrino, about ten different kinds of "mesons" and several new 
• Most of the difficulties originate in connection with making such 
an assumption consistent with the theory of relativity. 
122 

The Current Crisis in Microscopic Physics 
kinds of particles called hyperons have been discovered. No visible 
limit to this process of discovering new particles appears to be in 
sight as yet. And most of these new particles are unstable, having the 
ability to transform into each other, and to "decay" ultimately into 
neutrons, electrons, and protons. Besides, they can all be "created" 
in energetic collisions of other particles with nuclei. Moreover, a 
morԉ accurate analysis of the data suggests that these new properties 
of matter become important only when particles approach within a 
distance of each other that is of the order of 10-13 cm. or less. Hence, 
in experiments carried out at the atomic level, practically no indi­
cation of these new properties is to be found. 
It is evident, then, that the entire scheme by which the universe 
is regarded as made of certain kinds of "elementary particles" has 
demonstrated its inadequacy, and that some very different concept 
is needed here. Thus, when a similar instability and transformability 
of atoms in radioactive transformations was discovered half a 
century ago, it soon became evident that the chemical "clements" 
were not really elementary, being composed in fact, as was dis­
covered later, of protons, electrons, and neutrons. Similarly, it seems 
reasonable to conclude that in the domain of very high energy 
experiments, we arc disturbing the present-day "elementary" par-. 
tides sufficiently so that their actual structure is beginning to mani­
fest itself. According to the considerations that we have discussed 
previously, this structure should have a size of the order of 10-13 cm. 
It is easy to see that there are strong reasons for supposing a 
connection between the problem of the structure of the "elementary" 
particles and that of the infinities predicted by current theories. For 
if particles have a structure, this already implies that they occupy 
some space. And if they occupy space, then they will not be mathe­
matical points, so that there will be no occasion for these infinities 
to arise. Just what the internal structure of these particles is we do 
not know as yet, but to find out is now our problem. Evidently, it 
must be something new relative to what is known so far. In the next 
section we shall discuss the indications that now exist regarding the 
nature of this structure. 
8. A D V A N T A G E S  
O F  
N E W  
I N T E R P R ET A T .I O N  
O F  
Q U A N T U M  
TH E O R Y  I N  T H E  G U I D A N C E  O F  R ES E A R C H  I N  N E W  D O M A I N S 
We shall now discuss some of the principal advantages of the 
suggested new interpretation of the quantum theory over the usual 
interpretation in the guidance of research aimed at resolving this 
crisis. 
First of all, let us recall that one of the principal problems now 
faced in this domain is that of treating the structure of an "element-
1 23 

Alternative Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
ary" particle, and of discovering what kinds of motions are taking 
place within this structure-motions that would help explain, per­
haps, the "creation" and "destruction" of various kinds of particles, 
and their transformation into each other. In the usual i nterpretation 
of the quantum theory, it is extraordinarily difficult to consider this 
problem. For the insistence that o ne is not to be allowed to conceive 
of what is happening at this level means that one is restricted to 
making blind mathematical manipulations with the hope that some­
how one of these manipulations will lead to a new and correct th,eory. 
Secondly, the usual interpretation of the quantum theory implies 
a certai n  general mathematical and physical scheme which docs not 
seem to lend itself very well to the notion that matter has new kinds 
of properties connected with an inner structure of the "elementary" 
particles. This general scheme, which we have a l ready mentioned in 
Chapter III, Section 9, is the one involving purely li near equations 
for a wave function in a configuration space, "observables" ob­
tained from li near operators, a purely probabilistic interpretation of 
the wave functions, etc. If one adopts this scheme, then the only 
mathematical possibilities left open seem to be the modification of 
current versions of the quantum theory, by alterations of t he 
equations in such a way as somehow to cut out the contributions 
from short distances that lead to the infinities. Throughout the 
past twenty years, a great deal of i ntensive research has been devoted 
to attempts to do this in various ways (by cut-offs, finite distance 
operators, S-matrices, etc.), but none of these efforts has as yet 
shown any promise of leading to a consistent theory. These attempts 
have in general been guided by the expectation, commonly held, as 
we have seen in Section 1 ,  by modern theoretical physicists, that in 
future theories the behaviour of things will be even less precisely 
definable than is possible in current theories. Of course, it cannot 
be proved at present that these expectations are definitely wrong. 
But the failure of the large number of efforts that have already been 
made in this direction would suggest that it may well be fruitful to 
try other lines of approach, especially considering that, as we have 
seen in the previous chapter, the restriction to the currently accepted 
line of approach is in any case not justifiable by any experimental 
or theoretical evidence coming from physics itself. 
On the other hand, when we attack these problems within the 
framework of the new interpretation of the quantum theory, a large 
number of interesting new possibilities arc seen to open up. First 
of all, the work is considerably facilitated by the fact that we can 
imagine what is happening, so that we can be led to new ideas not 
only by looking directly for new equations, but also by a related 
procedure of thinking in terms of concepts and models that wil help 
1 24 

The Guidance of Research in New Domains 
to suggest new equations, which would be very unli kely to be 
suggested by mathematical methods alone. More important, how­
ever, is the fact that i n  terms of the notion of a sub-quantum 
mechanical level, we are enabled to consider a whole range of 
qualitatively new kinds of theories, approaching the usual form of 
the quantum theory only as approximations that hold in limiting 
cases. Moreover, there are a number of reasons, suggesting that the 
new features of such theories are likely to be relevant in the treat­
ment of processes involving very high energies and very short 
distances. Some of these reasons are : 
( 1 )  If there is a sub-quantum mechanical level, then, as we saw 
in Section 2, processes with very high energy and very high fre­
quency may be faster than the processes taking place in the lower 
level. In such cases, the details of the lower level would beco me 
significant, and the current formulation of the quantum theory 
would break down. 
For example, in our poi nt of view, the "creation" of a particle, 
such as a meson, is conceived as a well-defined process taking place 
in the sub-quantum mechanical level. In this process, the field energy 
is concent rated in a certain region of space i n  discrete amounts, while 
the "destruction" of the particle is just the reverse process, in which 
the energy disperses and takes another form. In the quantum 
domain, the precise details of this process are not significant, and 
can therefore be ignored. This is in fact what is done in the current 
quantum theory which discusses the "creation" and "destruction" 
of particles as merely a kind of "popping" in and out of being in a 
way that is simply not supposed to be subject to further descrip­
tion.* With very fast high e nergy processes, however, the results 
may well depend on these details, and if this should be the case, the 
current q uantum theory would not be adequate for the treatment of 
such processes. 
(2) The treatment of the Dirac quantum in our theory leads, as 
we saw in the previous section, to the possibility of describing many 
different kinds of fields in terms of different modes of vibration of a 
single basic field. Moreover, i n  very energetic processes, the approxi­
mation that reduces to the usual form of the quantum theory would 
break down . This fact would have the further desirable consequences 
that the infinities characteristic of the current quantum theory could 
be eliminated. For in our theory it can be seen that in an exact 
• This is done mathematically with the aid of the so-called creation and 
destruction operators, which describe the coming into existence of a given 
kind of particle in a certain state by the bare statement that the number 
of such particles has increased by unity, while its passing out of existence 
is described by saying that this number has decreased by unity. 
125 

Alternative Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
treatment. no results can become i nfinite. Thus, we are led to inter­
pret the infinities as a consequence of an u nj ustified extrapolation of 
all the features of the current quantum theory to very short distances 
and to very high energies. 
It can be seen that the assumption that the u sual form of the 
quantum theory will continue to hold in the high energy d omain is 
equivalent to the assumption that there is no sub-qu antum mechani­
cal level, or at least, if there is such a level, we have not yet reached 
a point where its effects are significant. It is of course possible that 
this assumption may be true. But enou gh evidence has been shown 
favouring the plausibility of the opposite assumption that it no 
longer seems to be justifiable to restrict all research in theoretical 
physics to those lines that fit into a continuation of the usual inter­
pretation of the quantum theory. 
9. A L T E R N A T I V E  I N T E R P R ET A T I O N  OF T l l E  Q U A N T U M  T H EO R Y  
A N D  T l l E P l l l L O S O P H Y  O F  M E C l l A N I S M  
The consideration of the alternative i nterpretation of the quantum 
mechanics discussed i n  this chapter serves to show that when one 
divests the theory of the i rrelevant and unfounded hypotheses of 
the absolute and final validity of the indeterminacy principle, one 
is led to an important new line of development, which strikes at 
the roots of the entire mechanist philosophy. For we now see that 
there is a whole lel'el i n  which chance fluctuations are an inseparable 
part of the mode of being of things, so that they must be interwoven 
into t he fabric of the theory of this level in a fundamental way. 
Thus, we have been led to take an important step beyond the classical 
notion of chance as nothing more than the effects of contingencies 
that modify the boundary conditions or i ntroduce randomly fluctu­
ating external forces in a way that is not pred ictable withi n  the con­
text of interest , but which play no essential part in the formulation 
of the basic laws that apply within such a context. 
If we stopped at this point, however, we shou ld ,  as we have seen 
in the previous chapter, merely have switched from deterministic to 
indeterministic mechanism. To avoid i ndeterministic mechanism, we 
must suppose that, in their tu rn ,  the chance fluctuations come from 
something else. Since, as Heisenberg and Bohr have shown so well, 
there is no room in the qu antu m d omain for anything to exist in 
which these fluctuations might originate, it is clear that to find their 
origin we must go to some new domain . As we have seen in this 
chapter, there is much evidence suggesting the plausibility of the 
notion that they originate in a sub-quantum mechanical level. 
Nevertheless, i ndependently of the specific proposals that we have 
made here, the essential point with regard to the question of mechan-
1 26 

Quantum Theory and the Philosophy of Mechanism 
ism is that the fluctuations should come from qualitatively new kinds 
of factors existing in a new domain. 
Within the new domain described above, we would naturally 
expect that new kinds of laws would operate, which may i nclude 
new kinds of causal laws as well as new kinds of laws of chance. Of 
course, if one were now to make the assumption that these new laws 
wou ld surely be nothing more than pu rely causal laws, one would 
then fall back i nto deterministic mechanism, while the similar 
assumption that they were surely nothing more than laws of proba­
bility would throw one back into i ndeterministic mechanism. On -the 
other hand, we have in the proposals made in this chapter avoided 
both these dogmatic and arbitrary extremes, since we have considered, 
as the situation demanded, the possibility that there are new features 
to the causal laws (a "quantu m force" not appearing at higher 
levels) as well as to the laws of chance (random fluctuations origin­
ating in the sub-quantum mechanical level). 
Of course, as we have i ndicated i n  Section 5, we do not regard 
ou r earlier proposals as provid i ng a completely satisfactory and 
definitive interpretation of the laws of the quantum domain. The 
basic reason is, in a sense, that the fundamental concepts considered 
in the theory (waves and particles in interaction) are still very 
probably too close to those applying in the classical domain to be 
appropriate to a completely new domain such as that treated in the 
quantum theory. I ndeed, the whole general effort to understand the 
quantum theory in terms of models so close to those of the classical 
domain has often been criticized as mechanistic. This criticism 
would in fact be correct if one's i ntention were to stop at this point. 
On the other hand, if one simply regards these theories as something 
definite from which it may be helpful to start, then it seems evident 
that such a criticism does not apply. 
It is important to add here that there are good reasons why the 
provisional consideration of mechanical explanations of the quan­
tum theory may be a good starting-point from which qualitatively 
new developments are likely to arise. 
First of all, one must recall that mechanical theories often imply 
qualitatively new properties. Thus, for example, when a large 
number of simple mechanical elements is pu t into i nteraction one 
obtains fu ndamentally new kinds of collective effects (e.g. the large­
scale properties of an aggregate of atoms). Thus, we may expect 
that the consideration of old mechanical concepts in new contexts 
will perhaps already lead to some qualitatively new results. 
Secondly, a careful consideration of the contradictions and the 
weak points of a given mechanical theory often suggests new con­
cepts that resolve these contradictions or eliminate the weak points. 
1 27 

Alternative Interpretations of the Quantum Theory 
Thus, the careful analysis of the mechanical theory of the electrons 
made by Lorentz was of great help in suggesting the theory of rela­
tivity, which gave a solution to ma ny of the dilllcullies raised by the 
Lorentz theory. In Section 6, we have described efforts to deal wilh 
some of the weak points of our original interpretation , which like­
wise suggest considerable changes relative to the original concep­
tion. 
Thi rdly, to insist that once we pass the classical domain , mechani­
cal concepts will surely have absolutely no relevance whatever 
would be j ust as dogmatic as to i nsist that these concepts must be 
adequate for every domain that will ever be investigated . A better 
proced ure is to try every kind of concept that we can think of, and 
to see which kind is best i n  each particular domain. The work 
described in this chapter then shows that mechan ical concepts can 
go further in the quantum domain than had hitherto been thought 
possible. 
Finally, it is important to stress the value of starting with some 
concrete theory and working forwards from there. Without such a 
concrete starting-point, criticism of the current theories is rather 
likely to become sterile in the long run . For it is extremely difficult 
purely from general considerations to be led to qual itatively new 
ideas. Thus, in practice, such criticism, accompanied by no concrete 
new suggestions, is likely to leave one with no real alternative but to 
continue to work along the usual lines, in the hope that new experi­
mental developments or lucky and brilliant new theoretical insights 
will eventually lead to a new theory. On the other hand, to leave 
future progress in this line solely to experiment or to the hope of 
chance new insights means that one is renouncing one of the import ­
ant functions of criticism, namely, to help suggest definite alter­
native li nes of research that are l ikely to lead to a correct direction. 
And as we have pointed out here, there is good reason to suppose 
that the specific proposals indicated in this chapter may be helpful 
in achieving this purpose. 
B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
List of References for Chapter I V  
(I) R .  Furth, Zeils. f. Phys., 8 1 ,  143 (1 933). 
(2) L. de Broglie, Compt. Rend., 183, 447 ( 1 926) ; 185, 380 ( 1 927). 
(3) E. Madelung, Zeits. f. Phys., 40, 332 ( 1 926). 
(4) Reports on the Solvay Congress, Gauthier-Villars, Paris ( 1 928), p. 
280. 
(5) L. de Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
London (1 954). 
128 

Bibliography 
(6) Uspekhi. fizich. Na11k, 45 (Oct. 1 95 1 ) ;  French translation in Q11esrio11s 
Scieutifiq11es, Vol. 1 (Editions de la Nouvelle Critique, Pa ris ( 1 952)). 
Sec also D. J. Blokhinzhcv, Gr1111dlagen tier Q11a11rcw11eclu111ik, 
Deutscher Verlag der Wisscnschaftcn, Berlin ( 1 953). 
(7) D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. , 85, 1 66 ( 1 952). 
(8) D. Bohm, Phys. Rei•. , 85, 1 80 ( 1 952). 
(9) Vigier's suggestions are discussed in L. de Broglie, La Physique 
Quamiq11e Restera-t-e//e Jndeterminisre, Gauthier-Vil lars, Paris 
( 1 953). 
( 1 0) D. Bohm, Prog. Theor. Physics, 9, 273 ( 1 953). 
( 1 1 )  D. Bohm and J. P. Vigier, Phys. Rev., 96, 208 ( 1 954). 
( 1 2) D. Bohm, R. Schiller, and J. Tiomno, Supplemenro al N110 1·0 Ci111e11tv . 
I ,  Serie X, 48 (1955) 
( 1 3) T. Takabayasi, Prog. Theor. Physics, 8, 143 ( 1 952) ; 9, 1 87 ( 1 953). 
( 1 4) I. Fcnycs, Zeirs. f Physik, 1 32, 8 1  ( 1 952). 
( 1 5) W. Weizcl, Zeifs f Physik . 1 34, 264 ( 1 953) ; 135, 270 ( 1 953). 
( 1 6) Fukada, Miyamoto and Tomanaga, Prog. Theor. Physics, 4, 47 and 
1 21 ( 1 949). 
(1 7) J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. , 74, 749 and 769 (1949) ; 80, 440 ( 1 950). 
( 1 8) R .  P .  Feyman, Phys. Rev., 75, 486 and 1 736 ( 1 949). 
1 29 

CHAPT E R  F I V E  
More General Concept of Natu ral Law 
1 .  I N T R O D U C T I O N  
WE have seen throughout this book that for several centuries there 
has existed a very strong tendency for one form or another of the 
philosophy of mechanism to be generally adopted among physicists. 
In Chapters ll and lll we have described the essentials of this philo­
sophy in some detail, and have given a general outline of how this 
philosophy has developed in response to the new problems with 
which physics was faced during the nineteenth and twentieth cen­
turies. In the present chapter we shall criticize this philosophy, 
demonstrating the weaknesses in its basic assumptions, and then we 
shall go on to propose a different and broader point of view which 
we believe to correspond more nearly than does mechanism to the 
implications of scientific research in a wide range of fields. In 
addition to presenting this broader point of view in some detail, 
we shall also show how it permits a more satisfactory resolution of 
several important problems, scientific as well as philosophical, than 
is possible within the framework of a mechanistic philosophy. 
2. S U M M A R Y  O F  T H E  E S S E N T I A L  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  
O F  A M E C H A N I S T I C  P H I L O S O P H Y  
The essential characteristics of a mechanistic philosophy in the 
most general form that it has developed thus far in physics are the 
following: 
The enormous diversity of things found in the world, both in 
common experience and in scientific research, can all be reduced 
completely and perfectly and unconditionally (i.e. without approxi­
mation and in every possible domain) to nothing more than the 
effects of some definite and limited general framework of laws. 
While it is admitted that the details of these laws may be subjected 
to changes in accordance with new experimental results that may be 
obtained in the future, its basic general features are regarded as 
absolute and final. This means that the fundamental entities that are 
1 30 

Characteristics of a Mechanistic Philosophy 
supposed to exist, the kinds of qualities that define the modes of 
being of these entities, and the general kinds of relationships in 
terms of which the basic laws are to be expressed, arc supposed to 
fit into some fixed and limited physical and mathematical scheme, 
which could in principle be subjected to a complete and exhaustive 
formulation, if indeed it is not supposed that this has already been 
done. At bottom, the only changes that are regarded as possible 
within this scheme are quantitative changes in the parameters or 
functions defining the stale of the system (as precisely as the nature 
of the system permits this state to be defined),• while fundamental 
qualitative changes in the modes of being of the basic entities and 
in the forms in which the basic laws are to be expressed are not 
regarded as possible. Thus, the essence of the mechanistic position lies 
in its assumption of fixed basic qualities, which means that the laws 
themselves will finally reduce to purely quantitative relationships. 
As we have seen in previous chapters, the philosophy of mechan­
ism has undergone an extensive evolution in its specific form, all the 
while retaining the essential characteristics described above, in 
forms that tend, however, to become more and more complex and 
subtle with the further development of science. 
3. C R I T I C I S M  O F  THE P H I L OS O P H Y  O F  M E C H A N I S M  
We shall now review some of the most important criticisms that can 
be made against the philosophy of mechanism. 
First of all, the historical development of physics has not con­
firmed the basic assumptions of this philosophy, but rather, has 
continually contradicted them. Thus, since the time of Newton, there 
have been introduced, not only the whole series of specific changes in 
the conceptual structure of physicst that was discussed in Chapter II, 
but also the revolutionary changes in the whole general framework, 
brought about by the theory of relativity and the quantum theory. t 
Moreover, physics is now faced with a crisis in which it is generally 
admitted that further changes will have to take place, which will 
probably be as revolutionary compared to relativity and the quan­
tum theory as these theories are compared to classical physics. 
Secondly, the mechanistic assumption of the absolute and final 
character of any feature of our theories is never necessary. For the 
possibility is always open that such a feature has only a relative and 
limited validity, and that the limits of its validity may be discovered 
• For example, in the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, the 
state of a system is subject, in general, only to a statistical determination. 
t The field concept, the concept of quantitative changes that lead to 
qualitative changes, the concepts of chance and statistical law. 
t These changes, especially those resulting from the quantum theory, 
have ben discussed mainly in Chapters III and IV. 
1 3 1  

ti.lore General Concept of Natural Law 
in the future. Thus, Newton's laws of motion, regarded as absolute 
and final for over two hundred years, were eventually found to have 
a limited domain of validity, these limits havi ng finally been ex­
pressed with the aid of the quantum theory and the theory of 
relativity. Indeed, as we saw i n  more detail in Chapter II, Sections 1 3  
and 1 5, the mechanistic thesis that certain features of our theories 
are absol ute and final is an assumption that is not subject to any 
conceivable kind of experimental proof, so that it is, at best. purely 
philosophical in character. 
Thirdly, the assumption of the absolute and fi nal character of any 
feature of our theories contradicts the basic spirit of t he scientific 
method itself, which requires that every feature be subjected to 
continual probing and testing, which may show up contrad ictions at 
any point where we come i nto a new domain or to a more accurate 
study of previously known domains tha n has hitherto been carried 
out. Indeed, the normal pattern that has developed without excep­
tion in every field of science studied thus far has been just the 
appearance of an endless series of such contradictions, each of 
which has led to a new theory permitting an i mproved and deeper 
understanding of the material under investigation. Thus, the full and 
consistent application of the scientific method makes sense only in 
a context in which we refrai n  from assuming the absol ute and final 
character of any feature of any theory and in which we therefore do 
not accept a mechanistic philosophy. 
Of course, the above arguments do not prove that a mechanistic 
philosophy is definitely wrong. For it is always conceivable that 
the trouble thus far has been that we have j ust not found the true 
absol ute and fi nal theory, and that this theory may be somewhere 
beyond the horizon of current scientific research. On the other hand, 
the historically demonstrated i nadequacy of this philosophy up to 
the present, the fact that its basic assumptions cannot possibly be 
proved, and the fact that they are in disagreement with the whole 
spirit of the scientific method, would suggest to us that it may well 
be worth our while to consider poi nts of view that go outside the 
limits of a mechanistic philosophy. It is with the development of a 
point of view having such an aim that we shall be concerned through-
out the rest of this chapter. 
· 
4. A P O I N T  O F  V I E W T H A T  G O E S B E Y O N D  M E C H A N I S M  
The nucleus of a point of view that goes beyo nd mechanism and that 
is also in better accord than is mechanism with general scientific 
experience and with the needs of scientific research has already been 
presented in Chapter I, Section IO and in Chapter II, Section 1 5, in 
connection with the extremely rich and diversified structure that has 
1 32 

Beyond Mechanism 
t hus far actually been found i n  the laws of nature. The most essential 
feat ure characterizing this general structure is this : Any given set of 
qualities and properties of matter and categories of laws t hat are 
expressed in terms of these qualities and properties is in general 
applicable only within limited contexts, over limited ranges of con­
ditions and to limited degrees of approximation, these l imits bei ng 
subject to better and better determination with the aid of further 
scientific research. Indeed, both the very character of the empirical 
data and the results of a more detailed logical analysis show that 
beyo nd the above limitations on the validity of any given theory, 
the possibility is always open that there may exist an unlimited 
variety of additional properties, qualities, entities, systems, levels, 
etc., to which apply correspondingl y new kinds of laws of nat ure. 
Or. lumping a l l  of t he above diverse possibil i t ies into the single 
category of " t hings", we sec that a systematic a nd consistent analysis 
of what we can actuall y  conclude from experimental and observa­
tional data leads us to the notion that nature may have in it an infinity 
of different kinds of things. 
It is clear that this point of view carries us completely outside the 
scope of what can be considered a mechanistic philosophy. For, as 
we recall, the mechanistic point of view involves the assumption 
that the possible variety in the basic properties and qualities existing 
i n  natu re is limited, so that one is permitted at most to consider 
quantitative infinities, which come from making some finite number 
of kinds of thi ngs bigger and bigger or more and more numerous. 
M oreover, it is also clear that the notion to which we have been 
led is quite distinct from that of a series of successive approxima­
tions that converge to some fixed and limited set of fi nal laws. For 
there is evidently no reason why new qualities and properties and 
the corresponding new laws should always lead just to smaller and 
smaller corrections that converge in this simple and uniform way 
towards definite results. This may well be what happens in certai n 
contexts and within a definite range of conditions. Nevertheless, 
there is no conceivable empirical justification for excludi ng the 
possibility that i n  different contexts or under changed conditions 
these new qualities, properties, and laws will lead to effects that are 
not small in relation to those following from previously known 
properties, qualities, and laws. Thus, for example, while the laws 
of relativity and quantum theory do in fact lead under special 
conditions to small corrections to those of Newtonian mechanics, 
they lead more generally, as is well known, to qualitatively new 
results of enormous significance, results that are not contai ned i n  
Newtonian mechanics a t  all. * 
The 
same possibility evidently 
• E.g. the "rest energy" of matter, the stability of atoms, etc. 
1 33 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
necessarily exists with regard to any other new laws that may 
eventually be discovered. Therefore, the assumption that the laws 
of nature constitute an infinite series of smaller and smaller steps 
that approach what is in essence a mechanistic limit is just as arbitrary 
and unprovable as is the assumption of a finite set of laws permitting 
an exhaustive treatment of the whole of nature. 
We see then, that, as far as the empirical data of science them­
selves are concerned, they cannot justify any a priori restrictions at 
all, either on the character or on the relative importance i n difTerent 
conditions and contexts of the inexhaustibly rich and diversified 
qualities and properties that may exist in nature. Such qualities and 
properties-which can always, as far as we are able to tell, l ie hidden 
behind the errors and inadequacies of any given set of theories­
may be disclosed later in an investigation carried out under new 
conditions, in new contexts, or to new degrees of a pproximation. 
Thus far, we have been led by our analysis of the character of 
empirical data and of scientific theories only to a consideration of the 
possibility that nature may have in it an infinity of potentially or 
actually significant qualities (i.e. qualities which are of major 
importance or which can become of maj or importance under suit­
able conditions and in suitable contexts). It is now clear, however, 
that there are really only two possibilities with regard to this prob­
lem. Either the qualities having this kind of significance are limited 
in number, or else they are not. To suppose the former is essentially 
to fall back into one form or another of the mechanistic philosophy, 
to which, as we have seen, so many objections can be raised. If we 
wish to go outside the mechanistic philosophy, we therefore really 
have no choice but to consider the consequences of the assumption 
that the number of such significant qualities is not limited . 
We have thus been led to see what is the first crucial step towards 
a point of view that goes beyond the mechanistic philosophy. On the 
other hand, at this stage of the analysis, this point of view presents 
itself as one of two possible alternatives : i.e. either mechanism or an 
infinity of potentially or actual ly significant qualities. Evidently we 
must choose one or the other. But on what basis can we make such 
a choice? In order to answer this question we point out that the 
notion of the qualitative infinity of nature becomes more than 
merely an alternative to the philosophy of mechanism, if we take 
into account the role of conditions, context, and degree of approxi­
mation in limiting the domain of applicability of any given theory. 
For, with this addition, it constitutes a broader point of view, 
in the sense that it contains within it all of those consequences of 
mechanism which represent a genuine contribution to the progress 
of scientific research, while it does not contain those which make no 
1 34 

Beyond Mechanism 
such contribution and which impede scientific research. To see this, 
we first note that, with regard to any given domain of phenomena, 
the specific form of the assumption of the qualitative infinity of 
nature that has been suggested above does not contradict the notion 
that these phenomena can be treated in terms of some finite set of 
qualities and laws, and indeed, in terms of a number much smaller 
than the number of items of empirical data that may be available. 
I t  is evident that if this were not possible, then one of the most 
i m portan t  achievements of scientific theories would be lost, for they 
would no longer permit the explanation• and prediction of a large 
nu mber of at first sight independent phenomena on the basis of 
relatively few general qualities, properties, laws, principles, etc. 
The recognition of this possibility and its practical exploitation in a 
wide range of fields was indeed the basic contribution that the mech­
anbtic philosophy brought to science in the early phases of its 
development.t As we have seen, however, as long as we qualify our 
theories by specifying the context, conditions, and degrees of approxi­
mation to which they are valid, or at least by admitting that these 
limitations on thei r validity must eventually be discovered, then the 
notion of the qualitative ir1finity of nature leads one to treat any 
given domain of phenomena in exactly the same way as is done if 
one adopts a mechanistic point of view. It is only with regard to 
predictions in new domains, in new contexts, and to new degrees of 
approximation that the qualitative infinity of nature dictates an 
additional measure of caution, since it implies that eventually (but 
exactly where must be determined only empirically) any limited 
number of qualities, properties, and laws will prove to be inadequate. 
But, as we have seen, the very form of the data themselves, as well 
as a logical analysis of their meaning, dictates exactly the same 
measure of caution. We see, then, that none of the really well­
founded conclusions that can be obtained with the aid of the 
assumption of a finite number of qualities in nature can possibly be 
lost if we assume instead that the number of such qualities is i nfinite, 
and at the same time recognize the role of contexts, conditions, and 
degrees of approxi mation. t All that we can lose is the illusion that 
• Let us recall that, as pointed out in Chapter I , Section 3, explanation 
constitutes showing that certain things follow necessarily from others. 
t See, for example, Chapter II, Section 3. 
t It is by recognizing that a finite and generally limited number of 
qualities, properties, and laws may be adequate in given contexts, con­
ditions, and degrees of approximation that we avoid the procedure of 
simply falling back into an arbitrary multiplication of qualities that was 
characteristic of the pre-mechanistic point of view, especially in the 
scholastic form of the Aristotelian philosophy that was prevalent in the 
M id<lle Ages. 
1 35 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
we have good grounds for supposing that in principle we can, or 
eventually will be able, to predict everything that exists in the 
universe in every context and under all possible conditions. 
Not only can nothing of real value for scientific work be lost if 
we adopt the notion of the qualitative infinity of nature in the 
specific form that has been described here, but on the contrary, much 
can be gained by doing this. For, first of all, we can thereby free 
scientific research from irrelevant restrictions which tend to result 
from (and which have in fact so often actually resulted from) the 
supposition that a particular set of general properties, qualities, and 
laws must be the correct ones to use in all possible contexts and 
conditions and to all possible degrees of approximation. Secondly, 
we are led to a concept of the nature of things which is in complete 
accord with the most basic and essential characteri'>tic of the scien­
tilic method ; i .e. t he requirement of continual probing, criticizing 
and testing of every feature of every theory, no matter how funda­
mental that theory may seem to be. For this view explains the 
necessity for doing scientific research in just this way and in no other 
way, since, if there is no end to the qualities in nature, there can be 
no end to our need to probe and test all features of all of its laws. 
Finally, as we shall show throughout the rest of this chapter, the 
assumption of the qualitative infinity of nature leads to a much more 
satisfactory solution of a number of important problems, both 
scientific and philosophical, than is possible within the framework 
of a mechanist philosophy ; and this in turn gives further evidence 
that it is a better point of view for the guidance of scientific re­
search. 
1 n conclusion, then, the notion of the qualitative infinity of nature 
permits us to retain all the positive achievements that were made 
possible by the development of mechanism. In addition, it enables 
us to go beyond mechanism by showing the limitations of the latter 
philosophy and by pointing towards new directions in which our 
concepts and theories may undergo further development. Naturally, 
we do not wish to propose here that the qualitative infinity of nature 
is a final doctrine, beyond which no further steps can ever be made. 
Indeed. as science progresses, it seems very likely that the qualitative 
infinity of nature will eventually be found to fit into some still more 
general point of view, which in turn retains its positive achievements, 
and which goes beyond them, much as the motion of the qualitative 
infinity of nature goes beyond mechanism. But, in this chapter, 
our purpose is merely to call attention to the many factors that 
suggest the need for this important step carrying us outside the 
limits of a mechanistic philosophy, and to show the numerous 
advantages that come from taking this step. 
1 36 

Tire Qualitative Infinity of Nature 
5. M O R E D ET A I L E D  E X P OS I T I O N O F  T H E  M E A N l N G  
O F  Q U A L I T A T I V E  I N F I N I T Y  O F  N A T U R E  
I n  this section we shall bring out in more detail what i s  the general 
view of the world i mplied by the notion of the q ualitative infinity 
of nature, and we shall show how this view agrees wil h  the actual 
results of research that have been obtai ned thus fa r  in the field of 
physics. 
I n  o rder to ma ke possible a discussion in relatively concrete terms 
we shall begin by considering a specific example : viz. the atomic 
theory of matter. Now, as is well known, the earliest forms of the 
atomic theory were based on the assumption that the fundamental 
qualities and properties defining the modes of being of the atoms 
were li mited in number. On the other hand, as we have poi nted out 
many times, deeper studies of the atom have disclosed more and 
more details of a moving substructure, which has within i t  a rich­
ness of properties and qualities that has never yet shown the slightest 
sign of being exhausted or of approaching exhaustion. Thus, there 
was found i n  the atoms a structure of electrons moving around a 
central nucleus consisting of neutrons and protons which themselves 
took part in further characteristic kinds of motions of their own. 
Within all of these motions appeared quantum-mechanical fluctua­
tions of various kinds. Then came the discovery of a structure for the 
electrons and protons involving in some as yet poorly understood 
way the motions of unstable particles such as mesons and hyperons. 
Still later came the realization that because these latter particles can 
be "created'', "destroyed", and transformed into each other, they 
too are very likely to have a further structure that is related to the 
motions of some still deeper-lying kinds of entities the nature of 
which is not yet k nown. 
An essential characteristic of the rich and highly i nterconnected 
substructure of moving matter described above is that not only do 
the q uantitative properties in it con tinually change but that the basic 
qualities that define its mode of being can also u ndergo fundamen tal 
transformations when conditions alter sufficiently. Thus, in electrical 
discharges, atoms can be excited and i onized, in which case they 
obtain many new physical and chemical properties. U nder bom­
bardment with very high-energy particles, the nuclei of the various 
chemical elements can be excited and transformed i nto new kinds of 
nuclei, with even more radical changes in their physical and chemical 
properties. Moreover, in nuclear processes, neutrons can be trans­
formed into protons, either by the emission of neutri nos or of 
mesons ; a nd of course, as we have seen, mesons arc unstable, so 
that their very mode of existence implies the necessity for thei r 
1 37 

/I/ore General Concept of Natural Law 
transformi ng into basically different kinds of particles. Thus, further 
research into the structure of matter has not only shown what is, as 
far as we have been able to tell, an unlimited variety of qualities, 
processes, and relationships, but it has also demonstrated that all 
of these things are subject to fundamental transformations that 
depend on conditions. 
Thus far, we have tended to emphasize the inexhaustible depth 
in the properties and qualities of matter. I n  other words. we have 
considered how experiments have shown the existence of level within 
level of smaller and smaller kinds of entities, each of which helps to 
constitute t he substructure of the entities above it in size, and each 
of which helps to explain, at least approximately, by means of its 
motions how and why the qualities of the entities above it are what 
they a rc under certai n  conditions, as well as how and why they 
can change in fundamental ways when conditions change. But 
now we must take into account the fact that the basic qualities and 
properties of each kind of entity depend not only on their sub­
structures but also on what is happening in their general back­
ground. I n physics, research thus far has not tended to stress this 
feature of the laws of nature as much as it has emphasized the sub­
structure. Nevertheless, the various fields (e.g. electromagnetic, 
gravitational, mesonic, etc.) that have been i ntroduced into the 
conceptual structure of physics represent to some extent an explicit 
recognition of the importance of the background. For, as we have 
seen, these fields (whose mode of existence requires that they be 
defined over broad regions of space) enter into the definition of the 
basic characteristics of all the fundamental particles of current 
physics. Moreover, when such fields are highly excited, they too can 
give rise to qualitative transformations in the particles, while, vice 
versa, the particles have an important influence on the character of 
the fields. Indeed, the discussion of the quantum theory given i n  
Chapters III a n d  IV shows that fields and particles are closely linked 
in an even deeper way, in the sense that both are probably opposite 
sides of some still more general type of entity, the detailed character 
of which remains to be discovered.* Thus, the next step in physics 
may well show the inadequacy of the simple procedure of just going 
through level after level of smaller and smaller particles, connected 
perhaps by fields which interact with these particles. Instead, we may 
find that the background enters in a very fundamental way even into 
the definition of the conditions for the existence of the new kinds of 
• This is suggested by the wave-particle duality in the general properties 
of matter, which implies, as we have seen, that we may have to deal with 
some new kind of thing that can, under suitable circumstances, act either 
like a localized particle or like an extended field. 
1 38 

The Qualitatil'e Infinity of Nature 
basic entities to which we will eventually come, whatever they may 
turn out to be. Thus, we may be led to a theory in which appears a 
much closer integration of substructure and background into a 
well-knit whole than is characteristic of current theories. 
We see from the above discussion that the qualitative infinity of 
nature is not equivalent to the idea expressed by the well-known 
rhyme : 
"G reat fleas have little fleas 
Upon their backs to bite 'cm ; 
Little fleas have lesser fleas, 
And so ad infinitum." 
For, firstly, we are not supposing that the same pattern of things 
is necessarily repeated at all levels ; and secondly. we are not even 
supposing that the general pattern of levels that has been so widely 
found in nature thus far must necessarily continue without limit. 
While we cannot decide this question from what is known at present, 
we have already suggested reasons why we may perhaps now be 
approaching a point at which the notion of levels will, at the very 
least, have to be enriched a great deal by the explicit i nclusion of the 
effects of a background that is essential for the very existence of the 
entities in terms of which our theories are to be formulated. More­
over, it is evidently quite possible that as we penetrate further still, 
we will find that the character of the organization of things into levels 
will change so fundamentally that even the pattern of levels itself 
will eventually fade out and be replaced by something quite different. 
Hence. while the qualitative infinity of nature is consistent with an 
infinity of levels, it does not necessarily imply such an infinity. 
And, more generally, this notion does not require a priori the con­
tinuation of any special feature of the general pattern of things that 
has been found thus far, nor does it exclude a priori the possibility 
that any such feature may continue to be encountered, perhaps in 
new contexts and in new forms, no matter how far we may go. 
Such questions are left to be settled entirely by the results of future 
scientific research. 
There is, however, one general statement that can be made at this 
point about the i nexhaustible diversity of things that may exist in 
the universe ; namely, that they must have some degree of autonomy 
and stability in their modes of being. Now, thus far, we have always 
found that such autonomy exists.* Indeed, if it did not exist, then we 
• This autonomy may have many origins ; e.g. the falling of the propa­
gation of influences of one thing in another with an increase of separation 
between them, the decay of such influence with the passage of time, 
electrical screening, the existence of thresholds, such that influences 
1 39 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
would not be able to apply the concept of a "thing" and there would 
then be no way even to formulate any laws of nature. For how can 
there be an object, entity, process, quality, property, system, level, 
or whate\'er other thing one cares to mention, unless such a thing 
has some degree of stability and autonomy in its mode of existence, 
which enables it to preserve its own identity for some ti me, and 
which enables it to be defined at least well enough to permit it to be 
distinguished from other things? If such relatively and approxi­
mately autonomous things did not exist, then laws would lose 
their essential significance (e.g. they could not in principle be tested 
by altering conditions with the aid of experiments in the manner 
described in Chapter I, Section 3, because the basic thi ngs entering 
into the laws would change all their characteristic modes of being 
with the slightest change of conditions). 
In conclusion, then, actual scientific research has thus far shown 
the need to analyse nature in terms of a series of concepts that 
involve the recognition of the existence of more and more kinds of 
things ; and the development of such new concepts has never yet 
shown any signs of coming to an end. Up to the present, the various 
kinds of things existing in nature have, at least as far as investigations 
in the field of physics arc concerned, been found to be organized into 
levels. Each level enters into the substructure of the higher levels, 
while, vice versa, its characteristics depend on general conditions in 
a background determined in part in other levels both higher and 
lower, and in part in the same level. It is quite possible, of course, 
that further studies will disclose a still more general pattern of 
organization of things. In any case, it is clear that the results of 
scientific research to date strongly support the notion that nature is 
inexhaustible in the qualities and properties that it can have or 
develop. If the laws of nature are to be expressible in any kind of 
terms at all, however, it is necessary that the things into which it can 
be analysed shall have at least some degree of approximate and 
relative autonomy in their modes of being, which is maintained over 
some range of variation of the conditions in which they exist. 
6. C H A N C E A N D  N E C E S S A R Y C A U S A L  I N T E R C O N N E C T I O N S  
With the aid of the general world view described in Section 5, we 
shall now proceed to show that the hypothesis of the qualitative 
which are too weak to surpass these thresholds produce no significant 
effects ; the fact that individual constituents of an object (such as atoms) 
are too small to have an appreciable effect on the object as a whole, while 
collectively there is a considerable independence of motions of the con­
stituents leading to the cancellation of chance fluctuations. Many o ther 
such sources of autonomy exist, and doubtless more will be discovered in 
the future. 
140 

Chance and Necessary Causal Connections 
infinity of nature provides a framework within which can fit quite 
naturally the concept, suggested in Chapter I, of chance and necessary 
causal interconnections as two sides of every real natural process. 
First of all, we point out that if there are an unlimited number 
of kinds of things in nature, no system of purely determinate law can 
ever attain a perfect validity. For every such system works only with 
a finite number of kinds of thi ngs, and thus necessarily leaves out of 
account an i nfinity of factors, both in the substructure of the basic 
entities entering into the system of Jaw in question and in the general 
environment in which these entities exist. And since these factors pos­
sess some degree of autonomy, one may conclude from the principle 
discussed in Chapter I, Section 8, that the things that arc left out 
of any such system of theory are in ge neral undergoi ng some kind of a 
ra ndom fl uctuation. Hence, the determinations of any purely causal 
theory are always subject to random disturbances, arising from 
chance fluctuations in entities, existing outside the context treated by 
the theory in question. I t  thus becomes clear why chance is an essen­
tial aspect of any real process and why any particular set of causal 
laws will provide only a partial and one-sided treatment of this 
process, which has to be corrected by taking chance into account. • 
Of course, it should not be supposed that every inadequacy or 
breakdown of causal laws must necessarily be due to the effects of 
chance fluctuations. Indeed, as happened in connection with the 
experiments leading to the theory of relativity (Michelson-Morley 
experiment, etc.), the failure of a given set of causal laws may 
represent just a simple and reproducible deviation between the 
predictions of these Jaws and the experimental results. A deviation 
of this kind implies only that the causal laws in question must be 
replaced by newer, more extensive, and more accurate causal laws 
(as i ndeed happened with Newtonian mechanics, which was replaced 
by the more general and more nearly correct relativistic mechanics). 
Quite often, however, experiments have disclosed not just simple and 
reproducible deviations from the predictions of a certain set of 
causal Jaws, but rather a breakdown of the entire scheme by which a 
specified set of properties are found to be related in a unique and 
necessary way in terms of a set of causal laws of a given general kind. 
Such a breakdown manifests itself in the appearance of chance 
fluctuations, not coming from anything in the context under investi­
gation , but coming rather from qualitatively different kinds of fac-
• More generally, causal laws must be corrected by taking into account 
contingencies (see Chap. I, Sec. 8) ; because of the complex, multifold and 
interconnected character of these cont ingencies, however, their average 
effects can ,  in a wide range of conditions, be treated in terms of chance 
fluctuations and the theory of probability. 
141 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
tors existing in contexts that are new relative to the one under 
consideration. *  In such a case, the origi nal causal law is seen to be 
valid only to the extent that the chance fluctuations in question can­
cel out, while in any given application the law will have a certain 
characteristic minimum range of error. This range of error is an 
objective property of the law in question, a property that is deter­
mined by the magnitudes of the chance fluctuati ons arising outside 
the context u nder investigation . 
V ice versa , however, the cha racteristic limitation on the domain 
of val idity of any given causal law which results from the neglect of 
the effects of chance fluctuations is balanced by a corresponding 
limitation on the domain of validity of any given law of chance, 
which results from the neglect of systematic causal i nterconnections 
between different contexts. In many cases (e.g. throws of a die) these 
interconnections are so u nimportant that they have never yet been 
significant in any real applications. Nevertheless, this need not 
always be so. Consider, for example, the case of insurance statistics. 
Here, one is able to make approximate predictions concerning the 
mean lifetime of an individual in a given group (e.g. one of definite 
age, height, weight, etc.) without the need to go i nto a detailed 
investigation of the multitudes of complex factors that contribute 
to the life or death of each individual in this group. This is possible 
only because the factors responsible for the death of any individual 
are extremely manifold and di verse, and because they tend to work 
more or less independently in such a way as to lead to regular 
statistical laws. t But the assumption underlying the use of these 
statistical laws are not always true. Thus, in the case of an epidemic 
or a war, the systematic interconnection between the cause of death 
of different i ndividuals grows so strong that statistical predictions of 
any kind become practically impossible. To apply the laws of chance 
uncritically, by ignoring the possibility of corrections due to causal 
interconnections that may be unimportant in some conditions but 
crucially important in others, is therefore just as capable of leading 
to erroneous results as is the uncritical application of causal laws, i n  
which one ignores the corrections that may be due to the effects of 
chance fluctuations. 
A point of view that avoids the errors that generally result from 
assumi ng either causal laws or laws of chance to be basic and fi nal 
kinds of laws is that suggested in Chapter II, Section 1 5. I n this 
• This is, for example, what happens to classical physics. For a particle 
such as an electron follows the classical orbit only approximately, and in 
a more accurate treatment is found to undergo random fluctuations in its 
motions, arising outside the context of the classical level (see Chapters III 
and IV). 
t See, for example, Chapter I, Section 8. 
142 

Chance and Necessary Causal Connections 
point of view we regard both classes of laws as approximations, in 
the sense that just as a causal law can arise as a statistical approxi­
mation to the average behaviour of a large . aggregate of clements 
undergoing random fluctuations, a law of chance can arise as a 
statistical approximation to the effects of a large number of causal 
factors undergoing essentially independent motions.• Actually, how­
ever, neither causal laws nor laws of chance can ever be perfectly 
correct, because each inevitably leaves out some aspect of what is 
happening in broader contexts. Under certain conditions, one of 
these kinds of laws or the other may be a better representation of 
the effects of the factors that are dominant and may therefore be the 
better approximation for these particular conditions. Nevertheless, 
with sufficient changes of conditions, either type of law may even­
tually cease to represent even what is essential in a given context 
and may have to be replaced by the other. Thus, we are led to regard 
these two kinds of laws as effectively furnishing different views of any 
given natural process, such that at times we may need one view or 
the other to catch what is essential, while at still other times, we may 
have to combine both views in an appropriate way. But we do not 
assume, as is generally done in a mechanistic philosophy, t that the 
whole of nature can eventually be treated completely perfectly and 
unconditionally in terms of just one of these sides, so that the othעr 
will be seen to be inessential, a mere shadow, that makes no funda­
mental contribution to our representation of nature as a whole. 
Thus, the notion of the qualitative infinity of nature leads us to the 
necessity of considering the laws of nature both from the side of 
causality and from that of chance, as well as more generally from 
new directions that may go beyond these two limits. 
7. R E C I P R O C A L  R E L A T I O N S H I P S A N D  THE A P P R O X I M A T E  A N D  
R E L A T I V E  C H A R A C TER O F  T H E  A U T O N O M Y  O F  T H E  M O D ES O F  
B E I N G  O F  T H I N G S  
The qualitative infinity of nature has an important bearing on the 
problem of the reciprocal relationships between things, and on the 
question of the extent to which the modes of being of different things 
have an approximate autonomy. 
First of all, we note that the universal interconnection of things 
has long been so evident from empirical evidence that one can no 
longer even question it. However, in a mechanistic point of view, it is 
assumed that this interconnection can ultimately be reduced to 
• As we pointed out in Chapter II, Section 14, both these possibilities 
can be demonstrated mathematically, as well as with the aid of more 
qualita tive types of arguments. 
t See Chapter II, Sections 1 3  and 1 5. 
143 

More General Concept of Natural Lall' 
nothing more than interaction between the fundamental entities 
which compose the system. By this we mean that in the mutual 
action of these entities on each other, there can only be quantitative 
changes in their properties, while fundamental qualitative changes in 
their modes of being cannot take place, provided that these entities 
arc really the basic ones out of which the system is composed. Thus. 
in Newton's laws of motion there is equality of action and reaction 
of the elementary particles on each other, but thiଘ action and reaction 
is not supposed to affect the properties of the particles in a funda­
mental way. 
On the other hand, in terms of the notion of the qualitative 
infinity of nature, one is led, as we have seen in previous sections, 
to the conclusion that every entity, however fundamental it may seem, 
is dependent for its existence on the maintenance of appropriate 
conditions in its infinite background and substructure. The con­
ditions in the background and substructure, however, must them­
selves evidently be affected by their mutual interconnections with 
the entities under consideration. Indeed, as we have shown in many 
examples, this interconnection can, under appropriate conditions, 
grow so strong that it brings about qualitative changes in the modes 
of being of every kind of entity known thus far. * This type of inter­
connection we shall denote by the name of reciprocal relationship, 
to distinguish it from mere interaction. 
The question now follows quite naturally, " I f  everything is in this 
very fundamental kind of reciprocal relationship with everything 
else, a relationship in which even the basic qualities and modes of 
being can be transformed, then how can we disentangle these relation­
ships in such a way as to obtain an intelligible treatment of the laws 
governing the universe, or any part of it?" The answer is that all 
effects of reciprocal connections are not in general of equal import­
ance. Of course we have the well-known fact already pointed out 
in Chapter I, Section 4, that within suitable contexts many of the 
reciprocal connections produce no significant effects, so that they 
can be ignored. On the other hand, if we consider a significant 
reciprocal connection between two things, then we must in general 
take both directions of this connection into account. If both direc­
tions are of comparable importance, then we will still find it very 
difficult to disentangle the real relationships between things, because 
one thing affects the basic qualities and laws determining the mode 
of being of the other; and this effect is returned in a complex process. 
Experience in a wide range of fields of science shows, however, 
that both directions of a reciprocal connection do not always have to 
have comparable significance. When they do not have equal signi­
• See, for example, Section 5 and Chapter I I ,  Section 1 3. 
1 44  

Reciprocal Relationships, Qualitative Changes 
cance, the problem is evidently simplified because the thing which 
has the major effect on the other is the dominant and controlling 
factor in the relationship. In this case we can study the laws and 
modes of being of the factors of major importance to a good degree 
of approximation, independently of the effects which may originate 
in the minor factor. A fundamental problem in scientific research is 
then to find what are the things* that in a given context, and in a 
given set of conditions, are able to influence other things without 
themselves being significantly changed in their basic qualities, 
properties, and laws. These are, then, the things that are, within the 
domain under consideration, autonomous in their essential charac­
teristics to an adequate degree of approximation. When we have 
found such things, then we can make use of them for the prediction 
and control of the other things whose modes of being and basic 
characteristics are dependent on them. For example, in the case of 
the relationship between the large-scale level and the atomic level, 
we find, as pointed ou't in Chapter II, Section 1 3, that under con­
ditions that are usually met and in most of the contexts that have thus 
far been treated in research in physics, the effect of the atomic 
motions on the laws of the large-scale level is much more important 
than the effects of the large-scale level on the laws of the atomic 
motions. Thus, it becomes possible by studying the laws of the 
atomic motions to make many kinds of approximate predictions 
concerning the laws and properties of things at the large-scale level 
and in this way to improve our understanding and control of the 
large-scale level. 
On the other hand, as we saw also in Chapter II, Section 1 3, our 
prediction of the properties of the large-scale level through those of 
the atomic level can never be perfect, if only because there is a small 
but nevertheless real reciprocal influence of the large-scale level on 
the laws of the atomic level. This is due to the electronic and nucleonic 
substructure of the atom, which can be significantly affected by 
suitable conditions at the large-scale level (e.g. very high tempera­
tures). Moreover, as we saw, the same possibility can arise with 
regard to the substructure of every entity that is known in physics 
(e.g. electrons, protons, mesons, etc.), provided that the conditions at 
the large-scale level are changed appropriately. As a result, we are 
led to the conclusion that in its reciprocal connections with the 
things existing in any given lower level, the entities at the macro­
scopic level must have at least some relative autonomy in their 
modes of being, in the sense that these modes cannot be predicted 
• Let us recall that we are here using the word "thing" in a very general 
sense, so that it 
represents anything (e.g. objects, entities, qualities, 
properties, systems, levels, etc.). 
145 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
perfectly from the specific lower level (or levels) in question. E.ven 
though the effects of this autonomy may be negligible in a wide 
range of conditions and contexts, it may nevertheless become very 
important in other conditions and contexts. 
We see, then, that the existence of reciprocal relationships of 
things implies that each "thing" existing in nature makes some con­
tribution to what the universe as a whole is, a contribution that 
eannot be reduced completely, perfectly, and u nconditionally, to 
the effects of any specific set or sets of other things with which it is 
in reciprocal interconnection. And, vice versa, this also means 
evidently that no given thing can have a complete autonomy in its 
mode of being. since its basic characteristics must depend on its 
relationships with other things. The notion of a thing is thus seen 
to be an abstraction, in which it is conceptually separated from its 
infinite background and substructure. Actually, however, a thing 
does not and could not exist apart from the context from which it 
has thus been conceptually abstracted. And therefore the world is 
not made by putting together the various "things" in it, but, rather, 
these things are only approximately what we find on analysis in  
certain contexts and under suitable conditions. 
To sum up, then, the notion of the infinity of nature leads us to 
regard each thing that is found in nature as some kind of abstraction 
and approximation. It is clear that we must utilize such abstractions 
and approximations if only because we cannot hope to deal directly 
with the qualitative and quantitative infinity of the universe. The 
task of science is, then, to find the right kind of things that should be 
abstracted from the world for the correct treatment of problems in 
various contexts and sets of conditions. The proof that any particular 
kinds of things are the right ones for a given context is then obtained 
by showing that they provide us with a good approximation to the 
essential features of reality in the context of interest. In other words, 
we require that theories formulated in terms of these abstractions 
lead to correct predictions, and to the control of natural processes in 
aecordance with the plans that are made on the basis of these theor­
ies. When this does not happen, we must, of course, revise our 
abstractions until success is obtained in these efforts. Scientific 
research thus brings us through an unending series of such revisions 
in which we are led to conceptual abstractions of things that are 
relatively autonomous in progressively higher degrees of approxi­
mation, wider contexts, and broader sets of conditions. 
8. T H E  P R O C ES S  O F  B E C O M I N G  
Thus far, we have been discussing the properties and qualities of 
things mainly in so far as they may be abstracted from the processes 
1 46 

The Process of Becoming 
in which these things are always changing their properties and quali­
ties and becoming other things. We shall now consider in more 
detail the characteristics of these processes which may be denoted by 
the general term of "motion". By "motion" we mean to include not 
only displacements of bodies through space, but also all possible 
changes and transformations of matter, internal, and external, 
qualitative and quantitative, etc. 
Both the existence and the necessity for the process of motion 
described above have now been demonstrated in innumerable ways 
in all the sciences. Thus, the study of astronomy shows that the 
planets, stars, nebulae, and galaxies all take part in a very large 
number of kinds of characteristic motions. These motions follow 
from the effects of the gravitational forces which would start bodies 
moving even if they were i nitially at rest, and because of the inertia, 
which keeps them in motion. And as a result of these motions, over 
periods of time of the order of billions of years, new stars, new 
planets, new nebulae, new galaxies, new galaxies of galaxies, etc., 
can come into existence, while the older organization of things passes 
out of existence. On the earth, the science of geology has shown that 
the apparently permanent features of the surface are always chang­
ing. Thus, as a result of the flow of water and the action of wind: 
existing rocks and mountains, and even continents, are continually 
being worn away while subterranean motions are continually leading 
to the formation of new ones. The science of biology shows that life 
is a continual process of inexhaustible complexity in which various 
kinds of organisms come into being, live, and die. Indeed, every 
organism is maintained in existence by characteristic metabolic 
processes taking place within it, as well as by the motions necessary 
for it to obtain food and other materials from its environment. 
Over longer time, as a result of the effects of natural selection and 
other factors, the forms of life have had to evolve ; and in this pro­
cess, new species of organisms have come into existence while old 
species have died out. Over still longer periods of time, life itself has 
come into existence out of a basis of inanimate matter, very probably 
as a result of motions at the inorganic level of the kind suggested by 
Opharin* ; and as conditions change it may later have to pass out of 
existence, perhaps to give way to something new, of which we can at 
present have no idea. In chemistry one sees that as a result of thermal 
agitation of the molecules and other causes, different chemical com­
pounds must react to produce new kinds of compounds, while 
already existing kinds of compounds must be dissociated into 
simpler compounds. In physics we find, at the atomic level and 
below, a universal and ceaseless motion which follows as a necessary 
• See Chapter I, Section 8. 
147 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
consequence of the laws appropriate to these levels, and which is 
discovered to be more violent the deeper we penetrate into it. 
Thus, we have atomic motions, electronic and nucleonic motions, 
field motions, quantum fluctuations, probable fluctuations in a sub­
quantum mechanical level, etc. Moreover, as happens at the higher 
levels, not only do the quantitative properties of things change in 
these motions (e.g. position, velocity, etc., of the various particles, 
the strength of the various fields, etc.), but so also do the basic 
qualities defining the modes of being of the entities, such as mole­
cules, atoms, nucleons, mesons, etc., with which we deal in this 
theory. 
In sum, then, no feature of anything has as yet been found which 
does not undergo necessary and characteristic motions. I n  other 
words, such motions are not inessential disturbances superimposed 
from outside on an otherwise statically existing kind of matter. 
Rather, they are inherent and indispensable to what matter is, so 
that it would in general not even make sense to discuss matter apart 
from the motions which are necessary to define its mode of existence. 
Now, the various motions taking place in matter have the further 
Yery important characteristic that, in gencrnl, they are not and 
cannot be smoothly co-ordinated to produce simple and regular 
results. Rather, they are often quite complex and poorly co-ordinated 
and contain within them a great many relatively independent and 
contradictory tendencies. 
There are two general reasons why such contradictory tendencies 
must develop ; first because there are always chance disturbances 
arising from essentially independent causes, and secondly, because 
the systematic processes that are necessary for the very existence 
of the things under discussion are, as a rule, contradictory in some 
of their long-run effects. We shall give here a few examples taken 
from the fields that were discussed in the previous paragraph. Thus, 
in the field of astronomy, we find that partly as a result of chance 
disturbances from other galaxies and partly as a result of the laws 
of motion under the gravitational forces originating in the same 
galaxy, stars have a very complicated and irregular distribution of 
velocities going in all sorts of directions, etc., with the result that 
some systems of stars are being disrupted, while new systems are 
formed. On the surface of the earth, storms, earthquakes, etc., which 
are of chance origin relative to the life of a given individual, may 
produce conditions in which this individual cannot continue to 
exist ; while a similar result can be brought about by old age, which 
follows from the effects of the very metabolic processes that are 
necessary to maintain life. Going on to the subject of physics, we 
see that both the effects of chance fluctuations and of the operation 
148 

The Process of Becoming 
of systematic causal laws is continually leading to complicated and 
violent fluctuations in the various levels, which are not at all well 
co-ordinated with each other, and which quite often lead to contra­
dictory tendencies i n  the motions. Indeed, these contradictory ten­
dencies not only follow necessarily from the laws governing the 
motions, but must exist in order for many things to possess charac­
teristic properties which help define what they are. For example, a 
gas would not have its typical properties if all the molecules had a 
st rong tendency to move together in a co-ord inated way. More 
generally, the relative autonomy i n  the modes of being of different 
t hings implies a certai n i ndependence of these things, and this in 
turn i mplies that contrad ictions between these things can arise. For 
if thi ngs were co-ordinated in such a way that they could not come 
into contradiction with each other, t hey could not be really i nde­
pende nt .  
We conclude, then, that opposing and contradictory motions arc 
the rule throughout t he universe, and this is an essential aspect of the 
very mode of things. 
Now it may be asked how it is possible for any kind of quality, 
property, entity, level, domain ,  etc., to have even an approximately 
autonomous existence, in the face of the fact that an infinity of 
relatively i ndependent kinds of motions with contrad ictory tenden: 
cies are taking place i n  its environment and in its substructure. The 
answer is that the existence of any particular quality, property, 
entity, level, domain, etc., is made possible by a balancing of the 
processes that are tending to change it in various directions. Thus, 
in the simple case of a liquid,* we have a balanci ng of the effects of 
the inter-molecular forces tending to hold the molecules together, 
and the random thermal motions tending to disrupt the entire 
system. I n  a galaxy, we have a balancing of the gravitational forces 
agai nst the centrifugal tendencies due to rotation and the d isruptive 
effects of the random components of the motions of stars. In atoms 
we have a similar balancing of the attractive forces of t he nucleus 
against the d isruptive effects due to quantum fluctuations in the 
electronic motions and the centrifugal tendencies. due to rotations of 
the electrons arou nd the nucleus. With living bei ngs, we have a much 
more subtle and complex system of balancing processes. The full 
analysis of this process naturally cannot yet be made. But already 
we can see that the two essential directions of processes in livi ng 
beings are those leading to growth and those leading to decay. If 
the growth processes go u nchecked, then a typical possible result is 
the development of a cancer, which eventually destroys the organism. 
On the other hand, if the opposite processes go unchecked, then the 
• See Chapter II, Section 1 0. 
149 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
organs will atrophy and wither away, and the organism will again 
eventually be destroyed. The maintenance of life then requires an 
approximate balancing of the destruction and decay of tissue by 
fresh growth. 
Now it is clear that if qualities, properties, entities, domains, 
levels, etc., are maintained in existence by a balance of the processes 
tending to change them, then this balance can, in general, be only 
an approximate and conditional one. As a result, any given thing 
is subject to being changed with changing conditions, both by 
changes of conditions that are produced externally and by changes 
that may be necessary consequences of internal motions connected 
with the very mode of being of the thing in question. To illustrate 
this point, let us return to the problem of a liquid. As long as the 
temperature, pressure, etc., of the liquid are held constant, the 
balance of molecular processes that maintains the liquid state will 
be continued. But to think of an isolated specimen of a liquid is 
evidently an abstraction. Any real liquid exists in some kind of 
environment, which cannot fail to change with enough time. Thus, 
if the container is on the earth, it will be subject to changes of 
temperature, to storms and earthquakes that may destroy any 
temperature-stabilizing mechanism surrounding it, and over longer 
periods of time to geological processes that may have similar effects. 
Thus, it can safely be predicted that if, for example, we consider a 
period of a hundred million years, no particular specimen of a 
liquid will remain a liquid throughout the whole of this time. Analys­
ing this problem further, we see that, as we consider broader con­
texts and longer periods of time, there will be more and more 
opportunities for conditions to change in such a way that any 
particular balance of processes is fundamentally altered. This is 
because it will be able to come into reciprocal relationships with 
more and more relatively autonomous entities, domains, systems, 
etc., the motions of which can come to influence the processes in 
question. Indeed, if we go to the extreme of considering super­
galactic regions of space and corresponding epochs of time, we see 
that there is a possibility for such a broad range of changes of con­
ditions that every kind of entity, domain, system, or level will 
eventually be subject to fundamental changes, even to destruction 
or extinction, while new kinds of entities, domains, and levels will 
come into existence in their place. For example, there is currently 
under discussion a theory in which it is assumed that some five 
billion years ago or more the parts of the universe that are now visible 
to us were originally concentrated in a comparatively small space 
having an extremely high temperature, and a density so high that 
neither atoms nor nuclei, nor electrons, nor protons, nor neutrons 
1 50 

The Process of Becoming 
as we now know them could have existed. (Matter would then have 
taken some other form about which we cannot have much idea at the 
present.) This particular section of the universe is then assumed to 
have exploded, and subsequently to have cooled down to give rise 
ultimately to electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms, dust, clouds, 
galaxies, stars, planets, etc., by means of a series of processes into 
which we need not go further here. The recession of the stars, 
suggested by the so-called red shift,* would then be a residual effect 
of the velocities imparted to matter in this explosion. Now, it is very 
important to emphasize how speculative and provisional large parts 
of this theory are.t Nevertheless, for our purposes here, it is 
interesting in that it gives an example of how widespread could be 
the effects of a breaking of the balance of opposing processes within 
the previously existing highly dense state of matter; for the resulting 
explosion would have given rise to everything that exists in the part 
of the universe that is now visible to us. 
In any case, whatever may have been the at present practically 
unknown earlier phase of the process of evolution of this particular 
part of the universe, there exists by now a considerable amount of 
evidence suggesting that the galaxies, the stars, and the earth come 
from some quite different previously existing state of things. With 
regard to what happened on our planet after it came into existence; 
we have of course much better evidence coming from traces left in 
the rocks, fossils, etc. Then, coming to the consideration of the 
• The "red shift" of the spectral lines of stars has been interpreted as a 
Doppler shift due to a recessional motion. If this interpretation is correct, 
then the stars are receding from each other with a velocity that is more or 
less proportional to their distances. The most distant stars visible would 
have speeds as high as 1 0,00 miles a second, and still more distant stars 
would presumably have still higher velocities. However, there are many 
possible explanations for the same phenomenon ; e.g. perhaps the be­
haviour of l ight over long distances is slightly different from that predicted 
by Maxwell's equations, in such a way that the frequency of light dimin­
ishes as it is transmitted through space. 
t In the actually published forms of this theory, it is assumed that the 
whole universe (and not just a part of it) was originally concentrated into 
the small space referred to above. Even if we do not make this additional 
assumption, the theory is already quite speculative. But this additional 
assumption is based on Einstein's theory of general relativity, which has 
ben proved to a rather low level of approximation only in weak gravi­
tational fields for low concentrations of matter and over l imited regions of 
space. A gigantic extrapolation is then made to gravitational fields of 
fantastic intensity, to unheard-of concentrations of matter, and to a 
region of space that includes nothing less than the whole universe. While 
this extrapolation cannot be proved to be wrong at present, it is in any 
case an example of extreme mechanism. If we divest the theory of these 
irrelevant and unfounded extrapolations, then the hypothesis is still, 
however, interesting to consider. 
1 5 1  

More General Concept of Natural Law 
origin of life, we have the hypothesis of Opharin, • which gives at 
least the general outlines of how living matter could have come into 
existence on the earth. Here we see the importance of the incom­
plete co-ordination and contradictory character of the various kinds 
of processes that took place on the earth at the time in question ; for 
storms, ocean currents, air currents, etc. , would have led to a chance 
mixing of various organic compounds until at last a substance 
appeared that began to reproduce itself at the expense of the sur­
rounding organic material. As a result, the contradictory character 
of the motions at the inorganic level created the conditions in which 
a whole new level could come into existence, the level of living 
matter. And from here on, changes in the inanimate environment 
ceased to be the only causes of development. For a fundamental 
property of life is that the very processes that are necessary for its 
existence will change it. Thus, in the case of the ind ividual living 
being, the balance of growth and decay is never perfect, so that in 
the earlier phases of its life, the organism grows, then it reaches 
approximate balance at maturity, and then the processes of decay 
begin to win out, leading to death. With regard to the various 
species of living beings considered collectively, these provide each 
other with a mutual environment , both through their competition 
and through their co-operation. Thus as a result of the very develop­
ment of many kinds of living beings, the environment is changed i n  
such a way that the balance of the processes maintaining the 
heredity of such species is altered, and the result is the well-known 
evolution of the species. 
In sum, then, we see that the very nature of the world is such 
that it contains an enormous diversity of semi-autonomous and 
conflicting motions, trends, and processes. Thus, if we consider any 
particular thing, either the motions ta k i ng place externally to it or 
those taking place internally and which are inherent aspects of its 
mode of being will eventually alter or destroy the balance of pro­
cesses that is necessary to maintain that thing in existence in its 
present form and with its present characteristics. For this reason, 
any given thing or aspect of that thing must necessarily be subjected 
to fundamental modifications and eventually to destruction or decay, 
to be replaced by new kinds of things. 
In conclusion, the notion of the qualitative infinity of nat u re leads 
us to regard the eternal but ever-changing process of motion and 
development described above as an inherent and essential aspect 
of what matter is. In this process there is no limit to the new kinds 
of things that can come into being, and no limit to the number of 
kinds of tranfsormations, both qualitative and quantitative, that 
• See Chapter I, Section ࡻ. 
1 52 

The Process of Becoming 
can occur. This process, in which exist infinitely varied types of 
natural laws, is just the process of becoming, first described by 
Heraclitus several thousand years ago (although, of course, by now 
we have a much more precise and accurate idea of the nature of this 
process than the ancient Greeks could have had). 
9. O N  T H E  A B S T R A C T  C H A R A C T E R  O F  T H E  N OT I O N  O F  
D E F I N I T E A N D  U N VA R Y I N G  M O D ES O F  B E I N G  
It is clear from the preceding section that the empirical evidence 
available thus far shows that nothing has yet been discovered which 
has a mode of being that remains eternally defined in any given way. 
Rather, every clement, however fundamental it may seem to be, has 
always been found under suitable conditions to change even in its 
basic qualities, and to become something else. Moreover, as we have 
also seen, the notion of the qualitative infinity of nature implies 
that every kind of thing not only can change in this very fundamental 
way but that, given enough time, conditions in its infinite back­
ground and substructure will alter so much that it must do so. 
Hence, the notion of something with an exhaustively specifiable and 
unvarying mode of being can be only an approximation and an 
abstraction from the infinite complexity of the changes taking place 
in the real process of becoming. Such an approximation and abstrai;­
tion will be applicable only for periods of time short enough so 
that no significant changes can take place in the basic properties and 
qualities defining the modes of being of the things under con­
sideration. 
When we come to times that are long enough for the basic 
kinds of things entering into any specific theory to undergo funda­
mental qualitative changes, then what breaks down is the assumption 
that we can specify the modes of being of these things precisely and 
exhaustively in terms of the concepts that were applicable before 
this change took place. Indeed, the very fact that a thing is able to 
undergo a qualitative change is itself a property that is an essential 
part of the mode of being of the thing and yet a property that is not 
contained in the original concept of it. For example, as we saw in 
Chapter I, Section 6, the fact that the liquid, water, turns into steam 
when heated and ice when cooled, is a basic property of the liquid in 
question, without which it coulc! not be water as we know it. Never­
theless, the original concept of water as nothing more than a liquid 
evidently does not contain these possibilities, either explicitly or 
implicitly, as necessary properties of this liquid. Hence, this concept 
does not give a precise and exhaustive representation of all the 
properties of the liquid in question. 
Now the way one usually deals with this problem is to regard the 
1 53 

More General Concept of Natural Lall' 
transformations between solid, liquid , a nd vapo u r  that take place 
at certai n  temperatu res as part of the q ualities defining the mode of 
being of a single broader category of substance : viz. water. But now 
the same k ind of problem arises again at a new level. For the laws 
governi ng the transformations of these qualities arc, i n  t u rn, bei ng 
regarded as part of an eternal and exhaustive specification of the 
properties of the substance, water. On the other hand , in reality this 
law is applicable and has meaning only u nder limi ted conditions. 
For example, it will no l onger have relevance at tem pera tures and 
denotes of matter so high that there can be no s uch thi ngs as atoms, 
and therefore no such a substance as water. Th us, we a re led to 
include water as a special state of a still broader category of things 
(e.g. systems of electrons, protons, neutrons, etc.) a nd the laws 
governing the transformation of water i n to other k i nds of sub­
stances as a part of the mode of bei ng of this still broader category. 
But if all things eventually u ndergo qualitative t ransformations, 
then the process described above will never end. Th us we conclude 
that the notion that all things can become other kinds of things 
implies that a complete and eternally applicable definition of a ny 
given thing is not possible in terms of any finite number of qualities 
and properties. 
If, however, we now start from the opposite side, viz. from the 
notion of the qualitative i nfinity of natu re, we a re then immediately 
able to arrive at a type of definition of the mode of bei ng of any given 
kind of thing that does not contradict the possibility of its becomi ng 
something else. For, as we saw in Section 7, the reciprocal relation­
ships between all things then imply that no given thing can be 
exactly and i11 all respects the k i nd of thing that is defined by any 
specified conceptual abstraction .  I nstead , it is always something more 
than this a nd, at least i n  some respects, something diferent. Hence, 
if the thing becomes somethi ng else, no u n resolvable contradiction is 
now necessarily implied. For it is in any case never exactly repre­
sented by our original concept of i t. Logically speaking, what this 
point of view towards the mea ning of o u r  conceptuul a bstractions 
does is, therefore, to create roo m for the possibility of qualitative 
change, by leading us to recognize that those aspects of things that 
have been ignored may, under suitable conditions, cease to have 
negligible effects, and indeed may become so important that they 
can bring about fundamental changes in the basic properties of the 
things under consideration. 
We may illustrate the above conclusions by returning to a more 
detailed discussion of the transformations between steam, liquid 
water, and ice. Thus, as we saw in Chapter II and in the present 
i chapter, the macroscopic concept of a certai n state of matter (e.g. 
1 54 

Definite and Unvarying Modes of Being 
gaseous, liquid, or solid) leaves out of account an enormous nu mber 
of kinds of factors that are not and cannot be defined in the macro­
scopic domain alone. Among these are the motions of the molecules 
constituting the fluid 
quantum 
fluctuations, 
field 
fluctuations, 
nuclear motions, mcsonic motions, motions in a possible sub­
quantu m mechanical level, and so on. I n  short, we may say that the 
real fluid is enormously richer in qualities and properties than is our 
macroscopic concept of it. It is richer, however, in j ust such a way 
that these additional characteristics may, i n  a wide variety of 
applications, be ignored in the macroscopic domain. Nevertheless, 
when we come to the problem of u nderstanding why transformations 
between gas, liquid, and solid are possible, we can no longer com­
pletely ignore the additional properties of the real fluid. Thus, as 
shown in Chapter I I ,  Section IO, the molecular motions are able to 
explai n at least the essential features of the transformation i n  the 
system from a state in which one set of qualities (i.e. those corre­
spond i ng to a gas) are the determinant, dominant, and controlling 
factors to a state i n  which these are replaced by another set of 
qualities (e. g. those corresponding to a liquid). M oreover, according 
to the not ion of the qualitative i nfinity of nature, the same general 
kind of result is obtained for all things, i ncl uding, for example, e\'._en 
the most fu ndamental entities that may have been discovered at any 
particular stage i n  the development of physics. 
Not only is the notion of unvarying and exhaustively specifiable 
modes of being of thi ngs an abstraction that fails for periods of time 
that are too long (because of the possibility of fu ndamental qualita­
tive changes), but it also fails for times that arc too short. This is 
because the characteristic properties and qualities of a thing depend 
i n an essential way on processes that are taking place i n  the back­
ground and substructure of the thi ng i n  question. Thus, for example, 
the properties of an atom (e.g. spectral frequencies, chemical re­
activity, etc.) arise and are determined mai nly i n  the process of 
motion of the electrons i n  the orbit, which take a period of time of 
the order of IO 1 6  seconds. Over shorter periods of time, however, 
the properties of an atom as a whole are so poorly defi ned that it is 
not even appropriate to consider them as such . A better conception 
of what the atom is can then be obtained by regarding it as a 
collection of electrons in motion around the nucleus. But as we 
shorten the period of time still further, the same problem arises with 
regard to electrons, protons, neutrons, mesons, etc. And if we go to 
a larger scale, the reader will readily see that a similar behaviour 
is obtai ned (e.g. the existence of a living being is maintained by 
inner metabolic and nervous processes that are fast in comparison 
with the period in which it makes sense to define the basic character-
1 55 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
istics of such a bei ng). I ndeed, the notion of the qualitative i n finity 
of nature impl ies that such behaviour is i nevitable. For, as we saw 
in the previous section, each kind of t hi ng is maintai ned i n  existence 
by a balance of opposing processes i n  its i nfinite b:ickground and 
substructu re. which are tend i ng to change it i n  di fferent ways. 
Thus, the properties of such a thi ng can be defi ned only over periods 
of time Jong enough so that t he average of the effects of all t hese 
processes does not fluctuate sign ificantly. 
It is clear, t hen, that all our concepts arc. i n  a great many 
ways, abstract representations of matter i n  the process of becomi ng. 
The choice of such abstractions is, however, limited by the require­
ment that they shall represent what is essential in a certa i n  context to 
a suitable degree of approximation a nd u nder appropriate conditions. 
The p;1 rticular k i nd of abstraction that is used may eviden t ly then 
vary, depending on what t he context is. Thus, in theories of simple 
types of phenomena where things can be approximated as bei ng i n  
equilibrium, the modes o f  being o f  the basic entities and properties 
may be conceived of as completely static (e.g. as in statics and i n  
thermodynamics). I n  the study o f  phenome na where motion i s  
important. however, a higher level o f  abstraction i s  needed . For 
example, in mechanics o ne considers a system of part icles which 
l!an change their positions without ceasi ng to be particles. In other 
words, t he bei ng of the particles is indifferent to their positions, and 
we can therefore consider them to be i n  motion through space. But 
the unvarying laws applying to these motions arc now regarded as 
constituting an essential part of the modes of bei ng of the particles 
in question. Thus. we have not escaped the necessity for considering 
unvarying and exhaustively specifiable modes of bei ng. Of course, we 
could in pri nciple go further a nd suppose, for exam ple, thut even t he 
Jaws of motion of the particles were evolving wit h  time. But then we 
would still be assuming that the higher Jaws applying to this process 
of evolution were themselves unvaryi ng a nd in pri nciple exhaustively 
specifiable i n  their form . On the other hand, according to t he notion 
that everything takes part i n  the process of becomi ng, even these 
latter features of the Jaws could not ever really be completely un­
varying and exhaustively specifiable in terms of a fin ite number of 
kinds of things. 
We conclude, t hen, that we must fi nally reach a stage i n  every 
؉heorv where we i ntroduce the notion of somet hing with unvarying 
and e
·
xhaustively specifiable modes of being, if only because we can­
not possibly take into account all the i nexhaustibly rich proper­
ties, qualities, and relationships that exist i n  the process of becoming. 
At this poi nt, then, we are maki ng an abstraction from the real 
process of becoming. Whether the abstraction is adequate or not 
1 56 

Definite and Un varying Modes of Being 
depends on whether or not the specific phenomena that we are 
studyi ng depend significantly o n  what we have left out. With t he 
f urthcr progress of science, we are then Jed through a series of such 
abstractions, which furnish ever better representations of more and 
more aspects of matter in t he concrete a nd real process of becoming. 
N ow, when we ref er to t he process of becoming by t he word 
"concre te", we mean by this to call attention to the quality of bei ng 
special, peculiar, a nd unique that one always fi nds to be clrnractcr­
istic of rea l thi ngs when one st udies them i n  sufficient detail. For 
example, if we consider any concept (e.g. apples), t hen t his concept 
contains nothing i n  it that would permit us to distinguish one apple 
from another. We may t hen indicate other \}ualities which make 
such a distinction possible (e.g. red apples. hard apples, sweet 
apples, etc.). Evidently, no finite n umber of s uch q ualities can 
ever gi ve a complete representation of any specific exa mple of a 
real apple. Of course, by going deeper (e.g. by giving the physical 
a nd chemical sl41tc of each part of the apple) we could come closer 
to our goal. But this process could never end. For even the modes of 
bei ng of t he i ndividual atoms, electrons, protons, etc., inside the 
apple are in t urn determi ned by an i nfinity of complex processes in 
their s ubstructures a nd backgrou nds. Thus, we sec that because 
every kind of thi ng is defined only through an i nexhausti ble ser of 
q ualities each hav i ng a certain degree of relative autonomy, s uch a 
thing can and indeed must be unique ; i.e. not completely identical 
with any other thing i n  t he universe, however similar t he two t hings 
may be. * 
Carrying t he analysis further, we now note that because all of 
t he i nfinity of factors determining what any given thing is are always 
changi ng with time, no such a thing can even remain identical ll'ith 
itself as time passes. I n  certai n  respects, this bri ngs us to a deeper 
notion of t he process of becoming than we had before. For at each 
instant of time, each thing has, when viewed from one side, a n  
enormous ( i n  fact i nfinite) number o f  aspects which are i n  common 
wit h  those that it had a short time ago. 1 ndced, i f  this were not so, it 
would not be a thing; i.e. it would not preserve any kind of identity 
• According lo the Pauli exclusion principle, any two electrons are 
said to be "identical". This conclusion follows from the fact that within 
the framework of the current quantum theory there can be no property 
by which they could be distinguished . On the other hand, the concl usion 
that they are completely identical in all respects follows only if we accept 
the assumption of the usual interpretation of the quantum theory that the 
present general form of the theory will persist in every domain that will 
ever be investigated. If we do not make this assumption, then it is evi­
dently always possible to suppose that distinctions between electrons can 
arise at deeper levels. 
1 57 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
al all. On the other hand, when viewed from another side, it has an 
equally enormous (in fact infinite) number of aspects that are not 
those tha,t it had a short time ago. For typical sorts of things with 
which we commonly deal, however. these latter aspects are not 
essential in the normal contexts and conditions with which we work. 
ln new contexts (e.g. a sub-atomic or a super-galactic time scale) or 
under new conditions (e.g. very high temperatures), these aspects 
may, however, take on a crucial importance. 
We are in this way led to the conclusion that the process of 
becoming will necessarily have, at each moment. certain aspects that 
are concrete and unique. In other words, each thing i n  each moment 
of its existence must have certain qualities which, in some respects, 
belong uniquely to that thing and to that moment. The notion of 
unvarying and exhaustively specifiable modes of being is then an 
abstraction obtained, in general, by considering what is common to 
the same thing at different moments, or to many similar things at the 
same moment. In dbing this, we evidently ignore the differences 
between these things, which are just as essential a side of them as are 
their similarities. By abstracting in more detail from these differences, 
we are then led to see newer but subtler aspects i n  which these 
differences contain common or similar relationships that apply to all 
of these things. Thus, the uniqueness of each thing at each instant 
of time is reflected in our abstract concepts by the limitless richness 
and complexity of the concepts that one needs to obtain a better and 
better abstract representation of matter in the process of becoming, 
or, in other words, by the incxhaustibility of the qualities that arc 
lo be found in nature. 
1 0. R E A S O N S  F O R I N A D E Q U A C Y  OF L A l' L A C I A N  D E T E R M I N I S M  
We are now ready to see why the mechanistic determinism of 
Laplace does not apply if the notion of the qualitative infinity of 
nature is correct. For this kind of determinism implies that the 
laws of nature are such as to permit the super-being of Laplace to 
know them in their totality. On the other hand, according to the 
point of view that we have been presenting, this is impossible. 
First of all, let us recall that no matter how far one goes in the 
expression of the laws of nature, the results will always depend in 
ln unavoidable way on essentially independent contingencies which 
exist outside the context under investigation, and which are therefore 
undergoing chance fluctuations relative to the motions inside the 
context in question. For this reason, the causal laws applying inside 
any specified context will evidently not be adequate for the perfect 
prediction even of what goes on inside this context alone. 
1 58 

Reasons for Inadequacy of Laplacian Determinism 
Secondly, however, the essential independence of different con­
texts implies that the processes taking place within a given context 
cannot provide a complete and perfect reflection of what goes on in 
the infinite totality of possible contexts. For example, because of the 
cancellation of chance fluctuations, the precise details of atomic 
motions are not usually reflected to any significant extent in the laws 
of the macroscopic level. The laws of each new context must then, 
in general, be discovered with the aid of new kinds of experiments, 
set up so as to create conditions in which the laws of the new context 
under investigation arc significantly reflected in the behaviour of the 
apparatus. Hence, even to know what the totality of all the laws of 
nature is. the super-being would have to do an infinity of different 
kinds of experiments, each of which would give results that de­
pended significantly on the laws of a different context, so that he 
could thereby obtain the necessary information. In doing this, he 
would have to be able to discover not only all the already oper­
ating kinds of laws, but also all the new laws that are expressible 
only in terms of the infinity of new qualities, new entities, and new 
levels that are going to come into being, all the way into the infinite 
future. It is evident, then, that if the Laplacian super-being resembles 
us to the extent of obtaining his knowledge through a series of in­
vestigations of partial segments of the universe, and not, for example, 
by Divine revelation or by a priori intuitions which he finds by plumb­
ing the depths of his own mind, he will never be able to predict the 
entire future of the universe or even to approach such a prediction 
as a limit, no matter how good a calculator he may be. And if he did 
have such revelations or intuitions, a calculation would hardly be 
necessary, since the detailed prediction of the behaviour of the 
universe would then require a miracle only slightly greater than that 
by which he would learn the basic laws of the universe in the first 
place. 
We sec, then, that the behaviour of the world is not perfectly 
determined by any possible purely mechanical or purely quantitative 
line of causal connection. This does not mean, however, that it is 
arbitrary. For if we take any given effect, we can always in principle 
trace it to the causes from which its essential aspects came. Only as 
we go further and further back into the past, we discover three 
important points : viz. first, that the number of causes which con­
tribute significantly to a given effect increases without limit ; secondly 
that more and more qualitatively different kinds of causal factors are 
found to be significant ;  and finally, that these causes depend on 
new contingencies leading to new kinds of chance. For example, let 
us consider an eclipse of the moon. Over moderate periods of time 
this is a fairly precisely predictable event, which is determined mainly 
1 59 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
by the co-ordinates and momenta of the earth and the moon relative 
to the sun. But the longer the time that we consider, the more precise 
this determination must be, in order to make possible a prediction 
of the effect with a given accuracy. For the details of the motion 
become very sensitive to the precise initial conditions. As a result, 
perturbations arising from other planets, from tides in the earth, the 
moon, the sun, and still other essentially independent contingencies 
become significant. Over long enough periods of time, even the 
fluctuations arising from the molecular motions c.ould in principle 
come to have significant effects ; but before this could really become 
important. we should have gone so far into the past as to reach the 
qualitatively different phase of the gaseous nebulae from which the 
earth, moon. and sun came. Here we see that the random motions 
of the gas molecules in these nebulae contributed to making the 
eclipse eventually occur in the way that it did. If we go further back. 
we might reach the dense state of matter, that perhaps existed before 
the explosion that may have led to the present state of the part of 
the universe that is now visible to us. Then, the motions of the 
entities existing in this previous state, whatever they may have been, 
would have contributed to making the eclipse occur in the way that 
it did. But these motions would be contingent on something still 
earlier. And so on without limit. It is clear, moreover, that the 
eclipse of the moon is a phenomenon that is subject to an exception­
ally simple type of determination, because of the approximate 
isolation of the earth and moon from other things. In other processes, 
where the degree of isolation is much less, the intertwining and 
fusion of the effects of more and more contingencies and more differ­
ent qualities as we go further back is much greater. Thus, over an 
infinite period of time, the determination of even the essential 
features of an effect is evidently not purely mechanical, because it 
involves not only an infinite number of contingent factors but also 
an infinity of kinds of qualities, properties, laws of connection, all 
of which themselves undergo fundamental changes with the passage 
of time. 
1 1 .  R E V E R S I B I L I T Y  V E R S U S  I R R E V E R S I B I L I T Y  OF T H E  
L A W S  O F  N A T U R E  
In this section we shall make a few remarks concerning the implica­
tions of the qualitative infinity of nature with regard to the question 
of whether the laws of nature are reversible or irreversible. 
It is well known that thus far the laws of microscopic physics 
have demonstrated themselves to be reversible. This follows from 
the fact that starting with any solution of the basic equations for the 
1 60 

Reversibility versus Irreversibility 
system (Newton's laws of motion, the laws of relativity, the laws of 
quantum theory), another possible solution can be found by re­
placi ng the time,* t, by its negative, - I .  Physically this means that 
given any motion, it is always possible, in principle at least, for a 
similar motion to take place, which is, however, executed in the 
reverse order. Of course, to obtain such a reversal of motion in 
reality, we would have to alter the boundary conditions appro­
priately (e.g. reverse all the velocities of the various particles, 
rates of change of the fields, etc.). Such a reversal does not, in 
general, occur spontaneously, at least within any practically signi­
ficant periods of time. To show that this is so let us consider, for 
example, two boxes of gas, one containing hydrogen and the other 
containing oxygen, and let us imagine that we open a tube that con­
nects them. As is well known, the gases will diffuse into each other. 
The reason is, of course, that the complicated and i rregular motions 
of the hydrogen molecules will tend to carry them into the chamber 
originally containing oxygen, while similar motions of the oxygen 
molecules will tend to carry them into the chamber originally con­
taining the hydrogen. As we have seen in Chapter II, Section 1 2, 
such processes can be treated in terms of the laws of chance, so that 
the theory of probability can be applied to them. Since over a long 
period of time it is equally probable that any particular mole,ule 
will occupy any given region of space, we conclude that on the 
average and in the long run we will obtain a practically uniform 
mixture of hydrogen and oxygen. It is characteristic of the laws of 
chance, however, that fluctuations away from the average can occur, 
although large fluctuations are very rare. A simple calculation, using 
the appropriate law of probability for these fluctuations, shows, for 
example, that a chance combination of motions that led all the 
hydrogen and oxygen back into their original containers would, 
under typical conditions, not occur for 101010 years (i.e. 1 followed 
by ten thousand million zeros). Clearly, then, although the motion 
may in principle reverse, the probability that this will happen is so 
small that we may for practical purposes ignore this possibility, 
especially considering the fact that, in any case, the containers of gas 
could not possibly last for such a long time. 
It is possible by means of analysis described above to understand 
the observed irreversibility in various physical phenomenon, such 
as the flow of heat, the establishment of thermal and mechanical 
equilibrium in fluids, etc. But this still leaves us with a disturbing 
problem. For the above reduction of the observed irreversibility of 
• In the case of the quantum theory, we must also replace the wave 
function, tp, by i ts complex conjugate, but this does not change any 
probabilities of physical processes, which depend only on I 'I' I. 
161 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
certain large-scale phenomena to the effects of chance does not alter 
the fact that the fundamental equations of motion are reversible, so 
that there is no inherent reason why processes in general must 
necessarily always take place in one direction only, since either 
direction would in principle be possible. Thus, if all the velocities 
and rates of change of fields did actually manage to be reversed for 
any reason whatever (e.g. by chance), then heat could go from a 
lower to a higher temperature, water could flow from the sea back 
to its sources in the mountains, etc. The fact that t hese events are so 
fantastically improbable does not detract from the problem of 
principle presented here, which is this : " Do t he generally irrevocable 
effects of the passage of time in so wide a range of fields really come 
out of nothing more than the random mixing or shuflling according 
to the laws of chance of molecular and other types of motion, the 
reversal of which is i n  principle possible but in practice too improb­
able to be considered as having any real importance'!" 
If we take into account the character of the laws of physics 
implied by the qualitative infinity of nat ure, however, we can 
immediately answer this question in the negative. For, as we have 
seen, the notion of a law that gives a perfect one-to-one mathe­
matical correspondence between well-defined variables in the past 
and in the future, is only an abstraction, good enough to describe 
limited domains of phenomena for limited periods of time, but, 
nevertheless, not valid for all possible domains over an infinite time. 
Thus, as has been pointed out in Section 8, the very entities with 
which physics now works, satisfying the currently studied laws of 
physics, must have come into being at some time in the past, while 
:hanging conditions, brought about in part by the effects of just 
these laws, and in part by chance contingencies, will eventually lead 
to a stage of the universe in which new kinds of entities satisfying 
new kinds of laws will come into being. On a smaller scale, we see 
ilso that new levels, such as that of living matter, have come into 
being, in which characteristic new qualities and new laws appear. 
Thus, we are not justified in making unlimited extrapolations of any 
>pecific set of laws to all possible domains and over infinite periods 
)f time. This means that the description of the laws of nature as in 
)rinciple completely reversible is merely a consequence of an 
:xcessively simple representation of reality. When we consider the 
nechanical laws in their proper contexts of ever-changing basic 
i_ualities, it becomes clear that irrevocable qualitative changes do 
.ake place, which could not even in principle be reversed. This is 
:>ecause, for systems of appreciable complexity, the fundamental 
:haracter of the laws that apply cannot be completely separated 
·rom the historical processes in which these systems come to obtain 
162 

Reversibility versus Irreversibility 
t heir characteristic properties.* The possibility of such a behaviour 
is especially clear with regard to living matter, for here the very 
mode of being an organism and the basic qualities and laws which 
define this mode of bei ng arise in the process by which the organism 
comes into existence, and passes through the various stages of its 
life. Thus, it is q uite impossible that a human being could become 
a human being except by a process of growth, through embryo, 
childhood, adulthood, etc. But when one analyses processes taking 
place in inan i mate mat ter over long enough periods of time, one 
finds a si mi lar behaviour. Only here the process is so much slower 
t hat the abst raction i n  which we conceive of matter as having 
properties that are independent of its specific historical develop­
ment is usually quite good as long as one considers periods of time 
which arc measured in units smaller than billions of years. 
The importance of co nsideri ng the impact of qualitative changes 
on the basic modes of being of things is also seen when we consider 
t he predictions of the "heat death" of the universe, which were 
especially common towards the end of the nineteenth century. The 
"heat death" refers to the prediction that eventually, because of 
random mixing and shuffii ng of molecules, the temperat ure of the 
universe would become uniform, and therefore, at least on the large 
scale, nothing could happen, so that the u niverse would be "dead':. 
However, long before this comes about, it is evidently quite possible 
and indeed very likely that q ualitatively new developments reflecting 
the inexhaustible and i nfinite character of the universal process of 
becomi ng will have i nvalidated predictions of the type described 
above. For example, j ust as there may have been a time before 
molecules, 
atoms, 
electrons, 
and 
protons existed, 
the 
further 
evolution of the universe could also lead to a new time in which they 
cease to exist, and are replaced by something else again. And new 
sources of energy coming from the infinite procĩss of becoming 
may be made available even if atoms, molecules, etc., continue to 
exist. Thus, in t he last century only mechanical, chemical, thermal 
electrical, luminous, and gravitational energy were known. Now we 
know of nuclear energy, which constitutes a much larger reservoir. 
But the i nfinite substructure of matter very probably contains ener­
gies that arc as far beyond nuclear energies as nuclear energies are 
beyond chemical energies. Indeed, there is already some evidence 
in favour of this idea. Thus, if one computes the "zero point" energy 
due to quantum-mechanical fluctuations in even one cubic centi­
metre of space, one comes out with something of the order of 1038 
• Of course, this may not be the only reason or even the main reason 
for the observed irreversibility in nature, but in any case, for this reason 
alone, irreversibility would follow. 
1 63 

Afore General Concept of /\'atural Lall' 
·gs, which is equal to that which would be l iberated by the fission 
: about 1010 tons of uranium.* Of course, this e nergy provides a 
mstant background that is not available at our level u nder present 
mditions. But as the conditions in the universe cha nge. a part of it 
ight be made available at our level. 
Not only is the qualitatively and quantitat ively i n finite universal 
·ocess of becoming too complex even to reverse i tself or to come 
' some kind of final equilibrism , but it a lso ca nnot go in a cycle . 
.)r even if the laws applying i n  ce rtai n contexts a nd cond itions 
.ould be consistent with a cyclical u ni\'c rsc. such l aws will always 
ive out an infinity of new kinds of factors , which " i l l  in the long 
n become important as conditions change suflicie nt ly . Unless these 
w factors arc exactly coordinated with those ;d rcady existing i n 
ore limited contexts and sets of cond i t i ons. 1 licy will even t ually 
cak t he eyclc and bri ng in fu ndamental q u a l i t a t i ve changes. U u t  
cause of their relative a n d  approximate autonomy, these factors 
Juld not in general be coordinated in s uch a way. Hence a cycli-
1 behaviour would also be inconsistent with the character of the 
1iverse t hat we have been grooming here. 
In conclusion , then, the notion of the qualitati ve i nfinity of nature 
1 iplies that the development of the u niverse i n  ti me will lead to an 
:xhaustible diversity o f  new things. 
1 2. A B S O L U T E  V E R S U S  R E L A T I V E  T R U T H -
T H E  N A T U R E  O F  O B J E C T I V E  R E A L I T Y  
˳ shall now sum up the ideas devel oped i n  t his chapter , and indeed 
oughout the whole book in terms of a t reat ment of the i m plica­
ns of the nature of t he qualitative i n fi nity of nature, with regard 
the problems of the absolute v. the rel at i ve character of t ru t h ,  
:! o f  what, in the framework o f  this poi nt of view, is mea nt b y  the 
lCept of objective reality. 
fo begin with, let us recall that we a re led to understand nature 
terms of an inexhaustible diversity and mult iplicity of things, all 
them reciprocally related and all of them necessa rily taking part 
the process of becoming, in which exist an unli mited number of 
atively autonomous and contradictory kinds of motions. As a 
ult no particular kind of thing can be more than an abstraction 
Actually, according to present theories, this energy is infinite, but if 
: assumes that the theory is valid down to fluctuations having wave­
˴ths of the order of 10-13 cm., then the above value of the energy is 
ained. This wave-length was chosen, because it is generally believed 
t current theories of quantum electro-dynamics break down for 
1rter wave-lengths and break down in such a way that the effects of 
mtum-ftuctuation; become finite. Thus, in a very rough estimate, we 
Y ignore the effects of wave-lengths shorter than 1 0 - 13 cm. 
1 64 

Absolute ተ·ersus Relative Truth 
from this process, an abstraction that is valid withi n  a certain degree 
of approximation, in defin ite ranges of conditions, within a limited 
context, and over a characteristic period of time. Such an abstrac­
t ion evidently cannot represent an absolute truth ; for to do this it 
would have to be valid without approximation, unconditionally, 
in all possible contexts, and for all time. Hence, any particular 
theory will constitute an approximate, conditional, and relative truth. 
We may then ask the question, "Does t he fact that any given 
theory can only be a pproximately, conditionally, and relatively true 
mean that there is no objective reality? To see that this is not so, it is 
only necessary to ask the further question of whether the behaviour 
of t h i ngs is a rbit rary. For example, would it be possible for us to 
choose the nat ural laws holding within a given degree of approxi­
ma t ion and in a particular set of conditions at will, in accordance 
with o u r tastes, or with wlwt we feel would be helpful fo r  us in the 
solution of various kinds of practical problems? The fact that we 
cannot actually do this shows that these laws have an objective 
content, in the sense that they represent some kind of necessity that 
is i ndependent of our wills and of the way in which we think about 
thi ngs. This docs n ot mean that we cannot, in general, make our 
own choices as to what we will or will not do. But unless these 
choices are guided by concepts that correctly reflect the necessary· 
relationships that exist i n  nature, the consequences of our actions 
will not in general be what we chose, but rather something different, 
and something that is quite often what we would have chosen not 
to aim for if only we had known what was really going to come out 
of our actions.* 
I t  is t rue, of cou rse, that the same natural laws can often be 
treated with the aid of a series of very different kinds of conceptual 
abst ractions. Thus, i n  the domain of classical physics, we could equally 
well work with the abstractions that are appropriate to classical 
mechanics (e.g. particles following orbits defined by definite laws), 
or we could utilize those that are appropriate to quantum mechanics 
(e. g. systems existing in discrete states, to which apply laws of prob-
• For example, we could choose to step out of a window and fly up­
wa rds into the sky. If we tried lo do this, however, we would fall down­
wards. The same thing would happen even if we had been guided in our 
act ions by a set of concepts which led us lo the conclusion that it was 
possible to fly upwards merely by flapping one's arms and saying certa in 
magic words. Actually, if we wish to fly, what we must do is to have a 
deeper and more accurate conception of the laws of dynamics ; and on the 
basis of this to construct suitable devices such as aeroplanes, dirigibles, 
rockets, etc. Thus, in the last analysis, the laws of natu re do not depend 
on how \\e think about it or on what we choose to do, but our actions 
must be guided by correct conceptions of these laws if they are lo lead to 
the results that we aim for. 
1 65 

More General Concept of Natural Law 
ability), and then take the limit of large numbers of very small 
quanta. Which of these very different proced urcs we used would not 
matter in this particular domai n, because both wo·1ld lead to essen­
tially the same results. I ndeed, as we pointed out in Chapter I ,  
Section 10, the different possible co ncept ual abstractions here play 
the role of various views of different aspects of the same basic 
reality. To the extent that these diferent abstractions have a common 
domain of validity, they must lead to the same conscq ucnccs (just as 
different views must be consistent with each other in thei r d o main 
of overlap). 
It is clear from the preceding discussion that a necessary part of 
the definition of the extent to which a give n law is t rue l ies in the 
delimitation of its domain of validity. To accomplish the definition 
of this domain, we must find the errors i n  the law i n  q uestion .  For 
the more we k now about these errors the he l l er we will k now tile 
conditions, context, and degree of approximation within which this 
law can correctly be applied and therefore the better we will know 
its domain of validity. 
Now, if there were a fi nal a nd exhaustively specifiable set of hlws 
which constituted an absolute truth, we could regard all errors as 
purely subjective characteristics, resulting from u ncertainty i n  our 
knowledge concerning this absolute t ruth. On the other hand, i n  
terms of the notion o f  the qualitative infinity of nature, we see that 
every law that can possibly be formulated has to have errors, simply 
because it represents nature in terms of some finite set of concepts, 
that inevitably fail to take into account an infinity of additional 
1potentially or actually significant qualities and properties of matter. 
In other words, associated with any given law there must be errors 
that are essential and objective features of that law resulting from the 
multitudes of diverse factors that the law in question must neglect.* 
'
Thus each law inevitably has its errors, and these are j ust as neces­
sary a part of the definition of its t rue significance as are those of 
its consequences that arc correct. 
It is clear from the above discussion that scientific research does 
not and can not lead to a knowledge of nature that is completely free 
from error. Rather it leads and is able to lead only lo an unending 
process in which the degree of truth in our knowledge is con tinually 
increasing. The first step in any part of this process is generally 
accomplished with the aid of new kinds of experiments and observa -
• In Section 6 we saw a special case of the essential character of errors 
il the laws of nature. Thus, casual laws inevitably contain errors resulting 
ቱom the neglect of chance fluctuations originating in contexts external to 
l'hat is treated by the casual law in question. Vice versa! laws of chrncc 
:nust contain errors resulting from the neglect of casual mterconnect1ons 
Jrought about by the laws operating in broader contexts. 
1 66 

Absolute i-ersus Relatfre Truth 
tions or with more accurate forms of already familiar kinds of ex­
periments and observation, which serve to disclose some of the errors 
that are inevitably present at any particular stage in the development 
of our theories. The next step, then. comes after we have discovered 
some of the new laws that apply in the newer and broader domains 
to which we have in this way been led. For, as we have seen in terms 
of a number of examples given in previous chapters,* these new 
laws not only approach the older laws as approximations holding 
in limiting cases, but they also help to specify the degree of approxi­
mation and the conditions within which the older laws will actually 
hold. Thus, with the further progress of science into new domains, it 
becomes possible for us to define the errors in older laws in more and 
more detail and in more and more respects, and in this way to 
del imit the domains of validity of these laws more precisely and more 
nc;irly completely. 
Now, if we could determine all the errors in a given law perfectly, 
we would know the absolute truth about that law. For we would 
then know just when and where, and to just what degree of approxi­
mation, it is valid, so that we would never be led to wrong predictions 
through using it. Of course, we cannot determine all the errors in 
any given law completely ; and as a result, we can never actually 
reach such an absolute truth with regard to the law in question: 
Nevertheless, in many fields we are able to determine the errors so 
well in this way that we can say that at least for the specific domains 
under consideration, we are approaching closer and closer to an 
absolute truth (more or less as we are able to come closer and closer 
to a representation of a curved figure by inscribing it in a series of 
polygons with more and more sides and thus to give a series of 
successive approximations that converges towards a definite and 
limited result). 
With regard to nature as a whole, however, it cannot be said that 
this continual process of disclosure of errors in our theories is lead­
ing us through a series of successive approximations that converges 
on some fixed and limited goal, which constitutes an absolute truth. 
For as science progresses, we find that the process of uncovering 
the errors in previous theories continually points towards the exist­
ence of more and more new kinds of things, which were not signifi­
cant in contexts and conditions studied up to a certain point in the 
development of our researches, but which may be of crucial import­
ance in new contexts and conditions. As a result, the goal of an 
absolute truth that applies in all possible contexts and conditions 
keeps on receding beyond the new horizons that appear before us 
• E.g. the approach of qua ntum theory to classical theory and of 
rel a t i vity to Newtonian mechanics. 
1 67 

More General Concept of Natural Lall' 
a& we con ti nue our studies of the i ncxhau-.ti ble characteristics of 
nature in more and more detail and i n more and more differen t ways. 
It is true that there is nothing in the st ruct ure of the universe that 
could prevent us from eventually comi ng in these studies to know 
about any given thing. Indeed, as our understanding of the reci­
procal relationships between things grows better. we will be able to 
make more a nd more kinds of measurements which probe deeper 
and deeper i nto the structure of the universe a nd which reach out 
further and further from the particular region of space a nd time in 
which our ex istence is centred. For t hese rela t i o nsh i ps will enable us 
to infer the character of things that are on d i ffe re n t  levels or far 
away from us, on the basis of experi ment s  and o bserva tions on 
things t hat a re on our level and which a rc i n  the domain of the space 
:m<l time t hat is immedia tely acce:-.si bk t u  u -. . l 'hu-.. a n y  ቮil'<'ll k i nd 
of thing is, i n  pri m:i ple, k nowa ble. On the o t her han<l, no matter 
how far even the whole of humanity may progress i n any speci fied 
period of time, however l ong, i t  cannot reach or even approach a 
complete, perfect, and unconditional knowledge of realit y as a whole. 
Thus, with regard to reality as a whole, the a nalogy of the a pproach 
to a given curved figure by means of a set of smaller and smaller 
tangent lines is not appropriate. A better analogy would be a particle 
in BrowniǍn motion, the path of which can be approached i n this 
way only within a certain degree of approx i mation, but which must 
be treated, as we go deeper and deeper, wit h  t he aid of more and 
more new qualities and properties, such as those associated with the 
atoms and molecules in motion, quantum fl uctuations, etc. 
lf we stopped at this poi nt i n  our analysis of the problem of truth, 
however, we would be focusing our attention on the side of the 
i nfinite diversity and multiplicity of thi ngs in the universe, and thus 
we would lose sight of how they are united as different aspects of one 
world. For we would tend to thi n k  of things and qualities as strung 
out one after the other in a never-endi ng l i ne or as strewn through 
space in a limitless chaos. In order to see the world from the side of 
1 its being a u nity, we m ust start from the notion that the basic reality 
1is the totali ty of actually existing matter i n  the process of becomi ng. 
I t is the basic reality because it has an i ndependent kind of ex istence 
such that none of i ts characteristics depend on anything else that is 
outside of itself. This is so becau!>c the totality of matter in the process 
of becoming contai ns, by defi nition, everythi ng that exists. If we 
find that somethi ng is outside of any given part of what we arc 
,consideri ng, this merely means that we m ust define a broader 
category, which i ncludes the part in question as well as what is out­
%ide of it. Thus, even though the ex istence a nd the characteristic 
ãefining the mode of being of any given thi ng ca n ,  a nd i ndeed must, 
.I 
1 68 

Absolute versus Relative Truth 
be conti ngent on other things, that of the i nfinite totality of matter 
in the process of becoming cannot, because whatever it might be 
contingent on is also by definition contained in this totality. 
We then come to t he question of defining in detail what is this 
totality of matter in the process of becoming. By this we mean that 
we wish to specify i ts basic properties and qualities, and to delimit 
its general characteristics. 
Now, the most essential and fundamental characteristic of the 
totality of matter in the process of becoming lies precisely in the 
fact that it can be represented only with the aid of an i nexhaustible 
series of abstractions from it, each abstraction having only an 
approximate validity, in limited contexts and condi tions, and over 
periods of time that are neither too short nor too long. The!>e 
<lh!>tractions have many rat ionally u nderstandable relationships be­
tween them. Thus, they represent things that stand i n  reci proca l 
relationshi ps with each other, and each theory, expressed i n  terms 
of a speci fic kind of abstraction, helps to define the domains of 
validity of d i fferent theories, expressed in terms of other kinds of 
abstractions. The fact that all these relationships exist is not sur­
prisi ng, since every theory i s, in any case, some kind of abstraction 
from the same totality of matter in the process of becoming. Vic.e 
versa, the fact that we need a n  inexhaustible series of such abstrac­
tions for the better and better representation of reality as a whole is 
also not surprisi ng, provided that we recall that, as we saw in Section 
9, this reality is concrete ; i.e. has aspects that are unique for each 
thing in each amount of its existence. 
The definition of the concrete characteristics of the totality of 
matter in the process of becoming can then be accomplished in 
unlimited detail in terms of relationships among the things that 
one can abstract out of this process itself. For each thing that exists 
in this process can be defined, to successively better approxi mations 
and in progressively wider contexts, in terms of its reciprocal rela­
tionships with more and more other things. This is the basic reason 
why the study of any one thing throws l ight on other things, and thus 
eventually leads back to a deeper understanding of its own proper­
ties. I n  fact, if it were possible to define the totality of all reciprocal 
relationships between thing5, this would enable us to define matter 
in the process of becoming completely. For every thi ng that exists, 
includi n g  all its characteristic properties and qualities, every event 
that happens, and every law relating these events and things, is 
defi ned only through such reciprocal relationships. And what more 
can there be to define about matter in the process of becorning, 
except that which does not exist, has no properties and qualities, 
satisfies no laws, does not happen, and which is therefore precisely 
1 69 

}.fore General Concept of Natural Law 
nothing? Of course, as has already been pointed out, we cannot 
actually come to know all these reciprocal relationships in any 
finite time, however long. Nevertheless, the more we learn about 
them, the more we will know about what matter in the process of 
becoming is, since its totality is defined by nothing more than the 
totality of all such relationships. 
In conclusion, a consistent conception of what we mean by the 
absolute side of nature can be obtained if we start by considering the 
infinite totality of matter in the process of becoming as the basic 
reality. This totality is absolute in the sense that it does not depend 
on anything else for its existence or for a definition of any of its 
characteristics. On the other hand, just what it is can be defi ned 
concretely only through the relationships among the things i nto 
which it ca n be analysed approximately. Each relationship has in i t  
a certain content that is absolute, b u t  this content must, a s  w e  have 
seen, be defined to a closer and closer approximation, with the aid 
of broader concepts and theories, that take into account more and 
more of the factors on which this relationship depends. Hence, even 
though the mode of being of each thing can be defined only relative 
to other things, we are not led to the point of view of complete 
relativity. For such a point of view implies that there is no objective 
content to our knowledge at all, either because it is supposed to be 
defined entirely relative to the observer, or to the general point of 
view and special conditions of each individual, or to special pre­
conceptions and modes (or "style") of thinking that may exist in a 
particular society or in a particular epoch of time. * In our point of 
view, we admit that all the above things do actually colour and 
influence our knowledge ; but we admit also that nevertheless there 
still exists an absolute, unique, and objective reality. To know this 
reality better, and thus to correct and eliminate some of the pre­
conceptions and lacunae that are inevitably in our knowledge at 
any particular time, we must continue our scientific researches, with 
the objective of finding more and more of the things into which 
matter in the process of becoming can 
be analysed approxi­
mately, of studying in a better and better approximation the relation­
ships between these things and of discovering in greater and greater 
detail what are the limitations on the applicability of each specific 
set of concepts and laws. The essential character of scientific re­
search is, then, that it moves towards the absolute by studying the 
relative, in its inexhaustible multiplicity and diversity. 
• This point of view may perhaps best be characterized by the assump­
tion that "relativity is absolute". In other words, it is stated to be the only 
absolute truth that there is no absolute content to our knowledge at all. 
1 70 


